A Mobile Application to Share Georeferenced Tourist Experiences
on a Discrete Global Grid
Rub´en B´ejar, Muhammad Umer
and Javier Mart´ınez-Fern´andez
Advanced Information Systems Laboratory (IAAA)
Aragon Institute for Engineering Research (IA3)
Universidad Zaragoza
c/ Mariano Esquillor s/n 50018, Zaragoza, Spain
Email: rbejar@unizar.es, m.umer@unizar.es,
737910@unizar.es
Jorge Dieste-Hern´andez, Ondˇrej Kratochv´ıl
and Carlos L´opez-Escolano
Study Group for Spatial Planning (GEOT)
Institute of Research into Environmental Sciences (IUCA)
Universidad Zaragoza
c/ Pedro Cerbuna, 12, 50009, Zaragoza, Spain
Email: jorgediestehernandez@gmail.com,
ondrej@geogis.es, cle@unizar.es
Abstract—This work presents the prototype of a mobile appli-
cation designed to make it easy for tourists to provide their
opinions about the places they visit. Two characteristics make
this application innovative. The ﬁrst one is the use of a discrete
global grid to collect the data, as discrete global grids are now
just starting to be integrated with other Geographic Information
System (GIS) technologies. And the second one is the strong
emphasis on the emotions those places evoke on the users,
an emphasis which is guided by the emotional cartography
perspective. Besides this, tools are being added to allow the
tourists to see and extend the views provided by previous visitors,
in a collaborative, volunteered geographic information way.
Keywords–Emotional Cartography; Collaborative GIS; Discrete
Global Grid System; DGGS; Tourism.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The United Nations World Tourism Organization points
out that tourism is being transformed, by means of digital
technologies, in order to offer, among other things, “hyper-
personalized customer experiences” [1]. Indeed, it is more and
more common for tourists to value the possibility to enjoy,
discover and share personal experiences, as shown for instance
in the rise of platforms such as TripAdvisor or Expedia.
With these platforms, tourists make decisions related to their
choice of destination based on the experiences, opinions and
judgement of others, and can then design personal experiences
for themselves.
Edward W. Soja deﬁnes a conceived space as objective,
qualiﬁable and mappable, and a perceived space as subjectively
experimented, imagined and desired. And then he adds a
third space, the lived one, as the summary of the other two
[2]. Emotional cartography is a methodological process to
represent the emotional spaces that form the territory [3]. The
application of emotional cartography to crowdsourced tourist
experiences, allows us to represent the emotional spaces that
form the touristic places and analyze them along with the
physical spaces.
This work discusses the prototype of a mobile web ap-
plication which is being developed to capture georeferenced
emotional data from the tourists that visit certain places. The
analysis of these data within the paradigm of the emotional
cartography will allow to make personalized recommendations
for more personalized experiences such as destination brand-
ing, by associating certain places with the emotions that these
places tend to elicit. The application will provide its users
with the data created by previous visitors. They will be able
to create new data, or to add their perceptions to areas created
by previous users, in a collaborative GIS way.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: in Section
II, the related work section describes some relevant related
research. Section III describes some technical and functional
aspects of the prototype application being developed. Finally,
Section IV summarizes the work done so far, and describes
some expected future results.
II.
RELATED WORK
Geographic Information Systems have been used to make
tourism more interactive and user informed by making use of
the location data. Some recent examples of this are [4], for
nature-based tourism, and [5] for tourism marketing.
Location-aware mobile devices and specialized applica-
tions may provide tourists with valuable information to enjoy
their trips and adapt them to their interests. A recent review of
context-aware tourism applications, [6], analyzed them from
four dimensions: knowledge acquisition, knowledge represen-
tation, knowledge processing and services offered to tourists.
One of its conclusions is that the acquisition of the knowledge
required to make these applications useful needs to take into
consideration the crowdsourced feedback. This does not only
need to include the location of the tourists; their experiences
should be analyzed in a high spatial resolution to be studied
in detail [7].
Those technologies that allow us to explore mental and
emotional lives in non-invasive ways, and from a certain
distance, are registering a fast acceleration [8]. With them,
and through the use of emotional cartography, we can develop
new geographical knowledge of places, such as those oriented
towards tourism, and therefore new economic and social devel-
opment. We can observe and analyze how the experiences in
those spaces conﬁgure the life there, and we can get a deeper
understanding of both their physical and human geographies
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[9]. This in turn may contribute to discover new therapeutic
possibilities of the places and to create a new image that makes
them different from others. This kind of “branding” is essential
for touristic development [10]. Destination management and
marketing studies can also beneﬁt from more research on
emotions and tourism [11].
Collaborative mapping development, such as the Open-
StreetMap (OSM), has become a trend in recent years. It
uses community engagement to produce quality data and
applications that may empower multiple sectors [12]. When
compared to passive crowdsourcing, active collaborative GIS
has been observed to generate more ﬁne-scale data with a more
ﬂexible value range, which is better suited for management and
analytics [13]. Collaborative GIS is currently been used, or at
least proposed, in diverse domains such us landscape inventory
creation [14], city models creations [15], and satellite imagery
analysis [16].
Discrete Global Grid Systems (DGGS) are spatial infor-
mation frameworks which divide the surface of the Earth in
tessellations of discrete cells [17]. These cells are organized in
a hierarchical fashion forming a multi-resolution grid. These
grids are intended to be information grids, not navigation grids,
and thus, issues such as quantization operations, i.e., assigning
and retrieving data to/from cells, and algebraic operations on
the cells and their contents must be deﬁned by the different
DGGSs. A DGGS must also provide a way to address, i.e.,
identify, each individual cell. There are proposals that build
on that capability to address any area deﬁned on a given
DGGS [18]. The rHEALPix is a cubic geodesic DGGS, which
is compatible with the OGC proposal [19]. Its cells, once
projected onto the plane, are squares.
III.
THE PROTOTYPE
Following the research goals, the application is designed to
provide the users with an easy to use interface for capturing
data. Data collection through the GUI is done by using
the rHEALPix DGGS quadrilateral grids with the parameter
nside = 3 (i.e., each square is divided into nine in the next
resolution level). Only grids of resolution levels from 8 to 11
are shown (i.e., resolutions ranging from approximately 1.5
km, to around 55 meters). The users can navigate to their
desired region using zoom in/out and panning functionality,
and then select one or more grid cells just by tapping on
their smartphone screen. The selected area will be added to the
database with the submit button after fulﬁlling the information
associated to it. The GUI of the current prototype is shown
in Figure 1. Cells with a brighter color are those which have
been selected by the user.
The source code of the prototype is currently avail-
able in two GitHub repositories: https://github.com/IAAA-Lab/
grid-ﬁeld and https://github.com/IAAA-Lab/grid-server. The
ﬁrst one includes the web application tier and the Django
server with the grid models which are stored in Post-
greSQL/PostGIS. The second one includes the Django Repre-
sentational State Transfer (REST) based web server tier along
with the rHEALPix and MongoDB components.
A. Architecture
The main components of the application are shown in
Figure 2. The application is entirely built with open source
Figure 1. Application GUI: selection of an area based on a grid.
technology. We followed a three-tier architecture: web ap-
plication, web server, and databases. In the web application
tier, we focused on a mobile-ﬁrst design as we expect this
application to be used mainly with smartphones. The web
server tier is built upon the Python Django framework, which
provides the server side logical processing as well as the
connectivity between the users and the database. The web
application tier connects there through the Django REST
framework Application Programming Interface (API).
Figure 2. Component diagram: the 3-tier architecture of the application.
The web application tier, i.e., the frontend, uses the Open-
Layers mapping library to display the rHEALPix grids on
a base map, which currently is OpenStreetMap. The grids
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

are retrieved in GeoJSON from the PostgreSQL database,
with the PostGIS extension. For efﬁcient processing, only the
grids within the user extent are requested from the server and
displayed.
Besides the access to the grid models stored in PostgreSQL,
the web server tier also contains the DGGS-rHEALPix com-
ponent. This component allows to store and retrieve sets of
cells from rHEALPix that cover a given area, we call them
Boundaries, which may be associated to some arbitrary JSON
data. The storage and retrieval uses a MongoDB database
to provide persistence. This rHEALPix grid component has
been exposed as a Django REST framework API, and it also
includes some basic level support for importing and exporting
data from other GIS models and formats. This API is used
by the frontend to manage the user generated geographic data
based on the DGGS.
B. Usage
The users of this application, i.e., the tourists, will not
choose among existing, common geographic features or points
of interest. As pointed out before, they will be deﬁning areas on
the geodetic grid displayed on the application by touching and
selecting/deselecting cells over the base map. Then, they will
add some information associated to that area, i.e., the emotions
they felt when visiting those areas. We are allowing users to
choose freely the areas they want because we are speciﬁcally
interested in how tourists see and feel the space around them,
i.e., Edward W. Soja perceived space, without imposing too
many constraints on their choices.
However, the application will also be able to show the areas
drawn by other tourists and the emotions they associated to
those areas. In this way, the perceived space of some users
might become the conceived space for others. Indeed, we
expect that some areas will be seen as “natural limits” for
certain features in the real space, and many tourists will reuse
them, while other places should prove themselves to be more
diffuse and difﬁcult to delimit.
All these areas will be stored in the application as Bound-
aries associated to the emotional data. The users will provide
the kind of emotion they are feeling by choosing among
the universal emotions pointed out in the model by Ekman
and Cordaro [20]: anger, fear, surprise, sadness, disgust and
happiness (contempt is left out because it does not make sense
to feel contempt about something which is not a person or
group of people). It will be possible to choose more than one
emotion, as it is possible for a person to feel different emotions
about the same place, even at the same time. Besides this
essential input, the application will allow to collect other data
from the users, both automatic (, the date and time) and manual
(e.g., a description of the place). This workﬂow is based on
previous works where paper maps and other generic mobile
GIS applications were used [21], and we expect to collect
information that will allow us to produce similar results, like
the emotional cartography shown in Figure 3 but in a more
automatic way.
C. The role of the DGGS
This prototype uses a DGGS to constrain the geometries
of the areas that its users (the tourists) ﬁnd of interest. This
is driven by two main hypothesis. First of all, we hypothesize
that it should be easier for non-expert users to draw geographic
areas of interest on their smartphones by simply touching
existing cells from a grid instead of drawing polygons as
commonly seen in vector-based GIS data capture applications.
We do not intend for this areas to have precisely delimited
borders, and tools that allow to do that could prove themselves
more difﬁcult to use. And second, once we decide to use grids,
it is rational to use some existing ones. The rHEALPix DGGS
seems well suited to this project, as its cells are projected
into squares. Although hexagons and triangles have some
advantages, most non-expert users who have used any kind
of map should be more familiar with rectangular grids.
Besides this, being intended to facilitate the integration of
geographic data with different origins and scales, a DGGS
should be a good candidate as a framework for the creation of
emotional cartography. Within the frame provided by a DGGS,
we can create a cartography where the objective is not to show,
localize or collect all the details of a place, but the sensations
and emotions that are disseminated over the space. And to do
this in a diffuse, non-continuous way with different intensity,
duration and temporality. The ability to select a resolution
level, and a corresponding grid with speciﬁc cell sizes, from
a DGGS provides us with a spatial framework that seems
ideally suited to emotional cartography, where exactitude is not
really possible and spatially diffuse areas are to be expected.
For instance, it is perfectly reasonable to assume that a city
in general sparks joy, but a particular neighborhood evoques
sadness and a certain square in the neighborhood provides
hope. The hierarchical spatial framework provided by a DGGS
should facilitate this kind of multi-scale data collection.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper has described the prototype of a mobile web
application intended to capture georeferenced emotional data
from tourists. This application uses a DGGS as a framework
both to capture and analyze the data. We hypothesize that this
kind of grid-based framework makes it easier for the users
to delimit the diffuse geographic areas that can be associated
to the different emotions they felt over the place. We also
consider that the hierarchical nature of the grids in a DGGS
will facilitate the analysis of data at different scales as needed.
Once we have deployed an operative version of the appli-
cation, we intend to validate, or refute, the hypothesis that
have driven the design of the application. Besides testing
the application itself, the data collected will be analyzed,
and cartographically presented, under the paradigm of the
emotional cartography.
After that, we want to advance on the collaborative part
of the application. As different users provide their own views
about a territory, we should provide them with to opportunity to
create new data, or to add their perceptions to areas created by
previous users, in a collaborative GIS way. It will be necessary
to develop a system where the mechanisms implemented to
solve conﬂicts, merge similar entries and ﬁnd possible relations
allow to study how consensus and compromises emerge, or not.
Finally, we also expect to ﬁnd cartographic challenges to
portray a collaborative work based on personal feelings, which
are not only different for different people, and associated to
slightly, or not so slightly, different locations, but that may
vary for example under a different weather, or just with the
time of the day.
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 3. An example of emotional cartography using a geodesic grid to depict emotions associated to areas on a base urban map.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially supported in 2019-2020 by
the project LMP19 18, with Arag´on FEDER funds 2014-2020,
“Construyendo Europa desde Arag´on”, and by the project
T59 20R of the Arag´on Government.
REFERENCES
[1]
UNWTO, Ed., International Tourism Highlights, 2019 Edition.
United
Nations
World
Tourism
Organization,
2019,
[retrieved:
October,
2020]. [Online]. Available: https://www.e-unwto.org/doi/pdf/10.18111/
9789284421152
[2]
E. W. Soja, Thirdspace: Journeys to Los Angeles and other Real-and-
Imagined Places.
Oxford: Blackwell, 1996.
[3]
Raqs Media Collective, M. van de Drift, S. B. Davis, R. van
Kranenburg, S. Hope, and T. Stafford, Emotional Cartography -
Technologies of the Self, C. Nold, Ed., 2009, [retrieved: October,
2020]. [Online]. Available: http://emotionalcartography.net/
[4]
O. Ghorbanzadeh, S. Pourmoradian, T. Blaschke, and B. Feizizadeh,
“Mapping potential nature-based tourism areas by applying GIS-
decision making systems in East Azerbaijan Province, Iran,” Journal
of Ecotourism, vol. 18, no. 3, 2019, pp. 261–283.
[5]
H. Albuquerque, C. Costa, and F. Martins, “The use of Geographical
Information Systems for Tourism Marketing purposes in Aveiro region
(Portugal),” Tourism Management Perspectives, vol. 26, 2017, pp. 172–
178.
[6]
F. Leal, B. Malheiro, and J. C.Burguill, “Context-aware tourism tech-
nologies,” The Knowledge Engineering Review, vol. 33, no. e13, 2018,
pp. 1–26.
[7]
N. Shoval and A. Birenboim, “Customization and augmentation of
experiences through mobile technologies: A paradigm shift in the
analysis of destination competitiveness,” Tourism Economics, vol. 25,
no. 5, 2019, pp. 661–669.
[8]
C. Ellard, Places of the Heart: The Psychogeography of Everyday Life.
Oxford: Bellevue Literary Press, 2015.
[9]
E. Olmedo, “Cartographie sensible: tracer une g´eographie du v´ecu
par la recherche-cr´eation (Sensitive cartography: tracing a geography
of lived experience through research-creation),” Th`ese de doctorat en
G´eographie, ´Ecole doctorale de G´eographie de Paris, Paris, France,
November 2015.
[10]
J. Nogu´e and J. Vela, “Geographies of affect: In search of the emotional
dimension of place branding,” Communication and Society, vol. 31,
2018, pp. 27–44.
[11]
A. Scuttari and H. Pechlaner, Emotions in Tourism: From Consumer
Behavior to Destination Management.
Springer International Publish-
ing, 2017, pp. 41–53.
[12]
J. Panek and R. Netek, “Collaborative mapping and digital participation:
A tool for local empowerment in developing countries,” Information,
vol. 10, 2019, p. 255.
[13]
L. Mu˜noz, V. H. Hausner, C. Runge, G. Brown, and R. Daigle, “Using
crowdsourced spatial data from Flickr vs. PPGIS for understanding
nature’s contribution to people in Southern Norway,” People and Nature,
vol. 2, 2020, pp. 437–449.
[14]
I. Sant´e et al., “The Landscape Inventory of Galicia (NW Spain):
GIS-web and public participation for landscape planning,” Landscape
Research, vol. 44, 2018, pp. 212–240.
[15]
I. Prieto, J. L. Izkara, and R. B´ejar, “A continuous deployment-
based approach for the collaborative creation, maintenance, testing and
deployment of CityGML models,” International Journal of Geographical
Information Science, vol. 32, no. 2, 2018, pp. 282–301.
[16]
W. Su, D. Sui, and X. Zhang, “Satellite image analysis using crowd-
sourcing data for collaborative mapping: current and opportunities,”
International Journal of Digital Earth, vol. 13, 2018, pp. 1–16.
[17]
M. Purss, Ed., The OpenGIS Abstract Speciﬁcation - Topic 21: Dis-
crete Global Grid Systems Abstract Speciﬁcation).
Open Geospatial
Consortium, August 2017, no. OGC 15-104r5.
[18]
R.
B´ejar,
M.
´A.
Latre,
F.
J.
L´opez-Pellicer,
J.
Nogueras-
Iso,
and
F.
J.
Zarazaga-Soria,
“On
the
problem
of
providing
unique identiﬁers for areas with any shape on discrete global
grid systems,” in Accepted Short Papers and Posters from the
22nd AGILE Conference on Geo-information Science, Limassol,
Cyprus, 17-20 June, 2019, [retrieved: October, 2020]. [Online].
Available: https://agile-online.org/images/conference 2019/documents/
short papers/58 Upload your PDF ﬁle.pdf
[19]
R. G. Gibb, “The rHEALPix Discrete Global Grid System,” in IOP
Conference Series: Earth and Environmental Science, ser. IOP Confer-
ence Series: Earth and Environmental Science, vol. 34, Apr. 2016, p.
012012.
[20]
P. Ekman and D. Cordaro, “What is meant by calling emotions basic,”
Emotion Review, vol. 3, no. 4, 2011, pp. 364–370.
[21]
J. Dieste, O. Kratochv´ıl, M. P. Serrano, and A. Pueyo, “Los mapas
emocionales:
Un
instrumento
para
la
mejora
del
conocimiento
de
los
espacios
metropolitanos
(Emotional
maps:
a
tool
for
improving knowledge of metropolitan areas),” in Libro de Actas
del XXXVI Congreso de la Asociaci´on de Geograf´ıa Espa˜nola.
Crisis y espacios de oportunidad. Retos para la Geograf´ıa, Valencia,
Spain, 2019, pp. 1523–1524, [retrieved: October, 2020]. [Online].
Available:
https://www.age-geograﬁa.es/site/wp-content/uploads/
2020/01/Actas-Congreso-Conclusiones-AGE-VLC2019 compressed
reduce-1.pdf
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-762-7
GEOProcessing 2020 : The Twelfth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

