A Prototype for a Real-Time Indoor Evacuation Simulation System 
Using Indoor IR Sensor Information 
 
Chulmin Jun, Hyunwoo Nam, Suyeong Kwak 
Dept. of Geoinformatics, Univ. of Seoul 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: {cmjun, nhw612, ksykk0}@uos.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract—Indoor fire simulators have been used to analyze 
building safety in the event of emergency evacuations. These 
applications are primarily focused on simulating evacuation 
behaviors for the purpose of checking building structural 
problems in normal time rather than in real time situations. 
Therefore, they have limitations in handling real-time 
evacuation events for the following reasons. First, the existing 
models mostly experiment with artificial situations using 
randomly generated evacuees, while the real world requires 
actual data. Second, the operation takes too long to generate 
real time data. Third, they do not produce optimal results for 
use in rescue or evacuation guidance. In order to overcome 
these limitations, we suggest a method to build an evacuation 
simulation system that can be used in real-world emergency 
situations. The system performs numerous simulations in 
advance according to varying distributions of occupants. Then 
the resulting data are stored in a DBMS. The actual data of 
people captured by an IR(infrared) sensor network are 
compared with the simulation data in the DBMS, and the 
queried data most closely is provided to the user. The system 
has been tested in a campus building, and the suggested 
processes are illustrated. 
Keywords-indoor evacuation simulation; DBMS; IR sensor; 
evacuation guide. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In order to minimize damage from increasing disasters 
such as fire, collapse in indoor spaces, many studies on 
indoor evacuation models have been done to predict 
pedestrian’s evacuation situations. Many evacuation models 
have been developed to model and visualize the evacuation 
patterns of the pedestrians. However, the primary purposes 
of these models are focused on building safety evaluation in 
such events [1, 2, 3] and they have limitations to be used for 
pedestrian’s evacuation guide or rescue activity at the time of 
actual situations as follows: 
First, existing evacuation models use the virtual human 
data to perform the simulations. However, in order to use the 
distribution of the real occupants, it is required for the 
models to have inter-communication functions with indoor 
sensors to find out real-time information about the present 
occupants in a building [4]. It is essential to have information 
of the present occupants acquired from the indoor sensors if 
the result data can be used for actual disaster situations. 
Second, there are time constraints for simulation results to be 
used in real-time situations. Since many factors, for example, 
physical and psychological aspects of evacuation patterns 
and building structures are considered in the simulation, it 
takes much time to generate simulation results [5]. Third, the 
main purposes of the most existing models studied 
previously have been focused on evacuation safety 
inspection of buildings, or have been developed for research 
or testing of algorithms [3]. However, if the evacuation 
simulation results can be used for reference data of 
evacuation 
guide 
or 
rescue 
operations, 
appropriate 
simulation results (e.g. total evacuation time, evacuation 
routes, the number of evacuees for each exit door, and 
expected bottleneck spots, etc.) should be created. 
In this study, the following methodologies are proposed 
to solve the limitations described above. First, in order to 
solve the time constraints of the simulation running time, we 
used a method to query ready-made data instead of creating 
data in real-time. In our model, many simulation results are 
generated beforehand, and from them, results which match 
up with the similar conditions of the specific situations are 
queried and visualized. To this end, a large number of 
simulation results for a variety of situations (e.g. occupant 
information, simulation parameters, disaster occurrence spots, 
etc.) should be accumulated and stored in a system. 
Therefore, a DBMS-based simulation management system is 
required to manage a huge number of simulation results. In 
this study, we developed a system that can store simulation 
results in a DBMS. Simulation results about a variety of 
present occupants distribution by changing the distribution 
are firstly obtained, and those simulation results are stored in 
the DBMS. The stored data in the DBMS are transformed to 
be used for reference data of evacuation guide and rescue 
operations for evacuees. We present a process to obtain real-
time placement information about occupants via inter-
operation between the evacuation simulator and indoor 
IR(infrared) sensors, and then, to generate simulation results 
based on the information. The actual data of people captured 
by the IR sensor network are compared with the simulation 
data in the DBMS, and the queried data most closely is 
provided to the user. The system has been tested in a campus 
building, and the suggested processes are illustrated. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
A. Pedestrian modeling 
The pedestrian behavior pattern modeling has been 
studied in various areas [6]. Among them, the social force 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

model (SSM) has been used to model pedestrian movements 
in indoor spaces from microscopic points of views [7, 8, 9]. 
Also, the cellular automaton (CA) based floor field model 
(FFM) that generates the similar results has attracted 
attention [10]. 
In this study, the FFM-based evacuation simulator was 
implemented and used, which is advantageous in operation 
speed [11, 12].  The FFM divides indoor spaces into grid 
cells, and using two field values, the static floor field (SFF) 
and dynamic floor field (DFF), pedestrian’s movements are 
modeled [13, 14]. In the study, the basic FFM theory and 
different parameter values were used and the patterns of 
pedestrian movements was represented by adjusting the 
sensitivity parameters of SFF and DFF. In particular, among 
the parameter values in three situations defined in [15], we 
used those of the cooperative regime case (ks=0.4, kd=0.1,α
=0,δ=0.3) by modifying ks (0.4 to 1.0) in order to increase 
the moving speed of pedestrians toward exits. These 
parameters influence the pedestrian movements significantly, 
and can be set appropriately for various situations to perform 
simulations. 
B. Evacuation models 
Previously, many evacuation models have been studied 
and developed for many purposes such as fire situation 
analysis, pedestrian pattern analysis and evacuation safety 
analysis. In [16], many previously developed evacuation 
simulators were compared and analyzed. In this study, data 
outputs generated by some representative models among 
them were reviewed and summarized as follows: 
The analysis results showed that most of the models 
produced initial occupant distribution, total evacuation time, 
and the number of total evacuees. Also, while some models 
produced 
additional 
information 
such 
as 
building 
information, evacuees by hourly basis, evacuation time and 
route by occupants, and the number of evacuees by exit 
doors per hour, other models such as ASERI and EGRESS 
even generated the bottleneck spots. Egress Section in 
FPETool, Simulex, and EXIT89, which were applicable to 
be used in multi-layered space structures, produced 
information such as stair information and vertical travel time. 
The evacuation simulation system proposed in this study 
should produce the resulting data which is compact to be 
stored in the DBMS and highly applicable to the actual 
disaster situations. 
Also, existing developed evacuation simulators such as 
Simulex and buildingEXODUS were mostly commercial 
programs, which were impossible to modify or add new 
features. In this study, since generation of the required 
resulting data and storage of the simulation results in the 
DBMS were needed, which were not present in the existing 
evacuation models, an evacuation simulator including the 
required features should be developed based on the one 
developed by the authors [17]. 
C. Indoor occupants detection sensor 
In order to find out the indoor occupants distribution or 
the number of indoor occupants, a variety of sensors such as 
Infrared (IR) sensors, RFID, heat detection sensors, weight 
detection sensors, Zigbee sensors, and camera sensors have 
been used. In [18], using an indoor camera sensor, a method 
of acquiring the location information of moving objects 
(pedestrians) was proposed. In [19], using the video 
information acquired by CCD cameras installed at the exit 
doors, information of moving objects was obtained too. In 
[4], a detection system was proposed to find the number of 
pedestrians and moving direction by measuring heat 
generated by pedestrians using the IR distance measurement 
sensor. In [20], a system to trace moving objects based on IR 
was proposed. 
The required information in this study was the 
distribution of occupants by each room, and accurate 
location information for each occupant was not needed. 
Since distribution information of the occupants based on the 
number of the occupants in each room or hallway was 
needed, exit or entry information of the occupants was only 
acquired. A sensor which is appropriate for acquiring the exit 
or entry information of the occupants is an IR sensor. In this 
study, a sensor network was configured to collect the actual 
occupants data by installing IR sensors at certain areas of the 
campus buildings, which will be described in detail in the 
next section. 
III. 
SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT 
A. Generation and storage of the simulation results 
In this study, a large number of simulation results were 
stored in the DBMS beforehand, and a system was 
implemented to search and output resulting data for a 
specific situation through queries. For this, resulting data 
which can be stored in the DBMS should be selected first, 
and then a database schema for them should be designed. As 
discussed in Section II, evacuation simulations were 
performed using the FFM with some modified parameters in 
this study [17]. The resulting data to be generated and stored 
were summarized in Table I. 
For more explanation of Table I, basic storage 
information included initial occupants’ distribution, total 
evacuated occupants and time, and algorithm parameters. For 
 
TABLE I.  
TYPES OF THE GENERATED DATA 
Resulting data 
Information to be stored in DBMS 
Initial occupants 
distribution 
Initial location coordinates for each 
pedestrian 
Total evacuated 
occupants 
Total evacuated occupants 
Total evacuation time 
Total evacuation time 
Algorithm parameters 
The algorithm parameters used in the FFM 
Evacuated occupants by 
exit door 
Evacuated occupants collected by each exit 
door 
Evacuation route by each 
room 
Coordinates list for the travelled route by 
selecting a representative occupant for each 
room randomly 
Expected bottleneck 
spots 
Cell occupancy degree value for each cell 
by calculating pedestrian’s occupancy 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the initial occupants distribution, simply put, the number of 
occupants in each room was stored, and initial position for 
each pedestrian can be stored as cell coordinates in more 
detail. The total evacuated occupants and time, which are the 
information provided by most evacuation simulators, were 
suitable to be stored in the DBMS. The algorithm parameters 
mean the parameter values of ks, kd,α, andδ, which were 
applied to SFF and DFF in the FFM. These values should be 
stored because evacuation patterns changed greatly by 
changes of these values [15]. 
In this study, together with basic information, additional 
information which can be required for actual disaster 
situations was produced as the resulting data which was then 
stored in the DBMS. The evacuated occupants by exit doors 
were collected and stored by calculating evacuated occupants 
by each exit door during the evacuation simulation running. 
The evacuation route for each room was stored by selecting a 
representative occupant of each room and storing his/her 
travel coordinates during evacuation. The reason for the 
selection of the representative for each room was to 
minimize data size otherwise too large to be stored in the 
DBMS. Finally the expected bottleneck spots represented 
information about bottleneck which can be occurred during 
evacuation at the hallways, doors or exits. In this study, the 
number of pedestrians occupied in each cell was recorded 
and this data was called the cell occupancy degree. If the 
distribution of the cell occupancy degree in an indoor space 
is known, then areas where pedestrians were crowded can be 
estimated. Figure 1 shows the visualization of the cell 
occupancy degree. The figure represented the cell occupancy 
degree by dark colors and showed that occupancy was most 
frequent at the lower exit. Based on this information, it can 
be estimated that which areas are likely to have bottleneck. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Example of cell occupancy 
 
TABLE II.  
DBMS SCHEMA 
Table 
Schema 
Sensor Detection 
Occupants 
ID, Person, Type(FK), Time, TotalPerson 
Sensor Type 
ID, TypeDescription 
Simulation Results 
ID, Building, Person, TotalPerson, Exit, Time, 
Alpha, Delta, Kd, Ks, SecPerTick, 
AgentPathLog, CellOccupationValue, 
PersonLocation 
In order to store the resulting data described above in the 
DBMS, a schema should be designed. Table II shows the 
table schemas in the DBMS. It consisted of three tables of 
sensor detection occupants, sensor type and simulation 
results. The sensor detection occupants table can store the 
number of detected occupants by hour and the recorded time 
as well as the total occupants. The sensor type table is 
information about the sensor location in which space it was 
installed. The simulation results table was designed as 
described above. 
B. Capturing indoor occupants distribution using the exit 
and entry detection 
In order to utilize the simulation data in an actual disaster 
situation, simulation results generated using the actual 
occupants distribution are needed. Therefore, sensor 
technologies applicable in indoor spaces should be used to 
find out the indoor occupants distribution. As an appropriate 
sensor for capturing indoor occupants distribution, infrared 
sensors were selected. The data which were transferred to the 
server through the sensor were detection time, detected exit 
and entry occupants in real-time, and the number of 
cumulative occupants. 
The transferred data were designed to be stored in the 
DBMS. Since a connection to the sensor can be disconnected 
when an actual disaster occurs, the system was designed that 
the exit or entry occupant data detected by the sensors were 
stored in the DBMS in the server first, and then the 
occupants distribution information at the specific time was 
queried and fetched. 
C. Matching between the evacuation simulation results 
and the detected occupants 
Section 3-A showed how the resulting data to be 
generated for the evacuation simulation were defined, and a 
database schema for the simulation results was designed to 
store the data. Section 3-B summarized that an infrared 
sensor network was built and detected occupants information 
was stored in the DBMS. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Configuration and flow of the matching system 
Data Matching 
Program
Occupants
Info
Results
Info
 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2 shows a configuration and data flow of the 
matching system between real-time occupants data by sensor 
detection and the simulation results proposed in this study. 
The interoperating system has a data matching program, 
which performs queries and returns the query results by 
connecting to the simulation results database that stores the 
simulation results and the sensor detection occupants 
database that stores the exit and entry occupants information 
detected by the sensor. The sensor detection occupants DB 
stored the exit and entry occupants information of each room 
detected in every 5 minutes. The simulation results DB 
stored the simulation results generated beforehand according 
to various combinations of occupants. In this study, among 
the various factors which influence the simulation results, the 
occupants distribution was focused so that simulations were 
run by changing combinations of occupants and its results 
were stored in the DB. Figure 3 shows an example of 
different combinations of occupants distribution. After all the 
possible combinations of distributions, each of which is 
composed of a set of occupants numbers in building rooms, 
were established, a simulation was run for each case. Then, 
the results were stored in the database table. 
To explain the system’s flow, first, a user requested a 
simulation results at the specific time such as the disaster 
occurrence situation. Then, the interoperating system 
requested the occupant information from the sensor detection 
occupants DB in order to obtain the occupants combination 
information at the closest time with the requested time. The 
requested occupant information was returned to the system, 
and stored in the memory. Next, in order to have the 
simulation results which were performed with the closest 
occupants 
combinations 
of 
the 
obtained 
occupants 
distribution information, the results were requested from the 
simulation results DB. Then, requested simulation results 
were returned to the system, and finally delivered to the user. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Different combinations of occupants distribution 
IV. 
SYSTEM TEST 
A. Development of the DBMS and the system 
A DBMS was used to store the simulation results and the 
sensor detection occupants information as described in the 
previous section. In this study, PostgreSQL was used as the 
DBMS [21]. The DBMS consisted of three tables such as 
IRSensor(storing occupants information detected by the 
sensor), SimResult(storing the simulation results) and 
SensorType(storing the configuration type of the sensor). 
Each schema for the tables was configured as described in 
Section III. 
Next, based on the evacuation simulator which was 
developed by [17, 22], the revised evacuation simulator 
proposed in this study was developed. There were two 
features required for the evacuation simulator: one is an 
automatic 
iteration 
by 
changing 
various 
occupants 
combinations, and the other is to store the result data in the 
simulation results DB after completion of simulation running. 
Using the developed simulator, simulation results 
according to the various occupants combinations were stored 
in the DBMS. Since it was not practical to constitute all the 
possible combinations from occupants of rooms, some 
increments (i.e. 5 as shown in Fig. 3) were used. Then, using 
the developed DBMS, the matching system was developed to 
fetch the simulation results. This system followed the 
configuration and flow as explained in Section III-C. To 
obtain the sensor detection occupants information at the 
specific time, queries with time information were used. The 
numbers of occupants stored in the DB, with which 
simulations were run, were integers with some increments as 
shown in Figure 3 (e.g. 5, 10, 0, 5, etc.), while those captured 
by the sensors were the actual numbers of people located in 
rooms (e.g. 4, 7, 1, 2, etc.). Therefore, it was not possible to 
expect to find two sets that match exactly. To find the 
simulation results generated by using the occupants 
distribution similar with the captured occupants information 
by sensors, the Euclidean distance was used, which 
calculates the difference between the number of the 
occupants of each room and the one that was captured by 
sensors as 

Dist(di, dj)  = 


2
1
n
k
ik
jk
w
w




where di, dj are the occupants distribution in the DB and the 
sensor, and Wik, Wjk are the number of occupants in room k in 
the DB and the sensor respectively. The lower the value, the 
higher the similarity between the simulation results in the 
DB and the occupants information from the sensor at the 
specific time. Then top 20 result data were displayed to the 
user. Basically, this information was provided in a text 
format, and additional information was displayed through the 
detailed information window. 
 
 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 4.  Main interface of the evacuation simulator 
 
B. System test 
  To evaluate the developed system, a part of the campus 
building was selected as the test area. It consisted of seven 
lecture rooms and a hallway, and infrared sensors were 
installed at all doors to detect the exit and entry occupants in 
the lecture rooms. 
Figure 4 shows the main interface of the evacuation 
simulator used in the study. The figure displays the interface 
before input of building data and simulation running. When 
simulation was running, virtual evacuation was performed 
and the resulting data were stored in the DBMS. 
Approximately, 20,000 times of simulations were performed. 
After simulations and database storage were finished, the 
matching process was performed.   Figure 5 shows the main  
 
 
Figure 5.  Main interface of the matching system 
 
Figure 6.  Visualization of the result data 
interface of the matching system. The figure displays the 
result after matching was done with the occupants data 
detected by the sensors. According to the calculated scores, 
top 20 results were generated with basic information as a text 
format. The time taken for search execution was 
approximately 0.5 second, which showed very short time 
compared to the actual simulation running time. 
Figure 6 shows the visualized scene of the result data.  
The points represent the initial positions of the occupants, 
and the dark colors in the floor represent expected bottleneck 
spots as indicated by the cell occupancy rate. The figure 
showed more occupants were crowded in the left hallway. 
The lines represent the evacuation routes which were 
traveled by an occupant of each room which was randomly 
chosen. By these lines, it can be estimated that which routes 
were chosen to evacuate for occupants in each room. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this study, a real-time evacuation simulation system 
was developed by using indoor sensors and DBMS. By using 
infrared sensors, the actual distribution information of 
occupants was detected and applied. Also, the evacuation 
simulation results were stored in the DBMS, and the 
simulation result data, which was corresponding to the 
occupants distribution at the specific time, was provided by 
matching with the sensor detection occupants. In addition, 
types and configuration for the simulation result data were 
defined, and a visualization module for the result data was 
developed. 
In this study, we demonstrated that evacuation simulation 
results can be used in not only evacuation safety evaluation 
of the building but also application to the actual disaster 
situation through our proposed system. Using the indoor 
sensor technology and obtaining simulation results through 
fast DBMS matching, limitations of the existing models 
inapplicable to real-time events were overcome. 
In this study, a sensor network was configured, and 
evacuation simulation results were obtained by focusing on 
the occupants distribution combination. In the future, not 
only using the occupants distribution combination but also 
by capturing the characteristics of the occupants (e.g. age, 
sex, disposition, etc.) via sensors, our proposed system can 
be improved further to obtain the simulation results which 
incorporate the characteristics and distribution of the 
occupants. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean 
Government (NRF- 2009-413-D00001). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] So-Yeon Kang, Jeong-Hoon Cho, Sun-Ho Choi, Min-Ho 
Hong, and Won-Bok Jang, "Assessment of evacuation safety 
in hospital by use of simulation", The Society Of Air-
Conditioning and Refrigerating Engineers of Korea 2004 
Summer Conference, Korea, 2004. 
 
 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[2] Jong Hoon Kim, Woon Hyung Kim, Jun Ho Hur, and Sam 
Kew Roh, "The evaluation of evacuation performance on 
large-volume spaces", Korean Institute of Fire Science & 
Engineering 2003 Autumn Conference, Korea, 2003. 
[3] Ho Ju Yoon and Yen Kyung Hwang, "A study on the research 
trends analysis for the eevelopment of evacuation simulation 
program", Korean Institute of Fire Science & Engineering 
2009 Spring Conference, Korea, 2009. 
[4] Kee-Hwan Ka, Gwang-Gook Lee, Ja-Young Yoon, Jae-jun 
Kim, and Whoi-Yul Kim, "People counting using infrared 
distance measurement sensor", The Institute of Electronics 
Engineers of Korea 2008 Summer Conference, Korea, 2008. 
[5] Ho Ju Yoon and Yen Kyung Hwang, "Studies in comparative 
analysis on algorithm of Exodus and Simulex for the 
evacuation 
simulation 
program 
development", 
Korean 
Institute of Fire Science & Engineering 2009 Spring 
Conference, Korea, 2009. 
[6] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnate, and J. B. Orlin, Network Flows: 
Theory, Algorithms and Applications, 1993. 
[7] D. Helbing, I. Farkas, P. Molnár, and T. Vicsek, "Simulation 
of pedestrian crowds in normal and evacuation situations" In 
M. Schreckenberg and S. Sharma (Eds.), Pedestrian and 
Evacuation Dynamics, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, pp. 21-58, 
2001. 
[8] D. Helbing, I. Farkas, and T. Vicsek, "Simulating dynamical 
features of escape panic", Nature, vol. 407, pp. 487-490, 2000. 
[9] D. Helbing and P. Molnár, "Self-organization phenomena in 
pedestrian 
crowds", 
In 
F. 
Schweitzer 
(Eds.), 
Self-
Organization of Complex Structures: From Individual to 
Collective Dynamics, Gordon & Beach, London, UK, 1997. 
[10] A. Kirchner and A. Schadschneider, "Simulation of 
evacuation processes using a bionics-inspired cellular 
automaton model for pedestrian dynamics", Physica A, vol. 
312, pp. 260-276, 2002. 
[11] C. Henein and T. White, "Agent-based modeling of forces in 
crowds",  Springer, vol. 3415,  pp. 173–184, 2005. 
[12] C. Henein and T. White, "Macroscopic effects of microscopic 
forces between agents in crowd models", Physica A, vol. 373, 
pp. 694-712, 2007. 
[13] K. Nishinari, A. Kirchner, A. Namazi, and A. Schadschneider, 
"Simulations of evacuation by an extended floor field CA 
model", Traffic and Granular Flow ’03, pp. 405-410, 2005. 
[14] T. Kretz and M. Schrekenberg, "Floor field- and agent-based 
simulation tool", International Symposium of Transport 
Simulation, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2006. 
[15] A. Kirchner, K. Nishinari, and A. Schadschneider, "Friction 
effects and clogging in a cellular automaton model for 
pedestrian dynamics", Phys. Rev., E 65(5):  056122-056128, 
2003. 
[16] E. D. Kuligowski and R. D. Peacock, "Review of building 
evacuation models", Report NIST TN 1471, Gaithersburg, 
MD: National Institute of Standards and Technology, 2005. 
[17] Suyeong Kwak, Hyunwoo Nam, and Chulmin Jun, "An 
indoor pedestrian simulation model incorporating the 
visibility", The Journal of Geographic Information System 
Association of Korea, Vol. 18, No. 5, pp. 133-142, 2010. 
[18] Hyun-jin Lee, So-young Park, Soon-ju Yoo, Ea-hwa Kim, and 
Chulmin Jun, "Real time mapping system for moving objects 
based on indoor camera sensor", Geographic Information 
System Association of Korea 2008 Spring Conference, Korea, 
2006. 
[19] Chang-yul Kim and Seok-rim Choi, "A camera-based system 
for counting people in real time", The Institute of Information 
Technology Assessment 2002 Autumn Conference, Korea, 
2002. 
[20] Seokmin Jung, Woojin Jung, and Woontack Woo, "Infrared - 
based user location tracking system for indoor environments", 
Journal of the Institute of Electronic Engineers of Korea CI, 
Vol. 42, No. 5, pp. 9-20, 2005. 
[21] PostgreSQL, http://www.postgresql.org/. 
[22] Inhye Park, Chulmin Jun, and Jiyeong Lee, "GIS-based fire 
evacuation simulation using CA model", The Journal of GIS 
Association of Korea, Vol. 16, No. 2, pp. 157-171, 2008. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

