Open source GIS Tools to Map Earthquake Damage 
Scenarios and to Support Emergency  
Maurizio Pollino, Antonio Bruno Della Rocca, 
Grazia Fattoruso, Luigi La Porta, Sergio Lo 
Curzio, Agnese Arolchi  
ENEA - National Agency for New Technologies, 
Energy and Sustainable Economic Development 
Casaccia Research Centre – Rome, Italy 
Portici Research Centre - Portici (Naples), Italy 
{maurizio.pollino, grazia.fattoruso, dellarocca, laporta,  
sergio.locurzio, agnese.arolchi}@enea.it 
Valentina James, Carmine Pascale 
Consorzio T.R.E. - Tecnologie per il Recupero Edilizio 
Naples, Italy 
{valentina.james, carmine.pascale}@consorziotre.it 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The latest improvements in geo-informatics offer 
new opportunities in a wide range of territorial and 
environmental applications. In this general framework, a 
relevant issue is represented by earthquake early warning and 
emergency management. In the recent years, the scientific 
community has recognized the added value of a geo-analytic 
approach in order to support complex decision making 
processes for critical situations, due to disastrous natural 
events like earthquakes. This paper describes the research 
activities concerning a GIS-based solution, which is aimed at 
the development of seismic Early Warning Systems (EWSs). In 
this context, an innovative open source GIS has been studied, 
implemented and integrated as component of the seismic EWS. 
Its architecture consists in: a geospatial database system; a 
local GIS application for analyzing and modelling the seismic 
event and its impacts and supporting post-event emergency 
management; a WEB-GIS module for sharing the geo-
information among the public and private stakeholders and 
emergency managers involved in disaster impact assessment 
and response management. 
Keywords-GIS, Open Source, Spatial analysis, Early 
Warning Systems, Emergency Management 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Over the last 100 years, more than 1,100 disastrous 
earthquakes have occurred worldwide, causing more than 
1,500,000 casualties: buildings collapsing is about 90% of 
direct deceases [1]. Those occurrences are clearly linked to 
world’s population increase jointly with cities expansion. In 
particular, the urban growth process is often characterized 
by lack of planning and unsuitable land use: those factors 
contribute to dramatically amplify the damages due to 
seismic 
events. 
In 
this 
framework, 
Geographical 
Information (GI) technologies can play a fundamental role 
both in seismic risk assessment and in complex decision 
making in the course of critical situations [2], supporting 
natural disaster early warning and emergency management 
tasks. The need for related standard and effective spatial 
GUI (Graphical User Interface), geo-visual analytic tools, 
integrated 
geographic platforms (GIS), spatial data 
infrastructures has been outlined within several research 
works (see [3], [4], [5], [6], [7] and [8] among others).      
As regards the early warning and emergency response 
issues related to seismic events, the recent advances in geo-
informatics, in communication and sensor technologies have 
opened new opportunities. The up-to-date earthquake Early 
Warning Systems (EWSs) consist in seismic sensor 
networks connected to a central unit (operating centre, OC) 
by high-speed communication network. The kernel of the 
operating centre is a decision support system (DSS) that 
should enable the operators to make decisions and to 
disseminate EW. The generated alarm should be used to 
evacuate buildings, shut-down critical systems (e.g., nuclear 
and chemical reactors), put vulnerable machines and 
industrial robots into a safe position, stop high-speed trains, 
activate structural control systems and so on. Immediately 
following an earthquake, the operating centre should also 
support emergency response and rescue operations. 
Until recently, the most common information available 
immediately following a significant earthquake is its 
magnitude and epicentre. However, the damage pattern is 
not a simple function of these two parameters alone, and 
more detailed information must be provided for properly 
ascertain the situation and adequately plan and coordinate 
emergency response. Just as an example, although an 
earthquake has one magnitude and one epicentre, it 
produces a range of ground shaking levels at sites 
throughout the region depending on distance from the 
earthquake, the rock and soil conditions at sites and 
variations in the propagation of seismic waves. Hence, GIS 
systems can support quick analysis of the situation 
immediately following an earthquake and facilitate critical 
decision making processes. Prototype systems, currently 
available in literature, have been on purpose developed ([6], 
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[7] and [9]) and are fundamentally based on commercial 
technologies [6] and [9]. 
In Paragraph II of this paper it is described the innovative 
free/open source GIS system [10] developed as integrated 
component of a seismic EWS. In particular, Par. II.B 
describes its architecture, consisting in a geospatial database 
system, a local GIS application for analysing and modelling 
the seismic event and its impacts, a WebGIS module for 
sharing the geo-information (listed in Par. II.C) and 
supporting post-event emergency management. Paragraph III 
is devoted to describe and discuss the results, in terms of 
expected seismic damage in structures and infrastructures, 
and the tools to support a rapid impact assessment and the 
disaster 
response. 
Finally, 
conclusions 
and 
future 
developments are reported in Par. IV. 
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Case of study and context 
The research work here described is focused on the 
development of a methodology for a regional seismic risk 
analysis by using GIS technologies and methodologies. The 
study is part of a seismic hazard, vulnerability and risk 
analysis for the seismically active areas in the Campania 
Region (Southern Italy) (Fig. 1).  
 
Figure 1.  Geographic location of the study area 
 
The main goal is to develop an integrated system for 
emergencies management in case of natural disasters, 
focusing on risk assessment and mitigation, early warning 
(EW) methodologies and post-event support activities. 
Further, the System is based on data coming from an existing 
seismic network located within the study area (ISNet, Irpinia 
Seismic Network [11]). The entire system improves a hybrid 
EWS based on a regional approach that assumes that a dense 
seismic network is deployed around the fault zone and a site 
specific approach, which aims to the protection of specific 
facilities.  
The earthquake EWS is based on the different 
propagation speeds between seismic waves and signal 
transmission, since the alert is given only after the detection 
of phenomena indicating the generation of a possibly 
dangerous event and it has to reach the terminal before it 
starts damaging a given location this allows an alert time of 
that goes for seconds to tens of seconds. 
The functions of a Seismic Alert Management System is 
related to two different phases of an event: 
 
Early Warning:  10-20 seconds after the main shock 
the system should predict the ground motion 
intensity, evaluate the epicentre and provide 
dissemination of information; 
 
Post event warning:  100-200 seconds after the main 
shock, the decision support system should address a 
preliminary scenario based on spatial interpolation of 
ground motion and then a detailed scenario, based on 
simulation of simplified source/propagation  models. 
The OC receives and elaborates information coming from 
monitoring systems (ISNet) and allows to activate a series 
of automatic security measures for sensible structures and 
infrastructures (e.g., high-speed railways, gas and electrical 
plants and installations, hospitals, strategic buildings, etc). 
The OC also coordinates the rescue operations in the 
immediate post-event phase. Moreover, the System has been 
designed not only to manage the emergency tasks, but also 
to provide a real-time monitoring of the vulnerability of 
structures and infrastructures within the area of interest. 
The OC is supported by a GIS system that represents and 
performs the geographical information related to the event 
source (real-time and near real-time phases) and analyses in 
few minutes the expected damages on structures and 
buildings. 
B. GIS System architecture 
The geospatial analysis and visualization play a 
fundamental role in earthquake EW and post-event 
emergency management: to this purpose, the GIS has been 
integrated into the overall Project architecture as geographic 
interface of the OC. Consequently, basic information and 
thematic maps are stored and managed into a geospatial 
database purposely implemented, so that it is possible to  
display and query the data by means a map viewer. Fig. 2 
shows the GIS logical architecture, developed by using  free 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

open source software (FOSS). It consists in the following 
modules (between brackets the FOSS used): 
1. Geodatabase Module (PostgreSQL/PostGIS); 
2. GIS Module (Quantum GIS); 
3. WEB-GIS Module (MapServer). 
 
 
Figure 2.  GIS architecture schema 
Geodatabase Module has been designed to manage and 
integrate geospatial data provided as input to the system, 
including the alphanumeric data related to seismic events 
(e.g., magnitude and epicentre, recorded and processed by 
the OC) and specific geospatial data related to the area of 
interest (geology, vulnerability maps, urbanized areas, 
Census, etc.). The FOSS technologies chosen to implement 
this module was PostgreSQL/PostGIS (www.postgresql.org 
and http://postgis.refractions.net/). 
The GIS Module, in direct connection with Geodatabase 
Module, is devoted to process geographical data and spatial 
information. By means of spatial analysis procedures and 
geo-processing operations, this module provides a complete 
and up-to-date description of the study area and, as final 
result, the maps of expected damage. After a comparative 
analysis between the main FOSS desktop GIS platforms 
available [10], the one chosen to implement the GIS Module 
was QuantumGIS (http://www.qgis.org/). The comparison 
was based on main functionalities, technology, geo-
processing capabilities and interoperability with the other 
FOSS packages used for the modules Geodatabase and 
WEB-GIS. 
Finally, the WEB-GIS Module was implemented by 
using the FOSS Mapserver (http://mapserver.org/): it allows 
the consultation of geo-spatial data stored in the system and 
support the management of activities during the immediate 
seismic post-event phase.  
The main features of the GIS subsystem can be 
summarized in: 
 
Description and characterization of the study area; 
 
Production of thematic maps (e.g., expected damage 
scenarios) to support the management of near-EW 
and post-event phases; 
 
Consultation via intranet/internet to data and maps. 
C. Materials 
The 
Geodatabase 
Module 
has 
been 
purposely 
implemented to provide the spatial description of the study 
area of the Campania region (Fig. 1) and structured into 
different logical schemes (homogeneous for geographic data 
type). In detail, the following data (UTM-WGS84 reference 
system) have been used: 
 
Basic GIS Layers (Administrative boundaries, road 
network, railways, hydrograph, etc ...); 
 
Thematic Maps (hydrology, geomorphology, seismic 
classification, etc.); 
 
1:25.000 Cartography; 
 
Census data; 
 
Digital Terrain Model (DTM, 20 m ground spacing); 
 
Geographic location and data of ISNet sensors; 
 
PGA (Peak Ground Acceleration) distribution maps; 
 
Data from parametric catalogue of damaging 
earthquakes in Italy (INGV, Italian National Institute 
of Geophysics and Volcanology). 
Those layers and information have represented the basis 
of the spatial analysis carried out through the GIS Module 
and, along with the new maps produced, have been stored 
and managed into the Geodatabase Module. 
D. Spatial analysis 
As stated before, magnitude and epicentre are 
fundamental information available immediately after a 
significant earthquake. Considering other parameters such 
as rock and soil conditions, distance from the epicentre and 
variations in the propagation of seismic waves, it is possible 
to produce the ground shaking maps by means of spatial 
analysis and geo-processing tools. Then, such maps can be 
overlaid with inventories of buildings, critical facilities, 
transportation networks and vulnerable structures and 
provide a mean of prioritizing response. 
The work here presented is based on several of these 
concepts in a simplified analysis over a fairly large region 
and exploits data from the parametric catalogue of 
damaging earthquakes in the Italian area, achieved by INGV 
[12]. The GIS system has been opportunely designed to 
process and achieve shake maps and multiple scenarios with 
different local magnitude (ML) for different epicentres. 
Considering the spatial data stored into the Geodatabase 
module and the geographic location of the ISNet sensors, 
the system has been structured to receive earthquake from 
the OC (epicentre and ML) in order to return PGA maps, 
vulnerability maps and expected damage scenarios. In this 
way, it is possible to have a preliminary assessment of the 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

expected damages after a seismic event of given magnitude 
and epicentre. The model developed within the GIS systems 
takes into account the potential effects of the earthquake on 
manmade objects and population: for this reason, the 
vulnerability has been expressed in terms of macroseismic 
intensity IMCS. In particular, PGA and IMCS values have been 
correlated using the law proposed by Sabetta and Pugliese 
[13] to calculate the PGA distribution and to correlate the 
PGA to IMCS [14]. In order to estimate the surface ground 
shaking in the region, the following attenuation relationship 
[13] has been used (1): 







e sS
e S
h
R
c
a bM
Y
2
1 1
/1 2
2
2
10
10
)
log (
log ( )
 
being Y the parameter to evaluate the PGA for this case 
study, M  the magnitude (local), R the distance (from the 
epicentre) and σ the standard deviation of log Y. The 
parameters S1 and  S2 refer to site classification and take the 
value of 1 for shallow and deep alluvium sites, and zero 
otherwise. The analysis don’t take in account of site effects 
and the PGA has been calculated considering bed rock 
condition. To convert IMCS to PGA, the following equation 
(2) has been used: 
I MCS
PGA



,0 197
.0 594
log


III. 
RESULTS 
A. Vulnerabilty Index 
To evaluate the vulnerability is required a suitable 
inventory of the buildings in the region and well-defined 
relationship between earthquake motion (including local site 
effects) and both structural and non-structural damage. The 
estimation of buildings vulnerability is fundamental to 
provide a measure of their susceptibility to be damaged in 
consequence of specified seismic events. To obtain this 
information, as basic source has been used the inventory of 
the buildings extracted from ISTAT [15] Census data 
(2001). Those data, in table format, have been linked to the 
respective census section (in vector format) and processed 
using spatial analysis GIS functions. In this way, it has been 
possible to produce new GIS layers containing aggregated 
information about built-up density, structural typology (2 
classes: Masonry or Reinforced Concrete), age of 
construction (7 classes), number of storeys (4 classes). 
Adapting the approach proposed by Giovinazzi and 
Lagomarsino [16] and using the above described data, thus, 
it has been calculated the vulnerability index Iv for each 
census section [17]. Firstly, the buildings have been 
basically distinct  (Table I) in  Masonry (M) or Reinforced 
Concrete (RC). Other information contained in the ISTAT 
data (number of floors and period of construction) have 
been instead used to correct the vulnerability index for each 
category and considered as behaviour modifiers (Table II).  
TABLE I.  
VULNERABILITY INDICES FOR BUILDING TYPOLOGIES AND 
CONSTRUCTION AGE OVER THE STUDY AREA 
 
Construction age 
IV 
Masonry 
RC 
1 
Before 1919
50 
-
2 
1919 ÷ 1945 
40 
- 
3 
1946 ÷1961 
30 
20 
4 
1962 ÷1971 
30 
20 
5 
1972 ÷1981 
20 
20 
6 
1982 ÷1991 
20 
0 
7 
After 1991 
20 
0 
TABLE II.  
VULNERABILITY INDEX MODIFIERS DEPENDING OF 
NUMBER OF STOREYS AND CONSTRUCTION AGE 
Age
N. of  
storeys 
<1919 
1919-
1945 
1946-
1961 
1962-
1971 
1972-
1981 
1982-
1991 
>1991 
1 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-6 
-6 
2 
+5 
+5 
+5 
+5 
+5 
0 
0 
3 
+5 
+5 
+5 
+5 
+5 
0 
0 
>4 
+10 
+10 
+10 
+10 
+10 
+6 
+6 
 
 
Figure 3.  Map of the vulnerability index IV: values for Census sections 
Those modifiers are used to increase or decrease in the Iv 
index, depending on the characteristics of the buildings 
within the area considered. Because each building has his 
intrinsic vulnerability and census sections may contain 
buildings with different values of the index, IV (ranging 
from -6 to 60) has been calculated for each polygon as a 
weighted average of the values due to different building 
characteristics (Fig. 3). 
B. Maps of expected damage 
Despite the obvious approximations, the preliminary 
assessment of seismic vulnerability performed by the above 
described approach has the advantage of an extensive and 
prompt application, especially considering a large area like 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the Campania Region. After converting each map into an 
array of numeric values with square cell size 50 m spatial 
resolution, consistent with other data, it has been possible to 
process (by means spatial analysis modelling) the thematic 
maps representing PGA, IMCS and IV in overlay with the 
spatial representation of Census data above described. 
According to Giovinazzi and Lagomarsino [16], the damage 
d has been calculated (3) as: 






V
MCS
I
I
d





.0 05
10 2.
.0 45 arctan .0 55
5.0
   [3]   
The formula (3) expresses the relationships between IMCS 
and damage d, according to the trend of fragility curves 
depicted in Fig. 4.  
 
 
Figure 4.  Fragility curves and Vulneravility Index IV relationships, in 
terms of mean damage 
 
Figure 5.  Scenario: example of map of expected damage (categorized 
according to different levels of damage) 
Therefore, from a qualitative point of view, it is possible 
to establish a relation between IMCS and d by differentiating 
the mean damage into 5 different levels (Fig. 4, left side). 
Then, the damage can be expressed by an a-dimensional 
parameter fd (ranging between 0 and 1), in order to obtain a 
correspondence (Fig. 4, underside) between the levels of 
damage and the values of d calculated by means the formula 
(3). Using this approach,  have been obtained the expected 
damage maps (Fig. 5) for each seismic event simulated: the 
variables are represented by epicentre coordinates and local 
magnitude ML. 
C. The WebGIS 
The primary goal of the WEB-GIS Module is to make 
geographic data and thematic maps available to specific 
end-users and, potentially, to the public. The application 
allows the end-user to view spatial data within a web 
browser, without a specific GIS Desktop software. This 
Module 
provides interactive query 
capabilities and 
integrates the GIS solutions with other technologies, 
according to server-side or client-side applications. Over 30 
different WebGIS packages are available at present. Among 
these, the most popular and commercially successful are 
ESRI 
ArcIMS 
(www.esri.com/arcims), 
Intergraph 
GeoMedia WebMap (www.intergraph.com) and AutoDesk 
MapGuide (www.autodesk.com).  
 
 
Figure 6.  WebGIS visualization of damage scenario (Earthquake 
simulation: epicentre in Andretta, ML 7.0) 
UNM MapServer is a FOSS application developed by the 
University of Minnesota through a NASA sponsored 
project, that has been widely adopted. The package is a free 
alternative to other commercial applications and it is a good 
solution when highly customised applications are needed. 
MapServer is a Common Gateway Interface (CGI) 
programme that sits inactive on the web server. MapServer 
provides a scripting interface for the construction of web 
and stand-alone applications, adding WebGIS capability to 
popular scripting languages. The expected damage scenarios 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

produced through the spatial analysis function above 
described are the main features of the WEB-GIS Module 
(Fig. 6). The Module allows to display these maps in 
overlay and in relationship to each other data stored into the 
Geodabase Module: basic geographic layers, geology, 
shaking maps, urban areas, Census data, PGA and IV maps, 
Scenarios, etc. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENT 
A procedure for mapping and assessing buildings seismic 
vulnerability has been developed integrating spatial analysis 
and using geoprocessing tools [18]. The GIS approach, 
including the reclassification and overlay of each spatial 
data layer, has been applied to analyse the potential hazard 
that would result from a certain magnitude earthquake. In 
this way, it has been possible to define a conceptual model 
that, exploiting the GIS architecture here described, allows a 
quick management of damage scenarios. Maps of PGA, 
IMCS, IV and building characteristics reported in the Census 
data represent fundamental parameters to detect the areas 
(subdivided in parcels) that could probably face serious 
problems in consequence of total or partial collapses. 
Further, the model described in this paper is fully 
functional and available to regional scale and the advantage 
of GIS methodologies is that the system is open and 
additional data can be integrated as soon as new information 
is available. In perspective, multi-source data and GIS 
integrated analysis can contribute to a better emergency 
planning, providing fundamental information for immediate 
response when future disasters will occur. A interactive DSS 
based on GIS approach could support the public government 
to address, in the near post-event phase, activities related to 
emergency management and damage evaluations for 
buildings and lifelines. Finally, the global architecture of the 
system will be enhanced also taking into account the 
implementation of a backup system, in order to manage 
and/or mitigate the effects potentially coming from a 
network failure (electricity, telecommunications, etc.). 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The methodologies here described have been designed 
and developed within the context of “SIT_MEW” Project 
(Sistema integrato di telecomunicazioni a larga banda per 
la gestione del territorio e delle emergenze in caso di 
calamità naturali comprensivo di Metodologie di Early 
Warning), which is a R&D project co-funded by Italian 
Ministry of Education, Universities and Research (MIUR) 
in the framework of the “Grandi Progetti Strategici” (GPS) 
national program. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Lantada, N., Pujades, L. G., and Barbat, A. H., “Vulnerability 
index and capacity spectrum based methods for urban seismic 
risk evaluation” Nat. Hazards, 51, 2009, pp. 501-524 
[2] Cova, T. J., “GIS in emergency management”. In: Longley, P. 
A. et al. (eds). Geographical Information Systems, V 2: 
Management Issues and Applications, John Wiley & Sons 
Inc., New York, 1999,  pp. 845-858 
[3] Andrienko, N. and Andrienko, G., “Intelligent Visualization 
and Information Presenattion for Civil Crisis Management” 
Transaction in GIS, 11 (6):, 2007, pp. 889-909  
[4] Charvat, K., Kubicek, P., and Talhofer, V., Konecny M., 
Jezek, J., “Spatial Data Infrastructure and geo-visualization”, 
In: Emergency management. Resilience of Cities to Terrorist 
and other Threats, Springer Science, 2008, pp. 443- 473 
[5] ESRI White Paper: Geographic Information Systems 
Providing the Platform for Comprehensive Emergency 
Management, 2008 
[6] FEMA 2008. HAZUS-MH Estimated Annualized Earthquake 
Losses for the United States (FEMA 366). Federal Emergency 
Management Agency, Washington, DC, April 200. 
[7] Mueller, M., Dransch, D., and Wnuk, M., “Spatial GUIs for 
Complex Decision Support in Time-critical Situations” In: 
XXIII International Cartographic Conference, 4-10 August 
2007, Moscow Russia, 2007 
[8] Della Rocca, A.B, Fattoruso, G., Locurzio, S., Pasanisi, F., 
Pica, R., Peloso, A., Pollino, M., Tebano, C., Trocciola, A., 
De Chiara, D., and Tortora, G., “SISI Project: Developing 
GIS-Based Tools for Vulnerability Assessment” In: Sebillo, 
M., Vitiello, G., Schaferer. G. (eds) LNCD, Vol. 5188, 
Springer, Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 327-330, doi:10.1007/978-3-
540-85891-1_37 
[9] Theodoridis, Y., “Seismo-Surfer: A Prototype for Collecting, 
Querying, and Mining Seismic Data” In: Y. Manolopoulos et 
al. (eds.) PCI 2001. LNCS, vol. 2563,. Springer Berlin-
Heidelberg, 2003, pp. 159--171 
[10] Steiniger, S. and Bocher, E., “An overview on current free 
and open source desktop GIS developments” Int. J. Geogr. 
Inf. Sci., 23: 10, 2009, pp. 1345-1370 
[11] Irpinia Sesimic Networ (ISNet). http://isnet.amracenter.com/ 
<retrieved: Nov., 2011> 
[12] INGV, Italian National Institute of Geophysics and 
Volcanology. http://www.ingv.it/eng/ <retrieved: Nov., 2011> 
[13] Sabetta F., and Pugliese A., “Estimation of response Spectra 
and Simulation of Non-Stationary Earthquake Ground 
Motion”. Bulletin  of Seismology Society of America, Vol. 86 
- No 2, April 1996, pp. 337-352 
[14] Decanini, L., Gavarini, C., and Mollaioli, F., “Proposta di 
definizione delle relazioni tra intensità macrosismica e 
parametri del moto del suolo” In: Atti 7° Convegno Nazionale 
“L’ingegneria sismica in Italia”, Siena, vol. 1, 1995, pp. 63-72 
[15] ISTAT, 
Italian 
National 
Institute 
of 
Statistics. 
http://www.istat.it/en/ <retrieved: Nov., 2011> 
[16] Giovinazzi, S., and Lagomarsino, S., “Una metodologia per 
l’analisi di vulnerabilità sismica del costruito” In: Atti X 
Congresso nazionale “L’ingegneria sismica in Italia”, Potenza 
– Matera, 2001 
[17] Borfecchia, F., De Cecco, L., Pollino, M., La Porta, L., 
Lugari, A., Martin, S., Ristoratore, E., and Pascale, C., 
“Active and passive remote sensing for supporting the 
evaluation of the urban seismic vulnerability” Italian Journal 
of Remote Sensing, 42(3), 2010, pp. 129-141, doi: 
10.5721/ItJRS201042310 
[18] Pollino, M., Fattoruso, G., Della Rocca, A. B., La Porta, L., 
Lo Curzio, S., Arolchi, A., James, V. and Pascale, C.: An 
Open Source GIS System for Earthquake Early Warning and 
Post-Event Emergency Management. In: B. Murgante, O. 
Gervasi, A. Iglesias, D. Taniar and B. O. Apduha (eds.) 
LNCS, vol. 6783, Springer Berlin-Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 376-
391, doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-21887-3_30 
[19] UNM MapServer. http://mapserver.org/ <retrieved: Nov., 2011> 
 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

