Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing and Multi-Disciplinary Documentation
for Geosciences and Archaeology Information
Claus-Peter Rückemann
Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster (WWU),
Leibniz Universität Hannover,
North-German Supercomputing Alliance (HLRN), Germany
Email: ruckema@uni-muenster.de
Abstract—This paper presents the results from the imple-
mentation of Integrated Information and Computing System
components based on a new universal framework using multi-
disciplinary documentation and advanced scientiﬁc computing
for enabling long-term use of information in geosciences and
archaeology. The solution enables the creation of general long-
term knowledge resources, which will stay highly efﬁcient, most
ﬂexible, extensible, and economic for any kind of use. The core
is an architecture consisting of a knowledge resources base,
application resources, and sources. The knowledge resources
can contain and refer to any object. For providing a universal
integration of objects and in order to improve the quality of
the data, a long-term integration of structured objects and
universal classiﬁcation has been developed. This way, any
content and context can be described and used for advanced
application scenarios, deploying high end compute and storage
resources for any processing and computing tasks. Due to a
ﬂexible collaboration framework the implementation allows
dynamical use with information systems and supercomputing
resources for any kind of workﬂow and application scenario,
integrating knowledge from natural sciences and humanities.
Keywords–Integrated Systems; Information Systems; Docu-
mentation; Advanced Scientiﬁc Computing; Classiﬁcation; Ar-
chaeology; Geosciences; High Performance Computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
With common collections of information and data today,
even if widely accessible, we are missing reliability, valida-
tion, and long-term sustainability. This is resulting from prin-
ciple problems of implementation: There are no foundations
of a suitable long-term strategy, documentation, tools, and
resources. This demands static and dynamical components in
all parts of an implementation. Content has to be developed
for long periods of time. This includes new research, includ-
ing historical information, and extending multi-disciplinary
references. The focus question for documentation, operating
on information and computing is: How can complex systems
be built, developed, and extended over the necessarily long
periods of time? With the application components, e.g.,
information system components like databases, mostly form
monolithic and even proprietary blocks. Their life cycle is
mostly much shorter than long-term content development.
On the side of computing challenges it is possible to create
solutions for very perishable present resources. Any more
complex problem cannot be considered “solved” for future
architectures and applications. Many information and knowl-
edge resources cannot be used without the original context,
e.g., computing resources any more. Up to now context
of information science cannot be described by common
means to a reasonable extend. This leads to another essential
question: What information and knowledge on content and
context can be preserved for medium- and long-term usage
when the complexity of an overall system will be unpre-
dictably high? The long-term strategy created here is based
on an implementation architecture, which includes long-term
knowledge resources with the resources and development.
In this paper we concentrate on the archaeological and
geosciences topics being part of the knowledge resources.
The foundations should enable the essential processing of
archaeological, geoscientiﬁc, geophysical, geological, spatial
and other data as well as a thorough documentation of
all aspects of content and context and the exploitation of
advanced scientiﬁc computing methods and resources for
maximum ﬂexibility. This paper will describe the potential
of Integrated Information and Computing Systems (IICS)
being based on multi-disciplinary documentation for this
purpose. Anyhow, it can only describe a tiny fraction of
the multitude of possible features.
This paper is organised as follows. Section two describes
the motivation and Section three lists aspects of related work.
Section four introduces the architecture and implementation
for the IICS created. Section ﬁve describes the aspects of
the long-term strategy. Section six discusses an implemen-
tation case study and basic mechanisms for a geoscience-
archaeology IICS. Section seven presents an evaluation
including processing, computing, and classiﬁcation aspects.
Section eight summarises the conclusions and future work.
II. MOTIVATION
There are no frameworks providing the necessary concepts
and features for integration of data, workﬂows, knowledge
and computing resources, and operation. For example, a lot
of advanced geoscientiﬁc processing cannot be reproduced
after a few years, even if the data and results are still
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

existing. Therefore means for extended long-term interpre-
tation and analysis are missing. It is a huge challenge that,
besides data creation not being able to support sufﬁciently
comprehensive documentation, the widely used technology,
e.g., document formats, Uniform Resource Locators (URL),
and Web Services are not persistent over longer periods of
time, e.g., for static objects ﬁle formats do change, for ap-
plications the implementations will change, and for services
the features will be modiﬁed. Therefore information struc-
tures built from such technologies will become inaccessible.
Long-term knowledge creation cannot rely on this. From
the complex systems’ point of view any of those building
elements are not suitable for describing objects and creat-
ing long-term knowledge resources. Anyhow the original
sources and building elements are needed for documentation
of the original content and context. Therefore knowledge
creation has to separate the essentials of knowledge from
technology, resources, and other tools while at the same
time respecting their importance. Even worse , that work-
ﬂows, algorithms, resources and their management cannot
be guaranteed for long-term availability. The topic is very
complex and experiences with long-term knowledge creation
are out of scale of the time interval of most researchers.
Especially, it has been found to be less difﬁcult for groups
with a strong background of classical academic education to
understand the problem itself, than it is for groups with a
“technical-only” background to realise the multiple beneﬁts
of classiﬁcation. A basic example of long-term creation of
knowledge and the implementation of applications building
on these resources are presented in the following sections.
It shows a scenario that can hardly be managed with other
available methods and concepts in a comparable way.
III. RELATED WORK
There is no wider concept and implementation known
comparable to the solution presented, described and im-
plemented here. Nevertheless, there are concepts for com-
ponents, implementations, and terminology. Previous work
[1], [2], [3], [4], [5] has delivered important basic con-
cepts and components, e.g., Integrated Information and
Computing Systems, dynamical components, and taxonomy.
Taxonomy is the science and practice of classiﬁcation. An
important facetted classiﬁcation is the Universal Decimal
Classiﬁcation (UDC) [6]. According to Wikipedia currently
about 150000 institutions, mostly libraries, are using basic
UDC classiﬁcation worldwide [7], e.g., with documentation
of their resources, library content, bibliographic purposes,
for digital and realia objects. This is mostly restricted to
publications and references but not of general knowledge
and applications. Some aspects can be studied from the goals
of knowledge discovery [8], which is becoming increasingly
important. Other aspects are handled with search algorithms,
which currently are still very primitive regarding knowledge
creation and usage.
IV. ARCHITECTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION
As far, it is not commonly possible to treasure content
currently used for being preserved in order to create really
long-term usable content. Even much more difﬁcult that an
implementable solution for any form of long-term context
is even in wide distance. In general, only a very small
percentage of disciplines and researchers are familiar with
knowledge classiﬁcation and applications. The more, multi-
disciplinary classiﬁcation is currently only in the focus
of third parties. Operational resources and features are
considered to be short-term issues whereas information,
knowledge, and respective resources and features must be
considered of long-term signiﬁcance. Case studies showed
that long-term development requires a strong sustainability
of content, context, and computation. This means, the most
important part of these systems is the knowledge resources
containing the content and context documentation to any
extent necessary for describing the activities and isolating
the perishable components for context documentation. A
solid classiﬁcation cannot be done automatically. The more,
it cannot be done automatically for use with IICS. Anyhow,
in fact that different views are possible, it is reasonable
to have classiﬁcation view from the origin, from main
disciplines or from the developers in order to increase
the quality of references. The architecture respects these
conditions. The following sections explain how a successful
implementation of an integrated system can be created and
operated using knowledge resources and classiﬁcation for
information system usage.
A. Architecture for documentation and development
The architecture implemented for an economical long-
term strategy is based on different development blocks. Fig-
ure 1 shows the three main columns: Applications resources,
knowledge resources, and originary resources.
Compute Services
Storage Services
and
Resources
Resources
Applications
Knowledge Resources
Scientific Resources
Databases
Containers
Documentation
Originary Resources
Resources
Workspace
Resources
Compute and Storage
Resources
Storage
Components
and
and
Sources
(c) Rückemann 2012
Services Interfaces
Services Interfaces
Services Interfaces
Services Interfaces
Services Interfaces
Figure 1.
Architecture: Columns of practical dimensions.
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The central block in the “Collaboration house” framework
architecture [5], are the knowledge resources, scientiﬁc
resources, databases, containers, and documentation (e.g.,
LX [1], databases, containers, list resources). These can be
based on and refer to the originary resources and sources
(photos, scientiﬁc data, literature). Application resources and
components (Active Source, Active Map, local applications)
are implementations for analysing, utilising, and processing
data and making the information and knowledge accessible.
These three blocks are supported by services interfaces.
The interfaces interact with the physical resources, in the
local workspace, in the compute and storage resources
the knowledge resources are situated, and in the storage
resources for the originary resources. All of these do allow
for advanced scientiﬁc computing and data processing as
well as the access of compute and storage resources via
services interfaces. The resources’ needs depend on the
application scenarios to be implemented for user groups.
B. Components: Applications, knowledge, and sources
The main information, data, geo-referencing, and algo-
rithms for all presented components and examples are pro-
vided by the LX Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources [1]. This
deploys the structure and classiﬁcation of objects necessary
for a reasonable implementation. Besides the LX structure
the already established Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation
(UDC) [6] has been integrated for objects [2] as it provides
a hierarchical and multi-lingual, faceted classiﬁcation for
any topic and allows implementing a faceted analysis with
enumerative scheme features, as well as to create new
classes by using relations and grouping. In multi-disciplinary
object context, this empowers to use workﬂows combin-
ing keywords, enumerative concepts and full-text analysis
with a faceted analysis. Besides the academic, industrial,
and business application scenarios in focus of the GEXI
collaborations’ case studies [3] it is an important factor
to integrate the necessary documentation and computing
facilities with systems like an Universal IICS (UIICS).
An implementation of interfaces for using structure and
classiﬁcation with appropriate Archaeological IICS system
components has been created for several simple (SAMPLE,
COLLECTION, CONTEXT, DISCIPLINE) and slightly
more complex workﬂows (CONNECT, REFERTO-TOPIC,
REFERTO-SPATIAL, VIEW-TO, VIEW-FROM) [5].
For the topics and content discussed here, geoscientiﬁc
and archaeological information and processing are the core
content. Data in this context necessarily includes appli-
cations and algorithms. Besides the above implemented
features, it is optional to support any visualisation tool,
processing algorithms, cartographic and mapping features
and many more tools from secondary sciences, e.g., spatial
algorithms and components, UDC (1-0/-9). These features
can be used with the objects in any way that will be
necessary to describe data and automate workﬂows.
C. Classiﬁcation, keywords, and interfaces
The interfaces allow to use the various resources. A
central element is the classiﬁcation and structure of the
knowledge resources as it increases the ﬂexibility of the
long-term development. Table I compares some features of
classiﬁcation and keywords used for object description.
Table I
UDC CLASSIFICATION AND KEYWORDS COMPARISON.
UDC
Keywords
Internationalisation
Methodical support, partial internationalisation
Codes
Code table support
High level of detail
Medium level of detail
Interfaces can be used in order to access and use objects.
This includes ﬁltering, combination, workﬂow and data pro-
cessing and so on. In summation, this allows the integration
of all data, objects, and resources available: scientiﬁc and
discipline data, lexicographical and bibliographical data GPS
data, geospatial information, processing algorithms, exe-
cutable software, and many more, including realia objects. It
means, we need to integrate multi-disciplinary information,
allowing different views on the same context and allow even
different paths for exploring knowledge.
V. LONG-TERM STRATEGY
Whereas looking from inside a traditional discipline,
information seems to be complete and appears to increase
slowly. On the other hand there is huge complementary in-
formation that cannot be described isolated by one discipline
and tendency is increasing over the time and complexity.
Table II presents the result of a reasonable categorisation
that has been found from practicing the knowledge resources
creation and use for several decades. It shows a more
detailed compilation of categorised features and components
for an expected actuality time range. In this context, the goal
for long-term means > 50 years, medium-term > 15 years,
and short-term < 15 years.
Table II
TIME-RANGE GOALS WITH IICS COMPONENTS (SELECTION).
Long-term
Medium-term
Short-term
Knowledge
Applications
Context
Containers
Interfaces
Sources
LX Resources
DOI, URN
URL
UDC
Converters
Media
Keywords
Active Source
Converters
Virtualisation information
Storage resources
Computing resources
Algorithms
Distributed services
Compiler, Executables
Content
Virtualisation
MPI, OpenMP
Context information
Complex implement.
Batch systems
Relations & references
Application features
Web Services
Internationalisation
OS features
Communication
Processing & workﬂows
Library features
Middleware
These components, described by a representative selection
in Table II, can cover all aspects of knowledge creation,
application, and system implementation. For example, with
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the implementation, the resources and containers are con-
sisting of thousands of pages. For the presentation within
the following sections a small excerpt of the objects and
classiﬁcation can be shown. The long-term objects must be
able to contain the essential knowledge, even as medium-
and short-term objects cannot be preserved or made persis-
tent as, e.g., DOI (Digital Object Identiﬁer), URN (Uniform
Resource Name), and URL (Uniform Resource Locator) will
vanish and context and sources made fade away as well as
OS (Operating System) features used. Therefore we have
to distinct between the real instance of a DOI and URL
or a context situation and a descriptive reference of these
objects. These descriptive references can contain as much
information and knowledge as possible (for example DOI,
URL, context description, sources).
VI. MECHANISMS CASE STUDY
A ﬁlter chain can be used to compute resulting object sets.
Based on the available system the following steps can be
separated, in an example from geosciences and archaeology:
• Select topic from knowledge base (volcanology).
• Select region from results (Europe, Caribbean).
• Select volcano from results (Vesuvius, La Soufrière).
• Select object entries (geosciences and archaeology).
• Select media objects and references.
• Select application resources and interfaces.
A. Workﬂows and algorithms
The knowledge resources block is the central resource
in the long-term strategy. The knowledge resources can
contain any kind of content. Application components can be
migrated into the knowledge resources for documentation
purposes and re-use. The services can access archived and
historical data as well as live data and feed it into the work-
ﬂows. Services interfaces allow to build complex workﬂows
using arbitrary algorithms. The knowledge resources can
be accessed from applications, which will extract suitable
information and trigger the use of compute and storage
resources. Objects can be selected by any algorithm, e.g.,
combinatory, search, and ﬁlter algorithms. The results can
be delivered to a deﬁned location or service.
B. Resulting cross-links calculated
The knowledge resources organisation allows to create all
structures and references possible for information science
purposes, besides content and taxonomy. A small subset
of knowledge space objects is less suitable for providing
the necessary depth for building facets and referring to
appropriate multi-disciplinary objects. Therefore a basic ex-
ample needs an extended knowledge environment. Table III
shows an excerpt of the references and cross-links calculated
from the knowledge resources for a “Vesuvius” object with
some applications and originary resources, media informa-
tion and illustrative examples. The secondary references
(symbol:
) for an object are calculated from the respective
reference matrix in the knowledge resources.
Table III
EXAMPLE CROSS-LINKS WITH SECONDARY REFERENCES FOR
“VESUVIUS” OBJECT AND GENERATED VIEWS (EXCERPT).
Knowledge
Applications
Media
Originary
Resources
Resources
Inform.
Resources
1
Vesuvius %-GP%-XX%---: Vesuvius [Vulcanology, Archaeology]:
2
%-GP%-XX%---:
(lat.) Mons Vesuvius.
3
%-GP%-XX%---:
(ital.) Vesuvio.
4
%-GP%-XX%---:
(deutsch.) Vesuv.
5
%-GP%-EN%---:
Volcano, Gulf of Naples, Italy.
(see Listing 5)
(see Figure 2)
(see Figure 3)
(see Figure 4)
(see Figure 5)
(Aerial image data, e.g.,
source: Google Maps)
Vesuvius
LX Resources
actmap
photo
samples
volcano
object
[on-site]
climatology
object
–
magma chamber
object
[on-site]
Thrihnukagigur
links
[on-site]
Þríhnúkagígur
Transcription
links
[on-site]
super volcano
[interfaces]
object
[on-site]
Yellowstone
object
[on-site]
Liparite
object
samples
Rhyolithe
object
samples
Soufrière
object
samples
La Soufrière, Guadeloupe
Movieview
video
samples
Lava sand, black
object
samples
Plage de Grande-Anse
object
samples
Mt. Scenery, Saba
Topicview
object
samples
archaeology
Photoview
photo
–
Pompeji
object
museum
Herculaneum
object
museum
Hephaistos
object
–
Vulcanus
object
–
Puteoli
object
–
Zipacná
object
–
Cabrácan
object
–
. . . [cut] . . .
Objectmap
–
Volcano compendium
Volcanomap
VNUM
Location
Archaeological compendium
Geological table
Stone table
Stonetab
object
samples
Mineral table
Mintab
object
samples
Periodic table of elements
Elemview
object
samples
Mapview
image
–
Satelliteview
service
–
. . .
–
Index
service
–
Dynasearch
service
–
Dynacompute
service
–
Dynaprocessing
service
–
Dynaindex
service
–
Dynatypeset
service
–
Dynastat
service
–
[compute and storage resources]
[workstation]
The cross-links are extracted from the long-term knowl-
edge resources and are usable with available data by any
application components. Available example instances from
the application components set, media resources, and origi-
nary sources (realia) are listed. In this context cross-linked
subentries, keys and, for example, in case of volcanic
features the classiﬁcation (UDC) and the Volcano Number
(VNUM) can be integrated in the analysis for computation
and processing via the reference to the appropriate container,
the volcano compendium. Applications and interfaces (e.g.,
Active Source, actmap [4]) can access any available data,
as creating index compilations, retrieving online maps and
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

satellite imagery. Media are, e.g., video data and photo
images. Originary sources of objects are, e.g., realia, in the
case with the volcanic material here, the objects are volcanic
samples, respective stones. These objects are referred to in
an appropriate archive, e.g., a collection, library or museum.
The bottom row shows how the services and resources are
used (e.g., local workstation access, special compute and
storage resources).
C. Resulting object classiﬁcations and processing
Listing 1 shows a simple UDC-Context sample subentry
from the LX Resources. This example expresses a basic
“Europe : America” relation.
1
UDC-Context:(4):(7)
Listing 1.
UDC-Context sample (LX Resources).
Classiﬁcation patterns are suitable to select objects with any
algorithm and pattern matching rules. Listing 2 shows a
basic grep-ﬁlter within a classiﬁcation set of UDC samples.
1
... | egrep "\([0-9]\):\([0-9]\)" | grep "(4):(7)"
Listing 2.
Search grep sample within classiﬁcation (LX Resources).
The result is a set of objects with a context relation between
the continents Europe and America. Listing 3 shows an
excerpt of an UDC table used with the examples.
1
%%IML: UDC55
:: Earth Sciences. Geological sciences
2
%%IML: UDC56
:: Palaeontology
3
%%IML: UDC57
:: Biological sciences in general
4
%%IML: UDC911.2
:: Physical geography
5
%%IML: UDC902
:: Archaeology
6
%%IML: UDC903
:: Prehistory. Prehistoric remains, artefacts, antiquities
7
%%IML: UDC904
:: Cultural remains of historical times
8
%%IML: UDC930.85 :: History of civilization. Cultural history
9
%%IML: UDC"63"
:: Archaeological, prehistoric, protohistoric periods, ages
10
%%IML: UDC(4)
:: Europe
11
%%IML: UDC(7)
:: North and Central America
12
%%IML: UDC(23)
:: Above sea level. Surface relief. Above ground generally.
13
%%IML: UDC(24)
:: Below sea level. Underground. Subterranean
14
%%IML: UDC=12
:: Italic languages
15
%%IML: UDC=14
:: Greek (Hellenic)
16
%%IML: UDC=84/=88:: Central and South American indigenous languages
Listing 3.
UDC classiﬁcation table, English (LX Resources, excerpt).
For a Topicview, corresponding object classes are processed
and media objects are computed. Listing 4 shows the core
data generated from the ﬁltered media data, processing
images for a sample Topicview as listed in Table III.
1
create_archaeology_planet_view_topic.sh \
2
volcano_guadeloupe_soufriere_viewto.jpg \
3
volcano_guadeloupe_soufriere_viewfrom.jpg \
4
volcano_saba_mtscenery_viewto.jpg \
5
volcano_saba_mtscenery_viewfrom.jpg
Listing 4.
Generated core data for Topicview processing.
As the knowledge resources’ objects carry references to
any kind of detailed processable data, distribution maps and
satellite views can be computed and passed on.
D. Resulting object entries on geosciences and archaeology
The following object entries are excerpts from the cal-
culated cross-links table (Table III). The excerpts contain
some, structure, UDC classiﬁcation, keywords, references,
and satellite image reference. The references for the geopo-
sitioning are created via classiﬁcation. They can be used
for any purpose where geopositioning will seem interesting.
Listing 5 shows an excerpt of an LX Resources object entry
[1], “Vesuvius” volcano.
1
Vesuvius [Vulcanology, Geology, Archaeology]:
2
(lat.) Mons Vesuvius.
3
(ital.) Vesuvio.
4
(deutsch.) Vesuv.
5
Volcano, Gulf of Naples, Italy.
6
Complex volcano (compound volcano).
7
Stratovolcano, large cone (Gran Cono).
8
Volcano Type: Somma volcano,
9
VNUM: 0101-02=,
10
Summit Elevation: 1281\UD{m}.
11
The volcanic activity in the region is observed by the Oservatorio
12
Vesuviano. The Vesuvius area has been declared a national park on
13
\isodate{1995}{06}{05}. The most known antique settlements at the
14
Vesuvius are Pompeji and Herculaneum.
15
Syn.: Vesaevus, Vesevus, Vesbius, Vesvius
16
s. volcano, super volcano, compound volcano
17
s. also Pompeji, Herculaneum, seismology
18
compare La Soufrière, Mt. Scenery, Soufriere
19
%%IML: UDC:[911.2+55]:[57+930.85]:[902]"63"(4+23+24)=12=14
20
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: http://maps.google.de/maps?hl=de&gl=de&
vpsrc=0&ie=UTF8&ll=40.821961,14.428868&spn=0.018804,0.028238&t=h&z
=15
Listing 5.
Knowledge resources – object entry “Vesuvius” volcano.
The example contains a reference and VNUM for the Vesu-
vius volcano, various secondary objects, UDC classiﬁcation,
satellite image reference (Satelliteview in Table III). It refers
to “Soufriere”, “La Soufrière”, and “Mt. Scenery”. Listing 6
shows an excerpt of the “Soufriere” object entry.
1
Soufriere
[Vulcanology, Geology]:
2
A common name for a volcanic feature resulting from the
3
french term for \periref{tgt:PeriSulfur}{Sulfur}.
4
The name soufriere is used for a volcanic crater
5
or other area in combination with solfataric activity.
6
The name is mostly used in French speaking regions,
7
especially in the West Indies.
8
Very well known are, for example:
9
La Soufrière volcano, Guadeloupe, F.W.I.
10
Soufriere Hills, F.W.I.
11
Soufriere St. Vincent, F.W.I.
12
Syn.: Soufrière
13
s. also La Soufrière, F.W.I., volcano, seismology
14
%%IML: UDC:[911.2+55]:[57+930.85]:[902]"63"(7+23)=84/=88
Listing 6.
Knowledge resources – secondary object entry “Soufriere”.
This secondary object entry, “Soufriere”, also refers to the
La Soufrière volcano (Listing 7), which itself refers to
various data and objects, e.g., satellite image references.
1
La Soufrière [Vulcanology, Geology]:
2
La Soufrière volcano, Guadeloupe, F.W.I.
3
Volcano Type: Stratovolcano,
4
Country: France,
5
Subregion Name: West Indies, Caribbean,
6
VNUM: 1600-06=,
7
Summit Elevation: 1467\UD{m}.
8
Syn.: Soufriere
9
s. volcano
10
s. also Soufriere, F.W.I., lava, lava sand, OVSG
11
%%IML: UDC:[911.2+55]:[57+930.85]:[902]"63"(7+23+24)=84/=88
12
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: http://maps.google.com/?ie=UTF8&ll
=16.043153,-61.663374&spn=0.003088,0.003262&t=k&z=18&vpsrc=6&
lci=weather
Listing 7.
Knowledge resources – secondary object “La Soufrière”.
The secondary object entry “Mt. Scenery” (Listing 8) also
contains classiﬁcations and media, and further data ref-
erences for the Mt. Scenery volcano on Saba. Extracted
examples are volcano type, VNUM, region, status, elevation,
and UDC classiﬁcation views as well as the geo-references,
which with this request are used to automatically compute
views and distribution maps for classiﬁed objects in the
result matrix. The classiﬁcation groups themselves show
references to associated objects. The data and media object
in a processed reference chain can be used for further
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

analysis, creating special features. That way, using UDC
classiﬁcations, e.g., places from a region or context that
can be associated with volcanology and associated with
archaeological sites can be selected and media objects can
be processed and realia referred.
1
Mt. Scenery
[Vulcanology, Geology]:
2
Volcano, Saba, Netherlands Antilles, D.W.I.
3
Volcano Type: Stratovolcano,
4
Country: Netherlands,
5
Subregion Name: West Indies, Caribbean,
6
VNUM: 1600-01=,
7
Volcano Status: Historical,
8
Last Known Eruption: in or before \isodate{1640}{}{},
9
Summit Elevation: 887\UD{m}.
10
%%IML: UDC:[55+56+911.2]:[902+903+904]:[57+930.85]"63"(7+23+24)
=84/=88
11
%%IML: GoogleMapsLocation: http://maps.google.com/maps?f=q&
source=s_q&hl=en&geocode=&q=mt+scenery,+saba+netherlands+
antilles,+google+maps&aq=&sll=17.633225,-63.236961&sspn
=0.048997,0.052185&vpsrc=0&t=h&ie=UTF8&hq=mt+scenery,+saba+
netherlands+antilles,&hnear=&z=14&lci=weather
12
s. also Saba, D.W.I., volcano, seismology
Listing 8.
Knowledge resources – object entry “Mt. Scenery”.
Dynamical components can even beneﬁt from precalculation
and precomputation of objects. This includes precalculated
classiﬁcation and weights (“PreUDC”). The following sec-
tion presents examples calculated from the above classiﬁed
objects and the ﬁgures are showing the results of selected
attributes, including the classiﬁcation and geo-references
used basic visualisation.
E. Resulting features selection for cross-links processing
The following (Figure 2) is an excerpt of the secondary
objects computed above for the Caribbean region volcanoes
and a selection with UDC “(23)”, “(24)”.
Figure 2.
Topicview – volcanoes, La Soufrière (left), Mt. Scenery (right),
VIEW-TO (green), VIEW-FROM (blue).
Figure 3 illustrates the computed objects (Topicview),
e.g., here volcanic samples after processing, all showing the
variety of material from the top of the La Soufrière volcano.
Figure 3.
Topicview – related volcanic samples (La Soufrière, 2011).
Any of these objects being part of the resulting matrix for
a request, e.g., photos for object entries as well as media
data for physically available samples, have been found via
references and UDC from the knowledge base. The realia
references for the objects refer to a collection where the
samples are stored. Further analysis for the samples is avail-
able via the knowledge resources. Figure 4 shows the geo-
locations [1] for computed geoscientiﬁc and archaeological
object samples on a conﬁgurable object map.
Figure 4.
Objectmap – computed map for related objects (red, excerpt).
A sample distribution of volcanic features is depicted
in Figure 5. It shows a comparison of volcanic data in a
projection identical to the computed Objectmap (Figure 4).
Although the knowledge matrix of this example is most
complex (Table III), the workﬂow for producing a view can
be speciﬁed very easy like for spatial presentation.
Figure 5.
Volcanomap – worldmap of referenced volcanoes (orange).
The map generated with the workﬂow as described with
the case study presents the related objects from the context
available in the geophysical research database. It can visu-
alise various aspects of the classiﬁed objects. In this case of
volcanoes and geological samples a reasonable view is the
spatial distribution of the referenced selection.
Anyhow it must be emphasised that the number of
possible views is not limited, neither from the knowledge
base nor from the implementation. Spatial and cartographic
methods provide only a very restricted tool set for supporting
sciences for their complex tasks. For example, more complex
examples from the same context could use more advanced
presentation methods than available from spatial procedures.
As it is obvious from this, the implementation of the knowl-
edge resources architecture can be used for any purpose.
With the suggested workﬂow, the objects from the knowl-
edge resources can be processed by any means like phonetic
search, e.g., via classical or modiﬁed Soundex algorithms.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

This includes the ﬂexible development of a non-limited
number of extensions for dynamical search and analysis. It,
too, provides a multiplicity of granularity regarding objects
and classiﬁcation.
Any features and data shown, based on the knowledge re-
sources [1] and further sources, even if much less structured
like online encyclopedia material, are resulting from the
request and workﬂow, e.g., selection of classiﬁcation, topics,
object, secondary data, area, map projection, applications
and so on [9], [10], [11].
One possible example of an algorithm for the interface
workﬂow, with one request iteration is: Knowledge base
request, keyword ﬁltering, object processing, UDC ﬁltering,
object element processing, object container retrieval, media
retrieval, media and container processing, building resulting
media, visualisation, provisioning results. This can be used
to create multi-disciplinary text and media results, e.g., dy-
namical distribution maps, from requests, using calculation,
processing, and computation of objects. A workﬂow can
enter the knowledge matrix from different directions, e.g.,
from topic to related topic or from overview to detailed view
as well as vice versa.
VII. EVALUATION
The integration of structure and classiﬁcation allows to
use the beneﬁts of algorithms like ﬁltering for any possible
use of processing and computing. Structuring the content
and context documentation allows a ﬂexible balance for
redundancy of data and compute requirements for various
application scenarios, even with identical data.
The facetted classiﬁcation and multi-disciplinary data
have proved to provide signiﬁcant beneﬁts for knowledge re-
use and discovery. This includes various ways of describing
aspects correctly. From one view a glass of water is half full.
From another view the same glass of water is half empty.
The two groups representing the classical views might argue
that the other view is unintelligible. Both are generally not
good as they only represent views. An alternative view
will be describing the status giving a ﬁlling percentage. In
addition this reduces the limitation of unprecise references.
Most content, tasks, and developments handled with in-
formation and computing systems are not suitable for any
long-term use. The use of the universal knowledge resources
and collaboration framework has shown to be very ﬂexible
and extendable with implementations and technologies over
several decades.
It has been found that standard search and pattern recogni-
tion on information is by far not sufﬁcient to gain reasonable
results for long-term knowledge herding and evaluation
processes. In contrast, the implementation shows excellent
results with opening multi-discipline data for IICS, advanced
computing, and processing. Statistically, ﬁltering 1 GB of
unstructured data delivers less quality than using 10 MB
structured classiﬁed knowledge base data. The Quality of
Data (QoD) must be drastically improved in order to get
better results. This can help to reduce compute times, storage
volume, and besides overall costs it can help to decrease
energy consumption in the end. Using UDC in this context,
the availability of a full UDC catalog, and an implementation
allowing classiﬁcation views, combined classiﬁcation, and
ranking priority has proven to drastically increase the QoD.
With multi-disciplinary networks, there is even need for a
tolerance of individual classiﬁcation.
In common environments it is only feasible to do one
implementation for a speciﬁc application, as has been done
with these components. Anyhow it has been possible to im-
plement the applications on various architectures providing
different resources. Workﬂows support the use of remote
resources (Table IV). In case of a 1000 knowledge-objects
reference chain, with 1–10 elements per object, performance
will increase much with low latencies.
Table IV
WORKFLOW PROCESSES (REMOTE, ETHERNET, 1000 NODES).
Remote Workﬂow Process
Elements
Response Time
Knowledge base request
1000
5 s
Processing (object, media)
10
7 s
Building result
10
5 s
Visualisation
2
25 s
When using one of the described very basic application
scenarios on a certain resources architecture the efﬁciency
mostly depends on the decision for the depth of the cross-
links to be considered and on the processing requirements
for the media data for the originary resources. With current
sizes for digital photos and a low depth of ﬁve to ten
for the cross-links a medium sized application can easily
use about one-hundred parallel processes. On a common
compute resource without a queue conﬁgured for the jobs
the response time will be less than a minute.
That way, implementing components with IICS on many
compute nodes can proﬁt from using various technologies
as suited for different purposes, using task and thread paral-
lelism to the extend needed to handle a problem remotely:
High level: Integrated Systems, collaboration frameworks,
Partitioned Global Address Space (PGAS) models. Virtual-
isation level: Parallel Virtual Machine (PVM). Low level:
Message Passing Interface (MPI) and OpenMP.
VIII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
It has been demonstrated how complex systems for
multi-disciplinary documentation and computing can be
built, developed, and extended based on creating long-term-
knowledge resources supported by a universal classiﬁcation
and implementing IICS systems. This paper presented the
successful implementation of a new universal framework
for an integrated system, integrating knowledge resources
and implementation components for long-term knowledge
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

creation and use, including the facilities for High End
Computing and processing resources.
The geoscientiﬁc and archaeological knowledge resources
have been, structured, extended, and developed for several
decades now, having been successfully used with various
technology over time. Huge beneﬁts creating new instances
of objects and components result from enabling a long-term
stepwise development for all parts of the knowledge and
application space and a free extendability of the knowledge
base. The previous work this implementation is built on has
been discussed.
The architecture allows any kind of documentation and
algorithm for content, context, information and resources
usage. The services and resources usage is very economic
and only limited by the limiting implementation factors, e.g.,
capacities and policies. This solution goes far beyond data
and text mining or image analysis and pattern recognition.
As shown, classiﬁcation, as well as spatial data should
be integrated with the objects. In no case is it suitable
regarding the long-term goals of knowledge creation to “ﬁx”
knowledge objects with an application or implementation,
neither simple or complex, nor closed or open licensed.
The comparison showed that the possibility of com-
bining methods (UDC, keyword, full-text analysis) does
lead to unique beneﬁts. Comparable precision, reliability,
performance, and scalability is not available from any iso-
lated method. For any advanced knowledge resources and
improved QoD, a ﬂexible classiﬁcation is undispensable.
Bringing the integration of universal classiﬁcation and IICS
into wider acceptance can provide a time-capsule against the
transience of knowledge and open new synergetic long-term
possibilities.
Complex systems can be created and extended over the
necessarily long periods of time, using IICS and UDC.
Advanced scientiﬁc computing is supported by interfaces,
accessing compute and storage resources. Further it has
been shown what information and knowledge on content and
context can be preserved for medium- and long-term usage
even for large complexity of an overall system.
The basic architecture has been presented using a long-
term knowledge base (LX), documentation, and classiﬁ-
cation of objects, the “Collaboration house” framework,
ﬂexible algorithms, workﬂows and dynamical and Active
Source components for creating future IICS. Besides that,
there is a strong demand for future education and teaching
in all disciplines of academia and research in order to
mediate and disseminate the basics of knowledge creation
and classiﬁcation.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are grateful to all national and international partners in
the GEXI cooperations for the innovative constructive work
and to the scientiﬁc colleagues at the Leibniz Universität
Hannover, the Institute for Legal Informatics (IRI), and
WWU Münster, sharing experiences on ZIV, HLRN, Grid,
and Cloud resources and for participating in fruitful case
studies as well as the participants of the EULISP Programme
for proliﬁc scientiﬁc discussion over the last years. We
do thank the international colleagues from geosciences,
informatics, and archaeology in the present collaborations
for constructive feedback and proof-reading this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] LX-Project, “LX Foundation Scientiﬁc Resources,” 2012,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/rprojs/en/#LX
(Information) [accessed: 2012-09-29].
[2] C.-P. Rückemann, “Integrating Information Systems and Sci-
entiﬁc Computing,” Int. Journal on Advances in Systems and
Measurements, 2012, ISSN: 1942-261x, (to appear).
[3] “Geo Exploration and Information (GEXI),” 1996, 1999,
2010, 2012, URL: http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/
rprojs/en/index.html#GEXI (Information) [accessed: 2012-
09-29].
[4] C.-P.
Rückemann,
“Beitrag
zur
Realisierung
portabler
Komponenten
für
Geoinformationssysteme. Ein Konzept
zur
ereignisgesteuerten
und
dynamischen
Visualisierung
und
Aufbereitung
geowissenschaftlicher
Daten,”
Diss.,
WWU,
Münster,
Deutschland,
2001,
161 (xxii+139) S.,
URL:
http://www.user.uni-hannover.de/cpr/x/publ/2001/
dissertation/wwwmath.uni-muenster.de/cs/u/ruckema/x/dis/
download/dis3acro.pdf [accessed: 2012-09-11].
[5] C.-P. Rückemann, “Enabling Dynamical Use of Integrated
Systems and Scientiﬁc Supercomputing Resources for Ar-
chaeological Information Systems,” in Proceedings of the
International Conference on Advanced Communications and
Computation (INFOCOMP 2012), October 21–26, 2012,
Venice, Italy.
XPS, Xpert Publishing Services, 2012, pp.
36–41, Rückemann, C.-P., Dini, P., Hommel, W., Pankowska,
M., and Schubert, L. (eds.), ISBN-13: 978-1-61208-226-
4, URL: http://www.thinkmind.org/download.php?articleid=
infocomp_2012_3_10_10012 [accessed: 2012-11-18].
[6] Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation Consortium (UDCC), “Uni-
versal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC),” 2012, URL: http://
www.udcc.org [accessed: 2012-02-19].
[7] “Universal Decimal Classiﬁcation (UDC),” 2012, Wikipedia,
URL:
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Universal_Decimal_
Classiﬁcation [accessed: 2012-09-09].
[8] B. A. Worley, “Knowledge Discovery from Data,” Interna-
tional Panel on Future High End Systems: Chances and
Challenges for Intelligent Applications and Infrastructures,
October 22, 2012, The International Conference on Advanced
Communications and Computation (INFOCOMP 2012), Oc-
tober 21–26, 2012, Venice, Italy, 2012, URL: http://www.
iaria.org/conferences2012/ProgramINFOCOMP12.html
[ac-
cessed: 2012-11-17].
[9] B. Steinberger, “Plumes in a convecting mantle: Models and
observations for individual hotspots,” JGR, vol. 105, pp.
11 127–11 152, 2000.
[10] “GMT - Generic Mapping Tools,” 2012, URL: http://imina.
soest.hawaii.edu/gmt [accessed: 2012-09-02].
[11] GDAL Development Team, GDAL - Geospatial Data Ab-
straction Library, Open Source Geospatial Foundation, 2012,
URL: http://www.gdal.org [accessed: 2012-07-15].
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

