A DEM Quality Dashboard  
 
 
Ariza-López, Francisco Javier; García-Balboa, José 
Luis. 
Dpto. Ingeniería Cartográfica, Geodésica y Fotogrametría 
Universidad de Jaén  
Jaén, Spain 
Email: fjariza@ujaen.es, jlbalboa@ujaen.es  
Reinoso-Gordo, Juan Franciso.  
Dpto. Expresión Gráfica Arquitectónica y en la Ingeniería  
Universidad de Granada 
Granada, Spain 
Email: jreinoso@ugr.es  
 
 
Abstract—A more holistic and applied view of data quality is 
considered and to better communicate it, the use of dashboards 
is proposed. The use of dashboards is very common in business 
management 
and 
quality 
management, 
but 
not 
for 
communicating quality of geospatial data. The definition of the 
use case, the establishment of the key performance indicators 
and how to make their graphic representation in the 
dashboard are key processes to achieve this objective. This 
paper presents our considerations and progress focused on the 
development of this proposal. 
Keywords-Quality dashboard; data quality; fitness for use; 
DEM. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
There are several directly related digital models such as 
Digital Terrain Models (DTMs), Digital Surface Models 
(DSMs) and Digital Elevation Models (DEMs). Although the 
proposal made here may be valid for all of them, it will focus 
on the case of DEMs. A DEM is a bare-earth terrain void of 
vegetation and man-made features [1]. DEMs are a key data 
type for many applications domains because they provide the 
height component in Geographic Information System (GIS) 
analysis, the geomorphological description of the land, a 
reference surface for all hydrological applications (water 
cycle, erosion, floods, etc.), the basis for the development of 
forestry models, the base for agricultural parcel rating and 
are useful in every analysis task related to civil engineering. 
The most usual way to evaluate the quality of a DEM is 
through Positional Accuracy Assessment Methods (PAAMs) 
(e.g., the National Standard for Spatial Data Accuracy). The 
use of PAAMs is the data quality approach preferred by 
official data producers. This is a datacentric perspective 
(internal quality). But this perspective does not adequately 
communicate the quality of a DEM data set when it is used 
in very common applications, such as the calculation of 
slopes, aspects, drainage networks, etc. This situation means 
that the data about the quality of a DEM supplied by 
producers is not understood by a large majority of users [2]. 
There are many references that indicate the existence of this 
handicap [3]. 
We believe that a more holistic view of the quality of a 
dataset is needed. But this holistic view must also be more 
applied, more focused on fitness for use. From the statistical 
point of view, a holistic perspective means a multivariate 
approach, as opposed to the univariate perspective 
(positional accuracy only). A more holistic view means 
considering all those aspects that define the whole, which is 
really complex. For this reason, the problem must be 
centered, and what the whole is must be well defined. In 
order to reach a more fitness for use orientation, we consider 
that the definition of use cases can be an adequate tool to 
define the framework of interest (the partial whole of 
interest). Basically, a use case is the description of an action 
or process with a certain level of formalization (e.g., using 
Unified Modelling Languages —UML— diagrams, or any 
other language). In addition, to better communicate quality, 
it may be appropriate to use graphic tools, which offer the 
user a friendlier view. In this sense, we are not referring to 
the representation of uncertainty (for example, in a terrestrial 
communication network using buffers of a certain width), 
but to the graphic expression of all the variables that are of 
interest to better communicate all the aspects the quality of a 
data set as a whole. 
The above situation, where there is a need to 
communicate objective information about a complex 
situation as a whole, is not unique to the field of data quality. 
For example, in the field of business management it is very 
common to use numerous variables to define the operation or 
behavior of a company. In this case, it is usual to resort to the 
so-called “dashboards”. A dashboard is a type of graphical 
interface which often provides at-a-glance views of Key 
Performance Indicators (KPIs). 
In the geomatics field, dashboards are used in business 
management, but there are few references related to data 
quality [4][5]. More common initiatives are related to the use 
of stars as a rating system (e.g., five stars for open data [6]). 
Recent DEM quality reviews [7][8] do not indicate the use of 
graphical elements (e.g., dashboards) to report DEM data 
quality. On the other hand, there are numerous works [2][3] 
indicating that users of DEM data do not have a good 
understanding of quality aspects. For all these reasons, there 
is a need to make communication regarding the quality of 
DEM data more understandable. 
In line with all of the above, the objective of this work is 
to establish a dashboard proposal to offer a multivariate 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

quality assessment control panel for a specific use case of 
DEM data. Therefore, it is also our goal to establish a 
specific use case on which to develop the dashboard. First, 
we will define the use case, and then a dashboard proposal 
will be made. Therefore, the ultimate purpose of our 
contribution is to convey in a simple and understandable way 
the quality of the DEM data when considering a specific use 
case. 
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section II 
presents major considerations that are needed to stablish a 
use case, Section III is a short discussion informs about our 
next steps. Finally, Section IV presents a brief conclusion. 
II. 
DEFINING A USE CASE  
Reference [3] recompiles several use cases of DEM data, 
and also the result of a worldwide survey on the main users 
and uses of DEM data. From this background, we consider 
that a use case that may be of great interest is the 
determination of a hydraulic network. A brief definition of 
the use case can be the following: given a DEM data product 
“DEMproduct”, 
a 
well-defined 
sequence 
of 
known 
algorithms {A1, A2…} are applied to the DEMproduct 
dataset 
to 
obtain 
automatically 
a 
vector 
dataset 
corresponding to the drainage network. It should be noted 
that no operator intervention is considered. In this case, a 
multivariate quality assessment can be proposed if an 
adequate reference dataset exist or is created. The existence 
of the reference is a critical point for all accuracy 
assessments, but is out of the scope of this work.  
Once the use case has been defined, basically through the 
set {data, algorithms, processes}, we have to define the 
content and configuration of the dashboard. In relation to its 
content, this tool must consider all those variables that are of 
interest from an applied perspective of the data generated 
and whose quality could be evaluated. For example, relevant 
aspects of the hydraulic network generated and that can be 
considered here are: the planimetric positional accuracy of 
the sections of the network, the positional accuracy of the 
nodes, the existence of surplus or missing edges, the 
accuracy of the altimetric profiles of the channels generated, 
the classification of the typology of the generated network, 
etc. We consider that user participation is necessary to decide 
which of these aspects are the most relevant KPIs. The ISO 
19157 data quality model [9] will be applied to these KPIs to 
establish standardized definitions of quality elements and 
their measurements. Reference [10] presents an example that 
can adequately serve as a guide on the use of this geospatial 
data quality model. This example shows the combined use of 
“quality elements”, “quality measures” and “data quality 
units” as defined by the ISO 19157 standard. In addition to 
the above, it must also be defined how the results are 
presented so that they communicate properly. Here the 
structure of the dashboard (quality dimensions) is as 
important as the tools (e.g., traffic lights, stars, histograms, 
box-plot graphics, etc.) that can be used depending on the 
type of variable being worked with and how you want to 
represent it. For example, there are variables that could be 
represented specialized or summarized in a value or in a 
graph. Another relevant aspect is to know if you want the 
dashboard to be simply informative (this is what results from 
the evaluation), or if it has a quality control perspective (the 
dataset passes/fails in relation to a specific quality element). 
In relation to graphical tools there is experience, but not with 
the perspective that is exposed here. We consider that user 
participation is also very relevant here. 
Figure 1 shows an example of a section of two sections 
of a dashboard in which several KPIs related to the positional 
accuracy and the network-type classification have been 
included as traffic light signals. 
 
Figure 1.  Example of two sections of a dashboard based on traffic light 
signals. 
III. 
DISCUSSION  
The approach of quality to users is a key aspect for the 
appropriate use of geospatial data. Therefore, the work that 
has been presented is aligned with a traditional desire in the 
field of geospatial data, which is to make quality more 
understandable for users. For this reason, it is very important 
that the aspects of quality to be considered are those that are 
really relevant KPIs from a “fitness for use” perspective, but 
can also be linked to the idea of functional quality (this idea 
is presented in another contribution of the authors in this 
congress). The work is just beginning, and the authors are 
preparing a survey to identify the KPIs for this case, and will 
subsequently survey various dashboard configurations as 
well. 
The idea has been presented on a single use case, but it 
can be applied to any use case. Once the most defining use 
cases of DEM data are available, you can consider 
developing a complete dashboard for all of them, and such 
that it offers a holistic view of the quality of a DEM. 
An especially critical aspect is the transition from 
elements of quality, as defined in the ISO 19157 model, to 
fitness for use, or usability in the jargon of ISO 19157. This 
is not a specific problem of our proposal, but it is a handicap 
that affects. The communication capacity focused on the use 
case would be much greater if this handicap were overcome. 
IV. 
CONCLUSSIONS 
The usefulness of dashboards is unquestionable in the 
fields of business management and quality management 
systems. This work presents an idea that already exists but 
has not received enough attention in the field of geospatial 
data quality. In order to advance in this line, it has been 
proposed to link it to use cases, such that they allow to limit 
the scope of work. The work is in progress, user participation 
is required to establish the KPIs and the dashboard 
configuration. We hope that these works will be the basis for 
offering a standardized communication tool for DEM's 
quality. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been financed by the research project 
"Functional Quality of Digital Elevation Models in 
Engineering" of the State Agency Research of Spain. 
PID2019-106195RB-I00/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 
(https://coello.ujaen.es/investigacion/web_giic/funquality4de
m/). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. F. Maune, Digital Elevation Model Tecnologies and 
Applications: The DEM Users Manual. ASPRS (2001). 
[2] S. P. Wechler, “Perceptions of Digital Elevation Model 
Uncertainty by DEM Users,” Urisa J. vol 15, pp. 57–64, 2003. 
[3] F. J. Ariza-López, E.G. Chicaiza-Mora, J. L. Mesa-
Mingorance, J. Cai, and J. F. Reinoso-Gordo, “DEMs: An 
Approach to Users and Uses from the Quality Perspective,” 
Int. J. Spat. Data Infrastruct. vol 13, pp. 131–171, 2018.  
[4] E. Folmer and W. Beek, “Data Quality for Use: A Linked 
Data Approach” The 3rd International Workshop on Spatial 
Data Quality (SDQ 2020) January 28th- 9th, pp 22-25, 2020. 
[5] J. Nogueras-Iso, J. Lacasta, M. A. Ureña-Cámara, and F. J. 
Ariza-López, “Quality of Metadata in Open Data Portals,” 
IEEE Access 2021, 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3073455 
[6] https://opendatahandbook.org/glossary/en/terms/five-stars-of-
open-data/ 
[7] J. L. Mesa-Mingorance, and F. J. Ariza-López, “Accuracy 
Assessment of Digital Elevation Models (DEMs): A Critical 
Review of Practices of the Past Three Decades”, Remote 
Sensing, 
12(16):2630 
2020, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12162630   
[8] Polidori L, and M. El Hage, “Digital Elevation Model Quality 
Assessment Methods: A Critical Review”, Remote Sensing., 
12(21):3522, 2020, https://doi.org/10.3390/rs12213522  
[9] International Standardization Association, ISO 19157:2013 
Geographic information — Data quality, ISO, 2013. 
[10] F.J. Ariza-López, J. Rodríguez-Avi, J. F. Reinoso-Gordo, and 
I. A. Ariza-López, “Quality Control of As Built BIM Datasets 
Using the ISO 19157 Framework and a Multiple Hypothesis 
Testing Method Based on Proportions”, ISPRS International 
Journal 
of 
Geo-Information, 
8(12):569, 
2019, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijgi8120569 
 
.
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

