Using a Social Network for Road Accidents Detection, Geolocation and Notification -
A Machine Learning Approach
Samuel Pereira de Vasconcelos
Information Systems Laboratory
Federal University of Campina Grande
Campina Grande - PB, Brazil
email: samuel.vasconcelos@ccc.ufcg.edu.br
Cl´audio de Souza Baptista
Information Systems Laboratory
Federal University of Campina Grande
Campina Grande - PB, Brazil
email: baptista@computacao.ufcg.edu.br
Hugo Feitosa de Figueiredo
Information Systems Laboratory
Federal Institute of Technology of Paraiba
Esperanc¸a – PB, Brazil
email: hugo.figueiredo@ifpb.edu.br
Abstract - The road system is the main means of transport
used in Brazil. Traffic accidents are quite common in this mode
of transport, incurring one of the biggest causes of death in
the country. Profiles on social networks of the Federal Highway
Police (PRF) and other sources of information, contribute to alert
drivers as quickly as possible about road accidents that have
occurred, in order to prevent other accidents from occurring.
Also, such information can be used by drivers about possible
delays, or even deviations in their paths. However, accessing such
information via text while driving is illegal and further increases
the risk of accidents. Therefore, this paper addresses a study
about reliable posts in social networks, in particular Twitter,
to create a supervised classification model, which is capable of
classifying tweets about the occurrence or not of accidents. The
results include the best induction model obtained for classifying
tweets, among several analyzed, as well as the construction of a
mobile application that can notify through audio drivers about
accidents reported on their way, in real time.
Keywords - Road accidents; Machine learning, Natural Lan-
guage Processing; Geoprocessing; Mobile Computing; Social me-
dia.
I. INTRODUCTION
Road accidents have been one of the most important chal-
lenges of contemporary society worldwide, being the cause of
concern and studies in several countries. Road accidents are
the eighth leading cause of death in the world [1].
On the other hand, we live in a highly connected world.
Social networks may help in disseminating traffic accident
alerts in order to attract the attention of those who are traveling
near the accident hotspot in order to prevent further accidents.
Thus, developing technologies that allow road accidents
alerts to reach, in real time and with reliability, the drivers who
will cross such an accident is a challenge of socio-economic
and public health interest, which gives rise to the focus of this
work.
There are several channels on the Internet to alert the
population about accidents, most of them in the form of text
(e.g., tweets), which makes it impossible for drivers while
traveling to access them. Also, there are applications for
smartphones such as waze that aims to alert drivers while
traveling on the highways; however, such applications are
not completely reliable, as it comes from crowdsourcing [2].
Hence, using official communication channels, such as the
Twitter profiles from the government, avoids misinformation.
This work proposes a framework that can automatically
identify, monitor and alert drivers through audio and in real
time about the incidence of road accidents using machine
learning, geoprocessing and Natural Language Processing
techniques based on tweets from authorities, such as the
Brazilian Federal Highway Police (PRF).
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section
II discusses some related works on road accidents. Section III
presents the methodology used in this research. In Section
IV, the experiments carried out to identify the best machine
learning model for the purpose of this research are discussed,
as well as the analysis of the results obtained. Finally, Section
V concludes the paper and presents future guidelines to
continue this research.
II. RELATED WORK
There are several works that address different aspects of
road accidents around the world. There are studies on the
social, economic and environmental impacts of road accidents
[3][4]. Other studies are focused on victims of road accidents,
whether fatal or even sequelae [5][6]. Some authors are
concerned with detecting potential patterns in road accidents
[7]-[11]. Also, there are studies aimed at analyzing the main
causes of road accidents [12]-[18]. Finally, there are studies
aimed at classifying and predicting the severity of accidents
[19]-[27].
Katsoukis et al. [28] used data mining techniques to classify
the risk of accidents in regions in Greece, considering the
number of accidents in a given region. Ryder and Wortmann
[29] proposed an approach to detect and classify places with
a high rate of accidents; aiming to alert drivers in real time
about imminent dangers on the highways, through a mobile
application.
Ryder et al. [29] developed a decision support system to
prevent road accidents. This system sends alerts to drivers
when they are close to high accident risk areas.
Ren et al. [30] proposed a deep learning model, through
a neural network Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), based
on spatiotemporal data correlation in order to predict traffic
accident areas in Beijing.
Zhang et al. [31] proposed a method to identify key points
where the incidence of road accidents is high in a given period
of time. The dataset contains characteristics such as: holiday,
day of the week, time, crash site type, and weather conditions.
Yu et al. [32] proposed a neural network model to predict
accidents on highways, called STEEN, which combines spatial
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

distributions, temporal dynamics and external factors, such as
Points of Interest (POIs).
To the best of our knowledge, there is no work that simul-
taneously uses machine learning techniques, natural language
processing and geoprocessing for the problem of detecting
road accidents and their communication to drivers. The BERT
transformer obtained the best results in our experiments.
We experimented several machine learning models based on
supervised classification. We use NLP regular expressions and
preprocessing techniques. Finally, we georeferenced tweets
from texts and store them in a spatial database system.
This integrated solution consists of the main contribution of
this paper.
III. METHODOLOGY
The methodology used in this research was based on the
Cross Industry Standard Process for Data Mining (CRISP-
DM) [33]. This methodology consists of six steps: (i) Business
Understanding, (ii) Data Understanding, (iii) Data Preparation,
(iv) Modeling, (v) Evaluation and (vi) Deployment.
The Business Understanding step was covered in Section I.
The Data Understanding step consisted of identifying the PRF
profiles on Twitter and analyzing the keywords to be used to
gather the tweets. The Data Preparation step addressed pre-
processing and data labeling to create an annotated corpus. The
Model Induction step focused on deploying several induction
models, using supervised classification, with hyperparameter
tuning. The Evaluation step carried out the analysis of the
results of the models that were generated in the previous
stage, choosing the model that presented the best performance.
Finally, the Deployment step consisted of implementing the
model in the SafeTrip tool in a mobile platform.
In the following, we detail the methodology steps.
A. Data Understanding
This step consists of selecting the Twitter PRF profiles; the
choice of keywords used in road accidents; as well as the tweet
gathering process.
1) Twitter Profile Selection: During the search for Twit-
ter profiles, to avoid data poisoning, official PRF pro-
files
from
several
states
in
Brazil
were
chosen,
due
to
reliability
on
reporting
road
accidents.
The
cho-
sen profiles were all active by November 2021 includ-
ing: @PRFParana, @PRFCeara, @PRF191RJ, @PRF191PR
@PRF191TOCANTINS, @PRF191SP, @PRF191SERGIPE,
@PRF191RORAIMA, @PRF191RONDONIA, @PRF191PE,
@PRF191PA, @PRF191MS, @PRF191ES, @PRF191AM,
@prf sc,
@PRF191ACRE,
@prf rn,
@prf pi,
@prf pb,
@PRF MS, @prf mg, @prf df, @prf ba e @prf al.
2) Keyword Selection: We chose keywords commonly used
in posts about road accidents in Twitter PRF profiles. The
words chosen were: ’wounded’, ’accident’, ’death’, ’shock’,
’tragedy’, ’run over’, ’overturn’, ’victim’, ’collision’, ’turn’,
’turned’, ’ pileup’, ’fire’, ’crash’, ’tip over’, ’crash’, ’left
the runway’, ’crashed’, ’dies’, ’passed away’ and ’fell over’.
Figure 1 depicts an example of tweet from the Brazilian
Federal Highway Police (PRF) of the State of Paraiba.
Figure 1. Example of a tweet with a highway accident alert.
3) Tweets Gathering Process: After choosing the profiles
and keywords related to traffic accidents, requests were made
to the Twitter API. The data returned by the Twitter API
include: identification number, user, date, place of publication,
text, and likes.
B. Data Preparation
This step carried out the manual data labeling and tweet
pre-processing.
1) Data Labeling: We performed the manual labeling of
tweets as follows. We label a positive class when the content
contains information about traffic accidents, including the
location where the incident occurred; whereas we label the
negative class when the tweet did not contain data on traffic
accidents. The resulting corpus has a structure similar to Table
I.
TABLE I
TWEET CLASSIFICATION EXAMPLE.
Tweet
Label
”the Dom Pedro road has stretches
with rain this afternoon, drivers should
redouble their attention, works that were
carried out this friday have already
been closed, there are no accidents
and traffic flows well”
NEGATIVE
”attention br 116 km 643 jequie
road partially closed due to accident reduce speed”
POSITIVE
At the end of the data labeling process, 3,311 tweets were
obtained, but the dataset was quite unbalanced, the negative
class occupied about 75% of the records, as shown in Figure
2.
2) Data Preprocessing: The collected data were prepro-
cessed using several NLP techniques . First we converted text
to lowercase, and removed non-relevant information such as
links, emoticons and punctuation from the tweets using regular
expressions. Also, we performed tokenization and removed
stopwords.
We also performed corpus balancing to avoid possible bias
in the classification models to be used. For that we used the
statistical technique of subsampling [34]. Thus, the balanced
set resulted in 832 instances for each class.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2. Labeled tweets distribution.
IV. MODEL INDUCTION AND EVALUATION
In order to find out the best model that fits our solution,
we ran several classification algorithms and compared their
results.
A. Model Setup
To obtain the best supervised classification model for our
proposed problem we used the following machine learning
techniques: Naive Bayes, Logistic Regression, XGBoost, Sup-
port Vector Machine (SVM), Random Forest and the BERT
transformer.
Our dataset was split into training and testing, 20% of
the data were allocated to the test set, while 80% were
allocated to training, with 10% of this training set being used
during training as a validation set. To reduce the chances of
overfitting, we used the k-folds cross-validation method with
the parameter k = 10.
We used the sklearn GridSearchCV algorithm for tuning the
model’s hyperparameters o during training. We used accuracy,
precision, recall and f1-score metrics to evaluate the models
performance. Different combinations of hyperparameters were
tested in order to find the model that best maximized the
accuracy and f1-score metrics. The corpus and all the code
used for training the models can be accessed through google
colaboratory [35].
Concerning the transformer classifier, we used BERTimbau.
BERTimbau is a pre-trained neural network to deal with
Portuguese. For the model induction, pytorch tensors were
used for 4 epochs, number recommended by the literature,
using the same training set of the sklearn models. The code
and corpus used can be accessed through google colaboratory
[36].
B. Model Evaluation
In this subsection, we present and analyze the results of
the classification models in order to choose the best induction
model for the road accidents classification problem.
Table II presents the metrics from the several classification
algorithms used. BertTimbau was the best induction model.
TABLE II
MODELS EVALUATION.
M´etrics
Model
Accuracy
Precision
Recall
F1
RandomForestClassifier
91,89%
87,36%
97,55%
92,17%
LinearSVC
92,19%
88,89%
96,39%
92,49%
MultinomialNB
93,69%
89,20%
98,74%
93,73%
LogisticRegression
94,89%
92,77%
96,86%
94,77%
XGBoost
95,50%
93,75%
97,63%
95,65%
BERTimbau
97,29%
95,88%
98,79%
97,31%
Figure 3. BERTimbau confusion matrix.
The confusion matrix for the BERTimbau model is pre-
sented in Figure 3.
To verify the absence of overfitting, Figure 4 plots the error
behavior during training with training and validation data.
Hence, we can observe that the validation data error decreases
as the training one also decreases. Therefore, we can conclude
that the model generalizes well.
Figure 4. Overfitting test.
C. Deployment: Road Accidents System
The infrastructure of the accident alert system was devel-
oped with the help of the Python 3.10.2 programming language
and the Postgresql 9.6 database for data management. In
addition, the Spatial Postgis 3.2 extension was used.
The SafeTrip architecture is composed of three main com-
ponents shown in Figure 5. The components are the crawler,
the classifier and the mobile application.
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 5. SafeTrip overall architecture.
1) Crawler: The crawler is responsible for tweets gather-
ing.. With the help of the tweepy API, tweets were periodically
collected, preprocessed and stored in the database, as shown
in Figure 6.
Figure 6. Crawler architecture.
2) Classifier: Figure 7 depicts the classifier module that
is responsible for retrieving the tweet stored by the crawler
and applying tokenization and data normalization to infer
the tweet class according to the chosen classification model.
When the tweets are classified as positive, a script based on
regular expression is applied to extract information such as
federal unit, code and kilometer of the highway to retrieve
the accident geolocation. This geolocation consists of calcu-
lating the starting point of the kilometer where the accident
occurred, so an algorithm was developed, described below
and implemented in a stored procedure that, with the help
of the database of Brazilian highways maintained by the
Ministry of Infrastructure and the information extracted from
the tweets, determines the latitude and longitude coordinates
of the accident. At the end, this information, plus the time
of occurrence and the text itself, are stored in the geographic
database in the form of an alert.
Figure 7. Classifier architecture.
3) The SafeTrip Mobile Application: In order to validate the
results obtained and make them accessible to the community,
a mobile application was developed to notify drivers by audio
about accidents detected on Twitter. This mobile application
was developed based on the client-server architecture model.
According to Vaskevitch [37], in this architecture, processes
are separated into independent platforms, allowing commu-
nication between processes while obtaining the maximum
benefit from each different device. The server is responsible
for monitoring PRF profiles, collecting published tweets, pro-
cessing, classifying, extracting information, geolocating and
sending alerts to users via websocket.
With the help of React Native, which is a javascript-based li-
brary that builds native code for Android and IOS applications,
a mobile application was developed to act as a client, providing
geolocation data and issuing alerts. This mobile application
acts as a client in our architecture. Permissions are required to
access the internet and also the location system of the device
on which it is installed. In the mobile application home, users
can choose one of all Brazilian cities as the destination city.
The path between the user’s current location and its destination
will be displayed after the city is selected and the “Continue”
button is pressed.
The client keeps the server informed about its location and
when it detects an accident alert on the user’s route, the server
notifies the application that represents this information through
an icon in the form of an exclamation mark, as shown in Figure
8. In addition, the textual content of the tweet that generated
the alert is converted into audio.
Figure 8. User´s route and accident allert.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This article addressed the issue of road accidents and
how, using technologies based on machine learning, natural
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

language processing, geoprocessing and mobile applications,
we can mitigate such accidents and improve drivers’ travel
safety through sound alerts of accidents that occurred on the
respective routes. For that, tweets from the Brazilian Federal
Highway Police were used, which report, among other things,
the occurrence of road accidents, with a very high reliability,
which differs from the information reported in traffic monitor-
ing applications that are based on crowdsourcing.
One of the main challenges in carrying out this research was
the manual labeling of the dataset for training the supervised
classification models. Another major challenge was trying
to understand the function of each hyperparameter in the
classification models and choosing those that presented the
best results. Finally, in the area of geoprocessing, we had the
challenge of transforming an accident reported in the form
highway kilometer to latitude and longitude coordinates. The
BERT transformer obtained the best results in our experiments.
As future work, we intend to increase the corpus of acci-
dents, using data from other secure sources such as tweets
from highway concessionaires and the press, as well as carry-
ing out usability tests of the mobile application. In addition,
with reliable tweet classification models, it is possible to
contribute as one more source for real-time updating of the
Brazilian Federal Highway Police database referring to the
history of accidents, in its open data portal, since there is a
delay of about 2 months in the data update.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The second author would like to thank the National Council
for Scientific and Technological Development (CNPq), Brazil,
for partially funding this research.
REFERENCES
[1] C. D. Mathers, T. Boerma, D. M. Fat, Global and regional causes of
death, British Medical Bulletin, Volume 92, edition 1, pp. 7–32, 2009,
https://doi.org/10.1093/bmb/ldp028.
[2] Google,
Sobre
o
Waze,
Available
at
https://support.google.com/waze/answer/6071177?hl=pt-BR&ref topic=
9022747, Accessed in 2023-03-09.
[3] A. Kocatepe, M. B. Ulak, E. E. Ozguven, and M. W. Horner,“Who might
be affected by crashes? Identifying areas susceptible to crash injury
risk and their major contributing factors”, Transportmetrica A: transport
science 15, pp. 1278–1305, 2019.
[4] C. Liu and A. Sharma, “Using the multivariate spatio-temporal Bayesian
model to analyze traffic crashes by severity”, Analytic methods in
accident research 17, pp. 14–31, 2018.
[5] P. Tiwari, H. Dao, and G. N. Nguyen, “Performance evaluation of lazy,
decision tree classifier and multilayer perceptron on traffic accident
analysis”, Informatica 41, 2017.
[6] P. Tiwari, S. Kumar, and D. Kalitin, “Road-user specific analysis of
traffic accident using data mining techniques”, In International Con-
ference on Computational Intelligence, Communications, and Business
Analytics, Springer, pp. 398–410, 2017.
[7] S. R. Santos, C. A. D. Junior, and R. Smarzaro, “Analyzing traffic
accidents based on the integration of official and crowdsourced data”,
Journal of Information and Data Management 8, pp. 67–67, 2017.
[8] S. Kumar and D. Toshniwal, “A data mining framework to analyze road
accident data”, Journal of Big Data 2, pp. 1–18, 2015.
[9] S. Kumar and D. Toshniwal, “A data mining approach to characterize
road accident locations”, Journal of Modern Transportation 24, pp.
62–72, 2016.
[10] F. M. N. Ali and A. A. M. Hamed, “Usage Apriori and clustering
algorithms in WEKA tools to mining dataset of traffic accidents”,
Journal of Information and Telecommunication 2, pp. 231–245, 2018.
[11] E. Turunen, “Using GUHA data mining method in analyzing road traffic
accidents occurred in the years 2004–2008 in Finland”, Data Science and
Engineering 2, pp. 224–231, 2017.
[12] J. Abell´an, G. L´opez, and J. D. O˜nA, “Analysis of traffic accident
severity using decision rules via decision trees”, Expert Systems with
Applications 40, pp. 6047–6054, 2015.
[13] H. ˙I. B¨ulb¨ul, T. Kaya, and Y. Tulgar, “Analysis for status of the road
accident occurance and determination of the risk of accident by machine
learning in istanbul”, In 2016 15th IEEE International Conference on
Machine Learning and Applications (ICMLA), IEEE, pp. 426–430,
2016.
[14] S. Gao, R. Pan, R. Yu, and X. Wang, “Research on automated modeling
algorithm using association rules for traffic accidents”, In 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Big Data and Smart Computing (BigComp),
IEEE, pp. 127–132, 2018.
[15] Y. Guo, Z. Li, P. Liu, and Y. Wu, “Exploring risk factors with crashes
by collision type at freeway diverge areas: Accounting for unobserved
heterogeneity”, IEEE Access 7 (2019), pp. 11809–11819, 2019.
[16] O. H. Kwon, W. Rhee, and Y. Yoon, “Application of classification al-
gorithms for analysis of road safety risk factor dependencies”. Accident
Analysis & Prevention 75 (2015), pp. 1–15, 2015.
[17] Z. Li, X. Guo, and J. Sun. “Analysis and research on the temporal
and spatial correlation of traffic accidents and illegal activities”, In
International Conference on Cloud Computing and Security. Springer,
pp. 418–428.
[18] J. Wang and Y. Ohsawa, “Evaluating model of traffic accident rate on
urban data”. In 2016 Federated Conference on Computer Science and
Information Systems (FedCSIS). IEEE, pp. 181–186, 2016.
[19] R. Bhavsar, A. Amin, and L. Zala, “Development of model for road
crashes and identification of accident spots”, International journal of
intelligent transportation systems research 19, pp. 99–111, 2021.
[20] A. Iranitalab and A. Khattak, “Comparison of four statistical and ma-
chine learning methods for crash severity prediction”. Accident Analysis
& Prevention 108, pp. 27–36, 2017.
[21] S. Kumar, P. Tiwari, and K. V. Denis, “Augmenting classifiers perfor-
mance through clustering: A comparative study on road accident data”,
International Journal of Information Retrieval Research (IJIRR) 8, pp.
57–68, 2018.
[22] N. Mor, H. Sood, and T. Goyal, “Application of machine learning tech-
nique for prediction of road accidents in Haryana-A novel approach”,
Journal of Intelligent & Fuzzy Systems 38, pp. 6627–6636, 2020.
[23] R. Richard and S. Ray, “A tale of two cities: Analyzing road accidents
with big spatial data”, In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big
Data (Big Data), IEEE, pp. 3461–3470, 2017.
[24] M. Sangare, S. Gupta, S. Bouzefrane, S. Banerjee, and P. Muhlethaler,
Exploring the forecasting approach for road accidents: Analytical mea-
sures with hybrid machine learning, Expert Systems with Applications,
pp. 113855, 2021.
[25] M. S. Satu, S. Ahamed, F. Hossain, T. Akter, and D. M. Farid, “Mining
traffic accident data of N5 national highway in Bangladesh employing
decision trees”, In 2017 IEEE Region 10 Humanitarian Technology
Conference (R10-HTC), IEEE, pp. 722–725, 2017.
[26] D. Singh and C. K. Mohan, “Deep spatio-temporal representation for de-
tection of road accidents using stacked autoencoder”, IEEE Transactions
on Intelligent Transportation Systems 20, pp. 879–887, 2018.
[27] T. Tambouratzis, D. Souliou, M. Chalikias, and A. Gregoriades, “Com-
bining probabilistic neural networks and decision trees for maximally
accurate and efficient accident prediction”, In The 2010 International
Joint Conference on Neural Networks (IJCNN), IEEE, pp. 1–8, 2010.
[28] A. Katsoukis, L. Iliadis, A. Konguetsof, and B. Papadopoulos, “Classi-
fication Of Road Accidents Using Fuzzy Techniques”, In 2018 Innova-
tions in Intelligent Systems and Applications (INISTA), IEEE, pp. 1–5,
2018.
[29] B. Ryder, B. Gahr, P. Egolf, A. Dahlinger, and F. Wortmann, Preventing
traffic accidents with in-vehicle decision support systems-The impact of
accident hotspot warnings on driver behaviour, Decision support systems
99, pp. 64–74, 2017.
[30] H. Ren, Y. Song, J. Wang, Y. Hu, and J. Lei, “A deep learning approach
to the citywide traffic accident risk prediction”, 21st International
Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC), IEEE, pp.
3346–3351.
[31] C. Zhang, Y. Shu, and L. Yan. “A Novel Identification Model for Road
Traffic Accident Black Spots: A Case Study in Ningbo”, China, IEEE
Access 7, pp. 140197–140205, 2019.
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[32] L. Yu, B. Du, X. Hu, L. Sun, W. Lv, and R. Huang, “Traffic Accident
Prediction Based on Deep Spatio-Temporal Analysis”, IEEE Smart-
World, Ubiquitous Intelligence & Computing, Advanced & Trusted
Computing, Scalable Computing & Communications, Cloud & Big
Data Computing, Internet of People and Smart City Innovation (Smart-
World/SCALCOM/UIC/ATC/CBDCom/IOP/SCI). IEEE, pp. 995–1002,
2019.
[33] P. Chapman, et al. Crisp-dm 1.0 Step-by-step data mining guide, 2000.
[34] D. N. Politis, J. P. Romano, M. Wolf, Subsampling, Springer, 1999.
[35] S.
P.
Vasconcelos,
“Source
code
and
corpus”,
Available
at:
https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1bSWqT7AyHK5ZaprG7m kf0f
PkhcypPN , Accessed in: 2023-03-10.
[36] S. P. Vasconcelos, “BERTimbau source code and corpus”, Available at:
https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1h7RziptpLvCBSaJpiiq3ZbVH2
N7Q6n33, Accessed in 2023-03-10.
[37] D. Vaskevitch, Client/server strategies, IDG Books Worldwide, 1995.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

