Guiding the Controller in Geovisual Analytics to Improve Maritime Surveillance 
 
Gabriel Vatin, Aldo Napoli 
MINES ParisTech 
Centre for research on Risk and Crisis (CRC) 
Sophia-Antipolis, France 
gabriel.vatin@mines-paristech.fr, aldo.napoli@mines-paristech.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Maritime traffic surveillance requires a very 
accurate and continuous analysis of the sea. This area consists 
of many different objects, actors and rules. Monitoring such a 
wide and complex area requires adapted visual tools, such as 
Maritime Surveillance Systems. These tools help identifying 
abnormal behaviours, which can lead to risky situations. We 
investigate the usability of visual analytics and geovisualization 
methods that will improve these systems: a better synthesis of 
the data and more effective tools lead to improved situation 
awareness. Visualization methods and needs of controllers 
being very specific, there is no single solution for modelling, 
visualizing and analysing maritime data. In this paper, we 
identify the limits of current research in geovisual analytics for 
maritime surveillance. A new approach for guiding the 
selection of visual analytics methods is proposed. The profile of 
the user, the purpose of use and the situation to analysis are 
considered together; a knowledge-based system will guide the 
user toward the most suitable visualization methods. 
Keywords-Geovisual analytics; geovisualization; maritime 
surveillance; use and user issues. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Maritime traffic surveillance asks for many stages of 
control. This includes monitoring the traffic, detecting 
anomalies like abnormal behaviours, and finally decision 
making to preserve security (security of persons, pollution 
prevention) and safety (illegal acts prevention and fight) at 
sea and along the coast. Having an accurate knowledge of 
what is happening in the area of interest (current situation) 
and understanding how events will evolve in the near future 
(projection) are key principles to situation awareness [1]. 
Surveillance requires many heterogeneous and dynamic 
data, in order to control maritime situation: Automatic 
Identification System (AIS) coupled to marine radar provides 
real-time information about ships position, speed and course 
by radio. In order to display these data, controllers and 
analysts use Maritime Surveillance Systems (MSS). 
Dynamic data are merged with static data such as nautical 
charts and meteorology layers. 
Figure 1 gives an overview of vessel traffic data that 
have to be monitored in real-time. On this image, triangles 
stand for moving ships, whereas squares are static ships. The 
colour represents the type of boat, broadcasted by AIS data 
(e.g., Fishing, Tanker, High Speed, etc.). In this paper, the 
images illustrating cartographic representations of vessels are 
captured from our web-mapping system called FishEye. It is 
used to test visualization with web libraries and OpenLayers 
mapping. 
But the poor display of MSS does not suit the human 
needs for situation awareness. On the one hand, the amount 
of data, human stress and cognitive limits of vision make 
decision process even more difficult [2], [3]. On the other 
hand, MSS do not offer a real analysis of the data with 
effective tools: vessels trajectories and positions are only 
displayed, without complete analysis tools. Yet, the users 
need the most efficient tools to control maritime system, 
without an entirely automated process [4], [5]. 
Therefore, visual methods have to be used to let users 
analyse the data and extract knowledge. In this paper, we 
propose an approach for guiding the user in selecting the 
most appropriate visualization environments, according to 
his / her profile and the tasks to perform. The limits in traffic 
visualization are pointed out from literature, and are used as 
a basis for our own research. Therefore, the main stages of 
our approach are explained, for improving visual data 
exploration in maritime surveillance systems. 
Perspectives in developing geovisual analytics taxonomy 
are presented in the last section: it will be used for 
formalizing expert’s knowledge in geovisualization. 
This paper is structured as follows: Section II presents 
maritime surveillance systems and related work on traffic 
anomaly detection, particularly maritime traffic. Section III 
describes the needs in a general control system that uses 
cognition in a human / machine environment, and the way 
geovisual analytics fulfil these needs. In Section IV the basis 
of a research methodology is proposed for solving the 
problem. Finally, Section V concludes the paper. 
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of real-time traffic data in the Mediterrannean Se, with 
AIS data (FishEye, MINES ParisTech - CRC). 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
RELATED WORK 
A. Analysis of Maritime Data 
Maritime Surveillance Systems (MSS) are cartographic 
platforms that display the position of vessels on top of 
electronic navigational charts. These tools allow operators 
and analysts to monitor a zone of interest and to store the 
history of vessels movements. But due to the large amount of 
displayed data, detecting suspicious or dangerous behaviour 
happens to be very difficult for human operators; therefore 
analysing maritime data is a real challenge for human beings. 
The literature provides several methods to display and 
analyse maritime information, and to prevent the risks by 
automatic or semi-automatic means, which would be one of 
the three types: modelling the data, processing the data or 
investigating the interface. An example of modelling is using 
spatial ontologies based on the formalization of the 
knowledge of experts to detect anomalies in vessels 
movement, within real-time data [6]. Trajectories and events 
modelling must be chosen before being analysed (e.g., [7], 
[8]). 
Spatial data-mining is used beforehand in order to extract 
rules and scenarii from past events, for the processing part 
[9]: the knowledge of experts is used to complete these 
results. In the process of decision making, Bayesian 
networks help users to take relevant countermeasures [10], 
based on data-mining and brainstorming results. Multi-agent 
systems have also been investigated in [11] to simulate ships 
trajectories and their behaviour while coming across another 
vessel. 
To include human actors in this process and improve 
situation awareness, much research was led on the human / 
system interface. The use of geovisualization methods is a 
major issue for traffic surveillance: mapping historical data 
provides visualization of various behaviours at sea [12] and 
using statistical methods to compare actual data to a normal 
model allows highlighting anomalies [13]. 
We chose to improve the previous work that was done 
about geovisualization and visual analytics for supporting 
risk detection and risk management. Indeed, the literature 
and the projects we led previously showed that human role is 
still neglected in risk management, for the benefit of artificial 
intelligence [13], [14]. 
B. Visual Analytics for Traffic Control 
We have seen that the interfaces of MSS do not propose 
complete interactive and visual methods for accurate data 
analysis: their design is suitable for a single user looking for 
a global view of maritime domain and querying some 
information on ships. But there is a gap between a system 
for a single user and a system for decision making, designed 
for various users and various needs (close to the 
geocollaboration field). According to MacEachren and 
Brewer, visualization systems and GIS were first developed 
for a single user [15], [16]: MSS present the same limit, 
since they are based on a GIS general framework. 
Therefore, systems that have to be used for crisis 
management, which involve various user profiles and many 
different analyses to be led, ask for specific collaboration 
and information exchange tools [17], [18], [19]. 
The first user profile to be considered is the person who 
is directly in the studied environment: sailors, captains, 
pilots, etc. As they are at the heart of the controlled system 
(e.g., the sea, the sky), they do not have the same perception 
of the environment than an external controller would have. 
In order to take this point of view into account, studies have 
been done in modelling and displaying of trajectories with 
user-centred view [7] and augmented reality [20]. The 
results of these studies are methods and interfaces to help 
actors to analyse real-time data with their own point of 
view, which lead to a better situation awareness. 
Other actors, like traffic controllers or analysts, work 
with real-time or past data: they need a more global view on 
the system to extract patterns and monitor disturbances [21], 
[22]. Geovisual analytics tools provide means to explore 
large sets of data and to analyse both overview and detail 
scales using maps and graphs [23], [24]. By combining 
various methods and tools, as [25] did with Triple 
Perspective Visual Trajectory Analytics (TripVista), traffic 
data can be analysed at different scales in order to extract 
patterns or abnormal behaviours. 
Reference [26] presents a state of the art of existing 
software and methods for information visualization and its 
application to maritime surveillance. It gives an overall view 
of all possible needs for this domain and the type of 
methods that fulfil them: visualizing space-time data, 
discovering unknown information, displaying uncertainty of 
data, etc. However, these visual analytics environments may 
require skilled users to manipulate it and really extract 
information from the data. The authors conclude the report 
by reminding visualization problem in maritime security 
that should be automatically proposed: Visualizing coverage 
and ignorance, Visualizing ship tracks in time and space, 
Visualizing “normal” behaviour of ships and Visualizing 
attribute data of interest. 
Respecting these points, new means of visualizing 
information and analysing past or real-time data have been 
developed recently in maritime and aerial domain. Willems 
used composite density maps to highlight various 
behaviours [12], whereas Riveiro led her research about 
detecting unusual behaviours at sea with self-organizing 
map and Gaussian mixture models [13]. 
Latest research highlighted the role of geovisual 
analytics in traffic surveillance. Methods and tools have 
been developed to support anomalies detection and situation 
awareness. These studies provide major results for 
improving 
control 
systems 
using 
geovisualization. 
However, the aims and the functionalities of control systems 
in general need to be further investigated: this would lead 
our forthcoming research in the role of geovisual analytics 
for risks management. 
In the next section, we introduce the definitions of risk 
and control, and we discuss the limits of previous work 
according to this concept. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

III. 
COGNITIVE SYSTEMS FOR MARITIME CONTROL 
In the field of risk management, whether it is in a 
company or on a geographic territory, four main steps must 
be controlled [27], as shown in Figure 2. Potential risks 
must be known and anticipated to prevent them. Vigilance 
stage is about controlling the system and monitoring what is 
happening. Then, if unexpected events happen, a solution 
must be found to stabilize the system (e.g., search and 
rescue mission). Finally, this cycle is improved with the 
analysis of past events (feedbacks), which feeds the 
anticipation step with new rules. 
 
 
Figure 2. Risk management process according to Wybo. 
This cycle is the basis for control systems. 
Within maritime surveillance, the operators are in charge 
of monitoring the traffic, which is mostly the Vigilance step. 
With the help of analysts and other actors, the three other 
stages are led with group decisions and analysis. The stage 
called Handling with unexpected requires an accurate 
analysis of the situation, so that actors could take a suitable 
decision. The purpose of our research is to improve the use 
of visualization in maritime surveillance systems, which 
mostly handle unexpected events. In the rest of this paper, 
we focus on unexpected events within control systems. 
Reference [21] defines control as “the ability to direct 
and manage the development of events, and especially to 
compensate for disturbances and disruptions in a timely and 
effective manner” (p. 148). Collaboration between human 
and machine in cognitive systems for control should allow 
measuring and interpreting differences between actual and 
“intended” states [21]. This way, unexpected events would 
be defined by the observed offset. If this offset is known, 
users would understand why this situation was not expected 
and how to deal with it. 
In order to maintain control, Hollnagel proposed the 
Extended Control Model (ECOM) [5]. This is a four layer 
control model for risks assessments, instead of a basic 
control loop: (1) characterise the context, (2) identify the 
risks, (3) analyse the risks and (4) decide on the 
countermeasures. As each control layer affects the lower 
one, risks identification would depend on the context, 
analysis would depend on the possible risks, etc. 
Within the context of maritime surveillance, Idiri and 
Napoli proposed a new definition of risk that takes into 
account geographical and behavioural specification [28]: it 
is the combination of a vessel’s behaviour (based on its 
kinematic), a geographic area (e.g., dangerous zone or not) 
and a situation (e.g., vessel type, visibility, meteorology). 
We observed that MSS do not take into account these 
three elements, and are not based on the ECOM model for 
controlling the maritime domain, though these control tools 
use both human and machine contribution. Moreover, 
previous work in visual analytics for maritime surveillance 
usually proposed only one or a few specific methods for 
traffic visual analysis. 
Various visual analytics methods have been identified 
to answer ECOM control loop, allowing visual analysis at 
different scales and for various tasks. Choropleth maps, 
density maps, statistical analysis and clustering methods 
provide cartographic analysis methods for characterising 
geographic areas [12], [29]: at sea, we can visualize zones 
with high density of vessels, risky areas (piracy, drug 
traffic). Figure 3 is an example of clustered data, using the 
same ships positions than Figure 1. Results are obtained 
with an OpenLayers map using a Cluster strategy. Another 
type of area characterisation is displayed on Figure 4, giving 
an example of heat map that shows major traffic zones in 
the Mediterranean Sea. 
 
 
Figure 3. Cluster method to display ships position with an OpenLayers map 
(FishEye, MINES ParisTech - CRC). 
 
Figure 4. A heat map shows zones with high density of vessel (FishEye, 
MINES ParisTech - CRC). 
Visualizing a vessel’s profile with parallel coordinates 
plots (e.g., Figure 5), speed profile or past trajectory, and 
comparing it to other vessels profile are examples of support 
for the controller’s work in identifying and analysing risks. 
Depending on the user’s profile and education, advanced 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

visualization environments can be used: from simple 
diagrams to highly interactive 3D visualization in a space-
time cube. Figure 5 uses PCP visualization to describe ships 
profile with five quantitative attributes: ship length, ship 
draught (distance between waterline and bottom of hull), 
longitude, latitude and speed (in knots). Vessels data are 
provided in near real-time by DCNS from AIS sensors. The 
colour of the lines corresponds to the country attribute of the 
ships. As this sixth attribute is qualitative information, using 
colour variable is preferred to creating a new axis. 
The selectivity of the colour variable is the easiest mean 
to detect particular profiles on this type of diagram. As an 
example, we clearly distinguish a correlation between the 
nationality of ships and the geographic coordinates (axis 3 
and 4) on Figure 5. Purple lines stand for Italy (mean 
coordinates: N41° E012°), green for Greece (mean 
coordinates N38° E025°), blue for France (mean coordinates 
N43° E004°) and orange for Spain (mean coordinates N40° 
E002°). 
The colour variable could also represent an attribute 
such as the type of ship, or its position within a previous 
classification. This will give more information in a simple 
line diagram that could be used by controllers or analysts. 
To respect the philosophy of visual analytics, this type 
of diagram must be highly interactive: brushing tools allow 
the selection of a subset of data, and the map is 
synchronised to the selection. This way, both the geographic 
and the attributes dimension are taken into account [23]. 
 
 
Figure 5. Parallel coordinates plot describing the profile of 70 ships (ship 
length, ship draught, lon, lat, speed over ground). 
Cognitive systems for the control require as many 
geovisual analytics methods as there are maritime risks and 
users for the system. We observed that proposing a single 
method that only suits a single need cannot fulfil all the 
steps that were described in this section. Geovisual analytics 
contribution, evaluation and user’s needs have to be 
investigated first [13]. 
Therefore, the use of geovisual analytics strongly 
depends on the type of data to analyse, the user in charge of 
the task and the purpose of the study. In the next section, we 
describe the approach that will be used in upcoming research 
work. 
IV. 
GUIDING THE USER IN VISUAL ANALYTICS 
The philosophy of geovisualization and geovisual 
analytics is to use both maps and diagrams to explore and 
analyse data [23]. As it was presented in Section II, many 
different methods can be applied to analyse traffic data. 
Moreover, cognitive systems for control highlight various 
situations that have to be taken into account in risk control, 
depending on available data, users and questions to be 
answered. 
Using several methods of geovisual analytics involves 
guiding the user in the choice of these ones. As analysts or 
controllers do not have the same knowledge about data 
exploration than a computer scientist, an automatic process 
based on visualization and risk knowledge should help the 
user in this analytical task. 
We propose to formalize (1) the needs in visual 
analytics for maritime risk management and (2) the 
contribution of visual analytics methods to data analysis. 
Knowledge bases would be the support for automatic 
proposal of methods or tools to the user. 
Figure 6 explains the architecture of such a 
methodology, using a knowledge-based system to propose 
the most suitable methods to be applied, according to the 
user and the tasks to perform. The input of the system are 
the user, who has a specific pre-defined profile (controller, 
analytics, researcher, etc.), the available data (characterised 
by their type, their amount, their geographical extent and 
statistical information) and eventually the tasks that have to 
be performed. 
The Risk Management base will be used to extract 
useful tasks to complete the input data, according to the 
user’s profile. As an example, if the user logged as the 
captain of a vessel, the first tasks that should be perform are 
answering the questions “Where am I?”, “What is the 
situation around me?”, “Is there any risk of collision?”. 
Using the evaluation and characterisation of geovisual 
analytics methods from the Visual Analytics base, the 
inference engine will process the information to evaluate the 
most suitable tools: its means the most effective, useful and 
usable tools according to the user,  tasks and data. With the 
same example of a captain, proposed results could be: an 
overview map centred on the vessel’s position, a relative 
view of surrounding vessels, his own course and a potential 
risk map evaluating distance from other ships. 
The user interface is the most important part of the 
process, as it would be the main way to exchange 
information between the user and the process: it should 
allow easily changing the profile or changing the tasks to 
perform; and therefore change the proposed visual analytics 
methods in the output. 
A knowledge-based method was proposed by Beaulieu 
[30] to suggest the most suitable representation models for 
multivariate data in a SOLAP system [31], which allows 
exploring and analysing massive heterogeneous datasets. 
This research was based on the visual variables of Bertin 
[32] within a “semiological knowledge base”: rules based on 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the semiology of graphics process the input data, returning 
possible types of graphic display. This way, representation 
models such as the type of diagram, shapes and visual 
variable(s) were proposed in order to respect graphic 
semiology, according to the specificity of data set and user’s 
request. 
Proposing a knowledge-based system to guide the user in 
visual analytics for risk management allows keeping the 
diversity of geovisual analytics environments, without 
developing a unique visualization mode. Depending on 
user’s input (profile, purpose, available data), an overall 
view of possible methods will suggest to the user the most 
suitable 
ones. 
This 
overview 
of 
visual 
analytics 
environments allows a high interactivity level between users 
and data: this is the founding principle of visual analytics 
[17], [33]. 
Our following research will focus on characterising and 
evaluating specific visual analytics methods and tools for 
risk management, taking into account two aspects: their 
specificities of use (e.g., input, output data, design, limits, 
processing time) and the user’s perception (e.g., ease of use, 
usefulness, time of use, types of queries). 
 
 
Figure 6. Architecture for a guided selection of visual analytics methods. 
Based on selected user profile and situation inputs, an knowledge-based 
system would suggest the most suitable visual analytics methods. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we showed that geovisual analytics 
methods provide efficient results to explore or analyse 
massive and multidimensional data, and are still missing 
within maritime surveillance systems. But their diversity is 
also a limit when considering all possible users and uses. 
Knowing which type of visualization or which analysis has 
to be led requires a real knowledge of these methods and 
how they have to be used. 
Operators in maritime surveillance are faced to many 
heterogeneous data to be controlled in real-time; analysts 
investigate past events to extract new knowledge; captains 
confront facts “in the field” and do not perceive the 
information the same way operators do. Each one of these 
profiles requires its own method of data visualization and 
visual analytics in order to have the best situation 
awareness. 
In order to improve modelling, visualizing and 
analysing maritime information, we have seen that a single 
visual analytics method does not match the diversity of 
these needs. The basis for a methodology for selecting 
proper geovisual analytics methods was introduced, based 
on users needs in risk control and visual analytics expertise. 
With the use of these two knowledge bases, the best visual 
analytics methods that fulfil one’s requirements would be 
suggested. 
We introduced a new approach for considering user’s 
profile and purposes in maritime surveillance systems, 
based on the evaluation of visual analytics environments. 
This evaluation takes into account the specificities of each 
visualization method and its perceived usefulness and ease 
of use. 
Geovisual analytics would both use computer methods 
to summarize data and user’s knowledge in data exploration. 
Even if cognitive systems for the control are be limited by 
human factors and human errors, they are major steps in 
controlling and decision making. 
To develop the method that was presented in this paper, 
we plan to study risk management requirements in analysis 
of data. Then, this study will be applied to maritime domain 
with our research partners in maritime surveillance. 
Geovisualization and information visualization methods will 
be tested and evaluated with people who are used to work 
with maritime data, but who have various profiles and 
different knowledge in information visualization. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. R. Endsley, “Toward a Theory of Situation Awareness in 
Dynamic Systems”, Human Factors: The Journal of the 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Society, vol. 37, no. 1, p. 32-
64, 1995. 
[2] J. Noyes and M. Bransby, Ed., People in Control: Human 
factors in control room design. The Institution of Engineering 
and Technology, Michael Faraday House, Six Hills Way, 
Stevenage SG1 2AY, UK: IET, 2001.. 
[3] S. I. Fabrikant and A. Lobben, “Introduction: Cognitive issues 
in geographic information visualization”, Cartographica: The 
International Journal for Geographic Information and 
Geovisualization, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 139-143, 2009. 
[4] R. Parasuraman, T. B. Sheridan and C. D. Wickens, “A model 
for types and levels of human interaction with automation”, 
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cybernetics, Part A: 
Systems and Humans, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286-297, May 2000. 
[5] E. Hollnagel, Barriers and Accident Prevention. Ashgate 
Publishing Limited, 2004. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[6] A. Vandecasteele, A. Napoli and M. Morel, “Apport du 
géodécisionnel et de la géocollaboration aux systèmes de 
surveillance maritime”, presented at INFORSID 2011, Lille, 
France, 2011. 
[7] V. Mallé-Noyon, “Modèle de vue relative et spatio-temporelle 
de trajectoires géographiques d’objets mobiles : Application 
au contexte maritime”, CFC, no. 198, December 2008. 
[8] W. van Hage, V. Malaisé, G. de Vries, G. Schreiber and M. 
van Someren, “Abstracting and reasoning over ship 
trajectories and web data with the simple event model 
(SEM)”, Multimedia Tools and Applications, p. 1-23, 2011. 
[9] B. Idiri and A. Napoli, “Découverte de règles d’association 
pour l’aide à la prévision des accidents maritimes”, in Revue 
des Nouvelles Technologies de l’Information, Bordeaux, 
France, 2012, vol. 23, pp. 243-248. 
[10] X. Chaze, A. Bouejla, A. Napoli and F. Guarnieri,  
“Integration of a Bayesian network for response planning in a 
maritime miracy risk management system”, Proc. 7th 
International Conference on System of Systems Engineering 
(SOSE 2012), Genoa, Italy, 2012. 
[11] S. Fournier, “Intégration de la dimension spatiale au sein d’un 
modèle multi-agents à base de rôles pour la simulation: 
application à la navigation maritime”, Université de Rennes 1, 
2005. 
[12] N. Willems, “Visualization of vessel traffic”, Technische 
Universiteit Eindhoven, 2011. 
[13] M. Riveiro, “Visual analytics for maritime anomaly 
detection”, University of Skövde, 2011. 
[14] M. Morel, A. Napoli, J.-P. George, F. Jangal, M.-A. Giraud 
and M. Botalla, “Surveillance et contrôle des activités des 
navires 
en 
mer : 
ScanMaris”, 
Proc. 
4th 
Workshop 
Interdisciplinaire sur la Sécurité Globale (WISG 2010), 
Troyes, France, 2010. 
[15] A. M. MacEachren and I. Brewer, “Developing a conceptual 
framework 
for 
visually-enabled 
geocollaboration”, 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 1-34, 2004. 
[16] G. Cai, “Extending distributed GIS to support geo-
collaborative crisis management”, Geographic Information 
Science, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 4-14, June  2005. 
[17] J. J. Thomas and K. A. Cook, Éd., Illuminating the Path: The 
Research and Development Agenda for Visual Analytics. 
National Visualization and Analytics, 2005. 
[18] B. M. Tomaszewski, A. C. Robinson, C. Weaver, M. Stryker 
and A. M. MacEachren, “Geovisual analytics and crisis 
management”, Proc. 4th International ISCRAM Conference, 
Delft, Netherlands, 2007. 
[19] M. Riveiro and G. Falkman, “The role of visualization and 
interaction in maritime anomaly detection”, in Society of 
Photo-Optical Instrumentation Engineers (SPIE) Conference 
Series, 2011, vol. 7868, p. 20. 
[20] D. C. Foyle, A. D. Andre and B. L. Hooey, “Situation 
awareness in an augmented reality cockpit: Design, 
viewpoints and cognitive glue”, Proc. 11th International 
Conference on Human Computer Interaction, Las Vegas, NV, 
2005. 
[21] E. Hollnagel and D. D. Woods, Joint Cognitive Systems: 
Foundations of Cognitive Systems Engineering. CRC Press, 
2005. 
[22] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, J. Dykes, S. I. Fabrikant and M. 
Wachowicz, “Geovisualization of dynamics, movement and 
change: 
Key 
issues 
and 
developing 
approaches 
in 
visualization research”, Information Visualization, vol. 7, no. 
3-4, pp. 173-180, 2008. 
[23] M.-J. Kraak, “Beyond geovisualization”, Computer Graphics 
and Applications, IEEE, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 6-9, August 2006. 
[24] J. Chen, A. M. MacEachren and D. Guo, “Supporting the 
process of exploring and interpreting space–time multivariate 
patterns: the Visual Inquiry Toolkit”, Cartography and 
Geographic Information Science, vol. 35, no. 1, p. 33, 2008. 
[25] H. Guo, Z. Wang, B. Yu, H. Zhao and X. Yuan, “TripVista: 
Triple Perspective Visual Trajectory Analytics and its 
application on microscopic traffic data at a road intersection”, 
Proc. Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis 2011), 
IEEE, March 2011, pp. 163-170. 
[26] M. Davenport and C. Risley, “Information visualization: the 
state of the art for maritime domain awareness”, DTIC 
Document, 2006. 
[27] J.-L. Wybo, Maîtrise des Risques et Prévention des Crises, 
Lavoisier, in press. 
[28] B. Idiri and A. Napoli, “Towards automatic identification 
system of maritime risk accidents by rule-based reasoning 
knowledge”, Proc. 7th International Conference on System of 
Systems Engineering (SOSE 2012), Genoa, Italy, 2012. 
[29] D. Pumain and T. Saint-Julien, L’analyse spatiale : 
Localisations dans l’espace. Paris: Armand Colin, 1997. 
[30] V. Beaulieu, “Étude de la visualisation géographique dans un 
environnement 
d’exploration 
interactive 
de 
données 
géodécisionnelles - Adaptation et améliorations”, Université 
de Laval, 2009. 
[31] Y. Bédard, S. Rivest and M.-J. Proulx, “Spatial On-Line 
Analytical Processing (SOLAP): Concepts, architectures and 
solutions from a geomatics engineering perspective”, in Data 
Warehouses 
and 
OLAP: 
Concepts, 
Architecture 
and 
Solutions, Wrembel R. et C. Koncilia (Eds), 2007, pp. 298-
319. 
[32] J. Bertin, Sémiologie Graphique, Mouton/Gauthier-Villars. 
Paris, 1967. 
[33] D. A. Keim, F. Mansmann, J. Schneidewind and H. Ziegler, 
“Challenges in visual data analysis”, Proc. 10th International 
Conference on Information Visualization, London, UK, 2006. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

