Digitizing the Geo-Cover of Greater Cairo Metropolis  
Supporting the Time of Transformation 
 
Ahmed Abdelhalim M. Hassan 
Institute of Landscape Ecology, Muenster University, 
Muenster, Germany,  
E-mail ahmedahalim@uni-muenster.de 
 
 
Abstract—Nowadays, many cities in developing countries are 
striving for reconstruction and sustainable growth after a long 
time of corruption and conflict. Hence, the planners of 
different trends need to access different types of information 
easily and work firmly by the use of modern technology. 
Accordingly, this paper aims to present the geological and 
physiographic setting of Greater Cairo metropolis in the 
perspective of a digital city and reintroduce the geo-map 
concern to the whole area. To achieve that, this study tends to 
use the remote sensing techniques to differentiate the rock 
cover types and describe the topographic relief of the area 
dominated Greater Cairo. The applied classification and 
nomenclatures were based on field observations that take the 
previous geological studies published on the concerned area 
and its neighborhoods into strong consideration. As a general 
result, eleven units representing all rock outcrops have been 
observed, described, and classified. Analyzing of the digital 
elevation model (DEM) delineated the structure relief of the 
study area. These outputs could support the stakeholders and 
earth-scientists to refine and develop a geological data bank in 
a digital form, to be directly processed by suitable software. 
And also, the familiarity with the geo-setting of such a 
megacity would help to detect the rapid spatial changes in 
some protected areas. 
Keywords-digital geo-cover; Greater Cairo physiography; 
rock unit classification  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Generally, 
applications 
of 
techniques 
to 
obtain 
information about an object without touching the object itself 
are used widely and extensively in geological investigations. 
These techniques mainly are geophysical tools (e.g. 
electromagnetic 
induction, 
ground 
penetration 
radar, 
aeromagnetic…etc.) and satellite sensors. These were located 
far apart hence the distance between the object and sensor 
being of several kilometers or hundreds of kilometers [1]. In 
the recent past, the remote sensing technique plays a very 
important role in geological mapping starting from aerial 
photographs interpretation and jumping to sophisticated 
enhancement, processing, and interpretation of images 
acquired by space satellites. These are able to show features 
and patterns which may not be distinguishable on aerial 
photographs due to the lack of color information in these 
(aerial photographs) [2]. Therefore, the remote sensing 
techniques used do not only allow geological mapping but 
also lithology and mineral differentiation and exploration on 
small and large scales, respectively. Accordingly, the use of 
satellite images for geological mapping and for exploring 
economic resources is becoming an increasingly important 
issue for earth-scientists. 
Furthermore, the 3D or elevation remote acquisition data 
provide mitigation and hydrological investigation for geo-
hazards rather than topographic description and relief 
description and measures. The later proved that the 
application of digital elevation model analysis (DEM) is a 
potentially efficient, reliable, reproducible and effective 
technique for under taking geological terrain mapping.  Abd 
Manap et al. [3] concluded that the advantage of 3-D draping 
technique compared to the conventional stereoscope 
interpretation is that the geological terrain features such as 
hillcrest, side slope, foot slope, straight slope, concave slope 
and convex slope can be observed not only from the normal 
vertical view but also to be viewed from different scales, 
orientations and perspectives.  
A Study done by Nalbant and Alpiekin [4] showed that 
thematic mapper (TM) imagery can be used as a valuable 
tool together with field studies for geological mapping and 
structural patterns. This procedure can save an appreciable 
amount of time, money, and man power compared to the 
efforts exerted by earth scientists and is also useful in 
undertaking geological terrain mapping in inaccessible areas. 
The U.S Geological Survey carried out a research program in 
1985 to produce 1:250,000 scale land-cover maps for Alaska 
using Landsat MSS data [5]. Sultan et al. [6] and, Gad and 
Kusky [7] demonstrated that TM data can be reliably used to 
distinguish mineral potential from surrounding rocks in arid 
regions and to generate detailed maps over wide regions by 
using quantitative, reproducible mapping criteria. In 
addition, possibilities for locating suture zones over the less 
well known parts of arid continents are clear.  
Ingram et al. [8] evaluated the relationships between the 
geology, land use, and elevation parameters in north 
Mississippi and addressed a strong correlation between the 
different rock formations and slope degrees. Since, land use 
information 
was 
extracted 
from 
satellite 
imagery, 
topographic parameters were derived from elevation data, 
and textural characteristics were generated from these 
datasets to provide a basis for surface mapping. However, an 
integrated GIS (geographic information system) and remote 
sensing techniques can be used effectively to develop a more 
comprehensive geologic database to facilitate geological 
field studies have been occurring for large areas.  
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The most geological studies describing Greater Cairo 
lack the application of techniques of remote sensing in an 
advanced way. Hence, the most work deals with raw image 
data by traditionally using color combination of multispectral 
satellite images to prepare preliminary maps regardless of the 
georeference, radiometric character or spectral analysis. 
Also, the most maps were traced based on Thematic Mapper 
(TM) and Enhanced Thematic Mapper (ETM) which are 
recently available freely in many open sources. Such studies 
conducted by Egyptian geologists (e.g., [9]) who modified 
the geologic map of Eastern Greater Cairo, area based on 
false color composite and utilization of band combination 7, 
4, and 2 for the R, G, and B, respectively, which is the best 
for the general lithological discrimination in the study area. 
II. 
T STUDY AREAYPE 
The selected area of study is the metropolitan area of 
Greater Cairo (G.C) and its surroundings, which is known as 
the capital of Egypt and one of the fastest growing 
megacities worldwide (Fig. 1). The area covers about 600 
km2, encompassing major parts of the governorates of Cairo, 
Giza, 6th of October, and Helwan. The Nile forms the 
administrative division between these governorates, with 
Cairo and Helwan on the east bank of the river and, Giza and 
6th of October on the west bank. Also, the area is 
geologically divided into two main parts, eastern part and 
western part, with the Nile valley between them. In relation 
to the later, the nomenclature and facies subdivision of the 
stratigraphic succession, described by many authors on both 
sides, are quite different. Therefore, the rock type characters, 
classified in this study, have been implemented on the 
identification and chronology of previous studies. 
 
Figure 1.  Location of the study area. 
 
III. 
MATERIALS AND TECHNIQUES 
A. Data availability 
Because of the rapid development and extensive human 
activities in the area around the Nile valley in Greater Cairo 
(hinterland and/or Nile valley terraces) the selected data are 
characterized by less cover of land use for a better 
discrimination of the rock units. Accordingly, Landsat 5 TM 
image data acquired in 1984 with seven bands of (three 
invisible wavelengths, four in infrared) most of which have 
30 meter resolution, except band six with 120 m resolution, 
has been selected. Then to increase the spatial accuracy of 
TM-5 image the moderate resolution panchromatic image 
with 10m pixel resolution acquired in 1997 by Spot-2 sensor 
(TT station) is merged with it. The high resolution (5 m pixel 
resolution) of multispectral Spot-5 images acquired in 2006 
by Spot-5 is available too for a good and accurate glance of 
surface exposures in the study area. Moreover, there is 
another sort of satellite data with elevation information that 
has been used to construct 3D visualization for the entire 
area of interest. This elevation data is obtained from ASTER 
GDEM which is generally characterized by 30 m pixel 
resolution at 95 % confidence horizontally and about 10 m at 
95 % confidence vertically. Furthermore, ancillary data such 
as scanned topographic sheets and geologic map of scale 
1:100,000 are utilized for required nomenclatures and 
location detection. 
B. Methodology 
In this study, the work procedure is based on different 
techniques of image processing to extract some interesting 
geologic and physiographic features. First of all, all satellite 
images and scanned sheets are georeferenced to UTM Zone 
36 North projection with WGS-84 datum. Moreover, TM 
and Spot satellite data are enhanced to insure radiometric 
balance between individual scenes and the DEM data were 
mosaicked to cover the study area. This step was followed by 
fusion technique to increase the pixel size and resolution of 
all TM image bands (Fig. 2) to get more spatial information 
of surface exposures. However, the produced maps based on 
TM reached to scale 1:100,000, but the maps based on 
merged image reached to scale 1:32,000 without remarkable 
pixels. 
Figure 2.  TM image (1984) to left and Panchromatic Spot band (1997) to 
right represent low and high resolutions respectively. 
The fusion process occurred by using the sharpen module 
which is provided with different merge algorithms in Erdas 
Imagine software. Therefore, the subtractive resolution 
merge algorithm is used in this study. Consequently, the 
different band combinations are tested for first impression on 
lithology discrimination. So, the combination between bands 
7, 4, and 2, and 5, 3, and 2 were reviewed in R.G.B false 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

color and presented the best image composites in the study 
area.   
The principal component analysis used in this study to 
reproduce the merged high resolution image allows 
inordinate and excessive data to be computed into fewer 
bands [10]. In addition, Principal component algorithms are 
image enhancement techniques to visualize the maximum 
spectral contrast from many spectral bands to three primary 
display colors [11]. These lead to a stretching of the pixels to 
differentiate different rock types. Moreover, the bands of 
PCA data are non-correlated and independent and are often 
more interpretable than the source data [12]. The PCA 
technique was applied onto two different kinds of 
multispectral satellites data TM with 7 bands and Spot with 3 
bands separately. The difference after the removal of 
redundancy information showed that differences exist 
between the different bands of each image. Because of the 
wide range of spectral wavelength of TM data which have 
seven channels, the author preferred to use principle 
component analysis of TM merged image in rock 
discrimination to compose a geo-digital thematic map rather 
than the multi-spectral Spot data which have only three 
channels. 
Consequently, it could found that the first principal 
component channel (PC1) has the largest possible variance, 
while the next two PC channels (PC2 and PC3) contain all 
other interband variations. Therefore, each one of the 
components from 3 to 7 in TM merged image is dominated 
in less than 1.3% of information and seems unnecessary in 
lithological information (Fig. 3). 
So that, the first three principle components, these were 
calculated from preferred and enhanced TM merged image 
beside the field observations and experiences, have been 
mainly used in classification process. 
 
 
Figure 3.  The spectral reflecance of the classifies rock typs regardind the 
PC channels. 
 
The classification step is provided by the supervised 
classification method which assembles the surfaces that have 
similar spectral signatures. Once signatures are examined, 
the classifier is then used to attach labels to all image pixels 
according to the trained classes. The procedure of supervised 
classification was processed by using maximum likelihood 
algorithm, which assumes that each spectral class can be 
described by a multivariate normal distribution [13]. In spite 
of that, the accuracy assessment is behind the objective of 
this study; but, there are many control points acquired from 
ground and estimated by GPS used and interpolated in the 
process of classification to enhance the pixel selection and 
refine the rock type identification. 
Finally, the morphological information and topographic 
features were extracted from the available mosaicked digital 
elevation model (DEM) (Fig. 4). 
Figure 4.  Colorued DEM for elevation information concerns the Greater 
Cairo area. 
1-15th of May City. 2- Wadi Garawi. 3- El Halawana Height.  
4- El Qurn Height.. 5- Wadi Gibbu.. 6- Wadi Abu Silli.  
7- Wadi Hof. 8- Gabal Hof 9- Obesrvatiory Plateou. 
10- Wadi Abu El Rokham. 11- Wadi Degla. 12-.Wadi El Tih. 
13- El Mokattam Plateou. 14- Abu Roash. 15- Pyramids Plateou.  
16- 6 th  of October City.17- Wadi El Tafla. 
 
The techniques used to obtain and analyze the elevation 
information are mainly supported by ENVI 4.7 software. As 
well, the produced digital maps could be reached to scale 
from 1:75,000 to 1:50,000. 
IV. 
GEOLOGY OF GREATER CAIRO 
A. Rock Cover and Type 
Many authors studied the different time rock units 
cropping out in the eastern and western sides of Greater 
Cairo and reported that in geographic maps and geologic 
correlations e.g., [9][14][15][16][17][18][19][20][21].  
The present application of remote sensing image 
processing techniques and field observation supplemented 
with the previous geological studies and nomenclatures in 
West-and-East Greater Cairo came to subdivide the rock 
exposure of the study area into the eleven rock types. 
Besides that, two dominating classes of the fertile Nile valley 
area are concerned too. One of them represents the urban 
materials and roads, and other one is concerned as a mix 
class representing the green cover and water bodies.  
Moreover, the spectral analysis of the exposed rocks in 
the area of interest is summarized and reported to show the 
relation between each band of PC image and reflectance 
spectrum of selected pixel for classification. (Fig. 3). 
In short, the eleven litho-types covering the study area 
are mainly dominated by 1-white limestone (Chalk), 2- white 
limestone with dolomite, 3- white Nummulitic limestone, 4- 
marl and fossiliferous marly limestone, 5- sands and 
fossiliferous sandstone, 6- calcareous sandstone and/or 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

eroded surface 7- sand and silty sand with subordinate clay 
intebeds, 8- sand stone (Ferruginous) with Gravels, 9- non-
marine Pliocene sand, 10- basalt, and 11- wadi deposits (Fig. 
5). 
These exposed rock succession that builds up the study 
area ranges in age from Upper Cretaceous to Quaternary 
(Fig. 6). 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Rock cover classification based on PCA. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Rock type and its equivalent formation 
 
1) White limestone (L.S) 
White limestone or chalk unit is distinguished by the first 
appearance of snow-white massive thick bedded chalk, with 
thin chert bands and nodules (Fig. 7 Left). The chalk is 
exposed only in the Western part of the study area mainly in 
Hassana Dom. According to Said [15], the age of Chalk unit 
ranges from Campanian to Masstrichtian with a maximum 
exposed thickness of about 78 m. While in western part of 
the desert this formation belongs to the Khoman Chalk and 
Senonian age [22]. 
 
2) White limestone with dolomite 
The white limestone contaminated with dolomite and / or 
marl is represented in the eastern part of the study area 
mainly by Observatory Formation and slightly by Abu Roash 
Formation or AbuRoash “D” member in Western part (Fig. 7 
Right). Furthermore, the Observatory Formation belongs to 
the Middle Eocene and constitutes the foundation bedrock of 
the northern eastern part of 15th of May city and its northern 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

extension [9]. Swedan [20] mentioned that the formation is 
composed of white to yellowish white, marly and chalky 
limestone, intercalated with several interbeds of hard, grey, 
dolomitic limestone. The type section of this rock unit 
measured by Frag and Ismail [14] in the northeast of Helwan 
below the Observatory establishment is about 77 m thick. 
On the other side, the Abu Roach Formation or “D” 
member [16] is dominated mainly by white to yellowish 
white, dolomitic limestone with large amounts of large fauna 
(e.g. Acteonella). [15], named the Turonian-Santonian beds 
in many parts in northern Egypt (included the study area) as 
Wata Formation, commonly used in Sinai. 
 
3) White Nummulitic limestone 
The white Nummulitic limestone class refers to the beds 
built up mostly with grayish-white, slightly chalky beds rich 
in Nummulites gizehensis, Nummulites Beaumonti, N. 
subbeaumonti, Schizaster africanus, and Turbinella frequens 
[14]. These beds exposed in the Eastern part to the North of 
Helwan province which is composed by upper part of the 
Gabal Hof Formation. The former named and subdivided 
into two units (up to 80 m in thickness) in its type locality at 
Wadi Abu Rakham by Frag and Ismail [14]. This formation 
is equivalent to the Middle Eocene rock unit cropped out at 
the escarpment of El Mokattam Plateau, East of Cairo city. 
While, along the western side of the Nile, the spectral 
analysis of this rock type does not show any good and/or 
obvious cover except at the area of Pyramid plateau. 
 
4) Marl and fossiliferous marly limestone 
The marl and/or fossiliferous marly limestone are mainly 
represented in the eastern side of the study by Upper-Middle 
to Upper Eocene time unit of El-Quran and Wadi Garawi 
Formations in southeast part and EL-Maddi Formation in 
northwest part. Osman [9], Frag and Ismail [14], Swedan 
[20] and we mentioned that the El Qurn Formation is 
composed mainly of about 70 m thick marl, marly limestone 
with thick gypsum veinlets, and hard dolomitic bands. In 
addition, they stated that the Wadi Garawi Formation is 
extremely equivalent to the Maddi Formation, which 
dominated by Carolia Placunoides, Plicatula polymorpha, 
Ostrea reili, Nummulites Beaumontai, and N. striatus. 
On the West side, this rock class is recorded southwest 
and west from the Pyramid plateau with maximum thickness 
of 154 m measured by Frag and Ismail [14] and named 
Maddi Formation. To the north of the Pyramid plateau, this 
unit cropped out at the flanks of macro structure of El 
Hassana Dom. In contrast, the spectral signature of this class 
has referred to the marl and fossiliferous marly limestone 
units which intercalated with sand and shale in the small part 
of the core of Abu Roash structure (Fig. 8). These units 
belong to the Cenomania (Lower Cretaceous) Baharyia 
Formation [15]. 
 
5) Sands and fossilifreous sandstone 
The sand stone facies cover a large area east and west of 
Greater Cairo, which constitute the foundation bedrock of 
many parts in new cities such as New Cairo, and 6th of 
October City. This rock type is composed mainly of sand 
stone, marl, yellowish green clayey marls, sandy limestone 
and bioturbated marly limestone. According to the 
describtion of Frag and Ismail [14], Moustafa et al. [18] and 
Swedan [20] the spectral signature of this class could be 
represented by Late Upper Eocene Wadi Hof Formation and 
Anqabiya Formation in eastern side of Nile valley. While, on 
the other side this reflectance spectrum belongs to the upper 
part of Qasr El Sagha Formation. This formation concerned 
by Said [15] and Swedan [20]. The upper most part is of the 
Eocene age and consists of poorly fossiliferous clay and 
channel deposits with minimum thickness regarding the 
original thickness. Also, this signature reflected the 
Coniacian-Santonian beds exposed in some areas at El-
Hassana Dom. 
 
6) Calcareous clastics and/or eroded surface 
This spectral reflectance is very ambiguous all over the 
study area, but the field check oriented to identify it to be 
under the erosional surfaces of clastics and calcareous-
clastics outcrops, in addition to some eroded Nummulitic 
limestone with clay contamination. 
 
7) Sand and silty sand with clay 
The exposed part of this rock type is found mainly at 
Gabal el Mokattam area eastwards and very close to the area 
west to southwest of The Pyramids Plateau composed mainly 
of fine grained calcareous sand stone, grading upward silty 
sand and shale [20] and [9]. The unit could be represented in 
the Anqabiya Formation due East of the study area and some 
most upper Eocene and Oligocene units due West (Qasr El 
sagha Formation). Generally, this pixel reflectance represents 
the unconsolidated sandstone and silt to shale outcrops in 
many parts of the study area.  
 
8) Sandstone (ferruginous) with gravels 
This exposure is widely distributed in the study area, 
especially East of el Mokataum plateau including the East of 
Cairo (Nasr City), New Cairo City, and protected areas 
(forest of petrified wood) along the Cairo-Red Sea high way. 
This rock exposure belongs to the Gabal Ahmar Formation. 
On other hand, this rock cover mainly dominates the region 
of 6th of October City and belongs to Gabal Qatrani 
Formation and Gabal El Khashab Formation [20]. However, 
Skukri [23] and Said [15] stated that, this formation 
constitutes the extension of a narrow belt of Oligocene-
Miocene age from Suez via Cairo and onward into the north 
western desert, which is mainly dominated by distinct red 
bed sequences with coarse-grained sand and gravels with 
large amounts of petrified wood separated by basaltic sheets 
in between (Fig. 9 Left). The pixel signature information is 
reported as following; 
 
9) Non-marine Pliocene sand 
This rock unit in the area of interest consists mainly of 
fine to coarse, friable sands and conglomerate sandstone of 
yellowish to brownish-white color [15] and [20]. Its spectral 
reflection appears on the western side of the G.C obviously 
accompanied with basaltic sheets rather than on the eastern 
side (Fig. 9 Right). 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
10) Basalt 
The distribution of Oligo-Miocene deposits was 
governed by the volcanicity and tectonic activity which 
affected the Red Sea regions and the high belt between the 
stable and the unstable shelves in Egypt during the 
Oligocene [15]. Therefore, the basaltic sheets in the study 
area recorded within the sandstone beds of Oligo-Miocene 
beds in 6th of October city towards the West and New Cairo 
area towards the East. 
 
11) Wadi deposits 
In the study area which is filled with recent fine clastics 
deposits mainly of clay, this rock unit represents its often 
being reworked by eolian processes and stream deposits near 
to the River Nile bank. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Chalky limestone (Khoman Fm.) observed in the western part of 
study area (Left). Well bedded limestone at Gabl Hof Fm. (Right). 
 
Figure 8.  The core of Abu Roasch structure shows the marl and limestone 
rock units. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Petrified wood at Gabal El Khashab, West of G.C (Left). Non-
marine Pliocene caped by basaltic sheet (Right). 
B. Physiography 
Topographically, the study area could be divided into 
three parts, the first one is represented by the lowest 
elevation corridor of the River Nile valley, the second is 
dominated by two plateaus detached by two  low areas at the 
eastern side of the area under investigation, while, the last is 
the western side which represented by topographic features 
forms an almost featureless plain with the exception of some 
small structure related heights  
According to the analyzing and slicing of the digital 
elevation model (DEM), the contour lines and elevation 
information, slope degradation, and three dimensional 
visualization are extracted (Figs. 4 and 11).  
Therefore, the area around River Nile mainly occupied 
by different human activates such as agricultures, houses, 
and industries with elevations ranging from 20 to 100 m 
above sea level.  
The topographic features expressed on the East side of 
G.C characterized by moderately rough relief, occupied by 
soft rocks ranging in age from Middle Eocene to Recent.  
The highest elevation is about 450 m above sea level (a. 
s. l) recorded due East of the El Halawana Hieght. In general, 
the landscape in the part of study area is characterized by 
numerous rugged, isolated hills of mostly made up of hard 
Eocene limestone beds. Those are arranged from south (close 
to 15th of May City) to north (El Mokattam area), e.g. El 
Qurn Hieght (~270 m a.s.l), Obesrvatory table land (~175 
m), Gabal Hof (~330 m a.s.l), and El Mokattam Plateau and 
New Cairo area (maximum ~287 m a.s.l). The wadies are 
usually controlled by faults of different trends mainly of NE 
to N-S and E-W to ENE trends. The main wadies traversing  
the study area are Wadi Garwi to the southeast from 15th of 
May City, Wadi Gibbu and wadi Abu Silli which dissect the 
15th of May City and Helwan area towards due West, to 
North of Helwan area present Wadi Hof which is extending 
ESE-WNW and joined with Wadi Abu El Rakham at Gabal 
Hof area, Wadi Degla which is the most important protected 
area and largest drainage line on the east side of G.C 
delineated the southern scarp of El Mokattam plateau, and 
due North of the Wadi Degla is small stream called Wadi El 
Tih bounded the New Cairo from south. These wadies are 
generally of dendritic and sub-parallel types. 
Most of the surface of the area West G.C is covered with 
very gentle-dipping Tertiary-Quaternary strata including 6th 
of October City (Fig. 23 A). However, the area in some parts 
characterized by different topographic features mainly 
consists of Giza plateau (~120 m) and small folded and 
faulted Abu Roash complex and El Hassana Dom to the 
north of Giza pyramids (Fig. 10). The latter is highly 
manifested and controlled by both the lithologies and 
structures. The drainage lines have a very low degree of 
shaded relief (hill shading) (Fig. 4 and 11) on western side of 
the G.C and only Wadi Tafla south of the Pyramid could be 
detected.  
 
 
 
Figure 10.  Hassana Dom at Abu Roash area 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 11.  Shaded relief (hill shading) of the Greater Cairo area. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Digital maps gain not only all ground and rock cover 
information but also are flexible for updating based on 
addition of new data and/or applications of advanced remote 
sensing techniques, which could be used for different 
purposes and to build a data base for large areas. 
A study of Greater Cairo as the biggest city in MENA 
(Middle East North Africa) arid region shows that the 
geological setting might be one of the effective driving 
forces for further studies concerning the growing trends of 
the city and developing plans.   
There are eleven rock types covering the Greater Cairo 
metropolis, composing mainly of carbonates and clastics 
with dispersed basaltic exposures. Although, these coverings 
are not dominated by any valued ores, some areas contain 
native structures and land forms. While the field 
observations and false composite high resolution satellite 
images (SPOT) showed degradation of protected areas; e.g. 
destroying land forms of El-Hassana Dom and misuse of 
Fores of Wood at Wadi Degla. 
The statistical report of spectral signatures derived from 
PC merged TM image showed that the carbonate covers have 
higher numbers than clastics deposits (ex. Mean of band 1 
addresses that more than 350 could be carbonate and 
between 350-320 could be clastics, while the basalt between 
210-240 and wadi deposits reflects high value about 380). 
Because the western part of G.C metropolis is dominated 
manly with clastics and characterized by a low relief and less 
roughness, the eastern part is built up mainly of carbonates 
and a rough relief, it can be mentioned that the western side 
has a higher opportunity for development than the eastern 
part. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Ravi, “Remote Sensing Geology”, second edition, Springer 2003, 
pp. 1-3.  
[2] A. Ibrahim, and M. Johari,“The Correlation of the Landsat TM 
Images Characteristic with the Geologic Information : A Preliminary 
Result of a Case Study in Langkawi Islands, Malaysia”, ACRS, 1997. 
[3] M. Abd Manap , M. R. Firuz, W.N.Sulaima and N. Surip, 
“Application of Remote Sensing in the Identification of the 
Geological Terrain Features in Cameron Highlands, Malaysia “,Sains 
Malaysiana,  vol. 39(1) , pp. 1–11, 2010. 
[4] SS. Nalbant,  and ö. Alpiekin, “The use of Landsat Thematic Mapper 
imagery for analysing lithology and structure of Korucu-Du la area in 
western Turkey”, 
International Journal of Remote 
Sensing 
Publication, vol. 16, issue 13, pp. 2357-2374, 1995.  
[5] L. Fitzpatric, “-Producing Alaska Interim Land Cover Maps from 
Landsat Digital and Ancillary Data”, in Proceedings of the 11th 
Annual William T. Pecora Memorial Symposium: Satellite Land 
Remote Sensing: current programs and a look into the future 
American Society of Photogrammetry and Remote Sensing , pp. 339 
– 347, 1987. 
[6] M. Sultan, R. E. Arvidson and N. C. Sturchio, “Mapping of 
serpentinites in the Eastern Desert of Egypt by using Landsat 
thematic mapper data” The society of American  Geology December, 
vol. 14, no. 12, pp. 995-999, 1986. 
[7] S. Gad., T. Kusky, “ASTER spectral ratioing for lithological mapping 
in the Arabian-Nubian shield, the Neoproterozoic Wadi Kid area, 
Sinai, Egypt”,Gondwana research vol.11, pp. 326-335, 2007. 
[8] S. l. Ingram, E. Gerg.., and H.  Khald.., “Application of remote 
sensing for mapping surface geology in heavily vegetated cover in 
North Mississippi”, Journal of the Mississippi Academy of Sciences / 
Jan, 2003, Abstract. 
[9] A. Osman, "Geotechnical and Structural studies on some new cities 
around Cairo” Cairo University, Faculty of Science, Geology 
Department. pp. 411-420, 2010. 
[10] ERDAS Field Guide, 5th Edition, ERDAS Inc., Atlanta, Georgia, 
USA, 2010. 
[11] K. V. Robert, “Fundamentals of geological and environmental remote 
sensing”, Prentice Hall series in geographic information science, 
University of California, 1997. 
[12] J. R. Jensen,“Introductory digital image processing: a remote sensing 
perspective. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, pp. 318, 1996. 
[13] J. A. Richards, “Remote sensing digital image analysis: an 
introduction “ (second edition).1993. 
[14] I. A. M Frag, and M. M. Ismail,“Contribution to the stratigraphy of 
the Wadi Hof area (North-East of Helwan)”, Bull. Fac. Sci., Cairo, 
Uni., vol..27, pp. 221-239, 1959. 
[15] R. Said, “The Geology of Egypt”, Elsevier Pub. Co., Amsterdam, 
1962, p. 377. 
[16] M. L. Abdelkhalek,  M. A.. El Sharkawi, M. Darwish, ., M. Hagras, 
and A. Sehim, “Structural history of Abu Roash district, Western 
Desert, Egypt,” Journal of African Earth Science, vol 9, No 3/4, pp.  
435-443, 1989.  
[17] A. R. Moustafa, “Wernch tectonics in the north western desert of 
Egypt (Abu Roash area, West of Greater Cairo)”. Earth Sc. Ser. vol 2, 
1988, pp. 1-16. 
[18] A. R. Moustafa, F. El-Nahhas,  and S. Abdeltawab, “Engineering 
geology of Mokattam city and vicinity, eastern Greater Cairo, Egypt.” 
Eng.Geol., vol. 31, pp. 327-344, 1991. 
[19] A. R. Moustafa, A. Saoudi,I. M. Ibrahim,H.  Molokhia, and B. 
Schwartz, B.,  “Structural setting and tectonic evolution of the 
Bahariya Depression, western Desert, Egypt”, Geo-Arabia, Bahrain, 
vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 91-124, 2003. 
[20] A. H. Swedan, “A note on the geology of Greater Cairo area”, Annals 
of the geological survey of Egypt, vol XVII, pp 239-251, 1991.  
[21] A. Sehim, “Cretaceous tectonics in Egypt”, Egypt. Jour. Geol., vol. 
37, pp. 335-372, 1993. 
[22] P. Norton, “Rock stratigraphic nomenclature of the Western Desert”, 
Pan American U.A.R Oil Co., Internal Report, p. 18, 1967,: 
[23] N. M. Shukri, “Remarks on the geological structures of Egypt”, Bull. 
Soc. Geography.of Egypt, vol. 27, pp. 65-82, 1954.   
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

