Incorporating the Analyses of Urban Form into the Geocomputational Modelling 
The Morphological Approach 
 
Małgorzata Hanzl 
Institute of Architecture and Town Planning 
Technical University of Lodz 
Lodz, Poland 
e-mail: mhanzl@p.lodz.pl 
 
 
Abstract - Geomatics allows for advanced modeling of 
phenomena in space and for the observation of process 
development in time. It enables comparative analyses of 
various aspects of urban-scape, including the social and human 
dimensions. At this time, the scope of urban data required by 
legal regulations is limited to basic issues, including land-use 
zoning, 
transportation 
and, 
cultural/natural 
values 
preservation. Successful sustainable urban environmental 
planning requires concentration on other aspects of city 
structure, with special emphasis on urban morphology 
analyses. Such an approach is more appropriate to the mixed 
used development and revitalisation processes, which take 
place in urbanised areas. The paper provides insights into the 
importance and challenges of using urban structure analysis 
from different perspectives: social, cultural, urban planning 
and design, and explains the main fields of contemporary 
urban morphological analyses, reviewing the geomatics use in 
this field. 
Keywords-urban planning; urban design; urban morphology 
analyses; geomatics; data modelling; INSPIRE 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The city - “a whole” in Plato‟s terms - should be 
considered holistically. The elements of the system are so 
complex that it is difficult to define them in an explicit way. 
Geomatics allows for comparative analyses of the 
distribution of different phenomena in space and for the 
observation of the dynamics of the processes of 
development. Contemporary urban planning practise and 
theory, presenting the holistic approach and underlining the 
importance of time [4], progressively develop the above 
qualities. The officially approved scope of urban analyses [1] 
restricts itself to the level of blocks and refers to the limited 
quantity of issues: mainly technical, including land-use 
zoning, 
transportation 
and 
cultural/natural 
values 
preservation. The objective to successfully plan the 
sustainable urban environment requires concentration on 
other aspects of city structure, with special emphasis on 
urban morphology analyses. 
A. Urban morphology as a repository of socially defined 
space 
When regarding the development of physical structures 
in relation to culture, the built form constitutes an important 
repository of cultural information, an artifact of cultures and 
societies, that created them in a given time [2], [11], [21], 
[26]. Hillier and Hanson [18] underline the relation of 
patterns of people movements and physical environment, 
introducing the concept of spatial logic of space. Thus, the 
analyses of existing and former urban structures provide an 
important tool for the creation of new structures, which not 
only follow the site genius loci and local tradition, but at the 
same time stay in compliance with the integral cultural 
patterns of social groups, e.g., the research by Gabaccia [15], 
cited after [26]. More contemporary research on the social 
production of space seeks to place the understanding of built 
form in the larger context of society's institutions and history 
[27], [26]. Proxemics relates to the human environment with 
the behavioral patterns proper for distinguished cultures. The 
above factors remain important when considering the 
constant displacement of people in an era of globalization, 
and the requirement to provide an environment, which suits 
their needs, while at the same time reducing the problems of 
social adaptation [16]. 
B. Complexity of urban design and planning 
As Carmona et al. [6] suggest, urban design and planning 
should remain a holistic process including the approaches of 
different disciplines. The writing of Lefebvre [27] also points 
at the need for the unity of science in the description of urban 
systems. The need for the consilience of science is 
considered indispensable also by scientists of other 
disciplines, e.g., sociobiology [41]. 
The current domination of engineering, including 
individual transportation policies and reducing planning to 
the definition of land use zoning, leads to the ugliness of 
urban settlements. As Landry [24] and Florida [14] state, the 
factor of attractiveness in urban environment is particularly 
important in cities, which search the development of the 
creative industries. The development of theories referring to 
urban perception, starting with Lynch [28], [29] and Debord 
[9], follows on constantly (e.g., works of Amoroso [3], 
Kempf [23]). The use of neogeography and mash-ups allows 
also for the inclusion of lay experience of urban forms in the 
analyses of urban scapes (e.g., popular competitions for best 
stories about different cities). Looking at cities through the 
eyes of citizens plays an important role in the public 
participation and project implementation process. All of the 
above issues (attractiveness and perception) refer to the 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

urban forms. At the same time attractiveness and beauty 
remain issues of culture [13]. These complex issues are 
omitted in the common descriptions of urbanised space 
referring to a very limited quantity of factors. For some 
projects, especially realized in the mixed up city cores and 
the rehabilitation projects, a clear definition of planned land 
use contradicts the objectives of these projects. In these 
cases, the description of city structure assumes the form 
based approach, where the shape of volumes and their scale 
and relations in space prevail over the definition of functions. 
II. 
BASIC TYPES OF MORPHOLOGICAL ANALYSES 
Panerai et al. [34] distinguish three main groups of urban 
analyses: (1) the general ones which refer to the geographical 
level, including the analyses of the growth of cities, (2) the 
analyses of urban landscapes – the sequential ones, and (3) 
typological analyses, which refer to streets, parcels, and 
buildings.  
Healey [17] points at the presence of the three main 
planning traditions, concentrated on: economy, formal 
issues, and political processes in planning. Studies of urban 
form are present in planning in different European countries 
although they belong to different disciplines, i.e. urban 
planning, urban design, architecture, and revitalisation 
projects. Mainstream urban planning at the European level 
covers the more general considerations, mainly of a 
geographical nature. The concentration on definition of land 
use and transportation systems, present in the official 
planning 
regulations, is also the 
consequence and 
reminiscence of the modernism era, when these two subjects 
constituted the main area of interests. These derive from 
modernist principles of separation of uses in the city, 
underlying the concept of the functional city, which 
constituted one of the most important rule of the Charte 
d'Athènes [7]. Planning theory and practice, which continue 
the approach rooted in the modernism tradition, find out its 
description in geocomputational models, which refer to a 
very limited number of issues, exposing the subjects, which 
are typically of a geographical nature: like land use, growth 
of cities, transportation, and usually omitting the analysis of 
urban form. 
A. Analyses at the geographic level 
The most important body of analyses, which finds its 
place in mainstream theory and in legal regulations at the 
European level [1], refers to the general description of the 
city structure, which is considered in geographical terms. 
The geographical descriptions usually concentrate on more 
general units (urban blocks, districts, etc.), although more 
detailed elements, like public spaces, streets, built up areas, 
are also present in some treatises, e.g., [25]. 
The analyses concern the level of metropolitan areas, 
cities and towns, or districts, the most detailed ones refer to 
urban blocks. The parcels are usually below levels of 
concern. Most of the analysis deals with urban functions, 
urban areas are classified according to their dominant usages 
and this continues since modernism [5], cited in [34], p.10. 
Within the city structure the distinguished parts are usually 
limited to the down-town and suburbs. Development studies, 
including growth simulations and tracing, constitute a 
considerable body of knowledge.  
B. Analyses of the urban scapes 
The analyses of the urban landscapes is the basic method 
of gathering data for urban projects in urban planning and 
urban design. Direct contact with the environment allows for 
observations and validation. The theoretical body for the 
studies is derived from Lynch's theory [29], in Polish 
architectural writings the theory of urban composition was 
developed by Wejchert [40], Szmidt [38] and Żurawski [44]. 
The theory was further developed in the Anglo-Saxon 
tradition, e.g., by Venturi et al. with regard to urban stripes 
[39]. The perception of cities in terms of sequence is not 
limited to the above authors. Sequential analyses were 
always present in architectural theory, their comeback started 
since Sitte [37]. In parallel, the continuation of the British 
Picturesque tradition was developed by Cullen [8]. 
Currently, concentration on the human perception of 
cityscape became quite a common approach, compare [23]. 
This group of analyses contains also psycho-geographical 
examinations of cityscape, e.g., [9], [33] or maps of East 
Paris [32].  
C. Typological analyses 
There are three basic elements of the urban landscape 
which are the subject of analyses: streets and public spaces, 
parcels, and buildings. These basic elements are interrelated, 
they create patterns, in which relations and hierarchies are 
also subject to analyses. Public spaces constitute the subject 
of planning since the very beginning. In the postmodern era, 
the analysis of public spaces is equalised with the 
examination of publicly accessible edifices and places 
(churches, commercial zones), as shown in the famous Map 
of Rome by Giambattista Nolli, 1748. Streets are examined 
as subject of sequential analysis, the example of which are 
transects drawings, compare, e.g., Project 360 degrees on 
Amsterdam city scapes, containing an assemblage of 
drawings and photo-collages of the physical materiality of 
the city, emphasizing signage and infrastructure [10], and as 
elements constituting patterns [31], [20].  
One of the basic units of morphological analyses is 
parcel: the layout of parcels, their dimensions, shape, 
correlations. Patterns remain one of the main threads of 
urban morphology analyses. The requirement of description 
of the character of space needs the engagement of more 
detailed observations – concerning the elementary level, 
which refers to the issues typically, in the Anglo-Saxon 
praxis, connected with the discipline of urban design. 
Lynch and Rodwin [30] distinguish the two general 
categories: flow systems and adapted space. They may be 
broken down into more categories, based on the following 
criteria: elements types, quantity, density, grain, focal 
organization, and generalized spatial distribution [30]. 
Element types as well as quantitative analyses are quite 
common concepts. A density may refer both to the physical 
structures (the intensity factor) and to the patterns of streets. 
Grain describes the extent to which the typical elements and 
densities are differentiated and separated in space. Focal 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

organization refers to the key points, which may be the 
density peaks, concentrations of dominant building types, 
main open spaces or nodes of the circulation flows and their 
interrelations. The generalized spatial distribution is a kind 
of synthesis, which includes patterns of zones taken by 
different types of development and densities. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Central part of Brzeziny, close to Lodz – model by students of 
the second year of Architecture Engineering course, International Faculty 
of Engineering, Technical University of Lodz, for the Urban Design 
classes. Synthesis model presenting the generalised spatial distribution of 
densities and basic elements of town structure. Model by students: 
I. Sikirycka, D. Pogorzelska, M. Socha, A. Salamończyk, tutor: M. Hanzl 
D. Analysis of morphological development 
The comparison of the layout of the city structure in 
different periods allows for the tracing of the development. It 
allows also for the comparison of the intercultural 
differences.  
This is particularly visible when analysing the cities - like 
Lodz, Poland, where the consecutive structures were the 
result of different urban theories and building cultures 
implementation. In case of Lodz „Old Town‟ the former rural 
Polish town was at the end of XIX century converted, 
preserving part of its former fabric, into the heart of the 
Jewish district, constituting a part of a big industrial city. 
During the World War II, it was partly demolished by Nazis 
and the Jewish ghetto was created there. After the War the 
demolitions were continued and part of former structures 
were replaced with socio-realist and modernist structures, as 
shown in Figs. 2 to 5.  
Figure 4 shows the perception analyses of the former 
Jewish district in Lodz, currently nonexistent, using the 
Lynch criteria [29]. The comparison to the current state 
proves the loss of street space definition in the eastern part of 
the area. The after war transformations utterly changed the 
former appearance of this part of the city. The land-use 
parameters remained the same, though the character of the 
district was altered. 
 
Figure 2.  The comparison of built up area and parcellation in the central 
part of the Old Town of Lodz, Poland – the former Jewish District between 
the II World War and currently: 1. Buildings 1939, 2. Buildings 2010, 3. 
Parcellation 1939, 4. Parcellation 2010. Street names – 1939 (in the 
paranthesis – current names). 
 
Figure 3.  Street layout for the central part of the Old Town of Lodz, 
Poland – the former Jewish District between the II World War and 
currently: 1. Streets 1939, 2. Streets 1939, which do not exist anymore, 3. 
Passages, 4. Streets 2010. Street names – 1939. 
 
Figure 4.  Nonexistent appearance of the central part of the old Jewish 
district: 1. frontages, 2. distant landmarks, 3. landmarks, 4. special places, 
5. buildings in 1939, 6. parcellation in 1939 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 5.  Not existing appearance of the central part of the old Jewish 
district contrasted with the contemporary figure-ground map: 1. lines of 
frontages – 1939, 2. buildings in 1939, 3. buildings in 2010, parcellation in 
2010 
III. 
URBAN MORPHOLOGY AND GEOCOMPUTATION 
In the above context, traditional morphological analyses 
of urban structure, which remain as the basic tool in urban 
planning praxis, takes on importance and should be 
considered principal in geocomputational modelling, along 
with the description of land use definition, transportation 
policies, etc.  
The basic unit of the morphological analyses is parcel: 
the layout of parcels, theirs dimensions, shape, correlations, 
patterns remain one of the main threads of urban morphology 
analyses. Descriptions usually concentrate on more general 
units: urban blocks, districts, etc., although more detailed 
elements had also been present, like public spaces, streets, 
built up areas [34]. As it was said, the requirement of 
description of the character of space needs the engagement 
of more detailed observations, involving the perception of 
urban form. 
A. Geocomputation as a platform for urban analyses 
The analyses of physical patterns of urban development 
should constitute the basis for other layers, describing the 
non-physical issues - as physical structure change progress is 
by definition slower than other processes. 
The concept of sustainability and climate resilience 
assumes the conciseness of urban structures [22]. The need 
for extended application of geomatics in assessing the 
current structures seems obvious in this context.  
Currently, the most popular theoretical approaches refer 
to figure background illustrations and land use data. The 
analyses of urban structure may assume the extended use of 
remote sensing. The commonly used photogrammetric refers 
to land use layer only, for example the commonly used 
thematic classifications, like the one by Anderson et al. at the 
U.S. Geological Survey [36]. The other most common 
example of remote sensing use refers to the analyses of 
growth processes of urban organisms [35]. The research of 
Yua et al. [43] provides an example of counting urban 
intensity, using LIDAR data. Another approach addresses the 
analyses of urban structure including the description of 
housing units [12]. 
B. Space Syntax and modelling of social behaviours 
Space Syntax is a method of simulating human social 
behavior based on the analyses of spatial layout [18], [19]. 
The analyzed patterns include movements, vulnerability, and 
activity in buildings and urban settings. The simulations are 
based on a process, that informs human and social usage of 
an environment. A model of individual decision behavior, 
based on spatial affordances offered by the morphology of a 
local visual field, is consistent with the spatial configuration 
of movement patterns. 
C. Development of morphological description of urban 
structure - suggestions 
The commonly applied land-use analyses derived from 
the LIDAR data are useful in urban planning praxis, but not 
satisfactory. The production of planning documents by 
definition must refer to the property layer. The basic analysis 
of urban morphological structure used for the master plans 
preparation includes a description of much more features 
than land-use parameter only, this concerns, e.g., Polish 
urban planning practice. The list of the most basic 
descriptors is contained in the table below. The list may be 
extended to include other features or shortened in case, when 
some of them are not substantial. The list content differs in 
different country planning regulations.  
TABLE I.  
QUALITIES OF URBAN STRUCTURE (EXAMPLES) 
Feature 
Description 
Land-use 
Basic and complimentary uses 
Parcellation 
Minimum and maximum sizes of parcels and front 
widths 
Urban 
parameters 
Intensity of development,  percentage of built up 
area 
Location on plot 
Buildings forming line of frontages, of different 
character: continuous or with breaks, 
Set back of building from the street 
Character of 
development 
Traditional or modernist, contemporary or of 
historical style, rich in/devoid of details, etc. 
Form of development 
Building height 
Number of stories, height [m] 
Roof shapes 
Slopes, kind of roof: flat or sloped, number of 
slopes, main ridge direction 
Materials 
Facades and roof materials 
Fences 
Materials, dimensions, shape 
Details 
Decoration 
 
The above description refers to urban structures only. 
Although a similar list of features could be defined for streets 
and squares, their patterns, etc. [20], [30], [31] or for any 
other set of features referring to urban-landscapes of 
different cultures and periods. An example of an analysis of 
the city physical structure, following some of the principles 
listed above, is shown in the Figure 6. The analyses assumed 
elements of both the qualitative description, referring to the 
types of development, and the quantitative one – describing a 
level of completeness. GIS generalisation allowed for the 
semi-automatic production of consecutive maps showing 
different phenomena in the scale of the whole city. 
 
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 6.  An example of the analyses following the principles mentioned 
in the paper - Study... Lodz [42]. Level of completion of urbanisation 
processes. The presentation assumed the generalisation of basic classes 
with the objective to get the map of most important structures types. 
A GIS analysis may also show non-physical phenomena, 
which influences both the physical aspects and the 
perception of cityscape by inhabitants and visitors. The 
juxtaposition of different layers allows for the comparison of 
the physical appearance and, e.g., public transportation flows 
and nodes, like in Figure 7. Visual methods of analysis 
enhance the understanding of phenomena and helps in 
finding appropriate solutions. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Wrocław center border drawn by capacity and location of tram 
transport nodes proceeded for 7-9 a.m. on workdays. Course: Architecture 
for Society of Knowledge, Warsaw University of Technology, seminarium 
GIS, student: Tomasz Kujawski, tutor: M. Hanzl. Further visualisations are 
available: http://system.asknow.eu/users/s_tomaszkujawski/ , retrieved: 
09.2011 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Planning practice in the postmodern era requires 
references to urban form rather than to other aspects of urban 
development. The modernist definition of functions is not 
adequate and not sufficient, both in the process of analysis 
and decision making. The rehabilitation of brown-field 
development, as well as the down-town mixed uses areas, 
require more flexible treatment of land-use concept and 
concentration on urban form. The perception of urban 
landscapes, the concept of legibility and the semiotics of the 
environment requires conscious treatment of the formal 
issues in the processes of urban planning [28], [29], [39]. 
Similarly, concentration on urban form has become result of 
the desire to redevelop the cities as more concise, which is 
perceived as required from the point of view of ecology and 
sustainable development [22]. City morphological structure 
is also one of elements responsible for the possibility of 
social adaptation of members of different cultures [16].  
The observed changes in urban planning theory and 
practice should influence alterations of the geomatics 
approach towards the environmental data, gathered for the 
purpose of urban planning, including the legal regulations 
and normative procedures concerning these issues. The 
current emphasis on land-use analyses should be replaced 
with form based approaches, which is enabled by the 
contemporary 
GIS 
and 
remote 
sensing 
technology. 
Currently, the tools encompassing 3D modeling are used 
mainly for presentation purposes. The requirements of 
progressing shift in urban planning towards more formal 
approaches should follow with their usage for analytical 
purposes. The basic element, and thus level of analysis 
required, should be the one of parcels. The technology 
allows for the integration of the two approaches – the main 
limitation seems to be lack of sufficient communication 
between 
urban 
planners 
and 
urban 
designers 
and 
geoinformatics professionals and researchers. The integration 
of approaches should result in increased easiness to fulfill the 
requirements of the analysis of urban environment and 
consequently urban policy preparation, which should also be 
reflected in the legal requirements. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 2007/2/EC Directive of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 14 March 2007 establishing an Infrastructure for 
Spatial Information in the European Community (INSPIRE), 
http://eur-lex.europa.eu, retrieved: 9.2011  
[2] Ch. Alexander, S. Ishikawa, and M. Silverstei, Pattern 
Language, New York: Oxford University Press, 1977 
[3] N. Amoroso, The Exposed City: Mapping the Urban 
Invisibles, New York: Routledge, 2010 
[4] K. H. Bhabha, “Rem Koolhaas in conversation with Homi 
Bhabha”, keynote speaches at the Conference Ecological 
Urbanism: Alternative and Sustainable Cities of the Future, 
Harvard 
University, 
2009, 
http://ecologicalurbanism.gsd.harvard.edu/conference.php, 
retrieved 12.2010  
[5] J. Beaujeu-Garnier, Traité de géographie urbaine, Paris: 
Flammarion 1977 
[6] M. Carmona, T. Heath, T. Oc, and S. Tiesdell, Public Places 
Urban Spaces The Dimensions of Urban Design, Oxford: 
Architectural Press, 2003 
[7] Le Corbusier, La charte d'Athènes, Urbanisme, Une 
injonction à penser droit, Paris: Edition de Minuit, 1957, 
(selection of the 1943 edition) 
[8] G. Cullen, The Concise Townscape, Oxford: Elsevier 
Architectural Press, 1971 
[9] G. Debord, Psychogeographic guide of Paris, Bauhaus 
Imaginiste Ed., Dermark: Permild & Rosengreen, 1955(?), 
http://imaginarymuseum.org/LPG/Mapsitu1.htm, 
retrieved 
09.2011  
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[10] F. Dresmé, Project 360°, student project realised in 
Hogeschool voor de Kunsten Utrecht, directed by 21bis 2006-
2007, http://www.21bis.nl/project/26/3, retrieved: 9.2011 
[11] R. Dubos, A God Within, New York US: Charles Scribner's 
Sons, 1972 
[12] A. Duncan, A. Smith, and T. Crooks, From Buildings to 
Cities: Techniques for the Multi-Scale Analysis of Urban 
Form and Function, CASA Working Papers Series 155, 
07.2010 
http://www.casa.ucl.ac.uk/working_papers/paper155.pdf, 
retrieved: 10.2010 
[13] U. Eco, Historia Piękna, Warsaw: Dom Wydawniczy Rebis 
Sp. z o.o. , 2006 
[14] R. Florida, Who‟s your city?, New York: Basic Books, 2008 
[15] D. R. Gabaccia, From Sicily to Elizabeth Street: Housing and 
Social Change Among Italian Immigrants, 1860-1930, New 
York: Albany State University, New York Press, 1984 
[16] E. T. Hall, The Hidden Dimension, Garden City, New York: 
Doubleday, 1966 
[17] P. Healey, Collaborative Planning: Shaping Places in 
Fragmented Societies, Vancouver BC: University of British 
Columbia, 1997 
[18] B. Hillier and J. Hanson, The Social Logic of Space, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1984 
[19] B. Hillier, Space is the Machine, A configurational theory of 
architecture, 
Space 
Syntax 
2007, 
http://www.scribd.com/full/17429763?access_key=key-
17h1eg897r3ausi05ud3 , retrieved: 09.2011 
[20] A. B. Jacobs, Great Streets, Boston: The MIT Press, 1995 
[21] B. Jałowiecki and M. Szczepański, Miasto i przestrzeń w 
perspektywie 
socjologicznej, 
Warsaw: 
Wydawnictwo 
Naukowe Scholar, 2006 
[22] M. Jenks and C. Jones, Dimensions of the Sustainable City 
(Future City), London: Springer, 2010 
[23] P. Kempf, You Are the City: Observation, Organization and 
Transformation of Urban Settings, Kösel, Germany: Lars 
Müller Publishers, 2010 
[24] Ch. Landry, The Creative City: A Toolkit for Urban 
Innovators, London, Sterling VA: Earthscan Publishing, 2000 
[25] P. Lavedan, Géographie des villes, Paris: Gallimard, 1936 
[26] D. L. Lawrence and S. M. Low, “The built environment and 
spatial form”, Annual Review of Anthropology, Vol. 19, 
1990, pp. 453-505  
[27] H. Lefebvre, The Urban Revolution, Minneapolis, London: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2003 
[28] K. Lynch, Good City Form, Cambridge and London: The 
MIT Press, 1994 
[29] K. Lynch, Image of the City, Cambridge: The MIT Press, 
1960 
[30] K. Lynch and L. Rodwin, “A Theory of Urban Form”, 1958 
in City Sense and City Design, Writings and Projects of 
Kevin Lynch, T. Banerjee, M. Southworth, Eds. Cambridge, 
London: The MIT Press 1991, pp. 355-378 
[31] S. Marshall, Streets and Patterns, New York: Spon Press, 
2005 
[32] Ch. 
Nold, 
“East 
Paris 
Emotion 
Map”, 
2008 
http://paris.emotionmap.net/paris.pdf, retrieved: 09.2011 
[33] Ch. Nold, Ed. Emotional Cartography, Technologies of the 
Self, 
2009, 
http://emotionalcartography.net/, 
retrieved: 
09.2011 
[34] P. Panerai, J. Ch. Depaule, and M. Demorgon, Analyse 
urbaine, Marseille: Édition Parenthèses, 2009 
[35] A. Schneider, M. A. Friedl, and D. Potere, “Mapping global 
urban areas using MODIS 500-m data: New methods and 
datasets based on „urban ecoregions‟”, Remote Sensing of 
Environment 114, 2010, pp. 1733–1746  
[36] N. M. Short, Sr., “Urban and land use applications: from Los 
Angeles to Beijing, Some Basic Principles and Examples” in 
Remote 
Sensing 
Tutorial, 
NASA, 
http://rst.gsfc.nasa.gov/Sect4/Sect4_1.html, retrieved: 09.2010 
[37] C. Sitte: L‟art de bâtir les villes, L‟urbanisme selon ses 
fondement artistiques, D. Wieczorek, trans. Paris: Éditions du 
Seuil, 1996 
[38] B. Szmidt: Ład Przestrzeni, Warsaw: Agencja Wydawnicza 
kanon, 1998 
[39] R. Venturi, D. S. Brown, and S. Izenour, Learning from Las 
Vegas - Revised Edition: The Forgotten Symbolism of 
Architectural Form, Cambridge, London: The MIT Press, 
2001 
[40] K. Wejchert, Elementy Kompozycji Urbanistycznej, 2nd ed., 
Warsaw: Wydawnictwo Arkady, 1984 
[41] E. O. Wilson, Consilience The Unity of Knowledge, New 
York: Random House Inc., 1998 
[42] M. Wiśniewski et al., “Study on the preconditions and 
directions for the physical development of Lodz”, 14 
volumes, 
1997-2002, 
urban 
planning 
document 
of 
Municipality of Lodz, Poland, unpublished 
[43] B. Yua, H. Liub, J. Wua, Y. Hua, and L. Zhanga, “Automated 
derivation of urban building density information using 
airborne LiDAR data and object-based method”, Landscape 
and Urban Planning, in press. 
[44] J. Żurawski, O budowie formy architektonicznej, Warsaw: 
Wydawnictwo Arkady, 1962 
 
 
 
 
 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

