Application of InSAR Method to Estimate the Surface Deformation of the May
Embankment Dam, Turkey
Rouhollah Nasirzadehdizaji
Department of Water and Environment
Y¨uksel Proje Inc.
Ankara, 06610, Turkey
e-mail: rnasirzadeh@yukselproje.com.tr
Anil Olgac
Department of Water and Environment
Y¨uksel Proje Inc.
Ankara, 06610, Turkey
e-mail: aolgac@yukselproje.com.tr
Abstract—This study is conducted to apply the Interferometric
Synthetic Aperture Radar (InSAR) method to investigate the
deformation of the upstream face of the May Embankment Dam
located in central Anatolia, Turkey. Optical satellite imagery
revealed significant water volume variation at the May Dam
over the past decade, prompting investigation due to the high
seismic risk of the region and the potential consequences of dam
failure for downstream lives and properties. In this study, dam
surface displacements were obtained from a series of Sentinel-
1 processed Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) data through
postprocessing and analysis of Single-Look Complex (SLC) radar
image pairs (interferograms). The results show that the average
displacement of the dam surface is -9.5 cm in the processed
7-year SAR data. However, a cumulative displacement rate of
-22.16 cm is estimated in the dam’s structure between 2015 and
2022. The highest changes occurred between 2018-2020, with a
deformation of -13.37 cm, as the amount of water behind the
dam began to increase due to increased precipitation. Analysis
of meteorological data indicates that the climate conditions in
the semi-arid upstream area that supplies water to the dam
result in lower precipitation and reduced water flow for much
of the year, often leaving the dam dry or with reduced water
volume. However, due to the effects of climate change, heavy
precipitation has occurred in the area, which led to large amounts
of water collecting behind the dam. Consequently, if not enough
attention is paid to the surface changes of the dam that are
happening, which have been obtained through the radar satellite
data analysis in this study, then during the intensive rainfalls that
have already been recorded in the region, there is a potential and
possibility of damage to the dam and causing a threat to the lives
of the residents of several cities and damage to the agricultural
fields on the downstream of the dam.
Keywords—Interferometric SAR; monitoring; surface displace-
ment; dam structure; climate change.
I. INTRODUCTION
Dams are one of the most important engineering structures
used for water supply, flood control, agriculture, drinking
water and hydroelectric power generation. Various parameters
play a role in determining the load of the dam. Deformation
can occur both in the dam and the surrounding areas. Nor-
mally, the structure of the dam, the weight of the embank-
ment and water, water pressure, temperature changes, and the
movement of the earth’s crust are the deformation factors of a
dam [1]. Monitoring is an important part of dam construction
and during operation and must be able to detect any behavior
that may deteriorate the dam in a timely manner, which may
lead to the closure or failure of the dam. Hence, accurate
monitoring measurements of the dam and its surrounding areas
are required on a regular basis.
Different methods including geodetic and non-geodetic
monitoring measurements are applied for dams’ deformation
controlling and detection. Dam deformation monitoring mod-
els can be divided into statistical models, deterministic mod-
els, and hybrid models. The statistical model can effectively
simulate the functional relationship between dam deformation
and environmental variables, such as reservoir water level
and temperature [2]. The fractal interpolation function method
[3] [4] is applied with the dam prototype observation data
processing to predict dam deformation.
Among the monitoring measurement techniques, special
emphasis is placed on geodetic methods, and some new
measurement techniques are recommended. Static monitoring
of the dam based on a geodetic control network is performed
by [5] and [6] to measure absolute and relative displacements
of the dam structure and the nearby areas, and the geode-
tic networks were complemented by geotechnical/structural
sensors. Geodetic measurements provide information about
absolute motion relative to some fixed datum that is considered
stable and least susceptible to movement due to the filling
and discharging of the dam reservoir. However, the accuracy
of the geodetic measurements may be inadequate and costly
sometimes when a high frequency of repeated observations
is needed. While the precision is achievable, the associated
operations are complex and require a team of expert surveyors
to work for several days on each campaign. Additionally,
terrestrial geodetic surveys require intervisibility between sur-
vey points, which limits their application. Geotechnical in-
struments can be easily adapted for continuous monitoring
and, if properly calibrated and installed, can provide highly
accurate results. Though, these instruments only provide local
information on selected parts of the deformation.
Over the past two decades, innovative remote sensing tech-
niques based on satellite SAR data (satellites that acquire
data using the microwave portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum) have been developed to detect and monitor surface
displacements. InSAR is a radar technique used in geodesy
and remote sensing to generate maps of surface deforma-
tion and potentially measure sub-centimeter scale deformation
changes over days to years. The Differential InSAR (DInSAR),
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Advanced stacking DInSAR (A-DInSAR), Multi-Temporal
InSAR (MT-InSAR), production of accurate velocity maps and
displacement time-series methods are among those techniques
that allow mapping deformations of the earth’s surface in a
very high resolution (i.e., millimeter-scale) [7] - [9]. These
methods ideally complement terrestrial surveying.
To demonstrate the capabilities of InSAR technology, dis-
placement maps of the Kurpsai Dam crest in Kyrgyzstan were
created by [7] using TerraSAR-X radar data. They obtained a
displacement of about -50 mm/year at the Kurpsai dam crest
by measuring Line-Of-Sight (LOS) velocity on the selected
point. Multi-sensor cumulative deformation map of Mosul
Dam in Iraq generated from space-based SAR measurements
from the COSMO-SkyMed constellation and Envisat satellites
was studied by [10]. Their study results showed that the
Envisat data measurements from 2004 to 2010 indicated a
maximum LOS velocity of -11.5 mm/year and -12.47 mm/year
vertical displacement, and the COSMO-SkyMed data analysis
demonstrated a maximum LOS rate of -12.1 mm/year and
-14.9 mm/year of vertical displacement at the Mosul dam
during 2012–2015. With compared the profiles from 2004-
2010 and 2014-2015, they found that there has also been a
300-millimeter shift to the east of the peak subsidence toward
the dam’s main spillway.
The current study has investigated the potential of the
European Space Agency (ESA) Sentinel-1 data by applying
the InSAR method to observe the deformation of the upstream
face of the May embankment Dam. The InSAR technique has
the potential to measure millimeter-scale changes in defor-
mation over time spans. Therefore, InSAR applications for
monitoring natural hazards, as well as structural engineering,
monitoring of subsidence, and structural stability such as dam
structure monitoring provide efficient information prior to the
terrestrial measurements and help to make rapid decisions and
prevent disasters.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section
II presents the study area, data sources including a discussion
of the nature and characteristics of the data, and the processing
platform used in this study. This is followed by a description
of the methodology used for processing the data. In Section
III, we provide the results of our analysis and the key findings
of the study. Finally, Section IV presents a discussion of the
implications of the results and offers concluding remarks.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Study area
May Embankment Dam is located in the C¸ umra District
of Konya province, at 37°31’19.27”N 32°32’23.71”E. It was
built between 1957 and 1960 to provide irrigation services
to an agricultural area of 1800 hectares as well as for flood
protection purposes. The dam body is earth-filled, with a
volume of 273,000 cubic meters and a height of 19.10 meters
from the river bed. At normal water level, the volume and
area of the lake are 40.10 cubic hectometers and 7.75 square
kilometre, respectively. Figure 1 shows the location maps of
the study area in Turkey and Konya province as well as the
Figure 1. Shows the location maps of study area.
extension of the water behind the May Dam in the satellite
image.
B. Sentinel-1 SAR data specification and processing
Sentinel-1 SAR data in ascending orbit pass, and in VV po-
larization were collected for the study area. For interferometric
SAR and multitemporal analysis, a total of 8 SLC images in
the Interferometric Width (IW) swath acquisition mode with a
relative orbit (track number) of 160 were acquired from 2015
to 2022. Characteristics of the Sentinel-1 dataset used for the
study and interferograms’ information are given in Table 1.
TABLE I
ACQUISITION DATES AND CHARACTERISTICS OF SENTINEL-1 DATASET
AND INTERFEROGRAMS FORMATION
Image
No.
Abs.a Orbit-
Frame
Acquition
Date
Temporal
Bas. (d)b
Perp.c
Baseline (m)
Interferogram
Formation
1
8282-119
23-Oct-2015
2
13707-118
29-Oct-2016
372
25
2+1
3
18957-117
24-Oct-2017
360
-84
2+3
4
24382-117
31-Oct-2018
372
-18
3+4
5
29632-117
26-Oct-2019
360
177
4+5
6
35057-117
1-Nov-2020
372
-63
5+6
7
40307-117
27-Oct-2021
360
-110
6+7
8
45732-117
3-Nov-2022
372
107
7+8
aAbsolute Orbit, bTemporal Baseline (days), cPerpendicular Baseline
(meters)
The interferometric SAR processing is performed using the
open-source tools of Sentinel Application Platform (SNAP)
software [11]. The processing steps for obtaining the Sentinel-
1 interferometric SAR maps are shown in Figure 2. The con-
secutive images in time (almost a one-year interval between
primary and secondary image acquisition) were used for inter-
ferometric analysis. Figure 3 shows the baseline configuration
related to the relative orbital number 160 in the ascending
pass direction for the VV polarization. In Figure 3, the line
represents the baselines between the consecutive images in
time used for interferometric analysis and nodes corresponding
to SLC images with acquisition date.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2. The pre-processing workflow schema for interferometric SAR processing of Sentinel-1 SLC SAR images.
In this study, to minimize the impact of atmospheric phase
disturbances (atmospheric noise) and unwrapping errors, a
series of images belonging to the same relative orbit (160) and
polarization at a temporal interval of an average of 365 days
were analyzed to obtain a more reliable surface displacement.
All steps for the interferometric SAR processing were repeated
for each consecutive image pair (i.e., 1+2, 2+3, 3+4, and so
forth), resulting in a total of 7 geocoded displacement products
between 2015 and 2022 (as shown in the last column of Table
1). The individual products are stacked in chronological order,
then the average displacement is calculated using band math
expression by adding the rasters for all dates and dividing
the result by 7 (the number of interferograms). The same
procedure was applied to obtain the average coherence maps
to mask out parts of the image with low coherence to prevent
misinterpretation of patterns caused by phase decorrelation.
To mask areas of low coherence values from the image, all
pixels with coherence values below 0.6 are eliminated and
made transparent to better interpret the displacement map.
However, before producing the stacked image, the geometric
terrain correction algorithm using a Digital Elevation Model
(DEM) is applied to correct the SAR geometric distortions and
produce a map-projected product.
Figure 3. Baseline configuration used for SAR data processing. The horizontal
axis is the acquisition time, and the vertical axis is the perpendicular baseline
(distance between the two passes relative to the baseline).
C. InSAR Method
The InSAR technique is a method that reveals the topo-
graphic height, changes on the earth’s surface or any ob-
ject on the ground, and their spatial movements. With the
InSAR method, the movement (velocity rates and vertical
deformation) and the changes of the targets are obtained in
sub-centimeter sensitivity in the radar viewpoint (i.e., LOS)
direction and based on the phase differences (time delay
between transmitted and received) of the radar signals from
the SAR image pair that acquired at different time intervals
from the same scene. In this method, after two radar images
are co-registered and precisely overlapped to the considered
resolution cell, the phase value of each pixel in the primary
image (reference or master) is subtracted from the phase value
of the corresponding pixel in the secondary image (slave).
This creates a new image and is called an interferogram.
In another word, the interferogram is generated by cross-
multiplying the reference image with the complex conjugate
of the secondary image. Accordingly, the computed interfero-
gram contains phase variations ∆ϕint from several influencing
factors, the most important being the flat-Earth phase ∆ϕflat
(the curvature of the Earth), the terrain phase ∆ϕDEM (topo-
graphic surface of the earth), atmospheric conditions ∆ϕatm
(humidity, temperature, and pressure change between the two
acquisitions), and other noise ∆ϕnoise (variation of scatterers,
different viewing angles and volumetric scatter), and lastly
the final surface deformation ∆ϕdisp that occurs between two
acquisitions “(1)” [12].
∆ϕint = ∆ϕDEM+∆ϕflat+∆ϕdisp+∆ϕatm+∆ϕnoise (1)
In addition to the interferometric phase, the coherence
between the primary and secondary images is evaluated as an
indicator of the quality of the phase information. Mainly, co-
herence shows whether the images have a strong similarity and
thus are suitable for the interferometric processing uses. The
Interferogram product is displayed in an interference pattern of
color bands (as the rainbow pattern) called “fringes” resulting
from the phase differences of two images and range from −π
to π. A fringe demonstrates a full 2π cycle and appears in an
interferogram as cycles of arbitrary colors, with each cycle
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

representing half the sensor’s wavelength. Relative ground
movement between two points is later derived by counting the
fringes and multiplying by half of the wavelength, thereby,
the closer the fringes are together, the greater the strain on
the ground [13]. To be able to relate the interferometric phase
that has ambiguous and known within the ranges of 2π to
the terrain height, the phase must first be unwrapped. Phase
unwrapping resolves the interferometric phase ambiguity with
the change of 2π after interferogram flattening by integrating
phase differences between neighboring pixels and removing
any integer number of altitudes of ambiguity (equivalent to
an integer number of 2π phase cycles). The phase variation
between two points on the flattened interferogram provides
a measurement of the actual altitude variation. Accordingly,
the unwrapped product should be interpreted as a relative
height/displacement between the pixels of two images.
To minimize the effects of atmospheric phase disturbances
and unwrapping errors, SAR data from 2015 to 2022 were
processed for each consecutive image pair. Then, the actual
displacement pattern of the dam is calculated by averaging the
displacements over several dates. In addition, using images
from the dry season is a strategy that can be effective in
minimizing the effects of atmospheric noise and residual phase
changes. However, different methods, services and toolboxes
are available for atmospheric noise correction, such as the
Small Perpendicular Baseline (SBAS) [14] method, weather
models (e.g., ECMWF ERA-I, WRF, NARR, etc.), spec-
trometer data (MERIS and MODIS), General Atmospheric
Calibration Online Services InSAR (GACOS) [15], Toolbox
for Reducing Atmospheric InSAR noise (TRAIN) [16], or a
combination of different sources.
III. RESULTS
The displacement map for the 7-year observation period
(October 2015 to November 2022) of the May Embankment
Dam shows zones of LOS motion on the dam’s surface and its
near area. Figure 4 shows the average deformation produced
by the remote sensing InSAR method at the May Dam. The
Figure 4. The average deformation map of the May Dam measured by the
InSAR method between 2015 and 2022 (Image source: Google Earth).
Sentinel-1 measurements from 2015 to 2022 indicate that the
displacement at a linear rate of -9.5 mm/year (the negative
rate indicates LOS increase or subsidence) on the upper part
dam. However, time series analysis of the Sentinel-1 dataset
shows a cumulative displacement rate of -22.16 cm for the
period 2015–2022 (Figure 5). As it can be inferred from
Figure 5, during the period covered by the Sentinel-1 dataset
(2015-2018), the average deformation pattern was lower at
about -2.1 mm/year. The reason for this is that between these
years, the amount of precipitation in the area and catchment
of the reservoir was low, and as a result, the amount of water
behind the dam was either very little or even non-existent.
The displacement rate started to increase between 2018 and
2020 due to the increased amount of precipitation during these
years. The displacement rate for these years showed high
increases and was obtained at -13.37 mm/year. Similarly, the
displacement rate remained almost constant during 2020 and
2021 and started to increase again between 2021 and 2022
due to decreasing and increasing precipitation rates in the dam
reservoir catchment. Figure 6 shows the time stamp of changes
in the May embankment reservoir in the period 2011-2022,
obtained from the Sentinel-2 dataset.
Figure 5. Time-series analysis, and the cumulative displacement on the dam’s
surface at the selected point.
In addition to the displacement of the upstream of the dam
and its surrounding areas, in August 2002, three sinkholes
were formed in the May dam reservoir that caused to loss of
the dam’s water in a short period of time. Figure 7 shows
the location of the sinkholes in the May Dam reservoir. The
sinkholes, which follow each other in a linearity, have 30-40m
intervals from large to small. The diameters of the sinkholes
are 5, 10-15, and 50 meters for the smallest to the large ones,
respectively. Due to the increased hydraulic load caused by
the rising water level in the dam lake, the ground pressure
can increase and therefore the displacement process can be
accelerated. Hence, apart from the potential displacement risks
of the earth-fill structure of the dam, the deformation, and
subsidence of the dam pond is also the subject. In 1960, the
May Dam started to impounding, however, when the water
height reached 6.7 m, the water of the dam suddenly dried up.
The investigations revealed that 33 sinkholes had been formed
at the dam reservoir. Once blocking the sinkholes failed, the
dam has left self-abandoned [16].
Over the past two decades, ground depressions and sink-
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 6. May Embankment Dam’s reservoir variation during the time period
of 2011-2022 (Imagery sources: Google Earth and Copernicus Sentinel data
processed by ESA).
Figure 7. Images of the sinkholes formed in the May Dam (Imagery sources:
Google Earth and Copernicus Sentinel data processed by ESA).
holes have begun to appear in the Konya region of Turkey.
The land-use type in this area is mainly used for agricultural
activities, and a large part of the water used to irrigate the
farmland comes from groundwater. Hence, the main reason for
the formation of the sinkholes and depressions in the region
is likely due to the over-extraction of underground water.
This study has revealed the displacement rates of the
structure of the earth-fill May Dam using the InSAR method.
The results of this study can be used to warn the relevant
authorities to make appropriate decisions and necessary mea-
sures to strengthen the dam to prevent potential risks. Due to
inattention to the changes and displacements that occur in and
around the dam structure, damage and failure of the dam can
cause loss of life and property downstream of the dam.
This paper has presented an investigation into the defor-
mation of the May Dam utilizing InSAR methodology. While
the findings provide important insights into the current state
of the dam and its potential risks, there remains a need for
further research. As a next step, the correlation between the
outcomes derived through InSAR methodology and ground-
based measurements will be explored to validate the results.
This approach is expected to enhance the reliability and accu-
racy of the findings, contributing to the broader understanding
of the May Dam.
IV. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This study applied the potential use of the InSAR method to
obtain the displacement rates of the May Embankment Dam
structure. The displacement rate of the dam was estimated at
a linear rate of -9.5 millimeters per year as a result of the
InSAR post-processing analysis. However, the cumulative de-
formation rate of the 7-year processed SAR data (2015-2022)
for the dam’s structure is estimated at -22.16 cm. The rate
of displacement increased between 2018 and 2020 due to the
increased amount of precipitation and raising the water level of
the dam reservoir during these years. The time series analysis
of SAR data shows that the displacements occurring in the
dam structure and its surrounding areas alert the authorities
to take measures to prevent possible damage or failure of the
dam and the occurrence of life and property losses at the dam’s
downstream. Although, different monitoring techniques can be
employed to assess the stability and health of the dam and
its safe operation, however, remote sensing methods provide
highly accurate measurements with high temporal resolution.
In conclusion, the InSAR technique along with high-resolution
satellite SAR data can help monitor the displacements of
the upper parts of large dams, it also provides the chance
to extend the observed region to a large part of a structure
instead of merely measuring a set of a few control points
used by ground-based monitoring systems. Therefore, the
InSAR technology can support the development of new and
more efficient methods of monitoring and analyzing dams to
complement land-based measurement approaches.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the colleagues and man-
agers of the R&D and Quality and Management Systems
Departments at Y¨uksel Proje International Co. for their contri-
butions and efforts. The authors would also like to especially
thank the management of Y¨uksel Proje (President and Vice
President) and the Coordinator of the Water and Environment
Department) for their support and encouragement of scientific
and academic research.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Kalkan, R. M. Alkan, and S. Bilgi, “Deformation Monitoring Studies
at Atat¨urk Dam,” FIG Congress, Sydney, Australia, pp. 11-16, 2010.
[2] Y. Dongang, W. Bowen, X. Bin, and Z. Zimeng, “Modified dam de-
formation monitoring model considering periodic component contained
in residual sequence,” Struct. Control Health Monit., 10.1002/stc.2633,
2020.
[3] Z. Yin and G.Gao, “Application of fractal theory to dam deformation
forecast,” Computer Modelling and New Technologies, 18(3), pp. 49-51,
2014.
[4] L. Tu, T. Bao, and Y. Li. ”ARIMA Dam Early Warning Model Based
on Fractal Interpolation,” J. China Three Gorges Univ. Nat. Sci, 37, pp.
29–32, 2015.
[5] L. de, et al., ”Monitoring of vertical deformations by means high-
precision geodetic levelling. Test case: The Arenoso dam (South of
Spain),” Journal of Applied Geodesy 11, no. 1, 11, pp. 31–41, 2017.
[6] A. Capra, M. Scaioni, and A. Wieser, ”terrestrial remote sensing for
areal deformation monitoring,” Applied Geomatics 7, no. 2, pp. 61-63,
2015.
[7] O. Lang, W. Diana and A. Jan, ”Satellite based long-term deformation
monitoring on dams and its surroundings,” In 5 th Conference on Smart
Monitoring, Assment and Rehabilitation of Civil Structures, Pots dam,
pp. 27-29. 2019.
[8] M. A. Ruiz-Armenteros, et al., ”Deformation monitoring of dam infras-
tructures via spaceborne MT-InSAR. The case of La Vi˜nuela (M´alaga,
southern Spain),” Procedia Computer Science 138, pp. 346-353, 2018.
[9] P. Riccardi, G. Tessari, D. Lecci, M. Floris, and P. Pasquali, ”Use of
Sentinel-1 SAR data to monitor Mosul dam vulnerability.” In EGU
General Assembly Conference Abstracts, p. 13098. 2017.
[10] P. Milillo, et al., ”The ongoing destabilization of the Mosul dam as
observed by synthetic aperture radar interferometry,” IEEE International
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Symposium (IGARSS), pp. 6279-6282,
2017.
[11] European Space Agency (ESA), Sentinel Application Platform (SNAP)
v9.0.4, Available from: http://step.esa.int/ 2023.03.25.
[12] F. Rocca, C. Prati, A. G. Monti, and A. Ferretti, ”InSAR Principles:
Guidelines for SAR Interferometry Processing and Interpretation (ESA
TM-19),” European Space Agency (ESA) Publications, February 2007.
[13] P. Berardino, F. Gianfranco, L. Riccardo, and S. Eugenio, ”A new
algorithm for surface deformation monitoring based on small baseline
differential SAR interferograms,” IEEE Transactions on geoscience and
remote sensing 40, no. 11, pp. 2375-2383, 2002.
[14] Y. Chen, Z. Li, N. Penna, and P. Crippa, ”Generic atmospheric correc-
tion online service for InSAR (GACOS),” In EGU General Assembly
Conference Abstracts, p. 11007, 2018.
[15] D.P.S. Bekaert, R.J. Walters, T.J. Wright, A.J. Hooper, and D.J. Parker,
”Statistical comparison of InSAR tropospheric correction techniques,
Remote Sensing of Environment,” doi: 10.1016/j.rse.2015.08.035, 2015.
[16] A. Do˘gu, ”Falling of the three meteors into the May Dam,” Available
from: https://www.bildiris.com/ansiklopedi/May-Baraji/ 2023.03.25.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

