Mission Exploitation Platform PROBA-V 
 
Jeroen Dries, Erwin Goor, Dirk Daems 
TAP - unit Earth Observation 
VITO NV – Flemish Institute for Technological Research 
Mol, Belgium 
e-mail - jeroen.dries@vito.be, erwin.goor@vito.be, dirk.daems@vito.be  
 
 
Abstract— VITO and partners developed recently an end-to-
end solution to drastically improve the exploitation of the 
PROBA-V EO (Earth Observation) data archive and derived 
vegetation parameters from the Copernicus Global Land 
Service by researchers, service providers and thematic users. 
The analysis of time series of data (+1PByte) is addressed, as 
well as the large scale on-demand processing of the complete 
archive, including near real-time data. Several applications 
will be released to the users, e.g., a time series viewer, a full 
resolution viewing service, pre-defined on-demand processing 
chains and virtual machines with powerful tools and access to 
the data. After an initial release in January 2016 a research 
platform will gradually be deployed allowing users to design, 
debug and test applications on the platform. From the MEP 
PROBA-V, access to, e.g., Landsat-7/8 and Sentinel-2/3 data, 
will be addressed as well. 
Keywords - MEP Mission Exploitation Platform; PROBA-V; 
vegetation; data analytics; on-demand processing; Web Services. 
I. 
 OBJECTIVES AND BENEFITS 
The PROBA-V MEP (Mission Exploitation Platform) 
builds further on the R&D (Research & Development) 
results, from the ESA ‘ESE’ project. These results consist of 
prototypes which were further refined in several other 
projects thanks to the active involvement of these projects in 
the ESE pilots activities. The paper is organized as follows: 
in this section I we discuss the objectives of the platform. In 
section II the technical solution is described and section III 
contains the conclusions and future work. 
The PROBA-V MEP  has the ambition to complement 
the PROBA-V [1] user segment by building an operational 
Exploitation Platform (EP) on the data, complementary data 
and derived products, addressing hereby the wider vegetation 
user community with the final aim to ease, and increase, the 
use of PROBA-V data. The data offering will consist of the 
complete archive from SPOT-VEGETATION, PROBA-V 
and bio-geophysical parameters from the Copernicus Global 
Land Service [2].  
The reasons for deploying a MEP dedicated to the 
PROBA-V mission are numerous: 
• 
The data and specifically the time series of daily / 
ten-daily data from 1998 till present is too big to be 
downloaded to and processed on the users’ premises, 
at least for the majority of the users. 
• 
On top of the Earth Observation (EO)-data  
mentioned above, the platform can co-locate as well 
complementary data in a way that it is easily 
accessible. 
Furthermore 
tools, 
libraries 
and 
applications, which can be used by the large 
community will be provided. This includes as well 
the data needed for calibration and validation 
activities. 
• 
The platform can stimulate collaboration between 
the users, as we bring together services from various 
users on the same platform with a number of tools to 
support the publishing of and to provide feedback on 
these services. A further focus on documentation, 
knowledge sharing and user support complements 
this. 
• 
The platform goes beyond offering standard 
products by offering in a first place applications to 
visualize and analyze large time series of data and 
pre-defined on-demand processing services, which 
deliver user-tailored products. In a next step we will 
gradually deploy a Virtual Research Environment, 
being a platform, which allows users to develop – 
debug – test an application on an infrastructure at 
VITO with access to the complete data archive. 
Successful applications from third-parties can then 
be offered as an operational on-demand processing 
service to the user community on the same platform. 
• 
As an Exploitation Platform (EP) with a focus on 
open interfaces, we position the PROBA-V mission 
in an ecosystem of TEPs (Thematic EPs), REPs 
(Regional EPs) and other MEPs. In the future, the 
PROBA-V MEP can be integrated gradually in a 
federation of different platforms, including as well 
Sentinel Collaborative Ground Segments, in line 
with the current ESA strategy on the ‘EO Ground 
Segment Evolution’. 
During the PROBA-V MEP project, which will at least 
last till the end of the PROBA-V mission in May 2018, 
several third-party service projects will develop and operate 
applications on the operation MEP platform. We will address 
their user requirements to implement the shift of paradigm 
from “data to user“ to “user to data”, bridging the gap 
between the traditional EO ground segment and the scientist 
or value added industry by providing a one stop shop for 
access to the full PROBA-V Mission data (including derived 
parameters) and to external repositories of similar 
missions/sensors (including Landsat and Sentinel). 
126
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
TECHNICAL SOLUTION 
The PROBA-V MEP will provide scalable processing 
facilities with access to the complete data archive and a rich 
set of processing algorithms, models, open source processing 
libraries/toolboxes and public/collaborative software. The 
platform becomes the processing infrastructure hub of the 
mission by functioning as a powerhouse system and open 
access development environment. 
To realize this, the platform consists of the following 
components: 
• 
The existing Product Distribution Facilities [3] and 
[4], are serving the access to the data archive, both 
via a Web portal as well as standardized discovery, 
viewing and data access interfaces. More evolutions 
on these standardized machine-to-machine interfaces 
are planned in the near future. 
• 
Hadoop [7], as a platform for data-intensive 
distributed applications, is designed to process large 
amounts of data by separating the data into smaller 
chunks and performing large numbers of small 
parallel operations on the data. It is applied often for 
processing big data and is applied in this context for 
the on-demand processing of EO data, as prototyped 
successfully in the ESE project. Oozie [5] is used as 
a workflow processing engine to design an EO-
application as a workflow of multiple processes. 
Spark [6] is used intensively to allow analytics on 
large time series of data. The Hadoop ecosystem 
provides furthermore a rich and still growing set of 
tools, which are used to provide fast access to the 
data in a format needed by the specific application. 
• 
The EO raster data is accessible via NFS (Network 
File System) and possibly uploaded to the Hadoop 
Distributed Filesystem (HDFS) using a Data 
Manager. This Data Manager also integrates with 
several catalogues implementing different protocols, 
so that third party-data can be ingested into the 
platform when needed by a specific user.  
• 
Cloud computing technology enables dynamic 
resource provisioning and is therefore providing a 
flexible and scalable solution. OpenStack [8]  is 
chosen as cloud middleware. Pre-configured virtual 
machines will be offered and can run on the 
OpenStack 
cluster 
at 
VITO, 
providing 
the 
environment needed for users to work with the data 
and develop/deploy applications on the platform, i.e., 
containing IDE’s, a rich set of tools and access to the 
complete data archive. 
• 
Interactive Web-based dashboards are designed to 
provide user-tailored information from the EO data 
archives of VITO and other providers, by combining 
existing components such as AngularJS, Javascript 
libraries and GIS components into one single 
solution. The combination of these different 
components, applied on data available in disparate 
data stores, offers powerful Web portals to the users 
in 
order 
to 
make 
vast 
amounts 
of 
data 
understandable. We can easily design user-tailored 
Web-based dashboards, which offer at any time near 
real-time information for the regional extent  of 
interest to the user and in the format chosen by the 
user.  
• 
A Web portal provides access to all applications and 
tools offered by the PROBA-V MEP and to the 
cloud consoles. Furthermore the portal provides all 
information on the data and components available on 
the platform and offers tools for e-collaboration and 
knowledge sharing amongst the users. 
• 
A main concern is security since we allow users to 
develop and execute their applications on the 
platform. Their IPR shall be properly protected and 
the activities of individual users cannot influence the 
stability of the system and the work of other users. 
Single sign-on and proper monitoring of used 
resources are further requirements. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
The platform was launched in January 2016 at the 
PROBA-V conference in Ghent, Belgium. Three iterations 
are planned to gradually expand the capabilities of the 
system and provide new features, in close collaboration with 
the first third-party projects working on the platform. 
The impact of this PROBA-V MEP on the user 
community will be high and will completely change the way 
of working with the data and hence open the large time series 
to a larger community of users. The operational platform is 
based on recent R&D activities and is in line with the new 
ESA strategy on the ‘EO Ground Segment Evolution’. 
Hence, as future work, the integration of the platform within 
a federation needs to be addressed. More applications and 
users will be integrated in the platform to enrich the content 
and enlarge the user community. Furthermore the evolutions 
in Big Data analytics and processing will be followed closely 
and integrated in the platform where relevant. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://proba-v.vgt.vito.be/ [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
[2] http://land.copernicus.eu/global/ [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
[3] http://www.vito-eodata.be [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
[4] http://land.copernicus.vgt.vito.be/PDF/ [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
[5] http://oozie.apache.org/ [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
[6] http://spark.apache.org/ [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
[7] http://hadoop.apache.org/ [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
[8] http://www.openstack.org [accessed: 2016-03-19]. 
 
 
127
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

