A Web-based Environment for Analysis and Visualization of Spatio-temporal Data 
provided by OGC Services 
 
Maxwell Guimarães de Oliveira, Cláudio de Souza Baptista and Ana Gabrielle Ramos Falcão  
Laboratory of Information Systems - Computer Science Department 
Federal University of Campina Grande (UFCG) 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
E-mails: maxwell@ufcg.edu.br, baptista@dsc.ufcg.edu.br, anagabrielle@copin.ufcg.edu.br 
 
 
Abstract—The popularity of GPS devices has led to the quick 
increasing of spatial data volume in the web. Although there 
are several studies on spatial data sets, not many deal with the 
temporal variation that may exist on these sets. Most of the 
approaches that implement a visual analysis of spatiotemporal 
data still reveal limitations regarding its flexibility, usability 
and, mostly, generalization. In order to improve these 
limitations, we propose a new approach, a web-based 
spatiotemporal viewer and analyzer, which is domain-
independent, deals with the temporal variation, and may be 
connected to any map server that implements the Web Map 
Service and Web Feature Service, specified by the Open 
Geospatial Consortium, and thus, it promotes interoperability. 
Furthermore, our approach includes data mining clustering 
algorithms, providing an intuitive visual analysis of the results. 
We performed a case study to validate the proposed solution 
and the improvements in spatiotemporal visual analysis. The 
results showed that the new proposed approach facilitates the 
analysis of spatiotemporal data by humans.  
Keywords—visualization; analysis; spatiotemporal; data 
mining; OGC services. 
I. 
  INTRODUCTION 
The constant growth of the use of GPS-based (Global 
Positioning System) devices, such as smartphones, along 
with the ease of sharing the information from such devices 
in the internet have substantially increased the volume of 
spatiotemporal data in the web. 
Such spatiotemporal data require visual and analytical 
tools in order to improve the decision-making process. 
These tools should be intuitive so that little time is spent 
obtaining relevant conclusions from the analysis process, 
such as information on predictions, recurrence patterns, and 
clustering. 
Visualization techniques are well known for improving 
the decision support process [1], once they take advantage 
on the human skills for quickly perceiving and interpreting 
visual patterns [2][3]. However, it has been argued that the 
visualization resources provided by most of the existing 
geographic-based applications are not enough for decision 
support systems when used solely [4]. 
Furthermore, 
spatiotemporal 
data 
impose 
serious 
challenges for analytics. First of all, due to the geographical 
space complexity, that requires human involvement and 
his/hers sense of determination of space, place, and spatial 
relationships [5]. Secondly, due to the complexity of the 
temporal dimension. Time flows linearly, however, some 
events that occur over time may be periodically recurrent, 
with multiple cycles, forming hierarchical structures that 
overlap and interact with each other. Hence, temporal data 
analysis also requires human involvement [6]. 
It is necessary to perform analysis over data stored in 
heterogeneous and distributed data sources. In addition to 
the complex features of spatiotemporal data, the existence of 
heterogeneous sources results in an interoperability 
problem. Aiming at minimizing such problem, the Open 
Geospatial Consortium (OGC) [7] proposes standards for 
heterogeneous spatial databases connectivity services, such 
as the Web Map Service (WMS) and the Web Feature 
Service (WFS), broadly used by GIS (Geographic 
Information Systems) applications. 
We propose in this paper a new approach, the GeoSTAT 
(Geographic Spatiotemporal Analysis Tool) system in order 
to address the problem of the lack of systems that may 
provide visualization and clustering techniques for large 
spatiotemporal 
datasets. 
GeoSTAT 
is 
a 
web-based 
environment that implements several spatiotemporal data 
visualization technique; interoperates with distributed data 
sources through OGC WMS and WFS services; and  
provides several data mining clustering algorithms proposed 
in the literature. 
The main contribution of this work concerns the 
proposal of a visual approach for the analysis of 
spatiotemporal data that: 
 
• Facilitates the exploration of the spatial and 
temporal dimensions; 
• Provides interoperability and domain independence; 
and 
• Integrates data mining algorithms into the visual 
analysis. 
 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 discusses related work. Section 3 focuses on the 
proposed environment. Section 4 addresses a case study to 
validate the proposed ideas. Finally, Section 5 concludes the 
paper and points out further work to be undertaken. 
183
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

II. 
  RELATED WORK 
There are many works based on spatial data 
visualization, but not many deal with the visualization of 
spatiotemporal data. 
Reda et al. [8] present a tool that enables the visual 
exploration of the changes in dynamic social networks over 
time. It is an application focused on the domain of social 
networks visualization and it introduces a data structure 
based on a 3D cube for the spatiotemporal visualization. 
Lu et al. [9] address a web-based system for the 
visualization of historical spatiotemporal data of the 
metropolitan area of Washington, D.C., in the United States. 
Apart from being an application based on a specific domain, 
their tool does not use georeferenced maps, dealing with the 
data visualization merely by several chart types. 
He et al. [10] highlight another domain specific study. 
The authors developed a spatiotemporal data visualization 
system on the domain of oceans. It is a web-based system 
that uses 2D and 3D maps for the spatial visualization. The 
time visualization is static (has no animations), based on 
charts and triggered by user that chooses a region of interest 
in the map and a target time interval. 
Chen et al. [11] implemented a tool that integrates 
several visualization techniques (GIS, self-organizing maps, 
hierarchical lists, periodical views, timeline views, etc.) for 
the criminal analysis domain. Although it is domain 
specific, this tool introduces interesting functionalities, like 
a time slider that allows time variations of the data over a 
georeferenced 2D map with basic interactivity tools such as 
pan and zoom. In spite of using several visualization 
techniques, the interface of the proposed application may 
get overloaded, making the user confused. 
We have seen so far works that address spatiotemporal 
data visualization exploring several visualization techniques 
chosen according to specific domain. Next, we relate 
important works that propose several spatiotemporal 
visualization techniques. 
Andrienko et al. [12] propose a framework based on the 
Self-Organizing Map (SOM) technique, combined with a 
number of interactive visualization techniques for the 
analysis of spatiotemporal data from two perspectives: 
spatial distributions that vary over time; and local time 
variation profiles distributed over time. This approach 
promises to be domain independent, gathering visualization 
techniques based on maps to enable the data analysis. 
Compieta et al. [13] focus on issues related to the 
complexity of the manipulation, analysis and visualization 
of spatiotemporal data sets. The authors propose a 
spatiotemporal data mining system based on association 
rules and several techniques for the visualization and 
interpretation of georeferenced maps.  
Andrienko et al. [14] argue that it is necessary to handle 
the time more effectively and list some characteristics that 
would be ideal for a good spatiotemporal data visual 
analysis system, such as treating and using both time and 
space characteristics, being visual, exploratory, scalable, 
collaborative, providing applicable methodologies for new 
and big data sets, and providing mechanisms for gathering 
evidences. 
Considering 
the 
related 
works 
that 
involve 
spatiotemporal data visualization, most of them address 
specific domain solutions and do not present flexibility on 
obtaining the data, forcing the user to use solely the data 
source provided by the application. 
It is necessary to conceive a spatiotemporal data 
visualization and analytical tool that is, mainly: flexible, to 
enable the user to manipulate data obtained from 
information sources that and to execute spatial or temporal 
queries over these data, according to the  analysis criteria; 
practical, in the sense of providing an intuitive interface, 
with resources that assist the visualization and analysis of 
both spatial (map resources) and temporal features (charts, 
map animations); and generic, by providing all those 
resources for users interested on any spatiotemporal analysis 
domain. 
It is then necessary to use visual analytical tools for 
spatiotemporal data, together with data mining algorithms 
that will enable the discovery of implicit knowledge. This is 
the aim of the GeoSTAT system. 
III. 
THE GEOSTAT SYSTEM 
This section introduces the GeoSTAT (Geographic 
Spatiotemporal Analysis Tool) system that implements the 
visualization and analysis of spatiotemporal data available 
on heterogeneous databases. We followed the guidance for 
good spatiotemporal visual analysis systems proposed by 
Andrienko et al. [14]. 
The GeoSTAT system is a web-based visualization tool, 
designed in three-tier architecture: Visualization, Control 
and Persistence. The first two tiers contain the core of our 
contributions. Figure 1 shows such architecture. 
A. The Visualization Tier 
The visualization tier is responsible basically for the user 
interface. The GeoSTAT viewer was implemented based on 
the Google Maps API [15] and provides, in addition to the 
basic map interactivity functionalities (drag, pan, zoom, 
information and scale), options for alternating between base 
map types (map, satellite or terrain), and adding map layers. 
The viewer enables the visualization of several map layers, 
whether they are spatial or spatiotemporal, simultaneously, 
regardless of the data source. For each map layer, it is 
possible to apply an opacity level (transparency) to allow a 
better visualization of the spatial information.  It is also 
possible to execute spatial and non-spatial queries over the 
visible map layers. Figure 2 shows the GeoSTAT 
visualization screenshot with one spatiotemporal layer 
added to the map. 
  Figure 2 shows the presence of temporal controllers, in 
addition to the spatial data manipulation tools already 
presented.  For the spatiotemporal map layers, the viewer 
offers some components such as the Temporal Slider (see 
component 1 in Figure 2) that allows (see component 1 in 
Figure 2) that allows data visualization according to their 
timestamps and over several possibilities of distinct tempo-
184
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 1.  The GeoSTAT  three-tier architecture.
-ral granularities, for example: day, month or year. It is also 
possible to apply temporal filters in order to reduce the 
number of data analyzed for relevant periods (moments or 
intervals), and to use interactive charts (see component 2 on 
Figure 2) to assist the analysis of the temporal distributions 
of the data. 
A map layer is considered being spatiotemporal as from 
the moment of its inclusion in the application, the user 
indicates the temporal attribute of the layer. 
Still at the visualization tier it is possible to execute and 
view the results of the clustering based spatiotemporal data 
mining on the spatiotemporal layers of the type POINT. 
Hence, the simultaneous visualization of a layer with real 
data and resulting data from the data mining processing may 
be achieved. 
B. The Control Tier 
The control tier is where the user requests from the 
visualization layer are treated and executed. This tier 
implements the application logic and direct communication 
with the data services that offer the spatial or spatiotemporal 
layers. It is responsible, mainly, for the spatial and temporal 
queries, resulting from the use of the Temporal Slider, and 
for the execution of the spatiotemporal data mining. 
Inside the control tier there is a module responsible for 
the spatiotemporal data mining. This module integrates the 
clustering algorithms found in the Weka data mining library 
[16] and is extensible for the addition of other algorithms of 
the same nature. To provide such extensibility, we 
developed a communication interface that can be easily 
implemented for new algorithms and we established a data 
input format based on spatiotemporal points; and  a data 
output format for the spatiotemporal clusters. The input 
format chosen was the Comma-Separated Values (shortly 
CSV), containing information on the spatiotemporal layer to 
be mined, such as the latitude, longitude and timestamp of 
the records. The output format chosen was XML 
(eXtensible 
Markup 
Language), 
containing 
relevant 
information over the generated clusters. An example of a 
generated cluster on the output format of the data mining 
module is presented in Code 1. 
According to Code 1, each element of the type "cluster" 
is basically composed of an identifier, the number of 
instances (records) grouped (representing its density) and 
the cluster’s spatial and temporal elements. The spatial 
elements enable the visualization of the cluster on 
georeferenced circle format, with radius and center point 
clearly defined. The temporal elements specify the temporal 
granularity and the value. 
Code 1.  Snippet of the XML file that represents an example of a cluster 
generated by the data mining module. 
 
<cluster> 
        <id>1</id> 
        <instances>144</instances> 
        <spatial> 
            <latCentroid>-8.253</latCentroid> 
            <lonCentroid>-36.964</lonCentroid> 
            <radius>0.14567</radius> 
        </spatial> 
        <temporal> 
 
 
    <granularity>YEAR</granularity> 
            <value>2010</value> 
        </temporal> 
    </cluster> 
185
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 2.  The GeoSTAT environment visualization screenshot with a spatiotemporal map layer. 
C. The Persistence Tier 
The persistence tier contains GeoServer map server that 
implements the OGC WMS and WFS services [17],  
ensuring the spatial DBMS (Database Management System) 
interoperability. The servers used by the users through 
GeoSTAT may be easily connected, through the information 
of the service URL and setting an alias to better identify it. 
With an established connection, the user has the option to 
perform map overlay of all the layers available from the 
OGC connected services. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY 
This section presents a case study in order to validate the 
solution proposed in this paper. 
To explore the functionalities offered by GeoSTAT, we 
set up a web server with GeoServer version 2.0.3, that 
implements the WMS and WFS services. We also used the 
PostgreSQL DBMS version 9.0.4, with the PostGIS spatial 
extension version 1.5.   
The spatiotemporal data  set  was obtained from the 
Brazilian National Institute for Space Research (INPE) [18]. 
resulting in 17,418 records. 
The data set contains records of fire events detected by 
satellites in the state of Paraiba, located in the Northeast 
region of Brazil, during a period of five years (2006-2010),  
resulting in 17,418 records. We used spatial data obtained 
from the Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics 
(IBGE) to visualize the vector layers of the states of the 
Northeast of Brazil (9 polygons), and those from the cities 
of the Paraiba state (223 polygons), 
Through GeoSTAT we may set up a data connection to 
the web server and obtain a list of available layers for 
inclusion, visualization and analysis.  Figure 3 shows a 
screenshot for adding a new data connection. GeoSTAT 
may connect to any map servers that implement OGC WMS 
and WFS services. In the case study we used the GeoServer 
map server.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Adding a spatial data connection. 
186
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 4.  Adding a spatiotemporal map layer. 
Figure 4 shows the screenshot of adding map layers. The 
layers available from the server are obtained by the 
GetCapabilities request, specified in the OGC WMS 
service. If a layer contains spatiotemporal data, the user has 
the option to select the attribute that contains the temporal 
dimension (see item 1 in Figure 4). The layer attributes are 
acquired using the DescribeFeatureType request, specified 
by the OGC WFS service.  
The selection of the temporal attribute is an essential 
step to perform spatiotemporal analysis. By specifying this 
attribute, GeoSTAT provide temporal components to the 
user. Otherwise the system will treat the attribute as spatial 
and will make available only the spatial API. 
In our experiment, we used the following layers: States 
(spatial), Cities (spatial) and Fires (spatiotemporal). Figure 5 
shows the GeoSTAT viewer with these layers visible in the 
map. Map layers are obtained from the servers through the 
GetMap request, specified by the WMS service. We may 
control the visibility of layers (see item 1 in Figure 5). The 
"checkbox" corresponds to the control of the visibility of the 
layer, whereas the "radio button" to the active layer control 
(see item 3 in Figure 2).  
Figure 6 shows the information component, which is 
enabled by clicking on the visible layer, e.g., the FIRES 
layer. This is done through the WMS GetFeatureInfo 
requisition. The layer opacity may be changed by clicking 
on the layer name.  
 
Figure 5.  GeoSTAT viewer with three layers visible in the map. 
 
Figure 6.  An example of the information component. 
After presenting the "Fires" spatiotemporal layer in the 
map, GeoSTAT displays a chart area with the distribution of 
such events over time (see item 2 in Figure 2). In the chart 
area, it is possible, for example, to classify the distribution 
chart using nonspatial and nontemporal attributes. In our 
experiment, we used the vegetation attribute to generate a 
new distribution chart showing types of vegetation over 
time (see Figure 7). Then the temporal slider is enabled so 
that the user may press the “play button” to start a map 
animation over time (see item 1 in Figure 2).  
Figure 8 presents an example of the temporal animation 
component. There are interface components such as play 
and pause; and a temporal slider. The objects shown in the 
map are exhibited according to the specific time being 
played.  
As the "States" and "Cities" layers include all of the 
Brazilian territory and we would like to focus on the region 
of fires analysis (Northeast region), we used the spatial filter 
to show on the map only the state of Paraiba and its 223 
cities. The use of spatial filters is only possible due to the 
GetFeature request specified by the OGC WFS service, 
which enables to execute queries on the spatial layers. Then, 
the user may be interested in analyzing the detected fire 
events where the type of vegetation was "NoForest" and 
during the year of 2008. By analyzing the dynamic chart, we 
can see which type of vegetation registered the  highest  
concentration of  such events in that time period. To 
perform this operation, we first apply a spatial filter on the 
layer, in order to display in the map only the records 
associated with the vegetation type "NoForest", and then we  
 
Figure 7.  Fire distribution chart over time, classified by type of vegetation. 
187
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 8.  Using the temporal controller 
apply a temporal filter for the time period between "2008-
01-01" and "2008-12-31". That way, we reduced the result 
set to 4,010 records of fires to be analyzed. The results may 
be seen in the map shown in Figure 9a. 
Finally, we execute the spatiotemporal data mining 
algorithms to the fire dataset aiming to find out relevant 
implicit patterns. For instance, we may detect that during a 
certain period of the year, a given type of vegetation is 
severally affected by fires in a specific geographic region 
(cluster). This knowledge may help decision makers to 
study fire defense and emergency services planning for 
future occurrences. We use the month granularity, through 
the density-based DBScan clustering algorithm [19], 
provided by GeoSTAT, with parameters epsilon = 0.1, 
minPoints = 2 and distance-type = ‘Euclidian distance’. The 
input values for the DBScan algorithm were established 
empirically. The resulting clusters can be seen in Figure 9b. 
DBScan [19] is a density based cluster algorithm that 
groups fire spots using spatiotemporal neighborhood. 
Hence, the fires occurred in a given time interval and within 
a distance specified in the epsilon parameter will constitute 
a cluster. The "minPoint" parameter specifies how many 
neighbor points are necessary to obtain a cluster. Finally, the 
distance type parameter specifies the distance metric to be 
used; in our case we are using the Euclidian distance. 
We validate our approach in a real scenario, and we 
could the usability and effectiveness of the proposed system. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We 
addressed 
the 
question 
of 
spatiotemporal 
visualization and analysis, highlighting its utility in the 
presence of large data sets.  We also pointed  out  the main 
limitations found in the related work. 
We proposed a spatiotemporal visualization and analysis 
environment aiming to minimize the main limitations found, 
regarding the flexibility of the data sources, practicality of 
the analysis process and generalization of the domain. Our 
case study has shown that the proposed solution fulfills the 
requirements established, being valid not only in the domain 
adopted for the case study, but also on any other domains. 
We built a DBMS independent environment, following 
the OGC guidelines specifying the WMS and WFS services 
that allow the interoperability between several  data  sources  
 
 (a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 9.  Case Study results: (a) 4,010 fires where type of vegetation is 
equals to "NoForest" (transactional data) during the year of 2008. (b) 
density spatiotemporal clusters generated of these 4,010 fires (mined data). 
with the use of simultaneous map layers regardless of their 
origins, in a transparent way for the user. 
As further work, we plan to improve GeoSTAT by 
incorporating a 3D viewer for spatiotemporal data. Also, the 
addition of the collaborative analysis concept, allowing 
several analysts to work in a shared and  evolutionary  
manner is another interesting future work. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Johnston, “Model visualization,” in Information Visualization in Data 
Mining and Knowledge Discovery, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., 
San Francisco, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 223–227. 
[2] I. Kopanakis and B. Theodoulidis, “Visual data mining modeling 
techniques for the visualization of mining outcomes,” Journal of Visual 
Languages and Computing, vol. 14, no. 6, 2003, pp. 543–589. 
[3] N. Andrienko, 
G. Andrienko, 
and 
P. Gatalsky, 
“Exploratory 
spatiotemporal visualization: an analytical review,” Journal of Visual 
Languages and Computing, special issue on Visual Data Mining, vol. 14, 
no. 6, 2003, pp. 503–541. 
[4] Y. Bédard, T. Merrett, and J. Han, “Fundaments of spatial data 
warehousing for geographic knowledge discovery,” in H. J. Miller and J. 
Han (eds.) Geographic Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, London: 
Taylor and Francis, 2001, pp. 53-73. 
[5] G. Andrienko, 
N. Andrienko, 
J. Dykes, 
S. I. 
Fabrikant, 
and 
M. Wachowicz, “Geovisualization of dynamics, movement and change: 
key issues and developing approaches in visualization research,” in 
Information Visualization, vol. 7, no. 3, 2008, pp. 173–180, 
doi:10.1057/ivs.2008.23. 
[6] D. J. Peuquet, “Representations of space and time”, The Guilford Press, 
2002. 
[7] A. T. Kralidis, “Geospatial Open Source and Open Standards 
Convergences,” in G. B. Hall and M. G. Leahy (Eds.) Open Source 
Approaches in Spatial Data Handling, Berlin: Springer, 2008, pp. 1–20. 
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[8] K. Reda, C. Tantipathananandh, T. Berger-Wolf, J. Leigh, and A. 
Johnson, “SocioScape - a Tool for Interactive Exploration of 
Spatiotemporal Group Dynamics in Social Networks,” in Proceedings of 
the IEEE Information Visualization Conference (INFOVIS ’09), Atlantic 
City, New Jersey, 2009. 
[9] C.-T. Lu, A. P. Boedihardjo, and J. Zheng, “Towards an Advanced 
Spatiotemporal Visualization System for the Metropolitan Washington 
D.C.” in 5th International Visualization in Transportation Symposium 
and Workshop, 2006, pages: 6. 
[10] H. Yawen, S. Fenzhen, D. Yunyan and X. Rulin, "Web-based 
visualization of marine environment data," in Chinese Journal of 
Oceanology and Limnology, vol. 28, no. 5, Science Press, co-published 
with Springer-Verlag GmbH, 2010, pp. 1086–1094. 
[11] H. Chen, 
H. Atabakhsh, 
T. Petersen, 
J. Schroeder, 
T. Buetow, 
L. Chaboya, C. O’Toole, M. Chau, T. Cushna, D. Casey, and Z. Huang, 
“COPLINK: Visualization for Crime Analysis,” in Proceedings of The 
National Conference on Digital Government Research, 2003, pp. 1–6. 
[12] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, S. Bremm, T. Schreck, T. V. Landesberger, 
P. Bak, and D. Keim, “Space-in-Time and Time-in-Space Self-
Organizing Maps for Exploring Spatiotemporal Patterns,” in Computer 
Graphics Forum, vol. 29, no. 3, 2010, pp. 913–922. 
[13] P. Compieta, S. D. Martino, M. Bertolotto, F. Ferrucci, and T. Kechadi, 
“Exploratory spatiotemporal data mining and visualization,” in Journal 
of Visual Languages & Computing, vol. 18, no. 3, 2007, pp. 255–279. 
[14] G. Andrienko, N. Andrienko, U. Demsarb, D. Dranschc, J. Dykesd, S. I. 
Fabrikant, M. Jernf, M.-H. Kraakg, H. Schumannh, and C. Tominskih, 
“Space, time and visual analytics,” in International Journal of 
Geographical Information Science, vol. 24, no. 10, 2010, pp. 1577–1600. 
[15] Google Inc, “Google  Maps  Javascript  API  V2  implementation  
reference 
documentation,” 
2010, 
available 
from: 
http://code.google.com/apis/maps/documentation/javascript/v2/refer
ence.html 25.11.2011. 
[16] M. Hall, E. Frank, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, P. Reutemann, and I. H. 
Witten, “The WEKA Data Mining Software: An Update,” in SIGKDD 
Explorations, vol. 11, no. 1, 2009, pp. 10–18. 
[17] Open Geospatial Consortium, “GeoServer - a Java-based software server 
to 
view 
and 
edit 
geospatial 
data,” 
2008, 
available 
from: 
http://geoserver.org/display/GEOS/What+is+Geoserver 25.11.2011. 
[18] INPE, “Vegetation Fires - Fire Monitoring,” in Brazilian National 
Institute 
for 
Space 
Research, 
2011, 
available 
from: 
http://sigma.cptec.inpe.br/queimadas/index_in.php 25.11.2011. 
[19] M. Ester, H.-P. Kriegel, J. Sander, and X. Xu, “A Density-Based 
Algorithm for Discovering Clusters in Large Spatial Databases with 
Noise,” in Proceedings of 2nd International Conference on Knowledge 
Discovery and Data Mining (KDD-96), 1996, pp. 226-231.
 
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

