Underground Monitoring Systems using 3D GIS for Public Safety
Kwangsoo Kim, Dong-Hwan Park, Jaeheum Lee, and Inwhan Lee
UGS Convergence Research Division
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute
Daejeon, Republic of Korea 34129
Email: {enoch, dhpark, ljh, ihlee}@etri.re.kr
Abstract—This paper describes an underground monitoring sys-
tem using 3D geographic information system (GIS), which models
and shows real world objects. This system consists of wireless
sensor networks, middleware, and a 3D visualizer. The wireless
sensor networks provide sensing values on the state of under-
ground facilities, the middleware provides an abstraction layer
for various sensing devices and communication protocols, and the
3D visualizer shows the shapes, the locations, the states, and the
risk indexes associated with facilities. The 3D GIS used in the
visualizer provides a powerful tool that enhances the ability to
monitor the underground environment for public safety and helps
improve the efﬁciency of the underground safety management.
Keywords–Underground facility; underground safety; 3D GIS.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the industrial society, human beings moved from rural
to urban areas during the industrial revolution. Therefore,
the number of people living in cities increased dramatically.
According to the Economist, about 86 percent of the developed
world and 64 percent of the developing world will be urbanized
by 2050 [1]. More than 50 percent of the world′s human popu-
lation now live in cities. This portion will increase continually.
As the population of large cities has increased, people have de-
veloped an infrastructure to support their comfortable life. The
infrastructure was very important for the urban dwellers. In the
cities, water pipes were constructed underground to transport
water from water sources to individual homes, factories and
buildings. Sewer systems were also constructed underground
to transport sewage from places to the outside of the cities.
Roads were constructed to better facilitate the movement of
important things such as food, soldiers, vehicles, and other
goods. In modern cities, underground railway systems have
been constructed to solve the heavy trafﬁc congestion.
Presently, the outdated and aging infrastructure is becoming
a problem. As many cities depend on extensive infrastructure
systems that support them, the aging infrastructures are in
need of repair or replacement to provide urban dwellers with
a comfortable life. For example, New York City′s water mains
were installed underground more than 100 years ago. Breaks
occur frequently. Since 1998, more than 400 main water breaks
have happened every year in New York City [2]. Also, road
subsidence in downtown areas in Korean cities has emerged as
a serious social problem. For example, the road subsidence in
Seoul City occurred at 3,328 locations from 2010 to 2014 [3].
In addition, subsidence occurred in Busan, Incheon, Gwangju,
Suwon, Suncheon, Andong, and elsewhere. Unfortunately, it
is very hard to recognize the place and time of the leaks
or breaks of water pipes and road subsidence. Furthermore,
failures of underground facilities are invisible. Sometimes we
do not know where they are under the roads.
Figure 1. Architecture of Underground Monitoring System.
We have developed an underground monitoring system to
detect the state changes occurring in the underground space. To
achieve this goal, the underground monitoring system monitors
the state changes of sewer pipes, water pipes, subway lines,
subway stations, and groundwater levels. Figure 1 shows the
architecture of the underground monitoring system. We install
various types of sensing devices underground and acquire the
sensing data related to the state of the utilities. In Figure 1,
the underground safety middleware (UGS-M) is responsible for
collecting data from those sensing devices. The locations of all
utilities and sensing devices are shown in the 3D visualization
module using GIS technologies. Thus, the purpose of this paper
is to introduce the underground monitoring system for public
safety.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II describes wireless sensor networks that transmit sensing
data. Section III describes the UGS middleware that collects
and manages sensing data. Section IV describes the visualizer
that displays geographic data and sensing data. Finally, Section
V concludes this paper.
II.
WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS
We use a wireless sensor network (WSN) to sense the states
of underground utilities and transmit them to a centralized data
collector. A WSN consists of two types of devices: an access
point (AP) and a sensor node. They form a star topology.
An AP interconnects a WSN and an IP-based network. An
AP provides diverse communication schemes such as wireless
ﬁdelity (WiFi), Ethernet, and long term evolution (LTE). A
sensor node includes one or more transducers. One transducer
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2. Underground facilities.
is either a sensor or an actuator. Sensor nodes are installed in
tube wells and subway stations and attached to sewer pipes,
water supply pipes, and subway lines.
Underground utilities generate different sensing types ac-
cording to their properties. Sewer pipes generate videos and
still images that show their states. Water pipes generate pitch
(lateral axis), roll (longitudinal), and leak noise. Subway lines
and stations generate videos, still images, the amount of inﬂu-
ent water, stress, and acceleration. Tube wells generate water
level, water temperature, water conductivity, water turbidity,
soil temperature, soil conductivity, and soil moisture. Most of
the sensing values are transmitted to the UGS-M through the
WSN; however, videos and still images are uploaded into the
database through the Internet.
III.
UGS MIDDLEWARE
UGS-M is located between several applications including
the 3D GIS Visualizer and the sensor networks consisting
of a larger number of sensor nodes. UGS-M is responsible
for collecting data from the sensor networks, transmitting it
to the applications, and providing an abstraction on diverse
speciﬁcations of sensing devices and communication protocols.
To achieve this goal, UGS-M consists of a communication
manager, data translator, resource manager, sensing data man-
ager, monitoring manager, and a service interface [3].
IV.
3D GIS VISUALIZER
The 3D GIS visualizer creates a detailed model that de-
scribes the objects both from above and below the city ground.
The model includes maps, imagery, and subsurface features
such as water pipes, water supply manholes, sewage pipes,
sewage manholes, subway lines, and subway stations. The GIS
data, which represents the underground features, is provided by
Daejeon Metropolitan City. Daejeon generates the underground
features as the two-dimensional objects. Water pipes, sewage
pipes, and subway lines are represented as the line object.
Manholes are represented as the point object. Subway stations
are represented as the polygon object. Daejeon City uses
the GIS data to recognize which underground facilities are
located within construction areas. Therefore, we convert two
dimensional objects into three dimensional objects by adding
its depth and pipe size to display the state information such
as cracks on the facilities, slopes of sewage pipes, etc. The
underground facilities represented as three dimensional objects
are shown in Figure 2. Figure 3 shows the sensor nodes
overlaid on the map. Since the road subsidence has occurred
mainly along the subway lines, the sensor nodes were installed
Figure 3. Node overlay and risk index.
Figure 4. Visualization of underground space.
near the subway lines (marked in green) initially. Figure 3 also
shows the risk indexes represented as circles in different colors.
Green, yellow, and red indicate low, medium, and high risk,
respectively. The sinkhole risk index (SRI) in Figure 4 shows
the degree of risk associated with each underground facility. Its
value is between 0 and MAX. Figure 4 shows the underground
space with the dangerous sewage pipes that are marked in red.
V.
CONCLUSION
This paper presents the brief features of an underground
monitoring system to detect the risks related to underground
utilities. We implemented and evaluated the prototype of this
system. It senses the states of utilities, collects the sensing
values, and visualizes those values and objects. We are going
to implement several analysis schemes that extract both state
changes and risks from the sensing values associated with
underground utilities. Then, we will apply this system to a
testbed to be implemented in Daejeon. In the testbed, the
correctness and efﬁciency of those schemes will be evaluated.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Research Council
of Science & Technology (NST) grant by the Korea govern-
ment (MSIP) (No. CRC-14-02-ETRI).
REFERENCES
[1]
Economist, “Urban life: Open-air computers,” Special reports: Technol-
ogy and geography, 2012.
[2]
A. Forman, “Caution Ahead,” Report published by the Center for an
Urban Future, Mar. 2014.
[3]
K. Kim, D. H. Park, J. Lee, and S. I. Jin, “UGS Middleware for
Monitoring State of Underground Utilities,” in Proceedings of the In-
ternational Conference on Information and Communications Technology
Convergence (ICTC) Oct. 28–30, 2015, Jeju, Rep. of Korea. The Korean
Institute of Communcations and Information Sciences, Oct. 2015, pp.
1186–1188.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

