Building an Open Personal Trajectory Repository 
 
 
Ville Mäkinen, Anna Brauer, Juha Oksanen 
Department of Geoinformatics and Cartography 
Finnish Geospatial Research Institute FGI, National Land Survey of Finland 
Otaniemi, Espoo, Finland 
email: ville.p.makinen@nls.fi, anna.brauer@nls.fi, juha.oksanen@nls.fi 
 
 
Abstract—Portable Global Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) 
-enabled devices enable gathering comprehensive personal 
trajectory data about the movement of citizens. Such data would 
be extremely useful for example improving the cyclability of 
cities. On the other hand, the data is personal and can reveal 
surprisingly large amount of personal information. To develop 
robust privacy-aware and utility-preserving methods to 
obfuscate personal trajectory data, we are faced with the 
problem that no comprehensive data sets exist that is needed to 
conduct such studies. Therefore, we are designing an open 
trajectory repository where citizens can donate their data for 
science. The main challenges are 1) how to motivate citizens to 
contribute and 2) how can we share the trajectory data back to 
participants and to society while respecting the participants’ 
privacy. 
Keywords-privacy; microtrajectory; open data. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Portable GNSS-enabled devices have become ubiquitous 
in modern society [1]. In principle, these devices enable 
gathering accurate location data of citizens. Such data could 
be used for example to assess the flow of cycling traffic, and 
thus be used to improve the cyclability of cities [2]. Efforts to 
mitigate climate change are needed and especially in cities, 
where transportation accounts for a large amount of 
greenhouse emissions [3], supporting cycling is an important 
way to help in this battle. 
When used for tracking, smartphones and other GNSS-
enabled devices usually record their location every few 
seconds. This results into accurate personal trajectories 
(consecutive (x, y, z, t) points) that can reveal surprisingly 
large amount of information about their carriers [4], especially 
when linked to other data sets [5]. Sharing such trajectories 
openly thus compromises the participants’ privacy. This has 
been acknowledged in the EU’s General Data Protection 
Regulation (GDPR). One unfortunate outcome of the 
regulation is that it has made the access and usage of personal 
location data practically impossible for anyone other than the 
companies who collect the data. Usually, only heavily 
aggregated data is available (e.g., Strava heat maps [6]), 
whose utility compared to the original data is considerably 
reduced. 
We think that the current situation is unbearable. In the 
GeoPrivacy project, we are studying methods that would 
enable the use of personal trajectories while respecting the 
privacy of their owners. More precisely, we are studying how 
personal trajectories could be processed so that their utility 
remains high while their potential to violate owners’ privacy 
is hindered. One problem we are facing is that there are almost 
no personal trajectory data sets that can be used to conduct 
such studies. To tackle this, we opted to build an open 
trajectory donation service, where volunteers can donate their 
trajectory for science. 
The rest of the paper discusses the various issues we have 
so far faced when designing and building such a service. 
Section II highlights the previous research relevant to this 
work. Section III summarizes our previous study about the 
citizens’ motivation to participate. Sections IV and V present 
the methodology that we have developed for this work and 
possible data sets that could be produced. The sections VI and 
VII contain detailed implementation details of the service and 
potential issues. Finally, section VIII contains the conclusion 
that we have drawn. 
II. 
PREVIOUS WORK 
Anonymization 
of 
databases 
have 
been 
studied 
extensively and numerous privacy protection concepts have 
been devised, for example k-anonymity [7] and l-diversity 
[8]. Research has been conducted also specifically with 
spatio-temporal data, but often the developed methods are 
applicable for relatively coarse data, such as phone location 
data from mobile operators [9]. The methods that are 
applicable to GNSS trajectories often require the data set to 
be dense. For example, in [10] the trajectories are translated 
closer to each other to achieve a specific (k, δ)-anonymity. In 
addition, the presented methods seem to be developed mainly 
for a fixed set of trajectories. Applying such methods to 
constantly growing data sets may pose additional issues. 
There are some studies about anonymization of individual 
trajectories. For example, truncating the trajectories from 
their endpoints has been studied in [11]. However, the 
method does not consider the environment of the trajectory 
in any way, which in turn can lead to unnecessary utility loss. 
As mentioned, open personal GNSS trajectory data sets 
are scarce. The only publicly available data set we are aware 
of is the GeoLife data set [12] which contains ~17000 
trajectories recorded by 178 individuals in Beijing, China. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

We are aware of the Bike Data Project [13], in which cycling 
data has been gathered. However, they seem to publish only 
aggregations of the donated trajectories. 
These findings support our hypothesis that more open 
personal GNSS trajectory data would boost the development 
of privacy-preserving publication methods of such data. 
III. 
HOW TO MOTIVATE PARTICIPANTS? 
The obvious first question is: is there anybody who might 
be interested in donating their movement data, and what are 
their motivations to do so? We conducted an online 
questionnaire to map citizens’ thoughts and opinions on the 
topic. The survey was targeted to Finnish citizens. The results 
of the survey suggest that the general attitude towards 
donating personal trajectory data to an open data repository is 
positive [14]. At the same time, the participants seemed to be 
aware of the privacy issues. The most important motivators 
seemed to be the possibility to help to improve pedestrian and 
cycling lanes, and to participate in scientific research. These 
findings gave us confidence to proceed with the plan. 
The results also indicate that the most important doubts the 
participants had about such service are related to revelation of 
personal information and to what the data will be used for. 
These tell us that it will be important to build the service in 
such a way that the users can trust the service. 
IV. 
PRIVACY-AWARE TRAJECTORY PROCESSING 
A naive method to anonymize personal trajectory data is 
to simply replace the subjects’ personal information with a 
pseudo-identifier that is unique to each participant. This 
approach is valid only if there is no other data that the 
trajectories can be compared to. With external data, for 
example the known location of an individual at a certain time, 
a matching trajectory can be linked to the individual. This in 
turn may reveal for example the home or the workplace, or 
any other sensitive location, by inspecting the trajectories with 
the same pseudo-identifier. Removing the pseudo-identifier 
may make this harder. However, people’s movement 
behavior, for example the mode of transportation (walking or 
cycling speed) can help narrow down the possible trajectories 
that belong to the same individual. Also, people are likely to 
use the same device/application for recording their movement, 
which may introduce some identifiable information to the 
trajectories (average accuracy, systematic errors). 
One method to counter these threats is to publish only 
aggregations of the trajectories. An example of this approach 
are the heat maps by Strava [6]. A more utility-preserving 
method is to aggregate attributes for example to the segments 
of the street network of the area [2]. These and similar 
methods are the most privacy-respecting ones. At the same 
time, they reduce the utility of the data considerably. 
Often the sensitive locations of the trajectories are the 
endpoints and stay points, i.e., locations where the trajectory 
spends a considerable amount of time. These can be at the 
endpoints of the trajectory (user forgets to turn the tracking off 
after arriving at the destination) or somewhere in the middle 
(stop at red lights, a quick stop at a shop). We have studied a 
method to truncate trajectories in such a way that sensitive 
locations (endpoints and stay points) can be narrowed down 
only to a group of locations nearby the real location [15]. This 
approach mitigates some of the threats but leaves (possibly 
most) parts of the trajectories untouched. 
V. 
POSSIBLE OPEN DATA PRODUCTS 
A. Aggregated data sets 
Aggregation is commonly used and somewhat “safe” method 
to publish sensitive data. We have considered to publish two 
different aggregated data sets. The first one is an aggregation 
to a regular grid with coarse enough grid size. The second one 
consists of deriving various attributes from the trajectories 
and aggregating them onto the segments of the underlying 
street network, like in [2]. 
B. Obfuscated trajectories 
Publishing even parts of the raw trajectories must be done 
with extreme care, as the data is personal. We are planning to 
use the method in [15] as a basis, but further process the 
trajectories to obfuscate for the exact temporal information. 
In addition, we have considered resampling the trajectories to 
a uniform time resolution to make distinguishing them from 
one another more difficult. This list is not exhaustive and 
studying and developing new methods in this context is at the 
focus of our research. 
VI. 
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 
We aim to keep the implementation of the service simple. 
It will consist of a Vue.js frontend and a Django backend. In 
addition, there will be an off-line data storage where the 
original trajectories are stored (Figure 1). The most 
interesting and important questions are related to processing 
the trajectory data and management of the possible open data 
products. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the architechture of the service. The 
arrows indicate the data flow (dash dotted: original data, solid: anonymized 
data). 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

We argued above that data aggregation is the safest way   
to publish sensitive spatial data. However, when new 
trajectories are donated (or some existing ones deleted), we 
must have all the previous data available to recalculate the 
aggregations. This is not a problem here since the motivation 
for us to set up the service is to collect trajectory data. 
However, we do not want to store the original data on the 
server that is connected to the internet. A more responsible 
way is to store the original trajectories on the previously 
mentioned off-line storage 
and upload recalculated 
aggregations to the server when needed. In this scenario, the 
raw data exists on the backend only for a moment when data 
is donated but before it has been transferred to the secure 
storage. 
Another option we have mentioned is to publish 
obfuscated individual trajectories without any further 
aggregation. In this scenario there is no need to store the 
original data because there is no need to recalculate any 
aggregations. It would be possible to perform the trajectory 
obfuscation on the client-side, and the user could see the 
results and decide trajectory-wise whether they are happy 
with the results before donating. In a “production” version of 
the service this is an interesting approach, because it reduces 
the role of the trusted party that now stores the original 
sensitive data. In the first phase of the implementation, we 
will have a hybrid version of this idea: the data will be 
uploaded to the backend for processing, but the results are 
sent back to the user for inspection, and only after explicitly 
consenting are the results stored permanently in the service. 
It should be noted that if we want the participants to be 
able to request to remove their data, there must be a way to 
link the obfuscated trajectories to their accounts. Using a 
pseudo-identifier is the simplest option. More privacy-
conserving way is to use a unique identifier for each 
trajectory and an index that is not public. 
 
VII. IDENTIFIED ISSUES 
Aggregated data products have the least privacy issues. 
Still, care must be taken so that no individual trajectories can 
be seen or deduced from the data. This can be achieved by 
filtering out grid cells or street segments that contain less than 
a predefined number of trajectories. 
The obfuscated raw trajectories are more problematic. It 
is impossible to obfuscate the trajectories in a bulletproof 
manner, because it is always possible to devise another more 
comprehensive external data set that the trajectories can be 
linked against to reveal some personal information. The 
underlying question is: is a trajectory that is obfuscated in a 
certain way still personal data? Currently there does not seem 
to be a clear answer for this. 
Originally our plan was to make releases of the database 
that could be stored indefinitely and used as a benchmark data 
sets in scientific research. However, the GDPR’s right to be 
forgotten raises concerns whether this is feasible. 
The service we have described here is designed mainly 
for collecting data for research. Even though one of the 
motivators that was identified in the questionnaire was the 
ability to improve pedestrian and cycling lanes, we are aware 
that we are not likely to be able to affect the city planning 
during this project. 
We are also facing the chicken and the egg problem. One 
of the goals for setting up the service is to gather personal 
trajectory data that can be used to develop more robust 
obfuscation methods. At the same time, robust and well-
tested obfuscation methods would increase the trust to the 
service and possibly attract more users. 
One big reason for the success and popularity of the 
existing tracking applications is the ease of use. Having to use 
a separate service to manually upload data will inevitably 
drive away potential motivated users. Having a dedicated app 
for our service might attract more users and should be kept in 
mind for further development. However, for a relatively 
small research project such things are big investments. In the 
first phase we will concentrate on making the user experience 
of the service as smooth as possible without compromising 
security. 
It might be possible for the user to allow the service to 
access a third-party service and download data automatically 
from there. Questions that rise immediately are a) is such use 
in accordance with the terms of use of the third-party service 
and b) is it possible to download the original trajectory data 
programmatically. Usually, it is possible at least for users to 
download all their data from a service. Developing the import 
functionality of such data exports from a few popular services 
may be more cost-effective, given that the trajectory data is 
provided in a format that can be read for example by the 
common open-source libraries. 
VIII. CONCLUSIONS 
The higher goal of the project is to advance the use of 
ever-growing personal location data for the common good 
without compromising the privacy of the individuals. The 
results from the questionnaire suggest that there is 
willingness in general to participate in such an endeavor. 
Acquiring the trust of potential participants is of paramount 
importance. We will try to accomplish that by being 100% 
transparent with the goals of the service, the methods used, 
and the possible privacy threats. In practice, these must be 
communicated to the participants as clearly as possible, in 
plain language, for example when we ask for their consent to 
donate data. 
We acknowledge that it is entirely possible that there is 
no “universal” privacy-preserving obfuscation method for 
personal trajectories, but instead a suitable aggregation must 
be done case by case. Even in that case, the different 
aggregations must be generated and published with a thought. 
Generating and delivering aggregations carelessly may lead 
into a situation where different aggregations can be combined 
to reveal more information that what was originally intended. 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The results from the research in the GeoPrivacy project will 
provide more insight into this area as well. 
We consider the service that we are building as a test case 
of a more official service that would be maintained for 
example by city officials. That would enable a natural 
connection between the donation service and city planning, 
make it easier to provide feedback back to the citizens and 
thus motivate more people to participate. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The project is funded by the Finnish Cultural Foundation. 
We made use of geocomputing platform provided by the Open 
Geospatial 
Information 
Infrastructure 
for 
Research 
(Geoportti, urn:nbn:fi:research-infras-2016072513) funded 
by the Academy of Finland, CSC – IT Center for Science, and 
other Geoportti consortium members. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Bento, “Calling  for  change?  Innovation,  diffusion,  and  
the  energy  impacts  of  global mobile telephony,” Energy 
Research & Social Science, pp. 84–100, 2016. 
[2] A. Brauer, V. Mäkinen, and J. Oksanen, “Characterizing 
cycling traffic fluency using big mobile activity tracking data,” 
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, vol. 85, 101553, 
Jan. 2021, doi:10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2020.101553. 
[3] L. Chapman, “Transport and Climate change: a review”, 
Journal of Transport Geography, vol. 15, pp. 354–367, 2007, 
doi:10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2006.11.008. 
[4] C. Song, Z. Qu, N. Blumm, and A.-B. Barabási, “Limits of 
Predictability in Human Mobility,”, Science, vol. 327, pp. 
1018–1021, Feb. 2010, doi:10.1126/science.1177170. 
[5] O. Goga et al., “Exploiting Innocuous Activity for Correlating 
Users Across Sites” in The 22nd International conference on 
World Wide Web, WWW’13, May 2013, Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil. pp.447-458, doi:10.1145/2488388.2488428 
[6] Strava, 
“Global 
Heatmap”, 
2022, 
https://www.strava.com/heatmap [retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[7] L. Sweeney, “k-anonymity: A model for protecting privacy”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Uncertainty, 
Fuzziness 
and 
Knowledge-Based Systems vol. 10(5), pp. 557–570, 2002. 
[8] A. Machanavajjhala, J. Gehrke, D. Kifer, and M. 
Venkitasubramaniam, 
"l-diversity: 
privacy 
beyond 
k-
anonymity", ACM Transactions on Knowledge Discovery 
from Data, vol. 1(1), pp. 3, 2007. 
[9] M. Gramaglia, M. Fiore, A. Furno, and R. Stanica, “GLOVE: 
Towards Privacy-Preserving Publishing of Record-Level-
Truthful Mobile Phone Trajectories”, ACM/IMS Transactions 
on Data Science, vol. 2(3), pp. 1–36, 2021. 
[10] O. Abul, F. Bonchi, and M. Nanni, “Never Walk Alone: 
Uncertainty for Anonymity in Moving Objects Databases”, 
2008 IEEE 24th International Conference on Data Engineering, 
2008, pp. 376-385. 
[11] J. Krumm, “Inference Attacks on Location Tracks”. In: 
LaMarca, A., Langheinrich, M., Truong, K.N. (eds) Pervasive 
Computing. Pervasive 2007. Lecture Notes in Computer 
Science, vol 4480. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg. 
[12] Y. Zheng, H. Fu, X. Xie, W.-Y. Ma, and Q. Li, “Geolife GPS 
trajectory 
dataset 
– 
User 
Guide”, 
https://www.microsoft.com/en-
us/research/publication/geolife-gps-trajectory-dataset-user-
guide/ [retrieved: 05, 2022]. 
[13] Bike Data Project, https://www.bikedataproject.org/ [retrieved: 
05, 2022]. 
[14] V. Jokinen, V. Mäkinen, A. Brauer, and J. Oksanen, “Would  
citizens  contribute  their  personal  location  data  to  an open 
database? Preliminary results from a survey”, in Basiri, A., 
Gartner, G., & Huang, H. (Eds.). (2021). LBS 2021: 
Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Location 
Based Services, doi:10.34726/1741. 
[15] A. Brauer, A. Forsch, V. Mäkinen, J. Oksanen, and J.-H. 
Haunert, “My home is my secret: concealing sensitive 
locations by context-aware trajectory truncation”, International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, in press. 
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

