Geoprocessing Applied to Open Government Data 
 
Daniel Farias Batista Leite, Julio Henrique Rocha, 
Claudio de Souza Baptista, Ana Gabrielle Ramos 
Falcão 
Federal University of Campina Grande, Campina Grande, 
Paraíba, Brazil 
{danielfarias, juliorocha}@copin.ufcg.edu.br, 
baptista@dsc.ufcg.edu.br anagabriellee@gmail.com 
 
Hugo Feitosa de Figuerêdo 
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of 
Paraiba, Monteiro, Brazil 
hugo.figueiredo@ifpb.edu.br 
 
Abstract—The increasing social supervision in various sectors 
of society, particularly in the government administration, has 
demanded for information access policies in several countries. 
In Brazil, for instance, there is a law that regulates access to 
the Open Government Data (OGD) for reading, monitoring 
and reusing data in new projects and applications. In this 
scenario, several applications that extract information from 
open data are being developed throughout the world. This 
paper presents the BrasilMaps system, an open source 
application that integrates, through GIS technology, twelve 
open data government services offered to the Brazilian citizens. 
Data as Basic Health Units (BHU), Notary Offices, National 
Employment System (SINE), Service Unit of the Inland 
Revenue, Universities and Federal Institutes, Agencies of the 
Ministry of Labor and Employment and the Federal Police 
Offices are made available in the proposed system. The 
proposed system provides information that helps people in the 
use of public services. Through theaccess to this data, citizens 
can benefit from the nearest services offered, identify the 
quality of some services and filter the desired services. 
Keywords- Open Government Data; Geoprocessing; GIS. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the last years, geoprocessing technologies have 
played an important role in the provision of solutions for the 
public sector. GIS presents a great potential for information 
dissemination, reflecting in several sectors of the society, 
especially in the public sector, in which we can note an 
intense social control. The use of GIS enhanced with social 
media enables a higher supervision and participation of the 
population in government policies. 
As a consequence of such social control in the public 
sector, many countries have invested in information access 
policies, such as the United States and New Zealand. In 
Brazil, in particular, two of these laws stand out: the 
Complementary 
Law 
131/2009, 
which 
states 
the 
transparency 
of 
the 
financial 
execution 
of 
the 
Union/State/City; and the Public Information Access Law 
12.587/2011. 
The Public Information Access Law (IALaw) establishes 
the access to Open Government Data (OGD), which are data 
produced by the government and made available for the 
citizens in order to enable not only its monitoring and 
accessing, but also its reuse in new projects, websites and 
applications. Furthermore, the government data are only 
considered open when published in conformity to eight 
principles: complete, primary, timely, accessible, machine 
processable, 
non-discriminatory, 
non-proprietary 
and 
license-free [1]. In addition there are three important laws 
[2]: 
 
whether the data cannot be found or indexed 
on the web, it does not exist;  
 
if it is not open and available in machine 
readable format, it cannot be reused; and  
 
if any legal framework does not allow it to be 
repurposed, it is not useful. 
The adoption of Open Government Data policies is 
beneficial in many ways. At first, with the transparency of 
the government actions, one can create a collaborative social 
control environment for both the population and the 
government. Matheus et al. [3] also highlight another 
benefit of the adoption of Open Data, which is the 
possibility of generating new information and applications 
from the interaction between the government and the society 
through the exploration of open data derived from several 
data sources. 
In this paper, we propose anGIS application named 
BrasilMaps[4] , that enables the integration of heterogeneous 
data sources from twelve data bases of public equipments 
(extracted from the Open Data National Portal - "Portal 
Nacional de Dados Abertos"), using geoprocessing 
techniques and allowing visualization and searching on such 
data. 
The database containsdata on Basic Health Units, notary 
offices, Employment National System, Internal Revenue 
Service, Fundacentro (responsible for the registration of 
work accidents and diseases), Universities and Federal 
Institutes, Ministry of Labor and Employment and Federal 
Police offices. It also contains data about services provided 
for assisting individuals in threat or right violation situations 
(physical, psychological or sexual violence, amongst 
others), such as the Social Assistance Specialized Reference 
Center the Social Assistance Reference Center, Therapeutic 
Communities (specialized in sheltering people with 
disorders derived from psychoactive substances) and Social 
Assistance Private Networks. 
In order to provide a good visualization on the map of the 
aforementioned sources, it is necessary to use a methodology 
based on the Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) process. 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Therefore, the data sources will be extracted and examined 
so that only the ones that qualify are loaded and, if 
necessary, normalized. In many data sources, we can find 
incomplete and uncertain information due to several factors 
that may occur during the data collection. 
When using many data sources, some challenges may 
rise on the data treatment process, notably: normalization of 
the 
geographic 
information, 
information 
filtering, 
elimination 
of 
imprecise 
information, 
correction 
of 
uncertainties and errors, incomplete information and 
outdated data. Such challenges were overcome using a 
methodology for the data treatment obtained from the 
aforementioned sources, thus facilitating the exhibition of the 
information in the map.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II, we discuss related work and applications that make use of 
Open Government Data. Next, we address the methodology 
used for obtaining and manipulating the open data in Section 
III. In Section IV, we focus on the BrasilMaps application in 
details, 
including 
its 
architecture 
and 
available 
functionalities. In Section V, we describe the usability 
assessment performed to evaluate BrasilMaps, and finally, in 
section VI, we present our conclusions and the future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
It is understandable that, due to the short lifetime of the 
IALaw, the Open Government Data policy in Brazil is still 
under the process of development and improvement. In this 
sense, few applications like BrasilMaps were been 
developed. Mootiro Maps [5]works with five public services 
datasets and shows all the information in only one layer at 
map, so it is impossible to filter information. Moreover, a 
single icon is used to represent all the public services. PAC 
II [6] displays the location of public constructions but  does 
not distinguish the icon according to the category of 
construction, only a single icon is used. 
Pedroso et al. [7] highlight several problems that some 
datasets made available by the government agencies, such as 
their availability in only the .pdf format, which makes 
interoperability difficult to achieve. In this perspective, 
Lourenço and Serra [8] defined a maturity model composed 
of 5 levels, in which the level 0 indicates the available 
databases that do not present any structure, whereas the 
highest maturity level (level 4) indicates that the available 
information is structured. 
Breitman et al. [9] performed a quantitative and 
qualitative analysis of the datasets available in the Brazilian 
Open Data National Portal, indicating the categories the 
datasets are organized and the total volume of each 
category, the origin of each dataset (spreadsheets, web 
services, among others) and the format they are made 
available (XML, Json, among others). On the other hand, 
Xu and Zheng [10] performed an analysis on the open data 
available on the world under the user perspective, indicating 
which categories the population would like to have access to 
and how such data should be made available. 
Matheus et al. [3] and Correa et al. [11] performed a 
comparative study between several Brazilian transparency 
portals, regarding the federal, state and city levels, coming 
to the conclusion that, none of the portals are in conformity 
to the eight aforementioned principles for data to be 
considered open. Furthermore, Erickson et al. [12]argue that 
applications developed using open data should be regulated 
according to some rules, such as the way the data must be 
explored. 
Even in such unfavorable scenario, however, many 
applications using open data information has been 
developed in Brazil. Nonetheless, these related applications 
use only a single database and, most of them, do not explore 
the spatial dimension of data. They only display the 
information in the form of charts and tables. Artigas [13] 
and Artigas and Chun [14] highlight the importance of 
exploring other means for displaying data, especially 
geolocation. The exploration of the spatial dimension may 
enable the detection of tendency and patterns between 
datasets. Graves and Hendler [15] state that displaying the 
data in many forms is essential for the entertainment of the 
citizens. In this context, this paper presents the BrasilMaps 
application that apart from integrating data from twelve 
open databases, enables the spatial visualization and 
interpretation of the data. 
III. 
DATA TRANSFORMATION PROCESS 
The 
BrasilMaps application performs the spatial 
integration of twelve databases. However, in order to 
accomplish the integration of these heterogeneous databases 
a data transformation process was necessary, once some 
databases did not have geolocation information of the 
underlying equipments. Figure 1 illustrates the data 
transformation process implemented. 
 
 
Figure 1. Extract, Transform and Load (ETL) Process. 
All the files were collected using the comma-separated 
values format (.csv), thus being in conformity to the 
technical rules for the publication of Open Data, other than 
preserving the original structure of the information. Then, 
these files were submitted to the geocoding module. The 
geocoding module is responsible for performing an analysis 
on the geographical information of the databases and 
converting them into geographic coordinates, in case they 
are in the form of addresses. This conversion is called 
Geocoding, which is the process of identifying the 
geographic coordinates (e.g., latitude and longitude) from 
other geographic information, such as an address or a postal 
code. In BrasilMaps, the geocoding process is performed by 
a web service available from Google Maps. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

It is known that it is very unlikely to achieve a full 
conversion of the address information into geographic 
coordinates. This is due to many reasons, such as the absence 
of complementary information (postal code, neighborhood), 
the misspelling of street names, and others; and all this data 
that were not successfully geocoded were discarded. It is 
better not to display them than displaying them erroneously. 
At the end of the refining process, about 92% of the 
submitted data were successfully converted. The failures 
encountered 
happened 
due 
to: 
incomplete 
address 
information of the public service; typos or misspellings from 
the team responsible for gathering the open government data; 
and outdated addresses. At the geocoding stage, we must 
mention the high success rates obtained for the data related 
to SINE and Fundacentro. Figure 2 presents the success and 
fail rates for each database considered, making it possible to 
note the low success rates of the other databases, such as the 
Federal Revenue information: only 77%. 
 
Figure 2. Geocoding success rates. 
After the refining process, in which all databases 
presented associated geographic coordinates (latitude and 
longitude), it is necessary to convert them into spatial 
objects compatible with the spatial Database Management 
System chosen: PostgreSQL/PostGIS. The spatial data 
conversion module is responsible for this task, performing 
the instantiation of a new spatial object through PostGIS's 
ST_Geom_FromText function. 
Finally, after the data transformation process we used 
Java Database Connectivity (JDBC) for sending SQL 
instructions to the database, loading the spatial database 
with the data gathered, considering each database as an 
entity 
responsible 
for 
storing 
equipment 
specific 
information. Next, we used OpenLayers to import and 
publish the entities with the support of the map server 
GeoServer. 
IV. 
BRASILMAPS 
This section introduces BrasilMaps, an application that 
allows the visualization, in the spatial dimension, of the 
government services offered to the population. This system 
was developed using the programming language JavaScript 
and HTML5, thus allowing its access via web navigators, 
even from mobile devices. BrasilMaps was awarded with the 
first prize in the 2ndBrazilian National Open Data 
Competition. 
The main goal of BrasilMaps is to provide a Geographic 
Information System (GIS) that enables the loading, 
processing and displaying of the Open Data for the 
population (made available from the Federal Government), 
offering a simple and practical public service search 
mechanism in a region of interest. The system's ability to 
categorize each public service results in a potentially higher 
and more effective participation of the society in consuming 
the open information that until then was of hard access to. 
BrasilMaps makes use of the user's current location to 
display the public interest services locations closer to where 
he is or to any other given location. User location is detected 
from the Internet once it has been authorized by the user, as 
Figure 3 shows. When the user accesses the system from a 
Global Positioning System (GPS) enabled mobile device, a 
higher precision on the detection of the current location is 
achieved. This way, when the access to BrasilMaps is done 
in a big city (São Paulo/SP, for instance), the accurate 
location detection assists the user when performing searches 
and also results in faster responses from the system, once 
only the public service within the user's region of interest 
will be shown.  
 
 
Figure 3. BrasilMaps initial page. 
Figure 4 illustrates the moment of the user's geographic 
location detection when accessing BrasilMaps from a mobile 
device. 
 
Figure 4. Accessing BrasilMaps from a smartphone. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

In both situations, in case the user chooses not to share 
his location, a search field is provided for him to insert any 
address or city desired. This way, the application is 
launched with the map centered on the location submitted. 
The 
following 
subsections 
describe 
BrasilMaps 
architecture and its functionalities details. 
A. Architecture 
BrasilMaps was designed according to the 3-tier model, 
aiming to facilitate portability, remote data updating and 
system modularization. The three layers that composed the 
system are: the Application Layer, the Business Layer and 
the Data Layer. Figure 5 illustrates the system's 3-tier 
architecture. 
 
 
Figure 5. BrasilMaps architecture. 
The Application Layer, responsible for presenting the 
information for the final user, provides mechanisms for 
loading, managing and viewing the data in a simple and 
intuitive mode. This layer has all the functionalities 
necessary for the users to benefit from the information of 
their interest. The Application Layer is responsible for 
communicating with the Business Layer performing 
requests, handling responses and formatting data properly to 
correctly display the information to end users. 
The Business Layer is the intermediate element between 
the Application Layer and the Data Layer. This layer is 
responsible for managing the flow of information consumed 
and forwarded by the application in terms of requests and 
responses. 
The Business Layer encompasses the  GeoServer open 
source 
map 
server 
framework. 
Geoserver 
provides 
Webmapping development services. From a connection with 
the spatial database, GeoServer can produce a set of 
thematic maps which, in turn, will be consumed by the 
Application Layer from a Web Map Service (WMS) request. 
The geocoding module, that contains the geocoding service 
responsible for obtaining the geographic coordinates, is also 
located in the Business Layer. 
Finally, the Data Layer is composed of an object 
relational database with support to spatial information 
(PostgreSQL + PostGIS). This layer is responsible for 
persisting and managing all the application's data, dealing 
with SQL queries and spatial functions. 
 
B. Functionalities 
The spatial location of all twelve public equipments 
available in the application needs to be presented in a map. 
In this context, BrasilMaps contains a map viewer 
(WebMapping), 
with 
the 
zooming 
and 
panning 
functionalities. The map displayed on the application was 
built using the OpenLayers library, that provides the 
visualization of spatial data. 
Each public equipment is displayed in the map as a 
layer. This way, BrasilMaps enables overlaying the 
information, in which different equipment layers may be 
combined in a map. Figure 6 presents BrasilMaps main 
interface, which is launched with the map centered on the 
user's location, with the layer "Notary Offices" and "Basic 
Health Units" enabled. On the right side of the image is 
shown the LayerSwitcher component, responsible for 
managing the layers. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. BrasilMaps main interface with two layers enabled. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Through user's location BrasilMaps assists the user in 
finding services of his interest. For example, let us 
consider a user that has been in an accident at his home 
and needs fast medical care. Hence, BrasilMaps can, using 
user location, point the Basic Health Units closer to him, 
facilitating the search for medical help and probably 
avoiding greater damages due to delayed medical support. 
It is vital for a system that embraces and displays 
public services to provide the details for each of these 
services. Thus, BrasilMaps allows users to view the details 
of each entity displayed on the map using an information 
window. To use this functionality, the user must click on 
the desired public equipment, which will cause a window 
to popup displaying all the basic and specific information 
of the equipment, such as phone number, physical 
structure and others. This capability enables the 
refinement of the desired searches. In the example given 
above, the user might analyze whether the chosen Basic 
Health Unit would meet his needs. Figure 7 presents the 
information window of a Basic Health Unit. 
 
 
Figure 7. Popup with the details of a Basic Health Unit 
With the help of the information window, a user that 
wishes to register a recently acquired property can check 
if the closest notary office to his current location may 
perform such task, as shown in Figure 8.  
 
Figure 8. Popup with the details of a notary office. 
Informing the user about the specific services offered 
by government services close to him promotes knowledge 
and avoids unnecessary displacement to obtain such 
information. 
V. 
USABILITY ASSESSMENT 
In order to assess the usability of the proposed system, 
we performed an evaluation consisting of analyzing its 
conformity to the standards defined in chapter 14 of ISO 
9241 - the standard from the International Organization 
for Standardization that covers ergonomics of human-
computer interaction. The recommendations described in 
such chapter of ISO 9241 suggest how the user interaction 
with the system might occur, considering specifically the 
menu structure and presentation, navigation, option 
selection and execution. So, such recommendations were 
evaluated in BrasilMaps and checked if they were 
successfully adopted. The results are shown in Table 1. 
 
TABLE I. RESULTS OF THE STANDARD CONFORMITY 
EVALUATION 
Standard 
#Sar 
#Ar 
AR (%) 
ISO 9241 Part 14 
31 
37 
83,78 
 
Where #Sar is the number of successfully adhered 
recommendations, #Ar is the number of applicable 
recommendations and AR is the Adherence Rate (AR = 
(Sar / Ar) * 100). 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Therefore, we can observe that the adherence rate is 
over 80% for the analyzed chapter, meaning that 
BrasilMaps is in very acceptable conditions of use. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper presented an overview of BrasilMaps, a GIS 
application that aims to assist the citizens in finding the 
desired government services closer to their location. As 
future work, we plan to incorporate crowdsourcing 
techniques combined with VGI (Voluntary Geographic 
Information) for feeding BrasilMaps with information 
obtained from social networks. 
With the goal of expanding the user experience with 
the system, in the future BrasilMaps will support spatial 
searches operations and will allow the generation and 
visualization of routes between the user location and the 
desired public service. Lastly, the integration with other 
government databases, whether national or international, 
is of high importance. However, the adoption of 
international databases will create new system evolution 
possibilities and challenges that will be explored in future 
works. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  The Annotated 8 Principles of Open Government Data, 
available at http://opengovdata.org/ [accessed: 2015-01-
05]. 
[2]  The Three Laws of Open Government Data, available at 
http://eaves.ca/2009/09/30/three-law-of-open-government-
data/ [accessed: 2015-01-05]. 
[3] R. Matheus, M. M. Ribeiro, and J. C. Vaz, “New 
perspectives for electronic government in Brazil: the 
adoption of open government data in national and 
subnational governments of Brazil”,in Proc. of the 6th 
International Conference on Theory and Practice of 
Electronic Governance - ICEGOV, October 2012,pp.22-29. 
[4] BrasilMaps, available at 
http://150.165.75.163/brasil-
mapeado [accessed: 2014-10-25]. 
[5] Mootiro 
Maps, 
available 
at 
http://maps.mootiro.org/project/307/map [accessed: 2014-
12-21] 
[6] PAC 
II, 
available 
at 
http://pac-
info.herokuapp.com/map.html [accessed: 2014-12-21] 
[7]  L. Pedroso, A. Tanaka, and C. Cappelli, “The Brazilian law 
of access to information and the technological challenges of 
open 
government 
data”, 
Brazilian 
Symposium 
of 
Information System,May 2013, pp. 523 – 528. 
[8] R. P. Lourenço and l. Serra, “An Online Transparency for 
Accountability Maturity Model”, in Proc. of the 13th IFIP 
WG 8.5 International Conference- EGOV, September 
2014, pp. 35-46. 
[9]   K. Breitman et al. “Open Government Data in Brazil”, 
IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 27, no. 3, November 2012, 
pp. 45-49. 
[10] H. Xu and I. Zheng, “Open government data: from users’ 
perspectives”, in Proc. of the 7th International Conference 
on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance - 
ICEGOV, October 2013, pp. 366-67. 
[11] A. S. Correa, P. L. Correa, and F. S. C. Silva, 
“Transparency Portals versus Open Government Data. An 
Assessment of Openness in Brazilian Municipalities”, in 
Proc. of the 15th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research – DG.O, June 2014, pp. 178-
85. 
[12]  J. S. Erickson, A. Viswanathan, J. Shinavier, Yongmei Shi 
and J. A. Hendler, “Open Government Data: A Data 
Analytics Approach”, IEEE Intelligent Systems, vol. 28, 
no. 5, March 2013, pp. 19-23. 
[13]  F. Artigas, “Spatial analytics for open government data”, in 
Proc. of the 15th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research – DG.O, June 2014, pp. 357-
58. 
[14]  F. Artigas and S. A. Chun,  “Visual analytics for open 
government data”, in Proc. of the 14th Annual International 
Conference on Digital Government Research – DG.O, June 
2013, pp. 298-99. 
[15] A. Graves and J. Hendler,  “Visualization tools for open 
government data”, in Proc. of the 14th Annual International 
Conference on Digital Government Research – DG.O, June 
2013, pp. 136-45. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

