Using GIS for Searching Medieval Texts – Beginnings of a Project
Correlating Digitized Manuscripts and Historical Maps on the Example of Manuscriptorium Digital
Library
Tomáš Klimek
National Library of the Czech Republic
Manuscriptorium Digital Library Department
Prague, Czech Republic
Tomas.klimek@nkp.cz
Abstract— This paper provides a theoretical introduction
presenting possibilities and challenges of correlation between
medieval texts and historical maps using GIS on the example
of Manuscriptorium Digital Library and historical mappings
from the area of Central Europe. It discusses methodological
questions connected to this task, as well as organizational
aspects of concrete suggested solution.
Keywords- GIS; historical maps; medieval manuscripts;
digital libraries of historical documents;
information science
theory.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Setting up connections between digitized manuscripts
and historical maps can become an important functionality of
digital libraries providing historical written documents. It can
help users not only to study spatial connections and
consequences of historical documents and make easier their
representation but it can also provide totally new possibilities
for searching and sorting information included in historical
texts. The most natural way how to build connections
between texts and maps in digital environment is to use GIS.
The aim of this paper is not to describe or project a
complete
technical
solution
for
connecting
digitized
manuscripts and historical maps using GIS. It should be
rather seen as an introductory theoretical input discussing
some methodological and organizational aspects of this task.
The paper will discuss the topic on the concrete example
of Manuscriptorium Digital Library and suggest theoretical
but realizable solutions. The rest of this paper is organized as
follows: Section II introduces with documents we can
correlate,
Section
III
introduces
with
difficulties
and
challenges of this correlation, Sections IV and V illustrate
next practical proceedings and outline of possible final
solution.
II.
BUILDING MATERIAL
If we want to correlate digitized historical documents and
historical maps, the first question must be – what are our
sources? Do we know what to correlate?
A.
Textual Documents – Content of
Manuscriptorium Digital Library
This paper will discuss the topic using the example of
Manuscriptorium Digital Library [1], an international digital
library
for
historical
written
documents
provided
and
coordinated by the Czech National Library. This is a digital
library based upon TEI P5 metadata standards fulfilling the
role of an integrator on this field. It provides data of more
than 120 institutions across Europe, nowadays metadata for
more than 330,000 documents, and more than 25,000 fully
digitized items.
The
core
of
the
library
is
created
by
medieval
manuscripts (therefore also its name), but there are also
many incunabula, early printed books (printed before 1800)
and maps.
B.
Maps – First Detailed Mapping and Their Digital
Representation
For the purposes of this paper we will need rather to
think about the type of available material than to provide its
complete overview. Therefore, I will briefly sum up the
situation for Central Europe area only.
Concerning the oldest maps detailed enough for our
purposes, for countries from Habsburg Empire, we have
copies of the “Ist Military Survey“ for our disposal covering
the whole area of today´s Czech Republic [2], Austria,
Hungary, Slovak Republic, Slovenia and some parts of
Rumania, Croatia, Ukraine and Poland [3] in year 1763 and
1787, then we can use Dritte Kursächsische Landesaufnahme
for Saxony (1780–1806) [4], and e.g., Dufour Map (1809)
for Switzerland [5]. All these mappings have been digitized
(some of them several times) and georeferenced, therefore it
is a task of cultural policy to set up a cooperation with
institutions providing or possessing this data.
III.
DIFFICULTIES AND CHALLENGES
A.
Metodological Problems – Different Times of
Origin
The first problem of correlation medieval manuscripts
and historical maps is obvious. There are no maps in the
modern sense of this term coming from medieval period.
Although maps as such were known, we cannot speak about
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

modern type of maps – so called “world maps” were being
used
as
a
specific
representation
of
theological
and
cosmological concepts, therefore they were not used for
orientation in the landscape and their aim was not to depict
and represent the terrain. We know also “itinerary maps” and
later also “portulan maps” serving for special purposes only
(planning timeline of the journey, navigating along the
seashore), and not usable as a modern map at least in inland.
It is clear that it would make no sense to use these maps for
our correlation – still they do not reflect shapes of terrain in a
way
which
would
be
sufficient
to
enable
their
georeferencing.
The oldest modern maps corresponding enough to the
real terrain are not earlier than from the 17th century, and the
oldest mappings detailed enough to enable analyses of
depicted landscape not earlier than from the second half of
the 18th century. This is the time much closer to ours than to
the period we are used to call the Middle Ages (500-1500).
Why to use these documents rather than today’s much more
elaborated and detailed maps and map servers?
If you open any book dealing with the history of
landscape, settlement, mining, warfare or any other topics
demanding the analyses of the form of historical landscape,
you can almost always meet with reproductions of mappings
from the 18th century although the book deals with much
more older history. The reason lies in the fact that these
historical
mappings
depict the
landscape before
huge
changes during the industrial revolution in the 19th century
and even bigger changes due to large urbanization and
growth of settlements as well as changing agricultural
management we experienced during the 20th century.
Nobody would like to claim that there were no big
changes in the landscape before the 18th century. We know
several processes affecting the form of landscape not less
than the processes which followed. For the area of Central
Europe I could mention here at least the big colonization in
the 13th century, period of destabilization and colder climate
leading to abandoning one third of settlements in the first
half of the 15th century, and the period of huge depopulation
during the Thirty Years War in the first half of the 17th
century. However mappings from the 18th century show
many aspects, features and facts which have been destroyed
and are invisible or hidden in our today’s landscape.
Therefore, supposing the knowledge of basic changes, they
can be efficiently used by scholars to study older situations.
B.
Practical Problems
Dealing with medieval texts and geographical locations
we have to challenge several specific difficulties. Apart from
modern texts we do not have complete indexes for localities
due to two facts. Authors and scribes of medieval texts used
many various forms of local names for concrete settlements.
Therefore we need special dictionaries providing synonyms
and antonyms for older local names.[3] For many cases we
will even need to look into specialized monographs dealing
with some concrete situations.
At the same time we have here many locations which do
not already exist. Sometimes we even do not know its
original position in the landscape. Sometimes we will be able
to use localizations of such places from historiographical or
archeological literature, sometimes we will be forced to
exclude some localities from the correlation.
Another difficulty will be caused by variability of
information types in Manuscriptorium Digital Library. We
must imagine that only a small part of included information
is in a text form. Images of digitized documents are of course
not searchable. Then we have here so called metadata
including technical metadata and descriptions, and then other
types of representation - full text editions correlated to
images of original documents. We cannot distinguish strictly
between
descriptions
and
full
text
editions
parts
of
descriptions used for identifying the texts are taken directly
from texts from original documents (so called incipits,
explicits, etc.). These parts are rather data than metadata. On
the other hand, other parts of descriptions refer to holders of
physical documents, history of concrete items, and their
physical features like origin of the writing material, type of
bindings,
etc.
These
both
totally
different
types
of
information have their own value and purpose speaking
about their correlation with maps, and must be sorted
separately.
Another issue is caused by various coordinate systems of
historical maps. However for the case of Manuscriptorium’s
texts we can use maps digitized by other institutions (e.g.,
The University of Jan Evangelista Purkyně in Ústí nad
Labem – Faculty of Environment; Research Institute of
Geodesy, Topography and Cartography in Zdiby) which
have already converted the old coordinate systems of some
maps and georeferenced them to modern maps.
Concerning belongings of concrete places to various
countries, considering the changing borders throughout the
time, to avoid confusions, we should come out from the
current situation.
IV.
PRACTICAL STEPS DO BE DONE
Apart from starting negotiations with institutions holding
data concerning historical mappings, we would have to
enrich existing data of the digital library of historical written
documents
by
XML
tagging
providing
geographical
coordinates. The reason why to use XML and e.g,. not to
start with a special ontology is following – surely we can use
existing thesauri or dictionaries like CERL (gathering local
and personal names from early printed books) for this work
and try to semi automatize the process but medieval texts are
unique concerning the issue of local names. [6] Many of
them contain many mentions about abandoned and forgotten
localities, we can meet with many variants of names and
many names used for more localities, etc. therefore each text
demands special care and linking to universal dictionary
becomes extremely problematic. Of course separate internal
ontology using RDF can be created as a usable output –
maybe it can appear as necessary because of the need of
representing
relations
between
localities
and
their
hierarchical levels; nevertheless also this internal ontology
would have to be linked to concrete texts by all means and
probably won´t be transferable.
For this
activity
there is
a
good
chance to
use
crowdsourcing. As other project show, work with maps is
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

attractive enough to arouse interest. In this case it would be
essential to develop a user-friendly editorial tool for XML
tagging providing a workspace with a modern map open able
with tagged text. Users would then just click on a word from
the text and to the map to add necessary information; the tool
would prepare all the technical work automatically.
V.
OUTLINE OF POSSIBLE SOLUTION
The final result of our effort would enhance facilities of
digital research environment of Manuscriptorium. Users
could easily work with geographical data included in
provided documents; they would be able to study or
represent this data on various time layers maps which would
enable them to study some mass phenomena like spreading
information across the space, setting up events to the
landscape in the literature (representation could reflect the
sequence of localities mentioned in the text), etc., etc. At the
same time – a map could be incorporated into searching of
the digital library – the user could choose one or more
localities or determine an area and the searching tool linked
to the map environment would narrow the next user query
(i.e. the system would look for documents with metadata
containing at least one of localities included in the query and
possible in defined fields – tags only). Processing texts in
this way would also increase the searchability of maps at the
same time because maps would be connected to metadata of
digitized
written
documents.
All
this
would
again
substantially increase the usability of the digital library for
research.
REFERENCES
[1]
Manuscriptorium.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.manuscriptorium.com/ 2014.10.09
[2]
Presentation of old maps covering the area of Czechia,
Moravia
and
Silesia.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://oldmaps.geolab.cz/ 2014.10.09.
[3]
Historical Maps of the Habsburg Empire. [Online]. Available
from: http://mapire.eu/en/ 2014.10.09.
[4]
Geoportal of Hochschule für Technik und Wirtschaft Dresden -
Geoportal of Faculty of Spatial Information. [Online]. Available
from: http://geoinformatik.htw-dresden.de/ 2014.10.09.
[5]
Dufour Map of Switzerland. [Online]. Available from:
http://map.geo.admin.ch/ 2014.10.09.
[6]
CERL
Thesaurus.
[Online].
Available
from:
http://www.cerl.org/ 2014.10.09.
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

