Time Geographic Network Modeling for Restraint Space of Transportation 
Network 
Zhang-cai Yin, Qian-yao Duan, Hua-tao Sun, Qing-quan Liu, Yu Bao, Zhi-qiang Wang 
School of Resources and Environmental Engineering 
Wuhan University of Technology 
Wuhan, China 
yinzhangcai@163.com; littexiaobai@qq.com; buotaoxiongyong@foxmail.com; 786931088@qq.com; 982771045@qq.com;  
472833494@qq.com 
 
Abstract—Time geographic accessibility in heterogeneous 
space can be converted to the shortest path problem. Based on 
raster grids, current time geography theory analyzes the 
shortest path among grid cells by using 8-neighbor mode 
(network). However, due to the irregularity of transportation 
network, the network is not constantly included in 8-neighbor 
network. This means neighbor network paths are different 
from continuous-space paths in location and length, and as 
cause a time distance error. In order to address this problem, 
the paper focuses on the restraint space of irregular 
transportation network, and introduces Voronoi diagram grid. 
Then, we establish a neighbor network model based on 
Delaunay 
Triangulated 
Irregular 
Network 
to 
contain 
transportation network. This means neighbor network paths 
can converge to continuous-space paths under the same 
condition of start and end, and as decrease a time distance 
error. As a result, the shortest path between Thiessen polygons 
is calculated with less error of time distance. Thus, we have the 
apporach to model time geographic network for restraint space 
of transportation network. This article also describes 
implementation of the models using ArcGIS 9.3 with a real 
transportation network as a way of validation.  
Keywords-network mode; irregular triangle network; field; 
space-time mode;  raster 
 I. INTRODUCTION  
Time geography’s main concern is measuring the 
accessibility region. Since the gradual space can be divided 
into raster grids, it enables the grid cell’s accessibility 
problem to be converted to the shortest raster path problem 
[1]. The raster path consists of a number of adjacent grid 
cells, the sum of whose weights is the path length. The 
weight of a cell is set to be the shortest time for passing the 
cell. Assuming the shortest time for passing a cell c 
horizontally or vertically is actually th and tv respectively. 
Without loss of generality, we assume th > tv, thus the weight 
of c, tc = tv; in such a way, tc would replace th to be the 
shortest time for crossing c horizontally in the shortest path 
algorithm analysis with a error: th - tv. However, the error 
would be quite small in gradual space, and get larger in 
transportation network restraint space (TNRS). For example, 
if c only has one vertical road, the result of th - tv would be 
quite large. This means we expect time geography in TNRS. 
Miller introduced a time geography field for TNRS [2]. It 
describes how the time geography network models can be 
established for the city space by adapting raster grid and its 
8-neighbor mode or network (neighbor network, NN). In the 
city, Salt Lake City, urban roads crisscross. A raster unit of 
500m×500m either has no road, or has a crisscross network 
of roads. Thus, th and tv of the unit are pretty much the same, 
resulting in small error: th - tv. According to the trace data of 
individuals, Miller verified the efficiency of raster time 
geography field model in regular-TNRS, such as Manhattan, 
Salt Lake City.  
So far, however, the elementary theory of time 
geography in TNRS deals with regular transportation 
network only. Since raster grids are regular rectangle units, 
the subdivision of units can hardly allow for transportation 
irregularity. Some units would only contain a single route 
(for instance, the unit c only has a vertical road), which may 
have larger weight errors. We would study the mathematical 
basis of time geography in irregular-TNRS. As a result, we 
will have a complete time geography theory for TNRS. 
Heterogeneous space’s time geography is an extension of 
(classical) homogenous space’s time geography based on 
fields. Raster time geography field is regular-based, and this 
article would introduce irregular Voronoi diagram field, to 
reflect the additional transportation network by the neighbor 
networks based on Delaunay Triangulated Irregular Network 
(D-TIN). Thus, we can measure the shortest path and spatio-
temporal accessibility for TNRS. 
The article is structured as follows. Section 2 summarizes 
the existing time geography. Then, we introduce time 
geography in TNRS (Section 3). Section 4 gives the 
approach to construct time geography networks for TRNS. 
The approach will be implemented and tested in ArcGIS in 
Section 5. Conclusions close the article (Section 6). 
II. TIME GEOGRAPHY 
The fundamental problem of time geography is 
measuring the accessibility region of an agent within the 
known time T. Given the agent’s start point s and velocity 
distribution v, if the agent leaves from s and arrive at p 
within the shortest time D(s, p), D(s, p)≤T, p should be 
included in the reachable region. When the end point e is 
also known, another condition must be added: the agent can 
leave from p and reach e within the minimum time interval 
D(p, e), D(s, p)+D(p, e)≤T. In this way, the accessibility of 
p can be converted to the shortest-path problem [1]. D(s, p) 
and D(p, e) are corresponding to path S(s, p) and S(p, e) 
respectively. 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

In homogenous space, v is everywhere equal, so the 
shortest paths S(s, p) and S(p, e) are line segments. Classical 
time geography uses cones to show an agent’s reachable area 
while moving freely at s (Fig. 1a), and uses prisms to 
represent that while proceeding directed movements from s 
to e (Fig. 2a) [3].  
In heterogeneous space, v is not constantly the same, so 
S(s, p) and S(p, e) may not always be straight, but curves. 
The algorithms of finding the shortest path curves are almost 
network-based, such as single-source shortest path algorithm 
(Dijkstra). This means the accessibility problem, via the 
shortest-path problem, can be converted to the network-
modeling problem, including space grid-modeling and its 
NN-modeling. 
Therefore, 
the 
process 
to 
measure 
accessibility region is 3 steps:  
1)  to construct the grid and its NN;  
2) to analyze the shortest path S(s, p) and S(p, e);  
3) to determine whether p is reachable, and to construct 
the accessible region including reachable point p or the 
discrete cell whose center is p.  
Transportation network is heterogeneous space, and is a 
NN covering itself, and thereby only from step 3) Kwan [4] 
analyzed time-space accessibility, in which the time-space 
prism degrades into vertical sections based on transportation 
network [5], shown as Fig. 2b. 
 
Figure 1. (a) time-space circular cone; (b) time-space cone; (c) intersection 
of two reachable regions; (d) the time-space cone of transportation network 
in restraint space 
TNRS is also heterogeneous, and can be divided to raster 
grid [2], by which enabling us to investigate time-space 
accessibility [6, 7, 8, 9] to analyze and visualize the 
individual’s reachable region in GIS [10]. The research on 
time geography application is beyond this paper; here, it is 
important to note that network modeling for TNRS has so far 
stayed in NN indirectly representing transportation network. 
 
 
Figure 2. (a) the prism in homogenous space; (b) the prism of 
transportation network; (c) spatial prism of regular transportation network 
It is simple to establish NN indirectly, representing 
transportation network. After TNRS is transformed to raster 
grids, we usually turn to an auxiliary NN to investigate the 
shortest-paths between raster cells [9]. The NN can be 
constructed by two restraints [6, 8]:  
1) the center of each cell is a network node;  
2) the lines connecting adjacent centers are the network 
edges.  
In general, common adjacent relationship includes Rock 
mode (4-neighbor), Queen mode (8-neighbor) and Knight 
mode (16-neighbor and its extension), representing adjacent 
relations among discrete units of varied orders. In this paper, 
the auxiliary NN are called raster NN (some of them are 
called virtual network [6], planer network view [7], and 
implicit network [2]). The raster NN’s weights can be 
dynamically generated by simple liner interpolation of raster 
cells’ weights [8, 11]. For example, if both cells with weights 
ta and tb are horizontally adjacent, the edge connecting both 
cells has weight (ta + tb)/2. Since transportation network 
directly influences its restraint space’ cell attributes, it affects 
the weights of NN. There exists a mapping relationship 
between transportation network and NN: transportation 
network → cell → NN. In regular-TNRS (like Fig. 3), the 
travel time in transportation network, via the weight of raster 
cell, can be transmitted to that of NN effectively. Armed 
with such a raster NN, Miller measured the space-time prism 
of Salt Lake City [2] (see Fig. 2c); of course, space-time 
cone can also be measured, shown as Fig. 1b. The question 
whether two agents would meet within T is answered by 
testing whether the agents’ time-space volumes intersect (Fig. 
1c).  
 
 
Figure 3. Part of Salt Lake City 
However, the way to establish NN directly representing 
transportation network has not been proposed till now. An 
exception may be YU et al. [8], who suggest 8-NN should 
add the edges connecting nonadjacent cells to stand for 
tunnel, but have not yet developed the algorithm for NN to 
cover plane transportation networks. Generally speaking, 
there are larger weight errors in the raster NN covering 
transportation network. The NN of the raster cells only 
containing a single route is belong to this category. Its reason 
is that the travel time in transportation net is transmitted to 
that of NN, via the weight of raster cell. A naive approach to 
construct NN is to build the mapping relation between 
transportation 
network 
and 
raster 
NN, 
and 
thus, 
transportation net’ weights can be directly passed to raster 
NN rather than in an indirect way bypassing raster cells’ 
weights, without cells’ weight errors transmitting to the NN. 
But this approach is wrong, as we will explain later. Fig.1d 
describes the spatio-temporal reachable region in a single 
road restraint space. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

III. TIME GEOGRAPHY IN TRNS 
A. Voronoi Diagram and Delaunay Network 
In the realm of GIS, Voronoi diagram is a significant 
field model. The field is a general conceptual space model 
constructing continuous spatial change; its logical model is 
usually described by specific field model of regular 
rectangles (such as raster), contours and irregular areas like 
Voronoi diagram and its dual graph D-TIN. The first two 
have been applied in raster time geography field [2] and 
isochrones (lines of equal travel time) [12]. In a multitude of 
geography spatial analysis, field model based on irregular 
area may be superior, suitable for the practical distribution of 
data.  
There are two networks: raster grids and its NN in raster 
time geography field. After surface space is transformed to 
the raster grids, we can construct a NN to analyze the 
shortest path between raster cells. Similarly, we construct 
two networks: Voronoi diagram and its D-TIN, for irregular-
TNRS (like Fig. 4). Since the nodes and edges of D-TIN 
stand for Thiessen polygons and their adjacent relationship 
respectively, D-TIN is the NN where a weight is the shortest 
time for passing an edge, and this diagram is the field model. 
Therefore, we can analyze S(s, p) and S(p, e) by D-TIN. 
Then, if p is accessible, it is accessible Thiessen polygon 
whose center is p. 
 
Figure 4. Part of Washington 
 
At present, the ways to model D-TIN for various 
restraints are fairly mature, such as inserting restraint lines 
into D-TIN. Theoretically, D-TIN can converge to any 
transportation 
network. 
Consequently, 
transportation 
network’ weights can be directly passed to D-TIN rather than 
in an indirect way bypassing Thiessen polygons’ weights. 
That means it can avoid the deviation errors and weight 
errors, and can decrease the elongation errors, that D-TIN as 
NN is used to analyze S(s, p) and S(p, e). Below, we describe 
how to construct D-TIN and D-TIN’s superiority to raster 
NN for irregular-TNRS.  
B. Time Geography Networks based on Voronoi diagram 
and D-TIN 
Let us take a crossroad for example (Fig. 5a), to picture 
the mapping procession from transportation net to NN. 7. Let 
the point where road AB cuts road CD be called O (Fig. 5a). 
The weights (the shortest passing time) of AO, BO, CO and 
DO are all set to be 1. Supposing there are pathways for walk 
in other edges AD, AC, CB and BD, thus their weights are 
all set to be 4. As a result, the shortest time from A to B is 
D(A, B) = 2. 
 
Figure 5. (a) crossroad; (b) Voronoi diagram and its TIN; (c) weighted TIN 
Firstly, we picture the mapping from transportation net to 
D-TIN NN. Armed with the point set {A, B, C, E, O}, D-
TIN and Voronoi diagram can be built (Fig. 5b), where E is 
the midpoint of OD. Again, Supposing there are pathways in 
edges AE and BE. According to Pythagorean Theorem, the 
weights of AE and BE are both 3.16. Through transportation’ 
and pathway’ net-to-NN maps, we can get the weights of AO, 
BO and CO with value of 1; that of OE is 1/2. On the other 
hand, the weights of AC and CB are both 4; that of AE and 
EB are 3.16. As a result, D(A, B) = 2, and S(A, B) = {AO, 
OB}, shown as Figure 5c. 
Secondly, we picture the mapping from transportation net 
to raster NN. When this junction O is exactly at the raster 
corner (Fig. 6a), there are two kinds of projections of 
transportation network to 4- and 8-raster NN. (1) In 4-
NN(Fig. 6b), edges AD, AC, BC and BD represent 
transportation net’s four circuits, AOD, AOC, COB and 
BOD respectively with weights of 2, so D(A, B) = 4. When 
4-NN edges AD, AC, BC and BD represent pathways, their 
weights are 4, and so D(A, B) = 8. (2) In 8-NN, edges AB 
and CD stand for the routes AOB and COD respectively, 
with weights of 2. However, AB and CD do not intersect at 
O, shown as Fig. 6c. This means, when raster NN cannot 
cover the transportation net, the gaps between them will 
cause differences between transportation net paths and raster 
NN paths in location and length. This, in turn, introduces 
elongation errors (NN path being longer than transportation 
network path) and deviation errors [2] in the shortest path 
algorithm analysis and accessibility analysis. It answers the 
question why transportation net’ weights cannot be directly 
passed to raster NN. 
 
 
Figure 6. (a) transportation network and raster grid; (b) 4-neighbor network 
simulating transportation network; (c) 8-neighbor network simulating 
transportation network 
Together, on condition that the transportation network is 
regular, that is, each cell has crisscross roads or no road, such 
as Manhattan net, raster NN based on Rock mode exactly 
seamlessly covers the transportation network, and avoids 
deviation error and reduces elongation error. The raster time 
geography field applied to Salt Lake City is belong to this 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

category. Also, that indicates the necessity of using NN to 
directly cover transportation network. However, when raster 
NN covers a single route in irregular transportation net, it 
introduces larger weight error; when does not cover the net, 
the gaps between raster NN and irregular transportation net 
introduce these errors of elongation, deviation, topology 
inconsistency. Hence, raster NN is unable to adapt to 
irregular-TNRS. This means, to enable the NN to cover 
irregular transportation net, we need introduce a kind of 
irregular NN and realize the mapping relation between NN 
and transportation net. The NN illustrating irregular 
transportation network is also irregular and D-TIN can 
seamlessly show the transportation network. In sum, the 
paper studies time geography theory for irregular-TNRS on 
condition that D-TIN is the prototype of NN and Voronoi 
dual graph is the field or grid model. 
IV. CONSTRUCTION OF TIME GEOGRAPHY NETWORKS FOR 
TNRS 
After studying on the theoretical issue of modeling NN 
and grid based on transportation network constraint, we 
would 
pay 
much 
attention 
to 
the 
mapping 
from 
transportation network to D-TIN NN, and to establish 
Voronoi diagram grid.  
A. Time geography network modeling mechanics based on 
transportation network constraint 
NN in TNRS, on the one hand, represents the centers of 
cells and their adjacent relations, so it is restrained by the 
spatial grid which subdivides TNRS into cells (grid →NN); 
on the other, have to contain the transportation net, so it is 
bound by transportation net (transportation net → NN). 
Governed by grid, the centroids of discrete units may not lay 
on the transportation net be located in the corresponding 
units. Here comes to the problem that how to build the NN 
on above both conditions. This directly influences the time 
geography network constructing for TNRS. 
Since there generally exists a one-to-one relationship 
between the grid and its NN, hence, the one-way constraint 
relation: grid→NN, can be extended to a two-way relation: 
grid←→NN. This means that NN can also control the grid 
subdivision for TNRS; that is NN → grid. Due to the 
objectivity of transportation net, the subjectivity of grid and 
its NN, the priority of the constraint: transportation net→NN 
is higher than others, such as NN→grid. It is for such 
reasons that, we can reduce the double constraints on 
modeling NN to both relationships: transportation net→NN, 
and NN→grid, or transportation net→NN→grid (Fig. 7). 
 
Figure 7. The model of constructing time geography network for TNRS 
B. The mapping relation between transportation net and 
NN 
On condition that TNRS is divided into transportation net 
and the restrained surface, we subdivide transportation net 
into plane transportation net on the flat surface and the non-
planar three-dimensional transportation net on or under the 
surface, like a tunnel. This article only considers plane 
transportation net. The mapping from transportation net to 
NN includes discretizing the plane transportation net and the 
flat surface, and these discrete points based generating D-
TIN, namely NN of TNRS. In this case, NN not only 
presents Thiessen polygons and their adjacency relations, but 
also contains transportation net, with the result that such 
double constraints of transportation net and grid on NN were 
fulfilled. 
The D-TIN NN, allowing for the restraint of discrete 
points in transportation net, we find it difficult to avoid edges 
of D-TIN being crossed by transportation lines, which 
disobey the principle that NN completely contains 
transportation net. For instance, the D-TIN (Fig. 8b), 
generated from two discrete points A and B on one 
transportation line (Fig. 8a) and the surrounding points C and 
D, is crossed by the routine AB (Fig. 8c). If the 
transportation line is presented by TIN path, (e.g. AC-CB 
stands for AB), it would deviate the transportation line and 
cause related errors.  
 
 
Figure 8. Transportation line crosses TIN (a) transportation routine; (b) 
TIN; (c) TIN edge intersecting transportation routine 
As a result, constructing the D-TIN allowing for 
transportation line restraint is the key to construct NN. By 
adding new points, we may re-build D-TIN whose edges 
would not cross transportation lines. Thus, NN may 
completely contain transportation net. 
C. The mapping relation between NN and grid 
According to the theory of dual graph, D-TIN can be 
converted to the only Voronoi diagram. Since the centroid 
set of Voronoi diagram namely is the node set of D-TIN, 
which includes the discrete point set in transportation net. 
This means the discrete point set is contained in the centroid 
set. Because a Thiessen polygon has one and only one 
centroid, the centroid is a discrete point in transportation net, 
yes or no, Therefore, there is at most a transportation net’ 
discrete point in a Thiessen polygon, and the discrete point 
must coincide with the centroid of the Thiessen polygon. As 
a result, the Voronoi diagram is the kind of space subdivision 
with constraint of transportation net, and it may become a 
kind of field model in TNRS. Hence, Voronoi diagram field 
cannot be replaced by raster field regardless of constraint of 
transportation net, in time geography for TNRS. 
Space 
NN 
Grid 
Surface 
Transportation 
Net 
D-TIN 
Voronoi
Diagram
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

D. Calculation of NN’s weights 
To put it simple, we assume that the vector v1 is constant 
in transportation net, which is the same to vector v2 out of 
transportation net and v2 < v1. Thus, the weight of a NN edge 
representing transportation routine can be obtained by 
dividing routine length by v1; as for a NN edge outside of 
transportation net, we gain its weight by dividing its length 
by v2. The nodes and edges representing transportation net in 
NN should be in correspondence with the real transportation 
network in node location, topological relation and weight; so 
it 
avoids 
the 
location 
deviation 
error, 
topological 
inconsistency error and path elongation error. Besides, since 
the weight calculations of transportation network and non-
transportation network part in NN are relatively isolated, we 
can avoid weight error of non-transportation network caused 
by transportation network in NN.  
V. EXAMPLE 
This section illustrates the methodology introduced 
above. For this purpose, the methodology was implemented 
in ArcGIS 9.3. All figures in this section are computed with 
ArcGIS 9.3. 
Taking part area of WuHan in China for example, we 
analyze the accessible domain in TNRS without considering 
3-D transportation net such as tunnels and bridges. Firstly, 
according to the discrete points set of transportation net 
(Fig.9a), we can model the NN based on D-TIN for TNRS, 
and make sure that NN contains the transportation net 
completely. Let us suppose that v2 is 60km/h, and v1 is 
10km/h. Thus, the weights of NN can be calculated, shown 
as Fig.9b. 
 
(a)                               (b)    
 
(c)                               (d) 
Figure 9. (a) discrete points; (b) D-TIN NN; (c) accessible points in NN; (d) 
accessible domain based on Thiessen polygons 
Secondly, we construct Voronoi diagram field based on 
the discrete points set of transportation net. Finally, the 
accessible points in NN can be computed in known start 
point s and T = 30 seconds (Fig.9c), and these points 
Thiessen polygons comprise the accessible region (Fig.9d). 
Similarly, using the principle of time geography field, we 
can also model the raster grid (Fig.10a), and can analyze the 
weight of every cell (Fig.10b). After obtaining the weights of 
8-NN (Fig.10c), we may measure the accessible points in 
NN, and their cells which form the accessible region 
(Fig.10d) under the same conditions of s, T, v1 and v2.  
 
(a)                                  (b)                        
 
  (c)                                (d) 
Figure 10. (a) raster gird; (b) gird’ weights; (c) 8-NN with weights; (d) 
accessible domain based on raster cells 
Consequently, there are two kinds of different accessible 
domains for the same TNRS (Fig.11), where the solid line 
boundary is based on Theissen polygons, and the dotted line 
boundary is based on raster cells. 
 
Figure 11. Two kinds of different accessible domains 
As shown in the figure, two points A，B are located on 
the transportation net. It is easy for us to find the shortest 
path from the start s to A in transportation net, by the 
Dijkstra algorithm in ArcGIS. Obviously, the path lies also 
in transportation net, and its shortest passing time is 26.538 
seconds. That means an agent can arrive at A from s within 
the given time T. Likewise, the shortest path from the start s 
to B, lies in transportation net, and its shortest passing time is 
32.316 seconds, so in T the agent cannot arrive at B from s. 
Point A is contained within solid line boundary, and is out of 
dotted line boundary. On the contrary, point B is out of solid 
line boundary and is in dotted line boundary.  
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Based on the summary of time geography theory such as 
that of raster time geography field, the article resolves spatio-
temporal accessibility into time geography network 
modeling. In order to model time geographic network for 
TNRS, this paper introduces Voronoi diagram grid and NN 
based on D-TIN. After analyzing the relationship among 
transportation net, grid and NN, the paper approves a 
modeling strategy that transportation net is contained within 
NN, while NN controls grid. Finally, on the basis of NN 
weight calculation, we use instances to analyze time 
geography network modeling algorithm for TNRS. Future 
studies mainly consider about non-planar transportation net, 
anisotropy of transportation network, etc. It is necessary to 
validate the proposed solution in the paper in the large 
transportation net. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by National Natural Science 
Foundation of China (Grant No. 41071283), and supported 
by “the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central 
Universities” (Grant No. 2012-IV-097). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. F. Goodchild, “An evaluation of lattice solutions to the 
problem of corridor location”. Environment and Planning A, 
vol. 9, Jul. 1977, pp. 727–38, doi:10.1068/a090727. 
[2] H. J. Miller and S. A. Bridwell, “A Field-Based Theory for 
Time Geography”, Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers, 
vol. 
99, 
Jan. 
2009, 
pp. 
49-75, 
DOI:10.1080/00045600802471049. 
[3] S. Winter and Z.-C. Yin, “Directed movements in 
probabilistic time geography”, International Journal of 
Geographical Information Science, vol. 24, Sep. 2010, pp. 
1349–1365, DOI: 10.1080/13658811003619150. 
[4] M. P. Kwan, “Space-Time and Integral Measures of 
Individual Accessibility: A Comparative Analysis Using a 
Point-based Framework”, Geographical Analysis, vol. 30, Jul. 
1998, 
pp. 
191-216, 
DOI: 
10.1111/j.1538-
4632.1998.tb00396.x. 
[5] B. Kuijpers and W. Othman, “Modeling uncertainty of 
moving objects on road networks via space–time prisms”, 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
vol. 
23, 
Sep. 
2009, 
pp. 
1095–1117, 
DOI:10.1080/13658810802097485. 
[6] J. Xu and R. G. Lathrop, “Improving simulation accuracy of 
spread phenomena in a raster-based geographic information 
system”. International Journal of Geographical Information 
Systems, 
vol. 
9, 
Feb. 
1995, 
pp. 
153–68, 
DOI:10.1080/02693799508902031. 
[7] W. Collischonn and J. V. Pilar, “A direction dependent least 
cost path algorithm for roads and canals”. International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, vol. 14, Aug. 
2000, pp. 397–406, DOI:10.1080/13658810050024304. 
[8] C. Yu, J. Lee and M. J. Munro-Stasiuk, “Extensions to least-
cost path algorithms for roadway planning”. International 
Journal of Geographical Information Science, vol. 17, Nov. 
2003, pp. 361–376, DOI:10.1080/1365881031000072645. 
[9] B. G. Alexandre, “An extension of GIS-based least-cost path 
modeling to the location of wide paths”, International Journal 
of Geographical Information Science, vol. 24, Apr. 2010, pp. 
983-996, DOI:10.1080/13658810903401016. 
[10] X. Chen and M. P. Kwan, “Choice set formation with 
multiple flexible activities under space-time constraints”. 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
vol. 
26, 
May. 
2012, 
pp. 
941-961, 
DOI: 
10.1080/13658816.2011.624520. 
[11] A. K. Saha, M. K. Arora, R. P. Gupta, M. L. Virdi and E. 
Csaplovics, “GIS-based route planning in landslide-prone 
areas”, International Journal of Geographical Information 
Science, 
vol. 
19, 
Feb. 
2005, 
pp. 
1149-1175, 
DOI:10.1080/13658810500105887. 
[12] D. O’Sullivan, A. Morrison, J. Shearer, “Using desktop GIS 
for the investigation of accessibility by public transport: An 
isochrone approach”. International Journal of Geographical 
Information Science, vol. 14, Aug. 2000, pp. 85–104, 
DOI:10.1080/136588100240976. 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-251-6
GEOProcessing 2013 : The Fifth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

