Generating a Pseudo Resident Registration Register by Using Open Data  
 
Dominik Visca, Max Hoppe, Pascal Neis 
Department of Technology 
Mainz University of Applied Sciences 
Mainz, Germany 
dominik.visca@hs-mainz.de, max.hoppe@hs-mainz.de, pascal.neis@hs-mainz.de 
 
 
Abstract— The paper offers a possibility for a (partial) 
reconstruction of a resident registration dataset combining and 
linking open (geo-) data with respect to data protection 
regulations. Here, a method is proposed that simulates a 
building-level georeferenced resident registration register as a 
pseudo-derivative. Understood as a potential supplement for 
research projects, the increasing relevance and discussion of 
datasets for analyzing individual dynamics on a small scale is 
taken up with easy-to-generate datasets without facing data 
protection issues. Complete reconstruction and disaggregation 
are not possible due to anonymization techniques and data 
available, but further improvements are conceivable with the 
latest census and additional open data. This procedure thus 
reflects trends of Urban-Geo to expand and better visualize 
small-scale demographic analyses, and also highlights the 
potential value of opening up register data to science. 
Keywords-Resident registration register; disaggregation; census 
data; open data; register-based research  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Public sector data (federal, state, local) are essential 
sources for small-scale analyses. However, data from 
statistical offices are usually aggregated at the municipal 
level or higher. These numbers do not provide an adequate 
framework for answering many critical questions in science 
and society, as it is impossible to conclude individual 
dynamics from aggregated data [1]. Therefore, applicability 
is limited. Especially in Social Sciences, the need for 
combined datasets for modeling research questions on a 
preferably small-scale level, e.g. for the investigation of local 
inequalities, of lifestyles or the residential location choice of 
certain groups, is in high demand [2]. As a consequence, also 
under the impression of the Corona pandemic, the discussion 
about opening up register data for research is very present. 
A large number of private companies offer micro 
geographic data variables that are used in the commercial 
sector, e.g. to analyze customer potential, for target-group-
specific advertising campaigns, or for location and branch 
network planning. Some of these variables are available at an 
address level, but at least at the level of settlement units or 
urban 
neighborhoods. 
They 
contain 
information 
on 
household sizes and household type, but also derived 
indicators on social status, income classes or purchasing 
power [3]. However, the underlying methods used by private 
companies to produce fee-based micro geographic data are 
generally not revealed. For scientific work, this means a 
limitation in terms of in-depth quality control. Therefore, 
transparent methods are needed being compatible with the 
requirements of data protection and yet flexible enough for 
modeling different research questions as well as other 
applications [2]. 
In compliance with data protection regulations and within 
concessions to quality, timeliness, and data resilience, 
expedient solutions for observations below the community 
level can be offered as a potential complement for research 
projects. This paper discusses a method for a (partial) 
reconstruction of a building-level georeferenced resident 
registration register using open data for the use as a small-
scale geomonitoring based on demographic analyses. 
Before the method is outlined in Section III, the paper 
introduces background and challenges regarding register-
based research and resident registration data in Section II. In 
Section IV, results for a test area are discussed and 
evaluated. The paper ends in Section V with a conclusion 
and an outlook regarding potentially available data in the 
future. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND CHALLENGES 
In Germany, certain information about residents is held 
in a register covered by the German Federal Registration Act 
(Bundesmeldegesetz, BMG). Currently, the registration 
authorities have to keep 19 attributes and 11 details for 
individuals who are required to register. Among the address, 
it contains information like date of birth, gender, or when 
moving in and out. The initial law dates back from May 3, 
2013, and entered into force on November 1, 2015 [BGBl. I, 
2015]. With this legislation, the federal government used its 
exclusive legislative competence, which was transferred to 
the state as part of a federalism reform. Affecting federal 
states now only have regulatory authority if they are 
explicitly entitled [4]. To its legally defined extent, the 
resident registration register is neither made for science nor a 
source for small-scale geomonitoring [5]. However, the 
overall positive effects of register-based research are 
reflected, for example, in Recital 157 of the EU General Data 
Protection Regulation [2016] (GDPR): "By coupling 
information from registries, researchers can obtain new 
knowledge of great value with regard to widespread medical 
conditions such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, and 
depression. On the basis of registries, research results can be 
enhanced as they draw on a larger population. Within social 
science, research on the basis of registries enables 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

researchers to obtain essential knowledge about the long-
term correlation of a number of social conditions such as 
unemployment and education with other life conditions. “ 
For example, Othengrafen, Linda, and Greinke [6] 
discuss the potential of resident registration data concerning 
multilocality in rural areas. Schmoigl and König [7] point out 
the value of opening register data to science if regulated 
using three examples from different fields. Also highlighting 
the need of population data with a fine spatial resolution, 
Pajares, Muñoz Nieto, Meng and Wulfhorst [8] propose an 
approach to hybrid population disaggregation using open and 
widely available data. As reference data for comparison, they 
use information from a resident registration register. 
Emphasizing a more detailed spatial observation in terms 
of a small-scale geomonitoring, Schaffert and Höcht [5] 
draw attention to the possibilities of resident registration 
data. By assigning geocoordinates to data, referred to as 
georeferencing or geocoding, spatial observations can be 
related to each other. At the same time, concrete analyses 
such as calculations of geographical distances between 
points or a more precise determination of supply needs and 
land consumption become possible [5][9]. 
Initially, addresses held in resident registration data allow 
buildings to be referenced. They do not necessarily consist of 
personal data with concern to the GDPR [9]. However, the 
assignment of an address to a single building could become 
critical if only one person inhabits the building. The identity 
of this individual might then be revealed [9]. In case 
geocoded 
address 
data 
are 
combined 
with 
further 
information (e.g., simple survey data without name 
reference), it is crucial to pay attention to data protection, as 
the spatial location poses a re-identification risk or may 
allow de-anonymization of individuals [9][10]. This 
difficulty is also mentioned by producers of German official 
statistics working on integrating statistical and spatial data: 
The more small-scale statistical data are provided and 
illustrated, the problem of detection risk becomes more 
relevant [11]. With regard, Section 16 of the Federal 
Statistics Act (2016) states that individual data on personal 
and factual circumstances must be kept secret resp. that re-
identification of individuals is prohibited. 
III. 
METHOD AND PROCEDURE 
Attributes to be kept in resident registration registers are 
listed in Section 3 of the BMG. Due to privacy and data 
regulations, a complete reconstruction of a resident 
registration register using open data is impossible since 
attributes such as names, ID card numbers, or tax IDs are not 
available. With some loss of information, other attributes can 
be reconstructed. For example, open data offers age classes 
instead of using the date of birth as listed. But focusing on 
geomonitoring based on demographic analyses, a complete 
reconstruction is not necessary. For the method presented 
here, open data of the 2011 Census [12] and free-to-use 
geodata from OpenStreetMap [13] will be utilized. Table 1 
shows an overview of attributes relevant to demographic 
analyses that are kept in resident registration registers and 
the data sources used as underlying input for deriving. 
 
TABLE I.  RELEVANT ATTRIBUTES AND THEIR DERIVATION FROM OPEN 
DATA 
Attribute 
Open Data Source 
Date of birth 
2011 Census (age 
groups) 
Current address 
OpenStreetMap 
Indication, whether spouse or life 
partner exists 
2011 Census (family 
types) 
Indication, whether minor children 
exist 
2011 Census (family 
types) 
 
Small-scale, localized results of the 2011 Census are 
available in statistical tables for linking to a geographic grid 
system. These new data sets were only made possible by a 
2013 
amendment 
to 
the 
Federal 
Statistics 
Act 
(Bundesstatistikgesetz, BStatG). They are not available for 
all information collected in the 2011 Census [14]. To assign 
data geographically, it is necessary to use a corresponding 
grid dataset. 
The Federal Agency for Cartography and Geodesy 
(Bundesamt für Kartographie und Geodäsie, BKG) provides 
geographic grids in different spatial resolutions. According 
to 
INSPIRE 
implementing 
regulations 
regarding 
interoperability of spatial data sets and services [15], a 
georeferenced ETRS89-LAEA 100m grid is decisive for 
using with 2011 Census data. But not all attributes of the 
2011 Census are available within a spatially resolved 100m 
grid system. Available data can be accessed through a web 
portal that provides what are called "grid cell-based results" 
for "population," "demographics," "families," "households," 
"buildings," and "housing." Handed as CSV tables, this data 
can then be joined to geographic grids by assigning the ID 
[16]. 
An overview of all single processing steps generating a 
resident registration register from open data can be seen in 
Figure 1. The area for which a derived resident registration 
register is to be generated can be bounded by a polygon. 
First, this area is intersected with all census grid cell data. 
Then, attributes contained are linked to the grid cells. 
Structurally, the table for "population" is different from 
others. Result tables for "demographics," "families," 
"households," "buildings," and "dwellings" contain a 
separate row for each existing characteristic value of each 
characteristic per grid cell. Tables need to be pivoted to 
enable a 1:1 join between grid cells and result tables. In 
conclusion, tables now contain one row for each grid cell and 
one column for each existing combination of the 
characteristic and characteristic value. In contrast, the result 
table "population" contains for each grid cell a column with 
the population number of the respective cell, which 
eliminates the need for preprocessing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 1. Schematic illustration for all single processing steps 
Next, datasets of the grid cell-based results are linked to 
the geographic grid cells based on their grid ID. It is essential 
to ensure that the geographic grid is projected correctly, as 
the grid ID is derived from the respective cell coordinates 
[17]. An assignment to the 2011 census results is only 
possible when applying an ETRS89-LAEA projection for the 
geographical grids. As for further processing, all single cells 
of the geographic grid are the decisive spatial reference unit. 
I.e., the following work steps take place for each grid cell 
individually. The result of each iteration leads to a complete 
data set (see Figure 2). A data structure is filled for each 
iteration of the following processing steps. The grid ID is 
passed as metadata and spatial reference information to the 
data structure. After that, the total number of buildings and 
households are transferred from the linked tables. This serves 
as a control panel.  
The census grid cell-based results' building type (size) 
attribute, which describes the building type e.g. “detached 
single house” or “apartment building”, served as a critical 
comparison feature for the OpenStreetMap dataset. This 
attribute classifies, among other things, whether buildings 
are single-family or multi-family houses. The summed 
number of buildings per attribute constitutes the total 
population of residentially inhabited buildings in a grid cell. 
Single buildings are enriched with address information from 
OpenStreetMap. For this purpose, the Overpass API tool is 
used to extract addresses from a spatially bounded area, i.e., 
the extent within the current grid cell [18]. In addition to 
spatial bounding, the Overpass Query Language (Overpass 
QL) 
also 
allows 
thematic 
selection 
based 
on 
OpenStreetMap's data model and tagging guidelines [18]. In 
OpenStreetMap, buildings are provided as way to which 
thematic information such as the address or the type of a 
building is kept in the form of tags. As a result of free 
editability, incorrect or missing data can be part of 
OpenStreetMap 
datasets 
[19]. 
Sometimes, 
address 
information is not attached to a building polygon but to a 
point object within the building polygon. Therefore, address 
tags of all nodes and landuse tags of all ways in respective 
grid cells are also requested. Data sets with an amenity tag or 
an incompatible landuse value (i.e., other than residential or 
settlement area) are filtered out, meaning commercially used 
buildings are not considered. This allows more accurate 
matching of buildings listed in the census dataset, containing 
only buildings with (partial) residential occupancy [20]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Derivation of the pseudo-derivative, © OpenStreetMap 
contributors 
If possible, the assignment of address data from 
OpenStreetMap and building information within the census 
datasets proceeds via building types, otherwise randomized. 
Based on the building type and the census data attribute 
"number of apartments in the building,” apartments or 
households are distributed across the buildings. The 
population of households is founded on the summed 
households belonging to the characteristic "type of private 
household,” to which adequate factual data of the 
characteristic "size of private household" was assigned in 
each case. In this way, households with a corresponding 
number of individuals are assigned to a building. A 
classification of whether the household members are adults 
or children is done by the household type, i.e., "single-person 
household" or "couples with children.” Afterward, a certain 
number of people datasets are generated for each household 
according to the household size attribute. These are assigned 
to appropriate age classes from the census data. After 
successful iteration, the final cell data structure is added to a 
comprehensive data set. 
IV. 
EVALUATION AND DISCUSSSION 
The method presented here was applied to the city of 
Herborn as a test area (Germany, state of Hesse) shown in 
Figure 3. The area covers an area of approximately 4.52 km2 
with 257 residential grid cells. 1,992 houses were derived 
and enriched with attributes relevant for demographic 
analyses. 
 
 
Figure 3. Overview across the test area of the city of Herborn, © 
OpenStreetMap contributors. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 4 shows a classification by building type (size) 
based on the census data. All nine residential buildings listed 
in OpenStreetMap were detected within the grid cell, eight of 
them as a single-family (marked in red) and one as a multi-
family house (marked in blue). A manual comparison with 
the keys maintained in OpenStreetMap shows seven single-
family and two multi-family houses for this area.  A field 
check also reveals a corresponding result.  
In total, 25 residents are distributed across twelve 
households in this grid cell. More specifically, three 
households consist of couples with one child, two 
households with a single parent and one child, two single-
person households, and five couples with no children. For 
each resident, the characteristics listed in Table 1 are 
available. The grid cell shown is characterized by its 
relatively homogeneous settlement structure. This is a factor 
of a high level of coherence between Census and 
OpenStreetMap 
data. 
However, 
this 
needs 
further 
investigation. 
 
 
Figure 4. Classification result by building type (size), © OpenStreetMap 
contributors. 
Parts of the census dataset suggest two additional 
residential buildings for this grid cell, a fact interesting to 
point out. The anonymization technique underlying the 
production of census data leads to a scenario in which 
summations across different characteristics will not 
necessarily produce identical results [20]. Summing up, all 
expressions of the characteristic "building type (size)" 
returns only 1,805 buildings. This is a difference of about 
9%. In total, 161 of the 257 grid cells, meaning almost 63 %, 
showed a deviation with a mean value of 1.75 buildings and 
a standard deviation of 0.89 of these two characteristics, 
which can vary either positively or negatively. These 
deviations are also found for other attributes of the census 
data set and put a theoretically achievable accuracy of the 
disaggregation into perspective. As such, it also fulfills the 
purpose of the SAFE (Secure anonymization for individual 
data) technique for anonymization [20]. Figure 5 below 
shows a result of an anonymization technique. According to 
OpenStreetMap, the grid cell contains four buildings; the 
census dataset indicates 76 inhabitants, but any information 
on buildings or households is missing. An in situ field 
comparison shows the existence of three multi-story 
buildings with elderly residences and a school building (left 
part of Figure 5). So far, the method described here cannot 
account for these 76 residents without information on 
buildings and households. 
 
 
Figure 5. Lack of mapping due to anonymization of census data, © 
OpenStreetMap contributors 
Furthermore, the results of the presented method 
correlate with the address completeness in OpenStreetMap. 
The selected test area shows a medium to good completeness 
of about 71 % in relation to the official real estate cadastre 
(Amtliches 
Liegenschaftskatasterinformationssystem, 
ALKIS). Building-related accuracy is expected to be 
marginal for areas with low address completeness. 
Additionally, the timeliness of the datasets also affects the 
results. While the census dataset reflects the state of 2011, 
OpenStreetMap tends to contain a continuously updated 
dataset. Depending on urban dynamics and population 
fluctuations, smaller or larger deviations are expected. In 
addition, the intended area of application must also be taken 
into account. As mentioned above, both of these factors need 
to be investigated in more detail in a follow-up study. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
This paper proposes a method that generates a 
georeferenced resident registration register at a building level 
as a pseudo-derivative based on openly available spatial and 
public-statistical 
data. 
Complete 
reconstruction 
and 
disaggregation of the census data is not possible due to the 
anonymization techniques but is usually not necessary for 
research purposes. In this case, addresses were assigned to 
demographic characteristics with relevant age classes. The 
accuracy of the assignment can be improved by considering 
additional census data characteristics, OpenStreetMap tags, 
and different open data sets. The census dataset offers other 
attributes such as gender, religious affiliation, or citizenship. 
This can increase the applicability of the pseudo-derivative. 
The lack of internal consistency of the census data caused by 
the underlying SAFE-anonymization technique and the data 
quality of OpenStreetMap requires a more comprehensive 
evaluation of the quality of the dataset generated by the 
method outlined. 
Regarding the 2022 Census in Germany, it is possible to 
continue providing easy-to-generate datasets for research 
purposes without facing data protection issues. Looking at 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

ways of enriching or combining data, the German 
government's open data strategy published in 2021 [21] gives 
reason to expect that more data from public administrations 
will be made available and that its quality will steadily 
improve. In addition, the availability of previously 
inaccessible data from the economy, science, and civil 
society is expected to increase. The State of Hesse, or rather 
the Hessian Administration for Land Management and 
Geoinformation 
(Hessische 
Verwaltung 
für 
Bodenmanagement und Geoinformation, HVBG), where the 
method presented here was applied using the example of the 
city of Herborn, has also been making additional free 
geodata available since 2022.02.01 [22]. The products of the 
real estate cadastre, the state measurement, and the real 
estate valuation are made available via the store component, 
the download center, as Web Map Service (WMS) and Web 
Feature Service (WFS). The data is continuously updated 
and permanently available.  
The Council for Social and Economic Data (Rat für 
Sozial- 
und 
Wirtschaftsdaten, 
RatSWD) 
[23] 
also 
recommends in a position paper for the 20th legislative 
period of the German Bundestag to facilitate access to 
register and administrative data for scientific purposes. An 
envisaged Research Data Act is intended to strengthen 
science in Germany and open up research into socially 
relevant issues, even in politically sensitive areas. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work on this article was done as part of the project 
"Spatial Intelligence for the Integrated Care of Seniors in 
Rural Neighborhoods (RAFVINIERT)", which is funded by 
the Carl Zeiss Foundation in the program "Transfer - 
Intelligent Solutions for an Aging Society".   
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Redaktion, „Registry Research: Opportunities, Risks, and 
Challenges,“ Wirtschaft Und Gesellschaft, vol. 46(3), pp. 
315–328, November 2020. 
[2] B. Heldt and D. Heinrichs, „Using the 2011 Census to model 
households' residential location choices under conditions of 
secrecy,“ 
Zeitschrift 
für 
amtliche 
Statistik 
Berlin 
Brandenburg, pp. 29-33, 2017.  
[3] A. Milbert and S. Fina, „Small town research methods: 
definitions, data, and spatial analysis,“ in A. Steinführer, L. 
Porsche and M. Sondermann (Eds.), Compendium of Small 
Town Research, pp. 24-49, Hannover: Forschungsberichte der 
ARL 16, 2021.    
[4] E. Ehmann, Dealing with Data from Population Registers 
Correctly, 3rd ed., Stuttgart: Boorberg, 2017. 
[5] M. Schaffert and V. Höcht, „Geocoded Data from Population 
Registers as a Source for Needs-Based Planning in Rural 
Municipalities 
and 
Regions,“ 
Raumforschung 
und 
Raumordnung, vol. 76(5), pp. 421–35, 2018.  
[6] F. Othengrafen, L. Linda and L. Greinke, Temporary arrivals 
and absences in rural areas: effects of multilocal lifestyles on 
land 
and 
society. 
Wiesbaden, 
Wiesbaden: 
Springer 
Fachmedien, 2021.  
[7] R. König and L. Schmoigl, „Successful Registry Research in 
Austria. What additional value does the regulated opening of 
registry data generate for scientific research? A presentation 
based on three examples,“ Österreichisches Institut für 
Wirtschaftsforschung (WIFO) und Institut für höhere Studien 
(IHS), pp. 1-16, 2020. 
[8] E. Pajares, R. Muñoz Nieto, L. Meng and G. Wulfhorst, 
“Population Disaggregation on the Building Level Based on 
Outdated Census Data“, ISPRS Int. J. Geo-Inf., 10(10), 662, 
pp. 1-21, 2021, doi.org/10.3390/ijgi10100662. 
[9] S. Müller, "Spatial Linking of Georeferenced Survey Data 
with Geospatial Data: Opportunities, Challenges, and 
Practical Recommendations," in U. Jensen, S. Netscher and 
K. Weller, Research Data Management of Social Science 
Survey Data, pp. 211-29, Barbara Budrich, 2019.  
[10] M. Van Der Meer, F. Meissner, M. Merten and D. 
Münderlein,  "Development and Potentials of Digital Spatial 
Research. Ethical Issues and Impulses for University 
Teaching," RaumPlanung, vol. 2/3(196), pp. 20–27, 2018. 
[11] S. Schnorr-Bäcker and M. Etienne, "Challenges and Possible 
Solutions in Combining Statistical and Spatial Data from the 
Perspective of Federal Statistics," Stadtforschung und 
Statistik: 
Zeitschrift 
des 
Verbandes 
Deutscher 
Städtestatistiker, vol. 3(1), pp. 63–69, 2018.  
[12] Statistische Ämter des Bundes und der Länder. Zensus 2011. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.zensus2011.de/ 
[retrieved: 04.2022]. 
[13] OpenStreetMap. OpenStreetMap. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.openstreetmap.org [retrieved: 04.2022]. 
[14] M. Neutze, „Grid-based Evaluations of the 2011 Census," 
Stadtforschung und Statistik, pp. 64-67, February 2015. 
[15] COMMISSION REGULATION (EU) No 1089/2010 of 23 
November 2010 Implementing Directive 2007/2/EC of the 
European Parliament and of the Council as Regards 
Interoperability of Spatial Data Sets and Services. [Online]. 
Available from: https://eur-lex.europa.eu/eli/reg/2010/1089 
[retrieved: 04.2022]. 
[16] Statistische Ämter des Bundes und der Länder. Results of the 
2011 Census for Download - Extended. [Online]. Available 
from:  
https://www.zensus2011.de/DE/Home/Aktuelles/Demografisc
heGrunddaten.html [retrieved: 04.2022]. 
[17] Bundesamt für Kartographie und Geodäsie. Documentation. 
Geographic Grids for Germany. GeoGrid. [Online]. Available 
from:  
https://sg.geodatenzentrum.de/web_public/gdz/dokumentation
/deu/geogitter.pdf [retrieved: 04.2022]. 
[18] R.M. Olbricht, “Data Retrieval for Small Spatial Regions in 
OpenStreetMap,” in J. Jokar Arsanjani, A. Zipf, P. Mooney, 
M. Helbich, Eds. OpenStreetMap in GIScience. Lecture Notes 
in Geoinformation and Cartography, pp. 101-122. 2015. 
[19] P. Neis and D. Zielstra, “Recent Developments and Future 
Trends in Volunteered Geographic Information Research: The 
Case of OpenStreetMap,” Future Internet, vol. 6, pp. 76-106, 
2014. 
[20] Statistische Ämter des Bundes und der Länder. 2011 Census. 
Methods 
and 
Procedures. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.zensus2011.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/DE/Publi
kationen/Aufsaetze_Archiv/2015_06_MethodenUndVerfahre
n.pdf;jsessionid=48260D25A514027445F421D903862F47.liv
e422?__blob=publicationFile&v=2 [retrieved: 04.2022]. 
[21] Bundesministerium des Innern, für Bau und Heimat. Open 
Data Strategy of the Federal Government. 
[22] Hessische 
Verwaltung 
für 
Bodenmanagement 
und 
Geoinformation. Introduction of Open Data by 2022.02.01 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://hvbg.hessen.de/open-data 
[retrieved: 04.2022]. 
[23] Rat für Sozial- und Wirtschaftsdaten. RatSWD Position Paper 
on the Federal Government's Data Strategy. 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

