Analyzing Spatio-Temporal Effects of Social-Economic Factors on Crime
Sebastian Baumbach
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI)
Technische Universit¨at Kaiserslautern
Kaiserslautern, German
Email: sebastian.baumbach@dfki.de
Sheraz Ahmed
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI)
Kaiserslautern, German
Email: sheraz.ahmed@dfki.de
Nikita Sharm
Technische Universit¨at Kaiserslautern
Kaiserslautern, German
Email: nikita.sharma1108@gmail.com
Andreas Dengel
German Research Center for Artiﬁcial Intelligence (DFKI)
Technische Universit¨at Kaiserslautern
Kaiserslautern, German
Email:andreas.dengel@dfki.de
Abstract—Rampant increase in crime incidents has led to the
need of crime analysis in greater detail. Existing crime analysis
approaches focused on higher spatial granularity (i.e., country
or state levels) and consider each data observation independent
of each other. However, data can exhibit spatial and temporal
relationships among them. Such interrelationships must be taken
into consideration if precise crime analysis is intended. Therefore,
a two-stage approach is proposed for predicting crime by ana-
lyzing its relationship with socio-economic factors: the ﬁrst stage
applies a spatio-temporal analysis on the data and these results
are utilized for the spatio-temporal prediction, which forms the
second stage. For evaluation, more than 450 different socio-
economic factors and crime data for county level in Germany
were analyzed. The evaluation results exhibit a mean absolute
percentage error of 6.79% for spatio-temporal crime predictions,
outperforming traditional regression techniques with an error
rate of 37.1% - 37.8%.
Keywords–Staptio-temporal Data Mining; Crime Analysis; Pre-
diction Models; Location Factors;
I.
INTRODUCTION
Crime has been a recurrent activity since the beginning of
society evolution. Crime incidents can be traced to as early
as imperial era in history. As McCollister et al. stated in
their work [1], such incidents have been a deterrent to social
harmony and have affected the development of communities.
The authors speciﬁed the effects of crime in society in terms
of economic development, as well as society integration and
suggest effective measures for government policies to reduce
criminal activities.
A detailed insight on crime is required as concluded in [1],
as it can beneﬁt the inland security services for effective police
force deployment. Cunningham et al. [2] described that crime
analysis is necessary to provide better law enforcement in a
region and maintain integrity as well as peaceful environment
of the society. Crime analysis assists surveillance forces to
make preemptive decisions and hence, ensures better vigilance
and control of a crisis situation [1] [2].
Consequently, crime analysis is an active research ﬁeld.
There are numerous studies like [3] [4] that explored social
media data (e.g., from Twitter) to predict crime. These works
conducted sentiment analysis on Twitter posts collected to pre-
dict crime at a speciﬁc location. There is a wide range of works
studying effect of social-economic factors on crime [5] [6]. For
instance, Chainey et al. [7] assessed the relationship between
crime and social-economic factors at the state level in the
USA. Similarly, Entorf and Spengler [8] analyzed the effects
of social-economic data on crime at state level in Germany.
Caruso and Schneider conducted a similar analysis in their
work [9] by focusing on crime trends at a higher geographical
level, i.e., comparing crime trends between different European
countries.
All the above-mentioned work focused either on higher
spatial granularity (e.g., [9]) or on data content, such as
analysis of social media data for sentiment detection (e.g.,
[4]). None of these studies focused on the detailed relationship
of crime and its inﬂuencing factors at lower spatial and
temporal granularity. Neither of these researchers assessed the
interrelationship that exists in crime data.
Referring to the problem stated for the existing approaches,
there arises the need for analyzing crime data on a deeper
spatial and temporal granularity. Additionally, there is the First
Law Of Geography by Walder Tobler’ which says ”every-
thing is related to everything else, but near things are more
related than distant things” [10]. Thus, the proposed two-
stage approach utilizes spatial and temporal data correlations to
predict crime intensity and applies it at lower spatio-temporal
granularity. The ﬁrst stage, spatio-temporal analysis, focuses
on validating the existence of spatio-temporal relationships in
data and allows for the selection of the best feature subset for
crime prediction. The second stage, spatio-temporal prediction,
exploits the spatio-temporal proximity in data and predicts
crime rate by utilizing spatio-temporal prediction models. The
evaluation was carried out on a county level collection of
social-economic factors and crime data.
Summarizing, the main contributions of this paper are
deﬁned as follows: i) a spatio-temporal analysis approach that
gives a detailed insight into crime and social-economic data
trends in space and time domain, ii) a signiﬁcant improve-
ment of 32% in crime prediction over existing regression
approaches by utilizing spatio-temporal prediction, and iii) a
spatio-temporal prediction approach, which can predict crime
at county level in Germany. Consequently, spatio-temporal
relations in a dataset decrease the error rate in crime prediction
and enhance the performance of existing prediction models.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II summarizes and assesses the state-of-the-art in crime data
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

analysis by focusing on the explored data sources, as well
as utilized methodologies. Section III presents the proposed
approach for analyzing crime with a high spatio-temporal gran-
ularity. Section IV depicts the applied crime dataset together
with the socio-economic location factors, which are used in
this paper for evaluating the proposed approach. Section V
presents the ﬁndings of this paper, stating that spatio-temporal
data interactions increase the prediction capability for crime
analysis. Finally, Section VI discusses and summarizes the
results.
II.
RELATED WORK
In the scientiﬁc community, there is a vast range of work on
crime analysis. The existing approaches focused on enhancing
traditional regression techniques or deep learning for crime
analysis and prediction. Their authors focused on tuning these
models based on crime relationship with inﬂuencing factors,
such as Twitter data, social-economic factors, or background
data of criminals. However, each observation in these datasets
is considered as independent, i.e., these approaches consider
no relation to be existing between individual records in the
dataset.
A. Exploring Data Sources for Crime Analysis
Data sources, such as social media, criminal records, or ide-
ological beliefs of listed terrorist organizations, were explored
in various studies to gain detailed insights into crime trends.
Acquiring social media data with a high spatial granularity
is difﬁcult as geo-referenced social media content is hardly
available [11]. Furthermore, analyses of crime with social
media data, criminal data, and their ideological beliefs are
based on subjective analysis. The sentiments respective the
intentions of people are evaluated based on a list of words
termed as ’hate’ words. These approaches do not necessarily
amount to crime intentions.
1) Social Media Content: Wang et al. [3] applied semantic
analysis and natural language processing on Twitter data to
ﬁnd topics of discussion on social media. The authors proved
that these topics can be indicators of future crime incidents by
analyzing previous crime incidents and the topics of discussion
on social media at their time of occurrence. Gerber [4] used
a Twitter-speciﬁc linguistic analysis and a statistical topic
modeling to automatically identify discussion topics across a
major city in the United States. Other studies [12] [13] focused
on determining the general population’s sentiment in a certain
regions by conducting sentiment analysis on microblogging
sites like Twitter.
2) Social-Economic Data: Caruso and Schneider [9] per-
formed an empirical evaluation on social-economic determi-
nants of crime. Their work was based around the hypothe-
sis stating that social-economic factors (such as population,
migration, and poverty) determine factors of crime. Edmark
[5] explored the relation between unemployment and crime
using regression methods. Freytag et al. [6] applied regression
techniques to conclude whether social-economic factors have
an impact on crime. Entorf and Spengler [8] utilized panel
regression on social-economic and crime data to predict crime
incidents at state level in Germany.
3) Crime Data and Criminal Beliefs: There exists a num-
ber of researches that explored past records of criminals and
their ideological beliefs to analyze crime. Martinez et al. [14]
assessed the relationships between past actions of criminals
and their associated behavior. This relationship was utilized
to predict actions based on the current observed behavior of
criminals. Sampson and Groves [15] measured the society
integration, i.e., how well people are connected and integrated
in a community. The authors explored the direct relationship
of social integrity with the number of crime incidents as listed
by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, USA.
B. Methodologies of Crime Analysis
Traditional regression techniques and neural networks are
based on a frequentist approach and rely on a large data sample
to train, learn and estimate crime incidents. Thus, Bayesian
approaches have their advantages over neural network and
other probability based regression techniques (frequentist ap-
proach) when it comes to the analysis of (spare) crime datasets.
Bayesian approaches add a degree of uncertainty to the predic-
tion methods and thus, emulate a real world situations closely
compared to the frequentist approach.
1) Regression Techniques: A range of work on crime pre-
diction is based on regression analysis. Edmark [5] performed
a panel regression on data from Swedish counties over the
time period 1988 - 1999. The author focused on analyzing
the impact of unemployment on crime. Entorf and Spengler
[8] utilized logarithmic panel regression on demographic and
economic data of German states to predict crime. Caruso and
Schneider [9] applied a negative binomial regression on social-
economic panel data of western European countries. Freytag
et al. [6] applied the same approach on data of 110 countries
to test the hypothesis that poor socio-economic development
leads to rise in terrorism.
2) Neural Network Techniques: A large section of studies
in the research community analyzed crime with neural network
techniques. Olligschlaeger [16] incorporated the predictions
with neural networks by using a geographical information
system to forecast the emergence of drug hot-spot areas. The
input data are the number of distress calls made to security
department in a certain region which were fed to a pre-trained
neural network to predict crime prone areas. Caulkins [17]
compared the performance of neural network based approaches
over statistical methods for crime analysis. The dataset used is
an information set about offenders and criminals that includes
their imprisonment terms, level of punishments, number of
crimes committed. Palocsay et al. [18] researched on neural
network approaches to locate recidivists from a dataset of
criminals and listed offenders.
C. Spatial Temporal Analysis
A vast range of work on crime analysis applied visual ex-
ploration approaches to understand crime patterns and used the
derived information to predict crime occurrences. Cheong and
Lee [13] performed visual analysis of Twitter data to generate
insights on how Twitter data could be a facilitator of crime.
Nakaya and Yano [19] conducted an exploratory analysis of
crime to facilitate the visualization of the geographical extent
and duration of crime clusters.
Wang and Brown [20] proposed the Spatio-Temporal Gen-
eralized Additive Model (S-T GAM) to discover the underlying
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

factors related to crime and predict future crime incidents.
Wang et al. [20] extended the S-T GAM approach by adding
Twitter analysis and concluded that the additive Twitter anal-
ysis enhance the predictive performance of S-T GAM.
Other research works emphasized that it is important to ﬁnd
external factors that facilitated the varying spatial or temporal
crime patterns. Ivaha et al. [21] devised a crime prediction
model that incorporated the effects of weather conditions on
changing crime patterns in space and time. Townsley et al.
[22] focused on discovering space and time dependencies
with crime. The authors investigated the relation between
crime incidents that have spatial and temporal proximity. They
concluded that the existing proximity relationship between
crime data can be used to forecast future crime locations and
time of occurrence.
III.
PROPOSED APPROACH FOR CRIME ANALYSIS
To perform crime analysis with a high spatio-temporal
granularity, the proposed approach consists of two sub-
processes: Spatio-Temporal Analysis and Spatio-Temporal Pre-
diction. Figure 1 presents the workﬂow of the proposed ap-
proach.
Temporal
Auto-Correlation
Spatial
Auto-Correlation
Cross-Correlation
Correlation Analysis
Feature Subset
Spatio-Temporal
Prediction
Social-Economic 
Factors and Crime
Figure 1. Workﬂow for proposed approach.
A. Correlation Analysis
The ﬁrst stage is the spatial and temporal data analysis,
for which the spatial, temporal, and cross-correlations are
discussed.
1) Spatial
Auto-correlaion
Analysis:
Spatial
auto-
correlation is an analysis process that measures the association
of a variable with itself along the spatial dimension. There
exists a number of statistical measures that can be computed
for spatial analysis. Moran’s I was chosen for this work
[23]. The statistical measures for spatial analysis are based
on a spatial weight matrix that deﬁnes the intensity of the
distance relationship among observations (crime data) in a
geographical space. The Moran’s I ranges from −1 to +1
depending on whether the observations are spatially dispersed
or clustered.
(a) Negative Auto-correlation.
(b) Positive Auto-correlation.
Figure 2. Example of observations with Spatial Autocorrelation.
Figure 2a displays an example of observations with neg-
ative spatial auto-correlation. In this case, Moran’s I is close
to −1 for such values because geographically nearby locations
exhibit negative relationship, i.e., they are dispersed and do not
form a cluster. Similarly positive auto-correlation is depicted
in Figure 2b, where data from geographically close locations
form a cluster. In general, an observation dataset with Moran’s
I close to +1 indicates a positive auto-correlation. Moran’s I
with a value 0 indicates no spatial auto-correlation.
2) Temporal Auto-correlation Analysis:
Temporal auto-
correlation is a measure of how data at one timepoint is related
to data at other timepoints. Figure 3 explains the temporal
auto-correlation plot for the social-economic factor ”Migration
data”. The plot depicts how migration data are related to itself
at time lags of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4. There is a positive correlation at
lag 1, i.e., the relation between migration data at consecutive
timepoints is a positive slope. The blue dashed line denotes
the signiﬁcant level of correlation. Correlation at any lag that
is intersecting this line is deﬁned to be a signiﬁcant auto-
correlation at this lag. The lag with a positive temporal auto-
correlation is used in spatio-temporal prediction models as an
input parameter.
ACF
Lag
0.0
-0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 3. Temporal Auto-correlation for Migration Data Time Series.
3) Cross-Correlation Analysis: Cross-Correlation between
two time series is a measure of the lateral effect of one time
series over the other. Correlations are calculated between every
social-economic factor at timepoint t+h and crime at timepoint
t for h ∈ N, h ≤ 0. A negative value for h is a correlation
between a social-economic factor at a time before t and the
crime variable at time t. When a time series x with h negative
are predictors of a time series y at t, it is referred to as x leads
y.
ACF
Lag
0.0
-0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
-0
-2
0
2
4
Figure 4. Cross-correlation between Migration and Crime Data Time Series.
Figure 4 depicts an example of cross-correlation between
migration data and crime series from the current dataset. At
lag −1 and −2, the plot shows a positive cross-correlation.
This concludes that at time t−1 and t−2, migration data can
be a positive inﬂuence in predicting crime data at time t.
B. Spatio-Temporal Prediction
The proposed approach utilizes spatio-temporal models,
which can be categorized into general and dynamic models.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

1) General
Spatio-Temporal
Models:
General
spatio-
temporal models are of 3 types, which differs in the choice
of distribution for the process stage model.
Gaussian Process Models are deﬁned as follows:
Zt = Ot + ϵt,
(1)
Ot = Xtβ + ηt,
(2)
where ϵt is the independent normally distributed nugget
effect or the pure error term at time unit t and ηt denotes
the spacial-temporal random effects following an independent
normal distribution. Zt depicts the observed spatio-temporal
data while Ot represents the overall random effects. For the p
covariates and n number of observations, Xt denotes the n×p
covariate matrix. β = (β1, ...βp) denotes the p × 1 vector of
regression coefﬁcients.
To perform predictions at location s at time t, the posterior
predictive distribution for Z(s, t) is deﬁned as an integration
over the parameters with respect to the joint posterior distri-
bution as:
π(Z(s, t)|z) =
Z
π(Z(s, t)|Ol(s, t), σ2
ϵ , z)
π(O(s, t)|θ)π(θ|z)∂O(s, t)∂θ
(3)
where θ = (β, σ2
ϵ , φ, ν) denotes all the model parameters.
Auto-Regressive Models are deﬁned as follows:
Zt = Ot + ϵt,
(4)
Ot = ρOt−1 + Xtβ + ηt,
(5)
where ρ denotes the unknown temporal correlation param-
eter assumed to be in the interval (1, 1). The initial value for
O0 is assigned a prior distribution with independent spatial
model with mean µ and the covariance matrix σ2S0.
To perform predictions at location s at time t, the posterior
predictive distribution for Z(s, t) is deﬁned as an integration
over the parameters with respect to the joint posterior distri-
bution as:
π(Z(s, t)|z) =
Z
, π(Z(s, t)|Ol(s, t), σ2
ϵ , z)
π(O(s, t)|θ, z∗)π(θ, z∗|z)∂O(s, t)∂z∗∂θ
(6)
where θ = (β, σ2
ϵ , φ, ν) denotes all the model parameters.
z∗ refers to the missing data while z refers to the non-missing
data [24].
Gaussian Predictive Model introduces random effects
η(s, t) at a smaller number, m, of locations, called the knots,
and then use kriging to predict those random effects at the data
and prediction locations. Hence, the basic Gaussian predictive
process model can be represented as:
Z(s) = µ(s) + η(s) + ϵ(s),
(7)
where, Z(s) denotes vector of observed data for a location
s at all timepoints, µ(s) is the mean function at location s.
The residuals are represented in two parts: η(s) is the spatially
correlated error with a distribution of zero mean and stationary
Gaussian process. The second part is the ϵ(s) which is a non-
spatial uncorrelated pure error also distributed normally with
mean zero and variance σ2
ϵ I, where I is the identity matrix [24].
The posterior predictive distribution of an unknown location
s∗ as described in [24] is deﬁned as:
π(Z(s∗)|z(s)) =
Z
π(Z(s∗)|θ, z(s))π(θ|z(s))∂θ
(8)
2) Dynamic Spatio-Temporal Models:
Bayesian frame-
works have the advantage of working with short time series
data and can also deal with uncertainties in data by introducing
the concept of priors. A detailed explanation of Bayesian mod-
eling can be found in [25]. Bayesian modeling is a statistical
inference approach where the Bayes theorem is used to update
the probability of unknown variables as more data become
known. The Bayesian models involve drawing inference from
the posterior distribution of unknown parameters which is
proportional to the likelihood of data times a prior knowledge
of various model parameters [26], which as can be seen in (9).
posterior ∝ likelihood × prior
(9)
With respect to the crime dataset, Bayesian modeling can
be explained as follows: let x = x1....xn be the observed
social-economic data and Q = Q1....Qp be the model param-
eters with an assumed prior distribution of π(Q), the posterior
distribution of parameters can be deﬁned as follow:
π(Q|x) ∝ f(x|Q) × π(Q)
(10)
where f(x|Q) is a likelihood function which determines
the probability of observing the data for different values of Q.
Spatial-Temporal processes contain observations in space
and time with varying spatial and temporal support and com-
plicated underlying dynamics [27]. Because of the complexity
of these processes, hierarchical models are deemed suitable be-
cause of their ability to represent joint covariance relationships
among process and model parameters into disjoint covariance
structures at lower level of the hierarchy model. There are two
main variants of Bayesian spatio-temporal process.
General Spatio-Temporal Models are beneﬁcial when
data are available across time and space domain. A general
spatio-temporal model focuses on spatio-temporal interactions
by modeling a joint space-time covariance structure [28].
However, due to high dimensional and complexity of non-
linear spatio-temporal behavior, formulating joint covariance
structures is highly complicated.
Dynamic
Spatio-Temporal
Models represent spatio-
temporal interactions in a hierarchical framework. The current
state of the process is evaluated as a function of previous states
[29]. The joint spatio-temporal process Y can be factored into
conditional models based on a Markovian assumption. That is,
[Y |θt, t = 1, ..., T] = [y0]
T
Y
t=1
[yt|yt − 1, θt]
(11)
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

where yt = (y(s1, t), ...y(sn, t)) with y(sn, t) is the process
at spatial location s and time t. The conditional distribution
[yt|yt − 1, θt] depends on a vector of parameters θt which
govern the dynamics of the spatio-temporal process of interest.
Arab et al. gives a detailed explanation of these models in [30].
IV.
DATASET
Crime data were obtained from the Federal Criminal Police
Ofﬁce of Germany. The dataset contains the total number of
offences for different crime categories per year and location.
These data are only publicly available for counties belonging to
cities with more than 100, 000 inhabitants. In Germany, there
are only a total of 81 sites beyond this population count, which
were taken into consideration for this paper. Ultimately, crime
data were modeled as a time series for a constant time period
from 2009 to 2013.
Furthermore, more than 450 socio-economic location fac-
tors were assessed, which are offered by the Federal Statistical
Ofﬁce of Germany. For the evaluation in this paper, 18 social-
economic factors were selected based on expert knowledge [6]
[8] [9]. These factors include, among others, Gross Domestic
Product (GDP), population division, migration population,
index of health services, social secured and insured population,
literacy level, employment rate, birth and death rate, number
of enterprises and businesses, and index of child day care
facilities.
V.
EVALUATION
The conducted evaluation aimed to prove that spatio-
temporal data interactions enhance the prediction capability
of existing approaches. Thus, a similar comparison approach
is followed as described in [31] [32]. The existing models
are tested against the given dataset and a comparison is drawn
between the error in crime prediction of the proposed approach
and existing state-of-the-art approaches.
A. Prediction Evaluation and Ground Truth
The ground truth for this evaluation was generated by
two traditional regression models [33]. Ordinary Least Square
(OLS) Regression was performed by minimizing the sum of
the squares of the differences between observed and predicted
values [34]. Panel Regression was calculated over panel data
(cross-sectional data across space and time). Table I shows the
prediction efﬁciency of OLS regression and Panel regression
on the socio-economic and crime dataset, measured in Mean
Absolute Percentage Error (MAPE).
TABLE I. PREDICTION RESULTS FOR GROUND TRUTH MODELS.
OLS Regression
Panel Regression
MAPE
38%
37.1%
B. Spatio-Temporal Correlation Evaluation
The spatio-temporal analysis’ results allowed to reject the
null hypothesis, which states that there is no spatial or temporal
auto-correlation between observation data and the data spread
is random. Hence, spatio-temporal auto-correlation indicates
the presence of spatial and temporal interactions and thus,
validates the choice for using spatial-temporal models for
prediction.
1) Local Spatial Auto-correlation of Crime: Spatial auto-
correlation was depicted by visualizing the Local Interactions
of Spatial Association (LISA) cluster maps [35]. LISA maps
were generated based on the neighborhood weight matrix
that represents the relation between locations based on their
distance proximity. The spatial association of a region is
plotted based on the signiﬁcance of its Local Moran’s I.
Figure 5. LISA Map for Crime Data of 81 County Sites of Germany.
Figure 5 shows the LISA cluster map for 81 county sites
of Germany. The weight matrix is based on a ﬁxed distance
band (average distance between two farthest location within
the same state). There were 27 such locations with signiﬁcant
spatial clustering. 17 locations depicted a positive spatial
correlation and consists of the categories high-high and low-
low. Ten regions fell under the category of high-low and low-
high and hence, depict a signiﬁcant negative spatial auto-
correlation. For the remaining sites in Germany labeled as
”not signiﬁcant”, there were not enough data available to draw
conclusions.
2) Temporal Auto-correlation of Crime: Figure 6 shows
the temporal auto-correlation in crime data, which is positive
at lag 1. Thus, crime occurrence at time t − 1 has a positive
effect on crime at time t. However, it is below the signiﬁcant
level. The reason for that is most likely that the given time
series only have 5 time points. For this research, the lag of
1 for prediction was taken into consideration. However, more
data is necessary to eventually clarify this fact.
ACF
Lag
0.0
-0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
0
1
2
3
4
Figure 6. Temporal Auto-correlation Plot for Crime Data of Germany.
3) Cross-Correlation of Crime and Social-Economic Fac-
tors: Figure 7 visualizes cross-correlation between the social-
economic factor ”disposable income” and crime rate in Ger-
many. It depicts the positive correlation between the disposable
income of households in Germany and crime rate at the
temporal lag − 1 and lag − 2.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

ACF
Lag
0.0
-0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
-4
-2
0
2
4
Figure 7. Cross-correlation between Disposable Income and Crime Rate in
Germany.
Table II presents the resulting factors selected from a subset
of 450 social-economic attributes. These factors have a sig-
niﬁcant cross-correlation with crime data at various temporal
lags. A factor was selected if there was a signiﬁcant correlation
(close to 1 or −1) at lag 0. When there was a weak correlation
at lag 0, subsequent cross-correlations at lag −1 and −2 were
taken into consideration.
TABLE II. CROSS-CORRELATION BETWEEN SOCIAL-ECONOMIC
FACTORS AND CRIME.
Factors
Lag 0
Lag -1
Lag -2
Lag -3
Lag -4
Migration Data
0.819
0.483
0.252
-0.366
-0.482
Population Data
0.214
-0.425
-0.749
0.420
0.248
Disposable Income
0.741
0.563
0.285
-0.271
-0.580
No. of Employees
0.801
0.596
0.161
-0.388
-0.453
No. of Employer
0.830
0.570
0.131
-0.380
-0.442
No. of Enterprises
-0.058
0.696
0.584
-0.116
-0.586
GDP
0.670
0.554
0.366
0.225
-0.631
No. of Hospital Beds
-0.783
-0.282
-0.358
0.472
0.352
Real Estate Price
0.319
0.469
0.423
0.170
-0.775
Graduate/Dropout Ratio
-0.581
0.134
0.449
0.472
-0.453
No. Social Insured Persons
0.932
0.389
0.048
-0.259
-0.445
C. Evaluation of General Spatio-Temporal Models
This section evaluates the crime prediction efﬁciency of
three Gaussian processes and compares it with the ground
truth.
Table III shows the result for the Gaussian process model,
which produced a MAPE of 36% with the given dataset.
Comparing the results with the ground truth, there is not much
improvement in the prediction results with Gaussian model.
TABLE III. PREDICTION RESULTS OF GAUSSIAN PROCESS MODEL.
Models
MAPE
OLS Regression
38%
Panel Regression
37.1%
Gaussian Process Model
36%
Table IV presents the comparison between the ground truth
and the Gaussian predictive process model, which gave a
MAPE of 37.1%. This model showed a mere improvement
of 0.5% over OLS regression. The prediction accuracy was,
however, less than for the panel regression and the Gaussian
process model.
Table V shows the performance of the auto-regressive
model and the comparison with the ground truth. The auto-
regressive models produced a MAPE of 28.23%. Compar-
ing the results with the ground truth, auto-regressive models
TABLE IV. PREDICTION RESULTS OF GAUSSIAN PREDICTIVE
PROCESS MODEL.
Models
MAPE
OLS Regression
38%
Panel Regression
37.1%
Gaussian Predictive Process Model
37.5%
perform better over traditional regression models. Among
the spatio-temporal prediction models, auto-regressive models
produce the best prediction result.
TABLE V. PREDICTION RESULTS OF AUTO-REGRESSIVE MODEL.
Models
MAPE
OLS Regression
38%
Panel Regression
37.1%
Auto-regressive Model
28.23%
D. Evaluation of Dynamic Spatio-Temporal Models
Table VI displays the comparison between these models
and the ground truth. As a result, the dynamic spatio-temporal
model outperforms all other spatio-temporal prediction models
and the traditional regression models referred in the ground
truth.
TABLE VI. PREDICTION RESULTS OF DYNAMIC ST MODEL.
Models
MAPE
OLS Regression
38%
Panel Regression
37.1%
Dynamic Spatio-Temporal (ST) Model
6.79%
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The proposed approach validated general and dynamic
spatio-temporal models for crime prediction. The results
showed that the relationships among this spatio-temporal data
i) have a positive impact on the prediction accuracy and ii)
can be utilized to analyze crime data with a high spatial and
temporal granularity. The conducted experiments, however, are
only a proof of concept for spatio-temporal predictions at lower
spatial granularity.
Upstream spatio-temporal analysis improved the spatio-
temporal predictions. The spatial analysis yielded that some
locations have a spatial-relation with their neighbors. The
temporal analysis conﬁrmed positive correlations between
consecutive year’s crime incidents. Cross-correlation further
identiﬁed social-economic factors having relations with crime.
Taking these spatio-temporal patterns into account, the pro-
posed prediction approach outperformed traditional OLS and
panel regression that ignores any spatio-temporal relationships
in the data. In detail, the dynamic spatio-temporal Bayesian
model lowered the error rate in prediction by 31.6% when
compared with the ground truth. In contrast, Gaussian based
prediction models and auto-regressive models only decreased
the error rate by 1% respective 7% (compared with ground
truth).
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

In the future, evaluations have to be extended with more
complete data from all geographical hierarchy levels. In prac-
tice, however, these data are hard to obtain. Furthermore, more
complex analysis models can be designed that accommodate
a larger number of independent variables (social-economic
factors) for predictions. Having more complete datasets, net-
work models like Bayesian neural networks and LSTM can
be evaluated. Especially LSTM archived high time series
prediction accuracies when applied on large datasets.
Additionally, the proposed approach can be combined with
social media analysis to create a hybrid prediction model
that consider the prediction results from two different data
sources (social-economic dataset and social media). This way,
statistical data (i.e., social-economic factors) anonymously
describing (large) groups of people are combined with concrete
and precise information about individuals and thus, likely
enhance prediction performance.
REFERENCES
[1]
K. E. McCollister, M. T. French, and H. Fang, “The cost of crime to so-
ciety: New crime-speciﬁc estimates for policy and program evaluation,”
Drug and alcohol dependence, vol. 108, no. 1, 2010, pp. 98–109.
[2]
W. C. Cunningham, J. J. Strauchs, and C. W. VanMeter, Private security
trends, 1970 to 2000: The Hallcrest report II.
Butterworth-Heinemann
Boston, MA, 1990, vol. 2.
[3]
X. Wang, M. S. Gerber, and D. E. Brown, “Automatic crime prediction
using events extracted from twitter posts,” in International Conference
on Social Computing, Behavioral-Cultural Modeling, and Prediction.
Springer, 2012, pp. 231–238.
[4]
M. S. Gerber, “Predicting crime using twitter and kernel density
estimation,” Decision Support Systems, vol. 61, 2014, pp. 115–125.
[5]
K. Edmark, “Unemployment and crime: Is there a connection?” The
Scandinavian journal of economics, vol. 107, no. 2, 2005, pp. 353–
373.
[6]
A. Freytag, J. J. Kr¨uger, D. Meierrieks, and F. Schneider, “The origins
of terrorism: Cross-country estimates of socio-economic determinants
of terrorism,” European Journal of Political Economy, vol. 27, 2011,
pp. S5–S16.
[7]
S. Chainey, L. Tompson, and S. Uhlig, “The utility of hotspot mapping
for predicting spatial patterns of crime,” Security Journal, vol. 21, no.
1-2, 2008, pp. 4–28.
[8]
H. Entorf and H. Spengler, “Socioeconomic and demographic factors
of crime in germany: Evidence from panel data of the german states,”
International review of law and economics, vol. 20, no. 1, 2000, pp.
75–106.
[9]
R. Caruso and F. Schneider, “The socio-economic determinants of ter-
rorism and political violence in western europe (1994–2007),” European
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 27, 2011, pp. S37–S49.
[10]
W. R. Tobler, “A computer movie simulating urban growth in the detroit
region,” Economic geography, vol. 46, no. sup1, 1970, pp. 234–240.
[11]
A. Beltran, C. Abargues, C. Granell, M. N´u˜nez, L. D´ıaz, and J. Huerta,
“A virtual globe tool for searching and visualizing geo-referenced
media resources in social networks,” Multimedia tools and applications,
vol. 64, no. 1, 2013, pp. 171–195.
[12]
X. Chen, Y. Cho, and S. Y. Jang, “Crime prediction using twitter sen-
timent and weather,” in Systems and Information Engineering Design
Symposium (SIEDS), 2015.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 63–68.
[13]
M. Cheong and V. C. Lee, “A microblogging-based approach to ter-
rorism informatics: Exploration and chronicling civilian sentiment and
response to terrorism events via twitter,” Information Systems Frontiers,
vol. 13, no. 1, 2011, pp. 45–59.
[14]
V. Martinez, G. I. Simari, A. Sliva, and V. S. Subrahmanian, “Con-
vex: Similarity-based algorithms for forecasting group behavior,” IEEE
Intelligent Systems, vol. 23, no. 4, July 2008, pp. 51–57.
[15]
R. J. Sampson and W. B. Groves, “Community structure and crime:
Testing social-disorganization theory,” American journal of sociology,
vol. 94, no. 4, 1989, pp. 774–802.
[16]
A. M. Olligschlaeger, “Artiﬁcial neural networks and crime mapping,”
Crime mapping and crime prevention, 1997, pp. 313–348.
[17]
J. Caulkins, J. Cohen, W. Gorr, and J. Wei, “Predicting criminal
recidivism: A comparison of neural network models with statistical
methods,” Journal of Criminal Justice, vol. 24, no. 3, 1996, pp. 227–240.
[18]
S. W. Palocsay, P. Wang, and R. G. Brookshire, “Predicting criminal
recidivism using neural networks,” Socio-Economic Planning Sciences,
vol. 34, no. 4, 2000, pp. 271–284.
[19]
T. Nakaya and K. Yano, “Visualising crime clusters in a space-time
cube: An exploratory data-analysis approach using space-time kernel
density estimation and scan statistics,” Transactions in GIS, vol. 14,
no. 3, 2010, pp. 223–239.
[20]
X. Wang and D. E. Brown, “The spatio-temporal generalized additive
model for criminal incidents,” in Intelligence and Security Informatics
(ISI), 2011 IEEE International Conference on. IEEE, 2011, pp. 42–47.
[21]
C. Ivaha, H. Al-Madfai, G. Higgs, and J. A. Ware, “The dynamic spatial
disaggregation approach: A spatio-temporal modelling of crime.” in
World congress on engineering, 2007, pp. 961–966.
[22]
M. Townsley, S. D. Johnson, and J. H. Ratcliffe, “Space time dynamics
of insurgent activity in iraq,” Security Journal, vol. 21, no. 3, 2008, p.
139.
[23]
M. Tiefelsdorf and B. Boots, “The exact distribution of moran’s i,”
Environment and Planning A, vol. 27, no. 6, 1995, pp. 985–999.
[24]
K. S. Bakar, S. K. Sahu et al., “sptimer: Spatio-temporal bayesian
modelling using r,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 63, no. 15,
2015, pp. 1–32.
[25]
J.-M. Marin, K. Mengersen, and C. P. Robert, “Bayesian modelling and
inference on mixtures of distributions,” Handbook of statistics, vol. 25,
2005, pp. 459–507.
[26]
C. Fern´andez and M. F. Steel, “On bayesian modeling of fat tails and
skewness,” Journal of the American Statistical Association, vol. 93, no.
441, 1998, pp. 359–371.
[27]
A. O. Finley, S. Banerjee, and A. E. Gelfand, “spBayes for large uni-
variate and multivariate point-referenced spatio-temporal data models,”
ArXiv e-prints, Oct. 2013.
[28]
N. Cressie and H.-C. Huang, “Classes of nonseparable, spatio-temporal
stationary covariance functions,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, vol. 94, no. 448, 1999, pp. 1330–1339.
[29]
J. R. Stroud, P. M¨uller, and B. Sans´o, “Dynamic models for spatiotem-
poral data,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical
Methodology), vol. 63, no. 4, 2001, pp. 673–689.
[30]
A. Arab, M. B. Hooten, and C. K. Wikle, “Hierarchical spatial models,”
in Encyclopedia of GIS.
Springer, 2008, pp. 425–431.
[31]
B. Huang, B. Wu, and M. Barry, “Geographically and temporally
weighted regression for modeling spatio-temporal variation in house
prices,” International Journal of Geographical Information Science,
vol. 24, no. 3, 2010, pp. 383–401.
[32]
K. Bakar, “Bayesian analysis of daily maximum ozone levels,”
Ph.D. dissertation, University of Southampton, June 2012. [Online].
Available: https://eprints.soton.ac.uk/340039/
[33]
H. R. Moon and M. Weidner, “Dynamic linear panel regression models
with interactive ﬁxed effects,” Econometric Theory, vol. 33, no. 1, 2017,
pp. 158–195.
[34]
B. Craven and S. M. Islam, Ordinary least squares regression.
Sage
Publications, 2011.
[35]
L. Anselin, “Local indicators of spatial associationlisa,” Geographical
analysis, vol. 27, no. 2, 1995, pp. 93–115.
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

