SodaSense: An Intelligence Platform for
Micro-Mobility, Micro-Climate and Agriculture
Paraskevi Raftopoulou, Spiros Skiadopoulos, Christos Tryfonopoulos, and Costas Vassilakis
Dept. Informatics and Telecommunications
University of the Peloponnese
Tripoli, Greece
email: {praftop,spiros,trifon,costas}@uop.gr
Abstract—SODASENSE is an end-to-end big data manipulation
platform that focuses on decision and policy making. It concerns
the management of big trajectory and spatio-temporal data that
is collected from sensors and relates to micro-mobility, micro-
climate and agriculture, and aims to the creation of an expert
decision making platform with research, social and business
orientation.
Keywords—spatial time series, trajectories, big data manage-
ment and analysis
I. INTRODUCTION
SODASENSE
(https://sodasense.uop.gr)
is
an
on-going
project implemented by the SoDa Lab (https://soda.uop.
gr). The platform under development that bears the same
name (i.e., SODASENSE) offers end-to-end big data ma-
nipulation focusing on decision and policy making in the
Peloponnese Region, Greece (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Peloponnese(region)). Specifically, SODASENSE will manage
big trajectory and spatio-temporal data that is collected from
sensors and relates to micro-mobility, micro-climate and agri-
culture. An overview of the layered structure of SODASENSE,
which comprises of Data sources, Data management and
Data analysis and visualization, is illustrated in Figure 1. The
uttermost goal of SODASENSE is to create an expert decision
making platform with research, social and business orientation
In more details, the platform’s services combine the col-
lection, storage, analysis, visualization and data mining, to
improve the quality of life in urban centers (through city
redesign, planning and micro-transportation) and to support
basic economic activities (such as tourism and agriculture),
especially for small and medium-sized enterprises that make
up most of the economic backbone of the Peloponnese. The
SODASENSE project is designed to enhance with specific
services the coordination of public authorities and the relevant
policy decisions making in the areas in which it specializes.
Through the new services, it will provide its users with
information, knowledge and tools on:
• the use of new technologies in micro-mobility, micro-
climate and agriculture,
• the collection of relevant data, and
• the utilization of data to improve life in urban centers.
Overall, SODASENSE will offer additional capabilities and ser-
vices to academia, research, professional associations, private
and public companies, infrastructure operators, independent
Figure 1. SODASENSE in a nutshell
authorities and public bodies, to support original research,
investment projects and decision making. This will enhance
tourism, support agricultural production, and better facilitate
decision-making in the Peloponnese area.
The rest of the paper is structure as follows. Sections
II and III illustrated the added value and the approach of
SODASENSE. Finally Section IV offers conclusions.
II. SODASENSE ADDED VALUE
Greece, due to its geographical position and its history,
is a pole of attraction for tourism. Consequently, there is
a great demand for micro-movements of both tourists and
permanent residents of urban areas. At the same time, it has
a long tradition on agriculture and the cultivation of excellent
quality agricultural products (e.g., olives and olive oil, grapes,
raisins and wine, figs). Until the launch of the SODASENSE
infrastructure, no other infrastructure had been created for the
systematic research, analysis and dissemination of data related
to micro-mobility, micro-climate and agriculture.
The lack of infrastructure to provide information and data on
the above subjects entails additional constraints for conducting
further research. It also limits the development of strate-
gic plans and policy making at local, regional and national
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2. SODASENSE technologies
level. The SODASENSE platform responds to the above needs
by updating and monitoring data on micro-mobility, micro-
climate and agriculture, combining them with data from other
stations (where available), as well as identifying and recording
trends with a focus on smart specialization in these areas. The
specialized knowledge that SODASENSE provides will also
enhance the implementation in Greece of European directives
and policies related to the aforementioned areas.
Overall, the main objective of the SODASENSE infrastruc-
ture is to enhance regional excellence in the fields of micro-
mobility data management, micro-climate and agriculture, by
providing the necessary services (data collection and analysis,
modeling, programming, applications to users).
III. THE SODASENSE APPROACH
SODASENSE platform will provide an reliable and easy ac-
cess to data using information technology and communication
services. SODASENSE addresses innovative topics, such as
large-scale data management, real-time exchange of scientific
data, data processing with advanced artificial intelligence
and machine learning methods, the use of cloud computing
services, aiming to improve the efficiency and reliability of
activities critical for a modern urban environment, such as
micro-mobility, micro-climate, smart agriculture, as well as
tourism.
More specifically, a Data Center will be designed as an
application of the Database as Service (DaaS) model [1].
SODASENSE’s services will be provided under the Software
as a Service (SaaS) model [2], while the Services Center will
operate under the Internet as a Service (IaaS) [3] and Platform
as a Service (PaaS) models [4]. Figure 2 summarizes the
technologies and tools employed by SODASENSE.
In the field of micro-mobility, micro-climate and agriculture,
the scientific and technological innovation of the operation lies
in the use of digital methods to gain new knowledge about
large-scale data, advanced computational models, applications
and visualization technologies. Research will be carried out
on micro-mobility topics, such as routing, compliance with
the new regulations regarding the environmental impact of
micro-mobility, intermodality and accessibility to poles of
concentration of cultural or educational activities.
Accordingly, urban air quality simulations will be designed
and carried out taking into account buildings of different
shapes, sizes and layouts. Finally, research will be carried
out on the placement of smart sensors on crops, as well as
combining them with data from other stations where available,
in order to collect data that will help farmers monitor and
optimize crops in line with changing environmental factors.
At the academic level, the scientific innovation of practice
lies in the use of advanced methodologies and tools with
increased reliability, such as simulation, decision-making and
policy support models.
SODASENSE aims to become an innovative e-research in-
frastructure with significant added value at all levels: re-
gional, national and international. At regional level, it will
support smart specialization, assisting regional innovation and
economic development of the Peloponnese Region, allowing
regional resources to focus on their advantages, including
the wealth and smart specialization of small and medium-
sized enterprises, and in particular small and medium-sized
enterprises engaged in micro-mobility, agriculture and tourism.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
SODASENSE infrastructure will support in an interdisci-
plinary way the key axes pertaining to micro-transport, micro-
climate, agriculture and tourism. It will create an electronic
information system for the systematic information, decision
support and research, while the use of standards for the
interoperability of the collected data and the provision of open
availability of the data will allow the exploitation of datasets
and related tools by the research potential and the general
public.
Finally, SODASENSE is expected to have a positive impact
on various socio-economic sectors specific to the region in the
context of smart specialization (e.g., tourism, micro-mobility,
micro-climate, environment, agriculture). At a different level,
through SODASENSE the region will have, for the first time,
an integrated tool (and the relevant data) to study and support
decision-making of key areas of activity; the platform has the
potential to promote green micro-transport, precision agricul-
ture, and sustainable tourism development. From the above,
it is understood that there is a wide range of beneficiaries of
the operation at both national and regional level, including
regional and local authorities, organizations, businesses and
bodies in the target sectors.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was funded by project SODASENSE (https:
//sodasense.uop.gr) under grant agreement No. MIS 5060275
(co-financed by Greece and the EU through the European
Regional Development Fund).
REFERENCES
[1] H. Hacigumus, B. Iyer, and S. Mehrotra, “Providing database as a
service,” in Proceedings of ICDE, 2002, pp. 29–38.
[2] B. Allen et al., “Software as a service for data scientists,” Commun. of
ACM, vol. 55, no. 2, p. 81–88, Feb 2012.
[3] B. Wang, X. Chang, and J. Liu, “Modeling heterogeneous virtual ma-
chines on IAAS data centers,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 19, no. 4, pp.
537–540, 2015.
[4] R. Dua, A. R. Raja, and D. Kakadia, “Virtualization vs containerization
to support PAAS,” in IEEE Int’l Conf. on Cloud Engineering, 2014, pp.
610–614.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

