Visualization System for the Positioning of Sunken Vessels  
Using Underwater Acoustic Devices 
 
Dohyeong Kim  
Sang-Hyeok Nam* 
Research Institute   
ENGSOFT Inc. 
Seoul, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: dhkim@engsoft.kr     e-mail: shnam@engsoft.kr 
Jongryong Choi                     Donguoon Kim 
Development Division 
 
  Head Office 
 
Ocean Planet Inc. 
Busan, Republic of Korea 
e-mail: xj2222@naver.com e-mail: daum5665@hanmail.net 
 
 
Abstract— In the event of a vessel sinking accident, it takes a lot 
of manpower, equipment, and time to search for lost vessels due 
to difficulties in securing underwater vision. If the searching 
work in the water is extended, excessive costs are incurred, and 
pollution of the marine environment may occur due to corrosion 
of ships and oil spills. In this paper, we introduce the 
visualization system for the underwater positioning using an 
underwater signal generator, a floating signal receiver and an 
underwater positioning algorithm to monitor the position of the 
sunken vessel. It can be minimized the human and material 
resources by maximizing the efficiency of underwater rescue 
and search operation for sunken vessels. In addition, it is 
expected that it can be used for various purposes such as 
submarine tracking, underwater monitoring and tracking the 
location of underwater rescue workers, underwater leisure 
sports, and so on through the minimizing of signal generation 
devices. 
Keywords-sunken vessel; acoustic transducer; floating signal 
receiver; underwater positioning algorithm; visualization system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper introduces the Sunken Vessel Position 
Identification System (SVPIS), which determines and 
visualizes the underwater position of a sunken vessels using 
an underwater signal generator and a floating signal receiver 
based on the short baseline (SBL) method as shown in Figure 
1 [1][2]. As maritime traffic steadily increases worldwide, 
maritime accidents such as ship sinking continue to occur. 
When a ship sinks underwater, the ship may be lost by 
movement in the water by tidal currents or waves at the 
accident site. In addition, there are frequent cases of giving up 
the sunken ship due to excessive costs for the salvage of the 
ship. Wrecked ships whose salvage has been abandoned or 
failed are not identified visually at the water surface, which 
may cause secondary accidents with other ships, or cause 
marine environmental pollution due to corrosion of the hull or 
leakage of oil or chemicals [3]-[5]. 
A representative technology currently used to determine 
the location of the sunken ship is the Emergency Position 
Indication Radio Beacon (EPIRB) system. The EPIRB is 
deployed on the water surface of the sinking location and 
transmits the sinking location using a GPS signal. So, it is 
possible to know the initial location of the ship where the 
sinking accident occurred, but if the sunken ship moves 
underwater by tidal currents or waves, it cannot be tracked. In 
order to solve these problems, a method of tracking the 
location of a sunken ship by connecting a ship and a buoy with 
a cable may be used. However, this type has problems that 
cables can be cut by underwater floats or tidal differences and 
can be tangled during deployment in the event of an accident. 
Therefore, divers should be deployed to search the expected 
location of the ship, but it is difficult to identify and track the 
sunken ship due to the limited visibility, which takes excessive 
time and costs.  
In SVPIS used in this work, the underwater signal 
generator emits an acoustic signal that is received by the 
floating signal receiver, which is floating on the surface of the 
water. The position of the sunken ship can be determined by 
utilizing the time differences of the acoustic signal arriving at 
each floating signal receiver and the GPS coordinates of the 
receivers.  Once the position of the sunken vessel is 
determined, the SVPIS can visualize its location using a 
display unit in the visualization system. This allows the user 
Figure 1. Overview of Sunken Vessel Position Identification System. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

to see the precise location of the sunken vessel and plan any 
necessary recovery or salvage operations. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
introduces the components of the SVPIS and their respective 
roles, Section III describes the data flows necessary to 
visualize the position of the sunken vessel, on-site weather, 
and data measured by built-in sensors. Section IV details the 
underwater positioning algorithm using time difference of 
arrival to each Floating Signal Receivers, and shows the 
example of the visualization system for the sunken ship. And 
Section V summarize the lessons learned, conclusions and 
future work. 
II. 
COMPONENTS FOR THE SVPIS   
The components for the SVPIS include the Underwater 
Signal Generator (USG), the Floating Signal Receiver (FSR) 
and the Positioning & Visualization System (PVS). 
A. Underwater Signal Generator 
When the ship sinks, the USG attached to the hull is 
automatically deployed by water pressure and rises about 10 
meters in the water while remaining connected to the cable, 
generating an acoustic signal. The USG contains an 
underwater acoustic transducer that can be attached to the bow 
or stern of the ship. The composition of the USG is illustrated 
in Figure 2. 
B. Floating Signal Receiver 
The main functions of the FSR are to receive acoustic 
signals from the USG while floating on the water surface and 
to transmit the received acoustic signal information with GPS 
information to the PVS. The FSR can be configured in various 
forms depending on the specific requirements, commonly 
including acoustic signal receiver modules, GPS modules, 
communication modules, and sensors (such as temperature, 
flow velocity, and turbidity sensors). Additionally, sensors 
may be added or excluded, or may also be manufactured in the 
form of a movable drone. 
C. Positioning & Visualization System 
The PVS comprises portable hardware that can calculate 
the location of the sunken ship using data obtained from the 
FSR and system software that visualizes the determined 
position based on GIS. The position of the sunken ship can be 
calculated based on the data received from the FSR via LTE 
or LoRa networks on rescue ships, the location (GPS 
coordinates) of each FSR, and sensor data. The accuracy of 
deriving the location of sunken ships will be improved 
through continuous research, including the application of 
noise filtering techniques, deep learning algorithms, and so on. 
III. 
DESIGN CONCEPT OF SVPIS 
Figure 3 presents an overall schematic diagram of SVPIS, 
illustrating the data flow and connections between devices. In 
the event of a sinking accident involving a vessel, the USG 
operates through water pressure caused by water flowing into 
it, generating acoustic signals. The rescue boat deploys the 
FSR on the surface of the water, which receives sound wave 
signals emitted by the USG. The time of arrival (TOA) of the 
acoustic signal at the FSR, along with the GPS coordinates of 
each FSR and the data measured by the built-in sensors, is 
transmitted to the PVS via LoRa communication. Using 
positioning algorithms based on the TOAs and GPS 
coordinates of each FSR, the PVS calculates the position of 
the USG, which corresponds to the location (coordinates) of 
the sunken vessel. The PVS then visualizes the positions of 
the sunken vessel and FSRs, displaying measured data from 
the built-in sensors, and field weather data provided via the 
APIs, on the visualization system screen. 
IV. 
POSITIONING AND VISUALIZATION 
The positioning algorithm of SVPIS calculates the 
difference in distance between each FSR and the USG by 
measuring the time difference between the times of arrival 
(TOA) of the signals received by different FSRs. This 
difference, combined with the known GPS coordinates of the 
FSRs, can be used to calculate the position of the USG, which 
corresponds to the location of the sunken vessel. In general, 
the time difference of arrival (TDOA)-based positioning 
algorithm uses either the "Least Square algorithm" [6] that 
obtains a solution by linearization or "Ho and Chan's 
algorithm" [7] that obtains a solution without linearization. In 
this work, the Least Square algorithm is used to derive the 
relative position of the USG by measuring the TDOA of each 
FSR. The absolute coordinates of the USG, which 
corresponds to the location of the sunken ship, are then 
calculated using the GPS coordinates of the FSRs as shown in 
Figure 4. However, in underwater environments, variations in 
sound wave velocity due to changes in water temperature or 
turbidity, as well as reflected sound waves by the water 
Figure 2. Composition of USG. 
Figure 3. Schematic diagram of SVPIS. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

surface or floating objects, can lead to inaccurate positioning 
results. Therefore, further studies are required to develop 
techniques that can increase the accuracy of underwater 
positioning by applying various technologies such as noise 
filtering technology, artificial intelligence modules, and others. 
Figure 5 shows an example of a visualization system for 
tracking and monitoring the location of a sunken ship. The 
locations of the FSR and the sunken ship are indicated by 
icons on the GIS map, and the latitude/longitude coordinates 
and depth information of the sunken ship are informed by text. 
This information may be visualized on a three-dimensional 
map if necessary. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
It has been introduced the Sunken Vessel Position 
Identification System, which uses underwater acoustic 
devices to rapidly and accurately calculate the position of a 
submerged vessel by measuring the time difference between 
the signals received by multiple FSRs in real-time. This allows 
for faster response times in rescue and recovery operations. 
The simplicity and efficiency of the SVPIS design, along with 
the use of relatively low-cost components, make it a cost-
effective solution for underwater vessel positioning. 
Therefore, it has the potential to become a generic technology 
for responding to marine safety accidents through the 
positioning and tracking of sunken ships. Furthermore, 
improving the salvaging rate of sunken ships can reduce 
marine pollution caused by ship corrosion or oil spills.  
In the near future, the SVPIS is expected to be used for 
searching for drownings, tracking the location of underwater 
rescue workers, and underwater leisure sports by minimizing 
the size of signal generation devices. To achieve this, 
continuous research is needed to improve the accuracy of 
underwater positioning technology and achieve a more 
efficient SVPIS. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was financially supported by the Institute of 
Civil Military Technology Cooperation funded by the Defense 
Acquisition Program Administration and Ministry of Trade, 
Industry and Energy of Korean government under grant No. 
2022DCME01. 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. H. Milne, “Underwater Acoustic Positioning System”, E. & 
F.N. SPON, London, 1983. 
[2] M. L. Neudoefer, “An Acoustic Position Reference System 
Integrating Long and Short-Baseline Operation”, Proc. 11th 
Ann. Offshore Technology Conference, pp. 1721-1730, 1979. 
[3] W. J. Chang, S. H. Lee, H. J. Yeom, and I. C. Lee, “A Study 
on the development of risk assessment for sunken vessels using 
remaining-fuel estimations model,” Journal of the Korean 
Society of Marine Environment & Safety, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 
90–97, Feb. 2016. 
[4] J. Michel et al., “An issue paper prepared for the 2005 
international oil spill conference: Potentially polluting wrecks 
in marine waters,” International Oil Spill Conference, pp. 1–40, 
May 2005. 
[5] N. Goodwyn, “Potentially polluting wrecks-UK risk database 
& it’s applications,” WOW II Conference, MD, USA, p.6, June 
2011. 
[6] Wade H. Foy, “Position-location Solutions by Taylor-Series 
Estimation,” IEEE Transcations on Aerospace and Electronic 
Systems, AES-12, No. 2, pp. 187–193, Mar. 1976. 
[7] Ho K, and Chan Y, “Solution and performance analysis of 
geolocation by TDOA,” IEEE Transcations on Aerospace and 
Electronic Systems, Vol. 29, No. 4, October 1993. 
Figure 5. Visualization of position and tracking history for sunken vessel. 
Figure 4. Underwater positioning. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

