Cultural Metro in Rome
A Sustainable Transportation Example Extending Public Transportation System in Rome
Michele Angelaccio, Lucia Zappitelli
Department of Enterprise Engineering
Smartourism Lab
University of Rome Tor Vergata
Rome, Italy
Email: angelaccio@dii.uniroma2.it, lucia.zappitelli@gmail.com
Abstract—This work introduces a georeferenced model that aims
to yield a sustainable transport system located in a part of the
city of Rome. This is achieved by considering two urban walks
as transport lines connecting existing metro stops in order to
improve the transportation system in a sustainable way, thus
reducing vehicular trafﬁc. In addition, the proposed solution
is designed according to a cultural heritage perspective in the
sense that the paths introduced have been deﬁned by following
ancient Roman roads leading us to call them Metro Cultural
Heritage (Metro-CH) paths. As an additional result, we obtain
the advantage to improve the touristic ﬂow and social life in the
suburbs that now are poorly exploited areas compared with the
heart of Rome. From the overview map deﬁnition, we derive a geo
based mobile application system used to implement a local Web
mobile application system tailored for the Metro-CH without any
additional infrastructure. As discussion, we show how the solution
is in line with the principles of European Convention of Faro for
the Cultural Heritage and with the national Italian guidelines of
historical paths.
Keywords–Cultural Heritage; Sustainable Mobility; Map Inte-
gration.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Sustainability is requiring a strong revision of technologies
and studies related to the improvement of the quality of urban
life. This is especially true for those urban areas rich in
cultural heritage sites, but having poor quality of life, like
the suburbs of Rome. In this case, a possible strategy to
remedy the situation could be to consider a new form of smart
tourism which can lead to a sustainable economic and social
improvement [3]. In particular, in this paper we introduce
a georeferenced sustainable mobility model that integrates
existing natural paths and urban paths revisited in accordance
to slow cultural tourism patterns. This mobility model has been
used in order to follow old roman roads, such as the one close
to the famous ancient Via Appia, thus connecting in a safe way
the railway metro stations by walking there. The description is
obtained by deriving a virtual map from the existing railway
map through a virtual extraction of such ancient roads after
a preliminary walking study and Web map annotation. The
ﬁnal characterization is strongly based on cultural heritage
preservation in the sense that it is inspired by literary works
of the famous writers Goethe and Gregorovius. Moreover, the
model could be applied to other transportation systems such
as local trains providing connections to other touristic areas
close to Rome.
A. Dynamic Revision of Cultural Heritage
From a general point of view, the main purpose of the
proposed Cultural Metro is strongly related to the principles of
European Faro Convention established in 2005 on the value of
Cultural Heritage for the Society. Starting from the principle of
Cultural Heritage as a set of resources inherited from the past
upon which values and knowledge are expressed by the help
of people living close to it (Art. 2 of the Faro Convention), we
think that there is the need to propagate such a cultural asset to
subsequent generations in order to guarantee a good evolution.
This will be accomplished by enriching its knowledge and
studying its value (Artt. 4 and 5 of Faro Convention in [7]).
B. On the Sustainable Cultural Tourism
Improving new type of tourism in a sustainable way is a
key factor for increasing the knowledge not only for historical
monuments but also for all facts and issues related to living
styles and traditions which are very rich in interpretations and
with new aspects to be transmitted to future generations.
In particular, the increasing interest for slow tourism gives
the chance to have a better interaction with hidden monuments
and local traditions. Hence, our purpose is to combine slow
tourism with existing public transport system by highlighting
the ancient roads with their monuments nearby. It is important
to note that this approach is effective because all roads are safe
for walking and they respect the guidelines of Italian walking
paths introduced at national level [9].
II.
CULTURAL METRO DESCRIPTION
The southern suburbs of Rome contain several walking
tours of particular interest from a historical point of view
which offer a strong potential in terms of slow tourism. With
respect to the hearth of Rome often plenty of cars and people
moving in a pletora of shops, museums etc., the suburbs offer
a different perspective with many hidden interesting places.
Our model aims therefore to cope with such issues trying to
optimize public transport and to contribute to hidden cultural
values extraction (see the integration schema proposed in
Figure 1).
The interested area has been outlined on the Ofﬁcial Rome
Transport Map as shown in Figure 2.
It corresponds to the south-east part of the city in which
there are two main subway lines A and C with their starting
stations.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2 gives the resulting integration schema with green
lines evidencing the Cultural Metro lines (a sort of urban
cultural trekking paths).
Figure 3 shows in a more focused way, by means of typical
transport icons and graphical elements, how this concept is
used to optimize the transportation system in a sustainable
way.
Figure 1. Cultural Metro Introduction Schema
Figure 2. The Metro Map of Rome with the green areas related to Cultural Metro
proposal
These pathways are organized by selecting ancient paths
close to old Appia roman street located to north-east of the
Appia itself. They are named Goethe line and Gregorovius
line respectively, in accordance to cultural heritage concept
because, in the XIX century, they were extensively used by
such famous writers. In fact, in the past they themselves have
traveled the routes checking in person and recording in their
studies / diaries what was catching their attention. In this way
the proposed Cultural Metro system might be considered a
way to preserve cultural heritage by handing down to posterity
Figure 3. Focus with graphical symbols and sustainable paths integrated with
railway metro lines
[Was du erebt von deinen Vatern hast,erwirb es, um es zu
besitzen!...(What you have inherited from your fathers, get it
to own it!) (Goethe-Faust)].
•
Goethe Line for the pathway along Appia and old
Latina road towards Tuscolo Area.
•
Gregorovius Line for the pathway corresponding to
Labicana road close to Prenestina road.
The proposed general schema for the Cultural Metro might
be organized by considering as terminus of the subway lines
the Tor Vergata Campus (Figure 3). All of these lines allow
to reach Metro lines A and C of the Rome Metro Railway
system.
Each line of the Cultural Metro is a walking pathway
designed in the area surrounding the Campus of University
of Rome Tor Vergata. The Gregorovius Line has been asso-
ciated to the old Labicana roman road while the Goethe line
corresponds to eastern roman road such as via Appia and via
Latina. In this way, such walking paths are very interesting
from an historical point of view, providing a nice experience
from the people.
A. Map Building Activity Description
From the Metro description, we can see that the map
deﬁnition could be obtained by deriving the walking routes
in a standard format for each path and adding to them the
occurring annotations (building information and monuments,
next stop station close to the current position, etc). The adopted
map building strategy is deﬁned as follows:
1)
Starting from the campus and walking towards metro
C in a way similar to the walking routes from Goethe
and Gregorovius travel books, we have marked points
of interest on the map with the purpose to use them
also as reference poinst like metro stations, leading to
a virtual metro line composed of a sequence of cul-
tural metro stops placed at regular intervals between
the starting point and railway Metro C (Gregorovius
Line).
2)
Again, after starting from Via Appia Park close to
metro A (Villa dei Quintili), we executed another
traced route by walking towards the Metro A and
by following ancient monuments like Acquedotto
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Claudio and ancient roads connecting Romana Appia
to other roads to the North (Goethe line).
3)
Hereafter, GPS (Global Positioning System) routes
and monuments informations have been included on
digital maps downloaded from Open Street Map web-
site (www.openstreetmap.org ). Green areas extracted
by OSM (Open Street Map) map in form of shapes
have been checked and compared with GPS tracks
in order to guarantee that there is a good chance to
obtaining a well sustainable complete walking path.
B. Description of Pedestrian Walking System in Cultural
Metro
The map shows that every line is deﬁned as a sequence of
small walking paths (each of them long from 10 to 100 meters),
without any slope and easy to be crossed due to presence
of sidewalks on all busy roads. In addition, the presence of
a public bus on the campus might be used to replace some
walking paths.
III.
A LIGHT MOBILE INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR
CULTURAL METRO
In order to optimize the cultural value of the proposed
Cultural Metro, it is important to introduce a mobile appli-
cation system that could be used to help people while walking
in Cultural Metro, thus leading to a particular innovative
cultural navigational digital system. The main advantage of
considering walking paths as a metro line for walking people
is the fact that its implementation requires only that each path
must be available for pedestrians and does not require external
infrastructure except for an adequate infosystem able to show
what are the nearest stop and physical route towards the next
stop. Figure 4 shows an example of Mobile Application View
with Augmentity Reality (AR) Interface (called MetroGO) to
navigate towards subway metro stop of Line A.
The main idea is to consider that visual annotations on the
screen can be used not only for explaining old monuments,
but also for helping to move towards next metro station.
It is important to note that the AR solution provided
by MetroGO APP is more sustainable with respect to other
solutions based on localization devices (or tags/beacons) in
the sense that environment is respected and there is no need
to make use of additional things or hardware often considered
for intercepting monuments and helping to ﬁnd direction. For
instance in the works [1] and [2] it has been introduced a geo
tag based info model named Street Web characterized by local
wiﬁ internet able to support mobile smartphones of visitors in
a context based navigation useful in places rich of monuments
and for which is hard to obtain the same result through 4G
connections. Hence this work can be considered a new way to
make use of AR for cultural navigational system and it is ﬁrst
example of this type to our knowledge.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS
Improving the quality of urban life in Art cities like Rome
according to Smart City paradigm, requires a careful design
to avoid dangerous effects (trafﬁc congestion and pollution).
Moreover the need to involve citizen must be kept onto account
especially in the case of Art Cities. A sustainable approach
is to consider Human Smart City in which cultural areas
hidden to citizen can be reused in terms of smart tourism
Figure 4. MetroGO APP with AR of cultural types
and slow tourism. In this work we showed a preliminary
example designed with the aim to reach a tourism-based slow
transportation system enforcing the emerging styles of slow
tourism for which touristic walking tours close to big cities
must be re-discovered and used in the planning systems of the
urban future.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Angelaccio, ”Street Web A Framework for -Web on the Road -
Smart Services”, Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on
Web Information Systems and Technologies, WEBIST, Volume 1, Rome,
Italy, April 23-25, 2016. SciTePress, ISBN 978-989-758-186-1
[2]
M. Angelaccio, B. Buttarazzi and C. Gnessi, ”Smart Mobility and
Cultural Tourism: The Termini-Centocelle Train Museum, an Example
of Smartourism Project in Rome”, IARIA SMART, June 25, 2017 to
June 29, 2017, pages: 44 to 48, Venice, (Italy)
[3]
M. Angelaccio, L. Zappitelli, ”Social Smartourism” Journal of Tourism,
June 25-27 2016, Athens, (Greece)
[4]
J. Y. Kim , J. Y. Lee, ”Development of Local Cultural Resources
Based on the Concept of Ecomuseum, Focusing on Cheorwon, Gangwon
Province”, International Journal of Multimedia and Ubiquitous Engineer-
ing, Vol.8, No.5 (2013), pp.297-302
[5]
N. Viswanadham, S. Kameshwaran,”Ecosystem Aware Global Supply
Chain Management”, World Scientiﬁc 2013
[6]
Dr.P.D. SireeshaKumari, Mosalikanti.Subha Lakshmi, ”Internet of Things
(IoT) gateway to smart villages”, International Journal of Innovative
Research in Advanced Engineering (IJIRAE) ISSN: 2349-2763, Issue
12, Volume 3 December 2016
[7]
”Convenzione Quadro del Consiglio Europeo 27 Febbraio, 2013 (Euro-
pean Convention )”. http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/EN/Treaties/Html/
199.htm
[8]
”Internet of Things: Converging Technology for Smart Environments and
Integrated Ecosystems”, (River Publishers series in Information Science
and Technology), Editors Ovidiu Vermesan and Peter Fries, June 2013
[9]
”Atlante dei Cammini d’Italia”, (”Italian Historical PathWays Atlas”)
http://www.turismo.beniculturali.it/home-cammini-ditalia/
atlante-dei-cammini-ditalia/ [accessed March 2018]
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

