Inferring Urban Population Distribution from GSM Data: An Experimental Case 
Study 
 
Hisham Raslan 
Telecommunications Industry Consultant 
Teradata Egypt  
Giza, Egypt 
hisham.raslan@teradata.com 
Ahmed Elragal 
Business Informatics & Operations Department 
German University in Cairo (GUC) 
New Cairo, Egypt 
ahmed.elragal@guc.edu.eg 
 
 
Abstract-A huge amount of location and tracking data is 
gathered by tracking and location technologies, such as Global 
Positioning system (GPS) and Global System for Mobile 
communication (GSM) devices leading to the collection of large 
spatiotemporal datasets and to the opportunity of discovering 
usable knowledge about movement behavior. Movement 
behavior can be extremely useful in many ways when applied, 
for example, in the domain of planning metropolitan areas, 
traffic 
management, 
mobile 
marketing, 
tourism, 
etc. 
Currently, population statistics are derived from census data 
and household surveys. However, they are difficult to manage 
and costly to implement. In this paper, we move towards this 
direction and propose a technique for inferring urban 
population distribution from GSM data. A case study is used 
from to build a prototype for testing and evaluating the 
proposed technique. Results showed that we were able to infer 
population density with high accuracy based on analyzing 
GSM data. 
Keywords-Population density; GSM-CDR data; experimental 
case study. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Spatiotemporal patterns that show the cumulative 
behavior of a population movement can be very useful in 
understanding mobility-related phenomena. In fact, the 
discovery of the pattern of traffic flows among sequences of 
different places in a town can help decision makers to take 
well informed decisions in different areas, such as urban 
planning and traffic management. In many application 
domains, useful information can be extracted from moving 
object data if the meanings as well as the background 
information are considered. The knowledge of moving 
patterns between different places in the geographic space 
can help the user answer queries about moving objects or 
movement behavior. 
The mainstream literature focuses on finding movement 
behavior using GPS datasets, however, GPS is rarely used in 
some developing countries, e.g., Egypt. On the other hand, 
almost overwhelming majority of the population is using 
mobile phones (in Egypt, >90M lines which exceed 100% 
penetration). For this reason, in this research we move 
towards the direction of using GSM data, as an alternative to 
the unavailable GPS data. 
In this paper, we introduce a technique for identifying 
home and work locations based on GSM-CDR (Call Detail 
Records) data. CDR stores the details of the call (caller ID, 
called ID, time of the call, call duration, etc. Before 
applying the technique, POI (Points Of Interest) will be 
identified, and then, the identified POI will be mapped to 
CDR data, which would then be used in inferring the 
location. The research relies on experimental case study 
based on GSM data from a mobile operator to support 
answering the research question "how to infer population 
density from GSM-CDR data?" 
The remaining of this document is organized as follows: 
Section II provides an overview of related work. Section III 
describes the proposed framework, conceptual model, and 
the algorithm used. In Section IV, the proposed framework 
is applied on an experimental case study. Section V 
discusses the results of the experimental case study. Section 
VI evaluates the work done and recommend future research. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The wide use of technologies, such as Global System for 
Mobile communication (GSM) networks and Global 
Positioning System (GPS) resulted in the availability of 
large amounts of spatiotemporal data. This section provides 
an overview of related work within the domain of 
spatiotemporal 
data 
analysis 
and 
mining 
research 
community including related work and research areas that 
directly 
address 
inferring 
population 
density 
using 
spatiotemporal data. 
The identification of dense areas has received the 
attention. Nevertheless, the techniques used so far suffer 
from limitations including poor spatial resolution due to the 
use of grids. Vieira et al. [1] proposed the DAD-MST 
algorithm to identify dense areas from CDR that is able to 
process large scale datasets and respects the original 
tessellation of the space. The DAD-MST algorithm has been 
tested and validated using a real CDR dataset of almost 50 
million entries for over 1 million unique users over a four-
month period. The dense areas identified have been 
qualitatively validated using the subway system of the city 
under study. The dynamics of the dense areas identified 
revealed the use that the citizens make of their city, 
indicating differences between different hour ranges and 
weekdays and weekends.  
One billion people now live in an urban slum, the vast 
majority of them in developing nations [2]. A slum can be 
defined as “a residential area which has developed without 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

legal claims to the land and/or permission from the 
concerned authorities to build; as a result of their illegal or 
semi-legal status, infrastructure and services are usually 
inadequate”. Sociologists theorize that the majority of urban 
migration is filtered through slums and understanding the 
migration patterns is vital to understanding the growth of 
urban areas. Wesolowski and Eagle [2] used data generated 
from mobile phones to better understand one of the largest 
slums, Kibera located in Nairobi, Kenya; focusing on 
migration patterns out of Kibera, inferring places of work, 
and tribal affiliations. Kibera has one cell tower location 
inside the slum, identified with six unique cell tower IDs. In 
order to form a sample of Kibera’s residents, a caller is 
classified as living in Kibera if they meet all of the 
following criteria: 1) Over fifty percent of their total calls 
between the hours of 6 PM and 8 AM have been made from 
one of Kibera’s towers. 2) The total number of calls made in 
a month is between 3 and two standard deviations from the 
mean number of calls made by those living in Kibera. They 
used this identification of callers, looking at three key 
components of slum dynamics: migration trends, work 
trends, and tribal affiliations. 
Understanding the causes and effects of internal 
migration 
is 
critical 
to 
the 
effective 
design 
and 
implementation 
of 
policies 
that 
promote 
human 
development. 
Typically 
government 
censuses 
and 
household surveys do not capture the patterns of temporary 
and circular migration that are prevalent in developing 
economies. Blumenstock [3] illustrated how new forms of 
information and communication technology can be used to 
better understand the behavior of individuals in developing 
countries and used mobile phones as a new source of data 
on internal migration. Using Rwanda as a case study, they 
developed and formalized the concept of inferred mobility, 
and computed this and other metrics on a large dataset 
containing the phone records of 1.5 million Rwandans over 
four years. The empirical results corroborate the findings of 
a recent government survey that notes relatively low levels 
of permanent migration in Rwanda. However, this analysis 
reveals more subtle patterns that were not detected in the 
government survey, namely, high levels of temporary and 
circular migration and significant heterogeneity in mobility 
within the Rwandan population. The following statistics are 
computed based on the mobile phone transaction history: 
Number of cell towers used: As a very crude proxy for the 
movement of the individual, it is the count of unique towers 
used by the individual during the specified interval of time. 
Maximum distance travelled: This is the maximum distance 
between the set of towers used by the individual over the 
interval under study. Radius of Gyration (ROG): measures 
how far an object travels from its center of gravity. In the 
case of humans, ROG roughly measures the typical range of 
a user in space. 
People spend most of their time at a few key locations, 
such as home and work. Being able to identify how the 
movements of people cluster around these “important 
places” is crucial for a range of technology and policy 
decisions in areas such as telecommunications and 
transportation infrastructure deployment. Isaacman et al. [4] 
proposed a new technique based on clustering and 
regression for analyzing anonymized cellular network data 
to identify generally important locations, and to discern 
semantically meaningful locations such as home and work. 
The algorithm used for identifying important places has two 
stages. In the first stage, it spatially clusters the cell towers 
that appear in a user’s trace. In the second stage, it identifies 
which of the clusters are important using a model derived 
from a logistic regression of volunteers’ CDR’s. To select 
Home or Work, the relevant algorithm (i.e., either the Home 
or Work algorithm) calculates a score for each important 
cluster using coefficients obtained from a logistic 
regression. The algorithm then assigns the cluster with the 
highest score to be Home or Work. 
Understanding the spatiotemporal distribution of people 
within a city is crucial to many planning applications. 
Obtaining data to create required knowledge, currently 
involves costly survey methods [5]. In their research, Toole 
et al. examined the potential of using GSM-CDR data to 
measure spatiotemporal changes in population. In the 
process, they identified the relationship between land use 
and dynamic population over the course of a typical week. 
A machine learning classification algorithm was used to 
identify clusters of locations with similar zoned uses and 
mobile phone activity patterns. It was shown that the mobile 
phone data is capable of delivering useful information on 
actual land use that supplements zoning regulations. 
In their attempt to perform a comparative analysis of the 
behavioral dynamics of rural and urban societies, Eagle et 
al. [6] estimated the location based on cellular towers. They 
used four years of mobile phone data from all 1.4M 
subscribers within a small country. They did not have access 
to phone numbers, but rather unique IDs that provide no 
personally identifiable information. In addition to the 
standard information within CDR, which includes voice and 
text-messages. 
To understand dynamics of human mobility in support 
of 
urban 
planning 
and 
transportation 
management, 
Phithakkitnukoon et al. [7] developed an activity-aware map 
that contains most probable activity associated with a 
specific area in the map based on POIs information. With 
activity-aware map, they were able to extract individual 
daily activity patterns from analyzing a large mobile phone 
data of nearly one million records. 
Palmer et al. [8] conducted a pilot study - the Human 
Mobility Project (HMP) – to explore the use of mobile 
phones in demographic research and to test a technique: a 
dynamic, location-based survey. The pilot study uses Global 
Positioning System (GPS) and cellular tower data from 
mobile phones to determine subjects’ residence locations, 
observe how they respond to questions at a fixed time and 
place and also to examine where they spend time when not 
at home, their trajectories, and how they respond to 
questions at a variety of different times and places. They 
were able to recruit 270 volunteers in 13 countries, to share 
GPS and cellular tower information on their trajectories and 
respond to dynamic, location-based surveys using an open-
source Android application. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The methods currently available for monitoring traffic 
tend to require the installation of ancillary devices along 
roadways (loop detectors, cameras and so on), which, along 
with the costs of installation and maintenance, render 
alternative techniques more attractive [9]. Their research 
project has demonstrated a methodology to infer traffic data, 
such as journey Origin Destination matrices or traffic counts 
at given points in the road network using a technique that 
involves analysis of anonymous phone location data in a 
mobile phone network. The estimation of traffic data has 
been carried out using non-real data generated by a 
simulator of vehicular traffic and phones along a stretch of 
the road network. These simulated data comprise phone 
location data, which form the source for the development of 
this technique.  
Smoreda et al. [10] reviewed several alternative methods 
of collecting data from mobile phones for human mobility 
analysis and described cellular phone network architecture 
and the location data it can provide. In conclusion, the 
authors proposed considering cellular network location data 
as a useful complementary source for human mobility 
research and provided case studies to illustrate the 
advantages and disadvantages of each method. 
Liao et al. [11] introduced a hierarchical Markov model 
that can learn and infer a user’s daily movements through an 
urban community. The model uses multiple levels of 
abstraction in order to bridge the gap between raw GPS 
sensor measurements and high level information such as a 
user’s destination and mode of transportation. Locations, 
such as bus stops and parking lots, are learned from GPS 
data logs. 
Krumm 
[12] 
assessed 
the 
privacy 
threats 
and 
countermeasures associated with location data. They 
examined location data gathered from volunteer subjects to 
quantify how well four different algorithms can identify the 
subjects’ home locations and then their identities using 
freely available, programmable web search engine. Their 
procedure was able to identify a small fraction of the 
subjects and a larger fraction of their home addresses. Then, 
they applied three different obscuration countermeasures 
designed to foil the privacy attacks: spatial cloaking, noise, 
and rounding and showed how much obscuration is 
necessary to maintain the privacy of all the subjects 
Advances in sensor networking and location tracking 
technology enable location-based applications but they also 
create significant privacy risks. Gruteser et al. [13] proposed 
a distributed anonymity algorithm that is applied in a sensor 
network, before service providers gain access to the data. 
The purpose of these mechanisms is to provide a high 
degree of privacy, save service users from dealing with 
service providers’ privacy policies, and reduce the service 
providers’ 
requirements 
for 
safeguarding 
private 
information. 
III. 
PROPOSED TECHNIQUE 
In our research, we consider population density is a 
result of residential and business facilities in areas (or POI) 
and in order to estimate the density we need first to identify 
the home and work locations for every commuter (user). 
The question is “how to identify home and work POIs for 
commuters from the CDRs?”  
Every time a mobile subscriber makes or receives a call 
the network generates a CDR to store the details of the call 
(caller ID, called ID, time of the call, call duration, etc.). 
One of the CDR parameters is the cell id, which can be used 
to identify cell location. It is possible to develop an 
algorithm to find home and work locations for the 
commuters based on categorizing day of the week and hour 
of the day to home, work, travel, and other. Then we 
aggregate the number of CDRs created by the commuters in 
different locations at the defined categories; then the 
location where we find the user most at a specific category, 
home or work, is considered the commuter home or work 
POI. Following are the steps to identify commuters home 
and work POI: 
1. Define “location type” as Home, Work, Travel, or 
Other; 
2. “Location Type” value is based on time of the day and 
day of the week as suggested in Table I; 
3. Aggregate the number of CDRs done by commuters for 
each Location Type per location (POI); 
4. For home and work Location Types, the POI with the 
maximum number of CDRs for a specific location type 
is assigned as the commuter home or work POI 
respectively; 
5. Knowing home and work POI, we can aggregate to the 
required level (district, area, city, and governorate). 
TABLE I.  
DEFINITION OF LOCATION TYPE 
Day of Week Time Interval Location 
Type 
Time Interval Description 
Start 
End 
Start 
End 
1 
7 
0 
6 
Home Home-overnight (Sun - Sat) 
6 
6 
6 
11 
Home Home-Friday morning 
2 
5 
20 
24 
Other Other-Afternoon Free time 
6 
6 
11 
24 
Other Other-Rest of Fri 
7 
7 
0 
24 
Other Other-all day, Sat 
1 
1 
0 
24 
Other Other-all day, Sun 
2 
5 
6 
8 
Travel Travel-Morning rush hour 
2 
5 
16 
20 
Travel Travel-Afternoon rush hour 
2 
5 
8 
16 
Work Work-regular working hours 
In order to apply this technique, we need to identify the 
mobile operator cells covering the areas under investigation 
then map their locations to geographical areas (semantics); 
then, using the CDRs generated with the identified cells 
over a period of time we can identify operator subscriber’s 
densities at these areas.  
We propose a framework that aims to establish an 
enhanced approach towards building analysis engine that 
can infer population density from GSM data. The 
framework includes process, technologies, data, and 
decisions as the main aspects towards knowledge extraction.  
The phases of the proposed framework are presented in 
Figure 1.  
The process outlines the detailed tasks to take place at 
each phase and highlights the main layers which data passes 
through to be transformed into knowledge. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The proposed framework process is comprised of the 
following phases: storage, data preparation, data pre-
processing, analytics, and interpretation. The framework 
takes all phases into consideration to provide a holistic view 
of the solution. 
 
Figure 1. Our Framework. 
While using GSM data to study traffic pattern, we will 
not be violating people’s privacy, we will be using disguised 
data, which do not reveal real identify of people. Besides, 
unlike GPS data which identify exact location of a 
subscriber, a GSM cell covers a wide area that makes it 
impossible to identify the exact location of a subscriber by 
knowing the location of the cell used during the network 
activity. This limitation will not affect our research as we 
are interested in the collective movement behavior between 
areas. 
The following are the tasks performed to reach the 
results: 
1. Build Logical Data Model (LDM); 
2. Data loading 
 
Load CDRs and Cell information 
 
Create and load lookups 
3. Data preparation & Semantic annotation 
 
Data Quality assessment 
 
Define POI to add semantics to the data 
 
Identify Commuters (users) 
4. Infer Home and Work POI; 
5. Perform Analytics. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL CASE STUDY 
In this section, we apply the suggested framework on an 
experimental case study. Our case study is based on data 
collected, with permission, from a mobile operator in Egypt. 
The data represents 4 months of CDR’s describing Greater 
Cairo.  
A. Build the Logical Data Model 
The foundation for the required analysis is the Logical 
Data Model (LDM). The LDM is the conceptual design that 
shows the business entities and relations between them. It is 
used to design the Physical Data Model (PDM), which will 
be created physically on the database management system 
(DBMS). The LDM is used to help the analytical users plan 
and develop queries and analytics. Figure 2 shows the LDM 
used for the case study. 
 
Figure 2. Prototype LDM. 
The model is comprised of entities, attributes and 
relations; the model entities are colored to differentiate the 
type of information stored in each entity; blue entities are 
data loaded from the source (CDRs and Cells), white 
(uncolored) entities have semantics information (lookups: 
governorate, cities, areas, districts), green represents entities 
identified for analysis (POIs), and yellow entities contain 
information extracted from the data (Commuters). The 
LDM is used to create the PDM, which will be created 
physically on the selected DBMS. 
B. Data Loading 
Data loading includes two main tasks: (i) loading CDRs 
and cell information; and (ii) creating and loading lookups. 
Load CDRs and Cell information is accomplished by the 
following activities: 
- 
CDR tables for voice and GPRS are merged into the 
table “CDR”. The CDR table has the following 
structure: (User_Id, CDR_Date, CDR_Time, and 
Cell_Id) 
• 
Four Months of voice and data CDR’s are 
merged into the table “CDR”. 
• 
Total number of CDRs: 10,314,009,634 ≈ 
1.5B 
• 
Greater Cairo cells loaded to “Cell” table in 
the cell id column; the POI column will be 
mapped later.  
• 
Number of cells: 14,175 
- 
After loading the CDR table, cell ids are loaded to 
the “Cell” table in the cell id column; the POI 
column will be mapped later. POI’s were manually 
identified using Google earth by locating all cells on 
the map then grouping the cells in a specific area to 
a POI as we will explain later. The cell table has the 
following structure: (Cell_Id, POI_Id). 
The create and load lookups fulfill the requirements of 
the data loading phase by creating those lookup tables: 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Governorate, City, Area, and District. They are then 
uploaded with the information required to add semantics to 
the analysis results. 
C. Data preparation 
The first step in the data preparation id the data quality 
assessment. Data quality is the suitability of data to meet 
business requirements. Because different organizations and 
applications have different uses and requirements for the 
data, data quality requirements will also differ. So data do 
not have to be perfect, but they need to meet business 
requirements. We will be assessing the data for the 
following: 
• 
Consistency (Format and Content) 
• 
Completeness 
• 
Uniqueness 
• 
Integrity 
We use data profiling tool to perform the required data 
quality assessments. Table II and Table III show value 
analysis for the CDR and Cell tables respectively. 
TABLE II.  
VALUE ANALYSIS FOR THE CDR TABLE 
Column 
Name 
Count 
null Unique 
Zero 
Positive 
Negative 
User_ID 
10314009634 0 
15424023 
0 
10314009634 
0 
CDR_Date 
10314009634 0 
122 
 
 
 
CDR_Time 
10314009634 0 
86400 138790 10313870844 
0 
Cell_ID 
10314009634 0 
15077 
0 
10314009634 
0 
TABLE III.  
VALUE ANALYSIS FOR THE CELL TABLE 
Column Name 
Count null Unique Zero Positive Negative 
Cell_ID 
14175 0 
14175 
0 
14175 
0 
Cell_Status 
14175 151 
4 
 
 
 
POI_Id 
14175 0 
522 
0 
14175 
0 
In our experimental dataset, CDR’s with cell ids that do 
not exist in the cell table represent: 
1. Number of CDRs with missing cells: 214026321 (2% 
of total CDRs) 
2. Number of missing cells: 1127 (8% of total Cells) 
The ratios of discovered data issues (2%) will not affect 
the accuracy of the analysis results.  
Second step in the data preparation is to define POI’s. 
This step is comprised of the following: 
1. Group cell sites to define POI: POI’s under 
investigation are defined by nearest cell sites. To locate 
cell sites, all cells were added to Google earth. To add 
the cells to the map we use the site coordinates. The 
coordinates 
are 
in 
Universal 
Transverse 
Mercator notation (UTM). Cell sites usually have more 
than one cell and they all have same UTM. The process 
of grouping cells to a centralized POI is a manual task. 
We tried to choose the POIs to be close to a real POI 
and in the same time to identify the urban areas. This 
process reduced the number of points on the map from 
around 14K to about 500 points, which is more 
manageable and easier to locate on the map. The 
identified POI and the POI demographics are then 
loaded in the POI table. 
2. Update POI column in the cell and CDR tables: As 
described earlier, the grouping of the cells to POI is 
done manually and a mapping table was created to map 
cells to POIs. The mapping table is used to populate the 
POI column in the cell table and by joining the cells 
table and the CDR’s table on the cell id column we can 
update POI column in the CDR table. 
Third and last step here is to identify commuters. 
Commuters are the users of the mobile devices who 
generate voice and data CDR’s. To maintain the privacy of 
the subscribers we only have anonymous identification 
number (user id) for the subscribers in the CDR table. We 
can use user id to select the CDRs made by each user 
(subscriber) and use it for the purpose of this research. To 
populate the commuter table we select the distinct users 
from the CDR table and load them in the commuter table. 
The number of commuters (users) identified is 13,887,256 
which is a considerable number of commuters, relative to 
greater Cairo population, that can fairly represent greater 
Cairo population distribution. 
D. Infer Home and Work POI 
Here, the proposed technique described earlier is applied 
to infer home and work POI in the commuter table. After 
populating the table, exploration queries are executed to 
assess the technique results. Resulting indicated that 71% of 
commuters where identified with home and work POI’s 
(approximately 9.8M); 7% with POI only; 18% with Work 
only; and 4% with neither. Additionally, and in same 
process, approximately 10.8M home POI’s were identified; 
12.3 work POI’s. 6.7M commuters were identified with 
identical home and work. After populating the table, we 
executed exploration queries to assess the technique results; 
the resulting figures of the queries are shown in Table IV. 
TABLE IV.  
DATA EXPLORATION RESULTS 
Commuters with Home_POI and Work_POI identified 
9,831,746 
71% 
Commuters with Home_POI only identified 
950,244 
7% 
Commuters with Work_POI only identified 
2,463,754 
18% 
Commuters with neither Home_POI nor Work_POI 
identified 
641,512 
5% 
T O T A L 
13,887,256 100% 
Identified Home_POI 
10,781,990 
78% 
Identified Work_POI 
12,295,500 
89% 
Unidentified Home_POI 
3,105,266 
22% 
Unidentified Work_POI 
1,591,756 
11% 
Commuters with identical Home_POI and Work_POI 
6,796,530 
49% 
E. Perform Analytics 
By aggregating per the required dimension (POI, 
District, Area, City, or Governorate) on Home or Work POI, 
then sorting the results descending, we were able to get the 
answer for different business question e.g., top busy cities as 
well as top busy governorates. In Table V, we provide 
results for Governorates as a sample. 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE V.  
TOP BUSY GOVERNORATES 
H o m e  (G o v e r n o r a t e) 
 
W o r k  (G o v e r n o r a t e) 
Id Governorate 
name 
Total 
%  Id Governorate 
name 
Total 
% 
1 
Cairo 
5,361,306 39%  1 
Cairo 
6,444,982 46% 
2 
Giza 
3,103,579 22%  2 
Giza 
3,365,887 24% 
3 
Qalubia 
2,317,105 17%  3 
Qalubia 
2,484,631 18% 
 
Unidentified 
3,105,266 22%   Unidentified 
1,591,756 11% 
 
T O T A L 
13,887,256 
   
T O T A L 
13,887,256 
 
The numbers are inferred from four month of usage data 
from June till September 2012. The inferred numbers can be 
related to the actual numbers as follows: 
- 
The inferred populations of the residence of Cairo, Giza 
and Qalubia governorates as shown in the table above 
are about 5M, 3M, and 2M respectively 
- 
According to Egypt census bureau, the population of 
Cairo, Giza and Qalubia governorates are about 9M, 
7M, and 5M respectively [14] 
- 
The percentages for the inferred population relative to 
the announced are: 55%, 42%, and 40% and these are 
reasonable 
percentages 
for 
the 
following 
considerations: 
• 
The data used are coming from one operator 
out of three operators in Egypt; 
• 
The operator form which we have obtained the 
data, has been the first to start its operations in 
Cairo which enabled it to acquire the largest 
customer base among the three operators; 
• 
Mobile penetration in Egypt by Q3-2012 was 
about 113% [15]. 
As far as movement between cities is concerned, 
home_POI and work_POI were used to calculate the 
number of commuters moving between them and 
aggregating on the dimensions district, area, city, and 
governorate; we will be able to calculate the volume of 
traffic between each as follows:  
– 
Select distinct home_POI, work_POI and Count of 
rows from commuter table to get the number of 
commuters moving daily from the two POIs 
– 
Sort the results descending on the resulted count 
will show the two POIs with the highest volume of 
traffic 
– 
Similarly, do the same to get governorates with the 
most traffic in and out. 
A 
matrix 
that 
shows 
the 
movement 
between 
governorates is shown in Table VI. 
TABLE VI.  
MOVEMENT BETWEEN GOVERNORATES 
Home 
W O R K 
 
Giza 
% 
Cairo 
% 
Qalubia 
% 
TOTAL  
Identified 
Home 
Giza 
2,447,841 87% 
311,390 11% 
43,562 2% 2,802,793 
Cairo 
214,168 4% 4,532,280 93% 
146,419 3% 4,892,867 
Qalubia 
64,653 3% 
261,946 12% 1,809,487 85% 2,136,086 
TOTAL  
Identified 
Work 
2,726,662   
5,105,616   
1,999,468   
9,831,746 
V. 
ANALYSIS OF RESULTS 
In this paper, we presented a new technique for inferring 
population density from spatiotemporal data. The technique 
could be used in relation to various applications e.g., urban 
planning and traffic management. We have shown, 
conceptually and practically, how the technique was able to 
population distribution in greater Cairo and hence being 
able to help answer related business questions with regards 
to movement pattern between cities.  
Results showed that it has been possible to infer the 
population density in areas, cities, and governorates with 
high accuracy. The analysis can also explain the regular 
movement volumes of commuters from home to work, 
which is very useful in identifying movement between 
areas, cities, or governorates and calculating the average 
distance of the commuters. 
The proposed technique was able to detect movement 
patterns 
from 
high-granularity 
GSM 
data 
whereas 
mainstream literature focuses on finding these patterns from 
GPS fine-grained data.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this research, we proposed a new technique to infer 
population distribution and movement based on GSM-CDR 
dataset. While mainstream literature focus on finding this 
knowledge based on GPS data, we have been able to show 
how this could be achieved based on GSM data. In the case 
study, we used real GSM data that was provided by a 
mobile operator in Egypt. Our dataset included around 4 
months of data for 13 million users performed over 10 
billion calls and GPRS sessions. We performed different 
types of analyses covering population density and traffic 
between areas, cities, governorates. Urban planning and 
traffic management decision makers could use our technique 
to make related decision. 
Our analysis confirms that long-term GSM activity data 
is well-suited typical population density analysis, especially 
when GPS data is not available. 
Using real data in the case study was definitely for the 
benefit of the research. However, the data size was a major 
obstacle that caused the research to halt several times before 
Teradata granted the use of one of its servers to the research. 
This is very important to mention as GSM CDRs are always 
huge in volume and for deployment the required volume of 
data will be much more as data from all operators should be 
integrated to provide complete view for whole population. 
Future work includes the deployment of our technique 
and in different business domains as well as conducting a 
comparative study between GSM versus GPS data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. R. Vieira, V. Frias-Martinez, N. Oliver and E. Frias-Martinez, 
"Characterizing dense urban areas from mobile phone-call data: 
Discovery and social dynamics," in IEEE Second International 
Conference, Minneapolis, Aug. 2010, pp. 241-248.  
[2] A. P. Wesolowski and N. Eagle, "Parameterizing the Dynamics of 
Slums," in AAAI Spring Symposium: Artificial Intelligence for 
Development, Palo Alto, Mar. 2010, pp. 103-108.  
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[3] J. Blumenstock, "Inferring Patterns of Internal Migration from Mobile 
Phone 
Call 
Records:Evidence 
from 
Rwanda," 
Information 
Technology and Development, vol. 18 no. 2, 2012, pp. 107-125.  
[4] S. Isaacman, R. Becker, R. Caceres and S. Kobourov, "Identifying 
Important Places in People’s Lives from Cellular Network Data," in 
Proc. of 9th International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
(Pervasive), Berlin, 2011, pp. 133-151.  
[5] J. L. Toole, M. Ulm, M. C. González and D. Bauer, "Inferring land 
use from mobile phone activity," in In Proceedings of the ACM 
SIGKDD International Workshop on Urban Computing, Beijing, 
Aug. 2012, pp. 1-8.  
[6] N. Eagle, Y. de Montjoye and L. M. Bettencourt, "Community 
computing: Comparisons between rural and urban societies using 
mobile phone data," in CSE'09. International Conference, Vol. 4, 
Vancouver, Aug. 2009, pp. 144-150.  
[7] S. Phithakkitnukoon, T. Horanont, G. Di Lorenzo, R. Shibasaki and 
C. Ratti, "Activity-aware map: Identifying human daily activity 
pattern using mobile phone data," in Human Behavior Understanding, 
Istanbul, 2010, pp. 14-25.  
[8] J. R. Palmer, T. J. Espenshade, F. Bartumeus, C. Y. Chung, N. E. 
Ozgencil and K. Li, "New approaches to human mobility: Using 
mobile phones for demographic research," Demography, vol. 50, no. 
3, 29 Nov. 2013, pp. 1105-1128.  
[9] N. Caceres, J. P. Wideberg and F. G. Benitez, "Deriving origin–
destination data from a mobile phone network," Intelligent Transport 
Systems, IET, 1(1), Mar. 2007, pp. 15-26.  
[10] Z. 
Smoreda, 
A.-M. 
Olteanu-Raimond 
and 
T. 
Couronné, 
"Spatiotemporal data from mobile phones for personal mobility 
assessment," in Transport survey methods: best practice for decision 
making, London, 2013, pp. 1-20.  
[11] L. Liao, D. J. Patterson, D. Fox and H. Kautz, "Learning and inferring 
transportation routines," Artificial Intelligence, vol. 171, no. 5–6, 
Apr. 2007, pp. 255-362.  
[12] J. Krumm, "Inference attacks on location tracks," in In Pervasive 
Computing, Toronto, May 2007, pp. 127-143.  
[13] M. Gruteser, G. Schelle, A. Jain, R. Han and D. Grunwald, "Privacy-
Aware Location Sensor Networks," in HotOS, Vol. 3, Lihue, Hawaii, 
May 2003, pp. 163-168.  
[14] Egypt census bureau, "Publication Name:Population," January 2013. 
[Online]. Available: http://www.capmas.gov.eg/pdf/EgyptInFigure 
/EgyptinFigures/Tables/English/pop/population/index.html. 
[Accessed Jan 2015]. 
[15] Egypt ICT Indicators, "September 2012 English.pdf," September 
2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.egyptictindicators.gov.eg/en 
/Publications/PublicationsDoc/September%202012%20English.pdf. 
[Accessed Jan 2015]. 
 
 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

