Comparative Analysis of Photogrammetric Methods
for 3D Models for Museums
Unnur Erla Hafstað Ármannsdottir, François Anton, Darka Mioc
Department of Geodesy, National Space Institute, Technical University of Denmark
Elektrovej 328, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby
uhafstad@gmail.com,{fa,mioc}@space.dtu.dk
Abstract—The goal of this paper is to make a comparative
analysis and selection of methodologies for making 3D models
of historical items, buildings and cultural heritage and how to
preserve information such as temporary exhibitions and archae-
ological ﬁndings. Two of the methodologies analyzed correspond
to 3D models using Sketchup and Designing Reality. Finally,
panoramic photography is discussed as a 2D alternative to 3D.
Sketchup is a free-ware 3D drawing program and Designing
Reality is a commercial program, which uses Structure from
motion. For each program/method, the same comparative analy-
sis matrix has been used. Prototypes are made partly or fully and
evaluated from the point of view of preservation of information
by a museum.
Index Terms—3D Reconstruction, 3D surface models, cylindri-
cal panoramas, Google Sketchup, Designing Reality
I. INTRODUCTION
There are several museums and institutions around the world
that have made, and are in the process of making, 3D models
of museum items. According to Mr. Pletinckx [1], the making
of 3D models in Cultural Heritage has different purposes: 3D
for research, such as the Virtual reconstruction of Regolini-
Galassi tomb; 3D for digital restoration, such as bronze disks
from the Regolini-Galassi tomb, Italy; 3D to prepare physical
restoration, such as Nymphaeum, Sagalassos, Turkey; 3D as
documentation, such as Hal Saﬂieni Hypogeum, Malta; 3D as
educational resource, such as Abbey of Saint-John, Biograd,
Croatia; or 3D as communication tool, for visual reference and
recontextualisation. The virtual reconstruction of the Regolini
Galassi tomb, Italy, is a part of the European “Etruscanning
3D" project, which can be followed on the ofﬁcial blog [2].
With the help of 3D modeling, it has been possible to restore
a part of the Nymphaeum at Sagalassos, Turkey. All the stand-
ing architecture has been conserved and damaged structures,
have been repaired using matching materials [3]. Hal Saﬂieni
Hypogeum is an enormous subterranean structure excavated c.
2500 B.C. It is the only known prehistoric underground temple
in the world [4]. At the website of Europeana, a 3D pdf can
be viewed for further information on this model [5].
3D models of museum items, historical buildings, archeo-
logical sites etc. can be used those to create virtual tours. At
the Virtual Museum Transnational Network(V-MUST) website
[6], some of these virtual museums can be visited. In most
cases, the viewer can take a virtual tour, making it possible to
visit historical places online from anywhere around the world.
A virtual tour can be guided or not and can include some or
all of the following [6]: written descriptions, photographs and
sound-ﬁles describing an item or telling a story; maps showing
the geographical location of a museum or the internal location
of the museum viewer; 3D models visualized as interactive
objects and/or videos that make it possible for the viewer to
explore an item from multiple view points; hypothesis and
historical 3D models that make it possible to tell a story
about how a certain place has evolved through centuries, or to
visualize an ancient cite that no longer exists.
The goal of this paper is to make a comparative analysis and
selection of methodologies for making 3D models of historical
items, buildings and cultural heritage and how to preserve
information such as temporary exhibitions and archaeological
ﬁndings. Two of the analyzed methodologies correspond to 3D
models using Sketchup [7] and Designing Reality [8]. Finally,
panoramic photography is discussed as a 2D alternative to 3D.
Sketchup is a free-ware 3D drawing program and Designing
Reality is a commercial program, which uses Structure from
motion. For each program/method, functionality, the same
comparative analysis matrix has been used. Prototypes are
made partly or fully and evaluated from the point of view
of preservation of information by a museum: the museum of
Byggðasafnið Hvoll. Due to length, time and museum access
constraints, we have not been able to combine these different
methods. However, it is unlikely that the results of any linear
combination of these methods would be very different than
the linear combination of these results.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present
the methodology used in this research, while in Section III,
we show the results of our comparative analysis. Finally, we
conclude this paper with Section IV.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we will present the different methods used in
this paper: “Structure from Motion" using Designing Reality
in Section II-A, Sketchup in Section II-B and the cylindrical
panorama in Section II-C.
A. Structure from Motion with Designing Reality
Designing Reality is a software solution creating 3D
models from 2D images. The program is commercial so access
to the details of the implementation is not available. However,
some examples of 3D models made with the program can be
viewed on the ofﬁcial website of Designing Reality: people,
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

cityscapes, statues, landscapes, buildings. According to its
founder, Ólafur Haraldsson, the method is less time consuming
than normal photogrammetry and, on the ofﬁcial website, it is
referred to as automatic photogrammetry [8]. Here, it will be
referred to as Structure from motion.
Structure from motion (SFM) is the process of estimating
3D information from a sequence of 2D images. When the
camera moves around an object or the object moves around the
camera, information is obtained from images sensed over time.
The correspondence between images and the reconstruction
of 3D object needs to be found [9]. Once the 2D projection
of a point in the real scene has been found, its position in
3D can be assumed somewhere along the ray connecting the
camera optical centre and the corresponding spot in the image
plane. Tracking its projections across multiple images and
using triangulation allows the relatively accurate localisation
of the point in 3D [10].
Given the sufﬁcient number of points and lines over images,
from different directions it is possible to estimate the 3D
location of the structure and the camera location for each
point in a 2D image. The 3D structure model differs from
the true model by a projective transformation. The process
of SFM aims at minimizing the distances between estimated
3D structure projections and actual image measurements [10].
The youtube video “The Structure from Motion Pipeline" [10]
explains the following procedure in a very simple way:
1) Use a tripod as object support
2) Add a panoramic head that allows click-stop rotations
(Manfrotto 300N).
3) Add object table on top.
4) Position object aligned with the rotation center (see
Figure 1).
5) Position lights, and camera on tripod (see Figure 2).
6) Shoot object, rotate one click-stop, shoot again for 360
degrees (A rotation of 10 degrees is recommended here).
7) Shoot another round with different camera inclination if
necessary.
8) Remove white background with Photoshop or other
similar software, replace by ﬁxed color, vignete or
image.
9) Do for all images with same parameters.
For reﬂective objects, use an object tent with surrounding light.
Put the object in the tent and install camera through the zipper
opening. Then, process as recorded without tent.
As the user has uploaded the images, the procedure of the
program is as follows:
• Calculates the location of the camera
• Creates a Point Cloud
• Creates a Mesh (Depth map)
• Adds texture to the Mesh
• Creates an output (video as an option)
B. Drawing of 3D models with Sketchup
Sketchup is a 3D modeling tool that allows the user to
draw 3D models. The program is available as a free version as
Figure 1.
Position object aligned with the rotation center.
Figure 2.
Position lights, and camera on tripod.
well a as professional and due to its simplicity, a user friendly
tool-bar and the help of on-line tutorials, almost anybody can
use it to develop interesting 3D models [7].
In order to investigate the possibilities of developing 3D
models for the museum Byggdasafnid Hvoll, an introductory
survey of surface classes that are easy to build, based on
the book Architectural Geometry [11] and some examples of
how these classes can be handled with Sketchup has been
made. The surface classes presented are rotational surfaces,
translational surfaces, ruled surfaces, developables, helical
surfaces, pipe surfaces and offsets. Mathematical description,
based on same book, is also shown. Note that some surfaces
can be expressed as a surface from more than one surface class.
Rotational surfaces, sometimes called surfaces of revolution,
are generated by rotating a plane curve γ, called the proﬁle
curve, about a straight line in the plane. If we describe γ as
(f(u), 0, g(u)), the mathematical expression for rotational sur-
face is σ(u, v) = (f(u) cos(v), f(u) sin(v)), g(u)). Spheres,
cylinders, cones and tori are well known rotational surfaces.
If we consider two curves k and l, that intersect at a single
point we call the origin o, a translational surface can be
created by translating one of the curves along the other. Thus,
the surface contains a set of curves kp that are congruent
with the proﬁle curve k. The curves are called proﬁle curve
and path curve and the same translational surface is gener-
ated when changing the roles of these two. Mathematically,
each point of the translational surface can be expressed as
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

σ(u, v) = k(u)+l(v). The generation of translational surfaces
is straightforward and, as they carry two sets of congruent
parameter curves, they are commonly used in architecture.
Surfaces that are generated by moving a straight line are
called ruled surfaces. Cylinders, cones, one-sheet hyperboloids
and hyperbolic paraboloids can all be described as ruled
surfaces. They carry families of straight lines that are called
generators or rulings and can be described mathematically as
σ(u, v) = α(u) + v · ω(u), where α is called the directrix
curve. The rulings go through α and are parallel to ω. Ruled
surfaces can also be generated by connecting corresponding
points of two generating curves and this method gives a wide
possibility for generating different surfaces.
Developable surfaces behave just like paper. They can be
bent and twisted and unfolded into the plane without stretching
or tearing. Due to this they can be easily covered with sheet
metal and are therefore widely used in architecture. In addition
to this, they carry a family of straight lines which simpliﬁes
their construction. Cylinders, cones and tangent surfaces of
space curves are all developable ruled surfaces and have the
property that a tangent plane is always tangent to the surface
along an entire ruling.
Helical surface is created by applying a smooth helical
motion to a spatial curve, c. One can generate the same
surface either by applying the helical motion to a meridian
curve or a cross section. When using the meridian curve
c = (f(v), 0, g(v), the mathematical expression for the helical
surface is ω(u, v) = (f(v) cos u, f(v) sin u, g(v) + a · v).
A pipe surface is the envelope of spheres of equal radius
r, whose centers lie on a spine curve c. As an example of
two simple pipe surfaces the cylinder has a straight line as
the spine curve, and the torus which has a circle as a spine
curve. Obviously, non-bendable materials are not suitable for
this type of surface. In practice, one uses metal tubes bent into
the required form and the manufacturing of such bent tubes is
challenging.
In this subsection, two methods for modeling a building are
presented. First, the building is modeled from scratch, using
non-digital data, that is a drawing on a paper. The interior walls
are included in this model. This model could be useful for
showing section planes and cuts, or to show the interiors of the
house, furniture, etc. Secondly, the same building is modeled
using photographs, and here, the model can be exported to
Google Earth. Other methods are available, for example by
importing a cad ﬁle or a drawing and use it as base-plan for the
model, and photo-match, those methods are are not explained
here.
1) Modeling From Scratch: Here, a three stories house is
modeled by using printed plans provided by a realtor. The
model contains only straight lines, and the tools that have
been used for drawing are Line, Rectangle and Push/Pull.
The door and window openings are created with a rectangle
that is pushed trough the walls in order to leave an opening.
Furnitures are not included. Figure 3 and Figure 4 show the
house in two different modes: Shaded with Textures and X-
Ray.
Figure 3.
The house shaded with textures.
Figure 4.
The house in X-ray mode. The interior walls can bee seen.
2) Modeling From Photographs: Google Earth is a useful
tool when it comes to presenting 3D models and Sketchup
is the most commonly used tool for Google Earth Modeling
[12]. There are a few simple steps to follow, and here, the
article How to Make a Google Earth Building in SketchUp
is used as a guide along with the accompanied video tutorial.
At the ofﬁcial Sketchup Help webpage, further guides in Geo-
modeling can be found [13].
C. How to Create a Cylindrical Panorama
A cylindrical panorama can be created by shooting several
pictures, where each pair of adjacent pictures have an overlap,
and then, stitching them together. It is possible to create a
cylindrical panorama using any hand-held camera, with any
lens, but in order to get good quality, some extra equipment is
needed: tripod, spirit level, remote shutter release, Panoramic
head ("pano-head") and wide angle lens.
By using a tripod, the camera rotates around a ﬁxed point
and at the same level. It also eliminates the risk of camera
shake and position change in between shots. If the photographs
are not taken at a good level, problems can occur when
stitching them together. It might be necessary to crop down the
image and thereby reduce the vertical ﬁled of the ﬁnal result.
A spirit level is useful to make sure that the tripods head
is correctly leveled, this is especially needed when shooting
pictures in the nature. A Remote shutter release can be useful
when shooting several photos at a time and also reduces
the risk of accidentally moving the tripod while shooting. A
Panoramic head is an additional attachment to put on top of
the tripod before the camera is attached. It makes it possible to
attach the camera such that it rotates around the no-parallax-
point of the camera lens. This is important in order to avoid
stitching errors. There is as well the feature of click-stops, that
allow you to ﬁx the angle of each rotation of the camera and/or
a built in spirit level. Using a wide angle lens has the advantage
over a regular lens, that less pictures needs to be taken and it
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

is possible to capture more vertically. When choosing a lens it
is necessary to make sure that it is supported by the software
to be used.
III. RESULTS
In this section, we will see the results of the methods
described in last section applied to a museum item (Section
III-A) and to a room (Section III-B) and the comparison
between different methods (Section III-C)
A. A Museum Item
In the database Sarpur [14], the following items from
Jóhannsstofa are listed with a photo and short description:
a custom made footrest, see Figure 5; and a custom made hat,
see Figure 6.
Figure 5.
The footrest as shown in the database Sarpur.
Figure 6.
The hat as shown in the database Sarpur.
1) A Sketchup Model of the Footrest: In this section, a
Sketchup model of a footrest has been made. The footrest is
remarkable due to the extraordinary size and with Sketchup
it is possible to emphasize this. Figure 7, shows the footrest
with scale, and Figure 8 shows the same footrest next to an
identical copy, scaled down to regular size, and a 3D woman
uploaded from Sketchup warehouse.
2) A Designing Reality Model of the Hat: In this section,
a 3D model of a museum object, in this case a hat from
Jóhannsstofa, is created with photography and the program
Designing Reality. Völundur Jónsson, photographer,
offered his professional help and equipment, taking care of
the photos and photo-editing, and Ólafur Haraldsson, the
developer of Designing Reality created the model using
his software. Figure 9 shows a snapshot of the video output of
the 3D model. The video can be viewed at vimeo.com [15].
Figure 7.
A scaled Sketchup model of the footrest.
Figure 8.
A Sketchup model of the footrest, compared to a regularly sized
footrest.
Figure 9.
A Designing Reality model of the hat: Photograph, Point cloud,
mesh and mesh with texture.
B. A Room
In this section, two methods have been used to partly model
and visualize the room Jóhannsstofa. In Section III-B1, the
room is modeled with Sketchup and in Section III-B2, some
examples of cylindrical photograps have been made. Völundur
Jónsson photographer, kindly offered his professional help and
equipment with some of the photos in this section.
1) Modeling the room with Sketchup: In this section, the
room is partially modeled with Sketchup. Figure 10 shows
the model that was made by measuring the room and then,
recreating it with Sketchup. The radiator was imported
152
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

from Sketchup warehouse and slightly modiﬁed. In order to
complete the room, texture should be added. Figure 11 shows
the same room where the Sketchup model of the footrest
from section III-A1 has been inserted.
Figure 10.
The room partially modeled with Sketchup.
Figure 11.
The room partially modeled with Sketchup, and the footrest
inserted.
2) Cylindrical Photograph of the Room: In this section
experiments have been made with panoramic photographs of
the room. Two examples have been created using minimum
equipment: only a tripod and a camera, but in each example,
with different lenses. Figure 12 shows a panoramic photo of
the room. The photo is created with a trial version of Easypano
[16] and thus, watermarked. It is taken with a compact digital
camera, Canon Ixus 220 HS, and therefore the lens-width is
not sufﬁcient for the purpose of creating a nice cylindrical
photo showing the room from ﬂoor to ceiling. However, since
the width of the camera is only 20.8mm, using a tripod and
rotating around the center of the camera, the distance from
rotation center to the no-parallax-point of the camera lens will
not exceed 10.4mm. Therefore, misplacement in the vertical
lines is not visible.
In order to get a photo showing a broader view in the
vertical, Völundur Jónsson offered his help. Using Canon
EOS 5D MKII camera and lens EF 17-40L @ 40mm, f14,
a panoramic photo was created that gives the necessary view
in order to visualize the museum items from ﬂoor to ceiling.
Figure 13 by Völundur Jónsson, shows the panoramic picture.
The picture is created with the program KOLOR Autopano
GIGA 3.0 [17].
Figure 12.
A panoramic photograph of the room, using a handheld camera
and a tripod.
Figure 13.
A panoramic photograph of the room, using wide lens and a
tripod.
3) Examples of error: When taking a cylindrical photo-
graph there are a few things to consider regarding the photo-
graphic equipment. Depending on the materials photographed,
some actions might be necessary on the spot. In this case, the
glass protecting the museum items should be removed before
photographing in order to prevent the mirroring effect shown
in Figure 14. This has not been done since the purpose was not
to create a virtual tour, but to give examples. Figure 14 shows
the vertical misplacement of lines that occurs if the focal point
of the camera is not centered.
Figure 14.
A mirror reﬂection is clearly seen due to the glass protecting the
museum items. Vertical misplacement of lines can be seen as well.
C. Comparative analysis results
At the beginning of the project a personal interview with
Íris Ólöf Sigurjónsdóttir was made in September 2012 [18]
in order to detect the expectations of the museum. Another
interview was made in August 2013 [19], in order to ﬁnd out
how the methods presented ﬁt with those expectations. The
following features are considered important to the museum:
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

cost (as it is a museum with tight budget), user-friendlynes
(since there are no IT specialists working for the museum)
and suitability for visualizing different items and accuracy.
The features above are compared in Table I. Sketchup is a
freeware, but there is a cost in hiring the staff to implement
models. The accuracy is within millimeters, and depending
on the modeler, is acceptable when it comes to drawing
buildings. However, modeling complex or irregularly shaped
items, such as a hat, is not considered to have accaptable
accuracy. Designing Reality is not a freeware, however,
there is less cost in hiring the staff. The accuracy is within
millimeters, and is acceptable for complex items. Cylindrical
Photography is a 2D alternative, here, not a freeware, and
not much training for the staff. The accuracy should not be
compared with the other programs since it is not 3D modeling.
However, it often shows what needs to be shown. All three
methods are considered to be user friendly.
Table I
COMPARISON OF THE METHODS.
Features
Sketchup
Designing
Cylindric.
Reality
Photogr.
Free
Yes
No
Yes/No
User friendly
Yes
Yes
Yes
vis. existing buildings
Yes
Yes
Yes
vis. non-exist. build.
Yes
No
No
vis. landscape
No
Yes
Yes
complex items
No
3D
2D
IV. CONCLUSIONS
The advantage of using Sketchup is mainly the cost,
it is a freeware, but also the fact that it is a very user
friendly program and compatible with many other programs,
such as Google Earth. It has been shown that Sketchup
can handle the surfaces that need to be dealt with in order
to create 3D models of the houses. The available data at
Hvoll is mainly old photographs and drawings and from this
data, it is possible to recreate a lost building or a certain
room. Furthermore, since many of the houses still exist, it is
possible to measure and photograph those. In addition, if the
houses have been reconstructed recently, some cad-ﬁles exist
as well. It is therefore concluded that developing 3D models
of historical buildings, using Sketchup is a possible option.
The disadvantage is that, when it comes to modeling complex
items, it can be inaccurate or even impossible to use Sketchup
or time consuming, and therefore costly when considering the
use of staff-time.
The advantage of using Designing Reality is that it is
a simple and fast method that gives accurate results. It has been
explained how to model an item, but in addition, houses and
landscapes can be modeled with the help of drones, helicopters
or airplanes. The disadvantage of this program is that it is not
possible to make models of non-existing buildings unless the
appropriate photographs exist, and the cost is high in this case.
However, when compared to Sketchup and depending on
the size of the model, the cost might be lower considering the
staff-time used for each model.
The advantage of taking cylindrical photographs is that it
is an easy and fast procedure, and even if not in 3D, it
still gives a very clear overview of for example a room or
a street-view. It can be used for making virtual tours where
already existing materials such as sound-ﬁles, videos or 3D
models can be included. The disadvantage is that it is usually
not a freeware. However using panoramas for the purpose of
creating a virtual tour could be thought of as combining it all
together, rather than a independent method to compare against
those previously mentioned.
The method chosen to model a historical building depends
not only on available data, but also on the purpose of the
model. There are a few possibilities. Museums could make
use of both programs in order to create various forms of
teaching material, such as pdf’s, slide-shows, animations etc.
Alternatively, the purpose could be simply to preserve in-
formation about a certain periodical street-view. Furthermore
models can be visualized using 3D printers, 3D pdf’s or video
presentations (animation). Finally, the 3D models created
could be used as a part of a virtual tour through the museum.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Pletinckx, “3d as innovation in cultural heritage,” http://www.
slideshare.net/DanielPletinckx, January 2013, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[2] “Virtual reconstruction of regolini-galassi tomb,” http://regolinigalassi.
wordpress.com/, 2013, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[3] “Sagalassos archaeologocal research project - anastylosis and conserva-
tion,” http://www.sagalassos.be/en/conservation/anastylosis, [accessed:
20/11/2013].
[4] “Hypogeum
of
hal-saﬂieni,”
http://heritagemalta.org/museums-sites/
hal-saﬂieni-hypogeum/, from Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia.
[5] “The abbey of saint john evangelist in biograd na moru, croatia,” http:
//carare.eu/gre/Media/Files/St-John-Abbey-Biograd-Croatia,
cARARE
3D case study.
[6] “v-must virtual museum transnational network,” http://v-must.net/, July
2013, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[7] D. Nath, “History of sketchup,” http://www.sketchup-ur-space.com/
july11/history-of-sketchup.htm, July 2011, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[8] “Designing reality,” http://www.designingreality.co/, 2012, [accessed:
20/11/2013].
[9] (2004)
Structure
from
motion.
http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/
CVonline/LOCAL_COPIES/MANESSIS/liter/node10.html.
[accessed:
20/11/2013].
[10] (2013, July) Structure from motion pipeline. http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=i7ierVkXYa8. YouTube. [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[11] H. Pottman, A. Asperl, M. Hofer, and A. Kilian", Architectural Geom-
etry, D. Bentley, Ed.
Bentley Institute Press, 2007.
[12] “How to make a google earth building in sketchup,” http://www.staged.
com/video?v=ys9b, September 2012, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[13] “Learning sketchup (a trimble product),” http://support.google.com/
sketchup/?hl=en, October 2012, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[14] “Sarpur,” http://www.sarpur.is/, May 2013, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[15] O. Haraldsson, “Olafur haraldsson,” http://vimeo.com/olihar, [accessed:
20/11/2013].
[16] “A trial version of easypano panoweaver,” http://www.easypano.com,
2014, [accessed: 20/11/2013].
[17] “Kolor
autopano
giga
3.0,”
http://www.kolor.com/
image-stitching-software-autopano-giga.html,
2013,
[accessed:
20/11/2013].
[18] I. O. Sigurjonsdottir, “Personal interview,” September 2012.
[19] ——, “Personal interview,” August 2013.
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

