Analysis of the Difference of Movement Trajectory
by Residents and Tourists using Geotagged Tweet
Shintaro Fujii
Faculty of System Design
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hino-shi, Tokyo
Email: fujii-shintarou@ed.tmu.ac.jp
Tetsuya Araki
Faculty of System Design
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hino-shi, Tokyo
Email: araki@tmu.ac.jp
Masaharu Hirota
Faculty of Informatics
Okayama University of Science
Okayama-shi, Okayama
Email: hirota@mis.ous.ac.jp
Masaki Endo
Division of Core Manufacturing
Polytechnic University
Kodaira-shi, Tokyo
Email: endou@uitec.ac.jp
Daiju Kato
WingArc1st Inc.
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo
Email: kato.d@wingarc.com
Hiroshi Ishikawa
Faculty of System Design
Tokyo Metropolitan University
Hino-shi, Tokyo
Email: ishikawa-hiroshi@tmu.ac.jp
Abstract—In recent years, tourism industry has been drawing
attention in various countries. Tourists are on an increasing
trend all over the world, and it is estimated that the value
exceed 1.8 billion in 2030. Consumer behavior by tourists brings
high economic effects to many industries such as transportation,
lodging, manufacturing. Therefore the increase in tourists is an
important issue for governments and tourism agency. According
to a survey by tourism agency, 60% of foreign tourists visiting
Japan are repeaters. In other words, it is considered important
to increase repeaters to increase tourists. Compared with the ﬁrst
tourist, there is a need for repeaters to visit sightseeing spot that
many residents visit and tourists do not know. One must analyze
data of resident to discover these sightseeing spots. Nevertheless,
most studies conducted to extract hotspots (areas where many
photographs are taken) and recommend sightseeing routes using
movement trajectories do not consider user attributes. Therefore,
by considering user attributes, this study was conducted to
extract hotspots that many residents visit but are not know
to tourists. Additionally, we extract movement trajectories from
residents and tourists to ascertain differences in sightseeing areas
and to analyze them by visualizing those results on a map.
Keywords—Tourism; Geospatial analysis; Cities and towns.
I. INTRODUCTION
The number of tourists worldwide is increasing every year.
It is predicted that they will be 1.8 billion in 2030 [1].
Tourism occupies an important position as a key industry
in many countries. Consumption activities related to tourism
positively affect industries such as transportation, lodging, and
manufacturing. Therefore, increasing the number of tourists
represents an important issue for governments and companies.
In Japan, where the Tokyo Olympics Games are to be held
in 2020, the Japanese Government and companies are actively
conducting activities to increase foreign visitors to Japan, such
as the Visit Japan Campaign [2] and promotion [3]. As a result,
foreign visitors Japan have increased year by year, reaching
a record high of 28.69 million in 2017 [4]. It is necessary
to analyze tourists data to increase tourism. According to a
survey by the Tourism Agency, 60% of foreign visitors to
Japan are repeaters [5]. We consider that increasing repeaters
is important to increase tourists. The repeater described here
refers to a person who visits a speciﬁc sightseeing area more
than once. The need exists for repeaters to experience more
local culture and visit local spots more than ﬁrst-time tourists
do [6]. The local spot described here refers to a place that
many residents know: not famous sightseeing spots that many
tourists visit. For this study, we deﬁne a local spot as a hotspot
that many residents visit but few tourists visit. Discovering
local spots is important to increase tourists. Therefore, we
extract hotspots that many residents visit but few tourists visit.
Additionally, several needs exist for tourism agencies as
tourists increase. It is necessary to ascertain the movements
and interests of tourists in sightseeing areas. Tourism agencies
perform more effective PR methods for sightseeing areas
and recommend sightseeing plans to satisfy tourist needs
and attract more tourists in sightseeing areas by knowing
the movements and interests of tourists in sightseeing areas.
We extract hotspots and movement trajectories of tourists to
analyze the movements and interesting spots of tourists in
sightseeing areas. Therefore, one must extract the respective
hotspots and movement trajectories of residents and tourists
to satisfy the needs of tourism agencies and tourists.
Several studies have been conducted to extract hotspots
and recommend sightseeing routes using movement trajecto-
ries [7]–[9]. Nevertheless, these studies do not consider user
attributes. Many tourists visit famous sightseeing spots in
sightseeing areas and post many contents from those locations.
Tourist contents continue to increase in sightseeing areas year
by year. By contrast, contents of residents for sightseeing areas
have not changed much numerically. These indicate that more
contents uploaded in sightseeing areas to social media site are
posted by tourists than by residents. Therefore, when we do
not consider user attributes and extract hotspots from their
contents, it is difﬁcult to extract local spots in sightseeing
areas because tourists post the most contents in sightseeing
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

areas. Therefore, for this study, we extract hotspots of residents
and tourists respectively using geotagged tweets to discover
local spots. Furthermore, when classifying users, we adapt
the method proposed in
[10] because our research goal is
discovering local spots and not user classiﬁcation.
Actually, [11] and [12] are studies applying [7] and [8].
Also, [11] and [12] extract sightseeing spot by considering user
attributes. For this study, in addition to discovering hotspots
considering user attributes, we extract movement trajectories
of residents and tourists. Considering user attributes, we com-
bine hotspot and movement trajectories and thereby discover
sightseeing routes that many residents use, but which tourists
do not use. Discovering these routes contributed to recommen-
dation of new sightseeing routes that many residents know,
thereby relieving congestion in sightseeing areas. Therefore,
for this study, we extract sightseeing routes that many residents
use and tourists do not use by clustering and visualizing
resident and tourist movement trajectories.
The structure of this paper is the following. In Section II,
this report presents some related research efforts. In Sec-
tion III, we describe our proposed method to discover local
spots and to assess differences of residents’ and tourists’ move-
ment trajectories. Section IV presents experiments and results
obtained using the proposed method. Section V, presents
discussion of the results of visualizing hotspots and movement
trajectories of residents and tourists obtained using our pro-
posed method. Section VI, we conclude this paper and describe
avenues for future work.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we describe research related to this research.
A. Hotspot
Research on hotspot extraction is actively conducted using
geotagged tweets and photographs posted on social media.
Crandall et al. [7] proposed a method to discover popular
spots using spatial clustering with large amounts of geotagged
photographs and image features. Kisilevich et al. [8] pro-
posed a method to discover hotspots using PDBSCAN: an
improved DBSCAN algorithm. Yang et al. [13] proposed an
algorithm to extract hotspots of various sizes: Self-Tuning
Spectral Clustering. Lacerda et al. [14] extracted hotspots
using geotag information and intersections of photograph
orientations. Zhijun et al. [15] divided areas into grids and
extracted and visualized geographical features in the grid using
geotag information and text tags attached to photographs. Li
et al. [16] proposed a method to classify Flickr [17] users as
residents or tourists, calculate their relative proportions in each
of the ﬁve cities, and compare them to ascertain and analyze
differences in cities. Zhuang et al. [11] proposed a method
to discover Anaba (sightseeing spots that are less well-known,
but still worth visiting) using geotagged photos. They evaluate
the scenery quality by considering both social appreciation
and the contents of images shot around there. Van et al. [18]
ﬁrst extracted hotspots by clustering Flickr photographs. Then
they analyzed Twitter [19] text and extracted areas of interest.
Furthermore, they conﬁrmed and investigated the places using
data from Foursquare [20]. Zhuang et al. [12] proposed a
method to discover obscure sightseeing spots that are less
well-known, but which are still worth visiting. They aimed
to overcome challenges that classical authority analysis based
methods do not encounter: how to discover and rank spots
based on popularity (obscurity level) and on scenery quality.
For the present research, we extract hotspots of residents and
tourists and discover local spots in sightseeing areas.
B. Movement trajectory
Actively conducted research efforts contribute to each in-
dustry by analyzing movement trajectories from geotagged
data. Yuan et al. [21] proposed a method to discover areas
of different functions in the city by combining taxi trajectory
data and data of a person’s area of interest obtained from social
media. Nanni et al. [22] proposed a method to adapt density-
based clustering algorithms to trajectory data based on the
simple concept of distance between trajectories. Additionally,
to improve trajectory clustering, they proposed an algorithm
incorporating time information. Kori et al. [23] proposed a
method to recommend sightseeing routes using user blogs
to extract movement trajectories that are produced during
sightseeing. Sun et al. [24] proposed a system that recom-
mends the best sightseeing route for users using geotagged
photographs that had been posted on Flickr. They deﬁned
the best sightseeing route recommendations as one for which
many users visit and for which each landmark distance is
close. Memon et al. [25] proposed a method to recommend
sightseeing routes particularly addressing the posting times of
geotagged photographs posted on Flickr. Garcia et al. [26]
proposed a method to examine route generation and route
customization and to analyze them to solve the tourist planning
problem. They present an heuristic that is able to solve a
tourist planning problem in real-time using public transporta-
tion information and the Time Dependent Team Orienteering
Problem with Time Windows (TDTOPTW). Zhang et al. [27]
proposed an efﬁcient tourist route search system that not only
recommends a route simply connecting several tourist spots,
but which also recommends a route with beautiful scenic
sights. Xin et al. [28] propose to leverage existing travel clues
recovered from 20 million geo-tagged photographs to suggest
customized travel route plans according to user preferences.
For the present study, we extract movement trajectories of
residents and tourists and discover sightseeing routes that
many residents use and which many tourists do not use.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
In this section, we describe our proposed method to extract
hotspots of residents and tourists and their respective move-
ment trajectories in the sightseeing area. The procedure that is
followed to accomplish the proposed method is the following.
1) We apply preprocessing.
2) We classify users as residents and tourists.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

3) We cluster movement trajectories.
4) We visualize the hotspots and movement trajectories of
residents and tourists.
For this study, we deﬁne users who post many tweets in
speciﬁc sightseeing areas as residents, and users who post
many tweets outside speciﬁc sightseeing areas as tourists.
A. Preprocessing
This section speciﬁcally explains how to obtain data and
how to preprocess the data. From Twitter, we obtained tweets
with annotated geo-tag information. At that time, we elimi-
nated tweets posted from countries other than Japan. Next, we
applied preprocessing to the tweets we obtained. We deleted
tweets including auto-generated texts from other social media
sites, replies, retweets and tweets by bots.
B. Classiﬁcation of users
This section presents a description of methods used to
characterize users as residents and tourists and methods of
extracting a series of tweets within a speciﬁc sightseeing area.
First, we sort the user tweets to arrange them in chronological
order. Additionally, we calculate the proportion of tweets
by latitude and longitude within a speciﬁc sightseeing area.
Subsequently, we deﬁne speciﬁc sightseeing areas by latitude
and longitude. Nozawa et al. [10] classiﬁed Twitter users as
residents or tourists. Users who posted over 30% of tweets
within a speciﬁc sightseeing area were inferred as residents,
and were otherwise inferred as tourists. We apply this classiﬁ-
cation method to classify users as residents or tourists because
our research is not aimed at user classiﬁcation. Next, we
extract tweets posted during a speciﬁed sightseeing period.
We extract a series of tweets posted from the time tourists
start tweeting within this area until they are out of range. For
this research, a series of tweets within the area is called as a
tourism tweet. Furthermore, for residents, we extract tourism
tweets by classifying everyday tweets within a range. Through
this process, we extract many movement trajectories suggested
by tourism tweets posted by residents and tourists.
C. Clustering of movement trajectories
This section presents an explanation of a method to cluster
tourism tweets extracted in Section III-B. The purpose of
clustering is to clarify differences in movement trajectories
between residents and tourists. First, we ascertain tourism
tweets as those of residents or tourists. Subsequently, we
classify them accordingly. Next, for each tourism tweet of
residents and tourists, we extract the distance of each tourism
tweet using Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) for every round.
Then, we calculate the distance of all tweets included in
tourism tweets. We adopted DTW in this study because the
length of tourism tweets is different depending on the user.
DTW allows duplication of correspondence between two time
series and is applied to time series data of different lengths.
We use this extracted distance to cluster tourism tweets using
TABLE I. DESCRIPTION OF GRID COLOR-CODED INTO 7 COLORS.
Grid color
Difference in proportion of users between residents and tourists
Green
low order 2%
Blue
low order 2 ˜4%
Purple
low order 4 ˜6%
No color
other
Yellow
superior 6 ˜4%
Orange
superior 4 ˜2%
Red
superior 2%
kmeans++. Kmeans that is non-hierarchical clustering depends
on the initial value because the initial centroid is allocated as
a random number. Therefore, we adopted kmeans++ in this
study to avoid the problem of assigning the cluster to the one
in which the kmeans method should not be frequently used as
a cluster. The clustered movement trajectories show where the
residents and tourists frequently move.
D. Visualize hotspots and moving trajectories on the map
This section describes a method to discover local spot
and sightseeing routes that many residents use and which
many tourists do not use. We visualize hotspots based on the
posting position of tweets to analyze areas where a user is
interested in the sightseeing area. To analyze details of the
visited places, we map areas into sixth-order meshes (125-
meter square grids), which is the smallest grid size provided by
the Geographical Survey Institute in Japan. We count the users
in each cell. We deﬁne a threshold in the cell and a hotspot
cell according to the proportion of the number of users.
To assess movement trajectories, we visualize the resident
and tourist tourism tweets as clustered in Section III-C on
the map. First, for all the clusters classiﬁed in Section III-C,
we calculate the movement proportion of the user between
the grids. Next, as a result of clustering, in clusters classiﬁed
in the same sightseeing area, we calculate the difference of
the movement proportion between the resident and the tourist
grids. The one that exceeds the threshold is visualized.
IV. EXPERIMENT
In this section, we describe experiment conducted based on
the proposed method.
A. Data set
We compiled and used a data set that was especially
intended for this experiment. We obtained geotagged tweets
for Twitter using Twitter API [29]. The data collection period
was January 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017. The total number
of data was 2,793,207. We used these data to classify users
as residents or tourists. Data used for the visualization of
hotspots and movement trajectory were tweets posted in Tokyo
during April 1, 2017 – May 31, 2017. For that time, we
deleted replies, retweets, tweets posted by bots and tweets
that included auto-generated texts from other social media
sites such as FourSquare. We consider these tweets are noise
because we analyze hotspots and consider users’ text. In
addition, we deleted tourism tweets that were only single
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

tweets or tweets sent from the same place because we need
to analyze the movement trajectory and extract consecutive
tweets. Results show that resident tweets were 190,091, users
as resident were 27,231, tourist tweets were 100,444, and users
as tourist were 13,712. Tourism tweets classiﬁed using the
proposed method were 14,582 for residents and 17,119 for
tourists.
B. Clustering
This section presents a description of procedures used for
clustering tourism tweets posted by residents and tourists after
extraction using this proposed method. We used the elbow
method to ascertain the optimal number of clusters because
kmeans++ must be determined beforehand. The elbow method
is widely used as a method for determining the optimum
number of clusters. We adopted widely used methods because
our goal is analysis of sightseeing areas. Results show that
the number of clusters of resident movement trajectories was
34; that of tourist movement trajectories was 29. The move-
ment proportion between the grids is calculated by dividing
the number of movements between the grids by the total
movement number for each cluster. We explain related details
with Figure 1 as an example. We extract movements between
grids when users tweet on different grids. In Figure 1, the
respective grid movement numbers of residents and tourists
are 100 and 200. This grid movement number is the result
of clustering and is classiﬁed in the same area. The top two
ﬁgures in Figure 1 show the number of residents and tourist
movements in the grid. The numbers in parentheses represent
the movement proportion. The difference between residents
and tourists is calculated as shown in the ﬁgure below. We
calculated the difference between residents and tourists and
visualized the movement trajectory of the top 0.5%. Hotspots
and movement trajectories of residents and tourists extracted
using the proposed method are portrayed in Figure 2, Figure 3
and Figure 4. Figure 2 presents the difference between the
proportion of residents and tourists in each grid around the
Tokyo Skytree. In Figure 2, the relation between the grid color
and the difference in proportion of users between residents and
tourists is presented in Table I. As a result of the difference
in proportion of users between residents and tourists, more
than 90% of the grids existed at 25% or less. Therefore,
we visualized result as shown in Table I. Additionally, if no
user exists in the grid, then the grid itself is not displayed in
Figures 2–4. The area around the Tokyo Skytree is a popular
sightseeing area in Tokyo that many tourists visit.
V. DISCUSSION
In this section, we discuss the results presented in Sec-
tion IV-B. First, we explain Figure 2. Figure 2 portray the
area surrounding Tokyo Skytree. We show Figure 2, Figure 3
and Figure 4 in ﬁve areas to support several points of the
discussion. We shall speciﬁcally discuss areas numbered as
Area1, Area2, ..., Area5 and describe each area in Table II.
From Figure 2, it is proven that many tourists visit Ueno
移動軌跡を可視化
Resident
		
		11	：100
30
(0.3)
20
(0.2)
25
(0.25)
25
(0.25)
Tourist
		
		11	：200
100
(0.5)
10
(0.05)
40
(0.2)
50
(0.25)
 1	

			1
+0.2
-0.15
-0.25
+0.2
0
Figure 1. Movement trajectories of residents(Blue) and tourists(Red).
Area1
Area2
Area3
Area4
Area5
Figure 2. Difference between hotspots of resident and tourist around Tokyo
Skytree.
in Area1, but fewer residents there. Many sightseeing spots
exist around Ueno, such as Shinobazu-no-ike Pond and the
Ueno Zoological Gardens. Especially at the Ueno Zoological
Gardens, attendance has increased recently [30] because of
the birth of a panda. Results demonstrate that it has become
a popular sightseeing spot for tourists.
Therefore, we regard the area around Ueno as a sightseeing
area of interest for tourists rather than residents. Conversely,
many residents visit Kameido Temple and Kinshicho Park in
Area5, but there appear to be few tourists among the users.
Kameido Temple, located near the Tokyo Skytree in Area3,
is a sightseeing spot where the main shrine and the Tokyo
Skytree can be photographed together. In addition, because
many wisteria ﬂowers grow within its precincts, it is possible
in the spring to take photographs of the Tokyo Skytree as well
as wisteria ﬂowers in the main shrine. A festival, called the
Fuji Festival, is held there and is visited by many people. As
Kinshicho Park is famous for cherry blossoms, many people
visit in spring. Therefore, the possibility exists that these
sightseeing spots are the local spot that is an object of this
research.
Next, we discuss Figure 3. Many more tourists than resi-
dents move to Ueno in Area1, Asakusa in Area2, and Tokyo
Skytree in Area3. The reason for this result is that many
pamphlets and web sites have presented this area as a series
of sightseeing areas. However Kameido Temple and Kinshicho
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE II. DESCRIPTION OF THE AREA AROUND SHIBUYA AND ASAKUSA.
Area
Area description
Area1
Near Ueno, with the Ueno Zoological Gardens and their well-known panda attraction
Area2
Near Asakusa, with its many temples such as Sensoji Temple
Area3
Near Tokyo Skytree
Area4
Near Akihabara, with its many famous electronics mass merchandisers and animation goods retailers
Area5
Near Kinshichou that has many taverns and restaurants
Area6
Near Shimokitazawa that is famous as a fashion like old clothes
Area7
Near Shibuya where many young people visit
Area8
Near Harajyuku where there are many stylish cafes and shops
Area1
Area2
Area3
Area4
Area5
Figure 3. Movement trajectories of residents(Blue) and tourists(Red) around
Tokyo Skytree.
Area8
Area7
Area6
Figure 4. Movement trajectories of residents(Blue) and tourists(Red) around
Shibuya.
Park in Area5 is near the Tokyo Skytree in Area3 by movement
trajectory of residents and sightseeing spots that many tourist
visit. We infer the possibility that the route of Kameido Temple
and Kinshicho Park is a sightseeing route that many residents
know, but tourists do not know. These results are regarded as
useful information for tourism agencies when recommending
sightseeing plans and sightseeing spots for tourists.
Next, we discuss Figure 4. Figure 4 portrays the area
surrounding Shibuya and Harajyuku. We show Figure 4 in
three areas to support several points of the discussion. We
shall speciﬁcally discuss areas numbered as Area6, Area7, and
Area8 and describe each area in Table II. Many more residents
than tourists move to Shimokitazawa in Area6 and Shibuya in
Area7. Conversely, many more tourists than residents move
to Harajyuku in Area8 and Shibuya in Area7, although both
Shimokitazawa in Area6 and Harajyuku in Area8 are famous
for fashion. The reason for this result is that Harajyuku is
known to many more people than Shimokitazawa because
Harajyuku is reported frequently in media such as television
and dramas. However, Shimokitazawa is a fashion town that
anyone living in Tokyo knows. Many magazines publish the
area and many residents are visit there. Possibly, the route of
Shimokitazawa and Shibuya is a sightseeing route that many
residents know, but which tourists do not know. In addition,
many reviews [31] state dissatisfaction with sightseeing be-
cause Shibuya and Harajyuku are extremely crowded by many
tourists on holidays. The result of our experiment points to
resolution of this difﬁculty if tourism agencies have performed
PR for Shimokitazawa, Shibuya, and Harajyuku as a series
of sightseeing areas and if tourists who visit Harajyuku visit
Shimokitazawa.
As for the implementation of discussion, we discover
hotspots and sightseeing routes that many residents use but
many tourists do not use. These result have the possibility of
local spots and new sightseeing routes. As reported herein,
we have discovered differences in the movement trajectories
of residents and tourists in sightseeing areas.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This study used latitude and longitude information given
along with huge volumes of data obtained from social media
sites. By classifying contents into those of residents and those
of tourists, and by performing DTW and kmeans++ analyses,
we clustered the movement trajectories, visualized hotspots
and movement trajectories, and analyzed them further. Based
on those results, we were able to discover sightseeing spots
that many residents and tourists visit respectively around
the Tokyo Skytree. Especially, sightseeing spots that many
residents visit, other than tourists, can become new sightseeing
spots for increased tourists. We also discovered sightseeing
route that many residents use and few tourists use around
Shibuya by movement trajectories.
As future work, we expect to conduct quantitative evaluation
experiments and improve the proposed method. As described
in this paper, we consider different hotspots and movement
trajectories of residents and tourists based on visualization
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

results. However, in future work, we plan to evaluate them
more quantitatively. For improvement of the method, we focus
on a certain cell, calculate the movement proportion of the next
cell, and extract the ranking of the cell movement proportion.
Then we must adapt this method to all resident and tourist
cells. By adapting the Spearman’s rank correlation coefﬁcient
to the calculated data, the difference between the movement
trajectories of residents and tourists is quantiﬁed. As a different
method, map matching are regarded as revealing details of
differences between residents and tourists when assessing the
roads that they used. Additionally, for this study, users were
classiﬁed as residents or tourists, but user attributes of many
types exist. Studies assessing them and their characteristics
are being conducted actively. The main targets of estimation
are gender [32], age [33] and residence [34]. As future work,
we expect to consider these user classiﬁcations and to analyze
their movement trajectories in sightseeing areas. Additionally,
we do not consider the user’s preference in this study, however
we also experiment with them in future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Num-
ber 16K00157, 16K16158, and Tokyo Metropolitan University
Grant-in-Aid for Research on Priority AreasResearch on social
big data.
REFERENCES
[1] “By 2030 overseas travelers expand to 1.8 billion people annually,” 2019,
URL: https://www.travelvoice.jp/20171005-97777 [accessed: 2019-01-
09].
[2] “Tourism promotion business to Japan,” 2019, URL: http://www.mlit.
go.jp/kankocho/shisaku/kokusai/vjc.html [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[3] “Some tourism promortions,” 2019, URL: http://www.sangyo-rodo.
metro.tokyo.jp/plan/tourism/chapter6 3 2018.pdf [accessed: 2019-01-
09].
[4] “The number of foreign visitors Japan records 28.69 million,” 2019,
URL: https://www.travelvoice.jp/20180116-104077 [accessed: 2019-01-
09].
[5] “60% of foreign visitors to Japan are repeaters,” 2019, URL: https://
www.travelvoice.jp/20180403-108446 [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[6] “The need of repeaters,” 2019, URL: http://www.mlit.go.jp/kankocho/
news02 000346.html [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[7] D. J. Crandall, L. Backstrom, D. Huttenlocher, and J. Kleinberg,
“Mapping the world’s photos,” in Proceedings of the 18th international
conference on World wide web.
ACM, 2009, pp. 761–770.
[8] S. Kisilevich, F. Mansmann, and D. Keim, “P-dbscan: a density based
clustering algorithm for exploration and analysis of attractive areas using
collections of geo-tagged photos,” in Proceedings of the 1st international
conference, 2010, pp. 38:1–38:4.
[9] H. Yin, X. Lu, C. Wang, N. Yu, and L. Zhang, “Photo2trip: an interactive
trip planning system based on geo-tagged photos,” in Proceedings of the
18th ACM international conference on Multimedia.
ACM, 2010, pp.
1579–1582.
[10] N. Yuya, E. Masaki, E. Yo, H. Masaharu, Y. Syohei, and I. Hiroshi,
“Inferring tourist behavior and purposes of a twitter user,” AIAI, 2016.
[11] C. Zhuang, Q. Ma, X. Liang, and M. Yoshikawa, “Anaba: An obscure
sightseeing spots discovering system,” in 2014 IEEE International
Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–6.
[12] ——, “Discovering obscure sightseeing spots by analysis of geo-tagged
social images,” in Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 2015.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 590–595.
[13] Y. Yang, Z. Gong, and H. U, Leong, “Identifying points of interest
by self-tuning clustering,” in Proceedings of the 34th International
ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information
Retrieval.
ACM, 2011, pp. 883–892.
[14] Y. A. Lacerda, R. G. F. Feitosa, G. ´A. R. M. Esmeraldo, C. d. S.
Baptista, and L. B. Marinho, “Compass clustering: A new clustering
method for detection of points of interest using personal collections of
georeferenced and oriented photographs,” in Proceedings of the 18th
Brazilian symposium on Multimedia and the web.
ACM, 2012, pp.
281–288.
[15] Z. Yin, L. Cao, J. Han, C. Zhai, and T. Huang, “Geographical topic
discovery and comparison,” in Proceedings of the 20th international
conference on World wide web.
ACM, 2011, pp. 247–256.
[16] D. Li, X. Zhou, and M. Wang, “Analyzing and visualizing the spatial
interactions between tourists and locals: A ﬂickr study in ten us cities,”
Cities, vol. 74, pp. 249–258, 2018.
[17] “Flickr,” 2019, URL: https://www.ﬂickr.com [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[18] S. Van Canneyt, S. Schockaert, and B. Dhoedt, “Discovering and
characterizing places of interest using ﬂickr and twitter,” International
Journal on Semantic Web and Information Systems (IJSWIS), vol. 9,
no. 3, pp. 77–104, 2013.
[19] “Twitter,” 2019, URL: https://www.twitter.com [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[20] “Foursquare,” 2019, URL: https://ja.foursquare.com [accessed: 2019-01-
09].
[21] J. Yuan, Y. Zheng, and X. Xie, “Discovering regions of different
functions in a city using human mobility and pois,” in Proceedings of the
18th ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery
and data mining.
ACM, 2012, pp. 186–194.
[22] M. Nanni and D. Pedreschi, “Time-focused clustering of trajectories of
moving objects,” Journal of Intelligent Information Systems, vol. 27,
no. 3, pp. 267–289, 2006.
[23] H. Kori, S. Hattori, T. Tezuka, and K. Tanaka, “Automatic generation
of multimedia tour guide from local blogs,” in International conference
on multimedia modeling.
Springer, 2007, pp. 690–699.
[24] Y. Sun, H. Fan, M. Bakillah, and A. Zipf, “Road-based travel recommen-
dation using geo-tagged images,” Computers, Environment and Urban
Systems, vol. 53, pp. 110–122, 2015.
[25] I. Memon, L. Chen, A. Majid, M. Lv, I. Hussain, and G. Chen, “Travel
recommendation using geo-tagged photos in social media for tourist,”
Wireless Personal Communications, vol. 80, no. 4, pp. 1347–1362, 2015.
[26] A. Garcia, O. Arbelaitz, M. T. Linaza, P. Vansteenwegen, and W. Souf-
friau, “Personalized tourist route generation,” in International Confer-
ence on Web Engineering.
Springer, 2010, pp. 486–497.
[27] J. Zhang, H. Kawasaki, and Y. Kawai, “A tourist route search system
based on web information and the visibility of scenic sights,” in Univer-
sal Communication, 2008. ISUC’08. Second International Symposium
on.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 154–161.
[28] X. Lu, C. Wang, J.-M. Yang, Y. Pang, and L. Zhang, “Photo2trip:
generating travel routes from geo-tagged photos for trip planning,” in
Proceedings of the 18th ACM international conference on Multimedia.
ACM, 2010, pp. 143–152.
[29] “Twitter API,” 2019, URL: https://help.twitter.com/ja/rules-and-policies/
twitter-api [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[30] “Tourists
visiting
the
Ueno
Zoological
Gardens
has
increased,”
2019,
URL:
https://www.nikkei.com/article/
DGXMZO28548380U8A320C1000000/ [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[31] “Reviews of Shibuya and Harajyuku,” 2019, URL: http://xayataka.
hatenablog.com/entry/2017/10/15/114420 [accessed: 2019-01-09].
[32] J. D. Burger, J. Henderson, G. Kim, and G. Zarrella, “Discriminating
gender on twitter,” in Proceedings of the conference on empirical
methods in natural language processing. Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2011, pp. 1301–1309.
[33] D. Rao, D. Yarowsky, A. Shreevats, and M. Gupta, “Classifying latent
user attributes in twitter,” in Proceedings of the 2nd international
workshop on Search and mining user-generated contents.
ACM, 2010,
pp. 37–44.
[34] Z. Cheng, J. Caverlee, and K. Lee, “You are where you tweet: a
content-based approach to geo-locating twitter users,” in Proceedings of
the 19th ACM international conference on Information and knowledge
management.
ACM, 2010, pp. 759–768.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-687-3
GEOProcessing 2019 : The Eleventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

