The Role of Food Sharing Applications (FSAs) in Supporting Food Waste 
Mitigation in Cities – Examples from Poland and Czechia 
 
Magdalena Pączek, Mateusz Rusin, Filip Bolicki, Daniel Straub, Magdalena Kubal-Czerwińska 
Institute of Geography and Spatial Management 
Jagiellonian University, Kraków, Poland 
email: magda.paczek@student.uj.edu.pl, mateusz.rusin@student.uj.edu.pl, filip.bolicki@student.uj.edu.pl, 
d.straub@doctoral.uj.edu.pl, magdalena.kubal@uj.edu.pl 
 
Abstract— The current problem of reducing food waste is 
becoming the subject of frequent political debate in the 
international arena. Researchers of global changes in the 
natural environment, as well as representatives of national, 
local, and non-governmental organizations, realize, as part of 
their activities, that a large amount of food cannot be saved.  
This increased attention is not surprising, as food is a basic need. 
Online platforms and mobile applications contribute to the 
redistribution of food saved thanks to modern information and 
communication technologies. Online platforms and application 
connect local entrepreneurs and the catering sector with their 
customers directly, changing the way food distribution works. 
Our research includes a food sharing application (FSA) as one 
of the practical solutions, in the business to customer (B2C) 
model, which directly connects catering or food retail facilities 
with the customer, supporting food waste mitigation in cities, on 
the example of FSAs used in Poland and Czechia. Based on data 
on localization and the type of food saved in specific areas of 
selected cities, it was possible to determine the regularities of the 
spatial distribution of food places and their relation to socio-
demographic characteristics. Using their localization pattern, 
we were able to draw a picture of the food saving opportunities 
of catering facilities, operating through the B2C (business to 
customer) marketing model. Additionally, attitudes and 
opinions about joining FSAs, will be discussed along with the 
benefits and disadvantages of participating in similar initiatives. 
Keywords-food sharing applications (FSA); food waste; food 
waste mitigation; Poland; Czechia. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
Today, the problem of reducing food waste is becoming 
the subject of frequent political debate in the international 
arena. Researchers of global changes in the natural 
environment resulting from the waste of food products, as well 
as representatives of national, local governmental and 
nongovernmental organizations, realize, as part of their 
activities, that a large amount of food wasted can no longer be 
saved. This increased attention is not surprising, Despite being 
a basic need food is wasted in large quantities at all stages of 
the food supply chain [1]. Local initiatives to collect, manage, 
and share surplus food have been facilitated by the 
development of emerging information and communication 
technology, such as online platforms and food sharing 
applications (FSA). Although food sharing is often discussed 
as a potential improvement to the food system, empirical 
research is still scarce, and few researchers have explored the 
reasons why practitioners, including trade and service entities, 
join food sharing initiatives. Food sharing initiatives are often 
considered transformative at various scales (national and 
regional food banks, church organizations, or small local 
eateries). 
Geospatial information systems support many aspects of 
geospatial 
data 
collection, 
presentation, 
processing, 
visualization, sharing, and management, and provide 
information on many geo-environmental hazards and how to 
manage them sustainably. GIS (Geographic Information 
System) environments today enable food waste management 
and modelling [2][8][9] by providing actors focused on food 
waste management tools for mapping food waste locations 
based on waste types, waste quantities, and other variables, 
which will improve the management of this problem on a 
daily basis and in the long run [3][4]. A database or GIS 
system can provide information on waste locations on large 
scales ranging from general city maps to detailed maps of 
food waste in specific areas [5]. By using GIS tools on a 
regional to national scale, it is possible to combat food 
insecurity and promote social justice [6][7][11]. GIS 
(Geographic Information System) tools, such as geotagging, 
geofencing, cluster analysis, and geoprocessing frameworks, 
can solve the social and environmental problems of food 
waste [9][10]. Through GIS (Geographic Information 
System) environments, food waste application developers 
assist in localizing specific entities that offer food at a 
reduced price, while users of those applications can see what 
food they can purchase and where it is available, helping to 
minimize food waste. 
With the development of modern information and 
communication technologies, such as online platforms and 
mobile applications, food is being redistributed online by 
connecting local entrepreneurs and the catering sector with 
their customers directly, e.g., TooGoodtoGo (the United 
Kingdom, Denmark, Germany, Poland), Foodsi (Poland), 
Karma, (the United Kingdom), Nesnezeno (Czechia), Olio 
(the United Kingdom), as well as donors with charities (Italy: 
BringTheFood, the United Kingdom: Olio). FSAs, whether 
profit and non-profit orientated [12], change the way food 
distribution 
works, 
from 
linear 
(production 
to 
supermarket/restaurant to consumer) to network (e.g., 
customer to producer) [13]. In the market, there are already 
various digital platforms for reducing food waste and sharing 
food (internet platforms, mobile food applications) and their 
essential relates, among other, to communication [14]. 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Our research includes food sharing applications as one of 
the practical solutions, in the B2C model, to food waste. Food 
sharing applications communicate about available food for 
consumption, directly connecting catering facilities or food 
retail facilities with the customer, supporting food waste 
mitigation in cities, on the example of such applications from 
Poland and Czechia. 
II. RESEARCH QUESTIONS 
In our analysis of the FSAs used by gastronomic facilities 
(e.g., restaurants, cafes, etc.) and food stores, located in 
selected cities of Poland and Czechia, the following research 
questions emerged: 
• 
What is the access to food from the apps in the 
selected cities in Poland and Czechia?   
• 
What kind of food is saved in those cities?  
• 
What are the regularities of the spatial distribution of 
gastronomic facilities in the selected cities (and the 
connections with the socio-demographic aspects and 
functions of the city)?  
• 
What picture of food-saving opportunities in the city 
emerges from their spatial distribution?  
• 
Are there city districts where the food cannot be saved 
from waste through the use of food apps?  
III. METHODOLOGY 
To provide the answer to these research questions, two-
step data collection methods were implemented. In the first 
stage, the investigators, trained to prepare a required database, 
collected data for analysis using three FSAs: Foodsi and 
ToGoodToGo for Poland; Nesnezeno for Czechia. The data 
was collected between September 2022 and January 2023. 
The investigators collected 1246 records corresponding to 
broadly understood facilities from the catering industry (e.g., 
restaurants, hotels, cafes, bars, etc.) and establishments related 
to the food trade (gas stations, grocery stores, bakeries, 
confectioneries, etc.) from 4 urban regions in Poland: 
Warsaw, Cracow, Poznan and cities that are part of the Upper 
Silesian-Zaglebie Metropolis and 2 cities from the Chechia: 
Prague and Brno. All the records collected from selected 
urban regions were merged into one database. During this 
process, some facilities repeated in the database because they 
were present in both Polish FSAs. This was the case with 51 
records, The duplicates were removed from the final dataset. 
This means that the final database contains in total 1195 
records. Regarding the study area, these are all large urban 
centres of a multifunctional character, to which Poles and 
Czechs migrate, among others, to study and remain, supplying 
the labour market. These are well-known international 
centers, cosmopolitan centers with the rank of European cities, 
whose inhabitants are usually characterized by higher 
education and employment in the service sector. Warsaw, 
Cracow, Prague, and Brno are also well-known urban centers, 
historical cities with long tourist traditions, visited year by 
year by an increasing number of domestic and international 
tourists. A large group of residents of these urban centres are 
also expats who come to Warsaw, Cracow, or Prague to join 
the ranks of employees of international corporations [15; 16]. 
The collected databases were combined for further 
quantitative and qualitative analyses. In the data collection 
process, special attention was paid to obtain information on 
the location of catering facilities and grocery stores, the type 
of facility, the type of food saved from waste, the 
characteristics of the facility in terms of ownership, etc. 
As part of the second stage of research, qualitative data 
will be augmented with quantitative data to identify attitudes 
and opinions among owners of catering facilities and food 
entrepreneurs. In addition to the benefits and disadvantages of 
participating in similar initiatives, we discussed attitudes and 
opinions about joining the food protection program through 
food sharing applications. 
IV. RESULTS 
The current stage of research ended with the acquisition of 
information on the location and characteristics of facilities 
participating in food-saving activities by selling products that 
are past their best-before date directly to customers using 
mobile application channels. Based on data on localization 
and the type of food saved in specific areas of selected cities, 
it was possible to determine the regularities of the spatial 
distribution 
of 
food 
places 
and 
their 
relation 
to 
sociodemographic characteristics. Using their localization 
pattern, we were able to paint a picture of the food-saving 
opportunities of catering facilities operating through the B2C 
marketing model. The most numerous restaurant facilities in 
the food sales program that use the FSA are those providing 
services for the preparation and sale of ready meals, such as 
restaurants, cafes, and buffet hotels. Another group of 
facilities are shops, including neighborhood greengrocers, 
bakeries, and large-area stores (so-called supermarkets). Most 
often, facilities that sell food through the FSAs are in central 
districts (e.g., Cracow, Warsaw, Prague, Brno) with diverse 
functions (e.g., tourist, administrative, entertainment). There 
are also facilities joining the FSA in typically residential areas, 
often revitalized,: e.g., in Warsaw, Cracow, Poznan, or Brno 
(Fig. 1) 
Prague is a special case, since FSA-using facilities are 
concentrated in the city's central tourist district, and their 
occurrence decreases with distance from the centre to 
residential areas (Fig. 2).  
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 1. Distribution of gastronomic premises that save food from 
waste using FSAs in Cracow (Poland) 
Source: own elaboration. 
Figure 2. Distribution of gastronomic premises that save food from 
waste using FSAs in Prague (Czech Republic) 
Source: own elaboration. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS 
The use of data from mobile applications dealing with the 
reduction of food waste from catering facilities allowed some 
preliminary conclusions. Both in the central districts of large 
cities, with various metropolitan functions, and in districts far 
from the center (mainly residential), there are facilities that 
use FASs to reduce food waste. Residents of both types of 
districts are, therefore, equipped with tools that allow them to 
participate in this effort to reduce food waste. It might be 
assumed that the owners of the premises, located in those 
areas, represent pro-environmental attitudes to food waste 
and that the young residents of these districts, Millennials and 
Generation Y, are the main users of those services. Since the 
above-mentioned services and products sell quickly, it is 
assumed that there is a demand for them in these city districts, 
both among sellers and consumers. 
In the future, in addition to spatial analysis of the 
distribution of entities joining FSAs in the selected cities in 
Poland and Czechia, the benefits and disadvantages of 
participating in similar initiatives, as well as attitudes and 
opinions about joining FSAs, will be discussed. Participants 
in food sharing have a variety of motivations and objectives 
that can mutually strengthen each other. We are interested in 
determining whether entities can simultaneously participate 
out of moral imperative and with a desire to make quick 
money. However, there can be tensions between individuals 
participating in collective action because of their diverse 
motivations and expectations. Some participants see their 
participation as a reflection of certain values (morality), while 
others see it primarily as an opportunity for personal gain (for 
example, by using the application as an additional 
distribution and sales channel). From the perspective of the 
methods introduced, the analysis pinpoints the need to search 
for unified and general motives of the owners of such 
premises to help residents of neighbourhoods participate in 
food waste mitigation practices, using phone applications. 
Open questions remain about the discrepancies between 
different individual views on what food sharing should and 
can achieve using FSAs. From the point of view of new 
owners, for whom both values: pro-environmental attitudes 
and environmental responsibility are important, it is 
extremely important crucial to determine what motivations 
drive the owners of catering facilities and entrepreneurs when 
joining 
the 
above-mentioned 
applications. 
Also, 
as 
documented, gastronomic facilities tend to appear in clusters, 
therefore, the therefore question of whether joining FSAs is 
subject to policy diffusion remains to be addressed. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is part of the Twinning project “Building 
excellence in research of human-environmental systems with 
geospatial and Earth observation technologies” that has 
received funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 
research and innovation programme under grant agreement 
No 952327. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. S. Stenmarck, C. Jensen, T. Quested, G. Moates, M. Buksti, 
B. Z. Cseh, D. Juul, A. Parry, A. Politano, and B. 
Redlingshofer, “Estimates of European Food Waste Levels”. 
IVL Swedish Environmental Research Institute, 1996. 
[2] H. V. Raut, A. D. Nagne, and K. V. Kale, “Management of 
food waste by using GIS environment: a review”, International 
Journal of Computer Sciences and Engineering, vol 3., issue 7, 
pp. 144-151, 2015. 
[3] S. Karsauliya, “Application of remote sensing and GIS in solid 
waste management: a case study of surroundings of River 
Yamuna, India”, International Journal of Environmental 
Engineering and Management, , Vol. 4, pp. 593-604, 2013. 
[4] Draper/Lennon, Inc. “Identification, characterization, and 
mapping of food waste and food waste generators in 
Massachusetts”, 
http://www.mass.gov/eea/docs/dep/recycle/priorities/foodwast
.pdf, 2002, September. 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[5] “Geographic Information Systems for Organics Recycling”, 
BioCycle, https://www.biocycle.net/2010/03/23/geographic-
informationsystems-for-organics-recycling/, 2010, March. 
[6]  J. Baumann, “GIS project helps with food insecurity and 
waste”, 
https://www.esri.com/about/newsroom/wp-
content/uploads/2020/11/foodinsecurity.pdf, 2020. 
[7] L. Mabe, “Food Waste Geographies: a GIS-based spatial 
analysis of food waste in Los Angeles County” UC Davis, 
ProQuest 
ID: 
Mabe_ucdavis_0029M_20464, 
2021, 
ark:/13030/m5rc439s. 
[8] A. Singh, “Remote sensing and GIS applications for municipal 
waste management”, Journal of Environmental Management, 
Vol. 
243, 
pp. 
22-29, 
2019, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.05.017. 
[9] E. Mati Asefa, K., Bayu Barasa, and D. Adare Mengistu, 
“Application of Geographic Information System in solid waste 
management” 
IntechOpen, 
2022, 
doi: 
10.5772/intechopen.103773. 
[10] S. K., Gurjar and A. Gaur, “21 - Application of remote sensing 
and GIS in integrated solid waste management - a short 
review”, Editor(s): Ch. Hussain, S. Hait, Advanced Organic 
Waste 
Management, 
Elsevier, 
2022, 
pp. 
351-362, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-85792-5.00001-0. 
[11] M. Mathenge, B. G. J. S. Sonneveld, and J. E. W. Broerse, 
“Mapping the spatial dimension of food insecurity using GIS-
based indicators: A case of Western Kenya” Food Security, 
vol. 15, pp. 243–260, 2023, https://doi.org/10.1007/s12571-
022-01308-6. 
[12] J. Harvey, A. Smith, and D. Golightly, “Giving and sharing in 
the computer-mediated economy”, Journal of Consumer 
Behaviour, vol. 16, pp. 363– 371, 2016, doi: 10.1002/cb.1499. 
[13] J., Harvey, A. Smith, J. Goulding and I. B. Illodo, “Food 
sharing, redistribution, and waste reduction via mobile 
applications: A social network analysis”, Industrial Marketing 
Management, 
vol. 
88, 
pp. 
437-448, 
2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.indmarman.2019.02.019. 
[14] A. Rýparová, “Digital food sharing: motivation and practice of 
sharing in Czechia” Geografie, vol. 126, pp. 263-287, 2021, 
https://doi.org/10.37040/geografie2021126030263. 
[15] National Statistical Office. “Narodowy Spis Powszechny 
Ludności i Mieszkań 2021 [National Population and Housing 
Census 2021]”, Polish Statistical Office, 2022. 
[16] Czech Statistical Office, “Statistical Yearbook of Prague – 
2022”, Czech Statistical Office, 2022. 
 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

