Development of a Web-Based Geospatial Application for Efficient Spatial Data
Management
Rouhollah Nasirzadehdizaji
Department of Water and Environment
Y¨uksel Proje Inc.
Ankara, 06610, Turkey
e-mail: rnasirzadeh@yukselproje.com.tr
Anil Olgac
Department of Water and Environment
Y¨uksel Proje Inc.
Ankara, 06610, Turkey
e-mail: aolgac@yukselproje.com.tr
Abstract—Today, digitization and dynamic representation of
geospatial data generated on different Geographic Information
System (GIS) platforms are mainly performed by location-based
information applications called Web-based GIS (Web-GIS). Web-
GIS technology encompasses multiple levels of technology for
publishing maps on the web, ranging from simply publishing
static web maps to dynamically serving maps, interactive custom
maps, and more complex sites that support multiple computer
platforms and operating systems. In this work, a Web-GIS
application has been designed and developed by using different
programming languages (and libraries) and implemented by pro-
viding interoperability between different open-source software,
which form the basis of the Web-GIS application such as GIS
software database/GIS data entry interface, and map server. A
Web-GIS application that can be accessed from a computer
or mobile device, allowing the dynamic presentation, analysis,
and manipulation of spatial or non-spatial data for various
purposes. Furthermore, it can be applied to quickly access data
obtained from different disciplines within an institution and
stored in databases from anywhere in the world if the user
can connect to the Internet. Web-GIS applications can be used
as an efficient decision support mechanism for decision makers
and authorities for quick and accurate decisions because there is
no need for data pre-processing, and all the spatial data stored
in the system are post-processed and the data displayed in a
user-friendly interface with the arranged styles. While Web-GIS
applications are designed to be accessible and user-friendly, it
should be recognized that some level of GIS knowledge may still
be necessary to fully interpret and understand geospatial data.
This work’s significance lies in its demonstration of the integrated
use of open-source software and interoperability between them
to develop a Web-based GIS application that caters to the needs
of decision-makers and authorities, promoting collaboration and
data sharing within organizations and institutions.
Keywords—Dynamic and interactive maps; geographic infor-
mation system; geospatial database; Web-GIS applications; web
mapping.
I. INTRODUCTION
The geospatial data contains general (maps) and specific
(attributes) information about a data (i.e., layer). The devel-
opment of computer and Internet technology has also accel-
erated the speed of accessing graphical and geospatial data
using Web-GIS applications. A Web-GIS system is a kind of
internet-based GIS application that uses an online map and
presents spatial data on the web. Several terms are commonly
used in the context of Web-based GIS, including Desktop
GIS, Distributed GIS, Internet GIS, and Web-GIS. These terms
are all types of GIS services, however, they differ in their
characteristics and functionalities. Desktop GIS is a powerful
GIS software that is installed on a desktop computer, requiring
specialized knowledge and training in GIS. Distributed GIS
stores spatial data in distributed locations, enabling multiple
users to access and work collaboratively on spatial data. Inter-
net GIS uses the Internet to share spatial data and is commonly
used for disseminating information related to environmental
planning, disaster management, and public health. Web-GIS,
on the other hand, is a user-friendly GIS system that is
accessed through a web browser and used for accessing and
analyzing spatial data related to environmental planning, urban
development, and public infrastructure management.Therefore,
Desktop GIS, Distributed GIS, Internet GIS, and Web-GIS
are all types of GIS services with different characteristics and
functionalities, designed for specific purposes and user groups.
The terms Web-GIS and web mapping are used synony-
mously, even if they do not mean the same. In fact, the
boundary between web maps and Web-GIS is blurry. Web-
GIS uses web maps and provides analytical capabilities to
web mapping end users. A web map typically includes a
web browser or other user agent capable of performing client-
server interaction. Web maps are a presentation environment
for Web-GIS, and are gradually gaining analytical capabilities.
In other words, web mapping is the process of designing,
implementing, and presenting maps provided by GIS on the
World Wide Web (WWW) and its products [1] [2].
Web-GIS applications are developed for many different
purposes as they serve and provide advantages in various
fields. Tourism, environment, e-commerce, managing land use,
and planning and designing transportation systems are the
most widely used areas of Web-GIS applications. The Web-
GIS application is considered to be the first system to meet the
needs of tourism [3]. The easy-to-use Web-GIS applications
attract environmental scientists and decision-makers to better
understand the spatial, socioeconomic, and historical aspects
of the hazards and the associated risks to society and to
increase people’s awareness of these risks [4]. E-commerce
companies and the private sector benefit from the potential of
Web-GIS to present and promote themselves. Even though 2D
and 3D Web-GIS systems can be applied to different projects
and fields, it provides more opportunities to increase the use
of these applications [5] [6].
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Recent studies have explored the potential of Web-GIS
applications in a variety of fields. For example, [7] developed
a Web-GIS approach for evaluating the effects of green in-
frastructure on urban thermal environment. The authors used
a combination of remote sensing data and field measurements
to assess the thermal performance of different types of green
infrastructure in an urban setting. The resulting Web-GIS
platform enabled users to visualize the spatial distribution of
temperature and vegetation cover, and to compare the ther-
mal performance of different green infrastructure types. The
authors concluded that the Web-GIS approach could provide
valuable insights into the effectiveness of green infrastructure
in mitigating the urban heat island effect.
In another study, [8] developed a Web-GIS platform for
monitoring and predicting air pollution in urban areas. The
authors used a combination of satellite data and ground-based
measurements to create a real-time air quality monitoring
system. The resulting Web-GIS platform provided users with
up-to-date information on air quality at the neighborhood level,
and enabled them to visualize the spatial distribution of air
pollutants. The authors concluded that the Web-GIS platform
could be a valuable tool for urban planners and policymakers
in developing strategies to mitigate air pollution and improve
public health.
In the most recent work, [9] proposed a web-GIS based
approach for flood risk assessment and management in ur-
ban areas. The authors developed a web-GIS platform that
integrates various data sources such as topographic data,
hydrological data, and land use data, to identify flood-prone
areas in urban regions. The platform also includes a decision
support system for flood risk management, which allows users
to explore different scenarios and evaluate the effectiveness of
various flood management strategies.
The aim of this work was to develop a Web-GIS application
for geospatial data management, analysis, and presentation.
Specifically, the methodology is demonstrated through the
development of a Web-GIS application that can provide a plat-
form to better manage, analyze, and present large datasets in
the web environment for efficient use of processed data. While
previous studies have used Web-GIS applications for similar
purposes, our methodology provides a systematic and efficient
approach to creating such applications that can be applied
to a wide range of environmental projects. This contribution
is particularly valuable in the context of increasing interest
in using geospatial technologies to manage and analyze and
present environmental data in an efficient manner, making
it a useful tool for decision support systems in a variety of
environmental projects.
The paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the
methodology for developing the Web-GIS application, includ-
ing the system development process and the key features of the
developed application. Section III provides a discussion of the
potential benefits of using the developed Web-GIS application.
Finally, Section IV concludes the paper and suggests avenues
for future research.
II. METHODOLOGY
This section provides an overview of the methodology
used in the development of the Web-GIS application. The
following sub-sections describe the different phases of the
development process in detail, including system design and
implementation, and interface development. The software used
and their interoperabilities are also discussed to provide a
better understanding of the development process.
A. System Development
The global nature of Web-GIS is inherited from the widely
supported Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP). Almost all
organizations open their firewalls on certain network ports
to allow HTTP requests and responses to pass through their
local networks, thus increasing accessibility. Web-GIS can
be designed as a web-based mapping application with multi-
platform features, easy to use for end users, and compatible
with different web browsers, such as Google Chrome, Internet
Explorer, and Firefox. Web-GIS based on HyperText Markup
Language (HTML) clients typically supports different operat-
ing systems (e.g. Win, Linux, Mac OS, iOS) as web browsers
largely adhere to HTML and JavaScript standards. In a web-
GIS application, information exchange takes place between a
server and a client, where the server is a GIS server and the
client is a web browser, mobile application, and desktop appli-
cation. The server has a unique “Uniform Resource Locator”
(URL; used to show the location of a resource on the internet)
so that clients can find this information on the web and perform
various actions. Figure 1 shows the main components of the
Web-GIS application system and the interaction between the
components.
Within the scope of this study, different processes were car-
ried out for the realization of the Web-GIS system. Depending
on the purpose of the Web-GIS project, where a server system
is provided, the server needs to provide a specific URL on the
web so that clients can easily access it. Clients rely on the
HTTP specification to send requests to servers. The server
performs the requested GIS operation and sends a response
to the client via HTTP. The format of response sent to the
client can be in many formats such as HTML, binary image,
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON), and Extensible Markup
Language (XML). The software and hardware infrastructure
has been created for the project to be displayed on the web,
including server setup, user account, and application access
management, provision of security policies, interface design
of applications and transactions, etc. In the design of the Web-
GIS application, establishing a database for entering, process-
ing, and keeping spatial data is carried out for the processes of
importing the GIS data into the spatial database, maintaining
the existing databases, and publishing the data on the web. For
the establishment of a map server to display spatial data on the
web, the map server needs to be set up to convert the selected
spatial data (maps) into a set of display elements and make the
created maps visible to the user on a suitable display device.
Styles such as symbols, lines, and fill styles are added to
spatial properties, annotations are created from alphanumeric
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 1. The structure and main components of the web-GIS application system.
properties, image elements are sorted in a specific order, and
other graphics operations take place within the map server
process. The features and extents obtained from the selection
process are prepared from data acquisition and conversion
into a format (raster or vector) suitable for processing into a
database. Generated data and maps are prepared in GIF files or
postscript files. In this work, open source software that forms
the basis of the Web-GIS system, such as JavaScript and QGIS,
PostgreSQL/PostGIS, and GeoServer are conducted to develop
the Web-GIS application by providing interoperability between
GIS software, database/GIS data entry interface and map
server, respectively. Features used as spatial data can also be
in different formats, such as vector and raster layers (Shapefile
and GeoTIFF) or text (XML) data types. GeoServer functions
as the Web Feature Service (WFS) reference implementation
of the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC) standard, as well
as using the Web Map Service (WMS), Web Coverage Service
(WCS), and web render service features.
B. The Developed Web-GIS Application
The developed Web-GIS application in this work can be
accessed through any web browser and can be accessed from
the URL [10]. The application login screen and interface
components are shown in Figure 2. The components are
numbered and each component is thoroughly explained below.
The username/password entry screen (number 1) is the
first part that appears after the user/customer opens the ap-
plication via the web browser. The login part of a Web-
GIS application is a critical component that plays a crucial
role in ensuring the security and privacy of the data stored
in the application. It allows users to authenticate themselves
and gain access to the different features and functionalities
of the application based on their level of authorization. The
importance of the login part lies in its ability to categorize
users on the back-end of the application in terms of storing
existing, confidential, and undesirable data in the database.
This categorization enables the application to store sensitive
data and confidential information in a secure and protected
environment, inaccessible to unauthorized users. Additionally,
the login part helps in managing user access to the application,
restricting or granting permissions based on the user’s role or
responsibilities, ensuring that users only access the information
and data that is necessary for their tasks. Overall, the login part
of a Web-GIS application is a critical feature that ensures the
security, confidentiality, and integrity of the data stored in the
application, while also enabling users to access the features
and functionalities they need to perform their tasks.
After successfully logging into the Web-GIS application, the
user can move on to the second component (number 2), where
they select the data group they want to examine (i.e., the spatial
query section). The spatial query component plays a critical
role in enabling users to navigate through the vast amounts of
data stored in the database and search for specific information.
The spatial query help filter the data within a specific group
or project, enabling the user to focus on the most relevant
and important information. In another word, a user working
on a project may want to filter the data to show only the
data that meets specific criteria or conditions. The pre-defined
conditional rules as the Structured Query Language (SQL)
modules in the application enable the user to do the spatial
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 2. The Web-GIS application interface login screenshot.
queries easily and efficiently, without the need for filtering
using expressions. Hence, this component of the Web-GIS
application plays a critical role in enabling users to access
and analyze the data they need to perform their tasks, making
the application a valuable tool for managing and utilizing large
amounts of spatial data. The third component (number 3) of
the Web-GIS application is where the user can select different
base maps and overlays to display on the application interface.
This component plays an important role in providing users
with a customizable view of the spatial data stored in the
geospatial database. Base maps provide the underlying context
for the spatial data, and users can choose from a variety of
options such as Open Street Map, Google Satellite, and others,
depending on their needs and preferences. Overlays, on the
other hand, are layers of spatial data that are called from
the database and displayed on the map interface, allowing
users to visualize and analyze the data in a meaningful way.
Examples of overlays could include population density, land
use, transportation networks, and others. By providing users
with a wide range of base maps and overlay options, the
Web-GIS application enables them to view and analyze spatial
data in a way that best meets their needs. For example, a
user working on a project related to land use may want to
use a base map that shows terrain features or vegetation,
while also displaying overlays related to land use patterns
and zoning regulations. Another user working on a project
related to transportation planning may want to use a base
map that shows roads and highways, while also displaying
overlays related to traffic patterns and transit routes. Thereby,
the base maps and overlays management section of the Web-
GIS application provides a useful feature and enables users to
customize their view of the spatial data, making it easier to
analyze and interpret the information they need.
The fourth component (number 4) of the Web-GIS applica-
tion is an option for measurement tools, which allows users
to make interactive measurements on the map interface. This
feature enables users to accurately measure distances and areas
on the map, providing them with a valuable tool for analyzing
and interpreting spatial data. The measurement option in the
application allows users to select different measurement types,
such as length or area measurements, depending on their
needs. For example, a user working on a project related to
land use planning may need to accurately measure the area
of a particular parcel of land to determine its zoning or
permitted land use. The measurement option in the application
would enable them to do this quickly and easily, using a
variety of measurement tools and techniques. The interactive
nature of the measurement option also enables users to make
adjustments and refinements to their measurements as needed,
ensuring that they are as accurate and precise as possible.
The last component (number 5) of the Web-GIS application
that is shown in Figure 2 is the attribution component, which
displays information related to the map interface, including
the geographic coordinates of the cursor location on the map,
the map scale, and the source reference of the map or satellite
image (map contributors) being used as the base maps. By
displaying this information, the application ensures that users
make informed decisions based on the data they are working
with. The geographic coordinates provide users with the exact
location of their cursor on the map, which can be particularly
useful for identifying specific features or locations. The map
scale information provides users with an indication of the level
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 3. Developed Web-GIS application interface.
of detail being shown on the map, helping them to understand
the spatial relationships between different features and ele-
ments. Figure 3 presents the developed Web-GIS application’s
interface, which showcases the functionality and features of
the application.
The example data that is called from the database is dis-
played on the interface, along with the preferences and filters
that have been applied to the data. The interface is designed to
be user-friendly and intuitive, allowing users to easily navigate
and interact with the application. To display the preferred data
set on the application interface screen, conditional filtering
within the preferred data set can be done with the help of the
pre-defined SQL operators as shown in component number 2.
The sample opened data in the applications’ interface shows
whether the capacity of the stormwater pipelines is sufficient
or not for a certain rainfall period. The green, orange, and red
colors indicate the pipelines’ capacities being sufficient, full,
and insufficient. The application automatically creates map
legends based on the user’s data set preferences. The legend
appears below Component 2, as shown in Figure 3. Component
6, as shown in the application interface, according to the SQL
query made on component 2, displays spatial filtering on the
layer based on selected attributes of the data. For instance,
in the sample stormwater pipeline data, the user has made
a query based on the ”Pipeline Capacity” attribute to filter
and display the insufficient pipelines. Any data attribute can
be selected on this screen, and the selection is dynamically
displayed on the map. In addition, as a base map, the user can
switch between different base maps, such as satellite images
or OpenStreetMap (OSM) invoked via the Internet, as shown
in component 3.
III. DISCUSSION
Web-GIS applications have become increasingly popular in
recent years, as they provide an easy-to-use and accessible
way to process and analyze spatial data. This is particularly
useful for decision-makers, who need to quickly access and
analyze data in order to make informed decisions about public
projects. The Web-GIS application presented in this paper
is designed with the needs of a broad audience in mind,
making it an ideal tool for users with some level of GIS
knowledge. This study presented a Web-GIS application that
was designed and implemented with a focus on its features and
functionalities. The application allows users to interact with
spatial data and utilize its features to explore, analyze, and
visualize it. The paper provided an example interface of the
application, showcasing its ability to process and display spa-
tial data. The work highlighted the importance of transparency,
accountability, and ease-of-use in a Web-GIS application, and
emphasized its potential to enable informed decision-making
and effective action. In addition, the developed Web-GIS ap-
plication provides a powerful platform for location-based data
analysis, offering various capabilities such as making spatial
queries, filtering data, and enabling interactive measurements.
These capabilities can be utilized for a wide range of purposes,
from environmental monitoring and urban planning to disaster
response and emergency management.
One of the key advantages of Web-GIS over traditional
desktop GIS is its ease of use. Web-GIS applications are
designed to be simple and intuitive, allowing users to quickly
and easily process and display geographic data. This makes
it an ideal tool for decision-makers who need to take quick
measures against certain events, such as floods or other natural
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

disasters. With the Web-GIS application presented in this
paper, flood spread maps can be easily classified and visualized
for the detection of vulnerable areas according to different
flood recurrences, without the need for the complex operations
required by traditional desktop GIS. Another advantage of
Web-GIS is its ability to enable a large number of users
to access and share spatial and non-spatial data within and
outside an organization. The Web-GIS application presented
in this paper provides global access to data obtained from all
disciplines within an institution, making it a valuable tool for
collaboration and data sharing. Overall, Web-GIS applications
are a powerful and accessible tool for processing, displaying,
and analyzing geographic data. Its ease of use and accessibility
make it an ideal tool for decision-makers, while its ability to
enable data sharing and collaboration makes it a valuable asset
for organizations across a range of industries.
Our future work is centered around the development of
a dynamic geospatial application that includes several key
features, such as a mobile client, 3D Web-GIS, quick and easy
query tools, hydrological processing tools, and an integrated
BIM and GIS web-based platform. These enhancements are
aimed at better meeting the needs of decision-makers and
authorities and facilitating collaboration and data sharing
within organizations and institutions, particularly those dealing
with large datasets. By implementing these improvements, we
believe our application will be a valuable tool for promoting
effective decision-making and advancing geospatial research.
IV. CONCLUSION
GIS software is not accessible to everyone, nor spends the
time necessary to use it effectively. Desktop GIS is designed
for professional users with months of training and experience
in GIS. The Web-GIS application developed in this study is
based on open source software, including JavaScript, QGIS,
PostgreSQL/PostGIS, and GeoServer. This choice of software
was made to ensure interoperability between GIS software,
database/GIS data entry interface, and map server, respectively,
resulting in an efficient and cost-effective Web-GIS system.
The Web-GIS application presented in this paper is aimed
at a broad audience, primarily for users with some level of
experience with GIS programs. In fact, Web-GIS applications
are often designed to be simple, intuitive, and convenient,
making them easier to use than desktop GIS. Thus, the Web-
GIS system becomes a fast and easy way to disseminate
the data as a tool for processing, displaying, and analyzing
geographic data, while supporting a large number of users at
the same time. Therefore, the Web-GIS application is an inter-
esting and powerful tool for decision-makers in designing and
planning public projects. Specifically, in order to take quick
measures against a certain event, for example, to classify and
visualize a flood spread map for the detection of vulnerable
areas according to different flood recurrences, the flood spread
maps available in the database can be easily displayed on the
interface of the application without the need for the operations
performed in traditional desktop GIS. In addition, Web-GIS
applications enable a large number of users to use services
(spatial or non-spatial data) to share with others (global access)
within and outside the organization. Therefore, as a result of
this work, a web-based GIS application that can be accessed
from a computer or mobile device has been designed and
presented. This web-based GIS application provides spatial
data obtained from all disciplines within an institution and
provides quick access to this data when necessary, via the web,
regardless of the user’s location. Hence, Web-GIS applications
have the potential to greatly expand the reach of geospatial
analysis and enable a wider range of individuals to engage
with geospatial data, fostering greater understanding and in-
formed decision-making in a wide range of fields, from urban
planning and environmental management to public health and
transportation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the colleagues and man-
agers of the R&D and Quality and Management Systems
Departments at Y¨uksel Proje International Co. for their contri-
butions and efforts. The authors would also like to especially
thank the management of Y¨uksel Proje (President and Vice
President) and the Coordinator of the Water and Environment
Department) for their support and encouragement of scientific
and academic research.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Fu and J. Sun, ”Web GIS: principles and applications.” Redlands: Esri
Press, pp. 89-114, 2011.
[2] R. Nasirzadehdizaji and R. N. Celik, “Open source geo-information
technology for making special purpose web-mapping application,” Co-
ordinate, 11, pp. 23-26, 2015.
[3] G. Kakaletris, D. Varoutas, D. Katsianis, and T. Sphicopoulos, ”Design
and Implementation Approaches for Location Based Tourism Related
Services” Chapter 18, Geographic Information Systems: Concepts,
Methodologies, and Applications, pp. 258-294, 2013.
[4] R. Nasirzadehdizaji, “A web mapping infrastructure design and imple-
mentation with open source geo-information technology: A case study
of ITU Smart Campus,” Master Thesis, Istanbul Technical University,
Informatic Institute, Higher Education Council Presidency (Y ¨OK), 2015.
[5] X. M. Chen, ”Remote sensing and GIS in environmental risk assess-
ment. Geographic Information Systems: Concepts, Methodologies, and
Applications,” Chapter 4.15, pp. 840-847, 2013.
[6] M. ¨U. G¨um¨us¸ay, ”WebTabanlı Co˘grafi Bilgi Sistemi Uygulamaları (YT ¨U
Davutpas¸a Kamp¨us¨u) (in English: ”Web Based Geographic Information
System Applications (Yildiz Technical University Davutpas¸a Campus)),
Journal of Science and Engineering Sciences, AKU (Afyon Kocatepe
University), J. Sci. Eng.17 Special Issue, pp. 215-222, 2017.
[7] X. Wang, Y. Zhu, and L. Yu, ”A web-GIS approach for evaluating
the effects of green infrastructure on urban thermal environment,”
Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 96, p. 103223, 2022.
[8] Y. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Li, and J. Li, ”A web-based GIS platform for
monitoring and predicting air pollution in urban areas,” Environmental
Pollution, vol. 287, p. 117395, 2021.
[9] J. Zhang, H. Chen, and Z. Li, ”A web-GIS based approach for flood
risk assessment and management in urban areas,” Natural Hazards, vol.
116, no. 1, pp. 367-383, 2022.
[10] Y¨uksel Proje International Company. Web-GIS: User Login. [Online].
Available from: https://ypnet.yukselproje.com.tr/YpCbs/ 2023.04.05
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-079-7
GEOProcessing 2023 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

