A Case Study for a Multitemporal Segmentation Approach in
Optical Remote Sensing Images
Wanderson Costa∗, Leila Fonseca∗, Thales K¨orting∗, Margareth Sim˜oes†‡ and Patrick Kuchler‡§
∗National Institute for Space Research (INPE)
S˜ao Jos´e dos Campos, SP, Brazil - 12227-010
Email: {wanderson.costa, leila.fonseca, thales.korting}@inpe.br
†Embrapa Solos
Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil - 22460-000
Email: margareth.simoes@embrapa.br
‡UERJ/FEN/DESC/PPGMA, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil
Email: geo.calvano@gmail.com
§Cirad, UMR Tetis, Montpellier, France
Abstract—Continuous observations from remote sensors provide
high temporal and spatial resolution imagery, and better remote
sensing image segmentation techniques are mandatory for efﬁ-
cient analysis. Among them, one of the most applied segmentation
techniques is the region growing algorithm. Within this context,
this paper describes a study case for a multitemporal segmenta-
tion that adapts the traditional region growing technique. Our
method aims to detect homogeneous regions in space and time
observing a sequence of optical remote sensing images. Tests were
conducted by considering the Dynamic Time Warping distance
as the homogeneity criterion to grow regions. A case study on
high temporal resolution for sequences of Landsat-8 vegetation
indices products provided satisfactory outputs.
Keywords–Multitemporal
Segmentation;
Image
Processing;
Geoprocessing; Remote Sensing; Dynamic Time Warping.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As satellite products have a repetitive data acquisition and
its digital format is suitable for computer processing, remote
sensing data have become the main source for application of
change detection and observation of land use and land cover
during the last decades [1]. Satellite image analysis plays a key
role for detecting land use/cover changes in different biomes.
The extensive amount of remote sensing data, combined with
information from ecosystem models, offers a good opportunity
for predicting and understanding the behaviour of terrestrial
ecosystems [2].
If the satellite image analysis is performed using only
per-pixel techniques, inherent information of the objects in
the scene is discarded, such as shape, area and statistical
parameters. In order to exploit this information, there are seg-
mentation algorithms, which partition images in regions whose
pixels present similar properties [3] [4]. Using a homogeneity
criterion between the image pixels, the identiﬁed regions are
treated as objects from which characteristics can be extracted
to be used in the analysis.
Change detection based on time series is advantageous
compared to the pure observation of image sequences, since
the series takes into account information regarding temporal
dynamics and changes in the landscape rather than just ob-
serving the differences between two or more images collected
on different dates [2]. With the amount of multitemporal and
multiresolution images growing exponentially, the number of
image segmentation applications is recently increasing and,
simultaneously, new challenges arise. Hence, there is a need to
explore new segmentation concepts and techniques that make
use of the temporal dimension [5] [6].
Many of the recent segmentation processes based on ob-
jects have paid attention to high image spatial resolutions
whereas, so far, there are few studies adapted to multitem-
poral data [7]. In this paper, we describe a case study for a
segmentation applied to time series of remote sensing images.
The algorithm integrates regions in order to detect objects
that are homogeneous in space and time. This approach aims
to overcome the dlimitations of the snapshot model [8], that
analyses each time step independently. The technique adapts
the segmentation based on spatial region growing [9]. A case
study was conducted using time series of Landsat-8 Opera-
tional Land Imager (OLI) scenes by applying multitemporal
segmentation using the Dynamic Time Warping measure [10]
as the homogeneity criterion.
With this context, this work can contribute to the seg-
mentation of remote sensing data in geographic information
systems from the construction of thematic maps as output of
the segmentation process, since it is possible to generate a layer
of information from the input data, representing homogeneous
regions with similar properties over time.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,
we present a brief description of remote sensing image seg-
mentation and related works applied in change detection. In
Section III, we discuss the use of satellite image time series.
The Dynamic Type Warping is described in Section IV. The
methodological procedures are depicted in Section V. In Sec-
tion VI, we discuss the results obtained in this work. Finally,
we describe the conclusion and future work in Section VII.
II.
REMOTE SENSING IMAGE SEGMENTATION
Segmentation is a basic and critical task in image pro-
cessing whereby the image is partitioned into regions, also
called objects, whose pixels are similar considering one or
more properties [8]. Overall, it is expected that the objects of
interest are automatically extracted as a result of segmentation.
Features can be extracted from these objects and used later for
data analysis.
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

One of the most applied segmentation techniques in remote
sensing is the region growing algorithm [9]. This is a simple
iterative approach that groups pixels or sub-regions into larger
regions depending on how similar they are, using some simi-
larity criteria. The technique starts with a set of pixels called
seeds and, from them, grows regions by adding neighbour
pixels with similar properties.
The threshold deﬁnitions in region growing segmentation
are a key step due to their direct inﬂuence on the accuracy of
the output. The similarity threshold analyses if the pixel value
difference or the average difference of a set of neighbouring
pixels is smaller than a given threshold. The area threshold
is another common parameter and it takes into account the
minimum size of the regions that will be individualized by
the algorithm. Setting these values enables the user to control
the outcome in an interactive way, depending on the goal and
study area. In general, the threshold is reached after several
tests among possible combinations of the algorithm. The tests
continue until the result of the segmentation is suitable for a
particular purpose.
Several segmentation techniques applied in change detec-
tion are still derived from the traditional snapshot model [6],
observing only the differences between discrete dates [11]–
[13]. However, a thorough literature review revealed just a few
studies that adapted methods based on objects for applications
with multitemporal data [7].
Some object-based techniques aim at performing the seg-
mentation generating one output for each time instance and
then comparing the objects changes over time [13]–[17]. In
other studies, the objects are deﬁned in the ﬁrst image, and
then their differences are analysed in subsequent image [12]
[18] [19].
Another approach has included the time as an additional
factor within the segmentation, being used with the spatial
and spectral image features [7]. However, many studies that
applied this segmentation approach have used a limited number
of multitemporal images [20]–[24] and they did not make use
of time series of high temporal resolution images [6].
III.
SATELLITE IMAGE TIME SERIES
Detection of changes based on time series is advantageous
compared to the analysis of each image in a sequence indepen-
dently, since the series take into account information regarding
temporal dynamics and changes in the landscape rather than
just observing the difference between two or more images
collected on different dates [2]. However, a large amount of
time series data has been generated over the past years, which
forces the remote sensing community to rethink processing
strategies for satellite time series analysis and visualization.
The time series of vegetation indices, for example, can
be used to analyse seasonality for cover monitoring purposes.
In the analysis and characterization of vegetation cover, for
example, vegetation indices are used for seasonal and inter-
annual monitoring of biophysical, phenological and structural
vegetation parameters. Figure 1 illustrates the time series
generation of a given vegetation index for a pixel p(x, y). For
each pixel, a time series can be observed, representing the
variation of the vegetation index over time.
Vegetation indices represent improved measures of spatial,
spectral and radiometric surface vegetation conditions. One
Figure 1. Example of a time series for the pixel p(x, y).
of most used indices is the Normalized Difference Vegetation
Index (NDVI), based on the reﬂectance of red and near-infrared
wavelengths [25].
IV.
DYNAMIC TIME WARPING
Dynamic Time Warping (DTW) is one of the most used
measures to quantify the similarity between two time series
[26]. Originally designed to treat automatic speech recogni-
tion [10] [27], DTW measures the optimal global alignment
between two time series and exploits temporal distortions
between them.
The choice of a good similarity measure plays a key
role since it deﬁnes the way to treat the temporality of
data. The main change detection analysis in remote sensing
images consists in comparing the data to estimate the similarity
between them [28]. In many cases, the similarity is computed
using a distance measure between two instances.
Among the known distances, DTW has the ability to realign
two time series, so that each element of the ﬁrst series is
associated with at least one of the second series. With DTW,
two time series out of phase can be aligned in a nonlinear
form (Figure 2). Providing the cost of this alignment, DTW
highlights similarities that the Euclidean distance is not able
to capture, comparing shifted or distorted time series [28].
Figure 2. DTW nonlinear alignment allows a more intuitive distance to be
calculated. Source: Adapted from [29].
Let A and B be two time series of length m and n, respec-
tively, where A = ⟨a1, a2, · · · , an⟩ and B = ⟨b1, b2, · · · , bm⟩.
The ﬁrst step for calculating the DTW measure between A
and B is to build a matrix of size n × m, where each matrix
element (i, j) corresponds to a distance measured between ai
and bi. This distance, δ(ai, bj) can be calculated using different
metrics, such as the absolute difference d(ai, bi) = |ai − bi|
or the Euclidean distance.
The values of the matrix elements are calculated from
left to right and from bottom to top. The algorithm adds
the distance value δ of the elements in that position of each
series. The elements receive the lowest value from the previous
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

adjacent elements to the left, down and diagonal, as in (1).
D (ai, bj) = δ (ai, bj) + min



D (ai−1, bj−1) ,
D (ai, bj−1) ,
D (ai−1, bj)
(1)
Once the matrix is completely ﬁlled, the next step is to ﬁnd
the best path between the start and end values of the matrix
that results in the optimal alignment value. For this, the search
for the path starts from D(an, bm) (top right), always adding
the lowest element in the neighborhood, until the ﬁrst element
at bottom left.
The DTW measure has been the subject of studies for
geoprocessing and analysis of satellite images time series.
Petitjean et al. [26] [28], for example, used DTW to compare
time series affected by clouds. Maus et al. [30] presented
a weighted version of DTW for land cover and land use
classiﬁcation.
V.
METHODOLOGY
The proposed spatio-temporal segmentation by region
growing is diagrammed in Figure 3. Our proposed method
Figure 3. Flowchart of the proposed methodology.
adapts the traditional region growing technique in order to
detect regions that present similar properties over time. The
methodology uses the DTW distance as a part of the region
growing process. The algorithm can be expressed by the
following steps:
1) Select a sequence of images as input data.
2) Set similarity and area thresholds.
3) Determine the seed set.
4) Compute the DTW distance between the time series of
the seeds and their neighbors. If the absolute difference
between the DTW value of the time series of the seed and
the time series of the neighbor is less than the similarity
threshold, the neighbor is considered similar and it is
added to the region.
5) Continue examining all the neighbors until no similar
neighbor is found. Label the obtained segment as a
complete region.
6) Observe the next unlabelled seed and repeat the process
until all the pixels are labelled in a region.
7) For each segment whose size is less than the area
threshold value, merge the segment with the neighbouring
segment with the largest common boundary.
A case study was conducted by considering the DTW measure
as homogeneity criterion in the algorithm. For each image,
each pixel corresponds to a NDVI value, so that the values of
this ordered sequence of images result in a time series. These
collected time series are used in DTW calculation between
the seed and its neighbouring pixels. The user determines the
length and periodicity of the time series from the input data.
The segmentation algorithm was written using R language.
For the acceptance or rejection of a given threshold in
a remote sensing image segmentation result, the resulting
segments were compared with a remote sensing image at the
same location of the scene in the end of the time series.
The seed set, processing order and location of the seeds were
set randomly by the algorithm. The similarity threshold was
reached using the same seed set and processing order of the
seeds in all tests.
VI.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Our technique was used to evaluate a central-western area
in Brazil. The study area encompasses a region in the state of
Mato Grosso (MT), located in Nova Cann˜a do Norte City,
illustrated in Figure 4. A sequence of 27 images obtained
from NDVI Landsat-8 OLI between April 10, 2016 and May
31, 2017 were used, with temporal resolution of 16 days. All
images have a dimension of 155 × 132 pixels, with spatial
resolution of 30 m.
Figure 4. Study area. Landsat-8 (R4G3B2) imagery of the study area.
The study was conducted in the Gamada Farm, which is
supervised by the Brazilian Agricultural Research Corporation
(EMBRAPA). Wet and dry seasons are well deﬁned in the
region. The dry season occurs from May to August, whereas
about 95% of the annual rainfall is concentrated between
September and April. During the analysed year, the farm
contained areas of native forest and pasture, in addition to
regions with several types of crops, such as sugarcane, maize,
rice and soybean. This area was chosen because it presented
regions with homogeneous properties in the described period,
according to information provided by EMBRAPA.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

After several tests, the similarity and area thresholds were
chosen so that the agricultural, pasture and native forest areas
could be separated from the other neighboring targets. The
expected segmentation output includes segmented areas with
similar geo-objects presenting homogeneity over time. The
similarity threshold was deﬁned empirically, based on visual
inspection of the results. For the segmentation result presented
in Figure 5, the similarity threshold was set to 0.061. The
processing time using this threshold value was 143 seconds.
The area threshold was used to eliminate sliver polygons that
the algorithm generates in boundary areas. This is due to
the low spatial resolution of the images that inﬂuences the
pixel values in edge areas. In addition, we set this threshold
to 60,000 m2 to disregard small regions derived from noise
caused by the high presence of cloud cover in the image
sequence.
Figure 5. Segmentation output (yellow outlines) for the study area. The
segments are superimposed on a Landsat-8 image (R4G3B2).
Evaluating the result of an image segmentation is difﬁcult
because, currently, no standard assessment techniques exist
[31]. For this test, we compared the segmentation result to
a Landsat-8 image, evaluating the output based on photo-
interpretation of the satellite image. Visually, the proposed
method was able to create similar-shaped segments, represent-
ing similar-sized groups of geo-objects, such as native forests,
croplands and pasture areas.
The farm contains a region of Integrated Crop-Livestock-
Forestry (ICLF) system. At the time of the study, Gamada
Farm had crop rotation consisted of Brachiaria pasture
grass (Urochloa Brizantha) interchangeable with soybean,
rice+soybean, maize+soybean, Brachiaria+soybean, pasture,
sugarcane and native forest. The region containing the ICLF
system was detected by our technique, corresponding to the
segment labelled 1 in Figure 5.
Additionally, our algorithm was able to create segments
that presented regions with similar seasonal dynamics over
the analysed period, distinguishing pastures regions (segments
2-4), native forest areas (5-17) and croplands (18-37). It is
important to notice that some large agriculture areas were
divided into sub-regions. Some of them were regions with
different harvest periods and the method performed this sepa-
ration between the areas during the analysed year.
However, since the proposed method is based on region
growing technique, the algorithm contains some disadvantages.
Different seed sets, for example, cause different results in seg-
mentation. In addition, there is the dependence of processing
order of the seeds, which is particularly noticeable when the
regions are small or have some similar properties. In addition,
DTW calculation demands a high computational cost.
The case study was encouraging and demonstrates the po-
tential of the proposed multitemporal segmentation in dealing
with time series generated by images of optical remote sensing
images. However, one factor that reduces the quality of the
segments is the noise in the time series derived from cloud
cover.
VII.
CONCLUSION
The proposed multitemporal segmentation brings a new
way of interpreting data by means of analysing contiguous
regions in time. In order to illustrate the potential of the
method, we presented a study case on NDVI time series
derived from Landsat-8 OLI products. We compared the seg-
ments generated by the proposed algorithm based on photo-
interpretation, observing similarities between the segmentation
results and the superimposed image.
Further analysis is needed to apply this approach in regions
with higher temporal resolutions and to test different indices
and spatial resolutions of Landsat-like image time series.
However, the DTW computation and the use of the temporal
dimension increases the complexity of processing compared
with the segmentation of satellite images which considers only
a single date.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge the ﬁnancial
support
of
CAPES,
FAPESP
e-sensing
program
(grant
2014/08398-6),
FUNCATE
MSA
BNDES
14.2.0929.1,
Project H2020-MSCA-RiSE-2015 Odyssea (EU 691053) and
CAPES/COFECUB Programme for the GeoABC Project
(n. 845/15) as well as information support of Embrapa
Agrossilvipastoril and Embrapa LabEx Europe.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. F. Lambin and M. Linderman, “Time series of remote sensing
data for land change science,” Geoscience and Remote Sensing, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 44, no. 7, 2006, pp. 1926–1928.
[2]
S. Boriah, “Time series change detection: algorithms for land cover
change.” Ph.D. dissertation, University of Minnesota, 160 p., 2010.
[3]
T. Blaschke, “Object based image analysis for remote sensing,” ISPRS
Journ. of Photog. and Remote Sens., vol. 65, no. 1, 2010, pp. 2–16.
[4]
L. S. Bins, L. M. G. Fonseca, G. J. Erthal, and F. M. Ii, “Satellite
imagery segmentation: a region growing approach,” Simp´osio Brasileiro
de Sensoriamento Remoto, vol. 8, no. 1996, 1996, pp. 677–680.
[5]
J. Schiewe, “Segmentation of high-resolution remotely sensed data-
concepts, applications and problems,” International Archives of Pho-
togrammetry Remote Sensing and Spatial Information Sciences, vol. 34,
no. 4, 2002, pp. 380–385.
[6]
V. Dey, Y. Zhang, and M. Zhong, “A review on image segmentation
techniques with remote sensing perspective,” ISPRS, vol. XXXVIII,
July 2010, pp. 31–42.
[7]
J. A. Thompson and B. G. Lees, “Applying object-based segmentation in
the temporal domain to characterise snow seasonality,” ISPRS, vol. 97,
2014, pp. 98–110.
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[8]
R. M. Haralick and L. G. Shapiro, “Image segmentation techniques,”
in Tec. Symp. East.
Arlington, VA: Int. Soc. Opt. Photon., 1985, pp.
2–9.
[9]
R. Adams and L. Bischof, “Seeded region growing,” IEEE Trans. Patt.
Anal. Mach. Intell., vol. 16, no. 6, 1994, pp. 641–647.
[10]
H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “A dynamic programming approach to contin-
uous speech recognition,” in Proc. 7th Int. Cong. on Acoust., vol. 3.
Budapest: Akademiai Kiado, 1971, pp. 65–69.
[11]
T. De Chant and M. Kelly, “Individual object change detection for
monitoring the impact of a forest pathogen on a hardwood forest,”
Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote Sensing, vol. 75, no. 8, 2009,
pp. 1005–1013.
[12]
D. Duro, S. Franklin, and M. Dub´e, “Hybrid object-based change detec-
tion and hierarchical image segmentation for thematic map updating,”
Photog. Eng. & Remote Sens., vol. 79, no. 3, 2013, pp. 259–268.
[13]
C. G´omez, J. C. White, and M. A. Wulder, “Characterizing the state and
processes of change in a dynamic forest environment using hierarchical
spatio-temporal segmentation,” Remote Sens. of Env., vol. 115, no. 7,
2011, pp. 1665–1679.
[14]
J. Im, J. Jensen, and J. Tullis, “Object-based change detection using
correlation image analysis and image segmentation,” Int. Journ. of
Remote Sens., vol. 29, no. 2, 2008, pp. 399–423.
[15]
I. Niemeyer, P. Marpu, and S. Nussbaum, “Change detection using
object features,” in Object-Based Image Analysis, ser. Lecture Notes
in Geoinformation and Cartography, T. Blaschke, S. Lang, and G. Hay,
Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 185–201.
[16]
P. Xiao, M. Yuan, X. Zhang, X. Feng, and Y. Guo, “Cosegmentation for
object-based building change detection from high-resolution remotely
sensed images,” IEEE Trans. Geosci. and Remote Sens., vol. 55, no. 3,
2017, pp. 1587–1603.
[17]
X. Zhang, P. Xiao, X. Feng, and M. Yuan, “Separate segmentation of
multi-temporal high-resolution remote sensing images for object-based
change detection in urban area,” Remote Sens. of Env., vol. 201, 2017,
pp. 243–255.
[18]
T. Blaschke, “Towards a framework for change detection based on
image objects,” G¨ot. Geo. Abhand., vol. 113, 2005, pp. 1–9.
[19]
A. D. Pape and S. E. Franklin, “MODIS-based change detection for
Grizzly Bear habitat mapping in Alberta,” Photog. Eng. & Remote
Sens., vol. 74, no. 8, 2008, pp. 973–985.
[20]
S. Bontemps, P. Bogaert, N. Titeux, and P. Defourny, “An object-based
change detection method accounting for temporal dependences in time
series with medium to coarse spatial resolution,” Remote Sens. of Env.,
vol. 112, no. 6, 2008, pp. 3181–3191.
[21]
B. Descl´ee, P. Bogaert, and P. Defourny, “Forest change detection by
statistical object-based method,” Remote Sensing of Environment, vol.
102, no. 1, 2006, pp. 1–11.
[22]
L. Dr˘agut¸, D. Tiede, and S. R. Levick, “ESP: a tool to estimate
scale parameter for multiresolution image segmentation of remotely
sensed data,” International Journal of Geographical Information Sci-
ence, vol. 24, no. 6, 2010, pp. 859–871.
[23]
L. Dr˘agut¸, O. Csillik, C. Eisank, and D. Tiede, “Automated parameter-
isation for multi-scale image segmentation on multiple layers,” ISPRS,
vol. 88, 2014, pp. 119–127.
[24]
Z. Zhou, J. Huang, J. Wang, K. Zhang, Z. Kuang, S. Zhong, and
X. Song, “Object-oriented classiﬁcation of sugarcane using time-series
middle-resolution remote sensing data based on adaboost,” PloS one,
vol. 10, no. 11, 2015, p. e0142069.
[25]
C. J. Tucker, “Red and photographic infrared linear combinations for
monitoring vegetation,” Remote Sens. of Env., vol. 8, no. 2, 1979, pp.
127–150.
[26]
F. Petitjean, J. Inglada, and P. Ganc¸arski, “Satellite image time series
analysis under time warping,” IEEE Trans. Geosc. and Remote Sens.,
vol. 50, no. 8, 2012, pp. 3081–3095.
[27]
H. Sakoe and S. Chiba, “Dynamic programming algorithm optimization
for spoken word recognition,” in IEEE Trans. Acoust. Speech and Signal
Proc., vol. 26, no. 1.
New York, NY: IEEE, 1978, pp. 43–49.
[28]
F. Petitjean, J. Inglada, and P. Ganc¸arski, “Clustering of satellite image
time series under time warping,” in Int. Workshop on the Anal. of
Multi-temp. Remote Sens.
Trento, Italy: IEEE, 2011, pp. 69–72.
[29]
S. Chu, E. Keogh, D. Hart, and M. Pazzani, “Iterative deepening
dynamic time warping for time series,” in Proceedings of the 2002
SIAM International Conference on Data Mining.
Philadelphia, PA:
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 2002, pp. 195–212.
[30]
V. M. et al., “A time-weighted dynamic time warping method for land-
use and land-cover mapping,” IEEE Journ. Sel. Top. in App. Earth
Observ. and Remote Sens., vol. 9, no. 8, 2016, pp. 3729–3739.
[31]
M. V. D. Eeckhaut, N. Kerle, J. Poesen, and J. Hervs, “Object-oriented
identiﬁcation of forested landslides with derivatives of single pulse lidar
data,” Geomorphology, vol. 173174, 2012, pp. 30–42.
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-617-0
GEOProcessing 2018 : The Tenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

