Spatial Regression in Health: Modelling Spatial Neighbourhood of High Risk 
Population 
Stefania Bertazzon 
Department of Geography 
University of Calgary 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
e-mail: bertazzs@ucalgary.ca 
 
Abstract— Many health conditions affect certain individuals 
more than others: for example, adults over 65 years of age are 
more affected by cardiovascular disease than younger 
individuals. Therefore, the spatial pattern of the disease 
incidence can be modelled more effectively through the 
residential pattern of higher risk groups. The method is 
demonstrated through a spatial regression of the association of 
cardiac catheterization and socioeconomic determinants in 
Calgary 
(Canada). 
Over 
a 
5-year 
interval, 
45% 
of 
catheterizations are performed on seniors, that constitute 9% 
of the population. Seniors’ residential location is therefore used 
as an auxiliary process to model the spatial weights of the 
regression model. This spatial model leads to a more realistic 
neighbourhood configuration, yielding more reliable regression 
estimates. Based on the residential location of the population at 
greater risk, the model presents low sensitivity to variations in 
the supporting geographic units. The use of a relevant 
auxiliary process is general and applicable to a range of 
conditions; it constitutes a promising alternative to the direct 
estimation of spatial parameters on the primary process. 
Overall, the spatial weights matrix based on at risk population 
shall increase the reliability of spatially autoregressive 
multivariate epidemiological models. 
Keywords- health geography; spatial regression analysis; 
spatial 
correlation; 
cardiovascular 
condition; 
cardiac 
catheterization; Seniors; risk population; residential location. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Geographic 
information 
science (GIS) 
has been 
increasingly employed in population health research due to 
its ability to analyze interactions of health determinants in 
space [12], [26]. This has furthered the integration between 
geography and health sciences, promoting the development 
of more effective spatial analytical methods [13], whose 
reliable results can be translated into policy decisions [9], 
[27].  
Most geographical phenomena, e.g., disease prevalence 
and population distribution, exhibit variations across space 
and self-similarity over short distances. These properties, 
known as spatial dependence and non-stationarity [24], are 
known to hamper the reliability of analytical models, by 
increasing the uncertainty of the estimated parameters [2]. In 
their presence, analytical models may lead to ineffective, or 
even harmful, health policy decisions. Spatial analytical 
methods offer a valid response to this problem; however, 
their ability to improve the model reliability [2], [3] depends 
on the representation of spatial interactions embedded in the 
model. 
Health and its determinants interact in space [17]; hence, 
these interactions can be modelled by multivariate regression 
[2]. While local analytical methods [15] are concerned with 
spatial non-stationarities, spatial autoregressive methods [2] 
address the uncertainty stemming from spatial dependence. 
The specification of a spatially autoregressive model requires 
the definition of a neighbourhood of spatial units: the more 
accurate the neighbour definition, the more reliable the 
model estimates. Ideally, an accurate neighbourhood 
definition rests on a deep knowledge of the spatial process 
involved; more often one must estimate spatial dependencies 
using statistical methods, which are typically applied to the 
dependent variable [3], [8], [2]. In such situations, we 
propose the application of those statistical methods to 
another spatial process, which is related to the dependent, 
and which is better understood, if not within the health 
sciences, within geography or urban studies. The latter 
process effectively serves as an auxiliary process, in that it is 
used to estimate the spatial parameters that will provide a 
more realistic neighbourhood representation, enhancing the 
reliability of the regression model.  
Here, a multivariate spatial regression model [2] analyses 
the socioeconomic determinants of cardiac catheterization 
cases. For a 5-year period in the study region, a large 
proportion of catheterizations affect seniors, i.e., individuals 
aged 65 years and older: over 45% of catheterizations are 
performed on seniors, where seniors account for 9% of the 
total population (12.6% of adults). While only 0.01% of 
adults under 65 receive catheterizations, almost 7% of 
seniors do. Visual observation suggests that catheterization 
cases are spatially associated with seniors’ residential 
location (refer to Figure 1). Seniors is therefore proposed as 
the auxiliary process. 
The association between older age and cardiovascular 
disease is well known and has received much attention in the 
health literature [29], [28], [30]. Their spatial association has 
received less attention, although this relationship has been 
examined at the neighbourhood level [16], [18], [5], [25]. 
The city of Calgary was chosen as an interesting study area, 
where seniors’ residential location presents a clustered 
distribution, 
facilitating 
the 
identification 
of 
spatial 
associations. 
In the following, Section II provides the context of this 
study; Section III describes the methods employed; Section 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

IV outlines the results; Section V provides a discussion, and 
Section VI draws the main conclusions of the study.  
II. 
BACKGROUND 
One of the leading causes of death in the developed 
world, cardiovascular disease is known to be associated with 
a number of risk factors, including age and gender, limited 
physical activity, smoking, and diet [18], [5]. Often these 
factors correlate with demographic and socioeconomic 
characteristics, such as age, occupation, and income, which 
can be measured by census variables [10], [31], [7], [4].  
Calgary is one of the largest Canadian cities. Located in 
the foothills east of the Rocky Mountains, it covers a large 
and regular geographic area; its population is relatively 
young, affluent, and highly educated [40]. Due to its 
economy and history, its population presents a pseudo-
concentric distribution, where age and socioeconomic status 
decrease as distance from the city center increases [36]. 
 
 
Figure 1. Distribution of Catheterization Cases and Seniors in Calgary. 
The clinical data were provided by the Alberta Provincial 
Project for Outcome Assessment in Coronary Heart Disease 
(APPROACH) initiative [22], a clinical registry begun in 
1995 with the collection of cardiac catheterization data. 
Cardiac catheterization is a procedure performed on 
individuals with cardiovascular conditions [22]. The 
province of Alberta has a publicly funded health care system, 
therefore there are no financial costs associated with the 
procedure. 
We 
acknowledge 
the 
limitations 
of 
catheterization in representing cardiovascular disease; 
however, more appropriate variables, e. g., hospitalizations 
for acute coronary syndrome (ACS), were not systematically 
collected at the postal code spatial aggregation level until 
much more recently. Analyzing the latter, more recent data 
would have been problematic, due to changes in the 2011 
census [39]. However, a comparison of catheterization and 
ACS over a two-year period of overlapping data (2006–
2007) suggests that the proposed method shall be 
transferable to ACS data as soon as all the clinical data and 
census variables become available. 
For this study, we considered only patients aged 20 years 
and older, residing in Calgary, who had one or more 
catheterizations between 1999 and 2003 (for multiple 
procedures, only the first one was retained). Patient 
residential addresses, at the postal code level, were spatially 
aggregated to match census spatial units, using postal code 
conversion files (PCCF +) [43]. Demographic and 
socioeconomic variables were drawn from the 2001 census 
of Canada. To match the clinical records, census variables 
were trimmed to represent the population aged 20 years or 
older. Clinical records and census variables were normalized 
for each spatial unit, i. e., divided by the total pertinent 
population and multiplied by 1,000 [34]. This variable, 
representing cardiac catheterization cases, is named “Cases” 
in Table 1. For the regression analysis, clinical records were 
age- and sex-standardized [42]: the standardized variable is 
named “Standardized Cases”. The variable “Seniors” (Table 
1) emphasizes the difference between workforce and retirees 
as the sum of all age groups aged 65 years and older.  
All the analyses are conducted on census tracts, which 
are relatively small and stable spatial units, with population 
between 2,500 and 8,000 residents, located in a census 
metropolitan area [39]. For the 2001 census, the spatial 
database contains 181 census tracts, and the clinical database 
contains 11,430 catheterization cases over the 5-year interval 
(Figure 1). 
 
III. 
METHODS 
Cross-correlations and spatial correlation analyses assess 
the association of catheterization cases and seniors’ 
residential location. Spatial correlation, measured by 
bivariate Moran’s I, extends this comparison to neighbouring 
census tracts. Spatial autocorrelation, measured by Moran’s 
I, assesses the self-similarity of each variable over 
neighbouring census tracts. Moran’s I ranges from –1 for 
negative spatial autocorrelation, to +1 for positive spatial 
autocorrelation, with 0 indicating spatial randomness [19]. 
The calculation of Moran’s I requires the definition of a 
spatial weights matrix, W (discussed below).  
Spatial autoregression aims at enhancing the reliability of 
estimates in the presence of spatial dependencies (1). 
 
 (1) 
 
Spatial autoregression also requires a spatial weights 
matrix, W, which selects the spatial units deemed spatially 
dependent [20], and an autoregressive parameter, ρ (rho), is 
estimated. This study uses a simultaneous autoregressive 
specification and maximum likelihood estimation [2]. 
Following conventional practice, the regression is computed 
on the age- and sex-standardized dependent variable. Indirect 
standardization [42] employs age and sex groups, therefore 
inflating the correlation between the dependent and those 
demographic variables. For this reason, the regression model 
does not include demographic variables, even though the 
exclusion some variables, and particularly of Seniors, has a 
large impact on the model’s goodness of fit. The use of 
Seniors as an auxiliary process mitigates this impact.  
The spatial weights matrix is viewed as a tool to enhance 
model reliability. In the absence of a spatial specification, the 
model reliability is decreased by the presence of spatial 
autocorrelation in the regression residuals, which inflates the 
 
ε
ρ
β
+
+
=
WY
X
Y
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

variance associated with the regression parameters [2]. 
Therefore, the spatial weights matrix is designed to best 
capture the spatial autocorrelation in the dependent variable, 
so that most of the spatial autocorrelation can be accounted 
for by the model, leaving insignificant spatial autocorrelation 
in the residuals. The basic form of a spatial weights matrix is 
a binary structure, where a threshold distance, or a number of 
nearest neighbours, selects the neighbouring spatial units 
where the variable is expected to exhibit spatial 
autocorrelation. Often a weight is added, in order to model 
distance decay effects [20]. This matrix involves the 
specification of three parameters: distance threshold, 
distance metric, and distance decay function. By dynamically 
adjusting these three parameters, the spatial weights matrix 
can yield different values of the spatial autocorrelation index. 
Of the three parameters, distance exerts the greatest 
influence, by determining how many spatial units are 
deemed spatially autocorrelated. There are several methods 
to define this parameter for areal units, such as census tracts 
[20]. Here, we use a distance threshold based on nearest 
neighbours, for the following reasons: census tracts are not 
necessarily 
meaningful 
for 
the 
spatial 
pattern 
of 
cardiovascular disease; they tend to be small and pseudo-
rectangular in the city center, but in the outskirts they tend to 
be larger and less regular (refer to Figure 1). The latter 
feature forms a pattern of spatial units, liable to confound the 
pattern of the variables recorded in those units. To reduce 
this confounding effect, the number of nearest neighbours is 
preferred. To further de-emphasize the geometry of census 
tracts, we consider the distance between their centroids.   
  The second parameter is the distance metric. Among 
many distance metrics used in geography, the most common 
is the Euclidean metric: the straight line distance 
measurement between two points, ‘as the crow flies’. In 
many North American cities, connectivity occurs over a 
pseudo-rectangular road pattern, better modelled by the 
Manhattan distance, which measures distance between points 
along a rectangular path with right angle turns. Connectivity 
over a complex or mixed network can be more accurately 
represented by metrics of the class known as Minkowski 
distance [38], which yields patterns intermediate between 
straight line and right angle. It is described by (2), of which 
Euclidean and Manhattan distances are special cases, where 
the key parameter, p, can take any value between 1 
(Manhattan) and 2 (Euclidean).  
 
  (2) 
 
The p value can be estimated to best approximate 
empirical distance or travel time. Within this class of 
metrics, an appropriate choice can refine the selection of 
spatial units, producing buffer shapes close to the physical, 
pseudo-rectangular connectivity pattern of the census tracts.  
The third parameter is the distance decay function, which 
weights the interaction among spatial units by their distance. 
Interaction tends to decrease as the distance between units 
increases:  a number of functions have been developed to 
model this relationship [14], [35]. Commonly the distance 
decay function is calibrated by a weight, often another 
variable, which normalizes the relationship [8].  
The interaction of these parameters in the spatial weights 
matrix affects the estimated spatial autocorrelation and hence 
the reliability of the regression estimates. In the proposed 
method, the three parameters are calibrated on the spatial 
autocorrelation of the auxiliary process, as opposed to the 
dependent variable, or primary process.  
Seniors’ residential location is understood better than the 
distribution of Cases, and can be explained by socio-
economic and urban traits. Because of their high spatial 
association, the spatial autocorrelation of Seniors should be 
more meaningful than that of Cases; therefore, the method is 
expected to increase the reliability of the regression 
estimates, along with their interpretability. 
Statistical analyses were conducted in TIBCO Spotfire 
S+ 8.2. Maps were obtained in ESRI ArcGIS 10. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Spatial autocorrelation and cross-correlation analysis, 
initially run on the parameters (k = 3, p = 2), yields two 
important results (Table 1): Cases exhibits significant but 
moderate spatial autocorrelation (I = 0.36), whereas Seniors 
exhibits a much higher value (I = 0.54); the two variables 
exhibit high cross-correlation (0.60) and spatial correlation 
(0.35). Together, these results confirm that clustering of 
Cases tends to occur in association with the clustering of 
seniors’ residential location. 
TABLE I.       CORRELATIONS AND SPATIAL CORRELATIONS  
Fam.Income
Families
Cases
0.36
**
0.75
**
0.66
**
0.50
**
-0.08
ns
0.25
**
-0.22
**
-0.25
**
Std.Cases
0.34
**
0.53
**
0.87
**
0.71
**
0.17
*
-0.09
ns
-0.42
**
-0.21
**
Seniors
0.35
**
0.49
**
0.60
**
0.31
**
-0.03
ns
-0.09
ns
-0.35
**
-0.47
**
Age.55-64
0.22
**
0.27
**
0.09
ns
0.50
**
0.29
**
-0.01
ns
-0.26
**
0.15
ns
Fam.Income
-0.06
ns
0.00
ns
-0.08
ns
0.10
ns
0.50
**
-0.68
**
-0.33
**
0.56
**
Secondary
0.09
ns
-0.12
ns
-0.17
*
0.04
ns
-0.42
**
0.75
**
0.25
**
-0.09
ns
Trades
-0.03
ns
-0.11
ns
-0.18
*
0.02
ns
0.02
ns
0.17
*
0.42
**
0.04
ns
Families
-0.13
ns
-0.19
*
-0.42
**
-0.05
ns
0.35
**
0.04
ns
0.24
**
0.74
**
Diagonal: univariate Moran's I. Upper half: Pearson's correlation . Lower half: bivariate Moran's I.
Economic 
variables
Education
Non-univ. 
post-sec. 
degree
Demographhic variables
2 parents  
with children
Family 
median 
income 
Secondary 
or lower 
education
Family 
status
Clinical records
Cardiac 
cath. cases
Age & sex 
std. cases  
Age 65 and 
over 
Age 55 to 
64
Trades
Secondary
Cases
Std.Cases
Seniors
Age.55-64
 
The correlation analysis also identifies additional traits 
consistent with this result. Significant and negative spatial 
cross-correlation between Seniors and Families indicates a 
highly clustered if not dichotomous spatial pattern, where 
neighbourhoods dominated by younger families alternate 
with neighbourhoods mostly occupied by seniors. The high 
correlation of Income with Families and with Education 
suggests that income exerts a strong but indirect influence on 
the spatial clustering, so that the observed residential pattern 
appears associated with economic factors, in addition to 
demographic ones. Nonetheless, age is confirmed as the 
variable that exhibits the most distinct spatial pattern. 
Following these results, we analyze the response of the 
spatial autocorrelation index to variations in the spatial 
contiguity parameters for the variables Cases, Standardized 
Cases, and Seniors, as summarized in Figure 2. For all the 
 
(
)
(
)
[
]
p
p
j
i
p
j
i
ij
y
y
x
x
d
1/
−
+
−
=
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

parameter combinations, Seniors exhibits the highest spatial 
autocorrelation values, whereas the values of Cases are 
constantly significant but relatively low. Age- and sex-
standardized Cases exhibits greater spatial autocorrelation 
than the non-standardized variable. The number of nearest 
neighbours (k) has a greater impact on the spatial 
autocorrelation value, whereas the distance metric only 
provides minor adjustments. Since the analysis shows that 
the spatial autocorrelation is best expressed by relatively 
small neighbourhoods, defined by low k values, distance 
decay weighting will not be discussed. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Moran’s I as function of distance threshold and distance metric. 
The spatial autocorrelation of Cases declines steeply as 
the number of nearest neighbours increases, and only 
parameter combinations of  k = 2 and p values between 1.6 
and 2 effectively capture the spatial autocorrelation in the 
variable. 
These 
combinations 
define 
very 
small 
neighbourhoods, as distance is short and metrics close to the 
straight line produce the shortest distance between centroids. 
For Standardized Cases, the trend is similar to Cases, and the 
most visible effect of the standardization is the increased 
value 
of 
the 
spatial 
autocorrelation. 
The 
spatial 
autocorrelation of Seniors exhibits less variation than Cases 
in response to variations in both parameters. 
The regression summarized in Table 2 is based on the 
spatial contiguity parameters derived from the auxiliary 
process. It models the association between the standardized 
dependent variable and the pool of socioeconomic variables. 
Significant explanatory variables are: low education 
attainments, family median income, and, -with negative 
coefficient- family status and technical education, the latter 
possibly a proxy for young, low income groups. The model 
does not include the variable that is most highly correlated 
with the dependent, i.e., Seniors, due to the confounding 
effect of the indirect standardization; hence, the goodness of 
fit is relatively low, e.g., the value of Anselin’s [1] pseudo-
R2 is 0.19.  
 
 
 
TABLE II.       SPATIAL AUTOREGRESSIVE MODEL 
 
 
In its linear specification, the model exhibits significant 
residual 
spatial 
autocorrelation; 
hence, 
a 
spatially 
autoregressive specification is presented, which exhibits non-
significant residual spatial autocorrelation and a significant 
autoregressive coefficient, rho. The calibration of the spatial 
contiguity parameters on the auxiliary process, Seniors, is a 
way of representing this variable in the model. Arguably, this 
method enhances the significance of the rho parameter, 
attaining a more effective reduction of the residual spatial 
autocorrelation and more reliable regression estimates. 
V. 
DISCUSSION  
The use of an auxiliary process as an alternative to the 
use of the primary process for the definition of the spatial 
contiguity parameters leads to an improved neighbourhood 
definition, enhancing the reliability of the spatial regression 
model estimates. In the application discussed here, the 
resulting neighbourhoods are larger; moreover, the analytical 
results are less sensitive to variations in the neighbourhood 
size, defined by the contiguity parameters. These two results 
are important and related, both deriving from the choice of a 
particular auxiliary process. The tiny neighbourhoods 
defined by the primary process model clusters of Cases, 
which are isolated, as shown by their low spatial 
autocorrelation. Conversely, the larger neighbourhoods 
calibrated on the auxiliary process effectively model the 
distribution 
of 
the 
highest-risk 
population, 
Seniors. 
Therefore, modelling Cases based on the spatial distribution 
of Seniors provides not only a more reliable, but also a more 
interpretable model. Overall, the greater analytical stability 
obtained through of the use of the auxiliary process is an 
important result, which can potentially reduce the impact of 
the modifiable aereal unit problem (MAUP) [41], [32]. As a 
future research direction, the method discussed here shall be 
tested on different spatial units, e.g., communities or 
dissemination 
areas, 
where 
previous 
analyses 
[6] 
implemented directly on the primary process have suggested 
a large impact of the MAUP. 
The distribution of seniors in Calgary has been studied 
within several disciplines, and it is conceptually understood 
as influenced by economic cycles and age of community, 
among other factors [36]. As an additional line of enquiry, 
the spatial structure of the process shall be analyzed in light 
of that literature. Conversely, other crucial aspects, such as 
range of spatial interaction, shall be confirmed by qualitative 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

analyses [23], [37]. An integration of these two lines of 
enquiry is expected to substantially improve understanding 
and representation of the spatial pattern of the high-risk 
population in its interaction with the incidence of cardiac 
disease [33].  
For the application presented here, the k parameter 
chosen through the auxiliary process is only marginally 
larger than the one selected for the primary process, and the 
difference between the resulting neighbourhoods is larger in 
conjunction with the distance metric. Hence, the impact on 
the reliability of the regression estimates may be moderate if 
measured simply by variance indicators; however, the spatial 
contiguity parameters also affect model inference, impacting 
model selection procedures. Comparing several regression 
specifications, the exclusion of Seniors as a predictor is 
constantly accompanied by increased residual spatial 
autocorrelation, suggesting that Seniors is the process 
associated with the observed spatial autocorrelation. 
One important extension of the current analysis will be 
its application on acute coronary syndrome (ACS). While the 
proposed method presents many advantages with respect to 
modelling seniors, it shifts the analytical focus away from 
younger adults, where the prevalence is very low (0.01%), 
and its spatial modelling remains challenging.   
A number of health conditions are associated with 
specific demographic segments, and in all those cases, the 
use of an appropriate auxiliary process can improve the 
analytical results. Testing is underway on ACS, congenital 
birth defects and child obesity. Further lines of enquiry shall 
include analyses of different contiguity configurations, such 
as threshold distance vs. nearest neighbours, distance metrics 
beyond the Minkowski range, and assessment of distance 
decay functions on larger neighbourhoods.   
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
A multivariate regression model estimates the association 
between cardiac catheterization and socioeconomic factors. 
In the presence of spatial dependencies, the use of a spatially 
autoregressive model increases the reliability of the model 
estimates. Such reliability can be further improved by an 
appropriate definition of the spatial contiguity parameters. Of 
the catheterizations recorded over five years in the study 
area, almost half are performed on individuals aged 65 years 
or older. This association is well known and understood, and 
it suggests a strong association between seniors’ residential 
location and the spatial pattern of catheterization cases. 
Therefore, Seniors is identified as an auxiliary process for 
the calibration of the spatial contiguity parameters of the 
model. The method enhances the reliability of the regression 
estimates and the model selection, rendering the auxiliary-
based model more efficient, interpretable, and stable over 
variations in the supporting spatial units. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I acknowledge the Natural Science and Engineering 
Research Council of Canada and the GEOIDE Network of 
Centers of Excellence for funding this research. I also thank 
APPROACH initiative researchers for data and support. I am 
grateful to Olesya Elikan and all the students who helped 
with bibliographic research, database maintenance, and 
visualization. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Anselin, SpaceStat tutorial. Regional Research Institute, West 
Virginia University, Morgantown, West Virginia, 1993. 
[2] L. Anselin, Spatial Econometrics: Methods and Models. Kluwer 
Academic Publisher, New York, 1988. 
[3] L. Anselin, A. K. Bera, R. Florax and M. J. Yoon, “Simple diagnostic 
tests for spatial dependence”, Regional Science and Urban Economics 
26, 1996, 77-104. 
[4] T. Augustin, T. A. Glass, B. D. James and B. S. Schwartz, 
“Neighbourhood psychosocial hazards and cardiovascular disease: 
The Baltimore Memory Study”. American Journal of Public Health 
98, 2008, 1664–1670. 
[5] A. J. Bagnall, S. G. Goodman, K. A. A. Fox, R. T. Yan, J. M. Gore, 
A. N. Cheema,  T. Huynh, D. Chauret, D. H. Fitchett, A. Langer and 
A.  T. Yan, “Influence of Age on Use of Cardiac Catheterization and 
Associated Outcomes in Patients With Non-ST-Elevation Acute 
Coronary Syndromes”. American Journal of Cardiology 103, 2009, 
1530-1536. 
[6] S. Bertazzon, S. Olson and M. Knudtson, “A spatial analysis of the 
demographic 
and 
socioeconomic 
variables 
associated 
with 
cardiovascular disease in Calgary (Canada)”. Applied Spatial 
Analysis and Policy  3, 2010, 1-23. 
[7] B. Chaix, M. Rosvall and J. Merlo, “Neighborhood socioeconomic 
deprivation and residential instability: Effects on incidence of 
ischemic heart disease and survival after myocardial infarction”. 
Epidemiology 18, 2007, 104–111. 
[8] N. Cressie, Statistics for Spatial Data. Wiley, New York, 1993. 
[9] M. Cutchin, “The need for the ‘‘new health geography’’ in 
epidemiologic studies of environment and health”. Health & Place 13, 
2007, 725–742. 
[10] A. V. Diez Roux, S. Merkin, D. Arnett, L. Chambless, M. Massing, F. 
Nieto, P. Sorlie, M. Szklo, H. Tyroler and R. Watson, “Neighborhood 
of residence and incidence of coronary heart disease”. New England 
Journal of Medicine  345, 2001 99-106. 
[11] S. Dray, “A New Perspective about Moran’s Coefficient: Spatial 
Autocorrelation as a Linear Regression Problem”. Geographical 
Analysis 43, 2001, 127–141 
[12] T. Dummer, “Health geography: supporting public health policy and 
planning”. Canadian Medical Association Journal 178, 2008, 1177–
1180. 
[13] P. Elliott and D. Wartenberg, “Spatial epidemiology: Current 
approaches 
and 
future 
challenges”. 
Environmental 
Health 
Perspectives 12, 2004, 998–1006.  
[14] A. Fotheringham, “Spatial structure and distance-decay parameters”. 
Annals of the Association of American Geographers 71, 1981, 425-
436. 
[15] A. Fotheringham, C. Brundson and M. Charlton, “Geographically 
weighted regression: A natural evolution of the expansion method for 
spatial data analysis”. Environment & Planning A 30, 1998, 1905–
1927. 
[16] A. Gatrell,  G. Lancaster, A. Chapple, S. Horsley and M. Smith,  
“Variations in use of tertiary cardiac services in part of North-West 
England”. Health & Place. 8, 2002, 147-153. 
[17] A. Gatrell,  J. Popay and C. Thomas, 2004. “Mapping the 
determinants of health inequalities in social space: can Bourdieu help 
us?” Health & Place. 10, 2004, 245-257. 
[18]  Y. Gerber, S. Jacobsen, R. Frye, S. Weston, J. Killian and V. Roger, 
“Secular Trends in Deaths From Cardiovascular Diseases: A 25-Year 
Community Study”. Circulation 113, 2006, 2285-2292. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[19] A. Getis, “A history of the concept of spatial autocorrelation: A 
geographer’s perspective”. Geographical Analysis  40, 2008, 297–
309. 
[20] A. Getis and J. Aldstadt, “Constructing the Spatial Weights Matrix 
Using a Local Statistic”. Geographical Analysis 36, 2004, 90-104.  
[21] A. Getis and K. Ord, “The analysis of spatial association by use of 
distance statistics”. Geographical Analysis 24, 1992, 189–206. 
[22] W. A.Ghali and M. L. Knudtson, “Overview of the Alberta provincial 
project for outcome assessment in coronary heart disease”. Canadian 
Journal of Cardiology 16, 2000, 1225–1230. 
[23] A. Grimes, D. C. Maré and M. Morten, “Defining Areas and Linking 
Geographical Data: an Example from New Zealand”. Population, 
Space and Place 16, 2010, 165–170. 
[24] R. Haining, The Special Nature of Spatial Data. The SAGE handbook 
of spatial analysis.In: A.S. Fotheringham and P. A. Rogerson (Eds.) 
SAGE, London, 2009. 
[25] E. J. Holowaty, T. A. Norwood, S. Wanigaratne, J. J. Abellan and L. 
Beale, “Feasibility and utility of mapping disease risk at the 
neighbourhood level within a Canadian public health unit: an 
ecological study”. International Journal of Health Geographics  9,21, 
2010. 
[26] A. Iftimi, F. Montes, A. M. Santiyán and F. Martínez-Ruiz, 'Space–
time airborne disease mapping applied to detect specific behaviour of 
varicella 
in 
Valencia, 
Spain', 
Spatial 
and 
Spatio-temporal 
Epidemiology, 14–15, 2015, 33-44. 
[27] V. Jürgens, S. Ess, M. Schwenkglenks, T. Cerny, and P. Vounatsou, 
'Using lung cancer mortality to indirectly approximate smoking 
patterns in space', Spatial and Spatio-temporal Epidemiology, 14–15, 
2015, 23-31. 
[28] G. A. Kaplan and J. E. Keil, “Socioeconomic factors and 
cardiovascular disease: a review of the literature”. Circulation 88, 
1993, 1973–1998. 
[29] E. G. Lakatta, Age-associated cardiovascular changes in health: 
impact on cardiovascular disease in older persons”. Heart Failure 
Reviews 7, 2002, 29-49. 
[30] D. Manuel, M. Leung and K. Nguyen, “Burden of cardiovascular 
disease in Canada”. Canadian Journal of Cardiology 19, 2003, 997–
1004. 
[31] J. McKay and G. A. Mensah, The Atlas of Heart Disease and Stroke. 
Geneva: World Health Organization, 2005. 
[32] M.-P. Parenteau and M. C. Sawada, “The modifiable areal unit 
problem (MAUP) in the relationship between exposure to NO2 and 
respiratory health”. International Journal of Health Geographics, 
2011, 10:58. 
[33] B. Preston and M. W. Wilson, 'Practicing GIS as Mixed Method: 
Affordances and Limitations in an Urban Gardening Study', Annals of 
the Association of American Geographers, 104 (3), 2014, 510-29. 
[34] S. Preston, P. Heuveline and M. Guillot, Demography: Measuring and 
Modeling Population Processes. Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, 2000. 
[35] A. Rattner and B. A. Portnov,  “Distance decay function in criminal 
behaviour: a case of Israel”. Annals of Regional Science 41, 2007, 
673–688. 
[36] B. Sandalack and A. Nicolai, The Calgary Project: Urban form/urban 
life. University of Calgary Press, Calgary, 2006. 
[37] S. M. Santos, D. Chor and G. L. Werneck, “Demarcation of local 
neighborhoods to study relations between contextual factors and 
health”. International Journal of Health Geographics 9, 34, 2010. 
[38] R. Shahid, S. Bertazzon, M. Knudtson and W. Ghali, “Comparison of 
distance measures in spatial analytical modeling for health service 
planning”. BMC Health Services Research 9:200, 200. 
[39] Statistics Canada, 2002. Cartographic Boundary Files: 2001 Census. 
Reference Guide. Catalogue no. 92F0171GIE. Minister of Industry, 
Ottawa. 
[40] Statistics Canada. The Canadian Population in 2011: Population 
Counts 
and 
Growth. 
http://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-
recensement/2011/as-sa/98-310-x/98-310-x2011001-eng.cfm. 
Last 
accesses on 3/15/2016. 
[41] D. J. Unwin, “GIS, spatial analysis and spatial statistics”. Progress in 
Human Geography 20, 1996, 540-441. 
[42] L. Waller and C. Gotway, Applied Spatial Statistics for Public Health 
Data.: John Wiley & Sons, Hobeken, 2004. 
[43] R. Wilkins and S. Khan, 2010. PCCF + Version 5G User’s Guide. 
Catalogue no. 82F0086-XDB. Health Statistics Division, Statistics 
Canada, 
Ottawa.  
http://data.library.utoronto.ca/datapub/codebooks/cstdli/pccf_health/p
ccf5h/MSWORD.PCCF5H.pdf. Last accessed on 3/15/2016.  
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

