Development of a GIS-based Spatial Database for the Debris Flow Hazard 
Assessment of Expressways in South Korea 
Min-gi Kim 
Institute of Engineering Research 
Seoul National University, SNU 
Seoul, South Korea 
e-mail: beyedsou@snu.ac.kr 
Kyung-suk Kim 
Expressway and Transportation Research Institute 
Korea Expressway Corporation, KEC 
Hwaseong, South Korea 
e-mail: kskim2k4@ex.co.kr 
Han-saem Kim 
Earthquake Research Center 
Korea Institute of Geoscience and Mineral Resources, 
KIGAM 
Daejeon, South Korea 
e-mail: adoogen@kigam.re.kr 
Young-woo Song 
Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering 
Seoul National University, SNU 
Seoul, South Korea 
e-mail: songyw@snu.ac.kr 
Kyung-june Lee 
Department of Structure & Geotechnical Engineering 
Isan Corporation 
Anyang, South Korea 
e-mail: junk2@hanmail.net 
Choong-ki Chung 
Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering 
Seoul National University, SNU 
Seoul, South Korea 
e-mail: geolabs@snu.ac.kr
Abstract—In this study, a database based on the geo-
information system (GIS) was developed for the debris flow 
hazard assessment of expressways in South Korea. The debris 
flow assessment method developed by the Korea Expressway 
Corporation (KEC) was used for estimating the debris flow 
hazard grade and for building the database schema. 
PostgreSQL was selected as a database management system, 
and PostGIS was used to process the spatial data. The primary 
information (e.g., expressway, rainfall, digital numerical map, 
processed information) assess using the KEC method can be 
standardized and stored in the constructed database. So far, the 
database was established based on the expressway and debris 
flow hazard information of 4,478 points along the 22 
expressways in South Korea. 
Keywords- Database; debris flow; GIS-based; hazard 
assessment; expressway. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Understanding the mechanism of debris flow is essential 
for forecasting occurrence and estimating its hazard. There are 
various factors, however, that affect debris flow occurrence 
and movement. Many research institutes and national 
agencies dedicated to mitigating the debris flow hazard have 
developed their own assessment method [1]-[3]. For instance, 
Korea Forest Research Institute developed a prediction model 
for debris flow occurrence and damage, and published a 
landslide/debris flow hazard map [3]. They highlighted not 
only the geological, geomorphological, geotechnical, and 
hydrological factors but also the dendrology factors like the 
vegetation condition. 
Owing to the diversity of the factors affecting debris flow 
occurrence and movement, developing a debris flow database 
based on the geo-information system (GIS) has become 
essential for evaluating the hazard grade in wide regions such 
as the stations along the expressways. The mapping of the 
debris flow hazard and the development of a GIS-based 
database system can be made possible by the use of the 
constructed debris flow database. 
In this study, a debris flow database was developed for the 
hazard assessment of the mountainous areas near the 
expressways in South Korea [4]. The database schema was 
built using the framework for the GIS-based assessment of the 
debris flow hazard of Korea Express Corporation (KEC). The 
method developed by KEC focuses on the possibilities of road 
hazards. The method can be quantitatively and objectively 
implemented in a simple way by using documents such as 
numerical maps and expressway design files, minimizing the 
need for tiresome field investigations on countless potential 
debris flow occurrence regions in vast areas. 
In Section 2, the KEC debris flow hazard analysis method 
is described. Section 3 describes the database framework for 
hazard assessment and Section 4 describes the constructed 
GIS-based database for expressways. Finally the conclusion is 
provided in Section 5. 
II. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The KEC debris flow hazard analysis method uses a 
limited amount of data. Therefore, it is applicable in a national 
scale. Only digital elevation models (DEMs) and expressway 
design files of the mountainous area to be assessed are used. 
The DEMs can be obtained from Korea National Geographic 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Information Institute (KNGII), and the expressway design 
files can be obtained from KEC. 
The debris flow hazard is evaluated using with two indices 
(Fig. 1): the susceptibility value and vulnerability value. The 
susceptibility value is the degree of likelihood that a debris 
flow will occur in the target area whereas the vulnerability 
value pertains to the degree of likelihood that the occurred 
debris flow will actually damage or have an impact on the 
expressway sections. 
The susceptibility value is the combination of the debris 
flow initiation point and the debris flow movement point. For 
the calculation of the debris flow initiation points, the mean 
watershed slope degrees and the percentage of watershed over 
35° are used. The values of the mean watershed slope degree 
point and the percentage of watershed over the 35° point are 
between 0 and 5, respectively. Therefore, the value of the 
debris flow initiation point is between 0 and 10. For the 
calculation of the debris flow movement points, the mean 
valley slope and the length percentage of the valley with 
slopes over 15° are used. The value of mean valley slope point 
and the length percentage of valley are between 0 and 5, 
respectively, and that of the debris flow movement point is 
between 0 and 10.  
In the KEC debris flow hazard assessment method, only 
the DEMs data are considered for the debris flow possibilities, 
which are expressed as susceptibility values. The other factors 
that affect the debris flow possibilities, such as the size and 
shape of the valley, along with the variations in the slope 
direction, the properties of the subsoil, and the vegetation, are 
Figure 1. Debris-flow hazard assessment framework for expressways. [5] 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

not used for calculating the susceptibility value for the 
simplification of the method. 
The vulnerability value can be assessed based on the 
volume of the margin area for depositing debris flow materials 
before reaching the expressway structures, and the sizes of the 
drainage facilities running through the expressway. The 
sedimentation volume attribute, which refers to the volume of 
the margin area, has a value between 0 and 5, and the size of 
the drainage attribute is also between 0 and 5. The total 
vulnerability value can be up to 10 points according to the 
grading standard. 
With the calculated susceptibility and vulnerability values, 
a hazard class is given for a target expressway section (Fig. 1). 
The x- and y-axis indicate the vulnerability and susceptibility 
values, respectively. Based on the results of the investigations 
of the past debris flow occurrences, the hazard classes were 
separated by rainfall reoccurrence period for expressway 
design purposes. Hazard class S indicates the likelihood of 
debris flow occurrence in areas with 2- to 5-year rainfall 
reoccurrence periods. Hazard classes A, B, C, and D have 5- 
to 20-year, 20- to 50-year, 50- to 100-year, and over-100-year 
rainfall reoccurrence periods, respectively. Hazard class E 
indicates an area with a very low likelihood of debris flow 
damage [4]-[6]. 
III. 
DEBRIS FLOW HAZARD ASSESSMENT DATABASE 
FRAMEWORK 
For data storage and debris flow hazard management, a 
database was developed. The developed database can be 
called “geodatabase (GDB)” because it is a container for 
spatial and attribute data. PostgreSQL (Ver. 9.5) was chosen 
for the database management system (DBMS), and PostGIS 
was used to assign the spatial attributes of the expressways. 
PostGIS is a specified extension function of PostgreSQL for 
storing GIS objects. It provides spatial objects for the 
PostgreSQL database, allowing the storage of and query on 
information about location and mapping [7][8]. 
Fig. 2 shows the structure of the geodatabase for debris 
flow hazard assessment. The database basically contains 
information on two information classes: primary information 
and processed information. Primary information stores not 
only general expressway, and rainfall information but also 
digital numerical-map data. The basic topographical 
information, which is used for calculating the susceptibility 
value of the hazard assessment system, is derived from the 
digital numerical-map data. The expressway information is 
composed of organization information used to manage the 
South Korean expressway route data and spatial information. 
The rainfall information data format has also been 
standardized. The rainfall data from automatic weather station 
(AWS) is essential to the real-time debris flow warning 
system combined with the hazard assessment system. 
Using the standardized primary information data, hazard 
assessment of the target area can be performed. After that, the 
results of the hazard assessment, such as the hazard class, 
susceptibility value, and vulnerability value, should again be 
stored in the database.  
IV. 
GIS-BASED DATABASE CONSTRUCTION FOR THE 
EXPRESSWAYS IN SOUTH KOREA 
The database construction procedure consists of four parts. 
First, a field survey is conducted (Fig. 3). The susceptibility 
value of the hazard assessment system can be computed with 
only the topographic data from the digital numerical map. A 
field survey should be conducted, however, to calculate the 
vulnerability value. 
Moreover, it is possible to confirm the factors that need to 
be considered when calculating the susceptibility value with 
the naked eyes in the field survey. This helps confirm the 
accuracy of the susceptibility assessment result. 
After the field survey, the result should be reported in a 
fixed form. The report includes not only the field survey result 
but also the debris flow hazard class, which was determined 
using the KEC debris flow hazard assessment method. The 
spatial data, field survey data, and hazard assessment results 
of the target point were standardized to construct a database 
using PostgreSQL and PostGIS (Fig. 4). 
Figure 2. Structure of the database for debris flow hazard assessment. 
Figure 3. Data collection from the field survey. 
Figure 4. Reporting of results and building of the database. 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

The data stored in the debris flow hazard database can be 
inquired about and visualized with the GIS system. In this 
study, the representative open-source GIS system Quantum 
GIS (QGIS, version 2.14.3-Essen) desktop was utilized for 
visualization (Fig. 5) [9]. The green dots indicate the target 
points for the debris flow hazard assessment along the 
expressways in South Korea. The information on the debris 
flow hazard assessment results and field survey results of 
4,478 debris flow risk sites along the 22 expressways is being 
stored in the developed debris flow hazard database up to now. 
The blue dots mark the 676 AWS points for collecting rainfall 
data.  
Then, the QGIS plugin was developed to display the 
picture of the target site and the countermeasurement plan of 
the debris flow hazard areas (see Fig. 6 and Fig. 7). The 
programming language Python was used to develop the 
plugins [9][10]. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
For the effective debris flow hazard management of the 
expressways in South Korea, a database based on the geo-
information system was constructed. To assess the debris flow 
hazard of the target points along the expressways, the Korea 
Express Corporation (KEC) method was adapted. The 
database schema and structure were based on the factors that 
need to be considered when estimating the hazard grade with 
the KEC method. 
The general information, digital numerical map, 
expressway information, and rainfall information were 
standardized. Then the processed information, such as the 
susceptibility information, vulnerability, and the hazard class 
information, of a target point were again stored in the database. 
Various open-source GIS tools were utilized to construct 
the database. PostgreSQL and PostGIS provided a database 
frame for handling the spatial attributes. Moreover, QGIS 
provided a visualization platform for mapping and inquiring 
about the information. 
The constructed database was used for debris flow 
assessment on 4,478 points along the 22 expressways in South 
Korea. Various countermeasurements were applied to the sites 
estimated to be hazardous among them. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by a National Research 
Foundation of Korea grant funded by the South Korean 
government’s MSIP (No.2015R1A5A7037372) 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Lin, J. Lin, J. Hung, and M. Yang, “Assessing debris-flow 
hazard in a watershed in Taiwan. Engineering Geology 66, pp. 
295-313, 2002. 
[2] D. Park, N. V. Nikhil, and S. Lee, “Landslide and debris flow 
susecptibility zonatino using TRGRS for the 2011 Seoul 
landslide even, Nat. Hazards Earth Syst. Sci., no. 13, pp. 2833-
2849, 2013. 
[3] H. Yun, et al., “Development of prediction model for the 
occurrence and damage of debris flow”, Korea Forest Research 
Institute. Research Report 09-20: pp. 92-107, 2009 (In Korean) 
[4] Expressway & Transportation Research Institute, Korea 
Expressway Corportation, “Development of debris flow hazard 
analysis method and its application”, Korea Expressway 
Corporation Report, 2009 (In Korean) 
[5] H. Kim, C. Chung, S. Kim, and K. Kim, “A GIS-Based 
Framework for Real-Time Debris-Flow Hazard Assessment for 
Expressways in Korea”, Int J Disaster Risk Sci 7: pp. 293-311, 
2016. 
[6] S. Kim, H. Kim, G. Kim, and C. Chung, “Debris-flow Risk 
Assessment along Expressways in Korea using GIS”, 
Geohazards 2014, Kathmandu, Nephal, pp. 159-163, 2014 
[7] “PostgreSQL: The world’s most advanced open source 
database”, http://www.postgresql.org [6, 2016] 
[8] “PostGIS: Spatial and Geographic Objects for PoestgreSQL”, 
http://www.postgis.net [6, 2016] 
[9] “QGIS(Quantum GIS version 2.14.3-Essen): A free and open 
source geographic information system”, http://www.qgis.org  
[4, 2016] 
[10] “PyQGIS Developer Cookbook”: http:www.docs.qgis.org/test 
ing/en/docs/pyqgis_developer_cookbook/ [6, 2016] 
Figure 5. Visualization of the constructed database using Quantum-GIS. 
Figure 6. The QGIS plugin for displaying local pictures. 
Figure 7. the QGIS plugin for displaying countermeasurement plan. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

