Footprint-Based 3D Generalization of Building Groups for Virtual City 
Visualization
Shuang He, Guillaume Moreau, Jean-Yves Martin 
L’UNAM Université, Ecole Centrale Nantes, CERMA 
Nantes, France 
e-mail: {Shuang.He; Guillaume.Moreau; Jean-Yves. Martin}@ec-nantes.fr 
 
Abstract - This paper proposes a footprint-based generalization 
approach for 3D building groups in the context of city 
visualization. The goal is to reduce both geometric complexity 
and information density, meanwhile maintaining a rather 
recognizable shape. The emphasis is placed on converting 3D 
generalization tasks into 2D issues via buildings’ footprints. In 
order to find suitable units for footprint projection and 
generalization, which should hold both semantic meaning and 
simple geometry, a meaningful partition is firstly introduced 
(from CityGML building models). For roof generalization, a 
new perspective is presented: to divide a building model into 
Top + Body, so that the Top part could be transplanted onto 
the extruded model by displacement. Two algorithms are 
developed for two types of building groups: one with a minor 
height difference and the other with a major height difference. 
For the former one, the outer units are detected and 
aggregated to represent the whole group. For the latter one, an 
iteration of aggregation is performed on subgroups. Each time 
the highest unit and its neighbors compose the subgroup. The 
algorithms are tested on two building groups and one part of a 
3D city model. 
Keywords-3D generalization; building group; footprint; city 
visualization 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
3D city visualization requires different representations of 
building models at different Levels of Detail (LoDs) to 
satisfy different scales and application needs. These LoDs 
should be generated automatically by specific generalization 
procedures. Generalization has a long history in cartography 
[1], with the goal of emphasizing the most important map 
elements while still representing the world in the most 
faithful and recognizable way. 3D building generalization in 
city visualization shares the same goal, but should consider 
both geographical and 3-dimensional information.  
As discussed and listed in [2], unlike 2D maps that have 
standard official scale series, there are no generally agreed 
LoDs for 3D buildings. Including the four LoDs defined by 
CityGML (City Geography Markup Language) [3], the 
existing definitions of LoDs for 3D buildings only 
differentiate by 3D details. That is to say, they hardly 
respond 
to 
geographical 
generalization, 
like 
the 
generalization regarding a group of 3D building, where 
topological relations should also be considered. This seems 
to lead more attention to single building generalization. 
A number of algorithms have been developed for 3D 
building generalization [4-13]. Most of those algorithms deal 
with single buildings [4-11]. Generalization of building 
groups is seldom addressed [12, 13]. In 3D city visualization, 
the goal of generalization is not only to simplify individual 
objects, but also to achieve better cognition by emphasizing 
important features. Thus, there rises a generalization need for 
building groups. Both 3-dimensional detail and geographical 
relations should be taken into account. More generalization 
operations like selection, aggregation, typification and their 
combinations are expected.  
Footprint has been serving as the connection between 2D 
and 3D. Plenty of block models of buildings were extruded 
from cadastral maps using their footprints and heights. But 
more detailed models couldn’t be acquired in this way. 
Therefore, a question rises here: how can we translate 3D 
building generalization issues into 2D scope for generalizing 
more detailed 3D building models?  
This paper is organized as below: related work is first 
discussed in Section II. Section III introduces the idea of 
partitioning a 3D building model into suitable units for 
footprint-based generalization. Generalization algorithms for 
two types of building groups are presented in Section IV. 
Experimental results are given in Section V. Section VI 
concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Compared with map generalization techniques in 2D, 
generalization in 3D is still in its infancy [14]. Different from 
general 3D models, most 3D building models are already 
low-polygon objects, so generic geometrical simplification 
techniques from Computer Graphics seem to be of little use. 
Besides, parallel and orthogonal properties of buildings need 
to be respected during simplification. Therefore, algorithms 
for 3D building generalization need to be specifically 
designed [14]. Thiemann proposed to segment a building 
into basic 3D primitives [4], and to decompose the whole 
generalization process into segmentation, interpretation and 
generalization phases [5].  Mayer [6] and Forberg [7] 
developed scale-space techniques for simplifying buildings, 
partly based on the opening and closing morphological 
operators. Kada proposed to define parts of simplified 
buildings as intersections of half-planes [8] and to divide 
buildings into cells and to detect features by primitive 
instancing [9]. Without semantic information, these methods 
mainly detect building features based on pure geometry.  
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

By taking semantic information into account, Fan et al. 
[10] proposed a method for generalization of 3D buildings 
modeled by CityGML from LoD3 to lower LoDs. Their 
research showed that good visualization properties could be 
obtained by only using the exterior shell of the building 
model that drastically decreases the required number of 
polygons. Fan and Meng [11] extended their work to 
automatic derivation of LoDs for CityGML building models 
staring from LoD4. However, the above mentioned methods 
are all limited to generalization regarding single buildings.  
Anders [12] proposed an approach for the aggregation of 
linearly arranged building groups. Their 2D silhouettes, 
which are the results of three orthogonal projections, are 
used to form the generalized 3D model. Guercke et al. [13] 
studied the aggregation of LoD1 building models in the form 
of Mixed Integer Programming (MIP) problems.  
Techniques start emerging for generalizing 3D building 
groups in the context of city visualization. Glander and 
Döllner 
[14] 
proposed 
cell-base 
generalization 
by 
maintaining a hierarchy of landmarks. In each cell, only 
landmark buildings can be seen, the other buildings are 
replaced by a cell block. In the work of Mao et al. [15], 
buildings are divided into clusters by road network, and 
grouped with close neighbors in each cluster. However, only 
LoD1 buildings were handled. 
III. 
PARTITION OF BUILDING MODEL 
Our approach places the emphasis on translating 3D 
generalization into 2D scope. The strategy is to generate 
footprints of 3D buildings, perform 2D generalization on 
their footprints, and then extend the result to 3D. The main 
issue is how we extend the result to 3D without losing 
recognizable features like differentiated height and roof. 
Therefore, a meaningful partition is proposed at first, so that 
each footprint can carry feature information. 
An implementation of partition is presented using 
building models encoded by CityGML [3], which supports 
coherent modeling of semantics and geometrical/topological 
properties. With semantically structured buildings models, 
generalization can be facilitated a lot. However, a building 
still can be structured in plenty of forms that make a uniform 
projection of footprint very difficult. Stricter rules are needed 
to form buildings into favorable partitions. 
A. CityGML Building Model at LoD2 
CityGML defines a standard for ontology of buildings at 
4 different LoDs. At LoD1, 3D buildings are represented by 
block models with flat roofs. At LoD2, 3D buildings have 
differentiated height and roof structures. LoD3 models are 
detailed architectural models with openings like windows 
and doors. LoD4 completes a LoD3 model with interior 
structures.  
This paper uses CityGML LoD2 building models for the 
partition and generalization. LoD1 block models are hardly 
recognizable; highly detailed models at LoD3 and LoD4 are 
too costly and normally only used for landmarks. 
Before partitioning, we should be aware of the possible 
elements in such a model. So we draw a UML diagram of 
building model exclusively for LoD2 (Figure 1) according to 
the CityGML encoding standard [3]. The pivotal class is the 
abstract class _AbstractBuilding, which is specialized either 
to a Building or to a BuildingPart. Each can contain 3 types 
of properties: text attribute, pure geometry, and semantically 
structured geometry. The last one is the essential for our 
footprint-based generalization. 
B. Partition Rules 
The goal of partition is to get a well structured building 
in both semantic and geometric sense, so as to extract 
suitable unit for footprint projection and generalization. The 
unit should have meaningful geometry and be good for 
computation. The rules are introduced as below: 
• 
If a Building is composed of unconnected segments, 
partition them into different Buildings. 
 
Figure 1.  UML diagram of CityGML’s building model at LoD2 (based on CityGML standard [3] ) 
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

• 
If a Building is composed of structural segments 
differing in e.g. height or roof type, partition them 
into different BuildingParts. 
• 
If a Building/BuildingPart has smaller components 
which are not significant as a BuildingPart (e.g. 
chimneys, dormers, and balconies), partition them 
into BuildingInstallations. 
• 
If a Building/BuildingPart has geometries without 
semantic information, partition them into pure 
geometry. 
• 
If a Building/BuildingPart has _BoundarySurfaces 
and includes BuildingParts at the same time, 
partition the _BoundarySurfaces into a new 
BuildingPart. 
• 
If a Building/BuildingPart includes only one 
BuildingPart, aggregate the included BuildingPart 
into its parent Building/BuildingPart. 
• 
If a Building has _BoundarySurfaces, there must be 
a WallSurface starting from and orthogonal to the 
ground plane; otherwise, partition this Building as a 
BuildingInstallation into another Building. 
• 
If a BuildingPart has _BoundarySurfaces, there must 
be a WallSurface starting from and orthogonal to the 
ground plane; otherwise, partition this BuildingPart 
into a BuildingInstallation. 
• 
If a Building/BuildingPart has unconnected or self-
intersected WallSurface, partition it into more 
BuildingParts. 
C. Beneficial Attributes 
After employing the partition rules, beneficial attributes 
can be obtained: 
• 
In a Building tree, all the leaf nodes must have 
_BoundarySurfaces; no branch nodes can then have 
_BoundarySurfaces. 
• 
If there are _BoundarySurfaces, there must be a 
WallSurface; other types of surfaces are optional. 
• 
A WallSurface must start from and orthogonal to the 
ground plane.  
• 
The orthogonal projection of WallSurfaces of each 
leaf node form a simple polygon or polyline. 
• 
Each leaf node only has one height. 
 
A leaf node can contain text attributes, pure geometry, 
BuildingInstallations and _BoundarySurfaces, but only 
_BoundarySurfaces will be selected to form a basic unit of 
generalization. The term unit will be used in the following 
discussion, referring to a leaf node of a building tree only 
consisting of _BoundarySurfaces. Two examples are given 
in Figure 2.  
IV. 
GENERALIZATION OF BUILDING GROUPS 
In a building group, the adjacent buildings can be 
connected or disjoint. In this paper, we only deal with the 
ones with connected buildings.  
There exists building groups with various features. They 
can hardly be generalized by a uniform method. Since height 
has significant influence on visual perception, we address 
two types of building groups in this paper: one with a minor 
difference in height (buildings that all look similar) and the 
other with a major difference in height (that include a 
significant building at city level). 
A. Generating Footprints 
Based on the partition discussed in the previous section, 
the first performed generalization operator is selection. For 
each unit, only _BoundarySurfaces are selected. Among 
_BoundarySurfaces, only WallSurface will be selected for 
generating footprint. However, the roof information will be 
lost during this projection of footprint. Another important 
issue is how we generalize roofs. 
B. Handling Building Roofs 
A common way of roof generalization is by primitive 
matching of different roof types. But type detection is a 
costly (most often manual) and uncertain process depending 
on the given types and lots of parameters. In CityGML 
building models, roof surfaces are separated from walls, but 
roof type is not always available in attributes. Even if given 
the roof type, the rebuilding of roof after extrusion would be 
another difficulty without knowing parameters.  
Since an extruded model is usually a prism, if the original 
model could be divided into a top part and a prism body, the 
top part could be easily transplanted to the extruded model 
and could also be generalized with adjacent roofs. Therefore, 
we propose a way of dividing a building model into Top + 
Body. For a building, if all of its walls end at the top in the 
 
Figure 2.  Two examples of building tree for generalization 
 
Figure 3.  An example of dividing a building into Top + Body 
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

same horizontal plane, the Top only consists of its roof; 
otherwise, the Top consists of its roof and the end walls. An 
example is given in Figure 3. 
C. Generalization of Building Groups with a Minor 
Difference in Height 
For a building group with a minor difference in height, 
we believe its outer feature could represent the whole group 
to a certain extent, like in large scale visualization.  
Therefore, inner units can be eliminated. Outer units can 
also be aggregated. If there are no inner units, aggregation 
can be directly performed on all units. If aggregated units 
have non-flat roofs, two levels of aggregation can be 
achieved. The original roof structures can be preserved based 
on the approach introduced in subsection A. They can be 
generalized to flat roofs as well. 
Our generalization operations start from LoD2 but won’t 
lead to LoD1 block models. Instead of using the term LoD, 
we use GeoLoD (Geographical Level of Detail) to denote the 
generalization results. Three GeoLoDs can be generated. At 
GeoLoD1, a building group is a prism model which conveys 
its outer shape. At GeoLoD2, a building group is a GeoLoD1 
model added with differentiated roof. At GeoLoD3, a 
building group is represented by all its outer units. The main 
flow of the algorithm is depicted in Figure 4. 
D. Generalization of Building Groups with a  Major 
Difference in Height 
For a building group with a major difference in height, 
the generalization will be performed on its subgroups.  
A subgroup is composed of a center unit and its adjacent 
neighbors.  Each time the highest unit will be chosen from 
the unprocessed units. If this unit is much higher than its 
neighbor, they should not be aggregated. We use the term 
coequal in this paper to indicate that the height difference in 
two units can be ignored, that is to say, they can be 
aggregated. Coequal units are defined as below: 
 
Given two units U1 with height h1 and U2 with height h2, 
if they satisfy the constraint as in (1), U1 and U2 are coequal, 
where Th1 is a predefined variable as the threshold. 
 
1/Th1 < h1 / h2 < Th1, 
(1)   
When merging two adjacent and coequal units, either 
height of the original units can be assigned to the new unit. If 
the lower unit covers a rather large area, the new unit takes 
the lower height; otherwise, it takes the higher one. We 
propose a criterion as below: 
 
Figure 5.  The main flow of the generalization algorithm for a 
building group with a major difference in height 
 
Figure 4.  The main flow of the generalization algorithm for a 
building group with a minor difference in height 
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Given a1, a2, and h1, h2 (h1< h2) as the areas and heights 
of two coequal units, the height of new merged unit h3 is 
determined as in (2), where Th2 is a predefined variable as 
the threshold. 
 
, 
(2)   
The main flow of the algorithm is depicted in Figure 5. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTATION AND RESULTS 
The footprint-based generalization approach presented in 
Section IV will be tested on two sets of building groups.  
A. Generalization of Building Groups with a Minor 
Difference in Height 
The algorithm presented in Section IV-C is tested on a 
building consisting of 381 units. The results are shown in 
Figure 6, and the statistics are given in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
STATISTICS1  
Footprint 
3D model  
(percentage of the original) 
Model 
Vertex 
Polygon 
Vertex 
Polygon 
Original 
361 
44 
1565 
381 
GeoLoD3 
186 
18 
843 (53.9%) 
203 (53.3%) 
GeoLoD2 
121 
3 
679 (43.4%) 
153 (40.2%) 
GeoLoD1 
121 
3 
590 (37.7%) 
121 (31.8%) 
B. Generalization of Building Groups with a  Major 
Difference in Height 
The algorithm presented in Section IV-D is tested on a 
building group consisting of 193 units. The results are shown 
in Figure 7, and the statistics are given in Table II. As for the 
threshold factor Th1 and Th2, we assign 2 to Th1, and 4 to 
Th2. Of course, other values could be assigned. 
TABLE II.  
STATISTICS2 
Footprint 
3D model 
(percentage of the original) 
Model 
Vertex 
Polygon 
Vertex 
Polygon 
Original 
193 
19 
879 
211 
Generalized 
118 
5 
565 (64.3%) 
116 (55%) 
C. Generalization of Building Groups in 3D City Model  
The approach is tested on a part of 3D city model of 
Nantes in France, which consists of 346 buildings (1536 
units). The generalized result is shown in Figure 8. As we 
could see, both geometrical complexity and information 
density are reduced; meanwhile essential features are 
preserved and emphasized. 
 
 
 
6a) Original model (© IGN BATI 3D) 
6b) Footprints of original model 
 
 
6c) Footprints of GeoLoD3 model 
6d) GeoLoD3 model 
 
 
6e) GeoLoD2 model 
6f) GeoLoD1 model 
Figure 6.  A generalization example of a building group with a minor 
difference in height 
 
 
 
7a) Original model (© IGN BATI 3D) 
7b) Footprints of original model 
 
 
7c) Generalized footprints 
7d) Generalized model 
Figure 7.  A generalization example of a building group with a major 
difference in height 
 
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presented a novel approach for generalizing 
3D building groups. The goal is to reduce both geometric 
complexity and information density, meanwhile maintaining 
recognizability, which requires at least LoD2 models. The 
emphasis has been placed on translating 3D generalization 
issues into 2D scope via footprints. First of all, a meaningful 
partition was suggested so that each footprint can carry 
feature information. A set of partition rules was developed 
for partitioning the buildings modeled by CityGML at LoD2.  
Footprint-based generalization is then confronted with 
the difficulty of roof generalization. Unlike the existing 
approaches such as primitive matching, we proposed to 
divide a building into Top + Body. Thus, Top part can be 
easily transplanted onto the extruded model by displacement. 
Two types of building groups were addressed in this 
paper: one has major difference in height and the other has 
minor difference in height. For the former one, we believe its 
outer feature can represent the whole group to a certain 
extent. For the latter one, it should not be handled as a 
whole. An iterative aggregation process is performed by 
comparing the height and area of every two adjacent units 
starting from the highest one. 
The approach was tested on two building groups and a 
part of 3D city model. Group generalization shows its 
advantage in reducing information density, e.g. by 
eliminating insignificant buildings. Different from the 
methods only handle LoD1 block models [13, 14], our 
approach can handle LoD2 models as well. Instead of 
aggregating detailed models directly into LoD1 blocks [15], 
our approach supports generalization of geographical LoDs, 
thereby 
achieving 
data 
reduction 
and 
maintaining 
recognizability at the same time.  
However, only connected buildings have been handled 
and only two types of building groups have been addressed. 
More studies are needed for dealing with complex cases. 
Coarser levels (including addressing the issue whether 3D is 
still necessary) will also be studied. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. McMaster and K. Shea, Generalization in Digital 
Cartography. Washington, DC: Association of American 
Geographers, 1992. 
[2] L. Meng and A. Forberg, “3D Building Generalisation”, in 
Generalisation of Geographic Information: Cartographic 
Modelling and Applications, chapter 11, W. Mackaness, A. 
Ruas, and T.Sarjakoski, Eds. Elsevier, 2007, pp. 211- 232. 
[3] OpenGIS® CityGeography Markup Language (CityGML) 
Encoding Standard, Version: 1.0.0, OGC® Project Document, 
No. 08-007r1, 2008. 
[4] F. Thiemann, “Generalization of 3D Building Data,” Proc. 
Geospatial Theory, Processing and Applications, IAPRS Vol. 
34, Part B4, Ottawa, Canada, 2002, pp. 286-290. 
[5] F. Thiemann and M. Sester, “Segmentation of buildings for 
3D-generalisation”, Proc. Working Paper of the ICA 
Workshop on Generalisation and Multiple Representation, 
Leicester, UK, 2004. 
[6] H. Mayer, “Scale-Spaces for Generalization of 3D Buildings”, 
International Journal of Geographical Information Science, 
Vol. 19, No. 8-9, Sept.-Oct. 2005, pp. 975-997. 
[7] A. Forberg, “Generalization of 3D Building Data Based on a 
Scale-Space Approach”, ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry 
and Remote Sensing 62, 2007, pp. 104-111. 
[8] M. Kada, “3D Building Generalization Based on Half-Space 
Modeling,” 
Proc. 
ISPRS 
Workshop 
on 
Multiple 
Representation 
and 
Interoperability 
of 
Spatial 
Data, 
Hannover, 2006. 
[9] M. Kada, “Scale-Dependent Simpliﬁcation of 3D Building 
Models Based on Cell Decomposition and Primitive 
Instancing,” in Spatial Information Theory. Springer, 2007. 
[10] H. Fan, L. Meng and M. Jahnke, “Generalization of 3D 
Buildings Modelled by CityGML,” in Advances in 
GIScience: 
Lecture 
Notes 
in 
Geoinformation 
and 
Cartography. Springer, 2009, pp. 387-405. 
[11] H. Fan and L. Meng, “Automatic Derivation of Different 
Levels of Detail for 3D Buildings Modeled by CityGML,” 
Proc. 24th International Cartographic Conference, 2009.  
[12] K.-H. Anders, “Level of Detail Generation of 3D Building 
Groups by Aggregation and Typiﬁcation,” Proc. International 
Cartographic Conference, 2005. 
[13] R. Guerche, T. Götzelmann,  C. Brenner and M. Sester, 
“Aggregation of LoD 1 Building Models as an Optimization 
Problem,”  ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote 
Sensing, vol. 66(2), 2011, pp. 209-222. 
[14] T. Glander and J. Döllner, “Abstract Representations for 
Interactive Visualization of Virtual 3D City Models,” 
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, vol. 33, no. 5, 
2009, pp. 375 - 387. 
[15] B. Mao, Y. Ban and L. Harrie, “A Multiple Representation 
Data Structure for Dynamic Visualisation of Generalised 3D 
City Models,” ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote 
Sensing, vol. 66(2), 2011, pp. 198-208. 
 
 
 
a)  Original model (© IGN BATI 3D) 
 
 
 
b) Generalized model 
Figure 8.  A generalization example of 3D city model 
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-178-6
GEOProcessing 2012 : The Fourth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

