Functional Quality: 
A Use-case Oriented Data Quality Evaluation 
 
Ariza-López, Francisco Javier 
Dpto. Ingeniería Cartográfica, Geodésica y Fotogrametría 
Universidad de Jaén  
Jaén, Spain 
Email: fjariza@ujaen.es  
Reinoso-Gordo, Juan Francisco  
Dpto. Expresión Gráfica Arquitectónica y en la Ingeniería  
Universidad de Granada 
Granada, Spain 
Email: jreinoso@ugr.es  
 
 
Abstract—The current paradigm in geospatial data quality is 
datacentric (internal quality), but it can be overcome by 
considering generic use cases that link geospatial data with its 
processing (algorithms). The new approach proposed by the 
functional quality supposes an intermediate situation between 
the user’s and producer’s perspectives (external and internal 
quality). This paper defines the functional quality and explains 
the need for this new perspective. 
Keyords-Data quality; fitness for use; functional quality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The concept of quality is close to everyone, it is used in 
colloquial language and is universally understood and 
intuitively accepted. In general, it can be said that a well-
done work has quality. The term quality is defined in [1] as 
the degree to which a set of inherent characteristics of an 
object fulfils requirements. This definition clarifies that 
quality does not have to be limited to a single property of the 
object under consideration, but that several factors may come 
into play to define quality. On the other hand, what is 
inherent is what is proper or inseparable from things, and it is 
worth clarifying that here are factors that are more evident, 
or explicit, than others that have a more implicit character. 
Another interesting aspect of this definition is the one that 
quality refers to the fulfillment of requirements.  
In this way, it is interesting to define what fitness for use 
is. If we go to the American Association for Quality glossary 
on quality [2], it tells us that fitness for purpose is a «term 
sometimes used to define the term "quality", to indicate the 
degree to which a product or service meets the requirements 
for its intended use». In the Online Browsing Platform of 
ISO, there is no direct entry for this term, although as a 
related entry appears «test or usability test», which is defined 
as «test to determine if an implemented system fulfills its 
functional purpose as determined by its users». All of the 
above means that the use of the term “fitness for use” implies 
having: i) a well-determined purpose of use and ii) the ability 
to evaluate the performance level. In this work, we will focus 
on the first aspect of the previous two. In relation to the first 
component, use cases can be considered. Basically, a use 
case is nothing more than the description of an action or 
process with a certain level of formalization (e.g., using 
Unified Modeling Language diagrams, or any other 
language). Focused on a specific user requirement, the 
documentation of a use case must include the actors, actions, 
inputs, outputs and decisions necessary to achieve the prosed 
goal. The fitness for use approach supposes the loss of the 
most transcendent, abstract and general vision of quality to 
focus on specific use cases. For example, in the automobile 
sector, there are many possible users, uses and ways of 
driving a specific vehicle model. Considering that for a user 
the fuel consumption is a relevant aspect of the quality of a 
car model, and that it is impossible to adequately inform for 
all possible situations, standards, such as the New European 
Driving Cycle (NEDC) [3], and more recently the World 
Harmonized Light-duty Vehicle Test Procedure (WLTP) [4], 
have been adopted for dealing in this complex scenario. In 
the latter, a driving dynamic is adopted that tries to 
reproduce much better how people drive in the real world 
[5]. Closer to the geospatial world, there is experience in 
performing functional tests on web services (semantic 
services [6], geospatial services [7] such as WFS, WCS, 
etc.). And, more generally, the OASIS model [8] for web 
services establishes several quality dimensions on functional 
aspects. 
For all these reasons, we consider that proposing the 
perspective of functional quality applied to the case of 
geospatial data is in line with what is already a reality in 
more advanced fields. 
In the case of geospatial data, there are many references 
(e.g., [9][10]) that indicate that the quality of geospatial data 
is something that is not really understood by the data users. 
On the one hand, quality is poorly communicated and on the 
other, it does not serve the interests of users because quality 
is typically reported from a producer and data-centric 
perspective (e.g., ISO 19157) [11], not usage-centric. The 
functional quality perspective will help avoid this 
undesirable situation. 
The objective of this work is to develop a new 
perspective of the quality of geospatial data, in which we are 
guided by the example previously exposed for the 
automobile sector. We propose that quality be defined and 
evaluated in specific use cases, which means linking data and 
processes (algorithms). In this way we get much better 
approximation to the fitness for use. We call this new 
perspective functional quality.  
The structure of the paper is as follows: Section 2 defines 
functional quality in more detail. Section III discusses the 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

advantages and disadvantages of this new perspective. 
Finally, Section IV presents a brief conclusion. 
II. 
DEFINING THE FUNCTIONAL QUALITY  
Given the disaffection that affects users regarding the 
quality of the data they use due, among other reasons, to the 
fact that the way in which it is reported does not come close 
to their real needs, this paper proposes the adoption of a new 
level of analysis and information on the quality of geospatial 
data, which we call functional quality. We describe quality 
with the adjective functional since we propose evaluate how 
well the data "works" in specific use cases.  
Since geospatial data is used in processes, this new level 
of quality assessment and reporting picks up on this, linking 
data with algorithms to more fully consider the quality of 
outputs, which most directly affects to users. Thus, we define 
functional quality as the consistency, against a reference, of 
the results generated by a given algorithm when applied to a 
given geospatial data set (e.g., a given digital elevation 
model —DEM— dataset that is used for the determination of 
a hydrographic network). 
We understand the functional quality as a new 
perspective that can be complex and must be defined by 
various indices (quality measures). For example, for the case 
of a drainage network determined on a DEM dataset and a 
given algorithm, some aspects that can help to inform about 
the functional quality of the DEM are: displacements of the 
resulting network, completeness of the obtained network, 
topological problems present in the network, etc. That is to 
say, aspects that may be of interest to a user who will use 
that drainage network in their production processes or 
decision making. 
Therefore, functional quality approximates the “fitness 
for use”, but focused on a use case defined as generic and not 
considering particular requirements of some users or others 
(for example, for an engineering project, resolution 
requirements are different for the phases of feasibility study, 
preliminary design and project). With all this, a certain 
component of particularity is eliminated, as occurs when 
applying the NEDC and WLTP methods for assessing the 
fuel consumption in specific driving scenarios. 
So, functional quality can be considered as the middle 
layer of a three-layer system, each of which brings us closer 
to quality from a different perspective: internal quality (the 
data-centric traditional producer’s perspective), functional 
(use-case-centric perspective) and external quality (fitness 
for use perspective). In this way, a more general approach to 
use cases can be made without going into the problem of 
countless users and specific conditions of their applications, 
which supposes a context that is too rich and broad to be 
addressed. Basically, we are following the same scheme that 
has been mentioned previously for the case of the automobile 
sector with respect to the information on vehicle 
consumption.  
III. 
DISCUSSION  
Before adopting a new perspective, it is worth thinking 
about whether or not it brings advantages over the previous 
situation. ISO 19157 establishes the framework for 
geospatial data quality. In this international standard, the 
concept that is closest to functional quality is the quality 
element called “usability”. In ISO 19157, this quality 
element does not have a clear formulation and is not linked 
to use cases or algorithms, which is a relevant aspect of 
functional quality. A better explanation is given in ISO 
25010, but there is no formal description. Obviously, the 
above can make difficult to establish a link with a (semi-
)formal description of specific use cases as proposed by us. 
In our view, the advantages of working with functional 
quality are several. Functional quality links the data to the 
essence of the processes (algorithms), and to applied use 
cases. All this has a more applied vision and vocation than 
the internal quality reported by the producers. Internal 
quality is much more data-centric, focused on the data itself, 
without considering its use. As functional quality remains 
linked to use cases by means of algorithms, functional 
quality provides a greater degree of specificity and always 
refers to the pair: FQ = Function {given data set, given 
algorithm}. That is, the algorithm is always present as a 
characteristic of the considered use case. In this way 
functional quality can provide valuable information to 
producers and users. For the former, it focuses on the applied 
interests of users and offers producers information so that 
they can improve their data quality definition and geospatial 
data, since now they will better understand the impacts on 
the final results. For the latter, it offers a more user-centric 
quality, focused on the use problems that they actually have 
when using the data, which makes it more understandable, 
interesting and valuable. In addition, this way of reporting 
quality is a wake-up call to those users who do not pay much 
attention to the processing algorithms and who consider that 
every digital result is good in itself. Finally, given that there 
are very common use cases and algorithms, the definition 
and evaluation of functional quality could be standardized 
for these cases, which would offer greater confidence and 
transparency. 
An aspect that is also relevant in the understanding data, 
their quality and use, is the quality of the metadata. 
Functional quality could also be assessed in the metadata. In 
any case, functional quality should be included in the 
metadata, which would represent a clear improvement in 
terms of making them more understandable and practical for 
users. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The main contribution of this work is conceptual and has 
focused on justifying the need to introduce a new level of 
quality assessment (functional quality), which is more 
informative for users but, at the same time, can be applied by 
producers. Based on what is already being done in other 
fields (e.g., vehicles and web services), we consider that 
adopting the perspective of functional quality is a natural 
evolution for the case of data and its processes.  
This new level of evaluation is intermediate between 
quality, as it is currently understood and materialized by 
producers, and quality in the sense of “fitness for use”. 
Functional quality links geospatial data with its processes, so 
it offers a way that is much closer to users and can help 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

producers to be more attentive to user’s needs. In the near 
future we will continue to develop complete illustrative 
examples and show the advantages of the use of the 
functional quality. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been financed by the research project 
"Functional Quality of Digital Elevation Models in 
Engineering" of the State Agency Research of Spain. 
PID2019-106195RB-I00/AEI/10.13039/501100011033 
(https://coello.ujaen.es/investigacion/web_giic/funquality4de
m/). 
REFERENCES 
[1] International Standardization Association, ISO 9000:2015 
Quality 
management 
systems 
— 
Fundamentals 
and 
vocabulary, ISO, 2015. 
[2] https://asq.org/quality-resources/quality-glossary/f 
[3] European Union, Regulation (EC) No 715/2007. Official 
Journal L 171, 29.6.2007.  
[4] European Union, Regulation (EU) 2017/1347. Official 
Journal L 192, 27.7.2017. 
[5] Dirección General de Tráfico, Nuevas mediciones, consumos 
más 
reales. 
https://revista.dgt.es/es/motor/reportajes/2020/1217-
WLTP.shtml  
[6] A. Tahir, D. Tosi, S. Morasca, “A systematic review on the 
functional testing of semantic web services”, Journal of 
Systems and Software, Volume 86, Issue 11, Pages 2877-
2889, 2013, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.06.064. 
[7] G. Giuliani, A. Dubois, P. Lacroix, “Testing OGC Web 
Feature and Coverage Service performance: Towards efficient 
delivery of geospatial data”, Journal of Spatial Information 
Science, 
No. 
7, 
1-23, 
2013, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.5311/JOSIS.2013.7.112  
[8] OASIS, Quality Model for Web Services September 2005 
http://cliplab.org/Projects/S-CUBE/papers/oasis05:WSQM-
2.0.pdf 
[9] S. P. Wechler, “Perceptions of Digital Elevation Model 
Uncertainty by DEM Users,” Urisa J. vol 15, pp. 57–64, 2003. 
[10] F. J. Ariza-López, E.G. Chicaiza-Mora, J. L. Mesa-
Mingorance, J. Cai, and J. F. Reinoso-Gordo, “DEMs: An 
Approach to Users and Uses from the Quality Perspective,” 
Int. J. Spat. Data Infrastruct. vol 13, pp. 131–171, 2018. 
[11] International Standardization Association, ISO 19157:2013 
Geographic information — Data quality. ISO, 2013. 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-983-6
GEOProcessing 2022 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

