Spatio-temporal Analysis and Visualisation of Incident Induced Traffic Congestion 
Using Real Time Online Routing Information 
A Case Study of Fremantle South, Perth, Western Australia  
Arfanara Najnin, Jianhong (Cecilia) Xia, Graeme Wright and Ting (Grace) Lin 
Department of Spatial Sciences, 
Curtin University, 
Kent Street, Bentley, Perth, Western Australia 
e-mail: 18126208@postgrad.curtin.edu.au 
e-mail: C.Xia@curtin.edu.au 
e-mail: graemewright2408@gmail.com 
e-mail: zju.grace@gmail.com 
Abstract— Traffic congestion triggered by incidents is 
extremely challenging because of its random occurrence. 
Incident Induced Traffic Congestion (IITC) usually refers to 
a form of non-recurrent congestion, which can be measured 
based on travel time variation after an incident has 
occurred. This study aims to analyze the spatio-temporal 
pattern of travel time variation induced by incidents using a 
case study of Fremantle South, Western Australia. The 
travel time data and information were collected from the 
TOMTOM® online routing system through TOMTOM® 
API. Around ninety-nine origin-destination (O-D) pairs were 
generated and geocoded to collect travel time information in 
three different periods, i.e., morning peak (7:00 am to 9:00 
am), evening peak (4:00 pm to 6:00 pm) and off peak (1:00 
am to 3:00 am) for six months from March 15, 2016 until 
September 15, 2016. Simultaneously, around 1047 records of 
incident location information have been collected in the 
vicinity of the study area. To understand the road network 
performance, travel time variation and delay were estimated 
using the Travel Time Index (TTI) measure.  The spatial and 
temporal pattern of travel time variations were analyzed and 
visualized using specialized geo-spatial tools and techniques. 
The paper displays the spatial and temporal pattern of IITC 
in different circumstances that can be used for better traffic 
management and planning. An attempt will be made to 
generate 
various 
IITC 
scenarios 
using 
Geographic 
Information System (GIS) tools and techniques. These 
scenarios may be used for further research to understand 
the behaviour of road networks due to the occurrence of 
incidents for the development of congestion mitigation 
strategies.   
Keywords- Incident Induced Traffic Congestion (IITC); 
Online Routing, Travel Time delay; Spatio-temporal Data 
Analysis; Data visualization; GIS.  
I.
INTRODUCTION
At present, ensuring proper planning and management 
of the transport sector is a universal issue. Besides, an 
emerging challenge for transport planning is to mitigate 
traffic congestion in a sustainable way. There is no 
concrete definition of congestion. Congestion can be 
defined as the travel time delay from the origin to 
destination during peak hours [1]. Factors, such as, high 
travel demand, low supply of road network and incidents 
on roads may lead to traffic congestion or travel delay. 
Different agencies and researchers tend to define incidents 
in a different way. According to the Traffic Incident 
Management Handbook, the term “incident” can be 
defined as occurrence of any non-recurring event that 
reduces the roadway capacity or abnormally increases 
highway demand [2].  Congestion caused by incidents is 
usually defined as non-recurrent congestion, which can be 
measured based on travel time variation in a certain 
location. Hence, location and time of incident, and travel 
time variation are two significant factors to measure the 
spatio-temporal distribution of IITC. Four general aspects 
to measure congestion are duration, extent, intensity and 
reliability [3].  
To measure congestion a real-time travel information 
system is becoming a significant objective. Global 
Navigation Satellite System (GNSS) technologies such as 
Global Positioning System (GPS) floating car data, GPS 
probe vehicle (moving vehicle equipped with vehicle 
tracker) or cell phone tracking are worthy methods for 
collection of non-stationary spatial data such as real time 
traffic flow and travel time information along the road 
network. Google API and TOMTOM API are two widely 
known Web-data-portal techniques that have been 
developed with the integration of GPS equipped floating 
car data. GPS floating car data is a potential source to 
collect data without using any vehicle detection technique 
[4]. A very few studies have been carried out to understand 
traffic congestion features using empirical data on traffic 
states from Web portal information [5]. 
Previous studies suggest that Travel Rate Index (TRI) 
[6], Congestion Index (CI) [7]-[11], Travel Time Index 
(TTI) [12] [13] and Speed Performance Index (SPI) [14] 
are the most widely used indices to quantify congestion 
and IITC. Among them, TTI has the benefit of assessing 
traffic congestion from a spatio-temporal perspective and 
it contains both recurring and incident circumstances 
encountered by urban travelers. Space and travel time 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

variation are two significant features to measure 
congestion caused by incidents, which are indispensable 
elements 
for 
effective 
congestion 
and 
incident 
management [15]. On the other hand, incident information 
helps to generate different congestion scenarios based on 
random events that help identify route choice behaviour 
during incidents induced congestion [16]. Beforehand, 
most studies were focused to identify the major areas of 
concern due to incidents or crashes; thus, additional study 
is required to identify areas of concern through emphasis 
on non-recurrent traffic congestion. 
 Appropriate tools and techniques need to be identified 
to analyze and visualize IITC by considering the domains 
of space and time. Previously, several methods have been 
used to visualize and analyze spatio-temporal data on 
traffic congestion and incidents through human computer 
interaction. For instance, different  graphical, cartographic 
and GIS tools such as, spider plots or radar graphs, line 
plots, scatter plots, box plot, QQ plot, Theme River, 
Comap, Self-organizing Map (SOM), contour map, pencil 
icons, 
spatial 
autocorrelation, 
spatio-temporal 
interpolation, cluster analysis etc. (), are widely used 
techniques to analyze, illustrate and visualize spatio-
temporal information effectively [10] [17]-[22].  
This study aims to analyze the spatio-temporal patterns 
of travel time fluctuation due to incident induced traffic 
congestion (IITC) in Fremantle South, Perth, Western 
Australia from real time traffic information to generate 
different IITC scenarios. Later, the generated scenarios 
(based on travel time variation) will be used to develop 
congestion mitigation strategies. The core hypothesis of 
this study is that, random events are the cause of non-
recurrent congestion. The specific objectives of the study 
are as follows:  
•
Identify appropriate measures for IITC;  
•
Identify proper techniques to visualize and 
illustrate the spatio-temporal pattern of IITC; 
•
Evaluate and implement the techniques using a 
case study area. 
Two major research questions were developed to fulfil 
the objectives:  
•
What is the appropriate measure to identify IITC 
pattern? 
•
Which visualization tools and techniques can be 
used to illustrate the information? 
This paper consists of four main sections with a list of 
references. Section one (I) reflects the study background 
and target of this study. Section two (II) contains the 
materials and method including the study area delineation, 
data collection and pre-processing and detail about the 
approaches for data analysis and visualization of the 
outcomes. The study outcomes are highlighted in the 
results and discussion section. The study outcomes are 
highlighted in the results and discussion section (III). 
Finally, conclusions are drawn in section four (IV) based 
on study findings to address the research questions and to 
provide further research direction.  
II.
MATERIALS AND METHOD
The study outcomes will be generated by following a 
sequential approach. The spatio-temporal pattern of traffic 
delay has been estimated using TTI and demonstrated in a 
GIS environment using ArcGIS 10.4 e to generate various 
incidents induced congestion scenarios. To analyze the 
study data and visualize the outcomes ArcGIS 10.4 and 
MS Excel Analysis ToolPak-VBA have been used. Figure 
1 demonstrates the conceptual framework for linking IITC 
data from a spatio-temporal perspective. 
Incidents
Travel Time
Incidents
Travel 
Time 
(TT)
TOMTOM Online 
Data Portal
Space
Time
Time
Location
ID
Inbound 
TT
Outbbound 
TT
Spatio-temporal Quantification of 
Travel time delay 
Road Network 
Shapefile
Morning Peak
Evening Peak
Off Peak
Highway
Primary access
Secondary access
Roadwork
Accident
Lane closure
Morning Peak
Evening Peak
Off Peak
Figure 1. Conceptual framework of spatio-temporal 
analysis of IITC data 
A. Study Area Deliniation  
The Fremantle City Centre is a historical and touristic 
place in Western Australia. The market place or city centre 
(destination point) includes but is not limited to East 
Street, Queen Victoria Street/Adelaide Street, Market 
Street/South Terrace, Parry Street, Ord Street and the 
connecting roads. Queen Victoria Street and Adelaide 
Street are two major corridors inside the study area. This 
corridor is a busy link connecting Fremantle to Perth CBD 
and the surrounding suburbs. Canning Highway and South 
Street form the northern and southern study boundaries 
and eastern and western boundaries are Carrington Street, 
Mews Road and Cliff Street. The study area boundary and 
the location of Origin-Destination (O-D) points are shown 
in Figure 2. 
B. Data Collection and Pre-processing 
All the data and information were collected based on 
two major parameters of this study, i.e., travel time and 
records of incidents in the study area. The travel time 
information was collected from TOMTOM online routing 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

system (TOMTOM® API) generated from GPS floating 
car data [23]. Around ninety-nine (99) O-D pairs were 
generated and geocoded to collect location specific data in 
two periods, i.e., morning (7:00 am-9:00 am) and evening 
(4:00 pm-6:00 pm) peak in each 15-minute interval. 
However, to get accurate real time information during free 
flow condition another time span at midnight from 01:00 
am to 3:00 am travel time information was also collected.  
The information was cross-checked with data collected 
from Google API. Travel time (TT) data were segregated 
as morning and evening peak, mid-day and late night 
hours from the original data set (from March 15, 2016 
until September 15, 2016).  
Figure 2. Study area boundary with Origin-Destination 
loaction, Fremantle, Perth 
For the case of incidents, a bounding box was created 
within the vicinity of the study area and around 1047 
records of incidents data were collected from the 
TOMTOM Traffic™ (the Online Traffic Incidents API). 
Finally, 747 records were identified after normalizing and 
overlaying the data with the study boundary. All the 
record were aggregated based on time and location during 
the analysis stage such as mean travel time during 
morning and evening peak, segment wise incident count 
per month etc. The road network data set was collected 
from Main Roads, Western Australia. 
C. Data Analysis and Visualization 
This section describes the spatio-temporal data analysis 
process, in addition to the illustration of study outcomes 
explained in the following sections. 
1)
Explore the General Pattern of Congestion 
Exploratory analysis of spatial data, including 
statistical analysis and data visualization, were considered 
to generate the outcomes as the two major spatio-temporal 
data analysis techniques [24]. The average travel time 
(ATT) was calculated using an excel query and pivot table 
for each O-D (origin to destination) location during 
morning and evening peaks. The peak hour delay was 
measured using TTI based on average travel time during 
peak hour and free flow travel time. TTI was computed 
from Equation (1) [12]: 
ܶܶܫ= ܲܶܶܨܨܶܶ⁄    (1) 
Where, TTI is the Travel Time Index, PTT is the actual 
travel time during peak hours and FFTT is the free flow 
travel time for the same O-D location. 
Average TTI for each O-D pair was calculated based 
on morning and evening peak hours and free flow 
conditions. In addition, the average TTI for the total peak 
hour was estimated. This outcome reveals the general 
pattern of congestion through a line diagram.   
Next, the road network was segmented according to 
location of O-D points using network analyst tool in 
ArcGIS. Then the segment wise travel time was calculated 
by subtracting the TT value of each O-D pair (location A) 
from O-D pair (location B) followed by a sequential 
location of travel time for each origin towards the 
destination. A model was developed in GIS to iterate the 
process 40 times to get TT value of all road segments. This 
outcome will be used to calculate segment wise delay that 
will demonstrate the spatio-temporal pattern of congestion 
in general (work in progress).  
2)
Mapping the Location of Incident  
To define a unique ID for each incident, the find 
identical tool in ArcGIS was used to identify duplicate 
record of incidents. Then summary statistics were 
calculated to determine the maximum count of each 
incident and joined with the main data file. To define the 
projection of all the data sets, geographic coordinate 
system GDA 1994 was used and MGA Zone 50 was used 
as the projected coordinate system. The incident point data 
set was plotted and mapped in ArcGIS to visualize the 
location of incidents using the spatial analysis toolkit. 
Temporal patterns of incidents were analyzed using spider 
graphs and doughnut charts in MS Excel.  
As the work is currently in progress, another 
subsequent initiative will be taken to identify incident 
hotspots using spatial analysis tools such as Kernel 
Density Estimation and Ordinary Kriging methods. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

3)
Calculate Incident Frequency 
Around 683 incidents were identified through overlay 
analysis in ArcGIS by considering spatial joins between 
the two attributes, i.e., incidents and road segments. The 
incident rate in each segment was calculated using the 
frequency method for six months records, shown in   
Equation (2): 
ܮ݋ܿ௜=ܰ௜(ܮ௜∗ܶ)⁄                 (2) 
Where, Loci is the incident rate at location i. Ni is the 
number of incidents identified at a certain location i over 
the period of T(total duration of recorded incidents) and Li
is the length of segment in metres.  
A total of 131 days from the survey were identified 
(excluding public holidays and weekends). Total hours 
were then calculated by multiplying total days with the 
total recorded hours per day. In this study, six hours per 
day of data were recorded (2-hour morning peak, 2-hour 
evening peak and 2-hour off peak) with a total of around 
786 hours.  
4)
Identify the IITC Affected Road Segment, Is 
Congestion Associated with an Incident or Not?    
This section analyses and identifies major congested 
areas based on average TTI and incident rate per hour 
along the road network segments. Here, the association 
between TTI and the average incident rate from the 
previous calculation was explored. Both attributes from 
two different datasets were linked using the spatial join
tool in ArcGIS. Then, the rate of incidents per segment 
were evaluated using the value of TTI. Later, a correlation 
analysis will be conducted between the number of 
incidents per segment or incident frequency and the 
average TTI per segment as further research.  
5)
 Spatial-temporal Pattern of IITC  
The spatio-temporal pattern of IITC for a major 
roadway was illustrated based on TTI of a specific day 
(with incident). The outcome was visualized through map 
and tables as shown in results and discussion section.  
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. General Pattern of Congestion 
To understand the behaviour of road networks from a 
spatio-temporal perspective, the general pattern of 
congestion was analyzed without incidents. Here the travel 
time data was separated from the days with incidents. 
Then average TTI was calculated to estimate delay for 
each O-D pair. That provides a notion of re-current delay 
along the road network. Figure 3 illustrates the average 
travel time variations in morning peak (Avg_TT_Mor), 
evening 
peak 
(Avg_TT_Eve,), 
free 
flow 
average 
(AVG_FF) and average for whole peak hour travel time 
(AVG_Peak) in each O-D pair.  
Figure 3. Average travel time variation (morning peak, 
evening peak and Free flow) per O-D pair; 
According to the O-D point analysis, morning peak-
hour travel times for pairs 1, 2, 5, 27, 83 and 85 are much 
higher than evening peak-hour travel times. Alternatively, 
pairs 37, 46, 52, 70 and 94 have minimum travel times 
both for the morning and evening peak hours that are 
lower than the free flow condition. This may happen due 
to a high rate of speeding by drivers. 
Figure 4. Travel time pattern in morning peak, 7:00 am 
along the road netwrok generated from netwrok analyst
(a), normalized travel time for each road segmnet (b). 
Morning peak-hour travel time was estimated for each 
road segment to explore the spatial pattern of congestion 
without incidents. Figure 4 (a) in the left side shows the 
distribution of travel time based on segment length (if the 
length is maximum then the value of TT was also 
maximum). Then the values were normalized with the 
lengths of road segments to get logical values of TT as 
shown in figure 4 (b). The north-west part of the study 
area near Canning highway was identified as mostly 
congested during peak periods. 
B. Incident Distribution 
The spatio-temporal distribution of incidents was 
analyzed using ArcGIS 10.4 and MS Excel Power Pivot. 
Figure 5 represents the locations of incidents based on 
category along the road network.  
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 5. Spatial distribution of incidents based on 
categories 
From the spatial distribution of incidents, only one 
record of an accident was found close to the Canning 
Highway and Stirling Highway intersection, which is a 
major intersection (Figure 5).  
Figure 6. (a) Temporal distrbution of incident per month 
(March to September, 2016), (b) Amount of  incidents 
overlay with road segments per month 
Figure 6 illustrates the temporal pattern of incidents 
before and after overlay with the road segments.  Most of 
the incidents generated stationary and queuing traffic. A 
very few number of (only two) accidents were reported in 
August 2016 over the whole study period, while a high 
number of incidents (how many) were found in March 
2016  
C. Incident Frequency 
The hourly rate of incident per segment was calculated 
to measure the magnitude of incidents per segment along 
the whole road networks. 
Figure 7. Incident rate per hour in each segment 
Figure 7 describes the rate of incidents for each road 
segment. The maximum incident frequency rate were 
0.0003 and 0.0002 near Staton Road to Stirling Highway 
and Queen Victoria Street to High Street (segments 11 and 
27) respectively. This outcome will be used to select the 
date and location of incident for the next step of analysis. 
D. Major Incident Induced Congested Road Segment 
To identify a major congested road segment, travel 
time for a  typical day was tested. Among the seven 
categories of incidents, an accident time of occurrence and 
location were selected to examine the impact on travel 
time for selected segments near the accident location. 
Hence, the evening peak hour TTI on Wednesday 17 
August 2016 was analyzed to explore the spatio-temporal 
pattern of congestion, where the time of accident was 
recorded as 4:30 pm.  From the result, segments 94 and 27 
were identified as the most affected road section due to 
incident (accident).   
E. Spatio-temporal Pattern of IITC 
To explore the spatio-temporal pattern of congestion 
for road segments, the delay has been measured using the 
estimated average value of TTI during peak hours 
(morning peak, evening peak and total peak periods) as 
shown in Figure 8.  
Figure 8. Estimated TTI value during Morning, evening and 
total peak periods 
Figure 9. Spatial pattern of IITC during incindent at 
segment 43, 23, 63 at u/s and at 94, 27, 76 d/s 
Figure 9 displays the pattern of congestion based on a 
single incident on 17 August near the Canning highway 
and Stirling highway intersection (segments 43, 23, and 63 
in u/s and segment 94, 27 and 76 in d/s) during evening 
peak hour (5:00 pm) on 17 August 2016. Logically, 
upstream (u/s) segments close to the accident should be 
more impacted than u/s locations further away. Also, the 
nearest downstream (d/s) segments should have more 
impact due to incidents than those further away. 
accident
closed
lane closed
queuing traffic
roadworks
slow traffic
stationary traffic
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

TABLE I. 
TTI VALUE OF U/S O-D POINTS TO AN ACCIDENT 
Date (17/08/2016)
Average TTI Values (u/s segments)
Time
O-D 69
O-D 71
O-D 26
16:00
1.13
1.32
1.50
16:15
1.13
1.32
1.50
16:30
1.12
1.31
1.49
16:45
1.12
1.31
1.49
17:00
1.12
1.30
1.48
17:15
1.11
1.29
1.46
17:30
1.10
1.28
1.45
17:45
1.09
1.27
1.43
18:00
1.07
1.25
1.41
TABLE II. 
TTI VALUE OF D/S O-D POINTS FROM AN ACCIDENT 
Date (17/08/2016)
TTI Values (d/s segments)
Time
O-D 28
O-D 37
O-D 48
16:00
1.71
1.52
1.22
16:15
1.70
1.52
1.22
16:30
1.71
1.52
1.23
16:45
1.69
1.51
1.21
17:00
2.06
1.51
1.20
17:15
1.67
1.50
1.19
17:30
1.66
1.49
1.18
17:45
1.65
1.48
1.17
18:00
1.63
1.47
1.16
Tables I illustrates the temporal pattern of IITC, where 
the closest u/s segment 43 (O-D point 71in u/s and O-D 
point 26 in d/s) was affected more than more distant u/s 
segments. Similarly, Table II illustrates how closer d/s 
segments 94 (O-D point 26 to O-D point 28) was affected 
more than more distant d/s segments. Next affected road 
segment in the d/s was 27. 
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study is part of an ongoing research program. The 
method will be used to further develop the research work. 
The aim of this paper was to explore and illustrate the 
spatio-temporal pattern of incident induced traffic 
congestion (IITC) on the road network using online traffic 
data. The study was designed to answer two research 
questions: 
•
What is the appropriate measure to identify IITC 
pattern? 
•
Which visualization tools and techniques can be 
used to illustrate the information? 
This study attempts to explore appropriate tools and 
techniques to visualize and illustrate IITC that will be 
helpful for policy makers and the non-scientific 
community to understand congestion patterns along the 
road network. Travel time variation caused by incidents 
(vehicle crashes) were identified as the primary feature to 
define IITC. TTI has been identified as a useful index to 
measure the duration and extent of IITC. ArcGIS Network 
Analyst and Excel Analysis ToolPak-VBA are very useful 
tools to analysis and illustration of spatio-temporal data 
and outcomes. 
From the preliminary analysis of incident and travel 
time data, segments 43 and 94 were found to be two major 
congested road sections due to an incident (accident). The 
preliminary assumption of this study was that random 
incidents are the cause of non-recurrent delay, and the 
results in Figure 9 and Tables I and II support the 
conclusion. This study attempts to explore suitable tools 
and techniques to visualize and illustrate IITC that will be 
helpful for the policy makers and non-scientific 
community to understand the congestion pattern along the 
road network. 
The relationships between different spatial data 
attributes will be explored as further research work. To 
identify and evaluate the outcome of major congested road 
segment a correlation analysis will be carried out between 
two data parameter, i.e., travel time index and incident 
frequency rate based on space and time. In addition, the 
major area of concern or significant incident induced 
congested road segment will be identified using ArcGIS 
Network Analyst tool.  
A major limitation of this study is the lack of data, 
especially information of travel demand and volume. To 
get robust results on incidents at least one-year of data 
should be used. Further research needs to develop more 
refined approaches to measure the spatial temporal 
dynamics of incident induced congestion.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research work funded by the Australian 
Government under the Australian Post Graduate Award 
(APA) Scholarship. We express our thanks and gratitude 
to TOMTOM Developer and Main Roads, Western 
Australia for giving us the data access to conduct this 
research work. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
WAAG, 2015, Main Roads Projects to Address 
Traffic Congestion (2), Retrieved from Western 
Australian Auditor General, Main Roads, Western 
Australia. 
[2]
P. Farradyne, Traffic Incident Management Handbook. 
2000, Federal Highway Administration Office of 
Travel Management. 
[3]
T. Lomax, S. Turner, and G. Shunk, Quantifying 
Congestion. 1997. 
[4]
C. Nanthawichit, T. Nakatsuji, and H. Suzuki, 
“Application of Probe-Vehicle Data for Real-Time 
Traffic-State Estimation and Short-Term Travel-Time 
Prediction on a Freeway,"  Transportation Research 
Record, 2003. no. 1855, pp. 49-59. 
[5]
H. Rehborn, S. L. Klenov, and J. Palmer, “An 
Empirical Study of Common Traffic Congestion 
Features Based on Traffic Data Measured in the USA, 
the UK, and Germany,” Physica A: Statistical 
Mechanics and its Applications, 2011. vol. 390, no. 
23-24, pp. 4466-4485. 
[6]
E. Hahn, A. Chatterjee, and M. S. Younger, “Macro-
Level Analysis of Factors Related to Areawide 
Highway 
Traffic 
Congestion,” 
Transportation 
Research Record: Journal of the Transportation 
Research Board, 2002. vol. 1817, pp. 11-16. 
[7]
E. Necula, “Analyzing Traffic Patterns on Street 
Segments 
Based 
on 
GPS 
Data 
Using 
R,”
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Transportation Research Procedia 2015. vol. 10,  pp. 
276-285. 
[8]
E. L. D. Oliveira,  L. d. S. Portugal, and W. P. Junior, 
“Determining Critical Links in a Road Network: 
Vulnerability and Congestion Indicators,” Procedia - 
Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2014. vol. 162, pp. 
158-167. 
[9]
C. Wang, M. A. Quddus, and S. G. Ison, “Impact of 
Traffic Congestion on Road Accidents: A Spatial 
Analysis of the M25 Motorway in England,” Accident 
Analysis and Prevention, 2009. vol. 41, no.4, pp. 798-
808. 
[10] B. H. Sibolla, T. V. Zyl, and S. Coetzee, “Towards the 
Development of a Taxonomy for Visualisation of 
Streamed Geospatial Data,” ISPRS Annals of 
Photogrammetry, 
Remote 
Sensing 
and 
Spatial 
Information Sciences, 2016. vol. III, no. 2, pp. 129-
136. 
[11] M. A. P. Taylor, J. E. Woolley, and R. Zito, 
“Integration of the Global Positioning System and 
Geographical 
Information 
Systems 
for 
Traffic 
Congestion Studies,” Transportation Research Part C, 
2000. vol. 8, pp. 257-285. 
[12] W. Eisele, Y. Zhang, E. Park, Y. Zhang and R. 
Stensrud,  “Developing and Applying Models for 
Estimating Arterial Corridor Travel Time Index for 
Transportation Planning in Small to Medium-Sized 
Communities,” 
Transportation 
Research 
Record: 
Journal of the Transportation Research Board, 2011. 
vol. 2244, pp. 81-90. 
[13] D. Schrank, B. Eisele, and T. Lomax, 2015 Urban 
Mobolity 
Scorecard. 
2015, 
Texas 
A&M 
Transportation Institute: Texas.  
[14] F. He, X. Yan, Y. Liu, and L. Ma, “A Traffic 
Congestion Assessment Method for Urban Road 
Networks Based on Speed Performance Index,” 
Procedia Engineering, 2016. vol. 137, pp. 425 – 433.  
[15] H. Zhang, and A. Khattak, “Spatiotemporal Patterns 
of Primary and Secondary Incidents on Urban 
Freeways,” Transportation Research Record: Journal 
of the Transportation Research Board, 2011. vol. 
2229, pp. 19-27. 
[16] J. Wahle, A. L. C. Bazzan, F. Klugl, and M. 
Schreckenberg,  “The Impact of Real-time Information 
in 
a 
Two-route 
Scenario 
Using 
Agent-based 
Simulation,” Transportation Research Part C, 2002. 
vol.10,  pp. 399–417. 
[17] A. Asgary, A. Ghaffari, and J. Levy, “Spatial and 
Temporal Analyses of Structural Fire Incidents and 
Their Causes: A Case of Toronto, Canada,” Fire 
Safety Journal, 2010. vol. 45, no.1, pp. 44-57. 
[18] Y. S. Park, H. Al-Qublan, E. Lee, and G. Egilmez, 
“Interactive Spatiotemporal Analysis of Oil Spills 
Using Comap in North Dakota,” Informatics, 2016. 
vol. 3, no. 2, p. 4. 
[19] H. Roberto, B. Fernando, and L. Victor, “Exploratory 
Geospatial Data Analysis Using the GeoSOM Suite,”
Computers, Environment and Urban Systems, 2012. 
vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 218-232. 
[20] C. Plug, J. C. Xia, and C. Caulfield, “Spatial and 
Temporal 
Visualisation 
Techniques 
for 
Crash 
Analysis,” Accident Analysis and Prevention, 2011. 
vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1937-1946. 
[21] M. Grant, M. Day, R. Winick, A. Chavis, S. Trainor, 
and J. Bauer, Showcasing Visualization Tools in 
Congestion Management, in Congestion Management 
Process: A Guidebook. 2011. p.35. 
[22] W. Aigner, H. Schumann, S. Miksch, and C. 
Tominski, Visualization of Time-Oriented Data. 2011. 
Springer. 
[23] TOMTOM, Measuring Real-time Traffic Data Quality 
based on Floating Car Data. 2014. 
[24] R. Haining, Spatial Data Analysis: Theory and 
Practice. 
2003, 
Cambridge, 
United 
Kingdom: 
Cambridge University Press. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-539-5
GEOProcessing 2017 : The Ninth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

