Differential Morphological Profile for Threat Detection on Pipeline Right-of-Way 
Heavy Equipment Detection 
 
Katia Stankov 
R&D department 
Synodon Inc. 
Edmonton AB Canada 
e-mail: katia.stankov@synodon.com 
Boyd Tolton 
R&D department 
Synodon Inc. 
Edmonton AB Canada 
e-mail: boyd.tolton@ synodon.com
Abstract - Unsupervised construction on the pipeline may 
provoke pipe rupture and consequently gas leaks. Monitoring 
the pipeline right-of-way for heavy equipment is important for 
environmental and human safety. Remotely sensed images are 
an alternative to expensive and time consuming foot patrol. 
Existing image processing methods make use of previous 
images and/or external data. Both are not always awailable. 
We propose a new method for image processing to detect heavy 
equipment without the need of auxiliairy data. 
Keywords-remote sensing image processing; right-of-way 
threats detection; histograms of oriented gradients; differential 
morphological profile. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The periodic surveillance of gas and oil pipeline’s Right-
of Way (ROW) is vital to protect the human safety and to 
prevent ecological damage. Though most of the incidents 
are related to gas leaks, excavation activities are considered 
responsible for as much as two third of the incidents for the 
period 2002-2008 [1]. Recognizing dangerous activity, such 
as digging or construction equipment (threats), near the 
pipeline and undertaking prompt measures to insure safety 
is an obligation of oil and gas companies. Pipeline networks 
span thousands of kilometers and may be located in remote 
areas. Walking the ROW to survey for heavy equipment and 
dangerous activity is highly costly and time consuming. The 
alternative is the use of remotely sensed imagery. 
So far the most reliable interpretation of these images 
remains the one made by human. The automation of the 
process faces difficulties from different origin:  great variety 
of vehicles; uneven flight altitude; different view and 
orientation of the images; variable illumination conditions; 
occlusion by neighboring objects, and others [2]. In 
addition, construction vehicles are sometimes very similar 
to transportation vehicles. All these make the development 
of pattern recognition algorithms for ROW threat detection 
a challenging remote sensing image processing task.  
Existing methods extract characteristic features to 
decrease the differences between construction vehicles 
(decrease the inter-class heterogeneity), while increasing the 
intra-class heterogeneity, i.e. make heavy equipment more 
distinguishable from other objects. In [3], scale-invariant 
feature transform was applied on previously defined scale 
invariant regions to receive object descriptors and detect 
vehicles. Presuming that local distribution of oriented 
gradients (edge orientations) is a good indicator for the 
presence of an object, Dalal [4] proposed the accumulative 
Histogram of the Oriented Gradients (HOG). In [5], the 
authors mapped HOG to Fourier domain to achieve rotation 
invariance and used kernel Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
to classify the data and identify construction vehicles. Using 
local textural descriptors and adaptive perception based 
segmentation, the authors in [2] sequentially eliminate 
background objects from the image, such as buildings, 
vegetation, roads, etc. The remaining potential threat 
locations are divided into several parts to extract and 
evaluate descriptive features and match them against 
template data. Extraction of local phase information allowed 
the separation between structure details and local energy 
(contrast) [6]. Afterward based on a single image template, 
the authors created a voting matrix to detect construction 
vehicles. To avoid the need of image template, potential 
threats locations are assessed with the aid of change 
detection in [7], next auxiliary data is used to decide upon 
the presence of a threat. Synthetic aperture radar images 
provide all weather coverage and together with optical 
images are used to produce a time sequenced image analysis 
for change detection and threat localization [8]. Existing 
methods need image templates or previous images and 
auxiliary data. Such external data is not always available. 
We present a new methodology that avoids both, the 
need of image template and the need of auxiliary data. In 
addition to increased flexibility, it also makes the 
performance of the method nondependent on the quality of 
the external data. The rest of the paper is organized as 
follows. In section II we describe the method. Section III 
presents some results and validation, and conclusion is 
given in section IV. 
II. 
DESCRIPTION OF THE METHOD 
To build our method we take advantage of the fact that 
construction vehicles have non-flatten surfaces, which 
creates inequality in the intensity of surface pixels and 
together with their outer edges make that they appear as 
areas of high frequency in the image. Therefore, potential 
threat locations may be found by identifying areas of high 
frequencies that are in the range of heavy equipment size. 
Further, different descriptors may be used to discriminate 
between heavy duty vehicles and other objects. This is the 
general workflow of our method. To account for different 
illumination conditions we compute the color invariant of 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

the blue band. To highlight frequencies (edges) we compute 
the gradient of the color invariant and retain only high 
frequencies applying a threshold on the gradient. The 
gradient is computed using the Otsu’s method. To identify 
only areas in a certain size range we apply the Differential 
Morphological Profile (DMP). DMP is an iterative 
algorithm that performs opening/closing by reconstruction 
with a structuring element (SE). The size of the SE is 
increased in the consecutive iteration and the result is 
extracted from the result of the previous iteration. When the 
SE size exceeds the object size, the background intensity 
values are assigned to the object. Thus, by extracting two 
consecutive results, only objects that correspond to the SE 
size are retained. We derived the size of the SEs from the 
size of the target object and the pixel size of the image. For 
each received object we compute the following descriptors: 
HOGs, curvature, the ratio between the major and minor 
axis of the object. Using all the descriptors simultaneously 
rather than thresholding each one separately, allows better 
assessment of the similarity between objects. To find the 
most similar objects we retain objects that maximize the 
ratio between the first and the last eigenvalue of the vectors. 
Finally, we apply spectral and shape constraint to 
discriminate between construction equipment and cars. 
III. 
RESULTS AND VALIDATION 
We present some results in Fig. 1. The first column (a) 
represents the original image, the second column (b) - the 
result of DMP, and the third column (c) - the detection.  
To validate the accuracy of the method we compared the 
results to the results of manually detected threats. We refer 
to the latter as ground truth data. A test from 3 flight days 
(more than 1000 images of 1200x800 pixels with average 
pixel resolution of 9 cm) reveals a detection rate of 82.6% - 
heavy equipment machines that are present in the ground 
truth data and were detected by the algorithm. At this stage 
of the development of the algorithm we are less concerned 
with the rate of false recognition, as the results are reviewed 
by an operator. We consider including additional descriptors 
to reduce the number of false positives events while 
increasing the detection rate.  
An advantage of using DMP is that by changing the 
shape of the SE different shape may be detected, changing 
the size of the SE allows the detection of construction 
machines with different size and also to account for the 
changing height of the flight. As the height of the flight in 
our case does not change a lot we derived the size of the SE 
empirically. If this height changes a lot, an automate way to 
choose the size of the SEs in accordance with the flight 
parameters should be adopted. In our opinion the method 
may have limited performance when applied on images with 
much lower spatial resolution, more than 1 meter for 
example, as it relies explicitly on information taken from an 
increasing neighborhood. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We presented a new methodology for the detection of 
threats on the pipeline ROW that does not involve the use of 
external data. The initial results are promising and we 
believe that the method has the potential to replace the 
manual processing of the images. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Chastain, “Pipeline Right-of-Way Encroacment: Exploring 
Emerging Technologies that Address the Problem”, Right-of-
Way, May/June 2009, pp. 22-27. 
[2] V. Asari, Vijayan, P. Sidike, C. Cui, and V. Santhaseelan. 
"New wide-area surveillance techniques for protection of 
pipeline infrastructure", SPIE Newsroom, 30 January 2015, 
DOI: 10.1117/2.1201501.005760 
[3] G. Dorko and C. Schmid, “Selection of scale-invariant parts 
for object class recognition”. IProceedings of the 9th 
International Conference on Computer Vision, Nice, France, 
pp 634–640, 2003. 
[4] N. Dalal and B. Triggs, ”Histograms of oriented gradients for 
human detection”, IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and 
Pattern Recognition, pp. 886-893, 2005 
[5] A. Mathew and V. K. Asari, ”Rotation-invariant Histogram 
Features for Threat Object Detection on Pipeline Right-of-
Way”, in Video Surveillance and Transportation Imaging 
Applications 2014, edited by Robert P. Loce, Eli Saber, Proc. 
of SPIE-IS&T Electronic Imaging, SPIE Vol. 9026, pp. 
902604-1-902604-1, 
2014 
SPIE-IS&T 
doi: 
10.1117/12.2039663 
[6] B. Nair, V. Santhaseelan, C. Cui, and V.  Asari, “Intrusion 
detection on oil pipeline right of way using monogenic signal 
representation”, Proc. SPIE 8745, 2013, p. 87451U,  
doi:10.1117/12.2015640 
[7] M. Zarea, G. Pognonec, C. Schmidt, et al., “First steps in 
developing an automated aerial surveillance approach”, 
Journal of Risk Research, vol.13(3–4): pp. 407–420, 2013 
doi:10.1080/13669877.2012.729520 
[8] Roper, W. E. and Dutta, S. "Oil Spill and Pipeline Condition 
Assessment Using Remote Sensing and Data Visualization 
Management Systems." George Mason University, 4400 
University Drive, 2006 
 
Figure 1.  ROW threats detection. (a) and (d) - Original images; (b) 
and (e) - Results of the application of DMP: SE = 8x8 pixels; 
(c) and (d) -  Detection. 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

