Integrative Analysis of Land-use and Road Network Structure 
 
Hyeyoung Kim, Chulmin Jun 
Dept. of Geoinformatics, Univ. of Seoul 
Seoul, Korea 
e-mail: {lucykhy, cmjun}@uos.ac.kr 
 
 
Abstract— In urban spaces, road and land use interact with 
each other. To understand urban spaces and make appropriate 
plans, 
integrative 
analyses 
considering 
these 
two 
simultaneously are required. So far, advancement in 
urbanization has led to a higher building density, rather than 
to a sprawl of urban areas. Therefore, the purpose of this study 
is to conduct integrative analysis and evaluation of road and 
land use considering the characteristics of modern cities. Based 
on road as an appropriate accessibility variable, modified 
importance 
performance 
analysis 
was 
conducted 
with 
development density and the results were categorized into four 
areas. To apply appropriate accessibility variable, space syntax 
theory considering the structure of road network was 
introduced for road. For land use, to consider both horizontal 
and vertical development densities of residential and 
commercial buildings were used. The proposed method was 
applied to Gangnam-gu, a central business district area in 
Seoul, and results were analyzed and visualized using 
geographic information system. 
Keywords-road network; space syntax; development density; 
IPA;  integrative analysis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Road is closely related to land use and the structure of 
road composition significantly affects the structure of land 
development. For sustainable urban development, integrative 
analysis considering road and land use simultaneously is 
required.  
Modern cities are in the structure of compact cities in 
which high density developments are proceed rather than 
urban space expand outward. For the proper analysis of 
urban spaces, not only their horizontal aspects but also their 
vertical aspects should be examined. In relation to this, 
previous studies mainly used data, such as populations and 
employees for analyzing urban density [1][2]. However, such 
data are usually summed up by administrative districts and 
thus, they are not proper for detailed analysis related road 
structure at finer level. As accessibility related data, 
Euclidean distances between two areas or facilities have been 
widely used [3][4]. However, using Euclidean distances that 
measure the direct distances between two points have 
limitations in that standards for to and from points do not 
exist and they do not reflect the form of road network. 
Recently, studies have been conducted in relation to space 
syntax in which the structure of road network based on 
visibility are considered. These studies showed that attributes 
calculated by space syntax are closely related to city 
components [5][6][7][8]. Although there was a study on 
transformation of urban patterns through analysis of 
urbanization rate with space syntax [9], studies that 
conducted integrative analysis and utilization of the 
attributes in combination with land use are insufficient.  
 The purpose of this study is to conduct integrative 
analysis and evaluation of road and land uses considering the 
characteristics of modern cities where road and land-use 
developments interact with each other. First, for road 
network, global integration was used among attributes 
calculated by the space syntax theory considering the 
structure of road network. For land use, to consider both 
horizontal and vertical development densities, the building 
plan areas and gross floor areas of residential and 
commercial buildings were used. In addition, to apply 
appropriate accessibility variables that would become criteria 
for analysis, the explanatory power of three variables, 
namely, Euclidean distance, global integration and length-
reflected global integration were compared. The explanatory 
power of these variables was expressed using development 
density and land price. Finally, a modified importance 
performance analysis model based on road as an accessibility 
variable was conducted with development density of 
residential and commercial land uses and the results were 
visualized. This study was tested on 22 administrative 
districts in Gangnam-gu of Seoul City, a planned central 
business district area developed in the 1970s. 
The paper begins with introduction of research. In 
Section 2, methodology of space syntax theory and modified 
IPA and data construction is described. The explanatory 
power of accessibility variables were compared in Section 3. 
Then results of IPA were expressed in Section 4. Concluding 
remarks are given in Section 5.  
II. 
METHODS AND DATA CONSTRUCTION 
A. Methodology Space Syntax theory 
Space syntax is a method that analyzes relative 
accessibility quantitatively based on visibility of roads 
recognized by humans [10][11][12]. Space syntax uses ‘the 
depth’ of spaces instead of Euclidean distances in order to 
compute the attribute values of the model. The depth means 
the minimum number of connecting lines that should be gone 
through when moving from a certain space to another. The 
depth between adjacent spaces is 1 and it increases as the 
levels where a space to pass to another increases. In space 
syntax, axial maps should first be prepared with the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

minimum number of lines that connect the longest possible 
straight lines with each other as shown in Figure 1. The 
attribute values are calculated and assigned in axial lines 
instead of intersecting points as with transportation network.  
In this study, global integration was used among the 
attributes of space syntax. This attribute is calculated based 
on roads that connect all axial lines in the scope of the 
subject of analysis assuming that the axial lines are starting 
points and end points and the depths. A large value of global 
integration in a certain space means that the numbers of axial 
lines that are gone through to move all other spaces are 
relatively small. That is, a large value of global integration in 
a certain space means that the space is the center of all 
spaces, accessibility to all other spaces is high, and 
movements to all other spaces are easy.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Preparation of axial map: (a) Subject of analysis (b) Axial map 
B. Modified IPA 
Importance-Performance Analysis (IPA) was developed 
by Martilla & Jame to establish efficient strategies to invest 
limited resources in the area of marketing [13]. In this 
analysis, importance and performance are expressed with 
two dimensional graphs having x and y axes and each of the 
graphs are divided into four areas based on the average value 
of each axis. That is, this is an evaluation method for 
comparing and analyzing the relative importance and 
performance of goods or services simultaneously.  
In this study, a modified IPA was developed and 
conducted for integrative analysis and evaluation of roads 
and land uses in urban spaces. The X and Y axes were made 
to indicate road network and development density 
respectively. More rightward points on the X axis indicate 
higher accessibility and higher points on the Y indicate 
higher development density. The Cartesian space in Figure 2 
was made using average values by administrative districts on 
individual axes and development density was defined into 
four areas as follows based on road network.  
 
 
Area 1 (Density-Road Balanced):  
Both accessibility and development density are high.  
 
Area 2 (Density > Road):  
Development density is higher compared to 
accessibility.  
 
Area 3 (Low Density-Road):  
Both accessibility and development density are low. 
 
Area 4 (Density < Road):  
Development 
density 
is 
lower 
compared 
to 
accessibility.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Definition of modified IPA area 
 
C. Study area 
In this study, Gangnam-gu was selected as a study area, 
which is approximately 10 km away from the Han-river to 
the southeast and plays the role of a sub-center of Seoul. 
Gangnam-gu 
is 
a 
planned 
area 
for 
which 
land 
compartmentalization 
rearrangement 
projects 
were 
implemented in the 1970s in which wide orthogonal main 
roads were developed except for greenbelts on the southern 
part. Currently, Gangnam-gu consists of 22 administrative 
districts and its area is 39.55 km² that corresponds to 6.53% 
of Seoul. Of the area, 56.28% is residential areas, 6.14% is 
commercial areas and greenbelt areas. Therefore, land uses 
are relatively in harmony with balance. The residential areas 
are mostly large apartment complexes or multi-unit 
dwellings and have been evenly developed throughout the 
entire area and commercial areas include few industrial 
regions. Figure 3 shows road network and development 
density of Gangnam-gu.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Gangnam-gu road network and development density 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 4.  Construction and processing of global integration: (a) Gangnam-gu axial map (b) Global integration (c) Length-reflected global integration
D. Generation and storage of the simulation results 
In this study, to analyze the density and structures of 
spaces, the 2009 Seoul KOTI spatial data and the 2006 
publicly notified individual land price were utilized. The 
average area of 22 administrative districts in Gangnam-gu is 
1.8 km². Because the sizes of space units vary from 0.73 to 
6.36 km², the constructed data were processed in proportion 
to areas. 
1) Accessibility variable: As accessibility variables, 
Euclidean distance, global integration, and length-reflected 
global integration were constructed.  
a) Euclidean distance: This is the linear distances from 
the center of each parcel to the nearest road link. The 
averages of the distances were calculated as follows.  
 
 
   
 
 
 (1) 
 
where 
 is the average of distances of parcels to roads of 
area A,  
 is distance of parcel i to the nearest road, and n 
is the number of parcels in area A. 
b) Global Iintegration: To construct global integration, 
as mentioned earlier, the axial maps of Gangnam-gu were 
built using Axwoman as shown in Figure 4-(a). The global 
integration is a value obtained by (2). 
 
   
 
(2) 
 
where 
 is the average global integration of area A,  is the 
global integration of road i, and k is total number of roads 
(axial lines). Figure 4-(b) shows the calculated values that 
are between the highest at 2.1 and the lowest at 0.98. The 
values above 1 mean the strong ‘integration’, while the 
values between 0.4 and 0.6 show somewhat ‘segregation’. 
c) Length-reflected Global Integration: The space 
syntax stemmed from the study of architecture, and the 
related studies have shown that the element ‘depth’ had 
higher explanatory power than ‘Euclidean distance’ [14]. 
Spaces syntax reflects the structure of road network in the 
computing but it excluds actual capacity (e.g., length) of 
roads. However, since the centers of urban spaces have 
higher road capacity than the outskirts, weighted values 
should be given in accordance with areas. Therefore, as the 
third variable, the global integration that reflected road 
lengths was calculated as shown in (3).  
 
   
 
(3) 
 
where 
 is the global integration with road length of area 
A, and 
 is length of road (axial line) i, 
 is global 
integration of road i, and k is total number of roads. Figure 
4-(c) shows the calculated values that are between the 
highest at 1143.67 and the lowest at 121.12. The average 
value was shown to be 535.51. 
2) Development density and land price: Development 
density values were obtained for residential and commercial 
uses separately. Plan areas and gross floor areas of buildings 
were processed to analyze horizontal and vertical densities. 
Plan areas were obtained from building data and gross floor 
areas were calculated by multiplying plan areas by the 
numbers of building floors. The average plan areas of 
residential and commercial buildings are 754.75 and 631.20 
respectively and the average gross floor areas of residential 
and commercial buildings are 5484.61 and 4204.41. Figure 
5 shows the values of residential and commercial buildings 
devlopment density by administrative districts. The effects 
of land price on accessibility variables explanatory power 
and the development of residential and commercial areas 
were examined. Land prices were calculated as averages 
weighted by the ratio of individual parcels. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 5.  Construction and processing of development density: (a) Residential buildings plan areas (b) Residential buildings gross floor areas  
 
(c) Commercial buildings plan areas (d) Commercial buildings gross floor areas
III. 
EXPLANATORY POWER OF ACCESSIBILITY 
VARIABLES 
To apply appropriate accessibility variables, the 
correlations of Euclidean distance, global integration and 
length-reflected global integration were analyzed each with 
development density and land price as shown in Table I. The 
Euclidean distance showed significant correlation only with 
commercial density and showed negative (-) relationships. 
This means that the shorter the distances for access of areas 
are, the higher the development density of the areas is. The 
global integration showed relatively high correlation with 
land prices and residential density and showed higher 
explanatory power for land prices. The length-reflected 
global integration had high correlation and explanatory 
power in most cases. In particular, its correlation with 
commercial density showed high explanatory power while 
the correlation with residential density showed relatively low 
explanatory power for gross floor areas compared to plan 
areas due to high residential density where many apartments 
are located. In general, commercial uses are greatly affected 
by accessibility and commercial zones are formed along the 
roads. 
The 
analysis 
also 
showed 
that 
commercial 
development is more affected by the lengths of roads than 
other factors.  
TABLE I.  
EXPLANATORY POWER  OF ACCESSIBILITY VARIABLES  
 
 
Therefore, the length-reflected global integration was 
selected as an appropriate accessibility variable to be applied 
to the study. 
IV. 
RESULTS OF IPA 
As mentioned earlier, IPA was conducted for integrative 
analysis of road network and development density and the 
results for individual areas were visually expressed. The x-
axis was defined as length-reflected global integration in 
road network and the y-axis as development density or land 
price.   
A. Road network-residential density 
The x-axis was defined as road network and the y-axis 
was residential building plan areas and gross floor areas 
relatively as shown in Figure 6 (a) and (b). Area 1 is blue 
areas where both accessibility and residential development 
density are high. Area 2 represented with red is the areas that 
show residential development density is higher compared to 
accessibility. Area 3, yellow color areas, shows both low 
accessibility and low residential density. Area 3 includes 
most districts in the southern part of Gangnam-gu. The 
reason that these areas show relatively low development 
density is because large greenbelts are located in the 
southern part. Area 4, in green color, show that residential 
development density is lower compared to accessibility. 
Although this area has low residential density compared to 
its accessibility, its commercial density seems to be high. On 
comparison of residential buildings, it can be seen that 
Cheongdam, Yeoksam 1, and Ilwon 1 districts moved to 
areas 3 and 4. This means that the gross floor areas of 
residential buildings are relatively small in these areas. 
B. Road network-commercial density 
The x-axis was defined as road network and the y-axis 
was commercial buildings plan areas and gross floor areas, 
as shown in Figure 6 (c) and (d). Area 1 is blue areas where 
both accessibility and commercial development density are 
high. Most districts in the central part of Gangnam-gu are 
included in this area. Area 2 is represented with red is the 
areas that show commercial development density is higher 
compared to accessibility. Area 3 includes the yellow areas 
where both accessibility and commercial density are low. 
 
Euclidean 
distance 
Global 
integration 
Length-
reflected 
global 
integration  
Land price 
-0.361 
(<0.99) 
0.686 
(<0.01) 
0.636 
(<0.01)  
Plan 
area 
Residential  
-0.392 
(<0.071) 
0.460 
(<0.05) 
0.910 
(<0.01) 
Commercial  
-0.551 
(<0.01) 
0.361 
(<0.09) 
0.946 
(<0.01) 
Gross 
floor 
area 
Residential  
-0.166 
(<0.46) 
0.432 
(<0.05) 
0.341 
(<0.12) 
Commercial  
-0.452 
(<0.05) 
0.372 
(<0.08) 
0.874 
(<0.01) 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
Figure 6.  Results of modified IPA: (a) Residential buildings plan areas (b) Residential buildings gross floor areas (c) Commercial buildings plan areas 
 
(d) commercial buildings gross floor areas (e) land price
 
 
Since the ratio of greenbelts was high, commercial density in 
this area was shown to be similar to residential density. Area 
4, with green color, show that commercial development 
density is lower compared to accessibility. Although Daechi 
2 district is included in this area, the gross floor area of 
commercial buildings was shown to be relatively large. On 
the other hand, Cheongdam and Apgujeong districts were 
shown to have relatively small gross floor areas of 
commercial buildings.  
C. Road network-land price 
The x-axis was defined as road network and the y-axis 
was land price as shown in Figure 6-(e). Based on road 
network, how the effects of land price are applied to 
development density can be examined. Most areas are 
included in the same areas based on both land price and 
development density. To review those districts that were 
included in different areas by residential and commercial 
density, land price in Daechi 1, Dogok 2, and Daechi 2 
districts were affected by residential density, those in Dogok 
1, Samsung 1, and Apgujeong districts were affected by 
commercial density, and those in Cheongdam district were 
affected by the gross floor areas of residential and 
commercial buildings. 
V. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
In this study, integrative analysis of roads and land use 
was conducted with 22 administrative districts in Gangnam-
gu, is a planned CBD. In order to consider the characteristics 
of the city, spatial data such as road structures and 
development density were used. Space syntax theory was 
employed for computing road structure and global 
integration was used among its attributes. For land use, to 
analyze both horizontal and vertical densities, the building 
plan areas and gross floor areas of residential and 
commercial buildings were used.  
The levels of explanatory power of Euclidean distance, 
the global integration, and the length-reflected global 
integration were compared with each other. The correlations 
between these accessibility variables and development 
density and land price were analyzed. According to the 
results of the analysis, the length-reflected global integration 
showed low explanatory power for residential buildings 
gross floor areas but showed high explanatory power for 
residential buildings plan areas. In particular, it showed high 
explanatory power for commercial density which is closely 
related to accessibility. Therefore, it was selected as an 
appropriate accessibility variable. 
A modified IPA model that use the length-reflected 
global integration and development density was conducted 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

and the results were visualized using GIS. Gangnam-gu was 
classified into four areas based on average values on 
individual axes and the areas were relatively analyzed. These 
four areas were defined as ‘density-road balanced area’, 
‘density > road area’, ‘low density-road area’, and ‘density < 
road area’ respectively; also, how the effects of development 
density acted on land price were identified. It is viewed that, 
with more refinement, the method suggested here can be 
used in analyzing urban development in microscopic level 
considering road structure. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the National Research 
Foundation of Korea Grant funded by the Korean 
Government. (No. 2011-0009601) 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. I. Lim, “Analysis on the Changes of Urban Structure by 
New Town Development,” The Journal of the Korea Contents 
Association, vol. 8, no. 10, 2008, pp. 317-327. 
[2] G. W. Lee and S. Y. Kim, “A Study on the Changes of Suwon 
city’s Urban Spatial Structure,” Asian pacific Planning 
Review, vol. 45, no. 1, 2010, pp. 7-20. 
[3] S. B. Lee, “The correlation analysis between land prices and 
accessibility and land use zones in the north Cheonan city,” 
Korea East West Economic Research, vol. 17, no. 2, 2006, pp. 
59-77.  
[4] W. K. Min, “A study of a land special quality effect on Posted 
land Price,” Residention Environment Institute of Korea, vol. 
4, no. 1, 2006, pp. 99-113.  
[5] B. Hillier, R. Burdett, J. Peponis, and A. Penn, “Creating life: 
Or, does architecture determine anything?,” Architecture and 
Behaviour, vol. 3, no.3, 1987, pp. 566-250. 
[6] J. Peponis, C. Zimring, and Y. K. Choi, “Finding the building 
in wayfinding,” Environment and Behavior, vol. 25, no. 5, 
1990, pp. 555-590. 
[7] H. L. Kim and D. W. Sohn, “An analysis of the relationship 
between land use density of office buildings and urban street 
configuration,” Cities, vol. 19, no. 6, 2002, pp. 409-418. 
[8] Y. W. Kim, “A study on the relationshop between properties 
of spatial configuration and patterns of space use using space 
syntax,” Asian pacific Planning Review, vol. 38, no. 4, 2003, 
pp. 7-17. 
[9] H. Y. Kim, Y. J. Joo, and C. M. Jun, “A study on 
transformation of urban layout patterns through analysis of 
spatial relationships with urban street configurations,” 
International Journal of Urban Sciences, vol. 15, no. 1, 2011, 
pp. 25-34. 
[10] B. Hillier and J. Hanson, “The Social Logic of Space,” 
Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
[11] B. Hillier, “Space is the Machine,” Cambrige University Press, 
1996. 
[12] B. Hillier, “Space is the Machine,” University of Cambridge 
Press, 2007. 
[13] J. A. Martilla and J. C. James, “Importance-Performance 
Analysis,” Journal of Marketing, vol. 41, no. 1, 1997, pp. 77-
79. 
[14] Y. W. Yun, Y. Y. Kim, and Y. K. Park, “A study on Influence 
by Depth and Distance in Spatial Cognition,” Journal of 
Architectural Institute of Korea, vol. 23, no. 1, 2003, pp. 171-
174.
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

