Analysis of Clustering and Unsupervised Learning of Geospatial Demographic Data 
 
Mikhail Kanevski and Jean Golay 
Institute of Earth Surface Dynamics 
Faculty of Geosciences and Environment 
University of Lausanne, Switzerland 
Mikhail.Kanevski@unil.ch, Jean.Golay@unil.ch  
 
 
Abstract—The 
research 
discusses 
the 
methodological 
framework of an application of a newly developed spatial 
clustering algorithm – the functional multipoint Morisita index 
(fm-Morisita) - and an unsupervised learning algorithm – self-
organizing Kohonen maps (SOM), for the comprehensive 
exploratory analysis and quantification of patterns in high 
resolution geospatial demographic data in Switzerland. fm-
Morisita is used to analyse the complex clustering of the spatial 
distribution of the population. The SOM are used to reveal 
regional patterns of similarity using detailed information about 
ageing groups.  
Keywords - geodemography; unsupervised learning; spatial 
data clustering.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The basic motivation for this research is to explore the 
structure and evolution of demographic and other geospatial 
data of the “SuisseMetropole” (SMP) using cutting-edge 
methods and algorithms from machine learning (mainly 
unsupervised learning and dimensionality reduction tools 
[1,2]), geocomputation (city clustering algorithms [3]) and 
spatial clustering using topological, statistical and fractal 
measures [4]. In this work, urban zones of Switzerland are 
considered as a “SuisseMetropole”, i.e. a complex 
multivariate, multiscale (from hectometric intra-city to inter-
city level), and high dimensional hierarchically organized 
system. One of the main intentions is to rely on real 
geodemographic data as much as possible, following the 
principle “let the data speak for themselves” in making as 
few prior hypotheses and assumptions as possible by 
following 
an 
unsupervised 
learning 
approach. 
Geocomputational approaches will help to carry out analysis 
at multiple selected scales and to better understand the 
structural 
and 
functional 
optimality 
of 
the 
“SuisseMetropole”. A subsequent evaluation of the 
relevance of the results for the fields of urban, economic and 
social geography will be carried out.  
Fundamentally, the first problem is to quantify and to 
understand the clustering of populated areas using a recently 
developed method – the functional multipoint Morisita 
index (fm-Morisita). The second one deals with the analyses 
of data in a high dimensional space (dimensionality >10-
100) in order to understand the geodemographic patterns of 
“SuisseMetropole”. Below, the data and the main methods 
proposed and how they will be applied are shortly 
discussed.  
II. 
DATA 
The Swiss Federal Statistical Office (OFS) and the Swiss 
Federal Office of Topography (Swisstopo) have provided 
the main data required by the research plan. OFS data are 
organized on a regular grid of high resolution (100m x 
100m) and they can be subdivided into different sections. 
For the present research, the following data sets were 
mainly used: population census of years 1990, 2000 and 
2010. They contain variables about the demographic and 
socio-economic characteristics of the population: resident 
population organized by language, place of residence, 
gender, age (19 classes), employment; information about 
education, socio-economic status, mean of transportation 
and households composition. The global distribution of the 
population in 2010 is given in Fig.1. The simulated data 
with known clustering structures (i.e. complete spatial 
randomness) were generated within the validity domains 
and the results were compared with the original 
geodemographic data (see Fig.2).  
III. 
METHODS 
Complex and challenging data demand the application of 
advanced data modelling tools, including machine learning 
algorithms.  
In the present research, the two main methods applied 
for the study of Swiss complex geodemographic data are 
based on 1) machine learning – self-organizing maps 
(unsupervised learning) and 2) geospatial data clustering 
algorithms –the Morisita index and fractal measures. 
[1,2,4,5,6]. The basic idea is to find and to model geospatial 
patterns (structures in space) in the high resolution 
demographic data. The first approach - SOM is used to 
reveal patterns in the 19th dimensional space of the Swiss 
demographic data composed of 19 classes of age groups (0-
5, 5-10,…,>90 years ) and to visualize them using 
Geographic Information System in a two dimensional space. 
SOM is a well know exploratory analysis and visualization 
tool making a topology preserving mapping (projection) 
from high dimensional space to two dimensional space. An 
important advantage of SOM is that it is an unsupervised 
algorithm and does not need a priori knowledge about the 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

number of similarity clusters in data. Here, the geographical 
information (i.e.the coordinates) were left aside and only the 
demographic data were used.  
The second objective of the research takes into account 
the distribution of the population in the two dimensional 
geographical space using fm-Morisita and fractal measures 
of clustering in order to understand the spatial distribution 
of the populated areas [5]. In [5], fm-Morisita method was 
first time introduced for spatial data and it’s the 
relationships of the multipoint Morisita index (on which fm-
Morisita is based) with multifractality was demonstrated.  
The multipoint Morisita index is calculated as follows: 
the region of interest in covered by non-overlapping cells of 
size l and the probability to find m points in a cell is 
calculated. Cell size and m are the free parameters. When 
taking into account the density of the population (not only 
the distribution in space) functional measures (depending on 
local density) based on the multipoint Morisita index can be 
implemented. The details can be found in [4,5]. In order to 
demonstrate that observed patterns are really structured, a 
comparison with point distributions generated generated by 
shuffling the original data was carried out.  
In the present research, both methods were applied for 
the first time for high resolution demographic geospatial 
data.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS 
The preliminary results of the first analysis (SOM) are 
quite interesting and demonstrate that several demographic 
spatially structured patterns can be observed in Switzerland: 
dense urban zones, interurban regions and country patterns. 
More detailed analyses will also take into account also the 
level of education and other relevant socio-economic 
parameters.  
The application of fm-Morisita has confirmed that the 
clustering of population in Switzerland (SuisseMetropole) is 
of multifractal nature.  
In future research, the methods will be applied to several 
temporal datasets, which will help to understand the 
evolution of the detected geodemographic patterns in time. 
Moreover, multivariate measures – joint multifractals and 
multivariate 
fm-Morisita-will 
be 
analysed 
to 
relate 
demographic and socio-economic data.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The preliminary research was partly supported by the 
Faculty of Geosciences and Environment, University of 
Lausanne 
within 
the 
framework 
of 
the 
FINV 
“SuisseMetropole” project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Kohonen. “Self-Organizing Maps”. Springer, 2001.  
[2] M. Kanevski, A. Pozdnoukhov and V. Timonin. “Machine Learning 
for Spatial Environmental Data”. EPFL Press, 2009. 
[3] H. Rozenfeld, Rybski D., Andrade J,  Batty M., H. Eugene Stanley H. 
E., and  Makse H. “Laws of population growth”. PNAS, vol. 105, No. 
48, 2008.  
[4] M. Kanevski (Editor). “Advanced Mapping of Environmnetal Data”. 
iSTE and Wiley, 2008.  
[5] J. Golay, M. Kanevski., C. D. Vega Orozco, and M. Leuenberger. 
“The Multipoint Morisita Index for the Analysis of Spatial Patterns”. 
Available on arXiv (arxiv.org):1307.3756, 2013 [accessed March 
2014]. 
[6] C. D. Vega Orozco, J. Golay, and M. Kanevski “Multifractal 
portrayal of the Swiss population” Available on arXiv (arxiv.org): 
1308.4038, 2013 [accessed March 2014]. 
 
 
Figure 1: Distribution of the Swiss population in Year 2010. 
Figure 2: Application of fm-Morisita [3] to the distribution of the 
Swiss population. The X-axis corresponds to the percentage of the 
population above the mentioned deciles (e.g., “20_100” means that 
all the hectares associated with a value lower than the second decile 
are rejected) and the Y-axis is a normalized index derived from the 
m-Morisita index. The results for shuffled data are given as well. 
They partially overlap. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-326-1
GEOProcessing 2014 : The Sixth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

