IQAr: A Web Based GIS for Air Quality Monitoring in Real-time 
Matheus Rosendo, Rafael Geha Serta, Yuri Arnold Gruber, Fabiano Scheer Hainosz 
Environmental Resources Department  
LACTEC Institutes: Curitiba, Brazil 
emails: {matheus.rosendo, rafael.serta, yuri.gruber,  fabiano.h}@lactec.org.br 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes the features of the software 
IQAr that aimed at improving the process of management of 
air quality data generated by automatic stations. The IQAr  
includes verification of incoming files for monitoring, 
processing, validation and storage of data. This tool enables the 
reporting, the dissemination of results of monitoring over the 
web with a dynamic map, the visualization of the current 
direction and speed of wind through a wind rose chart, and the 
display  of the Air Quality Index (AQI) of the last 24 hours. 
The IQAr allowed the Environmental Institute of Paraná 
(IAP) and the LACTEC Institutes to improve the equipment 
evaluation of air quality stations and consistency of the 
generated data, besides diagnosing air quality in real-time. Due 
to the ability to continuously validate the data, the software 
made 
it 
possible 
the 
dissemination 
of 
georeferenced 
information of air quality in real-time to the general 
population through the IAP website. 
Keywords-AQI; air quality; real-time monitoring; dynamic 
thematic map. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recent population boom in urban centers caused an 
increase in industrial production, the number of vehicles on 
the streets, and in energy consumption, generating an 
enormous raise in the use of fossil fuels to meet the demand 
of people. This led to an increase in the level of air pollution 
and the degradation of air quality as consequence, which has 
been damaging the health of the population.  
Data concerning the monitoring of air pollutant 
concentrations should be measured in places where the 
population is exposed to air pollution. Generally, the levels 
of air pollution are higher in places close to highways 
(mobile sources) and industries (stationary sources) [1].  
The analysis of monitoring data allows evaluating the 
tendencies of pollutants daily and long term, besides the 
observation of the effectiveness of the regulations of air 
pollution and check compliance with standards established 
by law in order to improve the air quality management [2]. 
Monitoring should be used to inform the public of critical 
situations creating emergency programs [3]. The results of 
monitoring can be related to levels of traffic or industrial 
activity for urban planning, assisting in environmental 
licensing [4].  
The importance of achieving agility in the process and 
reliability of the monitoring data of air quality has recently 
driving interesting and promising research in the area, 
involving the use of different technologies, such as artificial 
intelligence for description and classification of air quality 
[5][6], mobile devices with pollution sensors [7], remote 
sensing with Geographic Information System (GIS) 
techniques [8], and wireless sensor networks as an 
alternative to the conventional measuring stations [9][10].  
Automatic monitoring stations of air quality have been 
playing a key role in the continuous measurement of 
pollution levels in the atmosphere. However, the amount of 
data generated by these stations is very large and not always 
available in a friendly data format for easy interpretation by 
the end-user.  
In order to improve the interpretation, validation and 
dissemination of information of air quality, it is common for 
technical experts to use computational resources available in 
many different types of software, a fact that often makes the 
process even more costly, time consuming and complex.  
Given the above, it is clear the importance to improve 
monitoring, processing and information management of air 
quality, as well as make them available to society with 
simplicity and easy access. The IQAr (acronym of air quality 
index in Portuguese) aims to meet all these demands.  
In this article, the information is organized as follows: 
The management of data from the air quality stations and the 
advantages of using IQAr are discussed in Section II. Section 
III details the developed solution, describes the architecture, 
each part of the system and its features, including 
comparisons with the state of the art in air quality. The 
conclusions, recommendations and future work are described 
in Section IV. 
II. 
AIR QUALITY DATA MANAGEMENT 
To manage the raw data received from the air quality 
stations it is necessary performing mathematical operations 
in order to generate meaningful information for both expert 
operator and end-user, like calculating average hourly values 
for each parameter per station, calculating the Air Quality 
Index (AQI) to classify the air, converting data in order to 
compare them to standard of the legislation 03/90 defined by 
the national environmental council of Brazil (CONAMA), 
among others. 
The air quality standards stipulated by the legislation of 
each country have the role of protecting the health of 
citizens, assisting in risk management and environmental 
policies [1]. 
The AQI is a dimensionless index used to facilitate the 
disclosure of pollution data for the general public. This index 
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

is also used to get pollutants in the same scale and enable the 
comparison of the level of pollution between pollutants. 
The AQI must be presented together with the referenced 
period, the name of the critical pollutant, and the category 
following the indicative color.  It also needs to present the 
concentration of pollutants and their effects on health [11]. 
The index is calculated accordingly to the concentration 
and the limits of each region. In Brazil, the air quality index 
is based on the already mentioned CONAMA 03/90 
standard. It is divided into six categories (good, regular, 
poor, bad, hazardous, critical), where each category 
represents the level of pollution and health risks. The criteria 
used follow the primary and secondary standards, level of 
attention, alert and emergency stipulated in this legislation. 
The Brazilian system is very similar to the one used in the 
United States developed by the Environmental Protection 
Agency (US EPA), where the classification is also divided 
into six categories: good, moderate, unhealthy for sensitive 
groups, unhealthy, very unhealthy, hazardous [1]. In Canada, 
the rate is called the index of air quality on health and is used 
as a tool for the protection of people's health, aiding in 
decision making to minimize the risk exposure generated by 
pollution. The index is divided into ten intervals contained in 
four categories, separated into low, moderate, high and very 
high risk to health [12]. 
In 1998, when LACTEC started the operation of the first 
air quality stations in the state of Paraná, the disclosure was 
made through an annual report. After the development of the 
first system by LACTEC for processing and validation of air 
quality data and partership with environmental institute of 
Paraná (IAP) it had become possible, in 2010, to release  
monthly reports.  
With the improvement in transmission and validation 
techniques it had become possible in 2012, the disclosure of 
daily reports; now, IQAr is in real-time.  
In this paper, whenever “real-time” is mentioned, it must 
be comprehended from 5 to 10 minutes after data are 
measured by stations, since there is a delay in data 
transmition by the stations. Regarding air quality area, it 
should be considered real-time. 
Before IQAr, it was not possible for the IAP to provide 
information about air quality in real-time, since data were not 
unified into one management system. This required more 
than one software tool to process, validate and even other 
software for reporting and disseminating those data. The 
presented project allowed having all these tasks in one 
software, making obsolete other systems used previously for 
this purpose, as Excell, Scanair, Migris and Anagis 
(previously developed by LACTEC). IQAr joined all the 
data processed in the various stations of the air quality in a 
single database. Once incoming data files are at the right 
format (Figure 2) the processing occurs naturally. Thus, the 
system is able to process data from stations of different 
manufacturers, even them using distinct software for 
measurement and transmission of data.  
III. 
THE IQAR SOFTWARE 
The IQAr program was developed by the LACTEC 
Institutes for IAP in order to manage the periodic 
measurement data from air quality stations. It analyzes the 
text files from the stations, processes them, provides features 
for editing data, performs calculation of the AQI and makes 
them available on the web using GIS technology in real-
time. 
A. System architecture 
As it can be seen in the diagram of Figure 1, data flow 
begins in the air quality measuring stations. 
The stations measure meteorological parameters and 
pollutants (chemical parameters) in the atmosphere. The 
pollutants, generally, are: nitrogen oxides (NOX), sulfur 
dioxide (SO2), ozone (O3), carbon monoxide (CO), total and 
inhalable 
particulate 
matter 
(MPTS, 
PM10) 
and 
hydrocarbons (HCT). The meteorological parameters are 
temperature, humidity, wind speed and direction, pressure, 
global radiation and precipitation.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Data flow diagram. 
The stations make continuous measurements and store 
the data in intervals of five to fifteen minutes. Through dial-
up line or TCP / IP, they transmit the files to the computer in 
the data center where it is installed the IQAr Desktop that 
receives the text files of these stations and performs the 
processing. In the files, each line represents a measured 
parameter. The format of these files received by the central 
consists in date / time, a parameter code and its measured 
value separated by a semicolon (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2.  Example of a file generated by a station called BOQ 
With the files in the input folder of IQAr Desktop, the 
data is processed and inserted into the database (more details 
in Section C. IQAr Desktop). Then, the IQAr Desktop calls a 
stored procedure – a function stored in the database - 
developed to calculate the hourly average values of each 
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

parameter per station and stores this information in another 
database table, different from the measured raw data table. 
This hourly average is a key to the entire system, since 
the calculations of the AQI for each chemical parameter are 
based on them. Instead of storing the averages in the bank, 
the calculation of averages could be done in real-time when 
the user clicks to generate a report, chart or web viewing; 
but, in doing so, the time spent to finish the request would be 
much higher, since the mass of five minutes data (most of 
the information contained in the database) is 12 times greater 
than the mass of hourly averages. 
Calculated the averages, the data are ready to be accessed 
by the monitoring module IQAr Web. This access is made 
via web service that performs the request to the database, 
calculates the AQI and packages the data in JavaScript 
Object Notation (JSON) [13] using the main library of IQAr. 
JSON is an open standard format used to transmit data as an 
alternative to Extensible Markup Language (XML). 
Once the AQI is calculated and returned in JSON format, 
the monitoring module of IQAr Web updates the information 
on the map returned from the map server.  
Besides, the web service is responsable for all 
communications between IQAr web and the database, 
including performing queries to create the wind rose graph, 
the charts per parameter/station, the monthly reports and the 
information required by the diagnosis module. This module 
performs periodical tests to ensure the availability and 
reliability of the whole system like checking web servers 
status, database connections, last data inserted, last file 
processed and last connection done by IQAr Desktop. 
Most software developed for air quality management 
throughout the world has an hourly update routine; which is 
the case of the South Coast Air Quality Management District 
system (AQMD) [14]: a web software using GIS to display 
the state of the air quality in Southern California. On the 
other hand, the IQAr can provide the information to the end-
user within three minutes after being measured and 
transmitted by air quality stations. This is due to the fact that 
IQAr manages, fully automatically, from the raw data 
generated by the stations until the web visualization. For 
example, nowadays, at most 13 files arrives hourly, one by 
station. Each transmition takes around one minute and 
happens just after the hour is completed.  
Once the file is ready to be processed, the system takes in 
average three seconds to process each file which varies 
according to the number of parameters measured by each 
station. The hardware used in this processing is a quad core 
i5 3470 3.2 GH processor with 4GB of RAM memory and 
Windows 8. IQAr Desktop searches for new data every 
minute, so the database is always updated within at most one 
minute and a few seconds of delay in relation to the 
transmitted data. 
The data is then presented to the end-user at web through 
a JavaScript routine that updates the IQAr Web by default 
every five minutes, but can be set to do it even more often. 
For example, setting it up to one minute, the software will 
display information with less than three minutes of delay 
since the data arrival from the stations, which is pretty up to 
date regarding air quality. 
It is important to mention that the total delay depends 
also on the configuration of the measurement frequency and 
transmitting of each station. For example, if a station sends 
updated data within 20 minutes, IQAr can ensure that the 
information displayed was measured within 23 minutes. 
B. Used Technology 
Most of the system was developed in Java, including the 
the main library used by the desktop module and web 
service, as well as the web service and the IQAr Desktop 
itself. Due to political issues of the project in relation to the 
data storage, the system had to be designed so that the 
database and the web application were executed on different 
servers of different institutions. Thus, we chose to use a web 
service brokering data between the database and the IQAr 
Web. This peculiarity made the development more laborious, 
but, on the other hand, it turned the system into a more 
portable and flexible solution according to the demand and 
environmental policy of each institute, since this feature 
facilitates the adaptation of the system to handle data from 
other environmental institutes of Brazil.  
As 
database 
management 
system, 
it 
was 
used 
PostgreSQL [15]. To improve the performance of the 
database and to make it robust enough to hold millions of 
records it was necessary to use the partitioning of the main 
tables (raw data and average data). With the partitioning each 
table holds data for only one month and, as result, every 
system query became faster than one second. As map server, 
it was used ESRI ArcGIS Server [16]. The IQAr Web was 
developed using the ArcGIS API for JavaScript [17] and the 
PHP language [18]. To transfer information from the web 
service to the IQAr Web, it used the JSON format. We opted 
for the JSON instead of XML markup language in order to 
reduce the amount of information transmitted every request, 
since the IQAr Web is a monitoring system and makes 
automated queries often to keep always updated the 
information on the map. For charts in IQAr Desktop it was 
used JFreeChart [19] and for charts and other visuals 
interface effects in IQAr Web it was used the JQuery [20] 
library. 
C. IQAr Desktop 
IQAr Desktop is the part of the system responsible for 
continuously processing data received from stations. It runs 
on a regular PC within the LACTEC Institutes and is 
operated by a team of engineers and technical experts in air 
quality monitoring to ensure the quality of the information 
processed by the system. 
As described in Section III.A, the process starts with the 
arrival of the station files in the system’s input folder. This 
directory is checked periodically for new data in a time 
interval defined by the operator, by default it is set to one 
minute. When new files are detected, the IQAr proceeds with 
the format verification of each file, it analyzes if it is empty 
or truncated, which can occur systematically. In positive 
case, the IQAr does not process the file and alerts the user in 
the monitoring log about the detection of an invalid file; 
otherwise, all lines of the file (Figure 2) are split into 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

information regarding date, time, the measured parameter 
code and its value in the measurement.  
With this information in memory, it begins the process of 
checking each data contained in the file. Basically, according 
to predefined chemical and meteorological parameters, three 
types of validation are made by the system: range, endurance 
and step. The range validation establishes a minimum and 
maximum limit for each parameter, for example, in Curitiba, 
temperature will hardly be less than zero and higher than 35 
degrees. The endurance validation verifies if the value is 
being repeated over a long period, which is generally 
indicative of a sensor malfunction. Finally, the step 
validation evaluates large variations over short periods, for 
example, if the air temperature is close to 20 degrees in a 
moment, and 30 minutes after, it decreases to 5 degrees, this 
is an indicative of wrong value; probably, a failure occurred 
in the station of the air quality. All these validations are 
adapted to each station because the meteorological and 
emission conditions are different. The goal is to 
automatically recognize and classify data errors due to 
calibration procedures on station, power failure and 
inconsistent values, allowing data to be disseminated 
reliably. In the new versions of the IQAr, we plan to 
implement more types of automatic validation using 
correlations of chemical data with meteorological data and 
comparison of data between stations. 
In the case of invalid data considered by one of the 
validations, those data remain available for query and 
modification by the operator; but, they are not used in the 
calculation of the indices shown to the end-user.  
The system also allows editing of the data processed 
through screens that allow the operator to perform basic 
mathematical operations such as addition, subtraction, 
multiplication and division on a single specific value or all 
values comprised within a certain period of time. This is 
important to make manual corrections to the data to ensure 
the reliability of information. The role of the data validation 
staff as system operator at this stage is critical; since they are 
the ones with the expertise to assess whether the data from 
the stations are correct and after the automatic validation of 
the system, they can also manually validate or invalidate a 
block of data from one station. After processing, the files are 
physically transferred from the incoming directory to the 
directory of processed files. The system has a settings screen 
where the operator can set these directories and also the 
processing interval, which is the time that the system will 
automatically scan the incoming directory for new data to be 
processed.  
Once the data are stored in the database, the system 
allows the visualization of information through charts and 
graphs. In both, the operator can search by station, period 
and type of data that can be: raw data, hourly average, daily 
average, hourly AQI or daily AQI. Such information can 
then be converted into spreadsheets and reports for external 
use.  
As it can be seen in Figure 3, in the system home screen 
the operator can monitor the latest processed data of all 
stations divided into two tables: the chemical parameters 
above and the meteorological parameters below. To monitor 
the current status of processing, the processing screen 
displays a status bar with the progress of the file that is being 
processed; a second bar with the processing status of the 
complete list of new files found by the system; the amount of 
files to be processed; the amount of files that have been 
processed; the date and time of the last completed 
processing; the current processing status (scheduled, 
processing, or stopped) and also a log that shows the 
operator if any problem occurs during  inserting data in the 
database, for example, if there is already a record in the 
database with the same date, station and parameter.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Home screen of IQAr Desktop (chemical parameters; 
meteorological parameters; processed files; current processing).  
The operator has total control of all files that have 
already been processed by the system through the processed 
files screen. In this screen (also in Figure 3), the operator can 
search files by name, delete one or multiple files at once and 
therefore the data from these files. There is also the option to 
restore after deleting the files, which means removing the file 
from the processed files folder and put it back in the input 
directory; this option is useful if the operator wishes to 
reprocess a file. 
IQAr has the ability to work with an unlimited number of 
stations; it only depends on available hardware resources to 
process all data. The same applies to the number of 
parameters per station; there is a screen to control parameters 
per station where the operator can set it up without limits.  
The current air quality stations provide on average 14 
parameters, including chemical and meteorological, but this 
number may be higher depending on setup, demand and 
technology used in new stations. Previously, the software 
used to process the data from most stations of the state of 
Paraná was the Scanair developed by Envitech [21]. The 
Scanair, unlike IQAr, had a limitation of parameters per 
station, where no more than 16 parameters could be 
processed at once by the system.  
The system has a configuration screen for each station 
where the operator can set the geographic coordinates of the 
station so that the information appears correctly positioned in 
the map on IQAr Web, and also change parameters that 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

dictate the behavior of the system to calculate the hourly 
averages of the station. For example, dealing with five 
minutes data, by default, the system considers valid the 
hourly averages composed of nine or more valid data on a 
total of 12, but the operator can configure the system to 
consider valid hourly averages composed of four valid data 
in a particular station.  
All setup parameters needed to make the average and 
AQI calculations are customizable by the operator, which 
makes IQAr flexible and adaptable in case of changes in 
applicable laws of each country or region. The system can 
even process data from other systems, such as the case of 
Scanair itself. A big data exporting was successfully carried 
out recently: 230 MB of data divided into 247 files exported 
from Scanair regarding data of nine different stations along 
10 years from 2003 to 2013. Even after all those data have 
been processed it was not noticed any decrease of 
performance of the system queries, which proves that the 
partitioning realized on data base (mentioned before) was 
properly implemented.  
D. IQAr Web 
The IQAr Web is the part of the system responsible for 
showing to the end-user the processed information contained 
in the database. 
 
 
Figure 4.  IQAr Web running. 
Along with the processed data, geographical coordinates 
of each station are stored, as shown in Figure 4; they are 
represented punctually in a dynamic thematic map. Besides 
the air quality information, the municipal boundaries of the 
State of Paraná and the regional offices of the IAP are also 
represented on the map. The condition of air quality for each 
station is classified according to the following scale and 
color values:  
 
Green: good, AQI until 50;  
 
Yellow: regular, AQI from 51 to 100;  
 
Orange: inadequate, AQI between 101 and 200;  
 
Red: bad, AQI between 201 and 300; 
 
Purple: terrible, AQI between 301 and 400. 
 
Black: critical, AQI above 400. 
This classification was defined by CONAMA and 
adapted by IAP.  
Whenever the user clicks on a station on the map the 
system shows on the right side of the screen the AQI of the 
pollutant of highest value for the station in real-time. Since 
AQI is measured hourly, this value is truncated to the current 
time, i.e., if the user accesses the system at 15:19, it shows 
the pollutant with the highest AQI at 15:00. Then, the system 
displays the name of the pollutant, the corresponding time, 
the name of the clicked station and the description of the 
status (good, regular, etc.). 
Under the station status, the system shows a chart with 
the variation of the higher AQI value for the last 24 hours. 
This 
way, 
the 
responsible 
by 
monitoring 
at 
the 
environmental department can have an updated overview of 
air quality in the city.  
It is also presented a wind rose chart indicating the 
direction and speed of wind for the last 24 hours. This chart 
allows the monitoring team to identify possible causative of 
pollution in case of episodes where the air quality is not good 
and also issue warnings to the population if there is an 
accident with some toxic gas. At the bottom of the web page, 
the system shows the current situation of air quality for all 
stations in the format: "Station: pollutant parameter of higher 
concentration and its value of AQI, date and time". On the 
map, the user can zoom with the scroll button or choose a 
predefined region in the system with several stations 
contained and use the button "go to the region", so the 
system automatically positions the map in the given region. 
The web module is used today to show data from three 
different institutions, but it can hold data from stations of 
more institutions from different parts of the country.  There 
is no limitation in terms of software; again depends only on 
hardware resources to be allocated.  
A similar solution to IQAr Web was developed by 
AQICN [22] in China with the support of the United States 
Embassy and is being used for dissemination of data from 
various countries in Asia, Europe, North America and some 
countries in South America as Brazil, with data being 
supplied by the company of environmental sanitation 
technology of São Paulo (CETESB) [23]. The visual quality 
of the system is very friendly; They used Gmaps [24] as the 
map server and also developed a version for mobile devices, 
but the reliability and timeliness of the information shown in 
the AQICN system are responsibility of the air station 
owners, and most often environmental institutes do not have 
software and staff able to provide such information 
accurately and reliably in real-time. The AQICN software 
does not replace IQAr in Brazil also because of the standard 
for calculating the AQI. They use US's EPA index system 
that is not the one used in Brazil. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS  
The great advantage of this system is the possibility to 
alert people of critical episodes of air pollution in time to 
perform preventive actions to minimize or avoid the 
population to contact with the polluted air. 
Before IQAr, preventive actions were impossible, 
because all data used to be compiled into a daily report up to 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

24 hours of delay. Thus, in case of criticals pollution events, 
the population would be inevitably exposed to a polluted air 
which might cause serious health damage. 
Nowadays, IQAr continuously processes data from 13 air 
quality stations and this amount will possibly double in 
2015. Prior to the implementation of IQAr, it was necessary 
to use various software for processing, validation, reporting 
and dissemination of data. There was no standardization 
about the format of the data received by the processing 
central, and, for some stations, the own manufacturer's 
software with its own standards was supposed to be utilized. 
Those characteristics hardly limited the agility of the process 
turned the dissemination of information in real-time into an 
impossible task.  
IQAr enabled to automate the boring and costly process 
of collecting, processing and disseminating data - previously 
held by environmental engineers - so that these professionals 
could became able to focus on the work of supervision and 
evaluation of data, which the system cannot do on its own, 
because it requires the expertise of the professional in the 
area.  
In Brazil, the IQAr was the first software to provide 
information on air quality in real-time using dynamic maps. 
In the state of Sao Paulo, by CETESB, data are disseminated 
in real-time in a geo-referenced way [16]. But the map is not 
dynamic, and thereby, all stations cannot be seen on a single 
map, forcing the user to click on each region and open a new 
static map for viewing it. In the State of Rio de Janeiro, the 
state environmental institute has also a solution using maps, 
but the information is not updated in real-time. By the time 
of this paper was being written, the most recent information 
was dated 11 days ago. 
One of the future implementations that can be mentioned 
is the development of a mathematical modeling of pollutant 
dispersion module. With this feature it would be possible to 
simulate in real-time the dispersion of pollution (plume) 
emitted by industries and vehicles around the stations using 
the updated meteorological data from these stations.  
In the short term, other implementations are planned like 
to provide data from IQAr to the AQICN system, so that 
information relating to Curitiba and other Brazilian cities 
monitored by IQAr can be used for comparison in relation to 
other urban centers of the world; and also to increase the 
level of detail and interactivity of the dynamic map in order 
to facilitate the use and access to information by society. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Health Organization, “Air quality guidelines for 
particulate matter, ozone, nitrogen dioxide and sulfur 
dioxide”, 2005. 
[2] Ö. Özden, T. Dögeroglu, and S. Kara, “Assessment of 
ambient air quality in Eskisehir, Turkey,” Environment 
International, vol. 34, pp. 678-687, 2008. 
[3] C. A. Frondizi, “Air Quality Monitoring: Theory and 
Practice,” Rio de Janeiro: E-papers, 2008. 
[4] K. K. Khedo, R. Perseedoss, and A. Mungur, “A wireless 
sensor 
network 
air 
pollution 
monitoring 
System,” 
International Journal of Wireless & Mobile Networks, vol.2, 
no.2, pp. 1-5, May 2010. 
[5] J. Yadav, V. Kharat, and A. Deshpande, "Zadeh-Deshpande 
(ZD) fuzzy logic based formalism for linguistic description of 
air quality: A case study," International Conference on 
Informatics, Electronics & Vision (ICIEV), 2014, doi: 
10.1109/ICIEV.2014.6850706 
[6] W. Kaminski, J. Skrzypski, and E. Jach-Szakiel,  "Application 
of Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) to Predict Air Quality 
Classes in Big Cities," International Conference on Systems 
Engineering, 
ICSENG, 
Aug. 
2008, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICSEng.2008.14 
[7] D. Mendez, A. J. Perez, M.A Labrador, and J.J. Marron, "P-
Sense: A participatory sensing system for air pollution 
monitoring and control," IEEE International Conference on 
Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops 
(PERCOM Workshops),  pp. 344-347, March 2011. 
[8] R.H. Narashid and W. M. N. W. Mohd, "Air quality 
monitoring using remote sensing and GIS technologies," 
International Conference on Science and Social Research 
(CSSR), 
pp. 
1186-1191, 
Dec. 
2010, 
doi: 
10.1109/CSSR.2010.5773713 
[9] J. H. Liu, Y. F. Chen, T. S. Lin,  D. W. Lai,  T. H. Wen,  C. 
H. Sun, and J. A. Jiang, “Developed urban air quality 
monitoring system based on wireless sensor networks,” 
In Fifth 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on  
Sensing 
Technology (ICST), pp. 549-554, Nov. 2011.  
[10] E. Yaacoub, A. Kadri, M. Mushtaha, and A, Abu-Dayya, "Air 
quality monitoring and analysis in Qatar using a wireless 
sensor network deployment," 9th International Wireless 
Communications 
and 
Mobile 
Computing 
Conference 
(IWCMC), 
pp. 
596-601, 
July 
2013 
doi:10.1109/IWCMC.2013.6583625 
[11] U.S Environmental Protection Agency, “Guideline for 
reporting of daily air quality – pollutant standards index 
(PSI)”, December 1998.  
[12] Environment Canada webpage.  [Online]. Available from:  
http://www.ec.gc.ca/casaqhi/default.asp?Lang=En&n=065BE
995-1 2014.10.08 
[13] JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.json.org/ 2015.01.07 
[14] South Coast Air Quality Management District. AQMD. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:   
http://www3.aqmd.gov/webappl/gisaqi2/VEMap3D.aspx 
2014.10.07 
[15] PostgreSQL. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.postgresql.org/ 2015.01.07 
[16] ESRI 
ArcGIS 
Server 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.esri.com/software/arcgis/arcgisserver 2015.01.07 
[17] ArcGIS API for JavaScript [Online]. Available from: 
https://developers.arcgis.com/javascript/ 2015.01.07 
[18] PHP Language [Online]. Available from: http://php.net/ 
2015.01.07 
[19] JFreeChart 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.jfree.org/jfreechart/ 2015.01.07 
[20] JQuey 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://jquery.com/ 
2015.01.07 
[21] Envitech 
Ltd. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.envitech.co.il/ 2014.10.09 
[22] AQICN 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
website 
http://aqicn.org/map/ 2014.10.03 
[23] CETESB 
System. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://sistemasinter.cetesb.sp.gov.br/Ar/php/mapa_qualidade_
rmsp.php 2014.10.09 
[24] Gmaps 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.google.com.br/maps 2015.01.07 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-383-4
GEOProcessing 2015 : The Seventh International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

