Identification of Areas with Potential for Flooding in South America 
 
Sergio Rosim, João Ricardo de Freitas Oliveira, Alexandre Copertino Jardim, Laércio Massaru Namikawa, 
Cláudia Maria de Almeida 
Image Processing Division. 
National Institute for Space Research, INPE 
São José dos Campos, Brazil 
e-mail: {sergio, joao, alexandre, laercio}@dpi.inpe.br, almeida@dsr.inpe.br 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents the drainage network 
extraction of South American region using Shuttle Radar 
Topography Mission (SRTM) data set with 90 meters of 
horizontal resolution. Using different thresholds, the user can 
generate different drainage networks. The Height Above the 
Nearest Drainage (HAND) procedure was applied for each 
drainage. HAND determines the variation of relief in relation 
to the nearest drainage segments of each point, considering a 
regular grid structure representing the relief of the study 
geographic region. HAND is used to determine the areas with 
greatest potential for flooding. Results for South American 
region were shown illustrating the potential use of HAND 
process. The main benefit of this work is to show the viability 
of using this tool to study and simulation areas that can be 
flooded by natural processes or anthropic actions. 
Keywords-flooding; drainage network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The American continent has 39.6% of the world's fresh 
water, and of this total, 61.3% is in South America [1]. The 
existence of this huge amount of water is directly related to 
various situations of floods, both in cities and in rural areas, 
fast and slows flooding. Those floods, which can cause 
major social and economic damage, must be studied and 
whenever possible prevented. 
This work employed a procedure, called Height Above 
the Nearest Drainage (HAND) [2], for determining the areas 
with greatest potential for flooding. The whole South 
American geographic region was used, considering drainage 
networks with different densities. These networks were 
defined by the TerraHidro system [3], which is a distributed 
hydrological model system that is being developed at Image 
Processing Division of the National Institute for Space 
Research, located in the city of Sao Jose dos Campos, Brazil. 
HAND determines the variation of relief in relation to 
the nearest drainage segments of each point, considering a 
great regular structure representing the relief from their 
study geographic region. A comparison between the HAND 
flood results and the real flooded areas extracted from 
Landsat 8 image was done to show the accuracy of the 
HAND prediction in a real situation. 
The objective of this work is to show the usefulness of 
HAND to determine areas with the greatest potential for 
flooding, from a drainage network extracted by TerraHidro 
system. We chose to apply the HAND throughout the region 
of South America, to get a sense of this potential across the 
continent. The paper is organized as follows: Section II 
briefly presents works related to the proposed in this article, 
Section III describes TerraHidro system, Section IV shows 
HAND procedure, Section V presents the results and some 
discussions, and Section VI contains the conclusions. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The flood has been the subject of study for many years. 
The appearance of Digital Elevation Models (DEM) [4] and 
of medium and high resolution satellite images made 
possible the creation of methodologies and systems for 
identification, simulation and analysis of floods. Works have 
related to DEM quality and resolution with occurrence of 
floods [5]. Systems have also been developed in order to 
produce and analyze floods in local [6] and global level [7]. 
The study of flood forecasting involves specific models 
and different types of data, such as slope, land use and land 
cover, characteristics of rivers, soil types, among others. 
HAND constitutes a tool to aid the expert in the 
identification of areas with greater potential for flooding, 
based only on altimetry and drainage network. 
The aim of this paper is not to propose a new 
methodology to say whether there is flood at a given 
geographical location. Its goal is to show places with greater 
or lesser potential for flooding only using the existing relief 
information. The quality of the result depends on the quality 
and appropriate resolution of employee DEM. 
 
III. 
TERRAHIDRO DESCRIPTION 
This work was carried out using TerraHidro system and 
HAND process, also a TerraHidro process [8]. TerraHidro is 
a distributed hydrological system created to develop water 
resource applications. It uses regular grid (DEM) as the 
surface and elevation structure for drainage extraction. 
TerraHidro uses HAND procedure to identify these areas. 
TerraHidro is a plugin of the geographic viewer 
TerraView that loads and stores data in a geographical 
library called TerraLib [9], an open source geographical 
library implemented in C++ language that has also been 
developed at the Image Processing Division. This approach 
has allowed TerraHidro project team of designers and 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

programmers to keep focused on the development of 
TerraHidro system functionality. It calculates, for every 
DEM cell, the altimetry difference between this cell and the 
nearest cell belonging to the drainage network, following 
the local drain directions. 
TerraLib is an open-source Geographical Information 
System (GIS) software library. TerraLib supports coding of 
geographical applications using spatial databases, and stores 
data in different database management system (DBMS) 
including MySQL, PostgreSQL and other databases. 
TerraHidro functionality used here are: first, the 
definition of local flow, called of Local Drain Directions 
(LDD) extraction [10]. For each DEM grid cell, the LDD 
was defined considering the steepest downstream regarding 
the 8 neighbors grid cell. At the end of the task, a new grid 
was created with the same number of columns and rows of 
DEM and same resolution. Each grid cell received a code 
indicating the water flow from this cell. Figure 1 shows LDD 
functionality. 
The grid DEM contains the altimetry of the study area. 
The slope is calculated for each cell in the grid, considering 
its eight neighboring cells. The result of this can be seen in 
the second grid (SLOPE). The third grid (CODIFICATION) 
shows the encoding rule represented by numbers 2(0,1,…,7) 
defining the flow direction. The last grid (LDD) shows the 
flow direction for this example. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Local Drain Directions creation process. 
 
Second, we consider the creation of the grid called 
contribution grid area. The user wants to work only with 
representative drainages regarding his application, not with 
drainages of all LDDs. Each cell of the contribution area 
grid receives a value that is the amount of the areas of all 
cells that participate in the path arriving at that cell. Figure 2 
presents this concept. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Contribution area. 
 
Third, we consider the definition of a particular drainage 
network using a threshold value. The value of each cell of 
the contribution area grid is compared with the threshold 
value. If the value of contribution area grid is equal or 
greater than the threshold value the cell is selected as a 
drainage network cell. At the end of this process a new grid 
is created, defining the drainage network. Figure 3 presents 
a didactic example of drainage network and Figure 4 shows 
a South America drainage network extracted using threshold 
= 300000 and South America delimited by country and 
Brazil delimitates by States. 
Threshold is an empirical value, defined by the user, in 
order to select a drainage containing the density necessary to 
their work. As a general rule, the threshold selects the most 
representative drainage because it contains the largest 
accumulated values. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Drainage network (green), using threshold value = 4. 
 
Another TerraHidro task is the watershed delimitation 
for drainage segments or for isolated points. A segment is a 
drainage path between water springs and junctions, between 
junctions, or between junctions and mouth of the drainage. 
A watershed point is a location defined by the user on a 
location containing drainage. Figure 5 presents an example 
of watersheds by segments. 
 
 
Figure 4. America drainage network extracted using threshold = 300000. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

 
 
Figure 5. Basin created for each drainage segment represented in blue 
color. 
 
HAND will be described in the next session. 
IV. 
HAND DESCRIPTION 
TerraHidro uses the HAND procedure to identify flood 
potential areas. It calculates, for every DEM cell, the 
altimetry difference between this cell and the nearest cell 
belonging to the drainage network, following the local drain 
directions. As the HAND terrain descriptor is sensitive to 
drainage changes in the regions of sudden terrain variations, 
it was used as an attempt to determine critical drainage 
areas. Figure 6 shows a numeric example of the HAND 
process. The top figure shows the flow directions for each 
altimetry grid cell. This is shown in Figure 6. In this grid, 
the cell with value equal to 72 was highlighted. The 
calculation done by HAND was the subtraction of this value 
from the value of the cell found, according to the shortest 
flow direction path. The value to be considered is the 53, 
which was found according to the path highlighted in red, in 
the Local Drain Directions grid. Thus, in the resulting grid, 
HAND grid, the value of altimetry is equal to 19. 
HAND process can only identify the areas with potential 
for flooding. This result allows the water resources manager 
to focus his efforts on the most susceptible areas to the 
occurrence of extreme events involving water. For a more 
refined study, hydrological models must be developed. 
The materials used to develop this work were SRTM 
(Shuttle Radar Topography Mission) of 90 meters of 
horizontal resolution as surface elevation data set. 
TerraHidro and HAND used this data set to extract their 
information. A Landsat 8 image acquired on July/05/2014, 
showing a flooded region was compared with HAND result 
of a test area. 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Hand process. 
In the next session the results are shown. 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The HAND results extraction, based on TerraHidro 
drainage network definition, were shown as thematic maps 
containing altimetry tracks. Each altimetry track informs the 
greater or lesser proximity of its altimetry in relation to the 
nearest drainage altimetry. Different scenarios were created 
with the use of altimetry tracks with different relief 
intervals. Figure 7 shows HAND results for South America 
region from drainages extracted from threshold values of 
one and tree millions. The drainage networks were extracted 
from thresholds equal one and tree million. Only the 
differences between 0 and 15 meters divided into 5 slices 
were represented. Other areas have less potential for 
flooding. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. HAND results. (a) threshold =  one million; (b) threshold =  tree 
millions. 
 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

Figure 8 presents the details of the north and south 
regions of South American region. It is possible to see areas 
in the red color, with less than 3 meters of difference 
between the altimetry and the closer drainage. These areas 
have most potential flood than the other areas. 
 
 
 
Figure 8. Zoom of (a) north and (b) south of South American region using 
threshold = one million. 
 
This is the region Mariana, Minas Gerais state. The area 
reached by the rupture of a lake of mineral waste appears in 
red color. The result of the HAND appears in slices defined 
by lines of different colors, each color defines an altitude 
range. It may be noted that the blue line adequately 
represents the space occupied by waste. Figure 9 shows the 
area delimitated by HAND and the area extracted from 
image in a real flood situation. 
The result discussion concerns the relationship between 
selected drainage and HAND results. Each drainage gives a 
particular potential flood region context. For quick floods, it 
is better to have dense drainages to grasp the water behavior 
in small regions. For slow floods the drainage can be less 
dense. HAND allows, in both situations, identifying the 
flood boundaries. Identifying how many meters the water 
will rise and how fast this will happen are parameters that 
are outside HAND scope. 
 
 
Figure 9. HAND real example. Brazil. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
TerraHidro and HAND are used to define respective 
drainage network and potential flooded areas for the South 
America region. These areas serve as priority areas for 
experts to carry out studies on flooding. 
This work shows a simple solution for identification of 
locations with more potential for flooding. It only employs 
relief and drainage extracted from this relief. This 
methodology aims to help the expert to focus on areas with 
the greatest potential for flooding. It doesn’t say that there 
will be flooding. To be sure, experts should use appropriate 
hydrological models, which are beyond the scope of this 
proposal. We will carry out a job applying this 
methodology. This work will consist in the simulation of the 
areas that were flooded by the disruption of mineral waste 
lakes. 
A comparison between HAND result and a real flooded 
area shown by a satellite image revealed coincidence 
between both flood areas. This confirms that the 
methodology shown in this paper is useful to determine 
critical areas for flooding. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
work 
has 
received 
financial 
support 
from 
1022114003005 - MAS BNDES/CAMPO project, and from 
Permanent Protection Areas Project, EXAPP/FINEP – 
01.13.0118.00. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
ANA, “A água no Brasil e no mundo”, Agência Nacional de 
Águas, 
http://arquivos.ana.gov.br/institucional/sge/CEDOC/Catalog
o/2014/AAguaNoBrasilENoMundo2014.pdf (site accessed 
14/04/2016), (in portuguese). 
[2] 
C. D. Rennó, et al. “HAND, a new terrain descriptor using 
SRTM-DEM: Mapping terra-firme rainforestenvironments in 
Amazonia,” Remote Sensing of Environment v:(112) 3469–
3481, (2008). 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

[3] 
S. Rosim, J. R. de F. Oliveira, A. C. Jardim, L. M. 
Namikawa, and C. D Rennó, “ TerraHidro: a distributed 
hydrology modelling system with high quality drainage 
extraction”.  GEOProcessing 2013: The Fifth International 
Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, 
Applications, and Services, February 24 - March 1, Nice, 
France. 2013. 
[4] 
E. B. Brunson and R. W. Olsen, Data digital elevation model 
collection systems, Proc. Digital Terrain Models (DTM) 
Syrup. ASP/ACSM, St. Louis, Missouri, May 9-11, 1978, 
pp. 72-99. 
[5] 
Y. 
Gorokhovich 
and 
A. 
Voustianiouk, 
“Accuracy 
Assessment of the Processed SRTM-Based Elevation Data by 
CGIAR using Field Data from USA and Thailand and its 
Relation to the Terrain Characteristics”.Remote Sensing of 
Environment, vol. 104, no. 4, 2006,  pp. 409–415. 
[6]  HR Wallingford, “Real_time forecasting and warning 
solutions”. In: http://www.hrwallingford.com/expertise/flood-
forecasting, (site accessed 15/01/2016). 
[7] 
P. J. Smith, et al., “The Global Flood Awareness System”, 
TIFAC-IDRiM Conference, 28th–30th, October 2015, New 
Delhi, India. 
[8] 
S. Rosim, J. R. de F. Oliveira, J. de O. Ortiz, M. Z. Cuellar, 
and A. C. Jardim, “Drainage network extraction of Brazilian 
semiarid region with potential flood indication areas”. Proc. 
SPIE 9239, Remote Sensing for Agriculture, Ecosystems, 
and Hydrology XV, September 22–25, Amsterdam, 
Netherlands, 2014. 
[9] 
G Camara, R. C. M Souza, U .M Freitas, and J Garrido,  
"SPRING: Integrating remote sensingand GIS by object-
oriented data modelling. Computers & Graphics, vol 20, n 3, 
May-Jun 1996, pp. 395-403. 
[10] P. A. Burrough and R. A. McDonnell, “Principles of 
Geographical Information Systems”. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 1998. 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-469-5
GEOProcessing 2016 : The Eighth International Conference on Advanced Geographic Information Systems, Applications, and Services

