Impact of Resistance Training in Patients with Chronic Heart Failure 
 
 
Zahra Sadek/ Said Ahmaidi                                                
Laboratory EA 3300 (APERE) « Adaptations 
Physiologiques à l’Exercice et Réadaptation  à l’Effort » 
Picardie de Jule Vernes University 
Amiens, France 
Zahra.sadek@etud.u-picardie.fr 
Said.ahmaidi@u-picardie.fr 
 
Mahmoud Youness                                                                                                                            
Medical Research Center 
Beirut Cardiac Institute 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Myouness55@yahoo.com 
 
 
Wissam Joumaa / Charifa Awada 
Laboratory « PhyToxE Physio-toxicité environnemental » 
Faculty of Sciences, Lebanese University 
Nabatieh, Lebanon 
wjoumaa@ul.edu.lb 
charifa.awada@hotmail.com 
 
 
Wiam Ramadan 
Lebanese Institutes for Biomedical Research and 
Application (LIBRA) 
International University of Beirut (BIU) 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Wiam.ramadan@liu.edu.lb 
 
Abstract— This study aims to determine the positive effects of 
Resistance Training in Chronic Heart Failure patients with 
inspiratory muscle weakness. 16 patients were enrolled, and 
underwent a 3 months training program. They were 
randomized into one of two groups consisting of Resistance 
Training or control group. Resistance Training was performed 
at 60% of 1 repetition maximum and each workout was 
composed of 3 sets of 10 repetitions, with at least 30 seconds of 
rest between sets. However, the control group did not 
participate in any exercise program. Pulmonary Function, 
Respiratory and Skeletal Muscles Function tests were 
performed as well as Quality of Life and Functional Capacity 
before and after training periods. Results have shown the 
beneficial effects of Resistance Training on the skeletal and 
respiratory muscle function, the functional capacity reflected 
by the six-minute walk test, the cardiac function, exercise 
performance, as well as on dyspnea and Quality of Life.  
 
Keywords- Heart Failure; Resistance Training;  Skeletal 
Muscle Function; Ejection Fraction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Exercise intolerance, dyspnea and fatigue are the main 
obstacles that Chronic Heart Failure (CHF) patients face 
during their daily life activities. These phenomena might 
contribute to physical impairment and result in a poor 
Quality of Life (QoL) [1]. Such restrictions happen as a 
consequence of reduction in skeletal muscle mass and 
strength, which might be explained by both qualitative and 
quantitative abnormalities [2]. In fact, there are histological 
and biochemical derangements expressed respectively by 
altered fibers distribution and reduced oxidative enzyme 
activity in addition to muscle metabolism impairment, 
mitochondrial changes, inflammation and muscle atrophy 
[3]. After a period of intense evaluation of the safety and 
effectiveness of exercise rehabilitation in CHF patients, 
exercise training was shown to be the cornerstone of cardiac 
rehabilitation programs.  
Because muscle dysfunction represents a hallmark of 
heart failure, the emphasis was on Resistance Training (RT), 
in order to restore the normal muscle structure and function 
[4]. For many years, bed rest and limited physical activity 
were recommended for all stages and forms of heart failure; 
while exercise was not suggested [5]. Nowadays, however, 
the concept of cardiac rehabilitation, including exercise 
training, and specifically RT, is well spotlighted and highly 
recommended recently, mainly because of studies that show 
its benefits in various outcomes [6] [7].  In fact, application 
of such programs induces significant histological, metabolic 
and functional adaptations in skeletal muscles, thereby, 
improving patient’s QoL. McKelvie was the first to 
demonstrate in 1995 that there are no significant differences 
between cycling and RT regarding left ventricle response in 
heart failure patients [8]. This study found similar results 
with those obtained from Meyer et al. where central 
hemodynamics was stable and well tolerated during 
resistance exercise [9]. In addition, from the research 
conducted by Grosse et al. who performed RT at 65% of 1 
Repetition Maximum (RM), an increase of 80–102% of 
muscular endurance and 14.5% of VO2peak was reported 
[10]. Pu et al. who performed RT at 80% of 1RM, also 
showed a 43% and 13% increase of muscular strength and 
Six-Minute Walk Test (6MWT), respectively [11].  
These findings are consistent with those of Levinger et al. 
who discovered 18% increase of muscular strength and 19% 
amelioration of VO2 peak after training patients at 40–80% 
of 
1RM 
[12]. 
As 
shown 
above, 
the 
significant 
improvements in muscle strength and endurance, the 
adaptation of muscle mass and the increase in the QoL and 
functional capacity had been proved by many researchers 
after RT [11] [13] [14]. Each study performs RT according 
to specific characteristics such as intensity, duration, 
frequency, number of repetitions and sets of exercise. 
Overall, these features should be taken into consideration to 
44
Copyright (c) The Government of NO, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

avoid any cardiovascular stress, and thereby any harmful 
consequence. The aim of our study is to determine the 
effects of RT on skeletal and respiratory muscle function, 
functional capacity, cardiac function, dyspnea and QoL in 
patients with CHF. The paper proceeds as follows: Section 
II describes the experimental design, data are analyzed in 
Section III, Section IV presents the discussion and, finally, 
Section V draws the conclusions. 
II. 
METHODS 
16 patients with stable CHF and inspiratory muscle 
weakness were randomly assigned to a training program for 
12 weeks (3 times / week). The patients were divided, 
thereafter, into two different groups: controls (n=8) and 
resistance (n=8). Patients in the control group did not 
exercise at all and were instructed to continue their normal 
life activities during the three months of trial. However, RT 
consisted of strength exercises that targeted the muscles of 
the quadriceps, the hamstrings and gluteus muscles of the 
lower extremities; Biceps, Triceps, Deltoid, and Pectoralis 
of the upper extremities. The patients started training at 60% 
of 1RM that was assessed and recalculated every two 
weeks.  
During the test, verbal encouragement was used. 
Maximum Voluntary Isometric Force (MVIF) for right and 
left muscles was measured; three sets of three repetitions, 
separated by 20 seconds of rest were given to the patient to 
develop maximum force.  
Concerning the isometric endurance time or Maintenance 
Time (MT), it was assessed by maintaining 50% of the 
MVIF as long as possible, until exhaustion. This procedure 
was repeated three times separated by 5 minutes of rest. 
At baseline and after the training period, patients 
underwent 
pulmonary 
function 
test 
by 
spirometry, 
respiratory muscle function assessment by electronic 
pressure transducer in order to measure Respiratory Muscle 
Strength (MIP), echocardiography, to asses Left Ventricle 
Ejection Fraction (LVEF), stress test, skeletal muscle 
function test using hand-held dynamometer, and 6MWT. 
Dyspnea, according to Borg scale, and QoL, according to 
Minesotta 
living 
with 
heart 
failure 
questionnaire 
(MLWHFQ), were also assessed. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
Compared to control, the training group had 18% 
(p<0.05) and 11% (p<0.05) improvement in the right and 
left MVIF respectively, and a 24% improvement in the right 
quadriceps muscle endurance capacity (MT) (p <0.05). 
Moreover, RT has shown a 27% improvement in exercise 
time (p<0.01), 24% in METS (p<0.01), and a 15% 
improvement in dyspnea sensation (p<0.001). A significant 
increase in 6MWT distance (13%, p<0.01), a decrease in 
NYHA functional class (33%, p<0.05), and a decrease in 
MLWHFQ score (30%, p<0.05) were also noticed. In 
addition, a little increase in (LVEF) was observed in RT 
(5%, p<0.05) versus no changes in the control group. 
Concerning respiratory muscle function, RT was able to 
improve MIP by 14% (p<0.01). 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, RT was able to bring out significant 
improvements in the skeletal muscle function, the cardiac 
function, NYHA functional class, and dyspnea as well as on 
functional capacity and QoL. Surprisingly, RT has also 
shown significant impact on respiratory muscle strength. 
Since the control group had no significant improvements in 
any of these parameters, we can confirm the effectiveness of 
the RT. 
The benefits gained in skeletal muscle function affect 
positively the overall exercise performance and are closely 
related to beneficial adaptations in the muscle structure and 
function such as an increase in type 1 fiber, decrease in 
circulatory pro-inflammatory markers and a better muscle 
oxidative capacity [4].  In addition, such an intensive RT 
might induce an increase in the motor unit recruitment and 
so will impact on root mean square (RMS) value towards an 
upward trend.  
In addition, we observed that the right quadriceps muscle 
is stronger than the left quadriceps muscle. These variations 
can be explained by the fact that maybe most of patients are 
right leg dominants. 
Besides, as known, skeletal and respiratory muscle 
changes in heart failure are associated with biochemical and 
metabolic disorders. Thus, the fact of improvement in 
respiratory muscle function in our study may be attributed to 
the beneficial effects of RT in increasing mitochondrial 
enzymes and decreasing pro-inflammatory cytokines [3]. 
The skeletal muscle hypothesis confirms that impairments 
in the skeletal muscle not only alter the skeletal muscle by 
itself, but also contribute to further deteriorations and 
worsens the symptomes [15]. In the same manner as this 
hypothesis, RT also works not only by improving the 
skeletal muscle function, but also by enhancing the overall 
exercise 
performance 
and 
QoL, 
thus 
reducing 
hospitalizations as well as mortality rates. Therefore, regular 
RT programs are very efficient in counteracting these 
negative skeletal muscle abnormalities seen in CHF. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
      This study had shown the crucial effect of RT, for it has 
improved the respiratory muscle strength. RT was safe and 
effective in improving skeletal muscle function, exercise 
performance, dyspnea and QoL in CHF patients, as well as 
in improving cardiac LVEF. 
        We recommend that future studies investigate the 
usefulness of the electrical activity of the muscles known as 
Electromyography (EMG) in clinical diagnosis, in heart 
45
Copyright (c) The Government of NO, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

failure patients, in order to monitor the progression of 
skeletal muscle activity and function. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
      This research was supported by a fund from the National 
Council for Scientific Research (CNRS), Beirut, Lebanon; 
and was approved by the ethics committee of Beirut Cardiac 
Institute, Beirut, Lebanon. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Grazzini, L. Stendardi, F. Gigliotti, and G. Scano, 
“Pathophysiology of exercise dyspnea in healthy subjects and 
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
(COPD),” Respir. Med., vol. 99, no. 11, pp. 1403–1412, 2005. 
[2] M. F. Piepoli and A. J. S. Coats, “The ‘skeletal muscle 
hypothesis in heart failure’ revised,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 34, no. 
7, pp. 486–488, 2013. 
[3] C. Zizola and Schulze P. Christian, “Metabolic and structural 
impairment of skeletal muscle in heart failure,” vol. 6, no. 5, 
pp. 247–253, 2009. 
[4] C. Delagardelle, P. Feiereisen, P. Autier, R. Shita, R. Krecke, 
and J. Beissel, “Strength/endurance training versus endurance 
training in congestive heart failure,” Med Sci Sport. Exerc, 
vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 1868–1872, 2002. 
[5] C. D. McDonald, G. E. Burch, and J. J. Walsh, “Prolonged 
Bed Rest in the Treatment of the Dilated Heart,” Circulation, 
vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 852–856, 1965. 
[6] P. Ponikowski et al., “2016 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis 
and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure,” Eur. Heart 
J., vol. 37, no. 27, p. 2129–2200m, 2016. 
[7] C. W. Yancy et al., “2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the 
management of heart failure: A report of the American 
college of cardiology foundation/american heart association 
task force on practice guidelines,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 
62, no. 16, 2013. 
[8] S. M. Robert, L. Nei, T. Charles, B. Robert, and M. J.Duncan, 
“Comparison of hemodynamic responses to cycling and 
resistance exercise in congestive heart failure secondary to 
ischemic cardiomyopathy,” Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 76, no. 12, 
pp. 977–979, 1995. 
[9] K. Meyer et al., “Hemodynamic responses during leg press 
exercise in patients with chronic congestive heart failure.,” 
Am. J. Cardiol., vol. 83, no. 11, pp. 1537–43, 1999. 
[10] K Kreulich, and H Nagele, “Peripheral mus-cular strength 
training in patients with severe heart failure,” Dtsch Z Sport., 
vol. 52, pp. 11–14, 2001. 
[11] C. T. Pu et al., “Randomized trial of progressive resistance 
training to counteract the myopathy of chronic heart failure,” 
J Appl Physiol, vol. 90, no. 6, pp. 2341–2350, 2001. 
[12] I. Levinger, R. Bronks, D. V. Cody, I. Linton, and A. Davie, 
“Resistance training for chronic heart failure patients on beta 
blocker medications,” Int. J. Cardiol., vol. 102, no. 3, pp. 
493–499, 2005. 
[13] I. Levinger, R. Bronks, D. V Cody, I. Linton, and A. Davie, 
“Perceived exertion as an exercise intensity indicator in 
chronic heart failure patients on Beta-blockers.,” J. Sports Sci. 
Med., vol. 3, no. YISI 1, pp. 23–7, 2004. 
[14] G. Magnusson et al., “High intensity knee extensor training, 
in patients with chronic heart failure. Major skeletal muscle 
improvement,” Eur Hear. J, vol. 17, no. 7, pp. 1048–1055, 
1996. 
[15] A. L. Clark, P. A. Poole-Wilson, and A. J. S. Coats, “Exercise 
limitation in chronic heart failure: Central role of the 
periphery,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 1092–
1102, 1996. 
 
 
46
Copyright (c) The Government of NO, 2018. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

