Assessment of Walking Condition Using Pressure Sensors in the Floor Mat 
 
Tomoko Funayama 
Dept. of Occupational therapy 
Teikyo University of Science 
Yamanashi, Japan 
e-mail: funayama@ntu.ac.jp 
 
 Yasutaka Uchida 
Dept. of Life Science 
Teikyo University of Science 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: uchida@ntu.ac.jp 
 
Yoshiaki Kogure 
Professor Emeritus 
Teikyo University of Science 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: kogure@ntu.ac.jp
 
Abstract— Monitoring equipment and systems for older people 
and those with health problems are usually based on 
measuring vital signs and monitoring behavior and have the 
problems of invasion of privacy and difficulty with operation. 
We have developed a floor mat-type walking measurement 
device with a pressure sensor to determine natural walking 
conditions in daily life. The equipment consisted of a grid of 
eight pressure sensors, each perpendicular and parallel to the 
direction of walking. Although walking speed was calculated 
using the least-Squares Method, we did not show its relevance 
to walking assessments. In this study, to confirm the usefulness 
of walking assessments with this equipment, we simulated 
visual and motion limitations due to weight loading on the 
trunk and upper and lower limbs and compared the results 
with the Timed Up and Go test used in rehabilitation 
assessments. In addition to the conventional least-Squares 
analysis using programming, we directly calculated walking 
speed by manually judging footprints and suggested key points 
in the calculation of walking speed. We analyzed data from the 
Timed Up and Go test, various movement restrictions using a 
floor mat-type sensor device, and normal walking with no 
movement restrictions. Four requirements were found to 
determine the calculation of walking speed, suggesting the 
usefulness of this device. 
Keywords-Walking 
Assessment; 
Floor 
mats; 
Pressure 
Sensors; Activities of Daily Living; Timed Up and Go test. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The world is currently aging, with Japan having the 
highest rate of aging among countries. Early assessment of 
poor health conditions of people with health issues, including 
older people and people with disabilities, is useful to provide 
health care support. Equipment use has become an important 
part of providing support. Many monitoring support 
equipment and systems for older people and others with 
health problems have been developed and marketed in recent 
years [1]-[5]. These systems use not only video but also 
sensors, such as sheets, magnets, tags, ultrasound, infrared, 
etc., to judge problems from vital sign measurements to 
actions. Judgments are often based on vital sign 
measurements to assess health conditions and motion 
monitoring using video and infrared equipment. However, 
these have issues such as invasion of privacy and difficulty 
in using the device.  
We have been studying monitoring systems for those 
with health issues and have developed monitoring equipment 
using a floor mat with pressure sensors [6] [7]. We then used 
the data from the sensors perpendicular to walking to 
calculate the velocity using the Least-Squares Method 
(LSM) and on the left and right data from the parallel sensors 
to perform machine learning. The key points of this 
equipment are twofold: privacy is ensured owing to the use 
of a floor mat, and health conditions are assessed without the 
use of vital sign measurements. In the future, it will be 
possible to measure the motion speed unconsciously in daily 
life without having to switch the equipment on and off. We 
have previously studied patients on dialysis using this 
equipment [8]. 
This report presents a study on the availability of the 
developed floor mat sensor in the rehabilitation field. We 
compared the results of the Timed Up and Go test (TUG), 
which is often used as a gait ability assessment, with those of 
our floor mat sensor. TUG and floor mat walking speeds 
were measured with the participant wearing an older person 
experience set to simulate motor dysfunction. In addition, an 
occupational therapist evaluated the video recordings and 
developed a new speed -calculation method. This study was 
approved by the Ethics Committee on Research with 
Humans as Subjects of the Teikyo University of Science. 
Section II describes the experimental methods for 
measurement and analysis, Section III describes the results, 
Section IV presents the discussion, and Section V presents 
the conclusion. 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

II. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD 
Three subjects wore the older person experience set to 
measure the walking speeds in TUG and on a floor mat with 
grid array sensors. Walking speed was analyzed using the 
existing programming LSM and new methods, along with 
the assessment of walking by an occupational therapist. The 
experimental procedure is as follows: 
 
A. Measurement 
• 
Equipment  
The study used a floor mat with a grid array of 
eight pressure sensors, each perpendicular and 
parallel to the direction of walking. Eight sensors 
(P0–P7) are perpendicular to the walking direction, 
and eight sensors (Q0–Q7) are parallel to the 
walking direction (see Figure 1). Parallel sensors Q 
are 1.5 cm apart and are a set of two. They are 
arranged with four in the front and four in the back. 
Perpendicular sensors are 10 cm apart only at the 
initial P0–P1 sensor interval and 15 cm apart at the 
other sensor intervals. The length of the sensor was 
62 cm, and it measures approximately 120 cm in the 
direction of walking. The equipment size allows its 
use and placement at home. The surface is protected 
by a clear plastic sheet so that the position of the 
sensor position can be checked. The sampling 
frequency of the equipment is 100 Hz. 
 
  
 
 
Figure 1.  Floor mat-type equipment with pressure sensor array. 
 
• 
Walking measurements 
Three subjects in their 50s to 70s (Cases A, B, and 
C) performed TUG and walked on the sensor array 
floor mat under simulated restricted motion while 
wearing the older person experience set (see Figure 
2). The TUG measures the time it takes to get up 
from a chair, go around a cone 3 meters away, walk 
back to the chair, and sit down. We measured the 
time taken.  TUG is often used in walking 
assessment during rehabilitation. We performed the 
test not only with comfortable walking, which is 
standard practice, but also with fast walking. 
The motion restrictions varied by subject. Subject 
A wore tinted eye glasses in addition to (1) trunk 
weighted, and left upper and lower limb restrictions, 
followed by (2) trunk weighted and right upper and 
lower limb restrictions. Subject B was (3) weighted 
on the trunk and had both legs restricted. Subject C 
was (4) weighted on the trunk. 
The subjects then walked on the sensor array floor 
mat without motion restrictions. Comfortable and 
fast walking were performed. Videotaping and ankle 
joint Range Of Motion (ROM) measurements were 
also conducted by an occupational therapist. The 
ROM of the ankle joint is shown in Table I, with 
plantar flexion and dorsiflexion. R and L represent 
the right and the left sides. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.   Timed Up and Go test. 
TABLE I.  
Range Of Motion of cases A, B, and C 
  
Subjects 
Direction of motions 
R / L Side 
Case A 
Case B 
Case C 
plantar flexion 
R 
50 
60 
45 
L 
55 
50 
50 
dorsi flexion 
R 
20 
10 
20 
L 
20 
5 
-5 
 
B. Analysis 
• 
Speed calculation by the LSM      
Speed was calculated by programming using the 
LSM. This is the same analysis method that has 
already been used for patients undergoing dialysis. 
 
yi = a xi+ b 
() 
xi is the time when the P sensor is stepped on and 
yi is the distance from P0 to the stepped-on P sensor. 
Figures 3 and 4 show examples of a graphical 
representation of the output data for P0–P7 and Q0–
Q7. 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 3.  Q sensor output data. 
 
 
Figure 4.  P sensor output data. 
 
For the LSM calculation, data over half the height of 
the highest signal were used. In addition, data with 
very few continuous signals were judged to be noise 
and were not used. Figure 5 shows the time (s) and 
distance (sensor position), where the inclination of 
the red line is the speed. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Speed by the least-Squares Method. 
 
• 
Speed by direct calculation 
A footprint diagram was drawn by looking at the 
raw data from the P and Q sensors, plantar ground 
contact was determined, and the speed was 
calculated (see Figure 6). When two sensors were 
stepped on simultaneously at the same time by a 
single sole, it was assumed to be a single ground 
contact, and the position and time that was the 
middle of the two sensors were used to determine the 
speed. It was calculated directly by manual process 
(Direct Calculation: DC). 
The terms of judgment were as follows: (1) If 
there was an output that appeared to be noise that 
was not understood for a short time, the plantar 
ground contacts were judged to be grounded when 
10 consecutive pieces of data were obtained. (2) 
Data with <2.0% of the maximum value 10 times in 
a row were excluded from sole grounding. (3) When 
two 
front 
and 
rear 
sensor 
data 
responded 
simultaneously, the same plantar contact was 
assumed when >70% of the front sensor data 
overlapped with the rear data. (4) When adjacent 
P-sensors did not respond consecutively, that is, 
there was one or more unresponsive P sensors in 
between, we assumed a different plantar ground 
contact. 
Two major differences were noted between the 
LSM and DC of speed using footprint diagrams. 
First, the LSM calculates the speed based on the 
position and time of each sensor, regardless of 
whether 
the 
two 
sensors 
are 
stepped 
on 
simultaneously. The speed by the DC is calculated 
by judging when two sensors are outputting 
simultaneously, whether they are one footprint or 
two footprints, that is, the same grounding. Second, 
this is whether to use data with small values or 
responses in the calculation or to exclude them and 
treat them as noise. 
 
   
Figure 6.  Footprints and direct calculation. 
 
• 
Comparison with rehabilitation assessment 
 (1) We compared the TUG results to the sensor 
array data. (2) Occupational therapists assessed and 
validated the results by watching the video (see 
Figure 7). 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 7.  Assessed video screen. 
 
On the sensor array, subjects walked straight 
ahead, whereas on TUG, subjects walk straight 
ahead and then U-turn. The speeds on the TUG were 
converted and compared with the LSM and DC 
results on the sensor array data. 
III. 
 RESULTS 
A. Speed by Calculation Method 
The speed results were compared to determine the 
difference 
in 
the 
calculation 
method 
between 
the 
programming LSM and DC with footprint diagrams. Figures 
8–10 represent the speed in meters per second. Data blanks 
in the LSM were those that could not be calculated because 
the number of data points was less than 2. In the graph, 
subjects A, B, and C correspond to 1, 2, and 3, respectively. 
The letters following the numbers are “Rr for right upper and 
lower limb restriction, “Lr” for left upper and lower limb 
restriction, “W” for weight loading, “E” for wearing tinted 
eye glasses, “c” for comfortable walking, and “f” for fast 
walking. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 8.   Walking speed by motion restrictions of subject A. 
 
 
Figure 9.  Walking speed by motion restrictions of subject B. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Walking speed by motion restrictions of subject C. 
 
The results show that LSM tends to be judged as walking 
faster than DC. 
B. TUG and Walking on Sensor Array Floor Mat 
The speed of the TUG was compared with that of 
walking on a sensor array floor mat. The walking speed on 
the sensor-placed floor mat was calculated using two 
methods: LSM and DC. The mean speeds of subjects A, B, 
and C were calculated when they walked comfortably and 
fast with restricted motion. Figure11 shows the results for the 
TUG, LMS, and DC. The figure is graphed in ascending 
order of the TUG speed. 
The calculation results from the pressure sensor array 
differed according to two calculation methods: LSM by 
programming and DC by manual calculation using a 
footprint diagram. In the LSM, the calculation result showed 
that the speed was slower by 3 of 7 times than the slowest 
speed in the “left upper and lower limbs and eye limits 
(1LrE_c)” TUG in Case A. In DC, the calculation result 
shows that only 1 of 7 times the speed was slower than the 
slowest speed in the “1LrE_c” TUG in Case A. The 
relationship between TUG and DC is higher, which is a 
manual calculation using footprint diagrams, than between 
TUG and LSM using programming. In the sensor array, 
walking is measured only straight ahead, whereas in TUG, 
walking is measured both straight ahead and U-turns. 
Therefore, the speed of TUG walking would be slower than 
that of the sensor array walking. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 11.  Speed comparison between TUG and sensor array walking. 
 
The two discrepancies between TUG and DC were 3 
W_c and 3 W_f for subject C. Subject C’s walking was 
assessed on video by an occupational therapist, and a left-
right difference was judged. Both 3 W_c and 3 W_f was 
observed during plantar grounding of the left foot. The ankle 
joint ROM in case C was R20/45 and L-5/50, with a left–
right difference. 
 
C. Judgment of Left and Right Foot Speed 
The results of the speeds calculated by the DC for the 
simulated left and right upper and lower limb movements 
when restricted are shown in Figures 12 and 13, respectively; 
Figure 12 shows the right motion restrictions, and Figure 13 
shows the left motion restrictions, x-axis is the plantar-
grounded side of the foot, and y-axis is the speed. Only in 
case A the right and left upper and lower limbs were 
restricted. 
 
 
Figure 12.  Right upper and lower limb restrictions. 
 
Figure 13.  Left upper and lower limb restrictions. 
 
The right-side walking tended to be faster than that of the 
left side regardless of whether the motions were restricted to 
the left or right side. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The equipment for monitoring health conditions up to 
now usually measures vital signs, and the monitoring care 
system captures movements. In this study, we used a floor 
mat that provides privacy while monitoring movements and 
enables assessment of health status based on walking 
patterns. However, the reliability of walking assessment 
using this device has not been compared with that of 
conventional assessments. In this study, we compared this 
device with TUG, which is commonly used for walking 
assessment. Owing to simulated motor limitations with only 
three subjects, it is not yet possible to generalize the results 
to people with disabilities. However, there was a tendency 
toward a relationship with conventional TUG. 
In addition to the LSM of calculating walking speed that 
we have been using, we performed manual calculation using 
footprints, which showed a higher relationship with TUG. 
Data with low relationships were considered possibly 
influenced by left–right differences in the ankle joints. 
Footprints were created and calculated directly and manually 
according to the four requirements. The calculation 
requirements are related to whether it is a one- or two-
footprint diagram, that is, the same plantar ground contact, 
and to determine whether data with small values or responses 
should be used in the calculation or excluded and treated as 
noise. In this study, 10 consecutive datasets were used: in the 
case of simultaneous response by two sensors (front and 
rear), the same plantar contact was considered when at least 
70% of the front sensor data overlapped with the rear sensor 
data, but this number may vary depending on the distance 
between sensors and walking speed. Although the 
measurements 
were 
obtained 
with 
simulated 
motor 
impairment, some older people and those with disabilities 
were slower than others. If there is no output from the P 
sensor, data from the front and rear P sensors can be judged 
as different plantar ground contacts; therefore, it is effective 
to narrow the sensor interval. The LSM programming 
analysis was probably faster speed because two sensor data 
from the same plantar, that is, one footprint, were treated the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

same way as two data from different plantar contacts, that is, 
two footprints. Although the speed calculated by LSM had a 
low correlation with TUG, it was similar to the speed 
calculated by manual DC. Because this study was based on a 
small amount of data, the correlation may be higher in the 
future when huge data are used for analysis in daily life 
measurements. 
The length of the equipment was set at approximately 
120 cm, which is too small for determining the walking 
speed. However, as the equipment can be placed at home at 
all times considering its size, anything larger than this is not 
considered practical. Even with the 120-cm equipment, 
differences between the left and right feet could be detected. 
Suppose the width of Q is narrowed so that it can 
automatically determine whether the left or right sole is 
grounded. The speed at which the left and right soles are 
grounded can be calculated, and changes in walking ability 
by left and right can be detected.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this study, we investigated three subjects using a small 
amount of data. Therefore, the results of this study cannot be 
generalized. However, a relationship was suggested between 
TUG and array sensors, that is, the floor mat-type array 
sensors could be used for walking condition assessments. 
Occupational and physical therapists routinely assess 
walking conditions, but do not always use measuring devices 
or quantify them. They observed and assessed their 
interactions with the patients. Health conditions were 
expressed as a state of walking. If walking conditions can be 
measured naturally in daily life, it will be possible to assess 
walking ability without a therapist. This also leads to 
objective data showing the therapist’s tacit knowledge of 
experience. Motion speed measurement with pressure 
sensors has already been studied, as well as getting up out of 
the bed. The use of machine learning has also begun. We 
plan to study both walking and getting up from bed in the 
future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JAPS KANENHI Grant 
Number JP20K11924. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. M. Alam and E. B. Haidar, “Surveying Wearable Human 
Assistive 
Technology 
for 
Life 
and 
Safety 
Critical 
Applications: Standards, Challenges and Opportunities,” 
Sensors 2014, 14, pp.9153-9209, 2014. 
[2] V. Bucinskas et al., “Wearable Feet Pressure Senosr for 
Human gait and Falling Diagnosis, Sensors 2021, 5240, 2021. 
[3] J. Beyea, C. A. McGibbon, A. Sexton, J. Noble, and C. 
O’Connell, “Convergent Validity of a Wearable Sensor 
System for Measuring Sub-Task Performance during the 
Timed Up-and-Go Test ”, Sensors, 17, 934, 2017, doi: 
10.3390/s17040934. 
[4] S. Subramaniam, S. Majumder, A. I. Faisal, and M. J. Deen, 
“Insole-Based Systems for Health Monitoring: Current 
Solutions and Research Challenges”, Sensors 2022, 22, 438, 
2022. doi: 10.3390/s22020438. 
[5] A. Steinhage and C. Lauterbach, “Monitoring Movement 
Behavior by means of a Large Area Proximity Sensor Array 
in the Floor”, Proceedings of the 2nd Workshop on Behavior 
Monitoring 
and 
Interpretation, 
BMI'08, 
Conference, 
Kaiserslautern, Germany, September, 2008. 
[6] Y. Uchida, T. Funayama, and Y. Kogure, “Suport Vector 
Machine Analysis to Detect Deviation in a Health Condition 
Monitoring System”, Sensors & Transducers, vol. 237,  pp. 1-
3-108, 2019. 
[7] Y. Uchida, T. Funayama, and Y. Kogure, “Classification 
Accuracy of Suport Vector Machine, Decision Tree and 
Random Forest modules when Applied to a Health 
Monitoring with Flexible Sensors”, Sensors & Transducers, 
vol. 245, pp.83-89, 2020. 
[8] Y. Uchida et al., “Feature Value Extraction for Body 
Condition Change Measurement System Using Pressure 
Sensor Array” Human Interface Society in Japanese, vol. 24 
no.1, pp. 79-82, 2022, ISSN 2188-6652. 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

