 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Building Mental Resilience through Online Interactive Learning for Students in 
Higher Education
Zi-Ying Chong1, Ah-Choo Koo1, Hawa Rahmat2  
1Faculty of Creative Multimedia 
2Faculty of Applied Communication 
Multimedia University 
Cyberjaya, Malaysia 
Email: 1221400561@student.mmu.edu.my, ackoo@mmu.edu.my, hawa.rahmat@mmu.edu.my
 
 
Abstract—The global pandemic of COVID-19 has brought 
significant changes to the academic life of higher education 
students. Many of them face stressful and challenging situations, 
which calls for the need of resilience. The awareness, 
identification and practice of resilience traits are beneficial for 
students and this learning aspect is often not being taught within 
the university courses. The objectives of this paper are: 1) To 
review resilience models and identify resilient traits from the 
models, 2) To propose a study of online resilience building for 
higher education students using interactive tools and online 
modules. Three different models were reviewed to help building 
academic resilience. Some key traits of resilience are identified 
from the models, and to be included in the online interactive 
learning and modules in “Resilience Building” Knowledge 
Programme for higher educations. 
Keywords- Interactive learning; online module; resilience 
building; interactive tool. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the digital era where cybercultures took over the world, 
their related technologies became a part of our daily life. 
Devices and gadgets are becoming more and more accessible 
with the development of technologies. Students in higher 
education institutions are exposed to information overload, 
fake news, and infodemic perspective, which has the effect of 
diverting their attention away from their studies. As this 
happens, industries, such as medical, education, and 
manufacturing each have multimedia tools developed for 
different purposes and to meet different needs. One of them 
was the need to improve mental well-being or wellness of the 
talents in these industries. 
Since the COVID-19 pandemic outbreak, countless 
students worldwide were led into a new mode of study. 
Instead of physical and face-to-face classes, hybrid and online 
modes of study have emerged as new mainstream modes of 
study. This brings the students into a distressing situation, 
which calls for inner mental strength to adapt to this ever-
changing world, and resilience became a valuable quality for 
students to succeed in a challenging situation. Alongside the 
adaptive strategies in maintaining normal work and school life 
in midst of the pandemic, industries and tools that provide 
online learning platforms, such as Zoom and Google 
Workspace also flourished. This opens an opportunity for 
educators to convey their message and teaching resources in a 
more accessible way, which would benefit learners and future 
talents regardless of their locations. Previous Resilience 
Building Programme were mostly in-house and face-to-face 
within an institution. With online and interactive technologies 
as an enabler, this study explores open concepts of Resilience 
Building Programme for wider access to students in higher 
learning institutions.  
Section II introduces the background of the proposed 
study, the challenges faced by higher education students in the 
post pandemic era, and the key concepts of the study are 
highlighted. Section III starts to address the first objective of 
the paper by briefly reviewed the three resilience related 
models, which can contribute to a robust guide of resilience 
modules, and finally Section IV addresses the second research 
objective by proposing a study on Resilience Building 
Programme to be recommended for higher education students. 
The last section concludes the paper.  
II. 
RESEARCH BACKGROUND AND CONCEPTS 
A. Online and Interactive Learning 
Online learning is an educational concept that was brought 
up over two decades ago. It can be defined as an alternative 
way of study, mainly at the tertiary education level, and is 
often referred to as e-learning as well. It is also an umbrella 
term for learning process that took place across distance 
instead of in traditional classrooms [1]. 
Interactive learning is a type of learning that required and 
encouraged student participation and engagement during the 
teaching process. Instead of lectures, students are encouraged 
to explore and learn through interactive learning environment 
with the presence of instructors, peers and materials. It can be 
a problem or project-based learning and sometimes requires 
discussion and sharing. This type of learning method also 
incorporated multimedia tools such as, videos, websites, 
games, and applications to bring the learning process into 
another 
dimension 
and 
increase 
engagement. 
This 
environment is open, virtual, regardless of geographical 
location, and time.  
During the COVID-19 outbreak, universities and schools 
are required to adhere to the government’s constrain on order 
and policy. Through the phase of quarantines, both modes of 
learning were used more often than ever. Students were 
required to adapt and have classes, tests, quizzes, and submit 
assignments online. In a situation where social contact is 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
discouraged, interactive learning was the main tool that 
students rely on for their learning and developments. The 
concept of a virtual classroom was widely known among 
students and the practice incubates tools and applications that 
aid such a learning mode. The changes were revolutionary as 
the mentioned mode of learning has been more accessible than 
ever. Video conferencing and interactive tools such as, Zoom, 
Kahoot, and Google Classroom have become a crucial part of 
a student’s study life. Utilizing such tools also provided 
convenience to the process of training and learning and made 
the processes more convenient for some, as traveling or 
commuting is not required. It is also a mode of study that ease 
social anxiety as students felt more secure and would be more 
willing to share and interact with instructors [2]. 
B. Students’ distress and related issues 
Among the common stressors of a student are academic 
responsibilities or pressures, finances, anxiety, poor 
work/school-life balance, and family issues. On top of the 
already stressful tertiary education, students learning during 
the pandemic was also isolated and faced the fear of 
contracting the COVID-19 virus. The fear of going 
unemployed after graduation also rose as work situations also 
revolved in a different mode during the pandemic. The 
spreading of fake news is another fear that cannot be taken for 
granted. The Malaysian Communications and Multimedia 
Commission's (MCMC) findings on the propagation of fake 
news about coronavirus mortality is concerning in our culture 
[3]. This is because irresponsible people's attitudes provoke 
panic and concern in those who lack reputable sources of viral 
knowledge and are readily duped. They disseminated the fake 
news via various social media platforms such as, WhatsApp 
groups, family, community, and so on. A reasonable person 
should be able to verify their legitimacy by visiting more 
accurate websites, such as, the Ministry of Health Malaysia's 
website, MySejahtera or their social media channels. Amidst 
all the stress and fears, one might face psychological issues 
such as, anxiety, depression, and even develop eating 
disorders. This leaves a negative impact on students’ 
academic performance and further discourages them from 
achieving their potential [4]. 
 
Figure 1. Statistics show the mental health conditions of adolescents in 
Malaysia [5]. 
The statistic in Figure 1 shows that Malaysian adolescents 
aged 13-17 experienced depression, anxiety, and stress. 
Among them, anxiety was the most significant issue as 2 out 
of 5 faced it with 42.3% of females and 37.1% of males. 
C. Mental Well-being and Resilience in Academic Settings 
Resilience can be defined as the capacity to recover or 
bounce back from difficulties and challenging situation. The 
American Psychological Association once defines resilience 
as “the process of adapting well in the face of adversity, 
trauma, tragedy, threats or even significant sources of stress.” 
[6] In the situation of trauma and stress, such as financial 
problems, death of a loved one, due dates and failure, calls for 
this quality to strengthen one’s inner strength and determine 
their strategy to overcome hardships. In a student’s reality, 
resilience can differ in multiple degrees across their domains 
of life as they play their role as students, children, or 
employees. Developing resilience would help said students 
maintain a healthy, stable, and functional mental state after an 
adverse event or amidst challenges of academic life. Students 
could greatly benefit from having a tailored program to foster 
resilience or mental strength within them as an aid to support 
their identified challenges.  
On the other hand, mental well-being is a term often 
associated with resilience. Being in a state of good mental 
well-being keeps students thriving in various areas of life, 
such as, interpersonal relationships, academic performance, 
and work. Being in a mentally well state is in fact not 
equivalent to the absence of mental illness or adversity but 
acknowledging and believing the said problems can be 
handled and healed. This resonates with the concept of 
resilience and hence resilience is one of the qualities that ones 
can enhance their mental well-being.  
The qualities of well-being and resilience are vital for 
students to face their academic challenges and stress. By 
acquiring them, students can have the chance to display their 
potential in academic settings. This helps them to gain control 
of their life and to build soft skills, which would, in turn, help 
them adapt to the work environment after graduation. These 
qualities are believed to be a learnable skill or trait to help 
them flourish despite facing tumultuous situations. 
D. Interactive learning 
Interactive learning is a type of learning method that 
encourages learning exchange and independent study with the 
aid of interactive tools and means such as, the Internet, 
website, games, and applications. It requires hands-on activity 
or approaches for the students to build engagement and learn 
a certain topic. It can be conducted through guided activities 
or interactions with various tools [7]. 
E. Online Modules 
The term module is often used to describe unit or lessons. 
It breaks down knowledge into digestible, smaller pieces with 
a clear progressive path to build understanding on a field or 
skill. Online course or modules can be defined as a web-based 
learning experience in which students are able to access to 
teaching materials via online or multimedia tools such as, 
audio or video [8]. Online modules are designed for students 
with academically sound content that is devoid of incorrect 
information or fake news. 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
F. Interactive tools 
An interactive tool is a method to induce engagement 
within a targeted audience or user by providing them with 
functions within webpage, application, or other multimedia 
tool that users can interact at their own pace. It can also 
contain information, have different functionalities or 
assessment, and with an educational purpose. It is also widely 
used in fields that require huge amount of skill training and 
simulations [9]. 
III. 
RESILIENCE BUILDING MODELS FOR STUDENTS’ 
WELL-BEING 
A. The Need of Building Resilience for Students 
Students faced different stressors on academic aspects, 
which included due dates, assignment workload, and peer 
pressure. To face these stressors, students can benefit 
themselves by building resilience. However, resilience 
building is not officially taught in many university course 
modules. To have academic resilience as a student means to 
face challenges with a never giving up attitude, able to bounce 
back from a failed attempt, and eventually drive themselves 
towards success. This also allows students to have capacity to 
perform better even in a disadvantaged background. This 
helps students to be a high achiever in academic background. 
Resilience building is a crucial part of training for 
students. They should be exposed to various resilience 
models. Three resilience models are reviewed as follows: 
B. The 5-Part Model of Resilience 
The 5-part model of resilience would be the theoretical 
foundation of research and training for students (refer to 
Figure 2). It consists of five components that “represent the 
interaction of an individual's environment, thoughts, feelings, 
behaviors, and physical reactions” [10], which was also the 
pillar of building resilience.  
 
Figure 2. The extended five-part model of resilience [10] 
These pillars were used to understand the past experience 
of individuals in cognitive behavioral therapy, especially 
those who suffered in distress or adverse events. Through this, 
resilience is investigated as a multidimensional concept that 
was built up from personal, social, and physical resources. The 
concept of this resilience model was first brought up in the 
1999 by Kumpfer and included some internal and external 
aspects. This 5-part model was an updated one that recognized 
the key part in internal and external aspects while broaden the 
environmental factors such as, family, community and 
societal support on top of the five identified pillars of 
resilience.  
This model would be a guide to students’ internal aspects, 
which were cognitions, emotions, behaviors, and physical 
activities as well as their external factor, the environment. 
Cognitive aspect was how individuals interpret the situation 
they faced and their outlook on it. Emotion describes the 
feelings and thinking style, which have an impact on 
individual’s mood and thoughts. Behavior describes the 
reaction and action individuals take and utilize in different 
situations. This is not to be confused with physical activities, 
which was the physical sensation that individuals experience. 
It could be non-autonomous such as, anxiety, nausea and 
shortness of breath though it can be controlled by consciously 
managing 
it 
through 
rest 
and relaxation. Through 
understanding these aspects and how they worked, resilience 
and what foster it can be understood to help those students 
who wish to acquire resilience as their own trait [10]. 
C. The 5R model 
The 5R model is a framework proposed by Global Health 
Connect (GHC) [12] which is formulated based on the 
psychosocial foundations that can enhance well-being and 
productivity at workplaces. This model creates mental health 
awareness based on Resilience, Relationship, Roles, Respect 
and Resolution. It is believed that this mental health 5R model 
will be useful for students as well to improve their resilience, 
focus, relationship with others and well-being. This model is 
applied in the GHC’s psychosocial interactive mobile 
application for workforces, named as Empathic.  
It encompasses 5 aspects, which the first aspect is 
resilience, as it is critical to overcoming stressful situations in 
any type of work environment. The relationship is a factor that 
provided psychological safety and assure success and 
achievements. Roles can provide clarity to goals and ensure 
an undisrupted workflow and keeps the working process 
efficient. It also improves the sense of satisfaction as 
individuals contribute to their own roles. This model also 
included resolution which is a sense of purpose and meaning 
that drives people forward. The final aspect of this model is 
respect that aimed to reduce interpersonal conflicts, especially 
when mingling in a diverse culture [12]. 
Introducing students to this model would be an aid for the 
students to observe their current situations from different 
dimensions and viewpoints thus making their decision based 
on better judgement. 
D. The PERMA model 
This model was introduced by Martin Seligman [13] as an 
evidence-based approach to achieving a happy state and 
decreasing the likeliness of anxiety, depression, and stress. 
This model included many activities to systematically 
improve individual’s positive emotions (P), engagement (E), 
relationships (R), meaning (M), and achievement (A), which 
fits in the PERMA abbreviation.  
This model pursues the concept of happiness and well-
being through said five aspects. It describes the significance 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
of optimism in life, relationships, and situations. It also 
introduced the flow state where one is fully involved and 
enjoying what they do while getting rewarded with efforts 
made. This model also states the sense of belonging is a key 
to well-being and isolation and loneliness in a relationship 
often do harm to one’s mental well-being. Living a 
meaningful life with a sense of accomplishment also 
contributes to a state of happiness as well [14]. 
The concept of happiness and positive psychology would 
bring students to the attention of the importance of 
consciously managing and reaching for their happiness 
through positive thoughts and choices. 
E. Instilling Traits of Resilience for Students 
To possess the traits of resilience with improved mental 
well-being, students should acquire a few traits of resilience 
based on the three reviewed models. According to the 5-part 
model of resilience, students should have a positive view to 
themselves in terms of their ability and potential. They should 
also have stable emotion and consciously manage their 
thinking and behavior in a healthy and positive way. This also 
resonates with the concept of PERMA, which encourages the 
students to find and manage happiness in what they do. These 
two models will help in training students to have a positive 
attitude when facing challenges, bounce back from failure, 
and build up confidence gradually. This practice encourages 
students to face challenges and stress with a changed attitude 
and hopefully found success of their own way. The 5-R model 
provides a dimension for students to recognize the importance 
of being resilient for them in academic life with continuous 
assignments or projects to be accomplished. Students’ 
apprenticeship and work-life balance should consider the 
tenets of 5Rs, to be more comprehensive for building their 
resilience. Furthermore, students can also consider to get help 
or support from others when trauma and stressors are 
overwhelming. A resilient student will be able to use all the 
internal and external strength they have with intention to 
succeed in what they do. This would mean that they are 
determined to achieve goals even when facing setbacks and 
failure. This will also help them cope with negative situations 
and emotions. They need to manage their strong emotions and 
consciously stay in a healthy thinking style that encourage 
them to never give up. 
An online course was conducted to participants consisted 
of university students from the UK. Each was given rating of 
happiness each week where, on average, happiness ratings 
significantly increased throughout the course [15] (refer to 
Figure 3). The study found that the first-year university 
students took the same online course during their first term 
experienced positive benefits to mental well-being in 
comparison to the control group who were the wait-list group. 
Hence online based training can be a promising external 
support for students to improve their mental well-being and 
resilience. 
 
 
Figure 3. Statistics shows the rating of students’ happiness increase over the 
course of 10 weeks  
By using an online approach, students can feel secure by 
keeping their identity a secret when they share experience and 
receive help. The location will also not put as a constraint for 
students to get help.  
IV. 
RESILIENCE BUILDING KNOWLEDGE PROGRAMME 
FOR STUDENTS IN HIGHER EDUCATION: A PROPOSED STUDY 
This section is to address the second objective of this 
paper. A study is proposed with the aim to examine whether 
an online interactive module of resilience is able to improve 
final year students’ awareness of resilience, its traits and the 
coping strategies in their attempt to achieve academic 
performance.  
For undergraduate students, their final year was the most 
crucial year for them to build employable skills as they will 
eventually graduate and join the workforce. This is also the 
year that students will face most of their academic challenges 
and would greatly benefit from Resilience Building 
Programme. Hence this research will also review some 
resilience models currently available, which would aid the 
students in pursuing their academic success.  
This would help them to thrive in their higher education 
studies and achieve academic goals. With the awareness of 
maintaining and managing their mental well-being for a more 
resilient self, students can be guided to acquire the quality of 
resilience to navigate themselves to success. This would be 
done by focus group discussion with the targeted students. 
The students will be requested to fill two instruments 
regarding their mental well-being and resilience. The 
instruments involved are the Kessler Psychological Distress 
Scale (K10) and The Utrecht Work Engagement Scale for 
Students (UWES–9S), which carries ten and nine items 
respectively to collect quantitative data for this research. K10 
provided a brief screen and aided in identifying the level of 
distress among the selected students. This scale is highly 
reliable despite its simplicity [16]. The Utrecht Work 
Engagement Scale for Students (UWES–9S) measures the 
levels of energy and mental resilience in the process of 
working. It also investigates the sense of significance, 
inspiration, 
pride, 
attitude 
towards 
challenges, 
and 
concentration in work [17]. They will then be guided through 
an interactive module online based on the three models stated 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
before to help build their resilience. The K10 and UWES-9S 
instruments will be filled before and after the module as 
comparison. Data collected will be computed and analyze for 
group comparison. Interactive tools such as Google Meet, 
Empathic application and website will be used in this module. 
The contents of the module will consist of and backed by the 
three models, the 5R, PERMA, and the 5-part resilience model 
in order for them to acquire the traits in these models. Data 
collected will be used to design a resilient building application 
aimed to build resilience among higher education students. 
This study will take approximately a year.  
The significance of the study is that when resilient 
building for students can be done easily in terms of location 
and cost, it can be accessible for many students, and they are 
able to get a fair chance to be successful in academic life. 
Students’ dropout rate and complications caused by academic 
stress can be reduced simultaneously.  
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This paper highlighted some key concepts of research to 
be proposed and carried out in a study. The goal of research is 
to improve awareness and possibly to build resilience and 
well-being of students in higher education. The study will 
utilize online learning, interactive tools, video conferencing 
tools and online modules for reaching to a wider group of 
students.   
Resilience building for younger generation is urgent and 
important, especially those who are studying in the technical 
domains and vulnerable of information loading with low 
Internet literacy level. Soft skills on resilience awareness and 
learning should be widely introduced to benefit more young 
learners. Moreover, the skills may assist them in remaining 
attentive of any material loaded on the internet elsewhere. 
They are supposed to choose and filter the suitable 
information that is loaded to them. 
Online learning, Resilience Building module, interactive 
learning and engagement should be the next agenda of higher 
education, so that the graduates produced are resilience in 
facing greater challenges in their life and works.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the Malaysia Ministry of 
Higher Education’s Fundamental Research Grant Scheme 
(FRGS) [FRGS/1/2020/SS0/MMU/02/8].  
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Singh and A. Thurman, "How many ways can we define 
online learning? A systematic literature review of definitions 
of online learning (1988-2018)", American Journal of Distance 
Education, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 289-306, 2019. Available: 
10.1080/08923647.2019.1663082. 
[Retrieved: 
September 
2022]. 
[2] Z. Jing, S. Lu, J. Turi, and A. Warda, "Learning online 
sustainable education projects and students behavioral 
intentions during COVID-19", Tobacco Regulatory Science, 
vol. 
7, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
3543-3558, 
2021. 
Available: 
10.18001/trs.7.5.1.132. [Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[3] Malaysian Communications and Multimedia Commission 
(MCMC) 
Portal. 
Retrieved 
March 
2020 
at 
https://www.mcmc.gov.my/ 
[4] I. Rodrigues, T. Nunes, C. Cortez, and A. Lourenço, "E-
learning impact on veterinary medical student’s mental health 
during the COVID-19 pandemic", Journal of Veterinary 
Medical 
Education, 
p.e20210052, 
2022. 
Available: 
10.3138/jvme-2021-0052. [Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[5] Institute for Public Health (IPH), "Institute for Public Health 
(IPH)’s National Health and Morbidity Survey (NHMS)", 
Institute for Public Health (IPH)’, Setia Alam, 2018. 
[Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[6] E. Dean, "Resilience: what it is – and what it isn’t", Nursing 
Standard, vol. 36, no. 11, pp. 39-39, 2021. Available: 
10.7748/ns.36.11.39.s20. [Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[7] X. Xia, "Sparse learning strategy and key feature selection in 
interactive learning environment", Interactive Learning 
Environments, 
pp. 
1-18, 
2021. 
Available: 
10.1080/10494820.2021.1998913. 
[Retrieved: 
September 
2022]. 
[8] A. Brel, A. Artyukhina, N. Tankabekyan, N. Skladanovskaya, 
and E. Zhoglo, "Bite-size learning as a strategic format of 
modular online learning”, Современные проблемы науки и 
образования (Modern Problems of Science and Education), 
no. 52021, pp. 49-49, 2021. Available: 10.17513/spno.31167. 
[Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[9] F. Elkhamisy and A. Sharif, "Medical students perceptions of 
virtual learning stations as an innovative teaching tool: a 
qualitative study", Interactive Learning Environments, pp. 1-
17, 
2021. 
Available: 
10.1080/10494820.2021.2002366. 
[Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[10] I. de Terte, J. Becker, and C. Stephens, "An Integrated Model 
for Understanding and Developing Resilience in the Face of 
Adverse Events", Journal of Pacific Rim Psychology, vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 20-26, 2009. Available: 10.1375/prp.3.1.20. 
[Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[11] B. Stoliker, A. Vaughan, J. Collins, M. Black, and G. 
Anderson, "Building personal resilience following an online 
resilience training program for BScN students", Western 
Journal of Nursing Research, vol. 44, no. 8, pp. 755-764, 2021. 
Available: 
10.1177/01939459211017240. 
[Retrieved: 
September 2022]. 
[12] Globalhealthconnect.co, 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.globalhealthconnect.co/empathic. [Accessed: 06- 
Sep- 2022]. 
[13] M. Seligman, Flourish: A Visionary New Understanding of 
Happiness and Well-being. Free Press, New York, 2011 
[14] A. Mayo, E. Velaz, N. Nieto, and P. Sánchez, "Working 
happiness in the human resource of a university organization 
based on Seligman’s PERMA Model", International Journal of 
Human Resource Studies, vol. 9, no. 4, p. 101, 2019. Available: 
10.5296/ijhrs.v9i4.15718. [Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[15] C. Hobbs, S. Jelbert, L. Santos, and B. Hood, "Evaluation of a 
credit-bearing online administered happiness course on 
undergraduates’ mental well-being during the COVID-19 
pandemic", PLOS ONE, vol. 17, no. 2, p. e0263514, 2022. 
Available: 
https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.p
one.0263514. [Retrieved: September 2022]. 
[16] M. Smout, "The factor structure and predictive validity of the 
Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10) in children and 
adolescents", Australian Psychologist, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 102-
113, 
2019. 
Available: 
10.1111/ap.12376. 
[Retrieved: 
September 2022]. 
[17] M. Carmona-Halty, W. Schaufeli, and M. Salanova, "The 
Utrecht Work Engagement Scale for Students (UWES–9S): 
Factorial validity, reliability, and measurement invariance in a 
Chilean sample of undergraduate university students", 
Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 10, p.1017, 2019. Available: 
10.3389/fpsyg.2019.01017. [Retrieved: September 2022].  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

