An Integrated, Web-Based, and Automated 
Healthcare Institution Quality Management (HIQMA) System 
 
Hassan M. Khachfe, Bassam Hussein, 
Walid Hassan 
Center for Quality Assurance, Institutional Assessment 
& Scientific Research (QAIASR) 
Dept. of Industrial Engineering 
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Lebanese International University,  
Beirut, Lebanon 
 
Email: {hassan.khachfe, bassam.hussein, 
walid.hassan}@liu.edu.lb  
Ali Hage-Diab, Hassan Bazzi, Ayman Dayekh, 
Amin Haj-Ali 
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Engineering  
Dept. of Information Technology 
Dept. of Computer and Communications Engineering  
Lebanese International University, 
Beirut, Lebanon 
 
Email: {ali.hagediab, hasan.bazzi, ayman.dayekh, 
amin.hajali}@liu.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract—This paper describes HIQMA, an integrated, web-
based, and fully automated healthcare institution quality 
management system. HIQMA includes many applications, 
starting with a quality handbook for the individual beneficiary 
organizations and not ending by the development of service 
guidelines.  It is based on a result-proven design approach that 
will enhance medical and healthcare services.  The different 
stakeholders are provided with a common framework for 
designing, implementing, evaluating and improving these 
services. The system is scalable in the sense that additional 
professional development tools based on the worked service 
guidelines can be implemented. 
Keywords—healthcare; quality management system (QMS).   
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Constant upgrading of the quality of healthcare centers is 
a key priority at institutional, national, regional, and 
international levels.  Recent charted European agreements 
placed the objective of increasing the attractiveness of 
healthcare institutions and promoting medical tourism [3] as 
a 
key 
objective 
along 
with 
quality 
improvement 
requirements (e.g., the EU-OECD agreement on healthcare 
indicators [1], EUPHORIC Project [2], etc.). 
To achieve such key objectives, most of the current 
systems follow the classical methodology of cyclic planning, 
implementation, assessment and review, and examine the 
process as a relative and contextual concept. That process is 
depicted in Figure 1 [4].  The above approach is usually 
taken to avoid the creation of a pervasive and unequivocal 
definition of healthcare quality. An effectual Quality 
Management 
System 
(QMS) 
targets 
the 
systemic 
development and communication of a customer-focused 
mission, strategies, and action plans.  Thereby, listening and 
responding 
to 
customers’ 
needs 
and 
expectations, 
empowering employees to keep improving and increasing 
their satisfaction with their work processes and environment, 
and gathering and analyzing Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) to enhance organizational and process results are of 
immense importance for the good governance of an 
institution [5].   
 
Consequently, an integrated web-based Healthcare 
Institution Quality Management (HIQMA) system is 
required to improve the medical and healthcare services. The 
system attributes include many applications, starting with a 
quality 
handbook 
for 
the 
individual 
beneficiary 
organizations, continuing with the reformed professional 
training and advisory service concepts, and ending with the 
developed service guidelines.  In addition, scalability and 
customizability are intrinsic requirements of the system. 
These attributes ensure that different stakeholders are 
provided with a common framework for designing, 
implementing, evaluating and improving these services.  
This paper describes the functionality of HIQMA system 
as well as some of its attributes and services. Section II 
describes the system in details. Section III outlines the 
governance and standard compliance dimensions. Section IV 
presents some results and impact assessments. Further 
enhancements are described in Section V. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Classical methodology of cyclic planning. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

II. 
 TOOL DESCRIPTION 
 Managing quality performance requires a comprehensive 
approach that has a dynamic nature in terms of agility and 
customization. This becomes highly important when dealing 
with healthcare institutions as they must carefully consider 
and control their activities to ensure all quality requirements 
are met. The integrated web-based automated HIQMA 
system that we built has been designed to assist such 
organizations in implementing and maintaining this 
comprehensive approach by delivering tools structured 
around the ISO 9000 family of international standards for 
quality management taking into consideration the special 
needs and features for healthcare services [6]. 
HIQMA is a centralized management system that 
provides a portal to critical quality information and facilitates 
quality performance improvement through requirement 
tracking, notifications and real-time management reporting. 
It has been designed to streamline and automate quality 
management processes of any medical organization and 
assist in the effective implementation of wide quality 
initiatives on a “use per need basis”.  The software system is 
100% web-based, highly configurable QMS that helps 
organizations track, analyze, and report on quality 
management in addition to streamlining existing processes 
and enforcing their application.   
The system was deployed for the first time in Lebanon in 
early 2011.  Since then, the system has been deployed in 7 
medical institutions covering 3 private hospitals with 100+ 
bed capacity, 2 polyclinics and 2 medical labs.  As a part of 
the system’s development and evolution plan, a new version 
of the software is installed every 6 months in all 
locations.  Typically, the new software releases include bug 
fixes, further enhancements and new features.  In an attempt 
to ensure customer satisfaction and continuous quality 
improvement, an annual on-line customer survey is 
conducted.  The survey is comprised of 20 questions 
covering 4 distinctive areas:  functionality, compliance, 
efficiency and quality control.   A quantitative scale of 1-5 is 
used with 1 being poor and 5 being excellent.  In the first 
survey conducted in early 2012, a total of 5 institutions 
responded to the survey and an average score of 3.90 was 
recorded.  In the second survey conducted in early 2013, a 
total of 7 institutions responded to the survey giving the 
system an average score of 4.36.  This suggests that the 
system has evolved nicely and is a viable candidate for wider 
deployment and adoption by other medical institutes. In the 
next sections, the main features of the system will be 
described in further details. 
A. Web-Based Application 
From a technical perspective, the system is web-based, 
with all of its features and their respective functionality 
accessible through any web browser. It can be hosted inside 
the healthcare institute’s Local Area Network (LAN) with 
open or closed access from outside the institute’s premises. 
The system can also be hosted online using any preferred 
hosting service provider. In addition, it offers a deployment 
model for organizations preferring to outsource hardware 
and software maintenance.  Worldwide roll-out of the system 
can be completed in less than 6 hours enabling users with a 
URL, username and password to access the system from – 
virtually – any Internet access point.  According to recent 
findings, web-based interfaces reduce the learning curve of 
medical or administrative staff who can begin to work with 
the system shortly after installation and incorporate it in their 
daily tasks and activities [7]. 
B. Centralized Activities Management and Customization  
Through a friendly Graphical User Interface (GUI), the 
system provides the user with a workplace that is easy to 
work with through a variety of summary screens, task menus 
and drop-down lists.  These features are accessed by a 
regular user according to his/her assigned privileges and/or 
role(s).   
A regular user may access a user specific task summary 
screen that summarizes the responsibilities in sequential 
order. Users can be presented with this screen upon login, 
ensuring single click access to their most critical 
information.  Management personnel have access to a 
personalized menu that provides visibility over current 
activities and pending assignments of the medical staff tasks.  
Management system coordinators and senior personnel have 
access to a complete listing of tasks by location, department, 
region or corporation as a whole.  
The system tracks “who” is doing “what”, “when”, 
“where” and “how”. It doesn't just store this information; 
rather, it automates such information through notifications 
and tracking mechanisms. All tasks, forms and assignments 
can trigger an email notification to the appropriate 
responsible person. Every email notification includes a 
hyperlink that sends the user directly to the task detail screen 
within the system. This screen provides further instructions, 
downloads, as well as fields, to record activity completion 
and uploads related documentation.  The system ensures 
nothing falls through the cracks with an escalating email 
notification feature. The system can be configured to escalate 
the email notification of tasks pending completion. This 
feature is extremely flexible and can be configured to send 
any number of emails to any number of people to ensure 
tasks are completed on time.  
C. Embedded Forms and Processes  
The application is pre-loaded with numerous forms, 
checklists and common processes for all the necessary 
activities that are common in almost all healthcare 
institutions.  The availability of such material will help the 
user complete needed tasks and activities in a controlled 
manner where human mistakes are minimized.  Detailed 
process description is always displayed whenever the user 
invokes or triggers any activity which involves that 
respective process.  If multiple processes are involved within 
a specific operation, then all of them will be made available 
to the user for consultation and cross-checking.  This makes 
the application a fail-proof approach, ensuring all quality 
compliance requirements are met.   
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

D. Flexible Reporting  
The HIQMA system is designed to streamline the flow of 
information throughout the healthcare institution. Institutions 
can mirror their hierarchical structure within the database, 
and this enables data to flow from a site, to a department, to 
a unit, to institute-wide, to regional or other locations in the 
case of multi-center organizations.  Each location, division, 
department or other type of unit can manage its structures 
independently, and can have varying levels of hierarchy. 
Data within the system will roll-up to appropriate 
management levels instantly in real-time without the need for 
lengthy manual traditional processes and procedures. The 
system has a centralized reporting tool that makes sharing 
information easy. Users at all levels of the organization can 
generate reports that summarize performance status and 
requirements.  All reports can be generated in the most 
popular formats (HTML, PDF, .DOC or .XLS).  Reports can 
be configured online through the web-based interface. A 
screen-shot capturing the reporting panel is shown in Figure 
2.   
E. Mobility  
The user is provided with great mobility and agility 
where the system may be accessed from any computer or 
mobile device from anywhere as long as there is a 
connection to the hosting server (LAN, WLAN, or Internet).  
This provides the users with instant access to data at all 
times. Mobility certainly improves business performance, 
increases organizational efficiency and decreases response 
time.   
F. Security  
The system has a robust security management console 
that enables access to the modules, locations and 
functionality to be controlled for each user and user group. 
System administrators, who have access to the security 
module, can manage user access and the views available to 
user groups, as well as view the history of user visits.  In 
addition, encryption of the user credentials and data is 
included upon login and throughout the authentication and 
authorization process. 
 
 
The User/Permissions module of the system allows a top 
level administrator to assign permissions and roles for each 
user individually or as part of a security group. The 
functional permissions of each user are assigned based not 
only on the actions he/she is supposed to take, but also down 
to the data level he/she is required to manipulate. For 
example, two different users may have the same role and 
permissions but each can perform his/her permissions on a 
specified set or pool of data by department, patient, or others.   
 
G. Multi-Lingual Suppport  
The system has a dynamic user interface that is available 
in multiple languages.  Newly translated interfaces are 
continually being added.  The system currently supports 
English, French, Arabic and Farsi languages.  The system 
technology is developed in such a way that the interface’s 
language can be changed by the user according to the 
languages requested by the medical organization. In addition, 
data entry in multiple languages is also currently supported. 
Although the system does not translate data, it does provide a 
centralized roll-up capability of data in multiple languages.   
III. 
GOVERNANCE AND COMPLIANCE 
 
A. Governance  
In any healthcare organization, small or large, adding, 
demoting, or changing forms and procedures is a procedure 
by itself. The users will require training on the new 
procedures and forms, and the printed documents require 
replacement to reflect new changes.   
The system technical structure with respect to workplace, 
rules, forms, and menus takes into consideration future 
changes and enhancements of the business rules of the 
medical institution. Any updates to the forms or procedures 
are done directly on the system, and once committed, the 
institution ensures adherence to the new forms and rules 
instantaneously.   
B. ISO Compliance  
The software application is not only structured as per the 
ISO 9001 standards with all the modules that address each of 
its requirements, but also contains many unique features that 
facilitate on-going continuous improvements [8].  It is 
designed 
specifically 
for 
healthcare 
institutions 
implementing or maintaining a QMS based on ISO standards 
[9].  In addition, it drastically improves internal or third party 
audit results by adhering to the ISO modules summarized in 
Table 1 [10].   
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND IMPACTS 
So far, the system has been recently deployed in a 
number of healthcare institutions in addition to a number of 
medical colleges and universities.  Certainly, each sector has 
 
Figure 2.  Reporting panel screen-shot. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

its own flavor of the system but a number of common 
conclusions could be derived from their deployment and 
operations.  Some highlights are: 
 
• 
Seamlessly 
orientating 
the 
users 
to 
clearly 
understand and easily satisfy the quality needs. 
• 
Continuing improvement in the institution by 
adopting quality as a philosophy.  This is a crucial 
requirement 
for 
adopting 
a 
total 
quality 
management (TQM) approach which is essential for 
business sustainability. 
• 
Presenting defined and consistent processes and 
guaranteeing their successful completion as long as 
processes are done in a timely manner according to 
the standards. 
• 
Adhering to preventing instead of supervising, thus 
ensuring that the costs of preventive measures are 
less than those of close supervision or micro-
management.   This is a proactive step rather than a 
reactive one. 
• 
Utilizing a single, institution-wide system to 
manage all quality management information and 
initiatives.  This becomes especially relevant in 
multi-location institutions. 
• 
Automating 
the 
tracking, 
management, 
and 
notification of the QMS stakeholders. 
• 
Providing web-based tracking forms, analysis tools, 
and roll-up reporting to facilitate continual 
improvement and measurement of key performance 
indicators. 
• 
Centralizing the management of quality related 
activities and requirements and driving the medical 
institution performance. 
• 
Experiencing 
robust 
document 
control 
and 
management for all quality related procedures and 
policies. 
 
 The outlined findings are based on preliminary on-line 
surveys that were done by the institutions where the system 
was deployed and on thorough discussions with the various 
stakeholders through the formal review and evaluation 
process.  The following lessons learned were also noted: 
 
• 
A common – and rather classical – issue is faced in 
most of the institutions, which is related to the 
resistance to change, especially in institutions where 
some staff personnel have a low adaptation 
capability to non-paper based systems.   
• 
Changes and updates in automated quality 
management systems belong in general to the 
service/product provider which limits the capability 
and the capacity of the institution to abrupt changes 
in running processes which might be needed in 
some cases where non-ordinary circumstances are 
present (ex: change management in risky zones).  
• 
For institutions with low number of patients and 
specialties, the cost of such a system will increase 
the overhead and somehow lower the quality/price 
ratio. Usually, such institutions are oriented towards 
systems with fewer modules, thus leading to a 
limited access to all the benefits of the system.   
• 
Institutions with simple – or no – information 
technology (IT) departments will face the problem 
of hosting and managing the system servers. Such 
institutions are advised to go with the cloud hosting 
solution to minimize the overhead and transfer the 
risks to the hosting service provider.  
 
Many institutions that deployed this system found the 
need to update some of their forms, rules, and procedures 
early in the definition phase. The structured and logical 
methodology the system uses can spot flaws in procedures 
and regulations. In addition, it allows the institution to do a 
major review on the consistency and integrity of its existing 
QM system. 
TABLE I: A SUMMARY OF SUPPORTED ISO 9001 2008 
REQUIREMENTS 
ISO 9001 2008 Requirements 
Clause 
Title 
5.3 
Quality Policy  
5.4.1 
Quality Objectives 
5.4.2 
Quality management system planning  
5 
Management responsibility 
5.1 
Management commitment 
5.5.1 
Responsibility and authority 
5.5.2 
Management representative  
6.6.2 
Competence, awareness and training  
5.5.3 
Internal communication 
7.2.3 
Customer communication  
4.2 
Documentation requirements 
4.2.2 
Quality manual 
4.2.3 
Control of documents  
8.5.2 
Corrective action 
8.5.3 
Preventive action  
7.6 
Control of monitoring and measurement devices 
8 
Measurement, analysis and improvement 
8.2 
Monitoring and Measurement 
8.2.3 
Monitoring and measurement of processes 
8.2.4 
Monitoring and measurement of product  
8.3 
Control of nonconforming product 
8.4 
Analysis of data  
4.2.4 
Control of records  
8.2.2 
Internal audit  
5.6 
Management review 
5.6.2 
Review input 
5.6.3 
Review output  
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

V. 
FURTHER ENHANCEMENTS 
The HIQMA system is open to a huge set of 
enhancements in the future. Currently, we have three main 
enhancement features and propositions being studied.  
The first enhancement is to develop an add-on module to 
the system that is able to collect data from multiple 
institutions and organizations. This pool of data will result in 
a knowledge base that will allow the analysis of quality 
management practices on national or international levels. It 
will also give insights on how institutions interpret and 
understand quality, as well as propose best practices and 
procedures.  
The other enhancement is to allow healthcare institutions 
with well-established IT departments the capability of 
creating and designing their own forms and workflow from a 
graphical interface without the need to write code.  
A long-term proposition is to add a “Learn Mode” 
module powered with artificial intelligence code that reads 
and interprets the system’s technical logs to automatically 
propose enhancements to procedures and policies. The 
“Learn Mode” can be set to individual parts of the system or 
to the whole set of enabled modules.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The good healthcare service is not only a social 
responsibility, but also a good contributor to economic 
competitiveness and welfare in a global knowledge-based 
economy. Many challenges face medical services, including 
developing and upgrading the skills of the existing 
workforce, promoting labor mobility, diversifying customer 
base, and – most importantly – planning and implementation 
of education and training services. All of the above require 
that the management of such programs be handled with care 
and innovation, on the one hand to maintain a quality culture 
in the institution, and on the other, to keep up with a the 
competitive edge of the services rendered. 
The integrated web-based HIQMA system can meet 
these challenges, and more.  The system tackles the details of 
ISO standards and medical services peculiarities, and 
delivers a high quality, high performance package for use by 
the various institutes, irrespective of their specializations.  
Such an approach proved to be efficient, robust, and reliable 
in all the sites where it was installed and tested. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was sponsored in part by a grant from the 
Lebanese International University. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Department of Health and Consumers (SANCO), European 
Commission, "Healthcare quality indicators," 2013. [Online]. 
Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/indicators/other_indicators/quality/i
ndex_en.htm [retrieved: September 2013]. 
[2] M. Torre, "EUPHORIC Project Final Report," Zadig, Rome, 
Italy, 2009. 
[3] N. Dib, J. Freer, and C. Gray, "Service-level agreements at 
the Huddersfield NHS Trust," International Journal of Health 
Care Quality Assurance, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 96 - 101, 1998. 
[4] M. Munechika, S. Tsuru, and Y. Iizuka, "Quality 
Management 
Approach 
to 
Healthcare," 
in 
European 
Organization for Quality (EOQ) Congress, Dubrovnik, 
Croatia, 2009. 
[5] American 
Healthcare 
Association, 
"Guidelines 
for 
Developing a Quality Management System (QMS) For Long 
Term Care Providers," 2010. 
[6] D. Hoyle, "ISO 9000: quality systems handbook," ARRB 
Group Limited, Victoria, Australia, 2001. 
[7] S. Cao, J. Grundy, J. Hosking, H. Stoeckle, and E. Tempero, , 
"An architecture for generating web-based, thin-client 
diagramming tools," in IEEE International Conference on 
Automated Software Engineering, 2004, pp. 270-273. 
[8] T. Facklam, "Certification of persons: ISO/IEC DIS 17024. 
General requirements for bodies operating certification of 
persons," ISO bulletin, 2002. 
[9] "ISO 
9001:2008. 
Quality 
Management 
Systems 
- 
Requirements," Ginebra, 2012. 
[10] "ISO 9004:2008. Quality Management Systems - Guidelines 
for performance improvements," Ginebra, 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

