Modelling and Management of ePrescriptions on openEHR platform in  
Bulgarian eHealth  
 
Petko Kovachev 
Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics 
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridsky  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
email: az@petko.info 
 
Evgeniy Krastev  
Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics 
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridsky  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
email: eck@fmi.uni-sofia.bg 
 
Abstract—Medication prescriptions are widely used in patient-
centric eHealth services. In national healthcare they are 
usually 
represented 
employing 
proprietary 
information 
models. 
This 
significantly 
complicates 
management 
of 
prescriptions in electronic format (ePrescription). The lack of 
interoperability among such ePrescription models increases 
both the risks of drug prescription errors and the costs for 
ePrescription processing. The objective of this paper is to 
outline a methodology for management of ePrescriptions in the 
scope of Bulgarian healthcare by means of openEHR 
archetypes. The case study in this research work considers a 
typical use case in this application domain. A widely used 
information model of a medication prescription is represented 
in terms of reusable openEHR archetypes. The use of 
openEHR entails  semantic interoperability and portability of 
ePrescription instances across health information systems. 
Results from computer experiments reveal ePrescription 
benefits like reduced medication errors, increased patient 
safety and improved management of electronic health records. 
Keywords-openEHR information model; archetype object 
model; ePrescription; openEHR platform. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The need for improved quality of health services is one 
of the main reasons for adopting prescriptions in electronic 
format (ePrescription) as a preferred way for purchasing 
medicinal products [1]. The objective of this paper is 
proposing a methodology for modelling and management of 
ePrescriptions using openEHR specifications [2]. The 
following Section II shortly presents the proposed 
methodology for building an openEHR archetype model 
comprising typical clinical concepts in national healthcare. 
The status of deployment and the challenges in the 
implementation of the proposed approach are presented in 
Section III. Section IV makes an evaluation of the 
contributions in this research work in relation to results in the 
existing literature. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The proposed ePrescription model is an openEHR 
template composed of archetypes corresponding to clinical 
concepts in existing National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF) 
prescriptions.  
This approach reduces significantly the difficulty and 
cost in application development. Moreover, it  ensures 
semantic interoperability,  reusability of components and 
portability of patient-centric services across systems. 
III. 
RESULTS 
An open source openEHR platform is configured for 
evaluation the practical implementation of basic functional 
requirements of the model [3]. The obtained results extend 
previous research work in the area of cross-border exchange 
of International Patient Summary [4]. An INSTRUCTION 
archetype model of ePrescription is created employing 
openEHR specifications (Figure 1). The model incorporates 
all the health data in a prescription as it is specified by the 
NHIF. A multitier web application is developed for database 
management of ePrescriptions on openEHR platform [2]. 
The client part of the application communicates with the 
openEHR platform by means of web services (Figure 2). It is 
used to create and retrieve ePrescriptions with real-life data 
employing user friendly web interface. The design of the 
user friendly web interface enhances the business process for 
openEHR management of such reports. The information 
model is implemented in a fully functional web application  
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The here proposed methodology allows to transform 
existing XML schema definitions used by the Bulgarian 
NHIF into archetype-based models with inherent semantic 
interoperability of clinical documents exchanged by other 
EU countries. The implementation of this methodology is 
novel in the existing literature, where known ePrescription 
software applications allow basic functional interoperability 
of clinical documents. Plans for future results include the 
development of an application for cross-border exchange of 
ePrescription that add semantic interoperability to current 
“epSOS- friendly” ePrescription documents. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the National Scientific 
Program “е-Health in Bulgaria”. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Coimbra et al., "Improving the Codification of Hospital 
Discharges with an ICD-9-CM Single-page Application and 
its Transition to ICD-10-CM/PCS," International Journal on 
Advances in Life Sciences, vol. 10, no. 1&2, pp. 23 - 30, 
2018 
[2] openEHR, Reference Model (RM) Component - latest. 2020. 
[Online] https://specifications.openehr.org/releases/RM/latest 
[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[3] P. Kovatchev, "Web based software for converting NHIF 
claim XML health records to openEHR specification," 2020. 
[Online] 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YQoRCESMt 
[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[4] E. Krastev, D. Tcharaktchiev, P. Kovatchev, and S. Abanos, 
“International Patient Summary Standard Based on Archetype 
Concepts” International Journal on Advances in Life 
Sciences, ISSN 1942-2660vol. 12, no. 1 & 2, year 2020,  
pp. 34-46 [Online] http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/ 
[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
 
Figure 1.   openEHR INSTRUCTION archetype with ePrescription clinical data. 
 
Figure 2.  Extraction and visualization of ePrescripton data in openEHR server’s web console. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

