Multi-functional Wireless Body Sensor 
 
Roman Trobec, Aleksandra Rashkovska, and Viktor Avbelj 
Department of Communication Systems 
Jožef Stefan Institute 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
Roman.Trobec@ijs.si, Aleksandra.Rashkovska@ijs.si, Viktor.Avbelj@ijs.si 
 
 
Abstract—A 
wireless 
multi-functional 
body 
sensor 
for 
monitoring vital bio-signals is proposed. The sensor uses 
modern, 
moderately 
priced, 
user-friendly 
and 
robust 
technology solutions. It supports advanced algorithms for local 
analysis of data and communication infrastructure to widely 
available personal terminals for visualization of measurements, 
and further transfer of critical data, either to medical experts 
or to a personal database. We pay a special attention to the 
fusion of different sensing functions in a single multi-functional 
sensor. To improve the reliability and robustness of the system, 
the measured signals, e.g., ECG, light, voice, acceleration, etc., 
can be combined in order to prevent the rising of false alarms. 
The proposed multi-functional body sensor contributes in 
significantly elevated quality, unobtrusiveness and robustness 
of the health care and patient safety.  
Keywords - multi-functional body sensor; wireless; mobile; 
healthcare; monitoring 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
introduction 
of 
modern 
information 
and 
communication technologies (ICT), as support to medical 
activities, is one of the possibilities to increase the efficacy of 
the health care system and to decrease its costs. This basic 
premise is included in all strategic plans of the EU and the 
rest of the world. Numerous studies have confirmed the 
benefit of the development of Telemedicine/Telecare 
systems [1, 2]. We are proposing a multi-functional wireless 
body sensor (MWBS) that uses modern, moderately priced 
and user-friendly technology solutions. It is appropriate as a 
building block in systems for continuous monitoring of 
hospitalized patients, post-hospital care, or diagnostic long-
term monitoring. It measures vital functions, e.g., heart beat 
rate, blood pressure, body temperature, etc. Classically, these 
measurements are performed by nurses several times a day 
and then manually entered in the patient’s charts. In addition 
to the issue of intermittent monitoring of vital functions in 
non-intensive wards, there are other weaknesses in the 
current health care system. The interpretation of the patient’s 
condition and the consequent measures taken depend on the 
personnel, who could be, in certain conditions, overwhelmed 
with work or busy with other patients. The measured 
indicators can also be inaccurate - sometimes being biased 
by the presence or the inexperience of the medical personnel 
and therefore unreliable.  
In proposed systems for remote monitoring of vital 
functions [3, 4], patients or monitored subjects are fitted with 
several body sensors for vital functions, which communicate 
with personal terminals (size of a mobile phone) via wireless 
connections. The measurements are stored in the personal 
terminal for monitoring and processing with automated 
procedures based on comparison with threshold values, 
predetermined rules and automatic learning. The data are 
sent, either periodically or because of unusual events, to a 
computer server that maintains a database and is responsible 
for presentation, alerts and necessary actions.  
Taking into account that unobtrusiveness and robustness 
might be decisive factors for the success of the future bio-
monitoring systems, we concentrate on these two issues. We 
investigate options for the development of the MWBS and 
integrations in final monitoring systems that can fulfill both 
requirements. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. First, the 
architecture of the proposed system for remote monitoring of 
vital functions is presented. Next, the implementation of the 
system is described, elaborating the role of the wireless 
multi-functional body sensor, the concept for improved 
alarms using environmental sensors, and the platforms for 
transmission, representation and collection of data from the 
sensors. The paper concludes with a summary of our 
findings and potential future extensions of the proposed 
multi-purpose body-sensor approach. 
II. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The architecture of the proposed system for remote 
monitoring of vital functions is shown in Fig. 1. The design 
of the system takes into account the existing technical 
standards, allowing easy connection of various body sensors 
and their immediate replacement, if an improved version 
becomes available. The system allows connection of new 
sensors, which could help in the improvement of the 
monitoring of the patient's condition, for example, sensors 
for remote monitoring of respiratory acoustic phenomena 
(cough, obstruction), simple video sensors, etc. Some of the 
measurements are feasible with our custom sensors [5]; for 
others, like blood pressure measurements, new unobtrusive 
and non-invasive body sensors are to be developed. 
The transmission of the measurements to remote places is 
done by existing infrastructure (Ethernet, Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, 
etc.) and the Internet, which offers an inexpensive 
implementation, 
as 
well 
as 
wide 
availability. 
The 
information is available on site and controlled/monitored by 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the staff on call, which enables immediate detection of 
deterioration in the patient's state and prompt actions.  
Based on the simultaneous evaluation of multiple 
variables, the system will provide the threat level and its 
trend [6]. The analysis of vital functions in a longer time 
period allows for the implementation of cognitive methods; 
for example, analysis of a cardiogram over longer time 
period contributes to personalized patient’s threat level [7, 
8].  
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION CONCEPTS 
The implementation of the proposed system significantly 
increases the research potential of medical institutions. The 
system provides documented measurements and events 
obtained in an objective manner during different stages of 
the well being of patients or other users (elderly, athletes, 
etc.). The system could be upgraded with new medical 
research methods. Following are related research activities 
and findings that contribute in the system implementation. 
A. Development of multi-functional body sensors 
Body sensors should be non-disruptive to users; 
therefore, we consider small and multi-functional wireless 
sensors. We have already prototyped a differential wireless 
bio-electrode (WBE) for measuring ECG [5] and EEG. 
Within the WBE, other sensors can be incorporated towards 
the final version of the MWBS. We have currently identified 
the following options: 
bio-sensors 
 
heart beat rate, 
 
blood pressure, 
 
respiration, 
 
temperature, 
 
oxygen saturation, 
environmental sensors 
 
acceleration, 
 
position, 
 
audio recording, 
 
video detection. 
 
The wireless technology considered for transmission of 
measured data from the sensors to personal terminals is the 
newest version of Bluetooth technology – low energy 
Bluetooth 4.0 (BT4). It enables direct communication 
between the MWBS and newest Smart phones and devices 
with incorporated Bluetooth Smart technology. 
Bluetooth low energy protocol is low-cost wireless 
solution designed to meet special requirements for long-term 
operation in devices with limited energy capacity (e.g. coin-
cell battery). Its ultra-low peak, average and idle mode 
power consumption and enhanced working range enables the 
MWBS to operate on a single coin-cell battery for several 
days while transmitting live stream of raw ECG data. Based 
on our preliminary measurements, we conclude that the BT4 
enables 4 days of external power supply independency for a 
MWBS with a small coin battery. The maximal bit-rate of 
the data payload is 1 Mb/s, which is sufficient also for high-
resolution short-term measurements. 
Other features can be also added to the MWBS: vascular 
pressure, oxygen saturation, skin resistance and respiratory 
rate 
measurements. 
Furthermore, 
microphones, 
accelerometers and video sensors could offer additional 
environmental data that contribute to a better estimate of the 
status of the monitored patient. An example of the prototype 
multisensory electrode is shown in Fig. 2a. It is equipped 
with a BT4 radio and sensors for ECG, respiration 
acceleration and light. On the measured raw ECG signal 
(Fig. 2b), a respiration signal as an envelope of the R-peaks 
is clearly visible. 
The 
ECG-Derived 
Respiration 
(EDR) 
techniques 
relevant to our work are based on the observation that the 
positions of the ECG electrodes on the chest surface move 
relative to the heart. We confirm, with the analysis of clinical 
multichannel ECG measurements, which include also 
reference thermistor based respiration signals, that the 
proposed approach is a viable option for the monitoring of 
the respiration frequency and for the rough classification of 
the breathing types [9]. The obtained results are evaluated on 
a wireless prototype of respiration body sensor from Fig. 2. 
We indicate the best positions for the respiration body sensor 
and prove that a single sensor of body surface potentials 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of the system for remote monitoring of vital 
functions. All sensors should be merged into a single multi-functional 
unit. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

difference on proximal skin electrodes can be used for 
combined measurements of respiratory and cardiac activities. 
A new prototyped muscle contraction (MC) sensor [10] 
is considered for integration into the system. The sensor is 
relatively small and light. It is based on a novel principle for 
measuring muscle tension during muscle contractions and 
provides important data about patient's muscular activities. 
Additionally, we consider the option to use the MC sensor 
for detection of the tactile pulse. The sensor could be also 
adopted for measurement of changes in the blood pressure. 
An example of the prototype MC sensor and a preliminary 
measurement of the tactile pulse are shown in Fig. 3a and 
Fig. 3b, respectively. 
In clinical medicine, the gold standard for diagnosis of 
pneumonia is the X-ray imaging; nevertheless, in a clinical 
examination, pneumonia is diagnosed only in a small 
proportion of ill children. Computer analysis of the sounds in 
adult patients with pneumonia has been proved to confirm 
the diagnosis [11]; however, the method uses sixteen 
microphones, which is not suitable for clinical use. The 
proposed system enables development of convenient and 
computerized systems, designed by a smaller number of 
microphones, which spare the patients from the X-ray 
radiation. 
One of the advantages of the proposed system is the 
ability for continuous monitoring of ECG. In a recently 
published study on children with RSV bronchitis, the 
presence of abnormal heart rhythm was also found [8]. 
Long-term monitoring of ECG is an important source of data 
for confirming the correlation of the two diseases, which is 
not known so far. We can aggregate different sensor data 
and, using rule-based algorithms, devise higher-level 
diagnostic conclusions on medical or rehabilitation status of 
users. 
In some rare cases, more body sensors are still needed. 
An example is the synthesized 12-lead electrocardiogram 
(ECG) [12], which is the gold standard in cardiology.  
B. Improved alarms with environmental sensors 
One of the most critical problems that influence a 
sustainable use of monitoring systems is issuing false alarms. 
The personnel that assists and manages a monitoring system 
cannot tolerate false alarms above some minimal limit. We 
pay special attention to overcome this problem with 
multilevel alarms based on data from more than a single 
sensor. To improve the quality of patients’ status 
interpretation, we introduce visual sensors consisting of 
simple and low cost video detectors [13]. Visual sensors will 
not allow interference with personal intimacy. The video 
detectors cover just a near area of the patient’s bed and, after 
a simple local video processing, detect and store patients’ 
motion, movement and position. Based on these additional 
data, an improved reliability of raised alarms can be 
obtained.  
C. Platforms for transmission, representation and 
collection of data 
The transmission of data from the sensors, and later its 
representation, are planned on two levels: to the patient itself 
and to the medical personal.  
First, we have wireless transmission of the measured data 
from the sensors to personal terminals, like Smartphones or 
other portable smart devices. Custom made applications 
provide the opportunity for suitable representation of the 
transmitted data and the possibility for the patient to monitor 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 2.  (a) A prototype of the MWBS with two self-adhesive 
disposable electrodes, a lithium coin battery, micro-processor, BT4 radio,  
and printed circuit board antenna. (b) An example of an ECG recorded 
wirelessly – raw signal. 
 
(a) 
 
 
(b) 
Figure 3.  (a) A prototype of the muscle contraction (MC) sensor: (1) 
laminate, (2) incision, (3) tonguelet, (4) sensor tip, (5) strain gauge. 
 
(b) An example of measured tactile pulse. 
-0.2 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Time [s] 
ECG amplitude [mV] 
[mV] 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

its vital functions. We have already developed an application 
that provides a comfortable option for telemonitoring of the 
heart activity. We use the prototyped wireless bipolar body 
electrode to record ECG wirelessly, coupled with the 
advantages of existing portable smart devices to display the 
real-time data from the electrode [14]. Local processing of 
the measured data and alarm triggering can be done already 
on the sensor or on the portable device. For example, the 
respiration rate can be calculated on the sensor, while the 
reconstruction of the standard 12-lead ECG can be 
performed on the Smartphone for the visualization of the 
reconstructed signal.  
Second, a SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) client 
on the portable platform transfers relevant data (for example, 
ECG data when an alarm has been triggered) to a computer 
server. The transferred data on the server [15] is 
appropriately visualized to the medical personal for 
diagnostic purposes, and also is collected in a database for 
further analysis. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
We have designed a system for continuous remote 
monitoring of patients at risk, which is based on multi-
functional wireless body sensors. We thus contribute to 
significantly 
elevated 
quality, 
unobtrusiveness 
and 
robustness of the health care and patient safety. Widespread, 
accessible, and tested ICT solutions from the field of 
measuring sensor systems, mobile communications and 
network services, are incorporated into the system. Medical 
expertise are also included through the software for analysis 
of multi measurements, as well as the triggering of alerts and 
alarms for urgent action. The responses of medical personnel 
to clinical deterioration in patients will be faster; therefore, 
the patients will experience fewer complications in case of 
sudden deterioration of their health. The work of medical 
personnel will be less stressful and more efficient. 
The applicability of the proposed system is not limited 
only to hospitals and health care centers, where the added 
benefit of the system will enable “doctor-to-doctor” and 
“patient-to-doctor” communication. The system can be also 
installed in nursing and patients’ homes, e.g. for early 
postoperative care. The patient-friendly approach will 
contribute to easier diagnostics and reduction of healthcare 
costs.  
We developed and evaluated a prototype of multi-
functional sensor that can record main features of ECG, 
respiration, and acceleration. Further sensing options, e.g., 
temperature and MC, are under development and laboratory 
testing. It is clear that the proposed approach is ideal for 
users from the comfort point-of-view; however, the main 
focus of our future work is in the evaluation study of long-
term functional performances, including data security and 
privacy, and added diagnostic value of the proposed system.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors acknowledge the financial support from the 
state budget by the Slovenian Research Agency under Grant 
P2-0095. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A.G. Ekeland, A. Bowes, and S. Flottorp, “Effectiveness of 
telemedicine: A systematic review of reviews,” Int. J. Med. 
Inform., 
vol. 
79, 
Nov. 
2010, 
pp. 
736-771, 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2010.08.006. 
[2] W. Chaboyer, L. Thalib, M. Foster, C. Ball, and B. Richards, 
“Predictors of Adverse Events in Patients After Discharge 
From the Intensive Care Unit,” Am. J. Crit. Care, vol. 17, 
May 2008, pp. 255-263. 
[3] F. Hu, S. Li, T. Xue, and G. Li, "Design and analysis of low-
power body area networks based on biomedical signals," 
International Journal of Electronics, vol. 99, May 2012, pp. 
811-822, doi:10.1080/00207217.2011.643502. 
[4] J.M.L.P. Caldeira, J.J.P.C. Rodrigues, and P. Lorenz, 
"Toward ubiquitous mobility solutions for body sensor 
networks on healthcare," IEEE Communications Magazine, 
vol. 
50, 
May 
2012, 
pp. 
108-115, 
doi: 
10.1109/MCOM.2012.6194390. 
[5] R. Trobec, M. Depolli, and V. Avbelj, "Wireless network of 
bipolar body electrodes," Proceedings of the 7th International 
Conference on Wireless On-demand Network Systems and 
Services, 
WONS, 
Feb. 
2010, 
pp. 
145–149, 
doi: 
10.1109/WONS.2010.5437118. 
[6] C.P. Subbe, M. Kruger, P. Rutherford, and L. Gemmel, 
“Validation of a modified Early Warning Score in medical 
admissions,” Q. J. Med., vol. 94, Oct. 2001, pp. 521-526, doi: 
10.1093/qjmed/94.10.521. 
[7] R.Miller, “Rise of the machines: Computers construct new, 
better biomarkers,” theheart.org [Clinical Conditions > 
Imaging > Imaging], October 5, 2011. Accessed at 
http://www.theheart. org/article/1290375.do on June  18, 
2012. 
[8] S. Esposito et al., “Altered cardiac rhythm in infants with 
bronchiolitis and respiratory syncytial virus infection,” BMC 
Infect. Dis., vol. 10, Oct. 2010, pp. 305, doi:  10.1186/1471-
2334-10-305. 
[9] R. Trobec, A. Rashkovska, and V. Avbelj, “Two proximal 
skin electrodes – a body sensor for respiration rate,“  Sensors, 
in review. 
[10] S. Đorđević, S. Stančin, A. Meglič, V. Milutinović, and S. 
Tomažič, “MC Sensor - A Novel Method for Measurement of 
Muscle Tension,” Sensors, vol. 11, Sep. 2011, pp. 9411-9425, 
doi:10.3390/s111009411. 
[11] R.L. Murphy, “Automated Lung Sound Analysis in Patients 
With Pneumonia,” Respir. Care, vol. 49, Dec. 2004, pp. 1490-
1497. 
[12] R. Trobec and I. Tomašić, “Synthesis of the 12-lead 
electrocardiogram from differential leads,” IEEE Trans. Inf. 
Technol. Biomed., vol. 15, July 2011, pp. 615-621, 
doi:10.1109/TITB.2011.2159236. 
[13] B. Murovec, J. Perš, V. Sulić, R. Mandeljc, and S. Kovačič, 
“Computer-Vision-Centric Design of a Visual Sensor 
Network Node,“ Proceedings of the 17th Computer Vision 
Winter Workshop, Mala Nedelja, Slovenia, Feb. 2012. 
[14] A. Rashkovska, I. Tomašić, and R. Trobec, “A telemedicine 
application: ECG data from wireless body sensors on a 
smartphone,” Proceedings of MEET & GVS on the 34th 
International Convention MIPRO 2011, Opatija, Croatia, May 
2011, pp. 293-296. 
[15] K. Peternel et al., "Touch to communicate using NGN open 
interfaces," Proceedings of the 9th Annual Communication 
Networks and Services Research Conference, May 2011, pp. 
130-136, doi: 10.1109/CNSR.2011.27. 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

