A Cost-efficient, Camera-based Electronic Nose
Noor Alrabeeah1, Omar Osman1, Ali Hage-Diab1,3, Houssein Hajj-Hassan2,3, Hassan M. Khachfe1,2,3, 
1 Department of Biomedical Engineering
2 Department of Biological & Chemical Sciences
3 Lebanese Institute for Biomedical Research & Applications (LIBRA)
Lebanese International University
Beirut - Lebanon
{31230440, 11310051}@students.liu.edu.lb, {ali.hagediab, houssein.hajjhassan, hassan.khachfe}@liu.edu.lb
Abstract - Human’s olfactory system has a large number of
receptor types that respond only to a limited number of
molecules. Since human noses are subject to fatigue and
inconsistency and lack the sensitivity to low-concentration
molecules, scientists have developed the Electronic noses. E-
nose is a device that identifies the specific components of
volatiles and analyzes the chemical makeup to identify it.
Current applications include detection of odors specific to
diseases for medical diagnosis, and detection of gas leaks for
environmental protection. An E-nose consists of both, a
mechanism for chemical detection through an array of
electronic sensors and mechanism for pattern recognition
similar to that of the neural network. Relating to the previous
work of our fellow colleagues and major development of the E-
nose by scientists at Tufts University, our E-nose developed
here consists of a Biosensor, which is a protein extracted from
animals and a labeling component that is a chemical dye that is
suitable to the protein used. As for the electronic part of the
prototype that is responsible for the detection of color change
of the dye during the interaction with the odors, it is made up
of an application programmed for this specific purpose that
ensures proper detection of RGB (red, green and blue) value
color change.
Keywords - E-nose; Volatiles; Biosensors; Chemical dye; RGB
values
I. INTRODUCTION
The olfactory system is one of the most intelligent
sensory systems to be developed in the mother’s womb. The
primary pathway consists of two components, the olfactory
epithelium and the olfactory bulb. Olfaction means the sense
of smell. The main organ involved in olfaction is the nose,
which has millions of receptors for smelling that are present
within olfactory epithelium. This epithelium has three kinds
of cells: basal, supporting, and olfactory receptor cells [1].
Olfactory receptors are bipolar neurons that are made up of
dendrites and an axon that ends at the olfactory bulb. The
most important part of this receptor is the olfactory hairs that
respond to chemicals that are breathed in. When odorants
enter the nose, the olfactory hairs that are present inside the
nose become activated, generating the potential that then
initiates the response [2]. Signals move from the olfactory
cells to the olfactory bulb and move on to different parts of
the brain, depending on what kind of signals. Figure 1
illustrates the process by which olfactory information is
transmitted to the brain.
Figure 1. Olfaction procedure where signals move from the olfactory cells
to the olfactory bulb and move on to different parts of the brain [3]
Human sniffers are costly when compared to electronic
noses. Electronic noses are quick and use reliable new
technology of gas sensors. One major point is detection of
hazardous or poisonous gas that is not possible with human
sniffers that could be overcome by electronic devices.
Scientists thought of coming up with a device to
overcome
these
complications.
The
solution
to
these
difficulties would also advance the relationship between
biology and technology. An electronic nose (e-nose) is a
device that identifies the specific components of an odor and
analyzes its chemical makeup to identify it. Electronic noses
have been around for several years, but have typically been
large and expensive. Current research is focused on making
the devices smaller, less expensive, and more sensitive. [4]
A next-generation artificial nose developed by Tufts
neuroscientists [4] uses DNA (Deoxyribonucleic Acid) to
detect odors, and possible applications range from medical
to commercial to defense. Researchers at Tufts have
pioneered the use of DNA molecules to detect millions of
odors. In early versions of the electronic nose, airborne
odors passed over a square of silk screen treated with a
mixture of a reactive polymer (a large molecule comprising
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

a chain of smaller ones) and a fluorescent dye. If some
property of the odor, its molecular shape, polarity or
charge—interacted with the polymer, the fluorescent dye
would glow in response. The trouble was, for each odor they
wanted to detect, the researchers had to find, mainly through
trial and error, the specific polymer that could serve as a
sensor. Over 15 years, the Tufts team and researchers
elsewhere
discovered
20
to
30
polymers
capable
of
detecting a handful of odors. Figure 2 shows Tuft’s
University device and it could be tailored to be used in the
food and beverage industry, ensuring high quality products
and detecting possible contaminants [5].
Figure 2. Tufts University Electronic Nose [6]
As for the medical field, other researchers have come up
with a device later called Nano Artificial Nose as shown in
figure 3 [6]. In the absence of clear surrogate clinical
markers that could discriminate between various sources of
respiratory
infections,
over-treatments
with
antibiotic
prescriptions are evidenced in a large portion of the treated
cases. There has been an increasing interest in recent years in
improved methods for diagnosis of many metabolic and
infectious diseases. These new methods are expected to be
non-invasive and inexpensive, while allowing: (1) screening
of high-risk populations for emerging diseases; (2) early
detection and prediction of diseases; and (3) evaluation and
monitoring of therapy efficacy.
Figure 3. Nano Artificial Nose
A prototype of cross-sensitive nanowire-based sensors to
be integrated in the ‘Nano Artificial Nose’ were trained to
detect
target
disease
related
mixtures
of
biomarkers.
Advanced development of the Nano Artificial Nose disease
detection capabilities are present for the detection of the
following indications from exhaled breath: Streptococcus;
Methicillin resistant (MRSA); Staphylococcus; etc. Nano
Artificial
Nose
technology
detects
specific
disease
biomarkers based on a change in the blood chemistry or
metabolic activity (which is reflected in the chemical
composition of the exhaled breath and cell/tissue headspace)
rather than by other forms of imaging or invasive blood
analysis [7].
Relating to the previous work of our fellow colleagues
and major development of the E-nose by scientists at Tuft’s
University, our E-nose consists of a Biosensor, which is a
protein extracted from animals and a labeling component
that is a chemical dye that is suitable to the protein used. To
detect color change, an application is programmed and used
to validate the interaction occurring between odors and
proteins.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section
2, represent the materials used, the requirements and device
design, the project working process and the methods used.
Afterwards, in section 3, experiments, results and data
analysis are described. Then, section 4, results are discussed
and explained. Finally, in section 5, a conclusion summarizes
the requirements of this project and enhancements that meet
the market requirements.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
E-Nose technology joins several analysis techniques that
make way to understanding the structures and composition
of odors. Figure 4 illustrates the diagram of the device that
consists of a chamber containing the fan and battery,
biopolymer sensor, and odor receiving duct that is analyzed
using a programmed application that recognizes the color
change.
Figure 4. LIU (Lebanese International University) E-Nose Block Diagram
Materials and Preparation Steps:
1)
Use an Analytical Balance to weigh 3.5mg of ALP
(alkaline phosphatase) protein
2)
Dilute with 0.67ml distilled water at 33ºC to obtain
5.2g/l concentration
3)
Take 10ul prepared ALP and add to it 5ul coomassie
dye and 5ul tea tree oil and pour in 1.5ml eppendorf
tubes
4)
Prepare reference tubes containing:
a)
10ul ALP protein with 5ul coomassie dye (control
tube)
b)
5ul coomassie dye with 5ul tea tree oil
c)
5ul coomassie dye
5)
Mix the combinations for 2 min using a vortex mixer
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

6)
Place the sampled tubes in a water bath at 33ºC for 30
min
7)
Record the change in color at the end of the experiment,
each tube with respect to the reference tube containing
the protein-dye mixture, using the phone camera
8)
Analyze and compare the results using the LIU E-Nose
application
III. RESULTS
LIU E-nose application serves as the image processing
software programmed using MIT (Massachusetts Institute of
Technology) App inventor [8]. The software makes use of a
typical phone with 13-megapixel rear autofocus, a wide
aperture for extra light reaching image sensor, and an LED
(light emitting diodes) flash. Software attains RGB values at
fixed distance from the samples as well as exact focused
point in all the tubes to minimize light differences and have
more precise results.
Figure 5. RGB Values of the Prepared Samples in Liquid Phase
Figure 5 shows the different results obtained from the
experiment at the same time. The figure shows the prepared
samples with a label with its content above each tube, while
the RGB values are listed below the tubes. Detailed
explanation of the results is further mentioned in the
discussion.
We keep the following conditions of the samples constant:
•
Temperature using water bath
•
pH levels using ALP; stable pH
•
Volume and concentrations using pipettes, balance,
and dilution factor
We used alkaline phosphatase as the protein due to its key
features:
•
4 hydrophobic pockets are necessary to interact
with the acquired odors
•
Stable pH levels reduce odors’ pH influence
•
Temperature stability (up to 80 degrees) [9].
We choose tube 1 to the left as the reference and control
to compare the color change of the rest of the tubes to it.
Following is the protein and dye interacting with tea tree oil,
transparent and low viscosity organic oil with a specific
chemical structure.
To eliminate the effect of dilution that might be the
reason of the lighter blue color of the sample, we add in the
3rd tube with the same volume of the tea tree oil than that of
tube 2 and notice that there is difference in color as
compared to the mixture with the organic oil. Thus, another
factor is studied, and this showed positive results.
In the following tubes, 4 and 5, we tested for the
interaction between the organic oils and dye. It is required to
validate that the interaction is with the protein and not the
dye. Comparing the results of the tube 4 to tube 2, and tube
5 to tube 3, the dye did not quite change its color, which
made us conclude that there is minimal interaction between
the oils and dye.
IV. DISCUSSION
Electronic noses were originally used for quality control
applications in the food, beverage and cosmetic industries.
Current applications include detection of odors specific to
diseases for medical diagnosis, and detection of gas leaks
for environmental protection [10].
The advancement of e-noses may be coupled with
different sensor technologies, such as optical sensors,
conductive polymers, and in our case biopolymers.
Initiating our analysis, a color sensor is used, combined
with an arduino that controls and acquires data received by
the sensor. First experiments showed detection of color
change of the RGB values while stabilizing surrounding
conditions to prevent artifacts from influencing our results.
Yet, after maintaining constant light, temperature, and
sample settings, inadequate results were obtained. Any little
light disruptions, as well as inappropriate distance of sensor
from samples caused false results. In addition, reflections
off of objects placed in the surroundings, either sample or
sensor, did have a wrong impact on the results. Thus,
another detection method
is used after several trials
performed earlier. CCD (charge-coupled device) camera is
considered more convenient than the color sensor due to the
high efficiency of this camera, as well as the broad
availability of this sensor. Combined with a microcontroller
or analyzing unit, this arrangement makes way to detecting
the RGB value changes more accurately than that of the
color sensor, as well as proper analysis of the results.
It is validated that DNA interacts with odors as
mentioned
in
Tuft’s
University
experiments.
The
experiments conducted here are through using proteins as
biopolymers instead of DNA. It is known that protein
normally binds lipids. Most odors are hydrophobic, which
makes them candidates to bind to the hydrophobic pockets
available in the protein structures used here [11].
The specific influences of conditions that might affect
the interaction of the protein with the samples are avoided.
Temperature is maintained constant at 37 degrees, using a
water bath. The first experiments included the use of LDH
(lactate dehydrogenase) and BSA (bovine serum albumin)
proteins. Several trials were conducted on these proteins. In
addition, to prevent any pH fluctuations, ALP is used
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

instead of the previous proteins for its high affinity to bind
lipids without changing pH levels. Setting pH at a specific
value is required, for we are not probing the change in pH,
but we shall see odor sensitivity.
In order to visualize color change, a labeling substance is
used. The marker used here is the coomassie blue dye. To
detect the color change after an interaction between the
biopolymer and certain odors, the dye fluoresces and
changes its degree that facilitates the visualization of the
interaction occurring between the protein and volatiles. The
coomassie blue dye associates with basic and aromatic
amino acids, thereby causing shift in absorbance during
protein determination [12].
The volatiles used in this experiment are coconut oil,
rose water oil, cloves oil and tea tree oil. Coconut oil has
high viscosity that prevented proper mixing with proteins.
Rose water and cloves oils already have a non-transparent
color, thus they will affect the RGB values analysis. We
used the tea tree oil, a transparent, low viscosity, and
essential organic oil with a specific chemical structure is
then used.
Binding of hydrophobic entities like odors may induce
structural changes to protein due to the presence of
hydrophobic
pockets
that
may
change
their
optical
characteristics. Such interaction with lipids will induce
structural changes down to the helical structure of proteins
(Angstroms measurement unit) that affect their color nature,
e.g.: globin proteins that change color from dark red to light
violet
based
on
structural
change;
cytochromes,
hemoglobin, etc.
Optical activity of substance changes based on its
modification in structure impacts transparency vs. opacity as
well as color vs. color change.
The detected difference of the RGB values can be
visualized both using the naked eye, as well as by using the
application. The application uses the camera that is set to
measure RGB values so there is no need for any pre-
processing.
V. CONCLUSION
As a conclusion, the focus of this project is to mimic the
functionality
of
the
olfactory
system
using
materials
available in every lab. This makes way to producing a cost-
effective and easy to use device to perform the necessary
function. The experiments were performed on similar
materials as that of Tuft’s University then deviated the
attention onto using proteins instead of DNA as the sensors
for odor identification. It was validated that each gaseous
and liquid phased molecules and odors interact differently
when in contact with different proteins. This variance is
used to check for better repeatability, sensitivity, and
stability. This is analyzed by using a developed LIU E-nose
application that records and displays the values of change in
color post protein-odor interaction. Further practice shall
lead to a better understanding of the specific interaction with
given odors that can lead to notable discoveries in the field
of diseases’ testing and identification as well as in other
daily-life fields.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Vokshoor, F. Talavera, S. Batuello, A. Meyers, Olfactory
System Anatomy (2013, September 5). [retreived: July, 2017]
[2]
A. Menini, The neurobiology of olfaction, editor Boca Raton
(FL): CRC Press/Taylor & Francis; 2010. [retreived: July,
2017]
[3]
T. Page, Pour la Science #218 (2010, December 12).
[retreived: July, 2017]
[4]
S. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Choi Applications and Technology of
Electronic Nose for
Clinical Diagnosis, Open Journal of
Applied Biosensor, 2013, 2, 39-50. [retreived: July, 2017]
[5]
J. Mitchell, Picking up the scent. Tufts Journal, 3. (August
2008). [retreived: July, 2017]
[6]
J. Mitchell, (2008, August), Picking Up the Scent, A next-
generation artificial nose developed by Tufts neuroscientists
uses DNA to detect odors, and possible applications run the
gamut from medical to commercial to defense. [retrieved:
July, 2017]
[7]
NoCamels Team, (2014, June 19) NaNose: The Breathalyzer
Test That Sniffs Out Lung Cancer Before It [retrieved: July,
2017]
[8]
H.
Abelson,
Massachusetts
Institute
of
Technology
Application Inventor (2012-2017) [retrieved: May, 2017]
[9]
L. Zhang, R. Buchet, and G. Azzar. 2014, Biophys j
“Phosphate
Binding
in
the
Active
Site
of
Alkaline
Phosphatase and the Interactions of 2-Nitrosoacetophenone
with
Alkaline
Phosphatase
-
Induced
Small
Structural
Changes. “ pp: 3873-3881. [retrieved: June, 2017]
[10] M.
Rouse
–
Electronic
nose
(e-nose)
(2016,
March)
[retrieved: January 2017]
[11] J. Kauer, J. White, (2002), Representation of odor information
in the olfactory system: from biology to an artificial nose.
“Sensors and Sensing
in Biology and Engineering. Barth,
F.G., Humphrey, J.A.C., Secomb, T.W. (eds) Springer
Verlag, Berlin” [retrieved: June, 2016].
[12] A. Ninfa, ; D. Ballou, Benore, Marilee (2009). Fundamental
Laboratory Approaches for Biochemistry and Biotechnology.
Wiley. p. 113. [retrieved: July, 2017]
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

