A Case Study of a Practical Use of “MusiCuddle” that is a Music Therapy System
for Patients with Dementia
Chika Oshima∗†, Naoki Itou‡, Kazushi Nishimoto§, Kiyoshi Yasuda¶∥, Naohito Hosoi∗∗,
Hiromi Yamashita††, Koichi Nakayama‡‡, and Etsuo Horikawa†
∗Japan Society for the Promotion of Science
†Faculty of Medicine, Saga University, Nabeshima 5-1-1, Saga-city, Saga pref. 849-8501, Japan.
Email: chika-o@ip.is.saga-u.ac.jp
‡Intermedia Planning, Inc., Unryu FLEX Nishi-kan 8F, Shin-sakae 2-1-9, Naka-ku, Nagoya city, Aichi pref. 460-0007 Japan.
Email: n itou@ipi.co.jp
§Research Center for Innovative Lifestyle Design, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology,
Asahidai 1-1, Nomi city, Ishikawa pref. 923-1292 Japan.
Email: knishi@jaist.ac.jp
¶Holistic Prosthetics Research Center, Kyoto Institute of Technology, Email: fwkk5911@mb.infoweb.ne.jp
∥Chiba Rosai Hospital
∗∗Satsuki Sodegaura of a Medical Corporation
††Graduate School of Medical Science, Saga University
‡‡Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saga University, Email: knakayama@is.saga-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In this paper, we conducted an experiment that
an operator presented tunes using the “MusiCuddle” system to
a patient with dementia who repeats utterances. MusiCuddle
converted the patients’ utterances into pitches (F0) at a
predetermined interval. In response to an operator’s simple
key entry, the system automatically played tunes based on those
pitches. This function may contribute to resonating with the
patient’s emotions on the basis of iso-principle that is one of
principle of music therapy. In an experiment, we segmented
a patient’s utterances into sentences and compared her utter-
ances when music was presented and was not presented. The
results of the analysis showed that the sentences were uttered
with music tended to include the word of the immediately
previous sentence, as if she stutter out them. We thought that
if a patient’s attention could be captured by tunes, MusiCuddle
could contribute to alleviating their symptoms.
Keywords-Music; Convert utterances into pitch.
I. INTRODUCTION
Dementia is the deterioration of cognitive ability and skills
due to an organic disorder (such as Alzheimer’s disease,
dementia with Lewy bodies, cerebral vascular dementia, and
frontotemporal dementia, and so on.).
As one of the symptoms of dementia, some patients repeat
stereotypical behaviors and utterances. When we recorded
the utterances of patients with mental instability for one
month, regardless of whether a result of a test of cognitive
function is good or bad, many patients repeated stereotypical
utterances [1]. One of them repeated, “Did you do it?” in a
falsetto, another cried, “I want to go to the restroom!” even
after she had been to the restroom. Another locked herself
in a restroom and repeated the same words in a loud voice
all day. However, when a caregiver said something to her,
she could greet clearly.
In most cases, we could not understand what the patients
were saying. Although doctors, nurses, and caregivers talked
to the patients and attempted to distract them into another
action, it was not easy to calm the patients down. Therefore,
music that resonates with the patients’ emotions and calm
their symptoms can be expected to help the caregivers in
caring for these patients.
Music therapy is one of the methods known to alleviate
symptoms of dementia. Park and Pringle Specht [2] con-
ducted an experiment in which individuals with dementia
listened to their preferred music. The result showed that
mean agitation levels were signiﬁcantly lower while listening
to music than before listening to the music. Svansdottir and
Snaedal [3] showed a signiﬁcant reduction in activity dis-
turbances, aggressiveness, and anxiety in the group assigned
music therapy. The study of Nair, Heim, Krishnan, D’Este,
Marley, and Attia [4] did not ﬁnd that ambient Baroque
music had any calming effect. However, they showed that
in order to achieve the desired behavioral effect, music may
need to be tailored rather than generalized.
The iso-principle [5], which is one of the principles of
music therapy, suggests that a music therapist ﬁrst perform
music that matches the current mood of a patient. This
type of therapy is also effective for symptoms of mental
instability in which patients repeat stereotypical behaviors
and utterances, such as in some dementia patients.
Therefore, we [1] present a music therapy system, “Mu-
siCuddle,” which accompanies patients’ agitated repetitive
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stereotypical utterances with music that resonates with
his/her mood. This system converts the patients’ utterances
into pitches (F0) at a predetermined interval. Then, the
system presents a music phrase (tune). The ﬁrst note of it
is same as the pitch converted from the patient’s utterances.
Moreover, one type of tune is cadence that begin on a chord
that resonates with the patient’s current emotions and ﬁnish
on a terminative chord that calms his symptoms.
In this paper, we prepare more tunes in the database of
MusiCuddle. Then, we conduct an experiment that one of
authors presents tunes using MusiCuddle to a patient with
dementia who repeats utterances.
II. RESONATE WITH THE PATIENTS’ EMOTIONS
The iso-principle is well known to music therapists trained
in the United States [6]. “Iso” simply means “equal”; that
is, that the mood or the tempo of the music in the beginning
must be in “iso” relation with the mood or tempo of the men-
tal patient. The principle extends to volume and rhythm [5].
The actual use of music in a particular therapeutic situation
depends upon the particular needs of the individual, such as
a need for therapy to change behaviors on an immediate
basis to relieve troubling conditions [7]. For example, if
the client is distressed or agitated, then the quality of the
music initially should match his or her mood and energy.
By adopting the iso-principle, the ﬁrst choice of music may
be familiar and energetic [8]. In improvised music with the
client’s music, “match” means that the therapist’s music is
not identical to the client’s music, but is the same in style
and quality [9]. Likewise, in “validation,” one of the methods
used for communication between clients and therapists, a
therapist will observe the mood of a client and will emit
the same tone with his voice to indicate that he sympathizes
with the patient [10].
In our ongoing research, we are constructing a music
therapy system that performs music semi-automatically. It
is difﬁcult for the system to play improvised music that
resonates with the patient’s emotion in the same way as
a music therapist. However, we have tried to construct the
system using an advantage point of a computer. In the ﬁrst
step of our research, we allowed the system to convert
a patient’s utterances into pitches (F0) continuously. In
response to an operator’s key entry, the system selects a
short phrase in a database. The ﬁrst note of the phrase is
same as the pitch converted from the patient’s utterances. We
expect that this function may contribute to resonating with
the patient’s emotions on the iso-principle. Moreover, we
prepared cadences that begin on a chord that resonates with
the patint’s agitated mood in the database of MusiCuddle.
III. SET UP SYSTEM
MusiCuddle is a music therapy system that performs
music when an operator (e.g., a caregiver) pushes any of the
keys of the electronic keyboard or a button on the display
of the system [1]. The system also continuously converts
the patient’s utterances into pitches (F0). In response to
the operator’s key entry, the system determines a pitch at
a predetermined interval. The system selects a tune, a short
phrase, in the database on the basis of that converted pitch.
The top note of the tune is the same as the pitch converted
from the patient’s utterances. To convert the patient’s utter-
ances into pitches, we employ a pitch extractor to convert
the utterance into one pitch (i.e., Do, Re, Mi). This is based
on the technique for conversion of sounds that have unstable
pitches and unclear periods, such as natural ambient sounds
and the human voice, into musical notes [11].
In the original system shown by [11], if the operator gave
a start trigger, the system would initiate the processing to
obtain the F0 (fundamental frequency) time series from the
acoustical signals (i.e., a singing voice), which were being
recorded via the microphone. The short-term F0 estimation
by Fast Fourier Transform (FFT) and Inverse Fast Fourier
Transform (IFFT) for the power spectral is repeated until
the system catches an end trigger from the operator (i.e.,
the caregiver). The system then calculates a histogram of
pitches with the F0 time series between the start and end
triggers. Finally, only the most frequent pitch is selected
and is output as the pitch of the period.
For our research, some processing designs were modiﬁed.
Figure 1 shows the processing of the system. Considering the
attitude of the operator, we would assume that the triggers
would be input after the operator catches the utterance of the
patient. Therefore, we omitted the start trigger. The system
starts a short-term F0 estimation just after invocation of
the system and continues it thereafter. When the operator
inputs a trigger that is regarded as an end trigger, the
system calculates a representative pitch for a predetermined
period just before the trigger based on the above-mentioned
method. Then the system plays a prepared MIDI (Musical
Instrument Digital Interface) sequence that corresponds to
the representative pitch. These modiﬁcations of our system
improve usability by reducing the time lag between the input
of the trigger and the output of phrase.
To extract the F0 against the mixed acoustical signal of the
patient’s utterance and the cadence output from the speaker,
our system needed two of the same microphone (the better
solution is one stereo microphone) and one speaker. The
microphones are set in front of the speaker to record the
speaker’s sound at the same level from both microphones.
On the other hand, both microphones are displaced against
the patient to record the levels of the patient’s utterance that
are clearly different. The system calculates the differential
signals from the signals of both microphones to cancel the
sounds of the MIDI sequence where they are localized in
the center position. The F0 estimation is then determined
with these differential signals.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 1.
Convert into a pitch.
IV. DATABASE OF TUNES
Tentatively, we prepared four types of phrases in the
database. Table I shows some details of the phrases. The
patients who repeat utterances in many cases are experienc-
ing irritable moods and high anxiety. Generally, dissonance
chords indicate tension and consonance chords indicate re-
laxation. Clinically, a combination of these chords can elicit
tension and relaxation within the human body. Therefore,
we prepared dissonance chords and consonance chords.
Moreover, we prepared cadences that begin with dissonance
chords and ﬁnish with consonance, as well as terminative
chord.
“Four chords” means that the same four chords are
presented in one phrase (see Fig. 2). The chord is composed
of two notes. Thirty-seven MIDI ﬁles, of which the top notes
of the chords are C3∼C6, were prepared per one type chord
(see Fig. 3). Accordingly, the system can select a MIDI
ﬁle of which the top note of the chord is the same as the
pitch converted from a patient’s utterances. There are 888
MIDI ﬁles (phrase ﬁles) for a four-chord type phrase. In the
“Rhythm” column of Table I, “Quarter note” means each
of the four chords is presented in the rhythm at the rate
of 60 times per minute. “Random” is unregulated rhythm
[12]. The “Interval” column shows intervals between two
notes composed of each chord. In the “Change of volume”
column, “No change” means four chords are presented in
the same volume. “Crescendo” means that the volume of
notes gradually increases one by one, while “Decrescendo”
means that the volume of notes gradually decreases.
In the type of “Cadence,” we prepared 96 kinds of
cadences that begin with dissonance chords and ﬁnish with
consonance, as well as terminative chord. These cadences
were picked out from two piano suites; “Das Wohltem-
perierte Klavier Band 1, BWV846-869,” composed by J.
S. Bach in 1722, and “24 Preludes and Fugues, Op.87,”
composed by D. D. Shostakovich in 1952. Both suites
consist of 24 pieces (24 tonalities), and one piece consists of
a prelude and fugue. We could prepare at least 96 cadences,
if two cadences were chosen from one piece, the prelude,
and the fugue. The top note of the ﬁrst chord in each cadence
is applied as any of 12 tones, Do, Do sharp, Re, Re sharp,
and so on. Moreover, each piece is translated to go up/down
one to three octaves to cover all possible tones converted
from the patient’s utterance. The plural cadences correspond
to each of 12 tones converted from the patient’s utterance.
In the other direction, we prepared phrases from Japanese
school songs. Ashida reported that reminiscence-focused
music therapy might reduce depressive symptoms in elderly
people with dementia [13]. Therefore, we picked out short
phrases from some familiar songs for elderly people. We
created a simple accompaniment for each phrase. Each
phrase was arranged into 37 MIDI ﬁles, the ﬁrst notes of
which were C3∼C6.
Fig. 4 shows two kinds of phrase. These are the same
tune, “Akaikutsu.” The top of them begins with C4 as well
as the bottom of them begins with G#4. The difference in
the pitch of the ﬁrst notes affects and changes the entire
mood of the music.
The last type phrases were created from the patient’s
utterance. All segments of her utterance could be converted
into some notes. Fig. 5 shows an example. Previously,
her utterance, “i-ma-se-n-de-su-yo [I am not here],” was
converted into a phrase “re-re-re-si-ra-ra-si.” This phrase was
also arranged into 37 MIDI ﬁles, the ﬁrst notes of which
were C3∼C6.
Figure 2.
Same four chords are presented in one phrase.
Figure 3.
The top notes of the chords are C3-C6.
V. EXPERIMENT
A. Ethical Considerations
This experiment was approved by the Research Ethics
Board of Saga University. The participant of the experiment,
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Table I
TUNES
Types
Details
Four chords
Rhythm
Quarter note, Eighth note, Sixteenth note, Random
Interval
Perfect prime, Perfect ﬁfth, Major seventh
Change of volume
No change, Crescendo, Decrescendo
Cadence
Bach
Das Wohltemperierte Klavier Band 1, BWV846-869
Shostakovich
24 Preludes and Fugues, Op.87
Japanese school song
“Yuki,” “Akaikutsu,” “Hana,” “Tsukinosabaku,” etc
Stereotypical utterance
Ex. Utterance, “i-ma-se-n-de-su-yo” is converted into a phrase “re-re-re-si-ra-ra-si.”
Figure 4.
The difference of the ﬁrst note changes the entire mood of
music.
Figure 5.
The segment of patient’s utterance is converted into some notes.
who is a patient with dementia, her husband, and the hospital
director were informed about intention of the experiment and
the treatment of personal information. Moreover, they were
informed that they could withdraw from the experiment at
any time. Then, we obtained written consents from them.
B. Participant
The participant is a patient with frontotemporal dementia
(FTD) staying in a hospital. She is 72 years old. The score
of Revised Hasegawa’s dementia scale (HDS-R[14]) was 17
two years ago. She repeats the same words for many hours
a day. When she is agitated, she locks herself in a restroom.
However, she is lucid enough to remember the nurse’s name
and greet her clearly.
C. Preliminary experiment
When the participant was agitated and repeated the same
sentences, one of the authors repeated sentences in accord
with the participant’s repetition in the same melody and
rhythm. Fig. 6 shows these sentences in music score. Sen-
tence A means the participant’s sentence. First, the author
tried to repeat the same sentence as the participant’s together.
Namely, both of them repeated Sentence A, “i-ma-se-n-yo.”
Second, the author tried to repeat a different sentence using
the same melody and rhythm pattern as the participant’s
together. Namely, the author repeated Sentence B, “go-han-
de-su-yo” although the participant was repeating Sentence
A.
In the ﬁrst trial, the participant turned around to pay
attention to the author. However, she kept repeating the
same sentence harmonised with the author’s repeating. In
the second trial, the participant changed the sentence A to
the author’s sentence, “go-han-de-su-yo” in the same melody
and rhythm.
Figure 6.
Author repeated sentences in accord with the participant’s
repetition.
D. Method
When the participant is agitated and repeats the same
words, an operator (one of authors) presents tunes using
the system MusiCuddle. The tune is presented through a
wireless cuboidal speaker, 123×36×35mm, and the patient’s
utterances are recorded through a wireless columnar micro-
phone, about 75mm in height and 24mm in diameter. These
devices are set in the restroom.
E. Analysis method
In this paper, we analyze the participant’s utterances
in three records: 16, 8, and 3 minutes. The participant’s
utterances are segmented into small sentences based on the
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

way of repeating. Then, we analyze ways to change the
sentences.
First, we determine whether each sentence was uttered
“with music” or “without music.” If a tune was presented
in the middle of a sentence, the sentence was considered
to be uttered without music. In this case, the sentence was
started to utter before presenting the tune. So, we consider
that the sentence was untouched by music. In the following
example, “hirugohandeha” is recognized as no music:
P: imasendesu hirugohandeha imasendesu
[
(Start a tune)
In the following example, “ima” as well as “gohanden” are
recognized as they were uttered with music:
P: imasendesu ... imasen ima gohanden
[
]
(Stop a tune)
The sentence, “ima” was started to utter with music. So,
this sentence was affected by the tune. Moreover, we con-
sider that “gohanden” was affected by the tune because this
sentence was started to utter immediately after presenting
the tune.
Second, we determine whether each sentence includes the
words that are part of the immediately previous sentence. In
the following example, “imasendesu” includes the immedi-
ately previous sentence “ima:”
P: ima imasendesu
F. Results
1) Presented tunes: In the ﬁrst and second record, we
presented the tunes arbitrarily by giving triggers to Mu-
siCuddle. In the third record, we did not present the tune
at all. Recording time is 27 minutes. The total time of
presenting tunes was 6 minutes and 54 seconds, which is
one-fourth of all recording time.
Table II shows kinds of tunes, times of the tune, and
total time of the tunes at the ﬁrst and second-record. First,
we presented six four chords. In this record, we use one
type of four chords: Major seventh, Quarter note, and No
volume change. This chord can show unsteady images
to the participant. Next, we presented a Japanese school
song, “Yuki,” four times. The patient sang only the last
phrase, “zun zun tsumoru [accumulate rapidly]” along with
the melody the ﬁrst time. Continuously, “Akaikutsu” was
presented ﬁve times. Next, ﬁve cadences were presented.
The kind of cadences were decided by the pitch converted
from her utterances. After that, we again presented “Yuki.”
She sang again. The last tune of the ﬁrst record was a
Japanese school song, “Hana.” In the second record, ﬁrst,
we presented a Japanese school song, “Tsukinosabaku,”
four times. Continuously, “Yuki” was presented nine times.
However, she did not song along with them. Next, we
presented the phrase created from her utterance “i-ma-sen-
de-su-yo” ﬁve times. At the end of the record, we presented
“Hana” two times.
2) Classify utterances: The participant uttered all times
of the experiment. Most of utterances were rhythmical and
ﬁt into same meter, although she uttered many kinds of
sentences. Fig. 7 describes some examples of her sentences.
One of the authors took rhythm dectation of these sentences.
These example shows even if the sentences are different,
they ﬁt into four-four time.
Figure 7.
Sentences ﬁt into four-four time.
Table III shows the kinds of sentences. The segmented
sentences are 680 (84 kinds) in 27 minutes. There were many
cases in which the contents of the sentences are almost the
same even if the words among the sentences vary slightly.
Table IV shows the comparison between “with music” and
“without music.” The number of changing sentences is 114
with music and 179 without music. The tune-presented time
is one-fourth of all recording time. Therefore, the change
of sentences with music occurs with greater frequency than
that without music. However, with music, the rate that the
sentence includes the word of the immediately previous
sentence is higher than that without music. The rate with
music is 82.5%, whereas that without music is 41.3%.
Table IV
THE NUMBER OF CHANGING SENTENCES.
with music
without music
changing sentence
(ALL)
114
179
include the words of
the immediately previous sentence.
94
74
rate (%)
82.5
41.3
VI. DISCUSSION
Patients with dementia who continually repeat utterances
tend to repeat the same or similar content. Moreover, the
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Table II
PRESENTED TUNES IN THE EXPERIMENT.
Types
Tunes
Time(sec.)
Number of times
Beginning note
Total time(sec.)
Major seventh &
Four chords
Quarter note &
3
6
D3(2),D#3,F3,A3,C4
18
No volume change
Cadence
No.22 Fugue (B)
8
1
C4
8
No.1 Fugue (B)
8
1
F3
8
No.15 Fugue (B)
11
1
F#3
11
No.22 Prelude (S)
15
1
D4
15
No.3 Fugue (S)
25
1
F#3
25
Japanese school song
“Yuki”
9
21
D#3, E3(3),F3(7),G3(2),G#3,A3(3),A#3,B3,C4,D4
189
“Akaikutsu”
10
5
D3,F3,F#3,G#3,A#3
50
“Hana”
8
4
D3,G#3,A#3,G#4
32
“Tsukinosabaku”
11
4
F#3,F3, C4,C3
44
Stereotypical utterance
i-ma-se-n-de-su-yo
3
5
G3,G#3,A3(2),A#3
15
Sum
–
–
50
–
414
In the “Tunes” column, “(B)” means the tune is a part of a piece composed by Bach, and “(S)” means the tune is a part of a piece composed by Shostakovich.
In the “Beginning note” column, C, D, E∼A, and B show Do, Re, Mi∼Ra, and Si. A4 is about 440Hz. Values in parentheses shows the time of each beginning note.
participant in our experiment uttered in the same meter, four-
four time (see Fig. 7). Once patients fall into the pattern
of repeating utterances, it is difﬁcult for them end the
cycle independently. Generally, their caregivers address the
patients directly by calling out to them in attempt to shift
their attention, but it is not easy.
MusiCuddle might resonate with his or her mood in
accordance with the iso-principle. The ﬁrst notes of the tunes
that were presented in the experiment were also varied and
wide-ranging because the pitches (F0) converted from the
participant’s utterances were varied and wide-ranging. The
difference in the pitch of the ﬁrst notes affects and changes
the entire mood of the music (see Fig. 4). Tonality and pitch
(high or low) are essential determinants of musical mood.
The results of our case study suggest that tunes pre-
sented by MusiCuddle may give patients an opportunity
to stop repeating utterances. The participant in our case
study stuttered when each tune was presented. Each tune
presented by MusiCuddle began with a note in the same
pitch as that of the participant’s utterances. However, each
melody presented by MusiCuddle was different from the
pattern of the participant’s utterances. On the other hand,
in the preliminary experiment, when one of the authors
repeated the same sentence as the participant’s sentence
using the same melody and rhythm pattern, the participant
kept repeating the same sentence although she was paying
attention to the author (see Sec. V-C).
These results suggest that the sounds that are presented to
patients should neither be identical to nor entirely different
from their utterances. The patients might attend to the
tunes according to their similarity in pitch, and deﬂect
attention away from repeating utterances if the melody is
too strikingly different from their utterances.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we used a support system called “Mu-
siCuddle” to present short music phrases to a patient with
dementia. In our experiment, MusiCuddle presented a tune
that began in the same note as a converted note from the
participant’s utterances. We then analyzed the changes in
her utterances. When the tune was presented, she stuttered
and tended to begin saying a new sentence that only con-
tained a part of the immediately previous sentence. These
results suggest that MusiCuddle may give the patients the
opportunity to escape the pattern of repeating utterances.
We did a case study on only one participant to examine the
effectiveness of MusiCuddle. Although we simply say “de-
mentia” when referring to individuals who have deteriorating
cognitive abilities, individual expression and progression of
symptoms can very signiﬁcantly from person to person. We
have to consider the condition of participants and the advice
of their primary doctors when we examine the participants.
Thus, we will accumulate case studies of several participants
step by step.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Grants-in-Aid for Scientiﬁc
Research (23-40168).
REFERENCES
[1] C. Oshima, N. Itou, K. Nishimoto, N. Hosoi, K. Yasuda,
and K. Nakayama, “An Accompaniment System for Healing
Emotions of Patients with Dementia Who Repeat Stereotypical
Utterances,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, B. Abdul-
razak et al. (Eds.), Springer, Vol. 6719, pp. 65–71, 2011 [Proc.
ICOST 2011].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Table III
SENTENCES SEGMENTED FROM THE PARTICIPANT’S UTTERANCES IN THE EXPERIMENT.
Estimated meaning
Sentences
I am (not) here.
imasu (1), imasendesu (201), imasen (48), imasende (43), ima (5), deimasendesu (1), sokoniimasen (1), imasenyo (1),
uruchiimasendesu (1), ryugaimasende(1)
It is (not) luch time.
mazugohandesu (78), mazugohan (14), mazugohande (6), hirugohannarimasendesu (5)
gohandesu (4), hirugohandashimasendesu (2), hirugohannarimasende (2), gohandashimasendesu (2)
haisugugohandashimasendesu (2), mazugohandesuyo (2), gohan (2), gohanden (1), gohannarimasendesu (1)
gohannaidesuyo (1), hirugohande (1), gohandashimasende (1), gohanninarimasu (1)
gokaimenogohandashimasendesu (1), mawarinogohangoyamoyashisendesu (1)
First,
mazu (34), mazuyasumi (33), mazudesu (32), ma (6), mazuya (3), mazudesu (2), mazude (1), mazugo (1), mazuyasu (1)
Not do
masende (10), masendesu (6), masendesuyo (2)
Bath time, Break
ofurohaittadesuyo (2), ofuro (1), ofurojaimasende (1), hitoyasumi (1)
(Not) Birth day
tanjobijanaidesu (3), tanjokainaidesuyo (3), tanjobijanaidesu (1), tanjobijaimasendesuyo (1)
tanjobijaarimasendesu (1), tanjobijaarimasendesuyo (1)
Time
1ji40fundesuyo (13), yoruninarimasendesu (9), 1jihandesuyo (8), 3jihanninarimasendesu (8), yoruninarimasendesuyo (5)
handesuyo (4), 3jihandesuyo (4), 1jihande (3), 2jihandesuyo (2), 3jininarimasendesuyo (2), 1jihandesune (1)
1ji10fundesune (1), 1ji (1), 1jihandesuyo (1), 3jihanni (1), 3jihanninarimasendesuyo (1), mou3jininarimasendesu (1)
Snack time
oyatudesuyo (1), oyatujaimasendesu (1), keikihanaidesuyo (1), keikihanaidemasendesu (1), keikihanaitodesu (1)
Soon
suguha (1), suguhanaidesu (1)
“Yuki”
zunzuntumoru (2)
Question
imashitaka (1)
Greeting
konnichiha (1)
Others
dojoninarimasende (1), ugoninarimasende (1), sonouchimasende (1), mashi (1), bokujaarigatoarigato (1), basyohanaidesuyo (1)
Values in parentheses shows the time of each sentence.
[2] H. Park and J. K. Pringle Specht, “Effect of individualized
music on agitation in individuals with dementia who live at
home,” J Gerontol Nurs. Vol. 35(8), 2009, pp. 47–55.
[3] H. B. Svansdottir and J. Snaedal, “Music therapy in moderate
and severe dementia of Alzheimer’s type: a case-control study,
International Psychogeriatrics,” Int Psychogeriatr. vol. 18(4),
Dec. 2006, pp. 613-621.
[4] B. K. Nair, C. Heim, C. Krishnan, C. D’Este, J. Marley,
and J. Attia, “The effect of Baroque music on behavioural
disturbances in patients with dementia,” Australasian Journal
on Ageing, vol. 30(1), 2011, pp. 11–15.
[5] I. M. Altshuler, “The past, present and future of musical ther-
apy,” Music therapy, Podolsky, E. Eds. Philosophical Library,
1954, pp. 24–35.
[6] B. Koen, J. Lloyd, G. Barz, and K. B. Smith, The Oxford
Handbook of Medical Ethnomusicology, Oxford University
Press, 2008.
[7] D. E. Michel and J. Pinson, Music Therapy In Principle And
Practice, Charles C Thomas Publisher, 2005.
[8] D. Grocke, and T. Wigram, Receptive Methods in Music
Therapy: Techniques and Clinical Applications for Music
Therapy Clinicians, Educators and Students, Jessica Kingsley
Publishers, 2007.
[9] T. Wigram, Improvisation: Methods and Techniques for Music
Therapy Clinicians, Educators and Students Jessica Kingsley
Publishers, 2004.
[10] V. de Klerk-Rubin, Validation Techniques for Dementia Care:
The Family Caregiver’s Guide to Improving Communication,
Health Professions Press, Baltimore, 2007.
[11] N. Itou and K. Nishimoto, “A Voice-to-MIDI System for
Singing Melodies with Lyrics,” Proc. of ACM International
Conference on Advances in Computer Enter-tainment Technol-
ogy (ACE 2007), ACM New York, NY, USA, 2007, pp.183–
189, doi:10.1145/1255047.1255085.
[12] Y. Wakao and K. Okazaki, A handbook of impromptu for
music therapy, Ongaku-no-tomosya, 1996.
[13] S. Ashida, “The effect of reminiscence music therapy ses-
sions on changes in depressive symptoms in elderly persons
with dementia,” Journal of Music Therapy, American Music
Therapy Association, vol. 37(3), 2000, pp. 170–182.
[14] Y. Imai and K. Hasegawa, “The Revised Hasegawa’s Demen-
tia Scale (HDS-R) -evaluation of its usefulness as a screening
test for dementia,” Journal Hong Kong Coll Psychiatr, vol. 4,
1994, pp. 20–24.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

