Implementation of a Distributed System to Collect, Search and Manage Data of 
Patients with Leprosy in Hiperendemic Municipalities 
Artenes Junior Gomes Nogueira 
Federal University of West of Pará (UFOPA) 
Santarém, Brazil 
email: artenesama@gmail.com 
Cláudio Guedes Salgado 
Federal University of Pará (UFPA) 
Belém, Brazil 
email: claudioguedessalgado@gmail.com 
Valney Mara Gomes Conde 
Federal University of West of Pará (UFOPA) 
Santarém, Brazil 
email: conde.mara@gmail.com 
Guilherme Augusto Barros Conde 
Federal University of West of Pará (UFOPA) 
Santarém, Brazil 
email: conde@ufpa.br
 
 
Abstract— The state of Pará, in Brazil, with 2,351 new cases of 
leprosy reported in 2017, has an annual detection coefficient of 
30/100,000 inhabitants, conferring it the classification of a 
hyperendemic state. A research group at a university in Belém, 
capital of Pará, develops a research work where a medical 
team do household visits to individuals who have been 
diagnosed with leprosy. The objective of this work is to present 
a distributed computer system that helped the team to collect 
and analyze the patient's data without the need of printed 
medical records. The system is composed of four components: 
a database, a mobile application, a server application and a 
reports application. Tests on the system were made by the 
team while doing their research. Patient's data were collected 
from three municipalities in the state of Pará. From the 
feedback provided by the team, there was a reduction in their 
costs by not having to use printed forms and reduction in the 
delay of having the data ready to be analyzed, since it was 
being registered directly in digital format. In total, the system 
was used to store data of 1101 individuals, of which 276 are 
leprosy patients and 825 are contacts of these patients. 149 new 
cases were diagnosed that had not been notified prior to the 
team’s visit. Among these 149, 48 are under the age of 15; 122 
have type multibacillary (MB) and 27 type paucibacillary (PB) 
leprosy. 
Keywords-Leprosy; Distributed System; Mobile Application; 
Decision Support. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Leprosy is characterized as a chronic infectious disease 
caused by the intracellular bacillus Mycobacterium Leprae 
that has preference for cells found in the peripheral nerves 
and macrophages in the cutaneous tissue [1]. Its slow 
reproduction, about 2 to 7 years, results in an insidious 
clinical evolution of the disease, which manifests mainly 
through lesions on the skin and peripheral nerves, especially 
in the eyes, hands and feet [2]. 
In Brazil, there is a high incidence of leprosy in the 
states of the Northeast, Center-West and North compared to 
those in the south and southeast regions [3]. The state of 
Pará, in the North region, with 2,351 new cases reported in 
2017, has an annual detection coefficient of 30/100,000 
inhabitants [4]. This gives it the hyperendemic status 
classification. 
A descriptive case study was carried out in which a 
computational solution was developed to solve a data 
management problem of a group of researchers from the 
Federal University of Pará (UFPA), who studied leprosy in 
hyperendemic regions of the state of Pará. This group used 
the solution in loco to collect data of leprosy patients and 
constantly provided suggestions for improvements and 
corrections to the solution in order to adapt it to their needs. 
There are five sections in this paper: In Section 2, we 
present some works related to this one or used as base to 
develop it. In Section 3, we describe the materials and 
methods used to model and develop the system. In Section 4 
is shown each individual component of the system, 
describing how it works and how it communicates with each 
other. In Section 5 is described how the system was tested on 
field with the help of the medical team. Also, a summary of 
the data collected during the tests is displayed in table 
format. Finally, in Section 6, we present the conclusion of 
the work and some concerns about the usability of the 
system. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The base of this paper is the work of Barreto [6] that 
helped create a medical form to collect data from patients 
that were starting or were being treated for leprosy. This 
form was created based on the one used in Brazil [4] in a 
nationwide system to detected illness like leprosy. This form 
is used by health professionals to store patient’s data 
temporarily before submitting it to an online system used by 
the government to know which areas needs more help to deal 
with the detected illness.  
This methodology does not prove as efficient as it could 
be. Other works [10][11][12] that needed to access the data 
from this system to make some studies, reported that the data 
is very inconsistent due to the amount of noise that is 
possible to rise between the translation of the content in a 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

printed form to an online system [10]. This was one of the 
issues faced by Paschoal [11] when his team needed to create 
a database based on these data to make a study about the 
illness in a specific region in Brazil. 
It can be seen in works such as from Rafael [12] that this 
problem can be reduced if the technology is used more 
thoroughly. Instead of using papers that later needed to be 
typed into a computer, his work proposed the use of a mobile 
application to serve as a digital form that could be taken by 
health professionals in household visits to collect the 
patient’s data, which would be transferred to a remote server 
through the internet. 
Barreto’s work was used to model the data managed by 
the system. With the use of mobile devices, we extend his 
work by creating a distributed system that takes his original 
patient medical record and translate it into a digital format. 
Instead of using pens and markers to draw and paint crucial 
data of a leprosy patient, such as wound locations and 
sensitive degree points, a finger swiping a touchable screen 
in a smartphone is used, ensuring a better control over how 
the data is inserted in the medical record. 
III. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The system was structured in a client-server architecture 
[5] and consists of four components: database, server 
application, mobile application and reports application. All 
of these components interact with each other through the 
internet. 
 
Figure 1.   The client-server architecture used in the system.  
The server application (2) in Figure 1 accesses patient 
data in a database (1) which then passes it on to clients in 
mobile applications (3) and reports applications (4). The 
green arrows indicate data exchange. Bi-directional arrows 
indicate that data can either be received or sent by the 
component, unlike one-way arrows, where the component 
can only receive data. 
The database will be the system data source. It will be 
responsible for storing and providing data on patients with 
leprosy and ensuring their integrity so that inconsistent data 
(e.g., preventing the insertion of an unnamed patient) is not 
available. The server application will be a web application 
that connects the database and the other components of the 
system. It will facilitate access to data by providing an 
Application Program Interface (API) so that components do 
not have to worry about the specific access rules related to 
that database. The mobile app will be an electronic medical 
record that works on mobile phones or tablets with Android. 
It will have the responsibility of collecting the patient's data 
in the field and sending them to the server application. It can 
also request data for browsing and editing. The reports 
application will be a web application that provides reports of 
patient’s data, which can be accessed from any device with 
an internet connection (cell phone, tablet, computer, etc.). 
IV. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
For each component presented in the previous section, 
we will provide a short description on how it is modeled and 
how it can present data to users or other components. 
A. Database 
In order to include all the attributes of the chart created 
by Barreto [6], 31 tables were implemented in a relational 
database structure [7]. This set of tables represents one 
patient. Among the stored data, we can mention: personal 
data, household data, diagnostic data, location of lesions in 
the patient's body and neurological evaluation data. 
B. Server application 
Five endpoints were implemented in Representational 
State Transfer (REST) [8] that allow access to certain patient 
data from other system components. Each component 
performs a HyperText Transfer Protocol/2 (HTTP) request 
[8] to the server application through one of these endpoints, 
which will then process this request by collecting data from 
the database and arranging them in JavaScript Object 
Notation (JSON) [9] to be returned to the component that 
made the request. Some endpoints also have data 
synchronization capabilities, allowing the mobile application 
to send its database to have its data registered in the database 
of the system. 
C. Mobile application 
The application for mobile devices was implemented as 
an Android application that has an electronic medical record 
that allows the collection and browsing of data from patients 
with leprosy. This platform was chosen due to the number 
of free tools available in the internet that aids in the 
development of applications for it. Some screenshots of the 
application can be seen in Figure 2.  
A patient form has more than 10 sections that are 
organized into tabs by which the user can navigate. The 
collected data is stored in a local relational database on the 
mobile device before being sent to the server application, 
thus allowing the user not to depend on a stable connection 
to the internet to perform data collection. The local 
relational database has the same number of tables and same 
structure as the main database of the system to allow the 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

mobile application to understand the data sent by the server 
application. 
 
 
Figure 2.    Screenshots of the mobile application. From left to right: record 
of skin lesions, record of touch sensitivity in the hand, record of 
neurological evaluation. 
Some of the fields in the form make use of images and 
graphics that allows the user to better register and visualize 
the patient’s data as he is filling the form. 
D. Reports application 
 
Figure 3.    Web interface of the reports application. 
The reports application is a web application that takes the 
list of available cities and reports from the server 
application, displays for the user to choose and generates the 
report in Comma Separated Values (CSV) format for 
download. This report can then be used to aid in any 
analysis on the patient's data. As shown in Figure 3, when 
the user selects a trip (on the left) and reports type (on the 
right) and clicks the "Generate Report" button, the report is 
downloaded in CSV format. 
V. 
SYSTEM TESTS AND RESULTS 
The system was tested both in loco and in the laboratory. 
However, it was the tests with the research team collecting 
the data of the patients in their households that contributed 
the most to the maturing of the system modeling. 
The research team was multidisciplinary. There were 
dermatologists, physiotherapists, nurses and community 
health agents. The data collection was carried out in 
hyperendemic municipalities in the state of Pará. Before 
visiting any municipality, they contacted the local health 
team of the municipality to collect the data of the patients 
who already had or are being treated for leprosy, to then 
schedule with these household visits. During a visit, 
socioeconomic data and blood and lymph samples are 
collected from the patient and his/her contacts. To test the 
mobile app, one more member has been added to this team, 
which is the IT expert. This member was responsible for 
collecting data from the patient and his/her contacts. 
The system was used to collect and visualize the data of 
1101 individuals distributed among three cities in the state 
of Pará, Brazil: Breves, Redenção and Santarém. In each 
city, an average of one week was used to collect the data. 
Tables 1 and 2 show these numbers in more detail. 
TABLE  I.  
TOTAL NUMBERS COLLECTED AND 
MANAGED BY THE SYSTEM. 
City 
Individuals 
totals 
Contacts totals 
New cases 
totals 
Redenção 
432 
311 
29 
Breves 
311 
229 
75 
Santarém 
358 
285 
45 
Total 
1101 
825 
149 
 
TABLE  II. 
TOTAL NUMBERS OF CHILDREN AND MB 
AND PB TYPES FROM DETECTED CASES.  
City 
Students 
cases totals 
Less than 
15 years 
cases 
totals 
MB cases 
totals 
PB 
cases 
totals 
Redenção 
6 
6 
19 
10 
Breves 
46 
26 
61 
14 
Santarém 
8 
16 
42 
3 
Total 
60 
48 
122 
27 
 
Students and children younger than 15 years old are a very 
important data to collect because they are a strong indicative 
of infected areas. For a child to develop an illness that takes 
up to 7 years to show symptoms, he/she had to be 
overexposed to the bacillus. 
One big benefit brought by the system for the team that 
used it was the reduction of monetary costs. Before starting 
using the system, they needed to print roughly about $250 
worth of paper forms for each trip they made to collect 
patient’s data. Now, with a one-time investment in a couple 
of tablet devices, they reduced this cost to zero, only having 
to deal with possible maintenance in the electronic devices. 
Also, the time taken by the team to have the data ready to be 
used for its research was reduced from a couple of days to a 
few minutes. With the printed forms, after a week of 
collecting patient’s data, the team had to manually type in 
the data in a computer. Now, after the collection step is done, 
they just need to sync the data with the server and access the 
reports application to access the relevant data for their 
research. 
Instead of only working with diagnosis data and 
household contacts as in the system used in Brazil [4] and in 
the work developed by Rafael [12], the system also deals 
with socioeconomic data (monthly income, access to basic 
sanitation, help from government programs, etc.), household 
historic data (from where the patient came and where he 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

plans to go in the near future) and spatial information 
(Global Position System (GPS) coordinates). With this data, 
it is possible to have a greater knowledge about the patient’s 
condition and how he is contributing in helping spread the 
disease in its region if not treated. As mentioned in the 
Related Works section, the difference from Barreto’s work 
[6] is the use of technology. The main issue he reports in his 
work was inconsistency in collected data. Since he had to 
work with a big team, issues related on how each team 
member was registering each patient started to rise, such as 
illegible handwriting and important patient’s details been 
taking as side notes. This kind of problem is reduced with the 
usage of a software that restricts how each patient data 
should be collected, imposing clear standards that are 
enforced in the workflow of the team. 
It is worth mentioning that the system itself does not 
provide decision support for suitable treatments and follow-
ups. This information should be provided by the responsible 
doctor evaluating the patient and the system will only store 
its data for historical usage to see how the patient is 
progressing. The system is well suited to manage patient’s 
data thanks to its focus on diagnosis data, providing a well-
defined mapping of the possible regions of the body that can 
present wounds and mapping of the areas of the hands and 
feet that are losing sensibility due to leprosy. Also, the form 
provides fields to store data about laboratorial analysis. All 
of these data are visible through the mobile application and 
reports application. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The developed system completely replaced the use of the 
paper charts used by the research team that assisted in its 
modeling. This work presented a case study that proposed to 
solve a specific data management problem of a research 
team. The way the system is modeled may not make it 
practical to solve problems outside the scope of this team, 
but it has served to validate how computational systems can 
positively impact the management of complex data, such as 
data on leprosy patients. It is worth noting that the system is 
still only a tool. It is necessary the commitment of the team 
that will use this system in understanding its operation and 
restrictions and possibly even change its work process to be 
able to adapt the use of the tool in the collection of data of 
the patients. An electronic medical record actually helps 
reduce the chances of error in recording patient data, but it is 
up to the professional who is handling the medical record to 
take care and ensure that all data entered corresponds to the 
reality of that patient. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. G. Araújo, “Leprosy in Brazil”. Journal of the Brazilian 
Society of Tropical Medicine. 36(3): pp. 373-382, may. –
june., 2003. 
[2] V. D. Costa, “Experiences of Amazonian women living with 
leprosy”. [s.l.] Dissertation. Federal University of Rondônia - 
UNIR. Health Center. Porto Velho, Rondonia., 2011. 
[3] A. Figueira, “Evaluation of the coverage of basic health units 
in the fight against leprosy in the city of Santarém / Pa 
through 
spatial 
analysis”. 
Postgraduate 
Program 
in 
Biosciences. Federal University of Western Pará. Master's 
Dissertation in Human Physiology, 2015 
[4] Brazil, “National Health Surveillance System: progress 
report: Pará”. Ministry of Health, Health Surveillance 
Secretariat. – 5th edition – Brasília: Ministry of health, 2017. 
[5] G. Coulouris, J. Dollimore, T. Kindberg and G. Blair, 
“Distributed Systems Concepts and Projects”. Bookman 
Editorial Company Ltd. 5th edition. 2013, Porto Alegre, RS. 
pp. 56-60. 
[6] J. F. Barreto, “Spatial and Serological Epidemiology of 
Leprosy in the State of Pará”. December 16, 2013. 151. PhD 
Thesis in Tropical Diseases - Federal University of Pará. 
Belém – 2013-12-16. 
[7] R. Elmasri and S. B. Navathe, “Database systems”. 6th 
edition. São Paulo: Pearson Addison Wesley, 2011. 
[8] J. F. Kurose and K. W. Ross, “Computer Networking and the 
Internet - A Top-Down Approach”. Pearson Education. 3rd 
edition, 2011. São Paulo, SP. pp. 23 – 204. 
[9] Ecma, “International. Standard ECMA-404” – The JSON 
Data Interchange Syntax. Ecma International Standard 
Publications, 2nd edition, 2017. 
[10] S. M. T. Nardi, L. H. S. C. Marciano, M. C. L. Virmond, and 
R. Baccarelli, “Information system and physical disabilities in 
leprosy”. BEPA - Paulista Epidemiological Bulletin; 3(27): 3-
7, mar. 2010. 
[11] V. D. A. Paschoal et. al., “Creation of a data bank for 
sustainability of leprosy post elimination”. BEPA - Paulista 
Epidemiological Bulletin; 6(12): 10-15, mar. 2016. 
[12] B. Rafael, “A mobile health information logging application 
by community agents” – Dissertation. Federal University of 
Rio de Janeiro - UFRJ. Health Center. Grande do Sul – 
Unijuí, 2012. 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

