Enhanced Home-Based Medical Care Services Through Mobile Technology 
Walid Hassan1, Ayman Dayekh2, Hasan Bazzi3 
1 Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
2 Dept. of Information Technology 
3Dept. of Electrical and Electronics Engineering 
Lebanese International University, Beirut, Lebanon 
 
walid.hassan@liu.edu.lb; ayman.dayekh@liu.edu.lb; 
hasan.bazzi@liu.edu.lb 
Bassam Hussein3, Denise Kerbaj4, Hassan M. 
Khachfe1,5, 
4 QualiZone, s.a.r.l., Beirut Lebanon 
5 Program in Biomedical Physics, Faculty of Sciences  
Lebanese University, Beirut, Lebanon 
 
denise.kerbaj@qualizone-lb.com 
hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
 
 
Abstract — One of the fastest emerging services in healthcare is 
the development of home-based or home-based healthcare 
services. This trend has been growing in Europe, North 
America and Australia, especially in the last five years. 
However, the major challenge is the monitoring and control of 
the quality of the service.  In this paper, we propose a set of 
procedures for the quality control and monitoring of the 
service delivered, with the workflow being streamlined using 
mobile technology. The proposed model was simulated on 
different service management models and proved an assured 
tendency for an accurate tracking of the practice. Simulations 
revealed that upon the application of these procedures up to 70 
% (i.e. if 70 % of recommendations are applied), 90% of 
common medical errors could be avoided. In the proposed 
model, patients (under well defined mental conditions) are 
evoked and encouraged to constitute a part of the control 
procedure. The awareness of the patient reduces the estimated 
error measurement largely. The model takes care also of the 
quality control of certain medical devices (portable diagnostic 
devices) that are usually used in such practices. 
Keywords-quality 
control; 
home-based 
care; 
mobile 
technology; total quality management; healthcare management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many years ago, people used to have medical care 
provided at their places, where “physicians” used to diagnose 
and treat patients at their homes. This constituted an 
important opportunity for the physician to take a live look at 
the patient’s living conditions, given that these conditions 
were considered by that time as the most possible causes for 
diseases.   
 
With the development of medical equipment and tools 
for both diagnosis and therapy, there was a need to gather all 
these equipment in a place (Hospital) where patients could 
come to have medical services administered. This constituted 
an important step in the control of diseases especially 
contagious ones. With such a measure, people living with the 
patient were no longer endangered or subjected to the 
disease.  
 
As hospitals widely spread all over the world, an 
important issue unfolded: infection and its control. Most of 
the hospitals worldwide are general hospitals, which render 
them as places gathering a huge number of patients having 
different diseases, mostly infections. This leads to anticipate 
that a hospital is a place where we can –with a high 
probability– contract an infection (nosocomial infection). In 
order to minimize the aforementioned risk, many procedures 
and techniques were developed [1, 2]. One of the most 
common measures is to minimize the period of stay of the 
patient at the hospital [3]. Usually, patients having surgery 
procedures who are not in need for concentrated or intensive 
care can stay for a number of days at the hospital for the 
ordinary nursing tasks. During his/her stay, the patient is 
subjected to a non-negligible risk of infection. In cases where 
ordinary tasks could be performed at home, it would be 
better if the patient receives such a service at his/her own 
place. This will decrease the infection risk, liberate more 
space at the hospital, and in most of cases decrease the cost 
of treatment [4].  
 
The development of home-based care services is widely 
spreading in Europe and in the United States. The services 
mostly ensure medical and logistic help for seniors, children 
with special needs, persons suffering from chronic diseases.  
Late studies have revealed that even some cancer cases can 
be followed home-based [5, 6, 7].  
  
However, many problems are ensuing with the growth of 
this trend [8], the major amongst which is the lack of control 
of the nurse or staff delivering the service, when there is no 
direct supervision, as is the case in a hospital setting! In the 
latter case, the medical personnel are usually supervised at 
two levels (nurse / staff nurse and staff nurse / physician).  
Sometimes, a floor or ward supervisor can be added to the 
chain, just prior to the physician level.  In this work, we will 
be focusing on the issues related to quality control and the 
quality assurance of the service. In hospitals, the staff 
follows well-defined and well-practiced procedures to 
perform daily tasks. In addition, the presence of a staff nurse 
or any other well-experienced staff who can ensure that 
technical support is available when needed decreases the risk 
of errors. This is not the case when it comes to home-based 
care services.  Entities delivering these services are mostly 
private and they are governed by budgetary and human 
resources limitations. Thus, in most cases, they tend to 
minimize the personnel servicing one person at the time 
(depending of the case). The human resources limitations 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

may sometimes lead to employ some staff without enough 
experience. At this stage, a weakness point is identified 
which can be restated as follows: Lack of control on – and 
support (technical) for – the staff performing the medical 
task [9].  
 
In 2006, Koch [10] summarized the state of research on 
home-based healthcare from an international perspective. In 
their study, they reviewed all scientific literature concerned 
with telehealth services between 1990 and 2003.  They 
observed a trend towards tools and services, not only for 
professionals, but also for patients and citizens. It could be 
noticed that it was difficult to determine the quality of care in 
the presented solutions. They stated mainly the lack of 
standards for the compatibility of information systems, as 
well as the lack of evaluation frameworks considering legal, 
ethical, organizational, clinical, usability and technical 
aspects. Added to that comes the lack of proper guidelines 
for practical implementation of home-based healthcare 
solutions. [10] 
 
Recently, Kuo et al. [11] developed an information 
technology (IT)-mediated home-based healthcare model 
designed to improve the effectiveness of caring for stroke 
patients who require chronic home care.  The developed 
model showed an important success; however, their system 
depended on a measurement device capable of monitoring 
certain physiologic parameters and sending them to a control 
room.  Such dependence posed as a major limitation to the 
model. 
 
Margolis and co-workers presented a design and rationale 
for 
home 
blood 
pressure 
telemonitoring 
and 
case 
management to control hypertension with a cluster 
randomized trial [12].  The system communicates the 
measurements of blood pressure to a control space, without 
taking into account the quality of measurement.  
 
In this paper, we propose a general control model that 
can be used to evaluate the quality of home-based care 
services.  The model responds to the weakness points 
identified above; thus, the basic idea behind it is to ensure 
proper control and support for the staff, and to involve the 
patient in such a process.  It conforms to the basics of total 
quality management – in general – and quality healthcare 
management in particular.  The pillar in the proposed 
monitoring system is mobile technology, where the patient, 
the nurse, the physician, and the hospital information system 
are all linked in real-time. 
 
After this introduction, the problem is detailed and laid 
down.  The solution is then featured and characterized.  
Finally, future perspectives and possible ameliorations of the 
system are pointed out. 
 
II. 
SITUATIONAL ANALYSIS 
Controlling the quality of a service involves many 
parameters that should be evaluated and reported by the 
person delivering the service. Thus, it is tightly linked to the 
auto diagnosis methodology of the person and the system 
together. The identification of the problem causes reveals 
important aspects, as depicted in Figure 1.  
 
Figure 1 shows the possible causes of error according to 
a deep literature research on common errors in similar cases. 
The query included reported cases, patient surveys, and 
literature works. A simulation was performed in order to 
define an interval for each type of error according to the 
other parameters.  
 
The lack of experience was used as a testing parameter. 
This parameter is studied in two cases under conditions with 
and without control from a superior. A representation of the 
total error in both cases is presented in Figure 2. 
 
The above demonstration shows the importance of the 
control for many reasons. Thus, a primary parameter is 
identified that leads to have an oversight on the staff on a 
permanent manner. Here, we should mention that the 
presence of a control mechanism or a “permanent 
assistance” as we will call it later not only provides the 
control but also ensures a live support in case of need for 
information or in any emergency situation.  
Figure 1. Roots of error. 
Figure 2. Total error in both cases with and without control. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

One important issue can be revealed which is the 
importance of having a mechanism for archiving and 
analysis for all events that occur through the treatment 
process. Home-based care services are new enough that it is 
too difficult to find databases containing statistics or 
archives for incidents taking place. The presence of such 
databases minimizes the probability of mistake occurrence. 
Thus, the lack of supportive data is identified as an 
additional weakness point.  
 
The two points identified show the contribution of the 
staff to dealing with errors; however, an important factor is 
added which is the interaction of the patient himself/herself. 
For example, a hospitalized patient who is prevented from 
smoking for dangerous consequences will not be able to 
smoke in a hospital, but this is not the case for those patients 
receiving care at home. The interaction and responsiveness 
of patients receiving home-based care services constitute a 
difficult challenge in the treatment process. This point will 
be considered as a constraint in the solution process.    
  
Another constraint is the living environment of the 
patient and the respect of healthy living conditions at home. 
A sick person is more susceptible for infections than a 
normal one, which imposes giving high attention to hygiene 
control and to the quality of ambient air and temperature in 
the living place of the patient. This in turn reflects another 
challenge for treatment process because it depends relatively 
on the financial conditions of the patient.   
 
Figure 3 summarizes the different weaknesses and 
constraints of the treatment process and the cause-effect 
relationship between each of the contributors.  As presented 
in the figure, there are many parameters that influence the 
treatment process and are considered as limiting aspects. 
Besides, the quality control of the medical equipment used 
should eventually be addressed in some cases. For instance, a 
non-stable blood pressure measurement device can provoke a 
lot of disturbance for a non-experienced staff who may not 
doubt the measured value and further investigate it. Troubles 
and panic evoked by non-controlled or non-maintained 
devices can lead to dangerous decisions in certain cases 
ultimately increasing risk. Such a probability of errors in 
portable medical equipment may be higher because such 
devices are usually kept either with the staff or at the 
patient’s place. In a hospital, medical devices are usually 
maintained almost on a daily basis and the availability of a 
biomedical engineer or a technician on site decreases the 
risk. The biomedical department in a hospital performs 
periodic checks on the functioning conditions of devices 
(humidity, temperature, electricity and grounding, electric 
safety, etc.). In home-based care, neither the staff nor the 
patient are trained or qualified to perform such a task. 
III. 
MODEL AND MANAGEMENT OF THE SOLUTION 
A. Controls and Support  
The proposed management model for the service 
contains steps and procedures in order to minimize the risk 
and errors provoked by each of the above-mentioned issues. 
The model is based on the use of information and 
communication technology facilities in order to maintain 
acceptable working conditions, thus improving the quality 
of the service delivered.  
 
Nowadays, portable touchpads and smart devices can 
establish a bidirectional communication process where data 
is transferred rapidly and processed in a very short time. The 
design involves pre-defined mobile devices that connect 
through a secure application to a central system/database 
hosted at the hospital or at the company offering the service.  
 
The mobile application, installed on a mobile smart 
device (Touchpads, tablet PCs, smart phones, etc.) will have 
two different versions; one for the patient, and another for 
the physician. The mobile application can be modified or 
adapted depending on the case requirements that are defined 
through a well-traced procedure. 
The goal of the application will be: 
 
Physician’s version: 
1- Send instructions to the control room. 
2- Establish communication between the physician and 
the patient at home. 
3- Show critical medical information of patients 
(patient’s file, medical measurements, etc…) 
4- Show needed reports/trends about patients 
5- Receive emergency reports/alarms from the system 
 
Patient’s version: 
1- Send medical readings/measurements to the control 
room (example: blood pressure measurements). 
2- Establish communication between physician and 
patient. 
3- Receive instructions/alarms from control room. 
Figure 3. Cause-effect relationship influencing the treatment process in 
home-based healthcare. 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In the control room, the system will be managed by the 
experienced staff member(s) to control and manage the 
communication processes between the control room, 
patients, and physicians; as well as follow the treatment 
processes between the staff and the treating physician who 
may be situated inside or outside the hospital.  
 
The system itself will: 
1- Collect medical readings from patients. 
2- Collect instructions from physicians. 
3- Host maintenance information about mobile medical 
equipment. 
4- Ensure on-time connectivity to mobile devices. 
5- Analyze data based on intelligence. 
6- Trigger alarms 
 
A sample diagram of the system is illustrated in Figure 4. 
 
The created mobile application contains multiple steps 
where at the end of each routine to be performed by the 
staff, an outcome is required. The outcome will be presented 
as a value to be entered by the staff/patient. The value 
entered is transferred directly and shown on the server’s 
screen in the ‘Central Control Room”. The transfer of data 
to the control room enables online verification by the 
control room officer. The importance of this step comes 
from the fact that the control room officer, who in turn 
ensures the technical support and the control for the staff, 
can verify any procedure. A screenshot of what is displayed 
to the staff is shown in Figure 5. 
The software enables to create a visible history of any 
parameter of the patient. This history can be connected with 
the control room directly. This can even be done through 
videoconferencing, where the control room officer can in 
turn talk to the patient.   
 
Transferring the information all the time to the control 
room permits to create huge databases where all events are 
added using neural archiving methodologies. This data can 
ensure an important support for the staff and builds an expert 
system that will always be available in case it is needed.  A 
key bonus of this feature is traceability, where all events are 
recorded along with respective timestamps. 
 
B. Patient Responsiveness and Awareness 
Improving patient responsiveness and awareness has 
been shown to increase when patients are involved in the 
treatment process. A developed version of the model and the 
application proposes that two touch devices be used, where 
one of them will be kept with the patient. On the patient’s 
device, a patient application is installed permitting the 
interaction and the communication with the control room 
and with the staff concerned if available. In her/his 
dedicated application, the patient will be asked to enter all 
the parameters measured by the staff as the latter does on 
his/her own application. The staff will be asked to approve 
the data entered by the patient through the mobile 
application. Some alerts are programmed so that when a 
measured value approaches the safety limits or thresholds, a 
sign attracting the patient's attention is launched. However, 
this should be applied in a limited number of cases, 
depending on the patient’s alertness and/or – probably – 
their psychological aptitude.  Such a dual system is 
exemplified in Figure 6.  
 
Besides alerting the patient and involving her/him in the 
process, another purpose of having the data entered by the 
patient is to have a second reading of the parameter to be 
measured. This minimizes the risk of the human error and 
allows the staff to have a second look at the measured value.  
 
Certain features for the entertainment of patients might be 
incorporated in the application thus improving the healing 
process.  A psychic follow up can be also ensured through 
this application. 
 
C. Patient Living Conditions  
In the proposed model, a primary step is added to the 
patient incorporation procedure. This step is to perform an 
evaluation for the patient’s living place at the very 
beginning of the treatment process. If the patient’s living 
conditions are not adequate, the service might not be offered 
and the patient will be kept at the hospital. Eventually, some 
modifications might be required so that the living place 
stays in conformity with the defined norms. This can lead to 
Figure 5. Screenshots of the mobile application.  An example of the initial 
pad navigation screen (left) showing two potential patients.  A summary of 
a measurement (blood pressure in this case) is shown to the right. 
Figure 4. Home-based care system sample diagram. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the identification of some parameters that will be added to 
the mobile application and measured on an hourly, daily, or 
weekly basis depending on the parameter.  
D. Devices Maintenance  
In the dedicated program, a tab is designated for the 
device history. For any measured parameter, the application 
will ask the staff to enter the tag number of the device used. 
The tag number is an identification code that permits the 
system to check in the database for the device history. In the 
device history, all device maintenance records and control 
data are archived. The staff will be alerted if the device was 
not maintained or checked on time. In addition, when an 
abnormal value is measured, the system will directly check 
the maintenance date, and it might ask the staff to perform 
the test once or more, as shown in Figure 7.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
As home-based medical services are becoming a reality 
in today’s society, innovative solutions are needed to help 
offer such services safely and efficiently.  Technology plays 
an important role in ensuring this and in guaranteeing the 
quality of offered service. This is all the more so when the 
services are rendered in a country that markets itself as a 
destination for health tourism [13].  The proposed model 
enhances the home-based care service in a rapid and non-
expensive manner taking into account key quality 
considerations.  The preliminary implementation of the 
system – in cooperation with a Lebanese private hospital and 
a one-day-surgery polyclinic – involved the collection of 
data comprising vital signs (body temperature, blood 
pressure, pulse rate), blood glucose, general appearance, and 
– in limited cases – urination frequency and volume.  The 
collected data produced seed information that was further 
used to extrapolate into more quasi-real settings.  Current 
raw data (not shown) is in complete accord with the 
proposed model based on the simulation data shown above. 
  
The use of information and mobile communication 
technology permits the instantaneous control and support of 
the medical services rendered at home. Future advanced 
versions of the application may contain more features 
designed for people with special needs so that a permanent 
assistance is ensured. Other features may include tracking of 
the staff and patients, probably through the usage of global 
positioning system (GPS) capabilities in the device and an 
active subscription-based service to broadcast geographical 
locations. Both technical and geographical tracking can be 
performed at the same time through this software-based 
model. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Y. J. F. Hutin, S. T. Goldstein, J. K. Varma, J. B. O’Dair, E. E. Mast, 
C. N. Shapiro, and  M. J. Alter, “An Outbreak of Hospital Acquired 
Hepatitis B Virus Infection Among Patients Receiving Chronic 
Hemodialysis,” Infection Control and Hospital Epidemiology, Vol. 
20, No. 11, Nov. 1999, pp. 731-735. 
[2] 
N. Graves, “Economics and Preventing Hospital-acquired Infection,” 
Emerging Infectious diseases, vol.10, No: 4, April 2004, pp. 561-566, 
doi:  10.3201/eid1004.020754. 
[3] 
E. E. Bodle, J. A. Cunningham, P. Della-Latta, N. W. Schluger, and 
L. Saiman, “Epidemiology of Nontuberculous Mycobacteria in 
Patients without HIV Infection, New York City,” Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, vol. 14, No. 3, March 2008, pp. 390-396, 
doi:  10.3201/eid1403.061143. 
[4] 
É. Dubost, “La nuit dans un service d’hospitalisation a domicile,” 
Gérontologie et société, vol. 116, 2006, pp : 239-252, doi : 
10.3917/gs.116.0239.  
[5] 
N. Montjaux-Régis, F. Raynal, V. Chourré, V. Jasinskij, R.-H. 
Narcisse, I. Glorieux, C. Alberge, and C. Casper, “Hospitalisation à 
domicile pour les nouveau-nés,” Archives de Pédiatrie, vol. 16, June 
2009, pp. 713-714, doi : 10.1016/S0929-693X(09)74123-5  
[6] 
B. P. Ncama, “Models of Community/Home-Based Care for People 
Living With HIV/AIDS in Southern Africa,” Journal of the 
Association of Nurses in AIDS care, vol. 16, No. 3, May-June 2005, 
pp. 33-40.  
[7] 
C. Delaney, B. Apostolidis, L. Lachapelle, and R. Fortinsky, “Home 
care nurses’ knowledge of evidence-based education topics for 
management of heart failure,” Journal of Heart and Lung,  vol. 40, 
July-August 2011, pp. 285-292.   
[8] 
R. J. Webster, K. W. Carter, N. M. Warrington, A. M. Loh, and S. 
Zaloumis, “Hospitalisation with Infection, Asthma and Allergy in 
Kawasaki Disease Patients and Their Families: Genealogical Analysis 
Figure 6. Communication scheme between the various key players. 
Figure 7. Equipment maintenance tracking system. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Using Linked Population Data,” PLoS ONE 6(11), Nov. 2011, 
e28004. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0028004 (Open Access). 
[9] 
W. Hassan, H. Bazzi, D. Kerbaj, and H. M. Khachfe, “Quality control 
and monitoring of in-home cares services,” Proc. 16th International 
Conference on ISO and TQM (ICIT), July 2012, pp. 263-270. 
[10] S. Koch, “Home telehealth – current state and future trends,” 
International Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 75, August 2006, 
pp. 565—576. 
[11] Y. H. Kuo, Y. K. Chien, W. R. Wang, C. H. Chen, L. S. Chen, and C. 
K. Liu, “Development of a home-based telehealthcare model for 
improving the effectiveness of the chronic care of stroke patients,” 
Kaohsiung Journal of Medical Sciences, vol. 28, Issue 1, Jan 2012, 
pp. 38-43 .  
[12] K. L. Margolis, T. J. Kerby, S. E. Asche, A. R. Bergdall , M. V. 
Maciosek, P. J. O'Connor, and J. M. Sperl-Hillen, “Design and 
rationale for Home Blood Pressure Telemonitoring and Case 
Management to Control Hypertension (HyperLink): A cluster 
randomized trial,” Contemporary Clinical Trials, vol. 33, Issue 4, July 
2012, pp.794–803. 
[13] H. M. Khachfe, W. Hassan, H. Bazzi, and D. Kerbaj, “Impact of 
Medical Tourism on the qulaity of medical services: the case of 
Lebanon,” 
Proc. 
8th 
Competition 
and 
Cooperation 
(C&C) 
International Conference, July 2012, pp. 321-331. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

