Effects of Aerobic Training Combined with Inspiratory Muscle Training on 
Cardiopulmonary and Skeletal Muscle Function, Dyspnea and Quality of Life in 
Patients with Chronic Heart Failure 
 
Zahra Sadek/ Said Ahmaidi 
Laboratory EA 3300 (APERE) « Adaptations 
Physiologiques à l’Exercice et Réadaptation  à l’Effort » 
Picardie de Jule Vernes University 
Amiens, France 
Zahra.sadek@etud.u-picardie.fr 
Said.ahmaidi@u-picardie.fr 
Wissam Jomaa / Fadia Shebbo 
Laboratory « PhyToxE Physio-toxicité environnemental » 
Faculty of Sciences, Lebanese University 
Nabatieh, Lebanon 
wjoumaa@ul.edu.lb 
Fadia.shebbo@gmail.com 
 
 
Mahmoud Youness 
Medical Research Center 
Beirut Cardiac Institute 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Myouness55@yahoo.com 
 
 
Wiam Ramadan 
Lebanese Institutes for Biomedical Research and 
Application (LIBRA) 
Lebanese International University (LIU) 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Wiam.ramadan@liu.edu.lb 
 
Abstract - This randomized controlled study aims to determine 
the additive effects of combining Aerobic Interval Training 
(AIT) with Inspiratory Muscle Training (IMT) in subjects 
having chronic heart failure and inspiratory muscle weakness. 
32 patients were enrolled, and underwent a 3 months training 
program each allocated to one of three different exercising 
groups comprised of IMT, AIT and a combination of both. 
IMT training involved a 15 minutes inspiratory training at 
60% maximal inspiratory pressure, AIT involved a 30 minutes 
treadmill exercising at 60% to 90% of maximum heart rate, 
and the combined group performed both types of training 
separated by a rest period. Pulmonary function, respiratory 
and skeletal muscles function tests were performed as well as 
Quality of Life (QoL) and functional capacity before and after 
interventional periods. Our results showed the benefits of using 
the combination of the two training types on inspiratory 
muscle and skeletal muscle function. Also, additional 
improvements in functional capacity were observed using the 6 
minutes’ walk test and by evaluating the patients’ QoL. 
Keywords: Heart failure; Aerobic interval training; Inspiratory 
muscle 
training; 
Inspiratory 
muscle 
weakness; 
Cardiac 
rehabilitation; Quality of life. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The main obstacle that heart failure patients face is 
exercise intolerance, usually manifested by fatigue and 
dyspnea during the daily living activities. Thus, these 
symptoms might contribute to physical impairment and 
reduce the autonomy of individuals. Exercise training has 
been shown to be safe and beneficial in heart failure 
patients. Thus, the non-pharmacologic strategy guidelines 
recommended exercise training to relieve symptoms, 
improve exercise tolerance, quality of life and reduce the 
rate of hospitalization. 
II. 
REVIEW 
Exercise training is highly recommended in patients with 
Chronic Heart Failure (CHF) [1][2][3]. The significant 
improvements on patients Quality of Life (QoL) and 
functional capacity have been proven by many researchers 
after Aerobic Interval Training (AIT) [1] and Inspiratory 
Muscle Training (IMT) [4][5]. The combination of both 
modalities has been promising and proved to be more 
beneficial than each training modality taken alone. Two 
recent studies have confirmed the additional effects of 
combining IMT and AIT in CHF patients. Winkelmann et al. 
[6] reported additional improvements in cardiorespiratory 
response in the combined group when compared with 
aerobic training group. Adamopoulos et al. [7] reported 
additional benefits in serum biomarkers and dyspnea 
sensation in the combined group patients compared to the 
aerobic training group. Both studies did not measure the  
benefits at the level of skeletal muscle function, and did not 
compare their combined group patients to IMT group or to a 
control. 
III. 
AIM 
The first aim of this study is to determine the effects of 
combined training on skeletal and respiratory muscle 
function, exercise capacity, left ventricular remodeling, 
dyspnea and quality of life in CHF. The second aim is to 
find the best training exercise that could have additional 
benefits on measured parameters. 
IV. 
METHODS 
32 patients with stable CHF and inspiratory muscle 
weakness were randomly assigned to a training program for 
12 weeks (3 times / week). The patients were divided, 
thereafter, into four different groups: controls (n=8), aerobic 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

interval training AIT (n=8), inspiratory muscle training IMT 
(n=8), and combined AIT+IMT (n=8). AIT consisted of 
treadmill exercise at 60% to 90% of Maximum Heart Rate 
(MHR). Interval training was chosen for its confirmed 
benefits over continuous training [8]. The treadmill exercise 
included 5 minutes warm-up period, followed by four bouts, 
each of 4 minutes at high intensity (60%-90% of MHR) 
interspaced by five low intensity bouts (50% of high 
intensity), each of 2 minutes, and ended by 5 minutes cool-
down period. IMT was performed for 15 minutes using the 
PowerBreathe device [4]. It included 4 bouts, each of 3 
minutes at high intensity (60% of maximal inspiratory 
pressure (MIP) with a warm-up and cool-down periods each 
of 1 minute at low intensity (50% of maximum intensity).   
The combined group training consisted of AIT followed by 
IMT session, with 5 minutes rest in between. The controls 
were instructed to maintain their habitual daily living 
activities. At baseline and after the training period, patients 
underwent 
pulmonary 
function 
test 
by 
Spirometry, 
respiratory muscle function assessment by electronic 
pressure transducer, echocardiography, stress test, skeletal 
muscle function test using hand-held dynamometer, and 6-
min walk test. Dyspnea, according to Borg scale, and QoL, 
according 
to 
Minesotta 
living 
with 
heart 
failure 
questionnaire, were also assessed. 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
Exclusively, skeletal muscle strength and endurance 
improved significantly in all three training groups. The 
combined group was shown to be the best group at the level 
of all improved parameters. Compared to the control, the 
combined group had 11% improvement in the maximal 
voluntary isometric force (kg) and a 30% improvement in 
the quadriceps muscle endurance capacity (p <0.05). 
Compared to the control, this training has shown a 96% 
improvement in inspiratory muscle strength (p <0.01) and 
87% improvement in inspiratory muscle endurance (p 
<0.001).  Quality of life score, functional capacity, exercise 
time and dyspnea sensation had been improved in all three 
groups with the combined training being the most 
beneficial. No significant differences were reported between 
groups on spirometric and cardiac structure variables, forced 
vital capacity, forced expiratory volume and left ventricle 
ejection fraction. 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we have reported significant improvements 
in CHF patients after exercise training. We proved that 
combined exercise training has beneficial results on the 
respiratory muscle strength and endurance, as well as 
functional capacity and QoL. These results were previously 
shown by Winkelmann et al. in 2009 and Adamopoulos et 
al. in 2014. Skeletal muscle function that had not been 
assessed by these two studies, have also been significantly 
improved in our patients. Such beneficial effects in skeletal 
muscle, strength and endurance, might be due to improved 
skeletal muscle intrinsic properties. 
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Combined AIT and IMT was safe and more effective in 
improving exercise capacity, skeletal muscle function, 
inspiratory muscle strength and endurance, pulmonary 
function, and QoL in CHF patients. Since no improvements 
have been detected in the cardiac function, we recommend 
that future studies must include a higher number of patients 
and assess for cardiac related improvements after combined 
training. 
FUNDING ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by National Council for 
Scientific Research (CNRS), Beirut, Lebanon. 
 
ETHICS 
      The study is approved by the ethics committee of Beirut 
cardiac institute, Beirut, Lebanon. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Brum, A. V. N. Bacurau, A. Medeiros, J. C. B. Ferreira, A. S. 
Vanzelli, and C. E. Negrão, “Aerobic exercise training in heart 
failure: Impact on sympathetic hyperactivity and cardiac and skeletal 
muscle function,” Brazilian J. Med. Biol. Res., vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 
827–835, 2011 
[2] 
P. Ponikowski et al., “2016 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and 
treatment of acute and chronic heart failure,” Eur. Heart J., vol. 37, 
no. 27, p. 2129–2200m, 2016. 
[3] 
C. W. Yancy et al., “2013 ACCF/AHA guideline for the management 
of heart failure: A report of the American college of cardiology 
foundation/american heart association task force on practice 
guidelines,” J. Am. Coll. Cardiol., vol. 62, no. 16, 2013. 
[4] 
I. D. Laoutaris et al., “Immune response to inspiratory muscle 
training in patients with chronic heart failure,” Eur. J. Cardiovasc. 
Prev. Rehabil., vol. 14, no. 5, pp. 679–685, 2007. 
[5] 
M. Bosnak-Guclu et al., “Effects of inspiratory muscle training in 
patients with heart failure,” Respir. Med., vol. 105, no. 11, pp. 1671–
1681, 2011. 
[6] 
E. R. Winkelmann, G. R. Chiappa, C. O. C. Lima, P. R. N. Viecili, R. 
Stein, and J. P. Ribeiro, “Addition of inspiratory muscle training to 
aerobic training improves cardiorespiratory responses to exercise in 
patients with heart failure and inspiratory muscle weakness,” Am. 
Heart J., vol. 158, no. 5, p. 768.e1-768.e7, 2009. 
[7] 
S. Adamopoulos et al., “Combined aerobic/inspiratory muscle 
training vs. aerobic training in patients with chronic heart failure: The 
Vent-HeFT trial: A European prospective multicentre randomized 
trial,” Eur. J. Heart Fail., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 574–582, 
2014.Electronic Publication: Digital Object Identifiers (DOIs): 
[8] 
U. Wisløff et al., “Superior cardiovascular effect of aerobic interval 
training versus moderate continuous training in heart failure patients: 
A randomized study,” Circulation, vol. 115, no. 24, pp. 3086–3094, 
2007. 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

