How to Promote Patients’ Adherence to Treatments based on Virtual Reality? 
 A Preliminary Exploration of Virtual Environments Preferences according to Socio-demographic Factors 
 
Solène Le Bars, Mathis Cuzin 
Altran Lab - Research & Innovation direction 
Capgemini Engineering  
Paris, France 
E-mail: {solene.lebars, mathis.cuzin}@capgemini.com 
Jean-François Rouzé, Sébastien Rouzé 
Wake Up & Smile 
Madrid, Spain 
E-mail: {jf, seb}@wakeupandsmile.com 
 
 
Abstract—In the current study, we carried out an online survey 
that aimed to determine which Virtual Environments (VE) are 
the 
most 
suited 
to 
individuals’ 
socio-demographic 
characteristics such as age and gender. Our preliminary 
results notably demonstrated that the participants’ age 
influenced preferences concerning the four following VE 
dimensions: esthetics, the will to spend some time in it, the will 
to further explore it and its relaxing aspect. Thus, our results 
provide interesting criteria to comprehensively select a 
relevant VE regarding the targeted population or patients. By 
adapting Virtual Reality (VR) tools to maximally fit the 
population characteristics, patients’ adherence to the VR 
treatment should consequently be enhanced.   
Keywords—Virtual Reality (VR); Virtual Environment (VE); 
Socio-demographic characteristics; VR clinical tool. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
During the last decades, the emergence of Virtual Reality 
(VR) technology has provided new opportunities for 
developing innovative and relevant clinical applications, 
adapted to numerous medical contexts and pathologies [1]. 
Indeed, the ability to create and control dynamic 3-
dimensional (3D) environments and stimuli, which are 
naturalistic and ecologically valid, makes the VR technology 
extremely valuable for the clinical field [2]. For instance, VR 
is currently used as an exposure tool in patients with anxiety 
and post-traumatic stress disorders [3]. Through serious 
games, VR is also getting employed to promote 
rehabilitation of motor disorders in post-stroke patients [4], 
or to enhance training in children with Attention-Deficit 
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) [5]. 
Thus, given the myriad of pathologies and clinical 
applications, one might expect that the Virtual Environment 
(VE) characteristics (e.g., kind of landscape and atmosphere, 
virtual 3D or real 3D, etc.) could influence patients’ 
adherence to the VR clinical tools. More specifically, we 
believe that socio-demographic factors such as the 
individual’s age, gender and socio-professional category - 
which can be related to the pathology [6] - could have an 
impact on patients’ preferences regarding the used VE, and 
consequently, on patients’ adherence to VR treatments [7]. 
To test this hypothesis, we conducted an online survey 
using different samples of Virtual Environments on adult 
participants, aged from 20 to 85 years old. The visual 
samples consisted in 2D pictures of various types of 
landscapes (e.g., mountains, forests, sea, etc.) and were 
presented in synthetic and real versions (coming from real 
images) on a computer screen. For each image corresponding 
to one VE, participants had to rate the four following 
dimensions: the esthetics of the environment; the will to 
further explore the presented environment; the will to spend 
time in the environment and the relaxing power of the 
environment. 
Our 
results 
demonstrated 
that 
some 
sociodemographic variables such as the participants’ age 
influenced significantly the preference ratings. To our 
knowledge, the current study is the first to provide statistical 
results that could be useful to properly select the VE in order 
to maximally fit the targeted population (in terms of age, 
gender, etc.). This optimization of VE selection regarding 
patients’ preferences should necessarily increase patients’ 
adherence to the VR treatment. An additional survey 
targeting children, teenagers and neurological patients is in 
progress. Moreover, supplementary analyses will be 
performed to further examine the impacts of gender, socio-
professional level and practice of VR technology.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. The 
research methods are described in Section 2. Then, we 
provide the preliminary statistical results in Section 3. 
Finally, we discuss the data in Section 4 and we suggest 
future research directions in Section 5. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Participants sample 
We recruited N=105 healthy participants (63 females) 
with a wide range of ages ∈ [20, 85], (M=45.85, SD=17.12) 
and various Socio-Professional Levels (SPL), going from no 
higher education (Level 1) to doctorate level (Level 6), as 
indicated in Table 1 below. 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF PARTICIPANTS (N) PER SOCIO-PROFESSIONAL 
LEVEL (SPL) 
SPL 
Level 1 
Level 2 
Level 3 
Level 4 
Level 5 
Level 6 
N 
3 
15 
13 
22 
36 
16 
B. Material & Procedure 
The survey – We used the Google Form platform to build 
and spread the survey without any restriction criterion. The 
collection of responses followed a strict anonymous 
procedure since the participants never gave their names or 
any kind of information that would have allowed their formal 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

identification. The first questions concerned the following 
socio-demographic characteristics: age, gender, profession 
and education level. Then, 2D pictures representing samples 
of VR environments were presented one by one with a 
landscape orientation. Each image was followed by 4 
questions, that could be rated on a 7-point scale going from 1 
(lowest score) to 7 (highest score). Those questions aimed to 
collect 
participants’ 
opinion 
regarding 
4 
different 
dimensions: the esthetics of the VE, the participant’s will to 
spend more time in this VE, the participant’s will to explore 
further the VE, the relaxing aspect of the VE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The VE samples – Twenty-four VE images were 
presented in the survey. Half of them came from “real” 3D 
environments and were developed by Wake Up & Smile 
enterprise in Madrid. Those real 3D samples were matched 
with virtual 3D samples that corresponded in terms of 
landscape types and atmospheres, as presented in Figure 1, 
where virtual and real samples were coupled by letters. Then, 
seven main types of environments/atmospheres were 
analyzed: snowy lands (images A), forest & jungle (images 
B, G and L), mountainous lands (images H & J), city/town 
(images E), Buddhist temple (images F), pastures (images 
C), beach & sea (images D, I, and K). 
C. Data analysis 
     We examined how VE features such as the type of VR 
content (real 3D vs. virtual 3D) and landscape kinds (e.g., 
sea, mountain, etc.) could interact with participants socio-
demographic characteristics (i.e., age, gender and Socio-
Professional Level (SPL)). The factor age was split into 
three bins of equivalent length and equal distance. Thus, the 
first group of “young participants” (n=35) showed a mean 
age of 26.2±4.51 , while the second group of “medium age” 
(n=38) had a mean age of 46.71±7.02, finally the third 
group of “elderly participants” (n=32) showed a mean age 
of 66.31±6.23. 
      We standardized participants ratings and we ran linear 
mixed models using the R package lme4 [8]. The following 
five factors as well as their interactions were entered as 
fixed effects: VR content, landscape type, participants’ age, 
participants’ gender and SPL. The random intercepts 
associated to subjects’ and items’ (i.e., VE) effects were 
entered as random effects.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
We used the same model’s structure for all the four 
measured dimensions (esthetics, will to spend time, 
exploration will, and relaxation). 
      Regarding the results presented in the next section, 
degrees of freedom (df) and p-values were approximated 
with the Satterthwaite’s method [9]. 
III. 
PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
A. Etheticism ratings 
We found a main effect of the landscape type (F(6, 
10.04) = 3.36, p = 0.044), regardless of the participants’ 
socio-demographic factors. More specifically, participants 
preferred the esthetics of mountainous lands samples relative 
to the town images (t(10) = 1.35, p = 0.0302), whatever their 
age, gender and SPL. More interestingly, we found a 
significant interaction between the group of ages and the 
landscape kind (F(12, 2468) = 9.75, p < 0.0001), meaning 
that esthetics preferences for landscapes were influenced by 
participants’ age. For instance, as presented in Figure 2, 
young participants were more inclined (t(2309.4) = 5.914, p 
< 0.0001)  to find snowy lands esthetic than older 
participants, who preferred Buddhist temple images. 
Figure 1. Overview of the 24 virtual environments used for the survey. The letters A-L indicate the matched images. The letters R and V 
indicate Real 3D and Virtual 3D respectively. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
Figure 2. Esthetics ratings according to the group age. 
B. Exploration will ratings 
We found a main effect of the content type (F(1, 10.04) = 
8.448, p = 0.014), regardless of the participants’ socio-
demographic factors. More specifically, participants’ ratings 
concerning their exploration will were significantly higher 
for real 3D VE than for virtual 3D VE (t(10) = -2.91, p = 
0.016), whatever their age, gender and SPL.  
We also found a significant interaction between the 
group of ages and the landscape kind (F(12, 2449) = 2.95, p 
= 0.0004), meaning that landscapes’ exploration preferences 
were influenced by participants’ age, as presented in Figure 
3. 
 
 
Figure 3. Exploration will ratings according to the group age. 
 
Finally, we observed a significant interaction between 
participants’ gender and the landscape kind (F(6, 2449) = 
2.23, p = 0.038), meaning that landscapes’ exploration 
preferences were influenced by participants’ gender. 
However, due to Bonferroni corrections, our post-hoc 
analyses were not significant. 
C. Relaxation dimension ratings 
Interestingly, we observed a significant interaction 
between the group of ages and the landscape kind (F(12, 
2449) = 2.95, p = 0.0004), meaning that the relaxing aspect 
of landscapes depended on participants’ age, as presented in 
Figure 4. Notably, older participants found the snowy 
landscapes less relaxing than young participants (t(2449)=-
5.85, p < 0.0001). 
 
Figure 4. Relaxing dimension ratings according to the group age. 
D. Time dimension ratings 
Regarding the time participants were ready to spend 
within the different landscapes, we observed a significant 
interaction between the type of landscape and the group of 
ages (F(12, 2449) = 4.08, p < 0.0001), as presented in Figure 
5. For instance, older participants preferred to spend less 
time in snowy landscapes than young participants (t(2449) = 
-3.1, p = 0.002), while young participants were even less 
inclined to spend some time in VE representing pastures than 
medium age (t(2449) = 2.31, p = 0.021) and older 
participants (t(2449) = 3.14, p = 0.0017). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Ratings relative to the time participants are ready to spend in VE 
according to the group age. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The present study aimed to explore whether specific 
socio-demographic 
variables 
could 
influence 
users’ 
preferences 
regarding 
different 
types 
of 
Virtual 
Environments (VE). We found that participants’ age had a 
significant impact on all the rated dimensions, relative to VE 
esthetics, exploration will, relaxing aspects and the will to 
spend time in the presented VE. Thus, these preliminary 
results could guide clinicians and developers to select the 
right VE while creating serious games or VR therapeutic 
contents, in order to design a task and a gameplay that would 
fit the patients’ characteristics. For instance, a rehabilitation 
program designed for post-stroke patients could take into 
account the preferences that were expressed by the group of 
elderly participants. Such adaptation of gameplays and 
programs would necessarily increase the patients’ adherence 
to the VR tools and consequently the efficiency of the 
clinical application. 
However, we recognize that the generalization of the 
current results is limited by several aspects. First, even if the 
VE items were counted as random effects in our statistical 
models, the selected images could not be completely 
representative of a whole landscape category such as forest 
or sea. Second, to facilitate the survey spread, VE samples 
consisted in 2D images so that we can not guarantee that the 
exact same effects would be observed with 3D images 
displayed through VR headsets. Finally, for ethical and 
practical reasons, this survey was completed by healthy 
adults only. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
     Socio-demographic variables, and more specifically 
users’ age, are linked to specific preferences in terms of 
Virtual Environments. Such preferences must be considered 
while designing VR programs and gameplays intended for 
clinical applications, to notably improve patients’ adherence 
to treatments. Further studies are now required to 
specifically evaluate patients’ adherence to treatments using 
VR headsets. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Schultheis and A. Rizzo, “The application of Virtual 
Reality 
technology 
in 
rehabilitation,” 
Rehabilitation 
psychology, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 296-311, 2001. 
[2] L. Li et al. “Application of Virtual Reality technology in 
clinical medicine,”, American journal of translational 
research, vol. 9, no. 9, pp 3867-3880, 2017. 
[3] A. Rizzo, S. Thomas Koenig and T. B. Talbot, "Clinical 
results using Virtual Reality," Journal of Technology in 
Human Services, vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 51-74, 2019. 
[4] D. Levac et al. “A knowledge translation intervention to 
enhance clinical application of a Virtual Reality system in 
stroke rehabilitation,” BMC health services research, vol. 16, 
no. 1, pp 1-11, 2016. 
[5] R. Adams, P. Finn, E. Moes, K. Flannery and A. Rizzo, 
“Distractibility in attention/deficit/hyperactivity disorder 
(ADHD): 
The 
Virtual 
Reality 
classroom,” 
Child 
Neuropsychology, vol. 15, no. 2, pp 120-135, 2009. 
[6] N. Rose, “Normality and pathology in a biomedical age,” The 
Sociological Review, vol. 57, no. 2, pp 66-83, 2009. 
[7] R. Gearing, L. Townsend, J. Elkins, N. El-Bassel and L. 
Osterberg, “Strategies to predict, measure, and improve 
psychosocial treatment adherence.” Harvard review of 
psychiatry, vol. 22, no. 1, pp 31-45, 2014. 
[8] D. Bates et al.  “Linear mixed-effects models using S4 
classes. R package version,” Package lme4, vol. 1, no. 6, 
2011. 
[9] F. Satterthwaite, “An approximate distribution of estimates of 
variance components,” Biometrics bulletin, vol. 2, no. 6, pp 
110-114, 1946. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

