Automatic Measurement of Pronation/Supination, Flexion/Extension
and Abduction/Adduction Motion of Human Limbs using
Wearable Inertial and Magnetic Sensors
Irvin Hussein L´opez-Nava1, Francisco M´arquez-Aquino1,2, Ang´elica Mu˜noz-Mel´endez1,
David Carrillo-L´opez1, and H´ector Sim´on Vargas-Mart´ınez2
1Instituto Nacional de Astrof´ısica, ´Optica y Electr´onica
Luis Enrique Erro 1, Tonantzintla, Pue. Mexico
2Universidad Popular Aut´onoma del Estado de Puebla
21 Sur 1103, 72410 Puebla, Pue. Mexico,
Emails: {hussein, fmarquez, munoz, dabyte}@inaoep.mx
hectorsimon.vargas@upaep.mx
Abstract—This research deals with the design and program-
ming of devices for measuring automatically human motion using
portable and low-cost technologies. The movements studied in this
research are pronation/supination, ﬂexion/extension and abduc-
tion/adduction of the upper and lower limb, which are required
for a number of activities of daily living. A home-made attitude
and heading reference system based on inertial and magnetic
sensor is presented. It was compared with a similar device
available in the market, and with respect to a video-camera based
system used as gold standard. An experimental platform was
also built for controlling and replicating experiments. The results
obtained by the proposed device are competitive and promising
with a general performance comparable to a commercial device.
Keywords- ubiquitous healthcare; real-time medical data
collection; systems for measuring tissue parameters.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This research focuses on designing automatic methods
and technologies for long-term and continuous monitoring
of human motion related to functional activities of daily
living, namely pronation/supination ﬂexion/extension and ab-
duction/adduction of upper and lower limbs.
The pronation/supination describes the motion of a radioul-
nar articulation such as the wrist and comprise the pronation
or internal rotation, and the supination or external rotation,
palm-down and palm-up for the wrist, respectively. The ﬂex-
ion/extension describes the motion around a hinge joint such as
the elbow and comprise the ﬂexion, a bending movement that
reduces the angle between the segments linked by the joint,
and the extension or straightening movement that increases the
angle between the linked segments. The abduction/adduction
describes the motion away and towards a midline, such as the
axis of the body, it comprises the abduction or movement of
arms or legs, for instance, out to the side, and the adduction
or movement to bring the limbs back in.
The
movements
of
pronation/supination
and
ﬂexion/extension are required for a number of activities
of daily living such as feeding, handwriting, typing, picking
up and holding objects, just to mention examples involving
the upper limb [1], whereas abduction/adduction of the lower
limb plays an important role in activities such as walking
and running. In general, these movements are important
when assessing functional abilities, determining therapeutic
intervention or athletic programs for enhancing skills, and
are also relevant signs for neuromotor development and
neuromotor function associated with aging [2].
The
measurement
of
pronation/supination,
ﬂexion/extension
and
abduction/adduction
for
assessing
functional abilities relies commonly on both, goniometric
measurements and the observation of physicians and trained
therapists, that do not ensure a uniform assessment.
Nowadays, portable inertial and magnetic sensors as well as
powerful, inexpensive and tiny micro-processors enable the de-
velopment of wearable technologies for measuring movement
related to functional abilities on a long-term and continuous
basis. Also, these conditions offer a unique opportunity to
reach broad segments of the population. These devices are
known as Attitude and Heading Reference Systems (AHRS).
It is worth to mention that commercial AHRS present two
main drawbacks. First, they are developed as black boxes,
offering limited possibilities for extending or adapting them
to user’s needs. And second, commercial AHRS are usually
general-purpose devices that are not speciﬁcally intended for
measuring human motion. Therefore, we strongly believe that
developing a home-made AHRS is a way to overcome these
limitations.
This article describes the design of a home-made AHRS
(HM-AHRS) using inertial and magnetic sensors. The HM-
AHRS is programmed to automatically estimate its orientation
from which a joint angle is deduced. It was evaluated using
a set of tests of pronation/supination, ﬂexion/extension and
abduction/adduction movements. A speciﬁc platform for con-
ducting these tests was built. Eight people participated in the
tests; they worn both our HM-AHRS and a commercial AHRS,
a LPMS-B device (LP-research, Japan). Simultaneously, move-
ments of individuals were tracked by a video-camera based
system. Our HM-AHRS obtained competitive results.
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The main contribution of this research is the implementa-
tion of an AHRS device from the scratch with a performance
comparable to a commercial AHRS in the measurement of
human motion, namely pronation/supination, ﬂexion/extension
and abduction/adduction of upper and lower limbs. This is a
challenging problem and it also poses issues such as the lack
of external references, the deformation and stress of soft tissue,
and the noise and drift that usually affect inertial sensors.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
revises the most signiﬁcant related work. Section III describes
the design, implementation and programming of our HM-
AHRS. Section IV presents and discusses the results that were
obtained. Finally, Section V gives concluding remarks and
some perspectives of this research.
II.
RELATED WORK
In this section we brieﬂy revise signiﬁcant related work.
Lee et al. [3] designed an array of accelerometer-based
nodes to measure ﬂexion/extension of upper limb. Their de-
vice is tested ﬁrst on a programmable rotary stage and then
compared to an electro-mechanical goniometer in experiments
involving one individual. The power consumption of the nodes
and communication issues are also investigated in this research.
Namely, the latency of a system comprising various nodes for
measuring simultaneously multiple joints is calculated with
interesting results.
El-Gohary and McNames [4] combined two inertial mea-
surement units containing each one a triaxial accelerometer and
a triaxial gyroscope, and kinematic models to control robotic
manipulators to estimate human joint angles. The proposed
method was tested for pronation/supination movement of the
forearm, abduction/adduction movement of the shoulder, and
ﬂexion/extension of the elbow, using eight subjects performing
normal and fast movement. Also, it was evaluated against an
optical reference system with good results. A similar solution
was studied by Zhou et al. [5].
Zhang et al. [6] focused on the problems of inertial drift
and acceleration interference that affect inertial and magnetic
sensors. They proposed schemes for ﬁltering and data fusion,
and conducted tests for tracking motion of upper limb us-
ing an array of three units of triaxial inertial and magnetic
sensors. The outcome of the proposed method in represented
as quaternions, that are directly compared to the outcome of
a reference system, a BTS SMART-D optical motion tracker
(BTS BioEngineering, Italy) involving one individual.
Kaneko et al. [2] developed a portable evaluation system
for pronation/supination movement of the forearm using four
wireless inertial sensors. From the obtained measurements ref-
erence curves for both, neuromotor development for children
and changes in neuromotor function for adults are obtained.
Even though the cited system has been extensively tested, with
several hundreds of subjects, any alternative device or system
is considered to compare its performance.
Bonroy et al. [7] developed a brace to measure ﬂex-
ion/extension movement of the knee using two accelerometers
and one inductive sensor for static and dynamic measurement,
respectively. These measurements are used to classify physical
activities of ten healthy subjects, such as walking, ascending
and descending of stairs, and fast locomotion. Previously, the
system was compared against a Vicon optical motion capture
system (Vicon Motion Systems, UK) with competitive results.
However, the authors focused on classifying activities based
on pattern detection in form of peaks.
Lambrecht and Kirsch [8] implemented an AHRS module
using inertial and magnetic sensors. Two variations of AHRS
were tested, one relying only on inertial sensors and one
relying on both inertial and magnetic sensors, and compared
against an active-marker motion capture system, Optotrak
Certus (NDI, Canada). The range of movements tested in this
research is wide and comprises seven degrees of freedom of
upper limb, i.e., azimuth, elevation and internal rotation of
shoulder; elbow ﬂexion; forearm pronation; and ﬂexion and
deviation of wrist. The results that were obtained are very
good, however tests were conducted using only one individual.
In contrast to previous work, four important features of our
system can be highlighted: (1) it relies only on one inertial
and magnetic measurement unit; (2) the same method is used
to measure pronation/supination, ﬂexion/extension and abduc-
tion/adduction of upper and lower limbs; (3) its performance
is compared with an analog device and with respect to a
gold standard based on a video-camera tracking system; and
(4) it was tested with a group of people, in this case eight
individuals.
III.
MEASUREMENT OF PRONATION/SUPINATION,
FLEXION/EXTENSION AND ABDUCTION/ADDUCTION
This section is divided into two parts. The ﬁrst one provides
technical details of the instruments used in this research
and describes also the experimental settings. The second one
summarizes the methods and algorithms that were programed
in our HM-AHRS.
A. Setup
This part describes the physical components and conditions
of the experiments conducted for our research.
1) Measurement Instruments: Two different devices AHRS
were used, our HM-AHRS and a LMPS-B. A video-camera
based system to calculate ground truth values was also used.
Both AHRS devices as well as the video-camera based system
operate with a sampling rate of 50 Hz. In all the experiments
described in this research both devices AHRS were worn
simultaneously by the subjects, and meanwhile the experiments
were recorded by the video-camera based system. More spec-
iﬁcations of these instruments are detailed below.
•
HM-AHRS. The Home-Made Attitude and Heading
Reference System comprises an ArduIMU v3 (3D
Robotics, USA) with three different MEMS sensors
(3-axis gyroscope, 3-axis accelerometer and 3-axis
magnetometer), on-board Atmega328 microprocessor
running at 16MHz, bluetooth RN-42 communication
module for distances up to 20m, and a lithium battery
of 3.7V at 1000mAh. The approximate weight of HM-
AHRS is 35g.
•
LPMS-B. The LP-Research Motion Sensor Bluetooth
version is a miniature wireless inertial measurement
unit (IMU) / attitude and heading reference system
(AHRS). This device includes three different MEMS
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

sensors: 3-axis gyroscope, 3-axis accelerometer and 3-
axis magnetometer. Its communication distance scope
is 18m, it has a lithium battery of 3.7V at 800mAh,
and it weights 34g.
•
Video-camera based system. The video system con-
sists of both, video-camera and tracker software. The
video-camera is a Nikon D5200 with 24.1MP CMOS
sensor and Full HD (1900×1080p) video recording.
The tracker software is a free video analysis and
modeling tool built on the Open Source Physics (OSP)
Java framework, able to track a visual mark and
calculate its orientation with respect to a given axis.
2) Experimental settings: To perform pronation/supination,
ﬂexion/extension and abduction/adduction tests, an experimen-
tal platform was designed and built. It consists of a translucent
rectangular frame of 80×80cm and a weight of 3kg, with a
rotatory circular plate in the middle with visual marks and
limit stops (see Figure 1(a)). These stops can be manually
adjusted and set on arcs of 30 and 60 degrees. Additionally,
the rotatory plate has three handles for short frontal (prona-
tion/supination test of forearm), short lateral (ﬂexion/extension
test of forearm and shank) and large lateral (ﬂexion/extension
and abduction/adduction tests of arm and thigh) movements,
as illustrated in Figures 1(b), 1(c), 1(d).
A sketch of the general setup involving the measurement
instruments and the experimental platform used in our research
is given in Figure 2. It is important to notice that all estimations
are made locally by AHRS devices, and the server is only in
charge of data acquisition for further comparison.
B. Methods
1) Subjects and conditions: Eight asymptomatic subjects
participated in the tests, 6 men and 2 women, with a mean
age of 27.3 (±5.07) years, and a height of 1.69 (±0.08) m.
All subjects gave their informed consent to participate in these
experiments.
Both AHRS devices were placed on the forearms of test
subjects using an adjustable elastic band with axes manually
aligned previously using a mechanical goniometer. To neutral-
ize the movement of the shoulder a belt attached to the body
at the level of the breast was used.
Since both devices are wireless there is no need of addi-
tional cables that might obstruct the movement of the limbs.
Each subject performed two sets of movements for these:
pronation/supination of the forearm; ﬂexion/extension of fore-
arm and arm; ﬂexion/extension of thigh and shank; abduc-
tion/adduction of the arm and thigh.
For the ﬁrst set of movements involving upper limb, sub-
jects were asked to repeat systematic movements within an arc
of 60 degrees at normal speed, and for those involving lower
limb, subjects were asked to repeat systematic movements
within an arc of 30 degrees at normal speed. For the second
set of all sort of movements, subjects were asked to perform
freely movements at their own pace. These movements were
performed by the subjects in random order.
Since all the instruments utilized to measure angles operate
independently, a post-processing for synchronizing datasets
was applied. A controlled start time for each instrument was
(a) Experimental platform
(b) Pronation/Supination test
(c) Flexion/Extension test
(d) Abduction/Adduction test
Figure 1. Details of the experimental platform and measured move-
ments.
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 2. Setup of experiments.
established, for aligning independent signals in function of
time; the start time was also used to adjust the initial magnitude
of the instruments, 90 degrees for pronation/supination and 0
degrees for ﬂexion/extension and abduction/adduction tests.
2) Algorithm: Inertial and magnetic sensors comprised in
AHSR devices calculate linear acceleration, angular velocity
and magnetic ﬁelds. Even though calculating angles from these
values is possible, by applying for instance a straightforward
integration of multiple readings of linear acceleration, the
resulting value is subject to inaccuracy, specially over long
periods of time. In effect, these sensors produce highly vari-
able signals and they are susceptible to noise, for instance
accelerometers and gyroscopes are affected by drift whereas
magnetometers are affected by magnetized objects.
To the previously mentioned technical limitations of the
sensors of AHRS devices, two issues that increase the com-
plexity of the problem of measuring pronation/supination,
ﬂexion/extension and abduction/adduction motion must be also
considered. The ﬁrst one is tracking moving objects without
any external reference to which the system can be tied. And the
second is measuring motion of objects affected by deformation
and stress of soft tissue.
For these reasons, algorithms for AHRS devices typically
combine evidences provided by both, inertial and magnetic
sensors, to improve the accuracy of estimations, and apply
self-calibration and ﬁlters to reduce or compensate noise. This
is also the way in which our AHRS has been programmed,
which is based on complementary ﬁltering.
Our algorithm is divided into three main stages: (1) cal-
ibration, (2) estimation, and (3) correction. The algorithm is
sketched in Figure 3 and the main stages are described below.
•
Calibration. For calibrating inertial sensors they must
be exposed to various situations and then measure the
actual error.
In our case, the calibration of the accelerometer is
done in this way, the sensor is moved gently in all
possible orientations. For each axis, the maximum
and minimum values from the obtained readings are
identiﬁed, a range and the mean of the range are
determined from these thresholds. Next, the error or
offset is calculated by subtracting the mean to the
known value of gravity, that is 1g. Once calculated
the offset it will be subtracted from the raw readings
from the accelerometer.
For the calibration of the gyroscope an average of
readings while the sensor is static is ﬁrst calculated,
the offset. Then, the offset is subtracted from the raw
readings from the gyroscope.
The calibration of the magnetometer to reduce the
distortion of the magnetic ﬁeld is a bit more intricate
than previous ones. It comprises one similar step
where the sensor is turned in all possible orientations
and then an average error or offset is calculated for
each axis. The second step requires the calculation of
a rotating matrix to multiply the actual readings of
the sensor, distributed in the shape of an ellipsis, and
transforming the distribution into a sphere. These steps
are known as correction of hard and soft iron errors,
respectively.
The stage of calibration is made once (step 1 of the
algorithm) and must be recalculated each time the
experimental conditions have changed.
•
Estimation. In this stage, a ﬁrst calculation of angles
is performed. Since this calculation is inaccurate and
is revised in a next stage, these values are considered
as “estimations”.
In our case, the initial readings from sensors are ob-
tained (step 2). From the readings from the accelerom-
eter and magnetometer, a rotation matrix known as
the Direction Cosine Matrix (DCM) is calculated
(step 3). Then the rotation matrix is updated using the
readings from the gyroscope (step 4). The readings
from the gyroscope are integrated taking into account
a measurement error (Me). Initially Me is equal to 0
and is updated in a subsequent stage. Finally, the rota-
tion matrix is normalized to preserve its orthogonality
(step 5).
•
Correction. In this stage, estimations are corrected by
applying known error models of the sensors.
In our case, the drift error is corrected by using the
readings from both, accelerometer and magnetometer,
taking into account known errors of these sensors (step
6). In our algorithm, this value was obtained from
the data sheet of the sensors. With these values, the
measurement error Me is updated (step 7). Then Euler
angles are calculated from the rotation matrix (steps
8 and 9).
The stages of estimation and correction are alternated from
now on from step 2. The measurement error calculated in step
7 becomes the known error in the next iteration.
IV.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
One hundred and twelve sets were processed in total
(16 for the experiments of pronation/supination, 64 for ﬂex-
ion/extension, and 32 for abduction/adduction), all comprising
the angles calculated by three sources: (1) the commercial
AHRS, a LPMS-B device, (2) our HM-AHRS, and (3) the
video-camera based system or gold standard.
The root-mean-square error (RMSE) between the estimated
values of AHRS devices and the ground-truth values, as well as
the Pearson product-moment correlation coefﬁcient (PCC) for
the same values were calculated. Tables I, II and III summarize
the results per treatment (arcs of 60 degrees for upper limb and
30 degrees for lower limb, and also free movements for both
limbs).
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 3. Algorithm used to calculate AHRS orientation, and
then angles of pronation/supination, ﬂexion/extension and abduc-
tion/adduction movements. L is an index of iterations.
Two remarks can be highlighted from these tables. First,
there is a very good agreement between the estimations made
separately by independent devices with respect to the ground-
truth values, as can be seen in the high correlation between
the compared values (columns PCC). Second, the performance
of both AHRS devices is quite similar, according to the mean
error calculated for treatment (columns oRMSE).
On average, the LPMS-B device is up to 0.35 angle more
accurate than the HM-AHRS device for small arcs (30o) for all
treatments, whereas for larger arcs (60o and free movements)
the scores of both devices are close. There is a difference of
up to 0.55 and 1.13 degrees for movement within arcs of 60o
and free movement, respectively.
These results were obtained from experiments that lasted
short periods of time, as usually required for assessing func-
tional activities in laboratories. Longer tracking periods are
more prone to errors and noise, and more sensitive self-
calibration methods and ﬁlters must be designed for correcting
these drawbacks and enabling AHRS devices for daily uses.
However, it is worth to remark that our HM-AHRS
achieved a performance comparable with a commercial AHRS,
according to a video-camera based system using a standard
software for optical tracking.
TABLE I. RESULTS OF PRONATION/SUPINATION EXPERI-
MENT. IN THE COLUMN Treatment, f STANDS FOR FORE-
ARM.
LPMS-B
HM-AHRS
Treatment
oRMSE mean (SD)
PCC
oRMSE mean (SD)
PCC
f/60o
4.81 (0.98)
0.98
4.62 (1.03)
0.99
f/Free
9.78 (2.42)
0.99
9.11 (1.78)
0.98
TABLE II. RESULTS OF FLEXION/EXTENSION EXPERIMENT.
IN COLUMN Treatment, f STANDS FOR FOREARM, a FOR
ARM, t FOR THIGH AND s FOR SHANK.
LPMS-B
HM-AHRS
Treatment
oRMSE mean (SD)
PCC
oRMSE mean (SD)
PCC
f/60o
2.35 (0.59)
1.00
2.90 (0.59)
1.00
f/Free
3.63 (0.85)
1.00
4.76 (2.04)
1.00
a/60o
2.51 (0.61)
0.99
2.32 (0.66)
1.00
a/Free
3.63 (1.04)
0.99
3.26 (0.97)
1.00
t/30o
2.30 (0.73)
0.99
2.56 (0.71)
0.98
t/Free
2.79 (0.81)
0.99
2.91 (0.80)
0.99
s/30o
1.57 (0.50)
0.99
1.63 (0.45)
0.99
s/Free
2.60 (0.47)
0.99
2.98 (1.04)
0.99
TABLE III. RESULTS OF ABDUCTION/ADDUCTION EXPERI-
MENT. IN THE COLUMN Treatment, a STANDS FOR ARM
AND t FOR THIGH.
LPMS-B
HM-AHRS
Treatment
oRMSE mean (SD)
PCC
oRMSE mean (SD)
PCC
a/30o
2.17 (0.49)
1.00
2.37 (0.94)
1.00
a/Free
3.30 (0.99)
1.00
2.69 (0.97)
1.00
t/30o
1.79 (0.43)
0.99
2.14 (0.61)
0.99
t/Free
1.96 (0.51)
0.99
2.19 (0.69)
0.99
V.
CONCLUSION AND PERSPECTIVES
The design of an HM-AHRS device for measuring human
motion is presented. Designing and programming our own
tool is a decision made by our group to address the complex
problem of measuring angles of human motion.
The HM-AHRS device relies on inertial and magnetic
sensors, and a simple complementary ﬁlter running on a micro-
processor embedded in the device. The HM-AHRS was tested
with a group of real people for measuring pronation/supination,
ﬂexion/extension and abduction/adduction movements of the
upper and lower limbs. It was compared to a commercial
AHRS device from LP-research, and with respect to ground-
truth values provided by a video-camera based system. An ex-
perimental platform was also designed and built for controlling
and replicating experiments.
The results obtained by our device are very competitive,
with a general performance comparable to a black box based
on a commercial device.
The device described in this article is part of an on-
going research whose goal is to design reliable and low-
cost devices for enhancing human-computer interaction for
applications such as serious games, exergames, and interfaces
for rehabilitation systems. In all these examples, the proper
measurement of pronation/supination, ﬂexion/extension and
abduction/adduction movement of upper and lower limbs is
considered crucial for designing reliable technologies.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In the near future, we will work on the improvement
of ﬁlters to better track human motion over longer periods.
For that, more complicated ﬁlters such as Kalman ﬁlter is
considered.
We will extend our work to combine the estimations made
by pairs of our HM-AHRS device in order to calculate joint
angles in which both anatomical references are dynamic, i.e.,
for knee angle two AHRS devices are placed on thigh and
shank, and angles are measured while both segments are in
movement. These studies involve signiﬁcant computational
challenges, such as writing simple algorithms for local com-
putation, establishing real-time communication among vari-
ous AHRS devices, improving calibration, and incorporating
sensors and methods for self-detecting a proper alignment of
various devices, among others.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Cimatti, A. M. Marcolino, R. I. Barbosa, and M. C. Registro, A study
to compare two goniometric methods for measuring active pronation and
supination range of motion, “Hand Therapy”, 18(2), 2013, pp. 57-63.
[2]
M. Kaneko et al., A measurement of a motion of pronation and supination
of forearm for healthy subjects using wireless acceleration and angular
velocity sensors, “World Congress on Medical Physics and Biomedical
Engineering, IFMBE Proceedings 39”, 2013, pp. 700-703.
[3]
G. X. Lee, K. S. Low, and T. Taher, Unrestrained measurement of arm
motion based on wearable wireless sensor network, “IEEE Transactions
of Instrumentation and Measurement”, 59(5), 2010, pp. 1309-1317.
[4]
M. El-Gohary and J. McNames, Shoulder and elbow joint angle tracking
with inertial sensors, “IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering”,
59(9), 2012, pp. 2635-2641.
[5]
H. Zhou, T. Stone, and H. Hu, Use of multiple inertial sensors in upper
limb motion tracking. “Medical Engineering & Physics” 30, 2008, pp.
123-133.
[6]
Z. Q. Zhang, L. Y. Ji, Z. P. Huang, and J. K. Wu, Adaptive information
for human upper limb movement estimation, “IEEE Transactions on
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics - Part A: Systems and Humans”, 42(5),
2012, pp. 1100-1108.
[7]
B. Bonroy, K. Meijer, P. Dunias, K. Cuppens, R. Gransier, and B.
Vanrumste, Ambulatory monitoring of physical activity based on knee
ﬂexion/extension measured by inductive sensor technology, “Biomedical
Engineering”, vol. 2013, 2013, article ID 908452.
[8]
J. M. Lambrecht and R. F. Kirsch, Miniature low-power inertial sensors:
promising technology for implantable motion capture systems, to be
published in “IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
Engineering”, 22(6), 2014, pp. 1138-1147.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

