Olfactory Stimulation in Premature Neonates: The Relevance of Early Experience  
Misha Croes, Wei Chen, Loe Feijs 
Department of Industrial Design 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Den Dolech 2, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
E-mail: {m.j.g.croes, w.chen, l.m.g.feijs}@tue.nl 
Sidarto Bambang Oetomo 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
Maxima Medical Center 
De Run 4600, 5500 MB Veldhoven, the Netherlands 
E-mail: s.bambangoetomo@mmc.nl
 
 
Abstract – While in the womb, a fetus experiences olfactory 
stimulation by means of the surrounding amniotic fluid. This 
prepares the fetus’s olfactory system to its postnatal life. If a 
child is born prematurely, it is deprived of this preparation 
because it is hospitalized in an incubator in the Neonatal 
Intensive Care Unit. This sudden transformation from the 
womb to an overly stimulating hospital environment imposes 
increased stress to the vulnerable neonates. This paper 
discusses various studies that show the importance of early 
olfactory stimulation, an approach to improving olfactory 
stimulation and protection, and suggests examples of 
implementing these improvements in future research and 
design. 
Keywords –NICU; early experience; odors; stress; olfaction.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Of the total amount of childbirths about 11% (USA) is 
born premature [1]. Recent advancements in neonatal care 
have ensured that these prematurely born infants have an 
ever 
rising 
survivability 
rate 
[2]. 
Despite 
these 
advancements, prematurely born infants are prone to 
develop long term problems due to exposure to stressful 
environmental stimuli (light, noise, smells, etc.) [3].  
Most 
of 
these 
prematurely 
born 
infants 
will, 
immediately after childbirth, be placed in an incubator at 
hospital’s Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU). Over the 
years extensive research about the impact of premature 
childbirth has shown that these children, and their parents, 
go through quite a stressful period [4][5]. Because of the 
premature exposure to a postnatal environment, external 
stimuli are perceived as extra stressful and painful by 
prematurely born babies compared to their full term 
counterparts [6]. 
In order to support during their stay in the NICU various 
innovations have been devised. Among these innovations 
are for instance a sound system for the NICU [7], the 
Babybloom incubator [8], the sound awareness system 
SoundEar [9], the Smart Jacket [10], and the remote 
cuddling FamilyArizing system [11] are all developed with 
the intention to improve the NICU experience for parents 
and their children. 
We concluded, however, that none of these interventions 
consider the olfactory development and environmental 
impact on prematurely born infants.  
Through this paper, we provide not only a review of 
relevant literature, but we also draw attention to the 
importance of early exposure to odors in prematurely born 
infants. We want to highlight the importance of both 
protecting neonates from stressful environmental odors as 
well as providing them with comforting parental odors in 
the NICU. Finally, we formulate various challenges future 
research might face. 
II. 
OLFACTORY DEVELOPMENT 
During fetal growth the first nasal tissue can be observed 
during week 7 or 8 of pregnancy [12]. The swallowing 
reflex is detectible from week 12 onwards and around 18 
weeks gestational age nonnutritive sucking begins. Around 
the same time (week 17) the fetus is capable of tasting.  
Smelling however only starts in around gestational week 24 
[13].  Coordinated sucking and swallowing are perceivable 
from gestational week 35 to 40 [13], the end of the final 
trimester. This means that the sense of smell is fully 
functional in prematurely born neonates in the NICU (24> 
weeks of gestational age).  
In humans, the receptors for the olfactory system are 
located high in the nasal chambers in the epithelium in the 
nasopharynx or nasal cavity. These receptors are not only 
stimulated during inhalation (orthonasal route), but also 
when infants suck or when children and adults swallow 
(retronasal route) [13]. 
 
Figure 1.  Nasal cavity [12]. 
From the nasal cavity olfactory neurons go through the 
cribriform plate to the olfactory bulb. Positioned directly 
underneath the prefrontal cortex, the olfactory bulb 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

transmits its signals to the olfactory cortex, which is located 
in the brain’s limbic system [12]. The pathways that go 
through the thalamus back to the orbitofrontal cortex are 
thought to be responsible for the perception and 
discrimination of odors [12]. Furthermore, olfactory 
information is communicated from the amygdala to the 
hypothalamus and to the hippocampus. These are thought to 
mediate the emotional and motivational elements of odor 
and many of the physiologic and behavior effects of scents 
[12].  
 
III. 
STRENGTH OF MATERNAL ODOURS 
Already in the womb neonates are fully capable of 
detecting and discriminating odors/flavors through their 
olfactory system starting at 24 weeks gestational age [13]. 
During the third trimester the child’s olfactory system is 
preparing for the future world it will live in by tasting parts 
of its mother’s diet through the amniotic fluid [14]. 
Extremely prematurely born neonates are deprived of this 
experience and are instead presented with new unfamiliar 
environmental odors inside the NICU. Various researches 
have shown, however, that prematurely born infants prefer 
maternal odors over these new environmental odors. 
In their study, Schaal et al. [15] showed, for instance, 
that prematurely born infants are capable of distinguishing 
their mother’s body and breast milk odor from other 
mother’s odor samples. A test by Russel et al. [16] showed 
that mothers show similar capabilities of recognizing their 
own baby. Furthermore research concludes that babies show 
positive head turning and appetitive mouthing if presented 
with flavors which were part of their mother’s diet during 
pregnancy [17][18]. This shows that during pregnancy the 
fetus already tastes and smells their mother’s diet, providing 
them an initial preference immediately after birth [19]. 
Similar tests show that babies calm down faster after 
smelling maternal breast milk [20]. 
Furthermore it has been shown show that neonates have 
less apnea without bradycardia and less apnea with severe 
bradycardia if presented with a pleasant odor [21]. In 
addition it is demonstrated that neonates cry less during 
separation from their parents if presented with amniotic 
fluid odor [14].  
Concerning non-maternal odors in the use of pain relief, 
Goubet et al. [22] introduced vanillin to premature neonates. 
They have shown that infants showed less crying if 
presented with this familiar odor. Some aromas seem to 
distract infants from slightly painful stimuli. However, they 
are not distracting enough for more painful procedures [23].  
During our literature study, we were surprised to find no 
literature concerning design or procedural interventions for 
communicating paternal odors to prematurely born infants. 
Although the effects in literature are quite promising, as far 
as we know, nobody has tried to specifically develop 
systems or products that provide the possibility of 
communicating paternal odors to the child. Nowadays, the 
only practice that enables odor communication in the NICU 
is the use of odor cloths. Worn by mothers, these pieces of 
fabric are left next to the child in the incubator to provide a 
more comfortable incubator experience. However, these 
cloths need to be washed often and don’t provide any 
indication if they still contain maternal odors or not. 
Due to the observation of this gap in research and 
development within the NICU, we identify a new research 
niche. In this paper, we present our vision of how to 
approach the development and implementation of paternal 
odor communication in the NICU.  
IV. 
APPROACH 
Traditionally the means of relieving stress and pain in 
neonatal patients was to provide them with anesthetics 
and/or sedatives. In recent years, research has shown that 
there are other means of providing pain and stress relief in 
prematurely born neonates. In this section, we would like to 
take the opportunity to propose an overview of the overall 
approach in neonatal environmental stress relief. 
The main approach in the NICU, in order to reduce 
environmental 
stress 
relief, 
is 
the 
reduction 
of 
environmental stimuli. We like to refer to this as “phase 1”  
in the overall process. In order to achieve this we observed 
redesigns of the NICU architecture (e.g., single patient 
rooms), its apparatuses (e.g., incubator), providing the 
neonate with protection (e.g., goggles for neonate) and 
educating both medical practitioners and parents (e.g., the 
NIDCAP program). 
The main goal of these interventions is to ensure that 
stressful environmental stimuli are reduced to, what we like 
to call, the “no-stress-line” (see Figure 2). This no-stress-
line depicts the pivot point where all stressful environmental 
stimuli no longer have a stressful effect on the neonate.  
 
Figure 2.  Approach diagram. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

From the no-stress-line onward we come to what we like 
to call “phase 2”. This area depicts environmental stimuli 
that provide the neonate with comforting environmental 
stimuli. Although the child might not experience stress, the 
addition of comforting environmental stimuli in phase 2 
ensures a rise in the quality of the NICU experience for 
neonates.  
Overall, we see in presented studies that such 
interventions have a favorable influence on neonates in the 
NICU.  
For 
instance, 
the 
sound 
system 
developed 
by 
Panagiotidis and Lahav [7] is specifically designed for the 
NICU to communicate maternal sounds inside the incubator. 
Resulting tests with the system have shown that the 
presentation of maternal heartbeat and voice produce short 
term improvements on the physiological stability of preterm 
babies [24] . Furthermore, Doheny et al. [25] showed a 
reduced frequency in apnea and bradycardia in premature 
neonates through the presentation of the same maternal 
sounds in the NICU.  
Concerning the implementation of comforting stimuli 
into the NICU, we like to place phase 1 chronologically 
prior to phase 2. If stressful environmental stimuli are not 
removed, there is no need for implementing comforting 
stimuli in phase 2. This is because, usually, the comforting 
stimuli have to be presented in such quantities that they 
themselves become stressful environmental stimuli.  
In the following sections of this paper, we present how 
we envision the implementation of the here mentioned 
approach on the early olfactory experience of neonates. 
V. 
CLINICAL IMPLICATIONS 
We are convinced that a number of measures could be 
taken to improve the early olfactory experience of 
premature infants. The first step would have to be to identify 
stressful environmental olfactory stimulants in the vicinity 
of premature neonates. Although no conclusive study has 
been found, detergent and adhesive remover are proposed as 
unpleasant odors to premature neonates [26]. In order to 
provide a more concrete answer on which environmental 
odors are stressful for neonates, we believe more dedicated 
research is needed. 
First, research should determine which of the odors in 
the vicinity of neonates are classified as stressful for the 
neonate. Secondly it should be investigated how frequent a 
neonate is, in general, exposed to these odors. The logical 
next step would be to eliminate the exposure of these 
stressful odors to the child. This can be done by means of 
providing the child with protection to the odors or looking 
for ways to remove or replace odorous chemicals.  
In phase 2, the child should be presented with 
comforting environmental (paternal) odors, odors that have 
shown their favorable influence on premature neonates. 
Here, we like to propose various suggestions about what 
we believe are viable implementations in order to improve 
early olfactory experience for prematurely born infants in 
the NICU. 
VI. 
PHASE 1 
First, we would like to highlight opportunities that are 
expected to provide less frequent experience of stress.  
A. Identification of Stressful Odours 
Before the protection of prematurely born infants to 
stressful environmental odors can start, the odors should 
first be identified. A survey of 99 neonatal units in France 
resulted in nine groups of products with a total of 76 distinct 
commercial preparations [27]. 
Overall, depending on their respiratory support, preterm 
neonates were on average exposed 1320-1800 times to 
chemical unpleasant odors during their first month of life of 
neonatal care [27].  
Bartocci et al. [26] described a method of measuring the 
impact of odors on prematurely born neonates by means of 
near-infrared spectroscopy. In their study, they describe that 
the presentation of a pleasant odor (vanillin) ensures an 
increase in blood flow in the orbitofrontal cortex, while the 
presentation of a unpleasant odor (detergent and adhesive 
remover) ensures a decrease of blood flow in the 
orbitofrontal cortex [26]. 
B. Removal of /protection against stressful odours 
The moment when odors are classified as stressful to 
premature neonates, it is time to consider means of 
removing them or providing protection against them. 
First of all, it should be considered if odorous materials 
and chemicals could be replaced with less obtrusive 
alternatives.  
Another means to reduce the exposure of stressful 
environmental odors to neonates could be changing staff 
behavior. For instance, it has been shown that by means of 
using ethanol-based hand disinfection, medical practitioners 
can ensure a high variable concentration of ethanol vapors 
in incubators [28]. Although one might search for non-
ethanol based disinfectant, it is also plausible to ensure that 
medical practitioners ensure a longer evaporation time 
between the application of disinfectant and manipulations in 
the incubators [28].  
By reconsidering behaviors of both parents and medical 
practitioners, the exposure to stressful odors might be 
diminished as well. 
VII. PHASE 2 
Sequential to Phase 1, it is important to proceed into 
Phase 2; during this phase comfortable stimuli are made 
available to the child in the NICU. 
A. Support Kangaroo Care 
Kangaroo Care (KC) is a well implemented method in 
the NICU [29][30]. During KC, the neonate is placed onto 
one of the parent’s naked chest in a supine position. During 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

KC the parent’s body provides the child with warmth, 
protection and familiar odors. Especially when the child is 
on the mother’s chest, the child is able to smell familiar 
odors from the mother’s chest and nipples. 
This early presentation of familiar odors is expected to 
be an important factor in the child-parent bonding [31].  
B. Introduce maternal odors in the NICU  
Earlier in this article, we showed the importance of 
maternal odor presentation to prematurely born infants in 
the incubator. Until the current time however no specifically 
designed apparatus could be found that is capable of 
providing maternal odors to prematurely born infants. We 
believe it would be highly beneficial to develop such a scent 
dispenser for the NICU in order to provide neonates with 
maternal odors. 
C.  Early food experience 
In their 2011 article Lipchock et al. [13] describe the 
importance of early exposure to food related odors and 
tastes for the quality of food learning in neonates. As a fetus 
the child would be exposed to elements of the maternal diet 
through swallowing the amniotic fluid. As a premature 
neonate, this experience is mostly lost. 
It has been established that the cultural appreciation of 
food starts well before consuming solid foods [13]. This 
corresponds with research performed by Marlier et al. [19], 
who show that a fetus already learns to appreciate tastes of 
their amniotic fluid in the womb as a preparation for foods 
outside the womb. Since prematurely born infants are 
usually tube fed, the taste of their food (usually maternal 
breast milk) is taken away from them.  
Besides learning, a child might have of early food 
experiences, smelling and tasting food in itself also provides 
pleasure [12].   
VIII. CHALLENGES IN ODOR RESEARCH IN THE NICU 
During our process of thinking about and working on 
odor designs for the NICU, we came across various 
obstacles that we believe should be taken into account for 
future designs and development.  
A. Odor library 
First of all, there is the point where one odor is not the 
same for everybody. Since the olfactory bulb is closely 
positioned to the prefrontal cortex it is known that memories 
and odors are strongly connected [32]. 
As adults, we already have an extended “library of 
odors” at our disposal. We already have an immense amount 
of experiences with various odors. This helps us to interpret 
new odors better and ensures that odors are already linked to 
certain experiences. For prematurely born babies, this 
library is virtually empty.  
Research both by Schleidt and Genzel [33] and 
Delaunay-El Allam et al. [34], for instance, showed that 
newly born babies are able to learn new scents and couple 
them to the positive experience of being close to their 
mother. This means that there might also be a risk of 
connecting new odors to negative experiences. This risk that 
should be taken seriously. 
B. Human body odours 
The second major obstacle that researchers are likely to 
face while developing new odor communication designs for 
the NICU is the fact that you likely have to work with 
human odors. Human odors are as unique as a person’s 
fingerprint and are, therefore, close to impossible to 
replicate artificially [35]. Furthermore, people go through 
cycles during which the content of their odors [36] and their 
perception of odors changes [32]. For instance, the 
menstrual cycle of a woman determines the odor strength 
and type of a woman [37]. This together with our diets [38] 
ensures that our personal odor varies over time. This all 
makes it quite difficult pinpoint which variables impact the 
experience of people if presented with human body odors.  
C. Anxiety odours 
Finally, there is the point where even maternal odors 
could ensure stress in neonates. Various researches show 
that human sweat is capable of communicating anxiety 
among humans [39][40][41][42]. Because the NICU is quite 
a stressful environment for parents as well, researchers run 
the risk of capturing and communicating anxiety related 
odors from the parents to the child. Unfortunately, no 
research could be found that further supports this hypothesis 
specifically in the NICU. 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
While in the womb, a fetus experiences a specific 
olfactory 
and 
gustatory 
stimulation. 
However, 
if 
prematurely born, infants are deprived of this experience 
and are exposed to a highly stimulating environment of, 
among others, lights, sounds and odors. Therefore, the long 
hospitalization of prematurely born infants in the NICU is 
likely to have adverse effects on the long term development 
of these neonates. An extensive bundle of research suggests 
that the presentation of maternal/paternal odors to 
prematurely born infants has a positive effect on both the 
stress reduction as well as comforting of babies in the 
NICU. However, both in literature and in practice, hardly 
any interventions can be found which implement these 
insights on olfactory stimulation. We believe that as a first 
step for implementation, emphasis should be put on the 
removal of stressful odors (Phase 1) and sequentially 
implementation of comforting odors (Phase 2) in the NICU. 
The implementation of these comforting will probably 
encounter various obstacles. Since the child has a virtually 
empty “odor library”, researchers run the risk of teaching 
babies new scents and coupling them to negative 
experiences. Furthermore, since we are talking mainly about 
human body odors, there is still a large portion of research 
need on the capturing and preservation of these odors. We 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

believe that it is possible to design and develop systems that 
will overcome these obstacles and provide better care to 
neonates and their parents in the NICU.  
X. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 
Point One National R&D grant “Embedded Neonatal 
Monitoring” (E-Nemo) Project of SenterNovem in the 
Netherlands. 
XI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Goldenberg and D. Rouse, “Prevention of premature 
birth,” New England Journal of Medicine, 1998. 
[2] D. Wilson-Costello, “Is there evidence that long-term 
outcomes have improved with intensive care?,” Seminars in 
fetal & neonatal medicine, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 344-354, Oct. 
2007. 
[3] S. Blackburn, “Environmental impact of the NICU on 
developmental outcomes,” Journal of Pediatric Nursing, vol. 
13, no. 5, pp. 279–289, Oct. 1998. 
[4] Y. M. Ahn and N. H. Kim, “Parental Perception of Neonates, 
Parental Stress and Education for NICU Parents,” Asian 
Nursing Research, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 199–210, 2007. 
[5] E. Cignacco et al.., “The efficacy of non-pharmacological 
interventions in the management of procedural pain in 
preterm and term neonates. A systematic literature review.,” 
European journal of pain (London, England), vol. 11, no. 2, 
pp. 139-152, Feb. 2007. 
[6] R. E. Grunau, L. Holsti, and J. W. B. Peters, “Long-term 
consequences of pain in human neonates.,” Seminars in fetal 
& neonatal medicine, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 268-275, Aug. 2006. 
[7] J. Panagiotidis and A. Lahav, “Simulation of prenatal 
maternal sounds in NICU incubators: a pilot safety and 
feasibility study.,” The journal of maternal-fetal & neonatal 
medicine : the official journal of the European Association of 
Perinatal Medicine, the Federation of Asia and Oceania 
Perinatal Societies, the International Society of Perinatal 
Obstetricians, vol. 23 Suppl 3, pp. 106-109, Oct. 2010. 
[8] www.babybloomhealthcare.com, 14-09-2012 
[9] http://soundear.com/, 14-09-2012 
[10] S. Bouwstra, W. Chen, L. Feijs, and SB, “Smart jacket design 
for neonatal monitoring with wearable sensors,” 2009 Body 
Sensor, 2009. 
[11] M. Croes, S. Bambang Oetomo, L. Feijs, Eds., “Designing 
remote connectedness between parents and their premature 
newly born – a design proposal”, Neonatal Monitoring 
Technologies: Design for Integrated Solutions. Eindhoven: 
IGI 
Global, 
2012. 
1-536. 
Web. 
14 
Sep. 
2012. 
doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-0975-4 
[12] J. V. Browne, “Chemosensory Development in the Fetus and 
Newborn,” Newborn and Infant Nursing Reviews, vol. 8, no. 
4, pp. 180-186, Dec. 2008. 
[13] S. V. Lipchock, D. R. Reed, and J. a Mennella, “The 
gustatory and olfactory systems during infancy: implications 
for development of feeding behaviors in the high-risk 
neonate.,” Clinics in perinatology, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 627-641, 
Dec. 2011. 
[14] H. Varendi, K. Christensson, R. H. Porter, and J. Winberg, 
“Soothing effect of amniotic fluid smell in newborn infants.,” 
Early human development, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 47-55, Apr. 
1998. 
[15] B. Schaal, R. Soussignan, and L. Marlier, “Olfactory 
cognition at the start of life: The perinatal shaping of selective 
odor responsiveness.,” Processing, pp. 421-440, 2002. 
[16] M. Russell, T. Mendelson, and H. Peeke, “Mother’s 
identification of their infant's odors1,” Ethology and 
Sociobiology, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 29-31, 1983. 
[17] R. Schaal, B., Marlier, L., Soussignan, “Human Foetuses 
Learn Odours from their Pregnant Mother’s Diet,” Chemical 
Senses, vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 729-737, Dec. 2000. 
[18] J. A. Mennella, C. P. Jagnow, and G. K. Beauchamp, 
“Prenatal and postnatal flavor learning by human infants,” 
Pediatrics, vol. 107, no. 6, p. e88, 2001. 
[19] L. Marlier, B. Schaal, and R. Soussignan, “Neonatal 
responsiveness to the odor of amniotic and lacteal fluids: a 
test 
of 
perinatal 
chemosensory 
continuity.,” 
Child 
development, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 611-623, Jun. 1998. 
[20] S. Nishitani et al.., “The calming effect of a maternal breast 
milk odor on the human newborn infant.,” Neuroscience 
research, vol. 63, no. 1, pp. 66-71, Jan. 2009. 
[21] L. Marlier, C. Gaugler, and J. Messer, “Olfactory stimulation 
prevents apnea in premature newborns,” Pediatrics, 2005. 
[22] N. Goubet, C. Rattaz, V. Pierrat, A. Bullinger, and P. 
Lequien, “Olfactory experience mediates response to pain in 
preterm newborns.,” Developmental psychobiology, vol. 42, 
no. 2, pp. 171-180, Mar. 2003. 
[23] B. Golianu, E. Krane, J. Seybold, C. Almgren, and K. J. S. 
Anand, 
“Non-pharmacological 
techniques 
for 
pain 
management in neonates.,” Seminars in perinatology, vol. 31, 
no. 5, pp. 318-322, Oct. 2007. 
[24] L. Doheny, S. Hurwitz, R. Insoft, S. Ringer, and A. Lahav, 
“Exposure 
to 
biological 
maternal 
sounds 
improves 
cardiorespiratory regulation in extremely preterm infants.,” 
The journal of maternal-fetal & neonatal medicine
 : the 
official journal of the European Association of Perinatal 
Medicine, the Federation of Asia and Oceania Perinatal 
Societies, the International Society of Perinatal Obstetricians, 
no. November 2011, pp. 1-4, Feb. 2012. 
[25] L. Doheny, J. A. Morey, S. A. Ringer, and A. Lahav, 
“Reduced frequency of apnea and bradycardia episodes 
caused by exposure to biological maternal sounds.,” 
Pediatrics international : official journal of the Japan 
Pediatric Society, vol. 54, no. 2, pp. e1-3, Apr. 2012. 
[26] M. Bartocci, J. A. N. Winberg, G. Papendieck, T. Mustica, G. 
Serra, and H. Lagercrantz, “Cerebral Hemodynamic Response 
to Unpleasant Odors in the Preterm Newborn Measured by 
Near-Infrared Spectroscopy,” vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 324-330, 
2001. 
[27] P. Kuhn, D. Astruc, J. Messer, and L. Marlier, “Exploring the 
olfactory environment of premature newborns
 : a French 
survey of health care and cleaning products used in neonatal 
units,” no. January 2008, pp. 334-339, 2011. 
[28] C. Paccaud, D. Vernez, M. Berode, and N. Charri, “Hand-
disinfectant alcoholic vapors in incubators,” vol. 4, pp. 15-19, 
2011. 
[29] N. Charpak et al.., “Kangaroo Mother Care: 25 years after.,” 
Acta paediatrica (Oslo, Norway : 1992) , vol. 94, no. 5, pp. 
514-522, May 2005. 
[30] [S. Ferber and I. Makhoul, “The effect of skin-to-skin contact 
(kangaroo care) shortly after birth on the neurobehavioral 
responses of the term newborn: a randomized, controlled 
trial,” Pediatrics, 2004. 
[31] R. H. Porter and J. Winberg, “Unique salience of maternal 
breast odors for newborn infants.,” Neuroscience and 
biobehavioral reviews, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 439-449, Jan. 1999. 
[32] R. S. Herz and T. Engen, “Odor memory: Review and 
analysis,” Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 
300-313, Sep. 1996. 
[33] M. Schleidt and C. Genzel, “The significance of mother’s 
perfume for infants in the first weeks of their life,” Ethology 
and Sociobiology, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 145-154, May 1990. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[34] M. Delaunay-El Allam, L. Marlier, and B. Schaal, “Learning 
at the breast: preference formation for an artificial scent and 
its attraction against the odor of maternal milk.,” Infant 
behavior & development, vol. 29, no. 3, pp. 308-321, Jul. 
2006. 
[35] D. J. Penn et al.., “Individual and gender fingerprints in 
human body odour.,” Journal of the Royal Society, Interface / 
the Royal Society, vol. 4, no. 13, pp. 331-340, Apr. 2007. 
[36] C. J. Wysocki and G. Preti, “Facts, fallacies, fears, and 
frustrations with human pheromones.,” The anatomical 
record. Part A, Discoveries in molecular, cellular, and 
evolutionary biology, vol. 281, no. 1, pp. 1201-1211, Nov. 
2004. 
[37] A. Rikowski and K. Grammer, “Human body odour, 
symmetry and attractiveness.,” Proceedings. Biological 
sciences / The Royal Society, vol. 266, no. 1422, pp. 869-874, 
May 1999. 
[38] J. N. Lundström and M. J. Olsson, “Functional neuronal 
processing of human body odors.,” Vitamins and hormones, 
vol. 83, no. 10, pp. 1-23, Jan. 2010. 
[39] K. Haegler et al.., “No fear no risk! Human risk behavior is 
affected 
by 
chemosensory 
anxiety 
signals.,” 
Neuropsychologia, vol. 48, no. 13, pp. 3901-3908, Nov. 2010. 
[40] A. Prehn-Kristensen et al.., “Induction of empathy by the 
smell of anxiety.,” PloS one, vol. 4, no. 6, p. e5987, Jan. 
2009. 
[41] D. Rubin, Y. Botanov, G. Hajcak, and L. R. Mujica-Parodi, 
“Second-hand stress: inhalation of stress sweat enhances 
neural response to neutral faces.,” Social cognitive and 
affective neuroscience, Jan. 2011. 
[42] W. Zhou, P. Hou, Y. Zhou, and D. Chen, “Reduced 
recruitment of orbitofrontal cortex to human social 
chemosensory cues in social anxiety.,” NeuroImage, vol. 55, 
no. 3, pp. 1401-1406, Apr. 2011. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

