GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-359-9
31
New Approach to Information Extraction from X-ray Plates  
High Quality Digitalization 
Ivan Evgeniev Ivanov, Vesselin E. Gueorguiev 
Technical University Sofia  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mailс: {iei,veg}@tu-sofia.bg  
 
Desislava Valentinova Georgieva 
New Bulgarian University 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: dvelcheva@nbu.bg
 
 
Abstract—This article aims at solving one of the most 
important issues of computer-based interpretation of medical 
images for diagnosis purposes – obtaining the maximum 
authentic image, which then can be processed by computer-
assisted diagnosis methods. The article offers a new approach 
to the problem of the X-ray plate digitalization – namely 
increasing the quality and the quantity of information obtained 
from the X-ray plate by creating a model of the plate 
illumination while an X-ray image is being created. The 
implementation of the presented method is based on the theory 
of high dynamic range images. Increase and enhancement of 
human perception of X-ray plates and possibilities to diagnose 
more precisely many sicknesses are the final result of this 
work. 
Keywords-medical imaging; X-rays; HDR-images; image 
digitalization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the era of computer-based medical applications, the 
requirements for the diagnostic process quality are directly 
related to the quality of 
the 
computer generated 
data/information used by physicians. This follows to the 
requirement for generation new approaches for data 
acquisition, data storage and data/information processing. On 
the medical images processing tools market this led to the 
development of many new solutions. For example, the desire 
for increasing the quality of generic images led to the fast 
progress in the hardware and software development of digital 
X-Ray machines, CT, MRI, ultra-sound apparatuses, and the 
possibility to control the image-taking process. The need to 
store these images without any loss of information and 
without any reduction of the quality leads to changing the 
standards for image processing as well as the standards for 
image archiving – the best example is the changing of the 
DICOM standard in the last 10 years. 
One of the most important characteristics of the diagnosis 
process is the need to track patient’s status over time. In the 
area of automated and semi-automated methods and systems 
for detection and diagnosis of diseases and changes in 
tissues, this required to define the concept of “equality” and 
“comparability” of medical images. Now, this term is used to 
define how the physicians’ evaluation of the sameness of the 
two images coincides with the computer evaluation. This is a 
very serious problem, because tracking of a disease evolution 
is assessed depending on how the patient’s organs and 
tissues have changed. This is based on images which were 
taken at different times, on different systems and under 
different conditions. Although some digital X-ray machine 
manufacturers have software for images obtained from 
various X-ray apparatus from their product list [12], this 
problem has not yet been solved when using images obtained 
by the apparatus of different manufacturers.  
An additional factor, complicating the process of 
automated tracking of the disease, is the need to use X-ray 
images stored on plates and films. This requires the plates 
with X-ray images to be digitized with the quality and 
characteristics that allow computer-based comparison with 
images obtained by digital X-ray apparatus. From a technical 
point of view, this issue is much more complex than the 
problem of images portability between digital X-ray 
apparatus, due to the use of different physical phenomena in 
the process of obtaining digital images: 
 
The digital X-ray apparatus uses a digital sensor, which 
takes the X-ray photons and converts them into an 
optical picture depending on the sensor calibration – the 
process uses an additive type of lighting system 
because photo-photons, which are used for optical 
image generation, are generated by the emitting 
material, most commonly selenium. The resulting 
image is a medical image, which is displayed on a 
display and interpreted by radiologists. Therefore, in 
the same stream of X-ray photons radiologists can get 
different optical pictures depending on the sensor 
calibration and the sensor linearization [3][4]. This is 
used by radiologists for improving the quality of the 
final digital image. 
 
The digitization process of X-ray plates/films is an 
optical information conversion from an analog form 
(recorded on the plate) to a digital form to be displayed 
- this is a subtractive type of image generation, because 
the digital image is generated by measuring changes of 
luminosity when the light passes through the plate. This 
is a totally different class of problems, since the main 
limitation is the inability to obtain additional 
information to be used for the correction of deficiencies 
in the analog image. For example, it is necessary to use 
different type of methods and techniques for correcting 

GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-359-9
32
the nonlinearity and the constraints of a digitizing 
system. 
Since the final image quality is the result of three 
different groups of characteristics – the quality of the 
recorded image on the plate, the way the X-ray plate is 
stored, and the quality of the digitalizing system – the 
development of new digitalizing methods and techniques 
requires the use of more diverse hardware and software tools. 
The classic solution in this case is the use of a very small 
size laser beam, which allows high accuracy of measurement 
of the luminosity change, low degree of influence of the 
diffuse lighting over the luminosity change, and the well-
known apparatus architecture [8][9]. A major drawback of 
this approach is the fact that digitization cannot compensate 
for the change in the final image quality due to deterioration 
of the image quality with improper storage or because of an 
incorrect process of image creating on the plate [14][15][16]. 
The present paper describes a new approach to the 
process of X-ray image digitalization from the plate, which 
allows for compensating the reduction of image quality due 
to deterioration in the characteristics of the plate. At the 
same time, this approach allows you to compensate the 
reduction in the final image quality, resulting from the 
overexposed/ underexposed X-ray image recording. Also, 
this approach allows to preserve all the necessary 
characteristics of the radiographic image such as resolution, 
dynamic range, contrast, sharpness, etc. This is achieved 
through an image pre-processing technique which resembles 
the characteristics of the X-ray-image-creating process by 
modern digital X-ray apparatuses. 
This present paper is structured as follows: 
 
Section II background of the new digitalization method  
 
Section III describes the HDRI-based digitization 
method for X-ray plates 
 
Section IV includes the analyses of the results 
 
Section V is the paper conclusion.   
II. 
BACKGROUND OF THE NEW DIGITALIZATION METHOD  
X-ray imaging utilizes the ability of high frequency 
electromagnetic waves to pass through soft parts of the 
human body largely unimpeded. With classical X-ray 
apparatus, X-rays are usually generated in vacuum tubes by 
bombarding a metal target with high-speed electrons. The 
X-ray images are produced when the radiation passed 
through the body is absorbed by a photographic plate or 
digital X-ray sensor to produce a radiograph [17]. The 
resulting X-ray images show the parts of your body in 
different shades of black and white because different tissues 
absorb different amounts of radiation:  
 
Calcium in bones absorbs X-rays the most, so bones 
look white;  
 
Fat and other soft tissues absorb less and look gray;  
 
Air absorbs the least so lungs look black. 
The quality of the digitalization process of such images 
will be measured with the difference between the 
information stored on the image and the one read from it.  
From the perspective of optics an X-ray plate represents a 
type of material that fully corresponds to the laws of the 
physics of semi-transparent materials. This allows a much 
more flexible approach to be used for digitalization of the X-
ray image plate in order to extract the fullest possible 
information for the optical picture recorded on the plate. One 
of the benefits of the computer system in this case, compared 
to the human vision system, is the fact, that the computer 
system does not have features like "visual weight" and 
"approximation of the color consistency”. At the same time, 
the computer system does not have different perception 
sensitivity for color and grayscale images, which is a well-
known characteristic of human vision. 
Analyses showed that the plate with a recorded X-ray 
image on it has the behaviour of a multilayer structure. This 
is due to several factors: the different photo-photons 
penetration into the material corresponding to their energy in 
the process of image creation; the different distribution of the 
light-sensitive elements (often silver) in the plate material; 
and the different penetration of chemical reagents when 
handling the plate after capture. Therefore, the change in the 
different plates when exposed to the same constant light is 
different. In terms of optics, this characteristic of the plate 
material causes the effects of the subsurface scattering – the 
effect strongly depends on the spectrum and the energy of 
the light flux passing through the plate. Thus, the resulting 
optical picture after passing the light through the plate is 
some kind of averaging of recorded illumination in the 
different levels of the plate. This means that if the plate is 
illuminated for a short period of time with light having 
constant spectrum and intensity, we cannot obtain all the 
information stored in the plate. This defines the main 
difference between X-ray scanner manufacturers using laser 
beam lighting - the choice of the beam spectrum and energy 
results in a different amount of loss of recorded information. 
These differences are particularly visible when scanning 
overexposed or underexposed X-rays. Another reason for the 
search of a new approach is the characteristic of human 
vision which allows manifold increase of its dynamic range. 
When a person has long been watching the same image or 
scene for a prolonged period of time he gradually starts 
perceiving its elements in a much different way from the 
initial perception. 
This is due to the fact that the human dynamic range 
increases through the gradual light accumulation in the 
photoreceptors – mainly, this is a chemical process. In 
computer science the idea that comes closest to this one is 
the idea of creating and using the so-called HDR images. 
Limitations in the dynamic range of photo-sensors 
require to look for new methods and approaches to solve this 
problem. 
Different approaches were developed – from increasing 
the dynamic range of photo-sensors to methods based on the 

GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-359-9
33
merging of information from photo-sensors with different 
photosensitivity. 
Today a combined approach – photo-sensors with wider 
dynamic range and control of the sensitivity range is mostly 
used. 
Thus, combining information obtained in different ranges 
it is possible to create an image with a much wider dynamic 
range. The most well-known and used method today is the 
High Dynamic Range Imaging (HDRI) [12]. 
HDRI, in photography and imaging, includes a set of 
techniques for obtaining and reproducing a greater dynamic 
range of luminosity (the difference between the brightest and 
darkest parts of the image) than when using standard 
photographic and imaging techniques [13]. Thus, HDR-
images can present more accurate intensity levels of light for 
real scene. So, the HDR-image does not store pixels intensity 
values – it stores the information for the illumination in 
logarithmic form or as a real number without a fixed 
presentation of individual color channels [12]. Therefore, the 
use of HDR-images in the X-rays plate digitalization process 
allows the creation of a model corresponding to the 
illumination which has created the original image. In this 
way, by using lighting with different exposures, we can 
obtain information about the light flow which generated 
changes in the different levels of the plate. The only problem 
in this case is the number of exposure levels and the 
exposure value for these levels. 
III. 
THE HDRI-BASED DIGITIZATION METHOD FOR X-RAY 
PLATES 
Based on the research results of existing systems and 
technologies for X-ray plates digitization and using quality 
criteria for digital images from digital X-ray apparatus 
described in [1][5][6][7], the following primary requirements 
to develop a new method for digitization of chest X-ray 
images have been defined: 
 
The method should make it possible to obtain images 
with resolution at least 600 dpi (5 LP/mm). 
 
Digitized images should be grayscale images with at 
least 12 bits depth (4096 gray levels). 
 
The method should make it possible to obtain images 
with at least 120 dB dynamic range. 
 
The method should control the final image quality, 
similar to the pre-processing in digital X-ray apparatus. 
 
The method does not generate medical artifacts in 
digitization images. 
 
The method should allow compensating the reduction 
of image quality due to changes in the X-ray plate 
resulting from improper storage. 
 
The method should allow the digitization of all sizes of 
radiographic plates while maintaining the same quality. 
The idea of the method is to create the illumination 
model (the HDR-image) which has led to the grayscale 
image stored on the X-ray plate. This idea is implemented by 
capturing the sequence of images with different exposures 
(these images are images with low dynamic range – LDR-
images). Thus, the information about tissues and organs with 
different X-ray density would be obtained in great detail. 
To achieve the above requirements a method for X-ray 
plates digitization based on a "photo-camera" type of scanner 
has been developed [10][14]. The main difference between 
those methods and the presented in the paper new one is in 
the way how the information in X-ray plates is extracted and 
in the quality of the digitalization X-ray images.  
  The method has the following main characteristics: 
digitalization of segments and bracketing over segmented 
image, remote calibration of the digital photo-sensor, 
stitching multiple images’ segments and the HDR-image 
generation, pre- and post-processing of digital image.  
The proposed new digitalization method uses the 
following steps to achieve its goal: 
Step 1. Photo-sensor calibration to reach the biggest 
possible dynamic range according to plate’s quality. 
Step 2. Determining how many segments are needed to 
digitalize the processed X-ray plate.   
Step 3. Segment by segment digitalization of the X-ray 
plate following pre-defined scanning path and using 
bracketing. 
Step 4. Using 
segments 
stitching 
for 
simultaneous 
rendering of all the layers of the full image (captured 
with different exposures). 
Step 5. HDR image generation. 
Step 6. Image pre-processing and LDR-image generation. 
Step 7. Post-processing 
and 
rendering 
of 
the 
final 
digitalized X-ray image. 
The goal of the first stage of the method is a selection of 
photo-optical characteristics of the photo-sensor. This allows 
obtaining the largest possible amount of information about 
the luminance recorded on the plate.  
These characteristics are sensitivity of the photo-sensor, 
optical zoom, focal length, shutter speed and white balance. 
To determine the optimal values of these parameters a 
procedure has been developed which is based on a 
comparison of the average exposure of the image and the 
exposure of the image in the brightest and darkest areas (the 
aim is to have difference between the brightest and darkest 
areas not bigger than 4.0-4.5 EV). The procedure is iterated 
till an appropriate value of the average exposure and 
exposure range of change between the darkest and brightest 
areas is found. The same settings of the sensor system are 
used for the processing of all segments [8][9][10]. This 
increases the final image quality because it reduces medical 
artefacts. 
The second stage of the method requires to determine the 
number of segments (rows and columns) which the image 
should be broken down into.  The selected algorithm 
includes the size of the X-ray plate, the required final image 
resolution, image size according to the selected values for the 
focal length and optical zoom, and the degree of overlap for 
the particular class of images (underexposed plates, 
overexposed plates, plates with loss of brightness, etc.). For 

GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-359-9
34
chest X-ray plates, it was found that the best quality is 
obtained with an overlap between 35% and 45%, i.e., about 
40%. Thus, for a plate size 43/40 cm a 5×4 matrix is used, 
while for 30/35 cm the matrix is 3×3. 
The third stage is capturing plate segments using the 
bracketing procedure. In the initial versions of these photo-
camera-based scanners, filming of the entire image was used, 
which determined the low resolution of the resulting image. 
The resolution of the resulting image is the CCD/CMOS 
sensor resolution. This limits the quality of the final image. 
The method uses technology based on digitalization of an X-
ray plate as a set of ordered segments to meet the 
requirements for digitization of all sizes of X-ray plates and 
to achieve the necessary resolution of the final images 
(Figure 1). 
 
Figure 1.  Digitalized X-ray - one row of image segments. 
The method uses technology based on capturing of each 
segment by a bracketing procedure (our method uses 5 LDR-
images with different exposures). To achieve the dynamic 
range value requirement all individual images are captured 
and stored with a 12-14 bits depth (when using images with 
8-bits depth, the maximum value of the dynamic range does 
not exceed 60-65 dB); see Figure 2. 
 
 
  
Figure 2.  X-ray image bracketing with exposures 0 EV, -2 EV, +2 EV. 
The fourth stage task is to generate an integral image 
from the segments - the image segments are stitched into 
one, and thus a total final image is obtained. The stitching 
procedure is done simultaneously for different exposure 
segments and this allows a physical and geometric 
homogeneity of the final images (one per selected exposure 
of image capturing) to be achieved. Of a particular 
importance for the quality of the processing at this stage are 
the settings of the photo-sensor and the capturing procedure 
of each plate segment. The reason for this is that lung X-rays 
have a great number of “looking similar” areas which 
frequently results in wrong stitching. To solve this problem a 
methodology for software stitching tool evaluation and 
selection was developed which can be used in the presented 
area of application (medical images) without generation of 
artifacts with diagnostic importance.  The methodology 
includes 10 comparison parameters which allows to estimate 
the 
possibilities 
to 
work 
with 
sensor 
raw 
data, 
homogenization of luminosity between segments, working 
with different overlapping, simultaneous stitching of layers 
with different exposures, etc. 
The next stage is the generation of a luminance model for 
the X-ray plate. To achieve this goal a 32-bits HDR-image 
using the Tone Mapping Algorithm is generated. The 
selected exposure values for individual LDR-images allow 
the required final image quality to be obtained for all 
radiographic densities. The result of this stage is an image 
which is analogous to the raw data obtained from the X-ray 
digital sensor.  
Digital image pre-processing is the 6th stage – this stage 
has tasks similar to those addressed at the pre-processing 
stage of the digital X-ray apparatus, i.e. various operations 
are performed to correct the quality of the digitalized image. 
Most often these operations include the level of detail 
adjustment, local and global contrast changes, structures 
sharpness selection, eliminating the ‘halo’ effect, dynamic 
range adjustment (Figure 3).  At the final stage of processing, 
the HDR-image is converted to the 16 bits per channel 
grayscale LDR-image. This is the final image after X-ray 
plate digitalization. 
The last stage is the post-processing of the final image – 
as an additional stage in our method we propose the 
possibility to use methods for digital post-processing of the 
displayed final image. In this case the radiologist selects 
different values for brightness, contrast, level-of-details – 
this additionally improves the quality of the digitalized 
images. This stage is not obligatory and can be replaced by 
any product for medical images post-processing. 
The main problem when using HDRI-based technology 
to produce high quality medical images is the choice of the 
exposure values for LDR- images that will be used to create 
the HDR-image. The classic technique requires using 3 
LDR-images in which the base image is chosen so that there 
is an optimal presentation of the scene objects. The 
additional exposures are made at ‘+2 EV’ and ‘–2 EV’, 
which makes it possible to reach improved level of details 
and contrast in the brightest and darkest areas [11]: 1 EV 
corresponding to a standard power-of-2 exposure step. 
Experiments demonstrated that for the purposes of chest X-
ray plate digitization the presented above set of exposure 
values is not applicable. The reason is that the X-ray image 
does not have great homogeneity of the pixels color and 
intensity distribution in the entire range, because there are 
various well-defined radiographic densities, which lead to 
strictly defined grey levels. Therefore, the method is oriented 
to take 5 LDR- images with the following exposures: ‘0 EV’, 
‘+1.67 EV’, ‘+2 EV’, ‘–1.5 EV’, ‘–2 EV’. In this way the 
quality of the HDR-image is a function of the correct photo-
sensor calibration to create a base image (the image with 0 
EV) – the goal of Stage 1. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF THE RESULTS 
The experiments with the proposed method for 
digitization of chest X-ray plates, validated by physicians 
with over 20 years’ experience from hospitals at the Medical 

GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-359-9
35
University of Sofia, have led to the following conclusions on 
the applicability of the method: 
 
The possibility to control the number of segments used 
to capture the plate, makes it possible to receive the 
digitized image with a resolution better than the grain 
of the plate. This allows the correction of the digitalized 
image which does not generate medical artifacts. The 
only problem is the increased digitalization time when 
the final image resolution is increased. 
 
The creation of the illumination model (the HDR-
image) allows one, much more correctly, to choose the 
values for the different characteristics of the final image 
(dynamic range, contrast, sharpness, level of details, 
etc.). This significantly improves the final image 
quality compared to other digitization techniques. 
 
Classic X-ray plate scanners use constant exposure for 
the image capturing. In the case of images with a 
pronounced bimodal histogram this creates significant 
image readability problems. The proposed digitization 
method makes possible to avoid the appearance of this 
type of image histogram, due to the ability to manage 
the process of transformation from an HDR-image to 
the final LDR-image.  
 
In medical images with a small dynamic range, after 
digitalization, the image histogram has a narrow stretch 
and a very large peak in it. This creates serious 
problems for quality enhancement methods, which very 
often lead to the intrusion of medical artifacts. 
Examples of such images are underexposed images: 
they have small dynamic range and large peak in white 
area.  The proposed digitalization method makes it 
possible to create images with a unimodal histogram 
with a normal (Gaussian) distribution of intensities.  
 
In overexposed X-ray images most often the histogram 
has a bimodal nature. The approach used in the 
proposed digitalization method allows to create an 
image with a unimodal (or similar in nature) histogram 
because the created illumination model (the HDR-
image) makes it possible to minimize the peaks in the 
dark area (the user has control over the mapping 
process between the HDR-image and the final LDR-
image). This significantly improves the image quality 
and the possibility for using automated methods of 
digital image processing. 
Some results of the presented digitalization method are 
shown in Figure 4 and Figure 5. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The proposed X-ray plates digitalization method is highly 
adaptable depending on the condition and quality of the X-
ray plate, and some specific needs. The possibilities to 
manage sensor settings and the presence of a pre-processing 
stage substantially improve the quality of digitalized images. 
Comparability of results for different types and different 
sizes of X-ray plates show that when a correct adjustment of 
the digitalization system is set the captured images have 
higher quality, or at least similar to that captured by classical 
X-ray scanners. In several cases, the presented method has 
allowed to diagnose or exclude the occurrence of diseases 
that until now could not unambiguously be interpreted only 
using the original X-rays. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is funded partially by Bulgarian NSF under 
DO02/113 and DRNF02/3 projects. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Frost and Sullivan Institute. “Growth Partnership Service: 
Medical Imaging”, Frost & Sullivan’s Medical Imaging 
Research and Consulting practice, March 2011, available 
from: http://www.frost.com/prod/servlet/svcg.pag/HCIM. last 
accesed 12.June.2014 
[2] R. Koenker, “Improved conspicuity of key X-ray findings 
using 
advanced 
postprocessing 
techniques: 
Clinical 
examples.” MedicaMundi, 2005;49(3):11. 
[3] E. Krupinski et al., “Digital Radiography Image Quality: 
Image Processing and Display”, J Am Coll Radiol 2007, 
4:389-400. 
[4] M. Williams et al., “Digital Radiography Image Quality: 
Image Acquisition”, J Am Coll Radiol 2007, 4:371-388 
[5] ICRU. “Medical Imaging - The assessment of image quality”, 
ICRU report 54, International Commission on Radiation Units 
and Measurements, 1996. 
[6] EUR. “European guidelines on quality criteria for diagnostic 
radiographic images”, Report EUR 16260 EN Luxembourg, 
Office of official publication of the European Communities; 
1996. 
[7] ICRU. “Image quality in chest radiography”, Report 70, 
Journal of the ICRU, Vol. 3 No.2; 2003. 
[8] V. N. Misale, S. Ravi and R. Narayan, “Digital Radiography 
Systems Techniques and Performance Evaluation for Space 
Applications”, Proceedings of the National Seminar & 
Exhibition on Non-Destructive Evaluation, NDE 2009, 
December 10-12, 2009 
[9] B. Barbero and E. Ureta, “Comparative study of different 
digitization techniques and their accuracy”, Computer-Aided 
Design,  vol. 43, issue 2,  Feb. 2011, pp. 188–206 
[10] P. Krogh, “Camera Scans – Using a Digital Camera as a Film 
Scanner”,  2009, available from:  http://dpbestflow.org/ 
camera/camera-scanning [last accesed: 12.June.2014] 
[11] D. Nightingale. “Practical HDR: A complete guide to creating 
High Dynamic Range Images”, 2nd ed., ISBN 978-
0240821221, 2011 
[12] E. Reinhard, W. Heidrich, P. Debevec and S. Pattanaik. “High 
Dynamic Range Imaging: Acquisition, Display, and Image-
Based Lighting”, 2nd ed., Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN 978-
0123749147, 2010 
[13] F. Banterle, A. Artusi, K. Debattista and A. Chalmers. 
“Advanced High dynamic Range Imaging: theory and 
practice”. AK Peters/CRC Press, ISBN 978-156881-719-4, 
2011 
[14] V. Gueorguiev and I. Ivanov. “Digital cameras as low-cost 
tools for telemedicine and e-health: opportunities and 
constraints”. In proceeding of: 4th International Joint 
Conference on Biomedical Engineering Systems and 
Technologies (HEALTHINF2011); Rome, 2011, pp. 608-613 
[15] V. Gueorguiev, D. Georgieva, M. Nenova and I. Evgeniev. 
“Advancing in digitalized x-ray images post-processing”. In 
proceeding of: eTELEMED 2013: The Fifth International 

GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014. ISBN: 978-1-61208-359-9
36
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 
Nice, France, Feb - Mar 2013, pp. 234 – 239 
[16] D. Georgieva, V. Gueorguiev and I. Evgeniev. “Problems in 
the digitalization of x-ray, ultrasonic and Doppler machine 
images”. In proceeding of: 6th Annual International 
Conference on Computer Science and Education in Computer 
Science 2010 (CSECS 2010), Fulda, Germany, June, 2010. 
[17] IOP Institute of Physics. “X-ray imaging: Teaching Medical Physics”, 
Lecture notes, 2012, url: http://www.iop.org/education/ 
teacher/resources/teaching-medical-physics/xray/ 
file_56282.pdf [ last accesed: 12.June.2014] 
 
a. 
 b. 
 
c. 
   d. 
 
Figure 3.  Images after different pre-processing operations: (a) the basic image; (b), (c), (d) corrected images.   
a. 
  b.
  
c.
  d.
 
e. 
  f. 
 
g. 
  h. 
 
Figure 4.  Comparison between classical digitalization method and presented HDR-based digitalization: (a)(b)(c)(d) digitalization by classical method; 
(e)(f)(g)(h) digitalization by the presented HDR-method. 
a. 
  b.
  
c. 
  d. 
 
e. 
  f. 
 
g. 
  h. 
 
Figure 5.  Comparison between classical digitalization method and presented HDR-based digitalization: (a)(b)(c)(d) digitalization by classical method; 
(e)(f)(g)(h) digitalization by the presented HDR-method. 

