  
	  
Understanding the social dynamics of Twitter, Facebook and 
Diabetes.co.uk and their value implications for patients and health 
researchers
Joanna Taylor 
Centre for Population Health Sciences, 
University of Edinburgh
  
	  
Application of Bales Interaction Process Analysis Bales 
IPA system [6] was first introduced in 1951 and has been 
widely used in public health research as a means of identifying 
and recording the nature, not the content, of group interactions. 
Bales identified and defined twelve categories of group 
interaction each of which were considered when reviewing the 
Type 1 diabetes posts. Each post was considered a single unit 
of interaction and that the categories were not considered 
mutually exclusive when applied to the sample of posts. 
Twitter A random 1% sample of all available Tweets was 
extracted on the 3 October 2014. The tweets were posted 
between 0:00:00 (UTC) on 1 September 2014 and 23:59:59 
(UTC) on 10 September 2014 and were extracted by crawling 
the data through the standard publically available Twitter API 
using the pre-defined search terms diabetes, type 1 diabetes, t1 
diabetes, t1d and type 1. 
The data extracted included the date and time of posting in 
UTC, the Twitter account id and the text in the tweet. Re-
tweets were identified and any duplicates and spam were 
removed. The sample of 1433 English language tweets was 
manually screened. Those that referred to Type 1 diabetes, 
produced a sample of 66 posts, which were subsequently 
included in the categorization stage. url links included in the 
tweets were not reviewed during the screening. 
Facebook Using the Facebook search functionality, we 
searched for Type 1 diabetes and in doing so identified the 
largest Type 1 Diabetes Facebook community available. 
Known as the Type 1 Diabetes Community this community 
was established in 2011 and is intended to be an open forum 
for people who have Type 1 diabetes to talk about anything 
they want. As of 4 October 2014, it had 36,671 likes and on 
this same date all wall posts and replies that were posted 
between 1 and 10 September 2014 were identified by viewing 
the storyline of historical posts. These posts along with the 
author and the date of posting were manually extracted for 
further analysis. Given the particular focus of this online 
community, the sample of 479 posts were all considered 
relevant to Type 1 diabetes and therefore included in the 
categorisation stage. 
Diabetes.co.uk Diabetes.co.uk is a global Diabetes com- 
munity with over 125,000 members spanning all forms of the 
condition. The Type 1 discussion forum on Diabetes.co.uk was 
identified through the forum homepage and the list of 
discussion threads was then filtered based on the start date 1 
September 2014. All original posts and replies posted between 
1 and 10 September 2014, were identified and manually 
extracted. The total sample of 713 posts was included in the 
categorisation stage. 
Extraction and screening of relevant posts The output of 
the extraction and screening of Type 1 diabetes posts are 
summarised in Table 1, where we see the number of posts 
extracted from each of the three Social Media, the number of 
original posts and replies included in the sample and their 
respective number of authors. 
 
III. RQ1: DO DIABETES TYPE 1 PATIENTS USE 
DIFFERENT SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS FOR 
DIFFERENT PURPOSES? 
Surprisingly, although Twitter had the highest absolute 
number of total posts at 1433, these results revealed that it is a 
noisy source of data compared to other Social Media as only 66 
posts were relevant to the condition of Type 1 diabetes. 
Contrary to expectations, the results also revealed that despite 
being a popular Social Media, Facebook, with a total of 479 
posts, was not the most actively used platform for members to 
discuss the condition. Instead the discussion forum on 
Diabetes.co.uk was identified as being the most actively used 
Social Medium included in the study, with a total of 713 posts 
during the 10-day period. 
The sample of Twitter data contained notably fewer 
responses to posts (0%), than Facebook (96.6%) and 
Diabetes.co.uk (94.2%). suggesting that there is a greater 
degree of two-way communication between users of social 
networks and discussion forums compared to micro-blogging 
platforms. Twitter has less developed conversational structures, 
making it harder for patients to read all related comments. 
Facebook and Diabetes.co.uk posts include associated 
comments that are easily found. Facebook and Diabetes.co.uk 
also provided much richer posts, both in terms of length and 
structured content, i.e. long chains of comments. 
When analysing the data further, it was identified that the 
community moderator who posted questions from anonymous 
members of community created all original posts within the 
Facebook community. Thus creating a degree of uncertainty, as 
the number of authors contributing to original posts is not 
available This is in contrast to the Diabetes.co.uk discussion 
forum and Twitter where any registered member of the site 
could generate an original post and that 37 and 62 members 
created an original post, respectively. 
It was also revealed that a single post within the Facebook 
community generated a higher response rate relative to others. 
The post Over/Under time again. 153. Are you over or under? 
was a request from the community moderator for members to 
post their current blood glucose levels. This post generated 101 
responses, accounting for 21% of the total sample therefore 
performing a role similar to that of an online survey. 
In summary, our results for RQ1 indicate that patients do 
use different Social Media platforms for different purposes as 
is highlighted by the volume and conversation structures 
represented in the sample. Whilst Facebook appeared to be 
heavily moderated, this was weakly present in Diabetes.co.uk 
and absent in Twitter. Given these differences in utility it is 
natural to ask how members of the Type 1 diabetes community 
use these Social Media to interact with others. Surprisingly, we 
find that Diabetes.co.uk was the most actively used Social 
Medium in terms of volume, whilst Facebook achieved the 
highest percentage response rate. A finding widely known 
within the Computer Science community but not yet reflected 
in much of the published Public Health research that is 
available. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

  
	  
 
 
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF POSTS FROM 1 – 10 SEPTEMBER 2014 
Social Media 
Sample size 
Screened sample size 
Posts included in IPA 
N (%) original posts 
N authors 
N (%) replies 
N reply authors 
Twitter 
1433 
66 (4.6%) 
62 
0 (0%) 
0 
66 
Facebook 
479 
16 (3.3%) 
1 
463 (96.6%) 
310 
479 
Diabetes.co.uk 
713 
41 (5.7%) 
37 
672 (94.2%) 
123 
713 
 
 
IV. RQ2: WHICH SOCIAL MEDIA ARE SUCCESSFUL AT 
ENCOURAGING SOCIAL INTERACTION AND SUPPORT 
FOR PATIENTS? 
The results of Bales IPA reveal differences in the nature of 
interactions between users of these three Social Media. These 
are described in Table II, where we see the percentage of posts 
relevant to the Bales IPA categories for each of the three Social 
Media. The Over/Under post accounted for one fifth of the 
Facebook sample. It was therefore highlighted as a separate 
line item so as to avoid potential skew of results within the 
Facebook dataset. 
Whilst the three Social Media are predominantly used to 
disseminate suggestions, opinions and information with other 
members, the highest percentage of posts; Twitter (36%), 
Facebook (44%) and Diabetes.co.uk (55%) represent members 
sharing their opinion.  Noticeably fewer posts ask to receive 
suggestions, opinions and information from other members and 
the majority of these are original posts. 
We observe several interesting differences in the nature of 
the posts. As noted, Twitter is mainly used to disseminate 
information (29%) and opinion (36%) and not for interaction. 
These posts are characterised by dramatization (18%), few 
friendly posts (18%) and no indications of agreement or 
disagreement between members. Below shows some examples 
of these Tweets. 
• 33k kids in canada went #backtoschool with diabetes. 
it’s time to make school a better places for t1d kids.  
• sanofi launches mobile game for kids with type 1 
diabetes in the uk  
• did you know that the character elsa from the movie 
”frozen” was in part inspired by a child with type 1 
diabetes?  
• amazing revolution - bionic pancreas which will 
automatically inject insulin to type 1 diabetes patients  
• an open letter to teresa may advice on her type one 
diabetes   
 
In contrast, the Type 1 Diabetes Facebook community and 
Type 1 Diabetes.co.uk discussion forum were considered very 
interactive with friendly posts accounting for 47% of Facebook 
posts and 46% of posts on Diabetes.co.uk. The Facebook 
community generated a greater percentage of agreement (12%) 
and disagreement (5%) compared to the other Social Media. 
Whilst the posts within the Diabetes.co.uk discussion forum, 
indicate a higher percentage of tension (12%) and unfriendly 
posts (3%), particularly in relation to topics such as diet and the 
new treatments that are available. Limited moderation of this 
forum has, therefore, enabled a greater diversity of opinion to 
be represented. 
The three most popular discussion threads on Facebook 
community are listed in below, including the number of replies 
to the original post. 
• Over/Under time again... 153 Are you over or under? 
(101) 
• This may seem like an odd question but I’m more than a 
little curious if other T1s experience what I do. I get bit 
by mosquitos all the time. So much more than anyone 
else I know. Everyone jokes that mosquitos must love 
me cause my blood is so sweet. I laugh it all off cause it 
seems ridiculous. However, I also seem to attract bees. 
Kind of odd huh? I’m curious how many others 
experience this...if any? (63) 
• Just want peoples advice really I’m 22yrs old been t1 
diabetic since I was 6trs old I have one child but 
planning another but can’t get my hba1c past 8.5 and 
the docs won’t let me try till it’s 7 any tips on how to 
get it down? I’m on injections novo rapid and levemir, 
thanks (54) 
 
The three most popular discussion threads on Diabete.co.uk 
discussion forum are listed in below, including the number of 
replies to the original post. 
• How highly would you recommend eating low carb? I 
know this is probably a silly question as it has quite an 
obvious answer! I love my carbs. I love pasta, rice and 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

  
	  
potatoes. In the past, I’ve tried to take the right amount 
of insulin to cover this but it’s so easy to get it wrong 
and misjudge it - it also means I can end up taking 
whopping amounts of insulin! Would you recommend I 
reduce my carbs? It should make my diabetes easier to 
manage, yes? (I’m also doing Slimming World so 
although I’ve read a little about LCHF, I’m not keen to 
start eating loads of ’fattier’ foods!) (91)  
• New Flash Glucose Monitoring from Abbott Bloodless 
Testing Its arrived and heres a video for all you guys 
who wanted more info (76)  
• LCHF success stories from type 1’s I created this thread 
as a place for fellow type 1 diabetics to share their 
success stories on the LCHF diet. I know there is a 
similar thread on the low carb forum but I found that 
most of the responses were from type 2’s, so I thought 
it’d be nice to have a specific place for us to share 
experiences and hopefully inspire and learn from each 
other! (67)   
 
In summary, our results indicate that although the three 
Social Media are all used to disseminate information about the 
condition, Facebook and Diabetes.co.uk are also used for social 
interaction and peer support. These findings provoke 
controversy as to the validity and application of Twitter as a 
popular Social Media for gaining insight into Type 1 diabetes 
and in its use as a means of delivering relevant health 
interventions. 
 
 
V. RQ3: WHAT ARE THE IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL 
MEDIA DESIGN? 
Although the three Social Media can be considered a valid 
source of information about the clinical condition of Type 1 
diabetes these platforms should not be considered equal or 
synonymous as has been the case in previous public health 
studies. Exciting implications are also revealed into the utility 
of condition specific Social Media as a potentially more 
effective means of health promotion and patient engagement. 
Studies into the social shaping of technology reveal that 
technology does not develop according to an inner technical 
logic but is instead a social product influenced by the 
conditions of its creation and use [7]. With this in mind, we 
find that the way Social Media are configured and moderated 
as well as, through the opportunities that they offer for certain 
types of interaction [8] can shape the behaviours of Social 
Media users. 
For patients living with chronic and life threatening 
conditions such as diabetes, different utilities are derived from 
dissemination directed Social Media such as Twitter than from 
interactive and community building Social Media such as 
Facebook and Diabetes.co.uk. These differences in use within 
healthcare are contrary to the generalisations made in existing 
public health studies, which extrapolate the findings from a 
single Social Media. This therefore provides interesting and 
novel applications for a diverse range of research directions 
that aim to understand how Social Media are used by patients 
with other clinical conditions and what effect this has on the 
use of Social Media for research, health interventions and 
patient engagement.  
 
 
 
TABLE II. APPLICATION OF BALES IPA TO DIABETES POSTS 
 
Social Media 
Bales IPA Categories 
Shows 
tension 
Dramatises 
Agrees 
Gives Suggestions 
Gives Opinion 
Seems 
Unfriendly 
Twitter 
8 
18 
0 
20 
36 
0 
Facebook 
4 
5 
9 
29 
33 
1 
Facebook (minus the over/under 
post) 
4 
6 
12 
37 
40 
1 
Diabetes.co.uk 
12 
7 
5 
18 
55 
3 
 
Gives info 
Asks for 
info 
Disagrees 
Asks for 
Suggestions 
Asks for 
Opinions 
Seems friendly 
Twitter 
29 
8 
0 
5 
6 
18 
Facebook 
33 
6 
4 
1 
3 
37 
Facebook (minus the over/under 
post) 
15 
8 
5 
1 
3 
47 
Diabetes.co.uk 
32 
10 
1 
1 
6 
46 
 
 
 
 
 
 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

  
	  
VI. CONCLUSION 
We presented the first results from this unique study on how 
different types of Social Media are used by patients living with a 
chronic condition. In doing so we defy popular assumption and 
conclude that Type 1 diabetes patients use different Social Media 
platforms for different purposes, with Twitter primarily used by 
members for information and opinion sharing, with little support 
or empathy. Whilst Diabetes.co.uk and Facebook, by virtue of 
their user base, design and self moderating communities are 
more successful in their utility for social interaction and peer 
support by those living with this live long condition. These 
findings have important implications for Social Media and their 
application in the context of healthcare. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Hamm, A. Chisholm, J. Shulhan, A. Milne, S. Scott, L. 
Given, and L. Hartling, “Social media use among patients 
and caregivers: a scoping review,” BMJ OPEN, vol. 3, no. 5, 
2013. 
[2] D. Capurro, K. Cole, M. I. Echavarria, N. Joe, J., T., and A. 
M. Turner, “The use of social networking sites for public 
health practice and research: A systematic review,” Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, vol. 16, no. 3, 2014. 
[3] S. Moorhead, D. Hazlett, L. Harrison, J. Carroll, A. Irwin, 
and C. Hoving, “A new dimension of health care: Systematic 
review of the uses, benefits, and limitations of social media 
for health communication,” Journal of Medical Internet 
Research, vol. 15, no. 4, 2013. 
[4] E. Weitzman, B. Adida, S. Kelemen, and K. Mandl, “Sharing 
data for public health research by members of an 
international online diabetes social network,” PlOS One, vol. 
6, no. 4, 2011. 
[5] L. Ellis, C. Showell, and P. Turner, “Social media and patient 
self management: not all sites are created equal,” Studies In 
Health Technology And Informatics, 2013, pp. 291–295. 
[6] R. Bales, Interaction process analysis : a method for the study 
of small groups. Addison-Wesley Press, 1951. 
[7] R. Williams and D. Edge, The Social Shaping of Technology. 
BV, 1996. 
[8] P. Smart and N. R. Shadbolt, “Social Machines,” in 
Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology. IGI 
Global, 2014, pp. 6855–6862. 
	  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

