 
 
Standardization of Blood Pressure Management in Cedro Galán, a Semi-Rural 
Community in Nicaragua 
Holly O’Brien, Elimarys Perez-Colon 
Department of Internal Medicine-Pediatrics 
University of South Florida 
Tampa, FL, USA 
e-mail: hobrien1@health.usf.edu, eperezco@health.usf.edu  
Aly Strauss 
Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 
Johns Hopkins University 
Baltimore, MD, USA 
e-mail: aly.t.strauss@gmail.com 
Elizabeth Nicole Teal 
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology 
University of California San Francisco 
San Francisco, CA, USA 
e-mail: e.nicole.teal@gmail.com 
Taylor Martin 
Department of Emergency Medicine 
University of Texas 
Houston, TX, USA 
e-mail: taykmar11@gmail.com 
Wendy Sanchez 
Department of Family Medicine 
Universidad Americana 
Managua, Nicaragua 
e-mail: wendy.sanchez33@yahoo.com 
 
 
Abstract—Research supports the use of evidence-based 
guidelines in the management of hypertension. However, there 
is limited literature regarding translation of these initiatives to 
resource-poor settings. Specifically, Nicaragua has no evidence 
of appropriate treatment or management of hypertension. A 
team from the University of South Florida Morsani College of 
Medicine created a community-specific, algorithm-based 
educational 
program 
to 
standardize 
management 
of 
hypertension in the semi-rural community of Cedro Galán. 
Patients enrolled had monthly monitoring of systolic and 
diastolic blood pressures. The launch of the pilot program was 
followed by evaluation and intervention six months later. 
Results were analyzed using retrospective chart review, and 
separated into pre-pilot, post-pilot, and post-intervention data. 
Primary and secondary outcomes included blood pressure, 
community adherence, and provider confidence. Mean systolic 
and diastolic pressures for all patients prior to the pilot (n=10) 
were 146/78 mmHg, between pilot and intervention (n=16) 
were 153/83 mmHg, and after intervention (n=17) were 145/81 
mmHg. Patient adherence to medications and provider 
confidence 
increased, 
and 
patient 
clinic 
appointment 
attendance increased from a median of 47% at baseline to a 
median of 100% post-intervention. Our study suggests that 
community-specific, evidence-based education programs that 
include algorithm development can increase community 
adherence, provider confidence, and also blood pressure. 
Limitations include lack of similar research to be used for 
comparison, and we stress the need for continued study in this 
subject. 
 
Keywords- Quality improvement; Patient outcomes; Equity in 
health care; Primary care; Cardiovascular diseases; Developing 
countries; Patient education; Guidelines 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Nicaragua is the poorest country in Central America, and 
the second poorest in the Western Hemisphere, and much of 
the country lacks access to basic resources [1][2]. Almost 
50% of the population lives below the poverty line [3], and 
individuals face a unique set of risk factors related to 
barriers in access to care [4]-[6]. As of yet, there has been 
limited clinical research in Nicaragua, but it is well known 
that cardiovascular disease (CVD) is a leading cause of 
death [4][5][7][8], with hypertension being the primary risk 
factor for development of CVD [7][8]. There have been 
studies evaluating the prevalence of hypertension in 
Nicaragua [10], but there is little evidence to suggest 
appropriate management and treatment of hypertension [4]. 
Contributing to this is the fact that the majority of clinics in 
Nicaraguan communities tend to focus on acute conditions, 
rather than non-communicable disease [11]. Those caring 
for chronic disease in Nicaragua often rely on guidelines 
developed in other countries, cost constraints or their own 
personal experiences. Available guidelines for medical 
practitioners include the Joint National Committee (JNC) 
guidelines [12] and the Latin American Society of 
Hypertension (LASH) guidelines, but there is no good 
evidence that such guidelines fit the local context of rural 
communities in Nicaragua [13]. Research in Honduras has 
shown a positive impact from the formation of a 
community-based hypertension treatment program, with 
improved blood pressures, adherence to medications, and 
political support [14]. The aim of our study is to incorporate 
a personalized algorithm-based educational program for 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
practitioners in a rural Nicaraguan clinic. We sought to 
assess whether such a program would effectively result in 
reduced blood pressures and improved adherence to 
medications. To our knowledge, this is the only study 
evaluating the incorporation of cost-effective and evidence-
based hypertension management into a rural setting in 
Nicaragua. 
 
In this paper, we will outline our methods, results, and 
conclusions. Section 2 starts by detailing our patient 
population, and then discusses the launch of the pilot 
program, intervention and adjustment, hypotheses, and 
outcomes measured. Section 3 provides results, divided into 
primary and secondary outcomes. Finally, Section 3 is a 
discussion 
of 
our 
findings, 
conclusions, 
and 
recommendations for future projects. 
II. 
PATIENTS AND METHODS 
A.   Study Design and Setting 
We used an observational research design to incorporate 
an evidence-based and cost-sensitive algorithm into a rural 
Nicaraguan clinic. We visited the community on multiple 
trips over a 1 year period to provide education and receive 
feedback about the program. Institutional Review Board 
approval was given for this study by the University of South 
Florida (USF). (Institutional Review Board number: 
Pro00026167) 
 
This study was completed in Cedro Galán, a semi-rural 
resource-poor community located on the outskirts of 
Managua, Nicaragua. This community is home to an 
estimated 3,500 individuals whose incomes are, on average, 
$1.32 per person per day. Only 25% of adults in Cedro 
Galán have completed secondary school [15]. Up until 
October 2013, this community had extremely limited access 
to even basic health services and health education. This 
history of disconnection from the healthcare system 
combined with low socioeconomic status and low 
educational levels put this population at extremely high risk 
for many adverse health outcomes including but not limited 
to cardiovascular disease [15]. 
 
Research was conducted in the primary care clinic that 
opened in Cedro Galán in 2013. This clinic was created by 
and is managed though a collaboration USF and Manna 
Project International (MPI) [16], a non-profit organization 
that offers holistic community development. A Nicaraguan 
general practitioner physician and nurse staff the clinic three 
times weekly. Since the clinic has opened, it has provided 
two to three thousand consultations annually. USF Internal 
medicine physicians visit bi-annually to provide continuing 
medical education as well as patient consults. 
 
B.   Pilot: Algorithm Development and Provider Education 
       The USF Health team offered chronic disease 
management education to our partner Nicaraguan health 
care providers in two steps. The first occurred during an 
initial capacity building trip in March 2015. Internal 
Medicine physicians from USF Health started by presenting 
the JNC 8 guidelines (including changes from JNC 7) to the 
Nicaraguan providers. Next, they held individual meetings 
with the Nicaraguan providers to discuss their thoughts on 
the guidelines and perceived limitations with respect to 
implementation. Table I illustrates the questions that were 
asked during these individual meetings. Using the JNC 
guidelines as a foundation, with local practitioner input, a 
one-page algorithm was developed for practitioners to 
follow when managing hypertension. USF physicians also 
discussed 
potential 
side 
effects 
and 
recommended 
monitoring for each drug. All meetings were held and 
education provided in the local providers’ native language. 
 
TABLE I. QUESTIONS NECESSARY FOR COMMUNITY-SPECIFIC 
ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT 
How are the current 
prescribing practices of 
providers in the area 
determined? Are there any 
guidelines already 
followed? 
What is the currently 
recommendation by the 
appropriate governing 
body for the management 
of the disease targeted? 
What are the major 
comorbidities of the 
targeted population? 
What medications in those 
recommendations are not 
accessible in the targeted 
population? 
What is the level of control 
currently of the disease 
targeted? What 
medications is the 
population currently taking 
for management of the 
targeted disease? 
What is the data for 
medications that can be 
utilized as a substitute for 
those medications that are 
not readily accessible? Has 
that data been shown to 
apply to the targeted 
population? 
What medications are 
readily accessible in the 
region? 
Is there repeated education 
established for providers, 
with adequate follow up in 
between education 
sessions? 
What are the limitations in 
accessing those 
medications that are 
available? 
Is there a method for 
providers to ask questions 
should the algorithm 
become difficult to follow? 
What is the cost of 
available medications? 
 
 
C.   Intervention: Algorithm Adjustment & Further Provider 
Education 
      Analysis of treatment patterns and overall blood 
pressure control following the first capacity building trip 
indicated that the proposed guidelines were not being 
consistently followed. We completed a root cause analysis 
in collaboration with the health providers and our partner 
MPI to determine why this was the case and came up with
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
!
!
!
!
BP!>140/90!and!<170/110!
Diabetes!
No!diabetes!
Amlodipine*5mg*daily*
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
Continue!
treatment!
No!
Increase!Amlodipine!
to!10mg!daily!
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
No!
Add!HCTZ!25!mg!
daily!
BP!<140/90?!
No!
Add!Enalapril/Lisinopril!5mg!daily!or!Losartan!
25mg!dialy!and!increase!as!need!until!
maximum!doses!using!the!diabetes!algorithm!
Yes!
Enalapril/Lisinopril!5mg!
daily!or!Losartan!25mg!daily!
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
Continue!
treatment!
No!
Increase!Enalapril/Lisinopril!to!10mg!
daily!or!Losartan!to!50mg!daily!
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
No!
Increase!Enalapril/Lisinopril!to!20mg!
daily!or!Losartan!to!50mg!every!morning!
and!25mg!every!evening!
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
No!
Increase!Enalapril/Lisinopril!to!30mg!
daily!or!Losartan!to!50mg!twice!daily!
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
No!
Increase!Enalapril/Lisinopril!to!40mg!
daily!or!continue!Losartan!50mg!twice!
daily!and!add!HCTZ!25mg!daily!
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
No!
Add!HCTZ!if!
not!already!
added!
BP!<140/90?!
Yes!
No!
Add!Amlodipine!
5mg!daily!and!
increase!up!to!10mg!
daily!if!necessary!
Note:!goal!BP!for!
patients!>60!years!
of!age!without!
diabetes!is!
<150/90!!
 
Figure 1. Community-specific evidence-based treatment algorithm 
 
the following issues: 
1. Insufficient funding to pay for complete supply of 
medications  
2. Insufficient funding to pay for monitoring labs (ie 
creatinine, potassium) 
3. Minimal clinic time to practice putting guidelines 
in place with real patients 
4. Confusion regarding quantities of medications to 
be distributed to patients 
 
Between March and October of 2015, we worked in 
collaboration with the Nicaraguan providers and MPI to 
combat these issues. First, we reviewed the JNC guidelines 
taking into close consideration the cost of each medication 
at the local pharmacy and costs of monitoring labs. Using 
that information, we adjusted the one-page algorithm for the 
most cost effective treatment of hypertension in that specific 
community (Figure 1). Some of these substitutions included 
specifying with medication within a category to use. 
Making simple substitutions such as Enalapril instead of 
Lisinopril dramatically decreased the cost of treatment for 
many patients simply due to local pricing. In the customized 
algorithm, we included conservative but safe laboratory 
monitoring schedule. Clinic scheduling was changed to 
having a dedicated day for patients with hypertension to 
visit, as their appointments often required more time. 
Discussion with local practitioners revealed concerns 
regarding dispensing greater than a one month supply to 
patients, related to issues with theft, and it was decided that 
patients would visit once monthly to receive their blood 
pressure checks and to receive their medications. Lastly, 
during the October 2015 capacity building trip, USF Health 
attending physicians saw each chronic patient with the local 
physician and worked with her to create six-month plans 
based on the algorithm for every patient. Patients continued 
to come to clinic monthly, and those six-month plans 
required minimal adjustment by the Nicaraguan providers. 
Nicaraguan providers were also informed that they could 
make remote consults to USF providers as needed via the 
electronic community health records system. These changes 
were intended to encourage more consistent implementation 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
of the guidelines in the Cedro Galán Clinic and of the 
improve blood pressure control. 
 
D.   Outcomes and Hypothesis 
The primary outcome was blood pressure management, 
which was evaluated using the electronic community health 
record. Secondary outcomes included medication and 
treatment adherence, evaluated by adherence to clinic 
appointments and reported adherence to medications, as 
well as provider confidence. Provider confidence was 
evaluated 
subjectively, 
in 
discussions 
with 
local 
practitioners, as well as in use of the guidelines 
independently to adjust patient treatment plans. We 
hypothesized that patient blood pressure, patient adherence, 
and provider confidence would all improve with our 
community-specific algorithm-based educational program.  
 
E.   Data Analysis 
       Although this is an observational study based on 
sharing our experience to help others undergoing similar 
endeavors, we also collected some basic data about our 
patients with hypertension impacted by the program. All 
data was obtained from retrospective chart review. The data 
was examined in three different time intervals, outlined 
below. 
  
1. Prior to Pilot 
2. Between Pilot and Intervention 
3. After Intervention 
  
      Charts reviewed were determined by inclusion criteria of 
diagnosis of hypertension, defined as blood pressure greater 
than 140/90, age greater than 18 years, and enrollment in 
“USF Health Nicaragua Chronic Patient Program.” Baseline 
characteristics of all patients were obtained. For each of the 
patients, monthly systolic and diastolic blood pressures 
(mmHg) were collected by chart review to obtain data from 
October 2014 to April 2016. Averages of systolic and 
diastolic pressures were calculated separately, and displayed 
in a run chart for each month. Finally, trends in blood 
pressure were evaluated by obtaining averages in systolic 
and diastolic pressures for all patients in each of the three 
time intervals outlined above.  
 
III.  
RESULTS 
       Among those meeting inclusion criteria (N = 17) patient 
baseline characteristics showed a mean age of 58 years (SD 
14) and mean weight of 70 kg (SD 11). Four of the patients 
were male, while 13 were female. Eight of the patients had 
coexisting Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus (Table II). 
 
A.    Primary Outcome: Blood pressure  
       Figure 2 shows the run chart of blood pressure 
averages. Table III illustrates overall mean blood pressures 
prior to the pilot, between the pilot and intervention, and 
after the intervention. The mean systolic and diastolic 
 
TABLE II. BASELINE PATIENT CHARACTERISTICS (N=17) 
 
Mean (SD) or N (%) 
Age (years) 
58 (14) 
Sex 
 
 
Male 
4 
 
Female 
13 
Weight (kg) 
70 (11) 
Diabetic 
8 
 
pressure for all patients was 146/78 mm Hg at baseline, 
compared to 153/83 mm Hg (systolic SD 30.8, diastolic SD 
12.7) between the pilot and the intervention, and145/81 mm 
Hg after the intervention. Both systolic and diastolic 
pressure averages showed an increase in between the pilot 
and the intervention, but then a decline, more prominently in 
systolic pressures, after the intervention. It must be taken 
into account that, prior to the pilot, there were only ten 
patients that were identified as meeting inclusion criteria. 
All additional patients were added in between the pilot and 
intervention. Of note, there were more than double the 
number of diabetics in the post-pilot compared to before the 
pilot, which could explain the absence of large decline in 
blood pressures. All patients appeared to be more stable 
following the intervention.  
 
TABLE III. MEAN BLOOD PRESSURE VALUES 
 
Mean Blood Pressure (mm 
Hg) 
Prior to Pilot 
146/78 
Between Pilot & Intervention 
153/83 
After Intervention 
145/81 
Pilot date started 3/7/15. Intervention date started 10/10/15. 
Blood pressures before Pilot, between Pilot and Intervention, 
and 6 months following Intervention. 
 
B.   Secondary Outcomes: Community and Local Provider 
Effects 
      Local providers self-reported increased confidence in 
prescribing practices, and followed the algorithms more 
consistently, making changes when needed, after the 
intervention. Community members also self-reported 
increased medication adherence and understanding of 
management of their hypertension. Median and average 
number of kept appointments for medication refills and 
blood pressure checks increased, most prominently after the 
intervention, and is shown in Figure 3 below. The 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
Figure 2. Average blood pressures over time, with arrows indicating pilot and intervention 
 
Figure 3. Percent of patients presenting to clinic for monthly blood pressure checks and medication refills 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
appointment compliance median was 47% at baseline, 
compared to 100% after the intervention.    
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
      This study revealed an increase in mean systolic and 
diastolic pressures after the Pilot, and a subsequent decline 
in both systolic and diastolic pressures after the 
Intervention.  
 
      As discussed earlier, there proved to be confusion after 
the Pilot and initial presentation of the algorithm. 
Evaluation of the electronic medical record, coupled with 
discussion with local providers, indicated a number of 
issues. These issues were addressed via root cause analysis, 
detailed in Algorithm Development. Many of the problems 
identified fell into the categories that have been presented in 
prior reviews as barriers in guideline applications, those 
being knowledge, attitude, and behavior [17]. The addition 
of the Intervention to our strategy allowed us to address and 
correct upon the limitations in each of those categories. 
Improvement of blood pressure values post-Intervention 
suggests that those techniques improved upon the 
organization, understanding, and cost efficiency of the 
algorithms, and ultimately created a successful algorithm-
based educational program. Considering the difficulty in 
implanting clinical guidelines, we recommend a similar 
approach for future studies, with regular follow-up intervals 
and planned Intervention.  
 
      It would be necessary to follow-up current pressures to 
determine whether the decline in blood pressures can be 
definitively 
attributed 
to 
our 
methods. 
We 
would 
hypothesize that blood pressures have continued to improve 
since our retrospective data review. 
 
      Effect on the community and local providers was noted 
to correlate with the improvement in blood pressure post-
Intervention. The collaborative process of adjusting the 
algorithm with local providers built trust with the 
Nicaraguan health care providers. This phenomenon aligns 
with recommendations from experts in global health that 
have emphasized the need for partnership with host 
countries [18]. The addition of the option for remote 
consults with physicians in Tampa, Florida, also seemed in 
to increase prescriber confidence. Treatment plans were 
more consistently followed.  
 
      Community 
adherence 
and 
dedication 
to 
self-
improvement also seemed to increase over the course of our 
study. 
Community 
members 
became 
more 
active 
participants in their health care, traveling to clinic monthly 
to check their blood pressures and refill their medications. 
This 
is 
compatible 
with 
models 
of 
hypertension 
management that have been recognized by the American 
Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and the 
CDC, which describes improved clinical outcomes with 
active involvement and monitoring by both the patient and 
his/her medical professionals [19]. We highlight a strong 
need for an educational foundation.   
 
      Limitations include the addition of many participants 
after the Pilot. Our study is limited by small sample size. 
Finally, we are limited in comparison of our findings with 
similar initiatives, as there is not current outcomes-based 
literature regarding the standardization of management of 
non-communicable disease in resource-poor areas of 
Nicaragua. However, similar projects in rural areas of 
Honduras and China have also demonstrated success in 
creation of community-specific programs [14][20]. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Our evaluation suggests that there could be a benefit to 
the establishment of community-specific algorithms for the 
management of hypertension. We stress the need for 
continued study in this subject, given the significant 
morbidity and mortality associated with uncontrolled 
hypertension. However, we suggest that taking the time to 
develop a community-specific algorithm-based educational 
program using methods similar to those we have prescribed 
above can result in improved provider confidence, improved 
community 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Sequiera, H. Espinoza, J. Amador, G. Domingo, M. 
Quintanilla, T. de los Santos, The Nicaraguan Health System. 
Seattle, WA: PATH; (2011) 
[2] What are the current issues in Nicaragua. World Food 
Programme, 
2015. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.wfp.org/countries/nicaragua. 
[retrieved 
July, 
2016]  
[3] CIA. 
World 
Factbook. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-
factbook/geos/nu.html. [retrieved November, 2016] 
[4] N. Blondin and J. Lewis, “Prevalence, Awareness, Treatment 
and Control of Hypertension in a Rural Nicaraguan Sample,” 
J. Hum. Hypertens., no. 21, pp. 815-817, 2007.  
[5] PAHO (Pan American Health Organization). Health in the 
Americas – regional outlook and country profiles. 2nd ed. 
Washington, D.C.: Pan American Health Organization, Pan 
American Sanitary Bureau, Regional Office of the World 
Health Organization; 2012. 
[6] I. Emmerick, et al., “Barriers in household access to 
medicines for chronic conditions in three Latin American 
countries,” Int. J. Equity Health, no. 14, pp. 115, 2015.  
[7] M. Clark, et al., “Impact of a cleaner-burning cookstove 
intervention on blood pressure in Nicaraguan women,” Indoor 
Air no. 23, pp. 105-114 , 2013. 
[8] P. Ordunez, R. Martinez, M. Niebylski, and N. Campbell, 
“Hypertension Prevention and Control in Latin America and 
the Caribbean,” J. Clin. Hypertens., no. 17, pp. 499-502, 
2015.  
[9] C. Chow, et al., “Prevalence, Awareness, Treatment, and 
Control of Hypertension in Rural and Urban Communities in 
High-, Middle-, and Low-Income Countries,” JAMA, no. 310, 
pp. 959-968, 2013. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
[10] T. Laux, et al., “Prevalence of hypertension and associated 
risk factors in six Nicaraguan communities,” Ethn. Dis., no. 
22, pp. 129-135, 2012. 
[11] T. Laux, et al., “Prevalence of obesity, tobacco use, and 
alcohol consumption by socioeconomic status among six 
communities in Nicaragua,” Rev. Panam. Salud Publica, no. 
32, pp. 217-255, 2012.  
[12] J. Paul, et al., “2014 Evidence-Based Guideline for the 
Management of High Blood Pressure in Adults,” JAMA, no. 
311, pp. 507-520, 2014. 
[13] L. Alcocer, E. Meaney, and H. Hernandez-Hernandez, 
“Applicability of the Current Hypertension Guidelines in 
Latin America,” Ther. Adv. Cardiovasc. Dis., no. 9, pp. 118-
126, 2015. 
[14] S. Reiger, J. Harris, K. Chan, H. Oqueli, and M. Kohn, “A 
Community-driven Hypertension Treatment Group in Rural 
Honduras,” Glob. Health Action, no. 8, pp. 28041,  2015.  
[15] E. N. Teal, C. Stewart, A. Salinas, C. Gorsline, S. Lu, T. 
Martin, E. Monaco, E. Shamas, A. Strauss, E. Storch, R. 
Nelson, “From need to intervention: A community-guided 
holistic clinic founded on population health strategies,” 
University of Central Florida Global Health Conference, 
Orlando, FL, February, 2014. 
[16] Manna 
Project 
International. 
Available 
from: 
mannaproject.org 
[17] M. Cabana, et al., “Why don’t physicians follow clinical 
practice guidelines?” JAMA, no. 282, pp. 1458-1465, 1999. 
[18] L. Adams, C. Wagner, C. Nutt, and A. Binagwaho, “The 
future of global health education: training for equity in global 
health,” BMC Med. Educ., no. 16, pp. 296,  2016.  
[19] A. Go, et al., “An effective approach to high blood pressure 
control: a science advisory from the American Heart 
Association, the American College of Cardiology, and the 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,” Hypertension, 
no. 63, pp. 878-885, 2014.  
[20] G. Li, et al., “Effects of guideline-based hypertension 
management in rural areas of Guangdong Province,” Chin. 
Med. J., no. 128, pp. 799-803, 2015. 
 
 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

