 
 
Accurate and Reliable Recommender System for Chronic Disease Diagnosis 
 
Asmaa S. Hussein, Wail M. Omar, Xue Li 
School of IT and Electrical Engineering 
The University of Queensland 
Queensland, Australia 
asmaa.hussein@uqconnect.edu.au, w.omar@bnr-
education.ca, xueli@itee.uq.edu.au 
 
Modafar Ati 
College of Engineering and Computer Science 
Abu Dhabi University 
Al Ain, United Arab Emirates 
modafar.ati@adu.ac.ae 
 
 
Abstract-With the rapid growth of chronic disease cases around 
the world, healthcare support systems like recommender 
systems play a major role in controlling the disease, through 
providing accurate and trustworthy disease risk diagnosis 
prediction and acknowledgement of disease risk status, that 
assists healthcare providers to have 24/7 remote patient 
monitoring system and assist patients to have 24 hour access to 
the 
medical 
care. 
Providing 
an 
accurate 
real-time 
recommendation for medical data is a challenge according to 
its complexity represented by unbalance, large, noisy and/or 
missing 
data. 
The 
Chronic 
Disease 
Diagnosis 
(CDD) 
recommender system expectation is to give a high accuracy 
and reliable disease risk prediction. This paper presents a 
CDD recommender system model using multiple decision tree 
classification algorithms.  Decision tree algorithms are applied 
to achieve high accuracy disease risk predictive model. 
Historical patients’ medical data from the Middle East is used 
to train the model. Determining the relevant features through 
Attribute Selection method is used to reduce data generation 
and improve the predictive model performance. Merging 
patients’ lab and home test readings is considered to leverage 
the diagnosis fidelity. Diabetes diagnosis case study is designed 
through this research as experiment to show the feasibility of 
our model.  
Keyword-E-Health; Remote Chronic Disease Diagnosis 
prediction; Diabetes healthcare management system; Decision 
Tree; Random Forest. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In recent years, a pattern of chronic diseases has started 
to emerge in the Middle East similar to the rest of the world 
[1]. These diseases appear in the form of increases in obesity, 
heart diseases, and diabetes (both types 1 and 2). This growth 
in chronic illnesses along with the increase of inactive 
lifestyle in the Middle East has imposed great pressure on 
healthcare providers, especially when trying to ensure a 
structured patient follow-up to be achieved after each 
therapeutic change.  
The 
rapid 
increase 
in 
ICT 
(Information 
and 
Communications Technology) development has opened a 
new era for researchers to develop a number of E-Health 
applications that are starting to play a major role in 
improving healthcare services. Recommender systems [2] 
have been emerged and being increasingly used by many 
applications, like E-Commerce and E-Health [3] according 
to their feasibility in automatically extracting useful 
information and predicting and recommending appropriate 
results to consumers. Therefore, this research applies a 
recommender system to manage the chronic disease, which 
minimizes both the risk of such a disease as well as the cost 
that is associated with it.  
The most popular technique of recommender systems is 
collaborative filtering, which utilizes users' experiences or 
histories to generate predictions of the unknown preferences 
[4]. For example, in a system recommending books there 
usually are two sets, a set of users U (e.g., the readers) and a 
set of items I (e.g., the books), and a utility function r 
between the two sets (e.g., the books rating by users). In its 
most common formulation, the recommendation problem is 
reduced to the problem of estimating ratings for the items 
that have not been seen by a user, selecting for each user u ; 
U, the item i ; I that maximizes the defined user’s utility.   
In our case the set of users, U represents patients, while 
the set of items I is the patients’ medical record attributes 
represented by disease risk factors and diagnosis. The 
relationship between the two sets, instead of being a user 
preference rating, is the risk factors readings and an ordinal 
set of rating the disease risk diagnosis (represented by 0-10 
scale). This rating is determined by physicians based on 
various factors such as patient’s vital signs and lab tests.  
The hypothesis is that, if a patient’s chronic disease risk 
is predicted with high accuracy, we will expect the 
improvement of patients’ health conditions, lifestyle 
adjustments along with reducing the healthcare services 
costs.  
A. The Research Problem  
Accuracy is the essential factor of recommender systems 
[5]. 
In 
our 
research, 
accuracy 
reflects 
how 
the 
recommendation is valuable and correspondent with the 
patient’s physiologic state and complexity of disease in order 
to be valuable to the users who are looking for trusty 
recommendation. To achieve that, recommender systems 
should minimize false positive and false negative errors. For 
example, a specific disease risk diagnosis is not useful for a 
patient (false), which is recommended by the system 
(positive). While a specific diagnosis is useful for a patient 
(false), but it is not recommended (negative).  
Our purpose of developing the recommender system for 
CDD is to provide efficient recommendations benefit users 
remotely. To improve the accuracy of recommendations for 
CDD; we consider: the nature and complexity of medical 
data such as different types of data, large number of 
parameter, and missing and noisy data.  
For this consideration, as known, the patients’ states of 
health and disease risk are monitored through symptoms, 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
vital signs, laboratory test results, etc. Those results and 
readings are generated by different sources like different data 
entry-medical workers, medical home sensors, etc., which 
are not corresponding in structure or quality. Thus, medical 
data can have features of different types and may contain 
various types of errors (missing data and noisy data) that 
occur for a variety of reasons for example: erroneous 
attribute values during the insertion process, values cannot 
be recorded when the data is collected, a doctor may not 
order all applicable tests while diagnosing a patient [6],  and 
some personal data is ignored by users because of privacy 
concerns. Dealing with such data is a challenge to get 
accurate and reliable recommendations as it can have a 
significant effect on the recommendations quality and 
accuracy.  
Our contribution is to provide more accuracy and reliable 
recommendations in order to assist patients controlling their 
chronic disease and assist healthcare providers to have 24/7 
remote patient monitoring system. 
B. Decision Tree Classification Approach 
In this work, the decision tree classification approach [7] 
has been adopted within a recommender system to improve 
the prediction accuracy. Decision tree is a very popular data 
mining method for classification and regression, where 
decision tree Collaborative Filtering models act as classifier 
to classify tasks  [8]. 
Different decision tree classification models such as 
J48[9], Decision Stump[10], REP Tree[11] and Random 
Forest [12] have been constructed to predict the chronic 
disease risk. RF model has proven its feasibility in providing 
accurate predictions over the medical data, while the other 
decision tree classification models have been used for 
prediction performance comparisons.   
C. Random Forest  
RF algorithm [13, 14] was developed by Brieman in 
2001. RF is an ensemble classifier that consists of many 
decision trees created by using bootstrap samples of the 
training data and random feature selection at each node to 
grow each tree; it outputs the class that is the mode of the 
class's output by individual trees. In this way, an RF 
ensemble classifier performs better than a single tree from 
classification performance point of view [12]. And as each 
node is split using the best among a subset of predictors 
randomly chosen at that node, RF performs very well 
compared with many other classiﬁers and is robust against 
over-ﬁtting. Furthermore, RF can be used to estimate 
missing values [15]. Generally, RF is a powerful statistical 
classifier that has some advantages compared to other 
statistical classifiers; see [16] for RF advantages.  
The remaining of the paper is structured as related work 
in section two. CDD recommender system is in section three, 
followed by CDD scenario and methodology. Diabetes 
diagnosis 
experiments, 
outcomes, 
and 
results 
are 
demonstrated and discussed in section five. Conclusion and 
future work are presented in section six. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
This section demonstrates the current researches in the 
area of recommender system and its uses with healthcare 
applications, and the RF method used in disease diagnosis 
field. Recommender systems have been used by many 
researchers in different areas such as: movies, healthcare, E-
commerce, etc. [17]. With focus on healthcare applications, 
Davis et al. [18] proposed a Collaborative Assessment and 
Recommendation Engine (CARE), which relies on patient’s 
medical history using only ICD-9-CM codes without 
considering other information such as lab tests, etc. CARE 
predicted each patient’s future disease risks based on their 
own medical history and that of similar patients using ICD-
9-CM codes. The experimental results demonstrated that 
CARE performed well at capturing the future diseases and 
facilitating discussion about early testing and prevention. 
Sapon et al. [19] used supervised learning algorithms of 
Artificial Neural Network for diabetes prediction. The 
network was trained using the data of 250 diabetes patients. 
Scaled Conjugate Gradient algorithm with value of 
R=0.88026, produced the best performance in the prediction 
of diabetes compared to the other algorithms.  
Accuracy of the recommender system is vital in many 
applications. Therefore, different Collaborative Filtering 
(CF) recommendation approaches have been used to improve 
the 
reliability, 
performance 
and 
accuracy 
of 
the 
recommender system. Noh et al. [20] used multiple 
imputation-based CF approach for recommendation system 
to improve the accuracy in prediction performance by 
solving the incomplete data problem of CF algorithm. The 
approach replaces each missing value with m>1 acceptable 
values from their predictive distribution and converts an 
incomplete dataset into m complete dataset and each dataset 
is used for analysis. Overall estimate is then obtained by 
combing these m estimates. The prediction power was 
improved by adopting CF algorithm on the complete dataset 
after imputation is made.   
The RF is one of the decision tree classification methods 
that prove its feasibility to be used with healthcare 
applications. Özçift [12] presented a resampling strategy 
based RF ensemble classifier to improve diagnosis of cardiac 
arrhythmia. The resultant accuracy of the classifier was 
found to be 90.0%, and the results of experiments 
demonstrated the efficiency of random sampling strategy in 
training RF ensemble classification algorithm. Ko et al. [21] 
used RF to demonstrating an efficient white blood cell 
(WBC) image classification method. WBC was classified 
into five different categories that are necessary for accurate 
disease diagnosis.  The experimental results showed that 
using the random forest with dynamic features could indeed 
improve the classification performance. 
As demonstrated by the above surveys, recommender 
systems 
prove 
their 
usability 
in 
predicting 
and 
recommending the appropriate results to consumers. In this 
paper, our challenges are to provide a real-time and quality 
recommendation for a large, missing and lab tests merged 
with home tests medical data. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
As such, because of the power and efficiency of the RF 
classification technique [16], it has been implemented in the 
development of a recommendation system for CDD. Such a 
system is presented as a case study for the model developed 
in this work. 
III. 
CHRONIC DISEASE DIAGNOSIS RECOMMENDER SYSTEM  
CDD recommender system is represented by prediction 
and recommendation. It depends on a set of patients’ health 
history to train and build a model that is able to predict and 
recommend disease risk and disease risk status for the future 
cases. Those predictions and recommendations are approved 
by physicians. As shown in Fig. 1, the CDD recommender 
system 
requires 
input 
information 
to 
produce 
recommendation and predicted items. In this work, diabetes 
is used as a case study. 
The input information that is needed to build up the 
predictive model of CDD for diabetes and make prediction 
for undiagnosed patients is categorized into: 
Training data: a bulk of historical medical records of 
previous diabetic patients (935 records) has been collected 
from hospitals in Oman. The collected data records are 
represented by a number of attributes, values and doctors’ 
assessment (diagnosis) for each case. Oman Health 
Authority based on international standards defines these 
factors. All of these records have been tested and diagnosed 
by doctors in Oman hospitals. A scale from 1 to 10 has been 
used for the diagnosis to give more opportunities for better 
classification. The doctor diagnosis scale is based on: 1–2 
represents excellent, 3–4 good, 5–6 fair but needs control, 
7–8 bad with bad control, and 9–10 represents a critical 
condition. Fig. 2 demonstrates a sample of the collected 
data. 
Demographic data of active patient: refers to the user’s 
profile such as: name, age, level of education, type of end 
user device and type of connectivity.  
Medical dataset of active patient: formed by two types of 
data. The first type is known as home-tests such as blood 
sugar level, blood pressure, and weight. The other type 
involves results obtained in the laboratory, which is usually 
carried out over a long time interval, depending on the 
condition of the patient. Fig. 3 shows sample of the diabetes 
medical dataset of an undiagnosed patient case.  
The output of the system is:  
Prediction and recommendation: prediction is expressed as 
a numerical value that represents the disease risk diagnosis 
of an active patient and to the future cases. This prediction 
value should be within the same scale as the diagnosis 
values provided in the training dataset. Recommendation is 
expressed as disease risk status acknowledgment, which the 
active patient is seeking for. 
IV. 
CDD RECOMMENDER SYSTEM  SCENARIO  
The scenario consists of number of major activities, 
which starts by building the predictive model of 
recommender system, as shown in Fig. 4 and illustrated in 
the following sections. Multiple decision tree algorithms are 
adopted to achieve a high accurate predictive model.  
A. Building the Predictive Model 
The predictive model is built as follows: 
1) Data Preprocessing 
Filtering the data might be necessarily accomplished to 
avoid the creation of ambiguous or inappropriate models and 
improve the learning model performance [22]. In our system, 
the diabetes dataset is filtered by determining the relevant 
features through InfoGainAttributeEval Attribute Selection 
method, furthermore, the data is also transformed to a form 
appropriate the classification. InfoGainAttributeEval has 
ranked the relevant and significance features sequentially as 
follows: LDLC, Cholesterol, Triglyceride, FBS, HBA1C, 
BMI, HDLC, DBP, Age, SBP and Sex. As seen, the result 
shows that LDLC attribute, Low Density Lipoprotein 
Cholesterol, has a significant and highest effect on the 
diabetes diagnosis. The scale of diagnose is increased in 
conjunction with the increase of LDLC level. The patients 
with worse condition of diabetes (class diagnose 10) exhibit 
the highest readings of LDLC and vice versa. 
2) RF Algorithm 
The RF algorithm is utilized to analyze and segment the 
patients’ records in training data into distinguished and 
related groups of classes based on the seen diagnosis scales. 
These classes are used to generate a predictive model that is 
able to predict the class of diagnosis of an active patient.  
The workflow of RF algorithm starts by classifying the 
training datasets that is provided by the healthcare provider. 
Kth tree is constructed by sampling with replacement. At 
each node, mth variables are selected at random out of the 
total number of variables M, and the split is the best split on 
these mth variables. About one-third of the cases are left out 
of the bootstrap sample and not used in the construction of 
the kth tree. The out-of-bag data (oob) or bagging [23] is 
used to get an unbiased estimate of the classification error as 
trees are added to the forest. 
It is also used to enhance accuracy through using random 
features and to get estimates of variable importance [14]. 
After each tree is built, each case left out in the construction 
of the kth tree is put down the kth tree to get a classification. 
In this way, a test set classification is obtained for each case 
in about one-third of the trees. At the end of the run, take j to 
be the class that received the most votes every time case n 
 
 
 
Figure 1: CDD Recommender System
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
Figure 2: “10” sample records of total “935” diabetes training dataset 
 
Figure 3: Sample dataset of an undiagnosed active patient
was out of bag. In this case, the class of diagnosis is 
predicted by aggregating the predictions of the kth trees (the 
majority votes). 
B. New Data of Active Patient  
As shown in Fig. 4, the healthcare provider initiates a 
request to the request repository for collecting the home 
medical tests readings of an active patient. The request is 
sent to the patient-home medical sensor to collect those 
readings of the patient such as: blood sugar level, blood 
pressure, weight, etc. At the same time of sending the 
request, the healthcare provider provides the laboratory tests 
readings of the same patient (patient medical record). Those 
lab readings are merged with the home readings as a 
complete dataset in the profile of active patient (as shown in 
Fig. 3). This complete dataset has the same attributes of the 
training dataset, but the class diagnosis variable has no value 
and it is unknown.  
C. Prediction  
The complete dataset of an active patient is uploaded to 
the generated RF predictive model to predict the class of 
diagnosis and disease condition of patient. The dataset is 
analyzed and run over the tree model to finding the 
similarities between the current patient’s dataset and the 
training dataset from other patients [24].  
D. Alert Message  
Once the diagnosis scale is produced, it is sent to 
healthcare providers. Healthcare providers would examine 
the accuracy of the prediction and approve/correct them.  
The patient profile is then updated by adding the approved 
diagnosis to the medical record of patient. Finally, an 
assessment and acknowledgement alert message of the 
predicted disease diagnosis and recommended disease risk 
status is sent to the patient, and the updated patient’s medical 
record is stored in the training dataset repository. The latter 
action is performed in order to add an extra element of data 
to the training dataset, which as a result, would help in 
improving the performance of CDD recommendations for 
future cases. 
 
Figure 4: CDD Recommender System Scenario 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
V. 
OUTCOMES 
In this section, we present experimental results of the 
proposed predictive model and compare the prediction 
performance to other decision tree models like: J48, Decision 
Stump and REP Tree. The dataset used for this experiment is 
diabetes data set collected from hospitals in Oman. The 
collected data represented by 935 patients’ records, “13” 
attributes including the doctors’ diagnosis scale, and values 
of attributes for each case.  
A. Metrics 
 
Metrics such as MAE [7], Precision and Recall [15] are 
used to evaluate and compare the prediction performance of 
algorithms used. The accuracy of the system is high as the 
MAE of the prediction system is low. Precision and Recall 
should be maximized for well-performed prediction system. 
The MAE is given by: 
  
 	
  
 




  




 
where MAE is an average of the absolute errors ei = fi − yi, 
fi is the predicted class (diagnosis) and yi is the actual class.  
Precision =

 ! 
Recall =
"#$%&'(
"
)%
"#$%&'(
"
)%*+,(%%-%"
)%                           (3) 
B. Experimental results 
Our experimental in building the predictive model for 
CDD recommender system using decision tree algorithms, 
has shown the following: 
• 
RF has been built of 10 trees. Out of bag estimated 
error is 0.2877.  
• 
RF has demonstrated 99.7% of correctly classified 
cases.  
• 
Since we do not have a large dataset, we conducted a 
10-fold cross validation [25]. Cross validation has 
been used with: J48, Decision Stump, and REP Tree 
algorithms. However, RF does not need cross 
validation method [14] because the test set error is 
estimated internally during the run. 
• 
RF improves the accuracy by handling the missing 
data internally through the training and testing phase. 
In our case study, the dataset is complete. However, 
we randomly put missing values along the training 
data, and re-build the model with the aforementioned 
algorithms. The results show that our RF model still 
outperformed all other models. 
The comparison results of predictions performance for 
different models show:  
The model built using RF has less MAE and high 
Precision and Recall results compared with the other models 
results (as shown in Fig. 5). That shows the high quality and 
performance of our recommendation system for CDD built 
based on RF. 
C. Evaluation and Results 
To test our system, evaluate the performance and 
determine the efficiency of the algorithm used, 20 random 
samples of real patients’ medical records have been tested 
and applied on the RF learning model and the other trees 
models. The results show that the RF model outperformed all 
other models (as seen in Fig. 6).  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we presented an effective and reliable 
recommender system approach for CDD using data mining 
technique. The main contributions of this study are 
summarized as follows:  
• 
The utilized method is expected to generate effective 
disease risk prediction for chronic disease patients.  
• 
An ensemble trees classification algorithm is 
adopted. It handles the shortcomings of the medical 
data and generates a robust learning model that is 
able to provide more accurate predictions for online 
users. 
• 
An Attribute Selection method, that determines the 
relevant features of medical data, is applied.  
• 
The laboratory and daily-home test data of chronic 
disease are merged to accomplish more accurate 
results.  
• 
Reliable prediction and recommendation results 
approved by physicians are sent to patients as alert 
messages.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6: MAE values of four tree classification models tested on “20” 
samples of patients medical records 
 
 
Figure 5: Metrics results of evaluating the prediction performance of 
J48, Decision Stump, REP Tree and RF 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
Further study on testing different predication and 
recommendation methodologies will be considered to 
improve the system accuracy. In addition, more chronic 
disease case studies will be tested with the generated model. 
Moreover, the prediction result will be considered as one of 
the patient external features during our future work of 
extending the CDD recommender system. The extended 
work aims to provide medical advices and treatments 
recommendation along with the disease risk status.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
J.A. Al-Lawatia and J. Tuomilehto, "Diabetes risk score in Oman: A 
tool to identify prevalent type 2 diabetes among Arabs of the Middle 
East," Journal of Diabetes and Clinical Practice, vol. 77, pp. 438-444, 
2007. 
[2] 
L. Duan, W. N. Street, and E. Xu, "Healthcare information systems: 
data mining methods in the creation of a clinical recommender 
system," Enterprise Information Systems, vol. 5, pp. 169-181, 
2011/05/01 2011. 
[3] 
B. M. Sarwar, G. Karypis , J. Konstan , and J. Riedl, "Recommender 
Systems for Large-Scale E-Commerce: Scalable Neighborhood 
Formation Using Clustering," presented at the The Fifth International 
Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT 2002), 
2002. 
[4] 
D. Sun, Z. Luo, and F. Zhang, "A novel approach for collaborative 
filtering to alleviate the new item cold-start problem," presented at the 
Communications and Information Technologies (ISCIT), 2011 11th 
International Symposium on, Hangzhou, 2011. 
[5] 
G. Pitsilis and L. Marshall, "Trust as a Key to Improving 
Recommendation Systems 
 
Trust Management." vol. 3477, P. Herrmann, et al., Eds., ed: Springer 
Berlin / Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 421-432. 
[6] 
B. M. Marlin, "Missing Data Problems in Machine Learning," Doctor 
of Philosophy, Computer Science, University of Toronto, 2008. 
[7] 
N. S. N. Gayatri, A. V. Reddy, and R. Chitra, "Performance Analysis 
of Datamining Algorithms for Software Quality Prediction," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on 
Advances in Recent Technologies in Communication and Computing, 
2009. 
[8] 
X. Su and T. M. Khoshgoftaar, "A Survey of Collaborative Filtering 
Techniques," Advances in Artificial Intelligence, vol. 2009, 2009. 
[9] 
H. Kaur and G. P. S. Raghava, "A neural-network based method for 
prediction of γ-turns in proteins from multiple sequence alignment," 
Protein Science, vol. 12, pp. 923-929, 2003. 
[10] T. Kudo and Y. Matsumoto, "A Boosting Algorithm for 
Classification of Semi-Structured Text," in Proceedings of EMNLP 
2004, 2004, pp. 301-308. 
[11] J. Park, H. R. Tyan, and C. C. J. Kuo, "Internet Traffic Classification 
for Scalable QOS Provision," in Multimedia and Expo, 2006 IEEE 
International Conference on, 2006, pp. 1221-1224. 
[12] A. Özçift, "Random forests ensemble classifier trained with data 
resampling strategy to improve cardiac arrhythmia diagnosis," 
Computers in Biology and Medicine, vol. 41, pp. 265-271, 2011. 
[13] L. Breiman, "Random Forests," Machine Learning, vol. 45, pp. 5-32, 
2001. 
[14] L. 
Breiman, 
and 
A. 
Cutler. 
Random 
Forests. 
Available: 
http://www.stat.berkeley.edu/~breiman/RandomForests/cc_home.htm
#workings. Accessed on August 2012. 
[15] Y. Qi , J. Klein-seetharaman , and Z. Bar-joseph, "Random Forest 
Similarity for Protein-Protein Interaction Prediction," Pac Symp 
Biocomput, vol. 2005, pp. 531--542, 2005. 
[16] D. R. Cutler, T. C. Edwards, K. H. Beard, A. Cutler, K. T. Hess, J. C. 
Gibson, and J. J. Lawler, "Random Forest For Classification In 
Ecology " Ecology, vol. 88, p. 10, 2007 2007. 
[17] P. Pattaraintakorn, G. Zaverucha, and N. Cercone, "Web Based 
Health Recommender System Using Rough Sets, Survival Analysis 
and Rule-Based Expert Systems Rough Sets, Fuzzy Sets, Data 
Mining and Granular Computing." vol. 4482, A. An, et al., Eds., ed: 
Springer Berlin / Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 491-499. 
[18] D. A. Davis, N. V. Chawla, N. A. Christakis, and A.-L. Barabási, 
"Time to CARE: a collaborative engine for practical disease 
prediction," Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery, vol. 20, pp. 388-
415, 2010. 
[19] M. Sapon, K. Ismail, S. Zainudin, and C. Ping, "Diabetes Prediction 
with Supervised Learning Algorithms of Artificial Neural Network," 
presented at the International Conference on Software and Computer 
Applications, Kathmandu, Nepal, 2011. 
[20] Noh, H.-ju, Kwak, M.-jung, Han, and I. goo, "Handling Incomplete 
Data Problem in Collaborative Filtering System," Journal of 
intelligent information systems, vol. 9, pp. 51-63, 2003. 
[21] B. C. Ko, et al., "Cell image classification based on ensemble features 
and random forest," Electronics Letters, vol. 47, pp. 638-639, 2011. 
[22] S. B.Patil, and Y.S.Kumaraswamy, "Intelligent and Effective Heart 
Attack Prediction System Using Data Mining and Artificial Neural 
Network," European Journal of Scientific Research, vol. 31, pp. 642-
656, 2009. 
[23] L. Breiman, "Bagging Predictors," Machine Learning, vol. 24, pp. 
123-140, 1996. 
[24] Y. Chen, E. K. Garcia, M. R. Gupta, A. Rahimi, and L. Cazzanti, 
"Similarity-based Classification: Concepts and Algorithms," Machine 
Learning Research, vol. 10, pp. 747-776, 2009. 
[25] M. Saeedmanesh, T. Izadi, and E. Ahva, "HDM: A Hybrid Data 
Mining Technique for Stock Exchange Prediction," presented at the 
Proceedings of the International MultiConference of Engineers and 
Computer Scientists 2010, Hong Kong, 2010. 
 
 
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

