Evaluation Phase of a Novel Blood Pressure Monitor Device 
 
Adhurim Hajzeraj, Marco Belcastro, Davide Alfieri, Brendan O’Flynn 
Tyndall National Institute 
University College Cork 
Cork, Ireland 
E-mail: adhurim.hajzeraj@tyndall.ie; marco.belcastro@tyndall.ie; davide.alfieri@tyndall.ie; brendan.oflynn@tyndall.ie 
 
 
Abstract—Blood pressure (BP) has always been one of the most 
important parameters in monitoring cardiovascular system 
conditions and coronary artery diseases (CAD), such as angina 
and myocardial infarction (commonly known as a heart attack). 
This is due to the fact that many of the changes within the 
cardiovascular system, like clogged arteries for example, are 
reflected by changes in BP. A number of methods and devices 
that can measure BP are available on the market for both 
clinical and consumer use. However, being able to measure 
one’s own BP non-invasively, with the required frequency (even 
continuously) in a comfortable fashion remains an unsolved 
problem using currently available systems. To date, the Pulse 
Transit Time (PTT) measurement method has been seen as a 
feasible approach to help bring current blood pressure 
monitoring systems to a stage where non-invasive, continuous 
measurements are viable. However, developing a system which 
uses the PTT method for blood pressure measurement is as yet 
an unsolved problem and it remains a challenging way to 
achieve accurate BP results despite considerable research in the 
past decade. In this paper, we present the first step in building 
a smart sensing system that overcomes the technical difficulties 
associated with accurate measurement of PTT. The novel 
hardware developed incorporates multi modal sensing 
capability to explore and quantify the relationship between 
blood pressure and PTT in clinical tests. 
Keywords - blood pressure; pulse transit time; ECG; PPG; 
calibration; real time data. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to statistics, cardiovascular diseases (CVD) are 
the main cause of deaths in Europe with 45% of all deaths 
caused by CVDs. The overall estimated cost to the EU 
economy is €210 billion a year [1]. The motivation for this 
research is to reduce these statistics by finding a better 
method of monitoring real time blood pressure (BP). This 
will help clinicians to monitor, diagnose and improve the 
condition of the cardiovascular system [3]. 
The current state of the art in BP measurement utilises a 
number of different methods and devices including 
catheterization, auscultation, oscillometry, volume clamping, 
and tonometry, with catheterization being the most accurate 
standard  currently [2].  In general, the accuracy of the 
measurements using existing devices is acceptable, but they 
have a number of drawbacks. Firstly, where inflatable cuffs 
are used, they tend not to be comfortable for the user and as 
a result are inappropriate for long term continuous 
monitoring. Secondly, clinical grade systems need to be 
operated by doctors, which causes a phenomenon called 
‘white coat syndrome’, where BP readings are inaccurate due 
to the presence of the clinicians.  
A system which would enable clinicians to take accurate, 
real time and continuous BP measurements would be 
invaluable to doctors in diagnosing CVDs at an early stage 
[3]. 
In this paper, the first development stage of such a system 
for BP monitoring based on the PTT method is presented. 
Section II of this paper describes the theory behind the PTT 
measurement method. Section III describes the evaluation of 
components integrated into the system hardware platform 
and the design of a custom hardware and new sensors. 
Section IV concludes the work with some preliminary test 
results and a description of future work to be undertaken. 
II. 
PULSE TRANSIT TIME  
A method that seems to have a good potential to enable 
non-invasive continuous BP measurement is the Pulse 
Transit Time method. PTT is defined as the time needed for 
the blood wave that goes out of the heart with each beat to 
arrive at a peripheral body site, in our case the wrist or 
fingertip. The delay (PTT) is calculated as the time difference 
between the peak of electrocardiograph (ECG) and the peak 
of photoplethysmogram (PPG) signals. 
The main factors that determine the speed of propagation 
of the pulse wave, and which thus affect the PTT value, are 
the elasticity coefficient, the thickness of the arterial wall, the 
end-diastolic diameter of the vessel lumen and blood density 
[4]. In 1878, Moens and Korteweg developed a formula that 
relates the velocity of the pulse with the factors as described 
in (1): 
𝑃𝑊𝑉 = 𝐷
𝑃𝑇𝑇 = √𝑡𝐸
𝜌𝑑                            (1)  
 
The Pulse Wave Velocity (PWV) is dependent on a 
number of arterial properties, namely the elasticity of the 
artery wall E, the arterial wall thickness t, the arterial 
diameter d and the density of the blood 𝜌 [5]. So, as the 
density of blood is close to that of the density of the water, 
the main factors that influence the velocity of the pulse wave 
are the properties of the arterial vessels, stiffness and 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

thickness. These factors vary from person to person on an 
individual basis [4]. In the calculation of BP parameters from 
PTT readings for an individual, this would be solved through 
a calibration activity as part of the measurement protocol,  but 
this is insufficient, as vessel properties keep changing in a 
dynamic fashion due to a variety of factors [6]. Factors that 
can change vessel properties include ambient temperature [7, 
8] barometric pressure [9], sleep-wakefulness status of the 
person [10], time of the day [11], sport activities [12] and 
sometimes it can even change by the control of the brain or 
sympathetic system [13]. 
III. 
TYNDALL PTT EVALUATION SYSTEM 
In order to evaluate the impact of the variability inducing 
factors described above in the evaluation of BP and blood 
vessel properties, the WSN group at Tyndall has developed 
novel multi modal sensing system with the required 
hardware, sensors and algorithms, to be able to carry out the 
necessary measurements. The design flow utilised to build 
this system is shown in Figure 2 and the first prototype of the 
measurement system is shown in Figure 1. 
A. Microcontroller Hardware System Design 
The focus of this system development is the 
implementation of a smart sensing device in the form factor 
of a wrist watch, which would include the processor, battery, 
data visualisation interface, communications and all sensors. 
To achieve this, our design methodology had to focus on 
three main parameters. First, the size of the components 
should be small enough to fit in our miniaturised target 
device. Second, the microcontroller (MCU) should be 
powerful in its operations, as it will be a real time data 
acquisition system and it will run all the algorithms inside the 
embedded microprocessor. And third, it should be a system 
that spends as little energy as possible as it is battery 
operated. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Setup of the evaluation board prototype data acquisition system. 
 
Figure 2. Design and test flow for the PTT system and current status. 
Considering all these parameters, we have chosen the STM L 
series microcontrollers [17] to use as a computing unit.  
As this device is a 32-bit microprocessor that can run at 
clock speeds of up to 100 MHz, it will satisfy our computing 
needs from an algorithmic perspective. At the same time, 
size-wise the STM component is small enough to fit inside a 
smart watch form factor system and is one of the lowest 
energy consuming microcontrollers on the market, if 
embedded code is managed appropriately. In addition to the 
before mentioned performance characteristics of the STM 
component, the MCU is also required to have a powerful 
Analog to Digital converter (ADC) and other digital 
interfaces to read data from the chosen sensors. Figure 1 
shows a picture of evaluation boards that we are using as a 
first data acquisition prototype. The board on the left is the 
evaluation board with the STM microcontroller MCU.  
B. ECG and PPG sensors 
To develop the necessary algorithms to calculate PTT, it 
is anticipated that we will need to have datasets associated 
with two signals associated with the cardiovascular system. 
Heart, during work activities, generates a bio-signal that is 
well known and characterised as ECG, this is one of the wave 
forms we need to establish our BP measurement algorithm. 
Generally, these signals are recorded by placing electrodes on 
the skin, on the chest area, where the signals are stronger. 
Reading ECG by placing electrodes on the chest, gives the 
strongest and most easily read signal, but this is not 
comfortable and convenient for the user. For the Tyndall ECG 
measurement system, we will use two active electrodes, which 
will be placed in the watch in a wrist mounted 
implementation.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 3. Evaluation board of ECG sensor. 
The sensor used for this application is named the Electric 
Potential 
Integrated 
Circuit 
(EPIC) 
from 
Plessey 
Semiconductors [16]. The EPIC sensor can be used, as a 
replacement technology for traditional wet-electrode ECG 
pads, because it requires neither gels nor other contact-
enhancing substances. When the EPIC sensor is placed on (or 
in close proximity to) the patient, an ECG signal can be 
recovered. 
To illustrate the placement of the electrodes to enable ECG 
measurements, consider Figure 3, where we show the 
development board of ECG sensor placed on a subject’s wrist 
(electrodes in contact with the skin on the underside of the 
board as shown in the smaller picture). To enable ECG 
measurement in the wrist mounted scenario, there are two 
electrodes, electrode A and B. Electrode A will be under the 
watch and will touch the skin. Electrode B will be placed over 
the watch, so every time the user wants to measure BP, the 
user should touch electrode B with a finger of the opposite 
hand to read the differential signal. Figure 4 shows the 
differential amplifier which enables generation of the 
differential bio-signal. Input1 is the electrode touching the 
skin on the wrist and Input2 is the electrode touched by the 
finger of the opposite arm. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Generating differential biosignal from two inputs 
 
 
Figure 5. Targeted final device (future work). 
Figure 5 shows the layout how the final device would look 
like. Now, the electrode B from the previous picture would be 
the brown square on the side of the watch and this is where 
the user makes the electrical connection and completes the 
circuit to enable an ECG reading to take place. 
The second waveform that is needed to develop the BP 
measurement algorithm is the signal generated from a 
photoplethysmogram (PPG) sensor, which shows the level of 
the volume of blood circulating near the sensor. The system 
used in the Tyndall implementation is a Maxim PPG sensor, 
MAX30100, which contains two light-emitting diodes 
(LED), one red and the other one is infrared together with a 
photodiode.  
The change in volume caused by the pressure pulse is 
detected by illuminating the skin with the light from a LED 
and then measuring the amount of light either transmitted or 
reflected to a photodiode. Each cardiac cycle appears as a 
peak, as seen in Figure 9. 
We are using this sensor to read PPG data from the 
fingertip, which is optimal as at the fingertip the PPG signal 
tends to be clear and not very noisy. Care needs to be taken 
however to ensure the sensor does not move when it is 
touching the fingertip. For initial data set acquisition and 
algorithm development, the fingertip implementation will be 
used for this reason until the wrist PPG sensor development 
is finished. 
The same sensor has been tested acquiring real time data 
from the wrist mounted implementation. On the wrist the 
waveforms tend to be noisier and will require further filtering 
and signal processing to develop a signal of sufficient quality 
for use in real scenarios. 
C. Prototype wrist mounted PPG data acquisition system 
Based on the PPG measurement system described in the 
previous section, the WSN group at Tyndall have developed 
an application specific, new, PPG sensor system, which will 
enable data sets from the wrist to be taken directly and is of a 
form factor appropriate to that envisaged for the final 
product. A picture of the board is shown in Figure 6, where 
one can see the main components on a 5cm by 3cm sized PCB 
microsystem. The board contains a USB connection module, 
the microcontroller, the ECG sensor and the new PPG sensor 
circuit, which will be described in the next few paragraphs. 
A 3D printed enclosure will be printed for the board, which 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

will make it able to be used as a wrist mounted system and 
facilitate collection of data from participants in a reliable, 
repeatable and accurate fashion. 
Experiments have shown that variation in the position of 
the LEDs, as well as the particular power and wavelengths 
of different LEDs impact significantly on the quality of the 
PPG signal obtained. 
 
Figure 6. Wrist mounted PPG data acquisition system. 
To test different scenarios, we have designed an integrated 
circuit with nine LEDs mounted in a circular manner around 
a photo diode, three green LEDs, three red and three infrared 
are used for this experimental setup. Diodes are arranged 
around the photodiode, as shown in Figure 6. This series of 
experiments is currently underway and will enable the design 
team to find the optimal configuration of diodes from the 
perspective of position, colour (wavelength) and intensity. 
The new PPG sensor circuit is designed with the intention 
to test different configurations and positions of LEDs and 
photodiode within the same board. There are three different 
options to control LEDs in the same board.  A block diagram 
of this circuit is shown in Figure 7, which describes the flow, 
how the MCU can control LEDs through the three LED 
controlling plans. 
There are three experimental setups developed for this 
system to optimise PPG acquisition parameters. In option A 
(Plan A), an additional integrated circuit (IC) to MCU will 
control which LEDs will be on and the limit of current 
intensity. This IC has an analog output so that we can vary 
very precisely the intensity of the light output from the LEDs 
to achieve the optimum level for wrist monitoring of PPG 
signals. 
 
Figure 7. Three different test configurations of LEDs from PPG sensor. 
In the option B (Plan B), every colour group (green, red 
and infrared) is connected to a potentiometer and Pulse Width 
Modulation (PWM) unit of the MCU. This will enable 
variation of the intensity of the LEDs very precisely. Also in 
this case, the output will be analog and the ADC can be used 
to read data. 
The option C (Plan C) requires the integration of an 
additional IC also. This chip (Analog Front End - Texas 
Instruments AFE4490 [18])  controls the state of LEDs in a 
similar way to option A, except that LEDs here can be 
controlled only in groups, so there is the same intensity for 
all the red LEDs for example. In this case, digital output is 
the advantage, so data can be read the same way that is done 
with the fingertip PPG sensor. If accuracy is the same with 
other plans, this plan can be selected as it is more convenient 
because the chip samples data and the output is given through 
a digital protocol. 
D. Sensor Data Acquisition System evaluation 
To calculate PTT, we use the peak of the ECG wave form 
and the peak of the PPG wave. Other features of waves can 
be used, like the beginning of QRS complex in ECG or the 
segment with the highest slope in PPG signal, but peaks are 
easier to detect and so we go faster to an initial prototype for 
clinical tests. Additional tests may carry on to determine if 
other features of the waves may give better accuracy. To 
identify the required peaks in the signals an initial sampling 
frequency of 100Hz was used. Sampling rate can be increased 
in future experiments if additional features need to be 
detected  which will require higher precision [14]. The 
Maxim PPG sensor has a digital output using an SPI protocol 
and it generates an interrupt after each sample is taken. The 
USB virtual COM port is enabled in the microcontroller, so 
we use this interface to send data to and from a PC to develop 
the data analytics. The PPG and ECG data sets are sent in real 
time to the PC, and plotted to check the quality of the waves. 
As we mentioned earlier, the waveforms from the sensors 
when located on a fingertip are of superior quality and are 
what we are using for the initial algorithm development in the 
calculation of PTT. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

We tested the same sensor on the wrist, and the results 
were not good enough. Firstly, the sensor needs much more 
time to get stable. Even after we start to see the standard 
shape of the wave, it is very noisy and hardly readable, and 
also we lose the wave with small movements of the sensor or 
hand. In Figure 8, we can see the best wave we could get from 
the Maxim sensor on the wrist. For the final wrist mounted 
system, additional filtering and signal processing will be 
required on the wave forms for this reason. 
The ECG sensor is combined with a circuit created using 
an Analog Devices (AD8232 [19]), which was designed to 
record ECG signals using classic electrodes, but is modified 
and used with EPIC ECG electrodes in our case. This chip 
has an analog output and is sampled at the same rate, 100Hz, 
as the PPG wave.  The MCU’s ADC unit is used, and the data 
from ADC registers are read every time an interrupt is 
triggered by the PPG sensor. The same sampling rate for both 
waves is used in the literature [15], and we have also 
implemented this. It means that we will only use one interrupt 
service routine in the microcontroller, and less instructions 
will be used to implement the algorithms and measure time 
difference between peaks of two waves.  
As seen in Figure 9, the red colour wave is the real time 
ECG signal from the sensors. The signal is good enough to 
be able to detect the peaks as this will be the main feature we 
will extract from ECG at this stage. 
This signal is plotted from raw data, so no post processing 
done. In the future, software noise filtering can be applied on 
the signal, which would result with a clearer graph, and other 
features of the signal can be detected. 
In Figure 9 again, we can see the plotted waveforms and 
datasets needed to determine PTT. The blue, lower graph is 
the PPG wave form from the fingertip. This wave from 
fingertip is clear and consistent, which means peaks can be 
easily located. Both waves are shown on the same plotting 
area to visualize PTT. Time difference between two vertical 
segments is the value of PTT. 
 
 
Figure 8. Real time data from Maxim sensor on wrist. 
 
Figure 9. Real time ECG and PPG data on the same plot and PTT. 
 
 
Figure 10. ECG QRS complex. 
Figure 10 shows a close up representation of the ECG 
peaks QRS complex. The R peak will be considered a starting 
point to measure PTT for the purposes of our algorithm 
development. The PPG wave is inverted, as the wave shows 
the level of absorption, so it means at the lowest peak the light 
is absorbed the most and this is because of the amount of the 
blood in vessels at that moment. 
So, the distance between two black vertical lines on 
Figure 9 is the value of PTT used in our evaluation and future 
calculations. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
There is no doubt that a BP monitor that would be 
accurate, reliable, cuffless, and comfortable with easy to 
carry out frequent or even continuous measurements would 
be priceless for clinical diagnosis of cardiovascular illness 
diagnosis. For decades, research has been carried out to 
achieve this goal. Pulse transit time (PTT) seems to be the 
most promising method to achieve it, based on literature. But 
until now, one of the challenges to be addressed is in the 
development of an appropriate data acquisition system to 
provide the necessary data sets for such a system. The main 
challenges are: vessel’s properties changing from person to 
person, vessel’s properties can be changed by factors within 
body or ambient conditions and clear data acquisition from 
comfortable wearable sensors. 
The WSN group at Tyndall has started a recent research 
program in the development of such a system. In this paper, 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

we are showing practical results of the first phase of the work 
in progress. The main focus at this early stage is in the design 
development and evaluation of the computing hardware, 
sensors, custom board design and data acquisition. Initial 
results of evaluating the integrated ECG sensor and PPG 
sensor are shown during the study, also with a new PPG 
sensor design for the wrist.  
For future work, we will use the new PPG sensor designed 
and the intermediate board to do measurements on people in 
clinical validation trials with clinical partners and continue the 
development of the required processing and algorithms to 
provide BP measurements from PTT measurements.  
A list of biggest factors that affects blood pressure has 
been created, and measurements will be carried out to try to 
quantify the influence they have. These measurements will 
enable the development of the required algorithms that would 
relate BP and PTT, which will be the main part of the 
complete study to be reported in subsequent publications. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
These research is a part of the H2O (Human to Objects) 
project funded by the European Union under the CATRENE 
program. This publication has emanated from research 
supported in part by a research grant from Science Foundation 
Ireland (SFI) and is co-funded under the European Regional 
Development Fund under Grant Number 13/RC/2077. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] (EHN), "E. H. N. European Cardiovascular Disease Statistics 
2017." 
Retrieved 
from 
http://www.ehnheart.org/cvd-
statistics.html  
[2] Mukkamala, R., Hahn, J. O., Inan, O. T., Mestha, L. K., Kim, 
C. S., Töreyin, H., & Kyal, S. (2015). "Toward Ubiquitous 
Blood Pressure Monitoring via Pulse Transit Time: Theory and 
Practice". IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 
62(8), 1879-1901. doi:10.1109/TBME.2015.2441951 
[3] Dilpreet Buxi, J.-M. R., Mehmet Rasit Yuce. (2015). "A survey 
on signals and systems in ambulatory blood pressure 
monitoring using pulse transit time". 
[4] Peter, L., Noury, N., & Cerny, M. (2014). "A review of 
methods for non-invasive and continuous blood pressure 
monitoring: Pulse transit time method is promising?" IRBM, 
35(5), 
271-282. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.irbm.2014.07.002 
[5] McCarthy, B. M., Flynn, B. O., & Mathewson, A. (2011). "An 
Investigation of Pulse Transit Time as a Non-Invasive Blood 
Pressure 
Measurement 
Method." 
Journal 
of 
Physics: 
Conference Series, 307(1), 012060. 
[6] Brook, R. D., Weder, A. B., & Rajagopalan, S. (2011). 
"Environmental 
hypertensionology" 
the 
effects 
of 
environmental factors on blood pressure in clinical practice and 
research. J Clin Hypertens (Greenwich), 13(11), 836-842. 
doi:10.1111/j.1751-7176.2011.00543.x 
[7] Ganio, M. S., Brothers, R. M., Shibata, S., Hastings, J. L., & 
Crandall, C. G. (2011). "Effect Of Passive Heat Stress On 
Arterial Stiffness." Experimental physiology, 96(9), 919-926. 
doi:10.1113/expphysiol.2011.057091. 
[8] Frawley, T., & Bunton, T. B. (2012). "Effect of Temperature 
on Pulse Wave Velocity and Arterial Compliance." Journal of 
Undergraduate Research in Physics.  
[9] Jehn, M., Appel, L. J., Sacks, F. M., & Miller, E. R., 3rd. 
(2002). "The effect of ambient temperature and barometric 
pressure on ambulatory blood pressure variability." Am J 
Hypertens, 15(11), 941-945. 
[10] Lluberas, S., Bia, D., Zócalo, Y., Zabalza, M., Etchart, C., & 
Armentano, R. (2008). "Sleep-Wakefulness Variations in 
Arterial Stiffness: Assessment Using Ambulatory Recording of 
Arterial Pulse Transit Time." Revista Española de Cardiología 
(English Edition), 61(01), 41-48.  
[11] Bia, D., Lluberas, S., Zócalo, Y., Etchart, C., Zabalza, M., & 
Armentano, R. L. (2008). "Circadian pattern and night-day 
variations in human arterial stiffness: assessment using 
ambulatory recording of arterial pressure and pulse transit 
time." In C. Müller-Karger, S. Wong, & A. La Cruz (Eds.), IV 
Latin American Congress on Biomedical Engineering 2007, 
Bioengineering 
Solutions 
for 
Latin 
America 
Health: 
September 24th–28th, 2007 Margarita Island, Venezuela (pp. 
82-86). Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
[12] Liu, S.-H., Cheng, D.-C., & Su, C.-H. (2017). "A Cuffless 
Blood Pressure Measurement Based on the Impedance 
Plethysmography Technique." Sensors, 17(5), 1176. 
[13] Byeong Cheol, C., Hee Jeong, L., Soo Young, Y., Dong Keun, 
J., Gi Ryon, K., Kwang Nyon, K., & Gye Rock, J. (2004, 2-6 
Nov. 2004). "Evaluation of arterial compliance on pulse transit 
time using photoplethysmography." Paper presented at the 30th 
Annual Conference of IEEE Industrial Electronics Society, 
2004. IECON 2004. 
[14] Seeberg, T., Orr, J., Austad, H., Roed, M., Dalgard, S., 
Houghton, D., . . . Strisland, F. (2016). A novel method for 
continuous, non-invasive, cuff-less measurement of blood 
pressure: evaluation in patients with non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 
PP(99), 1-1. doi:10.1109/TBME.2016.2606538 
[15] Hey, S., Gharbi, A., Haaren, B. v., Walter, K., König, N., & 
Löffler, S. (2009, 1-7 Feb. 2009). "Continuous Noninvasive 
Pulse Transit Time Measurement for Psycho-physiological 
Stress Monitoring." Paper presented at the 2009 International 
Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine. 
[16] Ltd, P.S., "Epic Sensor Applications Guidebook." p. 17-22.. 
[17] "STM32 Ultra Low Power MCUs." (n.d.). Retrieved July 28, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.st.com/en/microcontrollers/stm32-
ultra-low-power-mcus.html?querycriteria=productId=SC2157 
[18] "AFE4490 Integrated Analog Front-End for Pulse Oximeters." 
(n.d.). 
Retrieved 
July 
27, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.ti.com/product/AFE4490/datasheet 
[19] "AD8232 Single-Lead, Heart Rate Monitor Front End." (n.d.). 
Retrieved 
July 
28, 
2017, 
from 
http://www.analog.com/media/en/technical-
documentation/data-sheets/AD8232.pdf 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

