Stereo 3D Displays and Telemedicine 
How to Select Stereo 3D Technology for Telemedical Applications 
 
 
Ivan Evgeniev Ivanov, Vesselin E. Gueorguiev 
Technical University Sofia  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: iei@tu-sofia.bg, veg@tu-sofia.bg  
Desislava Georgieva 
New Bulgarian University 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: dvelcheva@nbu.bg
 
 
 
Abstract — The aim of this paper is to present some ideas and 
results of a current research related to using stereoscopic 
equipment 
meeting 
the 
requirements 
of 
telemedical 
applications. The target of the presented preliminary tests and 
investigations are 3D teleconference and telepresence. This 
investigation is the result of joint work with physicians from 
the Medical University Sofia.   
Keywords-stereo 3D display; telemedicine; active glasses; 
passive glasses; autostereoscopy  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Telemedical applications have the potential to reduce 
differences in the people’s quality of life because they allow 
the treatment of patients over long distances. This is the main 
goal of Telemedicine - to provide permanent and rapid 
access to physicians at distance using telecommunications, 
computer and information technologies, regardless of the 
patient’s and the physician’s locations: 
 
E-Doctors at telemedical centres (via telemedical 
equipment) offer easy and almost immediate or at 
least very simple access. 
 
It is quite common for serious medical conditions to 
be diagnosed at a later stage because it is often 
difficult for patients in rural areas to travel to large 
cities to get medical consultations in a tertiary 
hospital. Telemedicine enables and/or increases the 
access to an expert physician.  
 
Patients may require further monitoring and 
consulting after the treatment they have received in 
hospital at their first visit. Telemedicine is becoming 
a reasonable alternative to hospital physician visits 
and helps monitor chronic conditions. This increases 
patient’s mobility and quality of life in post-hospital 
stages of the treatment.  
Using up-to-date technologies is of crucial importance 
for telemedicine. The video, as a kind of data and 
information exchange and/or communication, has an 
important role in videoconference and telepresence [1].  
Three-dimensional (3D) graphics has created new 
possibilities to present visual data and information. These 
opportunities add many new ideas in the field of 
Telemedicine: the 3D visualization of human internal organs 
of the human in their actual size and shape, and the analysis 
and manipulation of 3D structures from the captured 3D 
image(s). This is significant for a number of diagnostic and 
therapeutic applications, but this is an off-line activity. 
Surgical telemonitoring, emergency telemedicine and 
telepsychiatry are examples of the medical activities that 
require real-time action. The real-time 3D vision is one of 
solutions to increase the quality of these medical activities. 
Though the term "3D" is ubiquitously used today, one 
can find two types of displays/monitors on the market: 
stereoscopic and holographic. 
 
Stereoscopic (binocular) vision is the result of the 
fusion of the two images (an image per eye) in the 
brain: although two eyes look in the same direction, 
they deliver two slightly different perspectives of the 
scene. 
Convergence, 
focus 
and 
physiological 
diplopia are the three components of stereoscopic 
vision.  
 
Holographic displays have the ability to provide all 
four 
eye 
mechanisms 
[6]:  
binocular 
disparity, motion parallax, accommodation 
and 
convergence. For marketing purposes or other 
reasons, the term ’holographic display’ is often 
misused and applied in some cases to name systems, 
which are not truly holographic in the sense of 
video-holography. Even volumetric displays that 
create light spots somewhere within their volume are 
called in many cases ’holographic’ [5]. 
The most notable difference between these two types of 
stereo 3D displays is that the observer lacks any freedom of 
head movement and the freedom to increase the amount of 
information about the 3D objects in the scene: holographic 
displays do not have this limitation but on the market the 
term "3D" is used to refer to stereoscopic 3D (dual 2D 
images as being "3D"). 
The ideas and results presented in this paper concerning 
the characteristics of current stereoscopic 3D displays are 
part of our joint projects and collaboration with physicians 
from the Medical University Sofia. We are investigating and 
testing some of the available systems and displays, and 
analyzing their characteristics and abilities for telemedical 
purposes. These activities are based on the aims and 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

objectives corresponding to the government strategy “2020” 
concerning Telemedicine. 
This present paper is structured as follows. Section II 
looks into the pros and cons of current stereoscopic display 
technologies. Section III analyses the opportunities for a new 
type of imaging provided by 3D stereo technologies in 
telemedical applications. Section IV presents the conclusion.   
II. 
PROS AND CONS OF CURRENT STEREOSCOPIC DISPLAY 
TECHNOLOGIES 
 
3D photography gives an impression of depth, which is 
less convincing than real life. People looking at a 
stereoscopic picture may find that the third dimension only 
develops slowly. The longer they look, the more 
computation the brain does and the 3D impression improves 
with time. Stereoscopic vision is partly a learned response 
[7]: those who have looked at many 3D pictures seem to 
handle the computations with increasing rapidity. In fact, all 
visual interpretation is learned in infancy, especially the 
binocular interpretation.  
Having in the three basic components of stereoscopic 
vision (convergence, focus and physiological diplopia) the 
following problems can be considered: 
 
Proprioception: the eye muscles must give accurate 
information about which direction the eye is oriented 
to. 
 
The eyes alignment: when looking into the far 
distance the optical axes must be parallel if the eyes 
are aligned correctly. 
 
The movement parallax cannot be used to sort out 
areas when viewing photographic stereo pairs.  
 
The dominant eye vision: the brain must not 
suppress the image obtained from one of the eyes. 
 
The eyes “autofocus” and 3D information: focus 
does not give 3D information although the eyes 
automatically focus to prevent the world becoming a 
blur. This is the result of the difference between the 
convergence information about distance and the 
sharpness of the image (the eyes lenses change shape 
independently, until the blur is removed). Stereo 
pairs are always presented on a flat surface and so, 
focus information and binocular information are 
never in agreement, which is a defect of stereoscopic 
displays. 
 
The brain training: the 3D impression from bumping 
into things and manipulating them can combine with 
binocular visual information.  
 
Nowadays, three main versions of "3D" (stereoscopic) 
technology are of interest to the market: 
 
Active Stereo 3D: Shutter glasses are used to 
produce the 3D effect for the user and actively 
separate the images seen by the left and right eye.  
 
Passive Stereo 3D: There are two types of passive 
systems on the market.  
o 
Some passive displays are created using dual 
display technology: two displays present 
images with different polarization, and they are 
typically aligned with a half-mirror that permits 
the light from both displays to be presented 
together to the user’s eyes. This approach 
allows stereo images to be presented to the user 
with full brightness and full resolution but it is 
too expensive. 
o 
The single display method is a more common 
method: special films are applied to the screen 
instead of producing 3D effect, and polarized 
glasses separate the images for the left and 
right eye.  
 
Autostereoscopic 3D: This means that no glasses are 
required.  
For decades the Active Stereo 3D technology has been 
the standard solution for stereo 3D molecular visualization 
on the desktops and is still widely used. Many manufacturers 
use this technology. It is strongly promoted by NVIDIA with 
"3D vision technology" for desktop LCD displays [10]. 
Today for computer monitors AMD also offers a similar 
method, and for the LCD TV Samsung, Sony and Panasonic 
use this technology as a preferred method of delivering 3D to 
consumers.  
There are several factors that should be taken into 
consideration when this technology is used. From computer 
engineering, point-of-view the pros and cons of the Active 
Stereo 3D technology are: 
 
Pros: 
o 
A 120 Hz input frequency: This helps to 
improve objects motion on LCD displays and 
to smooth high-speed motions (the perception 
of motion increases). It also helps users 
running competitive or high end computer 
graphics applications. 
o 
The full HD 3D: the full 1920 x 1080 
resolution (of a 1080p image) is transmitted to 
each one of the eyes. 
 
Cons: 
o 
There is no defined industry standard at 
present, which means that maybe each pair of 
glasses (and vendors’ methods) will only work 
with a small set of compatible devices, and not 
when paired with other vendors equipment.  
o 
Crosstalk: Overlapping of the left-side and the 
right-side images. As a result some times 3D 
images can look artificial. 
o 
Eye Fatigue: High input frequency flickers are 
part of this technology. Users don’t see 
flickers, but the brain understands that flickers 
exist. This can lead to eye fatigue, dizziness 
and/or even headaches. 
o 
Image brightness: The brightness of the image 
is reduced when comparing 2D content with a 
3D image (as a result, active glasses are already 
tinted). 
 
The Passive Stereo 3D (the so-called polarized 3D) is 
oriented to glasses that aren’t the active element in the 
creation of the 3D content on the display: glasses handle 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

polarization of the generated image to uncouple images for 
the left and for the right eye. This is based on the idea of the 
projection of two images (one for the left and one for the 
right eye) onto the screen and the use of polarization in a 
different direction for each image. The main manufacturer 
oriented towards this technology for the production of 
monitors/TV's is LG (Film-type Patterned Retarder (FPR) 
technology [8]).  
From computer engineering point-of-view, the pros and 
cons of the Passive Stereo 3D technology are: 
 
Pros: 
o 
Glasses are very cheap: they do not need 
additional electronic and power supply. 
o 
This is a flicker-free technology: glasses don’t 
receive 60 flashes per second. As a result, 
many users find these displays easier to look at 
for prolonged periods of time. 
o 
Image brightness: the brightness of the image is 
higher when compared to active stereo 3D. 
o 
Each of the eyes receives a non-breakable light 
stream. 
o 
No crosstalk: this technology separates left and 
right images more purely. 
 
Cons: 
o 
Aliasing and resolution of image: each eye is 
exposed to every second line of resolution (half 
of the frame) by this technology. It is a 
significant detractor from image quality (small 
objects and fine details are strongly affected by 
this) [9]. The closer you get to the screen, the 
more obvious this effect becomes. The loss of 
resolution is more pronounced for computer 
displays than it is for 3D TVs.  
o 
Motion blur: 60 Hz is the standard input for 
this technology and sometimes this produces 
perceived motion blur. Recently, to reduce this, 
manufacturers have started to announce 3D 
TVs with 240 Hz input. 
o 
View angle: the polarized filter is the active 
element for this technology and it is placed on 
the screen. This means the device has an 
optimal viewing angle (severe anomalies like 
ghosting start cropping up, making the output 
intolerable).  
Autostereoscopic 3D displays are special displays which 
allow many different types of 3D content (objects, pictures, 
videos, animations) to be seen spatially in 3D: glasses free 
3D visual technology. This is achieved by the so called 
parallax barrier technology and elements that make sure that 
each eye of the viewer sees a slightly different perspective. 
Nowadays, there are two main types of devices on the 
market: 
 
Single Viewer: devices work with two perspectives 
built up approximately 70 cm in front of the display. 
 
Multi Viewers:  a number of different perspectives 
are projected in front of the screen. Since these 
perspectives are horizontally spread, many users can 
see a 3D image irrespective of the position in front 
of the screen while standing/sitting comfortably 
around the display.  
From computer engineering point-of-view, the pros and 
cons of the Autostereoscopic 3D technology are: 
 
Pros: 
o 
Glasses free technology 
o 
Resolution per eye: compared to other 3D 
display technologies the ‘Single viewer’ 
autostereoscopy 
has 
a 
higher 
reachable 
resolution per eye and gives a better image 
separation of the different perspectives. For 
many applications where 3D precision is a key 
factor this feature is a major advantage: this 
provides the possibility to create content with a 
higher depth disparity and/or very low depth 
differences can also be visualized spatially. 
o 
It is really possible to walk around an object 
based on the ‘Multi viewers’ autostereoscopy. 
 
Cons: 
o 
They are prohibitively expensive at the 
moment. 
o 
No standard: manufacturers are oriented to a 
short list of video-card vendors. 
o 
The time for training users to view stereo 3D is 
longer compared to other technologies. 
The comparisons and characteristics presented in this 
section are not aiming at an exhausting overview of the 
existing technologies, but they are provided to help non-
technical people to receive in-depth information concerning 
3D imaging devices. 
III. 
TELEMEDICINE AND 3D STEREO TECHNOLOGIES 
For Telemedical purposes video is used as a kind of data 
and information exchange and has an important role for 
videoconferencing and telepresence [1]: 
 
The main goal of video-conference applications in 
Telemedicine is to provide real-time visual and 
audio patient assessment.  This type of applications 
was developed to connect physicians with patients 
located in isolated areas where climatic or 
geographical conditions render provider or patient 
transportation difficult and costly, resulting in 
inequalities 
in 
patient 
care. 
Teleconsultation, 
telepsychiatry and tele-education are well-known 
examples. 
 
In general, Telepresence means projecting virtual 
images of the operative field to remote sites. 
Surgical 
telementoring, 
teledermatology, 
teleophtalmology, 
teletrauma, 
and 
emergency 
telemedicine are some of the examples of 
telepresence practice in telemedicine. 
Unfortunately, we were not able to find any overview of  
3D imaging subjective perception and comparison of 
available 3D imaging technologies related to this case.  
Two elements of the current video communication 
technology have critical importance for Telemedicine: 
peripherals (sensors, devices) and the video-audio-data 
transfer.  
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Our tests and analyses show that video-audio transfer is 
not the major problem for using new 3D vision technologies 
in Telemedicine: today’s technology allows transferring of 
high-quality video and audio data over extremely short delay 
times (latency).  
The main problem is with the devices. We split our 
investigation into two separate directions: devices for 
capturing real 3D and devices for 3D visualization. During 
the tests we ascertained the fact that the input of the 3D 
visualization device is the dominant characteristic for the 3D 
vision system.  
The first part of the tests was oriented to 3D capturing 
devices. We investigated 3 different technologies for 
capturing 3D content and its transfer to the output device 
(different 3D displays). The additional information for that 
can be found in [2]. 
The second part of tests was oriented to 3D displays. We 
investigated and analyzed the existing information about 
available computer displays from the described above three 
main groups: with active glasses, with passive glasses and 
glass-free displays. The evaluation procedure of the result 
was expert-based: we used physicians to evaluate the quality 
of the 3D display and the ability to use them for medical 
purposes.  
The next element for testing was the perception 
evaluation of 3D images by users with different eye 
problems: our investigation was oriented to evaluate the 
influence of the ability to generate stereoscopic content on 
the display with classical eyeglasses. We started this group 
of tests because self-tests hinted that: 
 
The length of the time for training eyes to perceive a 
3D content is different. 
 
There is a difference between understanding of the 
‘normal’ perception of a 3D content when the 
convergence is changed from low to high, and when 
the parallax is changed from positive to negative.  
We tested the following kind of users with eyeglasses: 
single lens (with low, middle and high diopters, with 
nearsightedness 
or 
farsightedness 
without 
or 
with 
astigmatism) or a progressive lens with middle value 
diopters. 
The results from our two groups of tests can be 
summarized as follows: 
 
The glass-free technologies are the future of 3D 
displays for telemedical applications:  
o 
If we need a simulation of a ‘tête-à-tête’ visit, 
this technology will be the only solution. 
o 
If we need to simulate a walk around an object 
or a group of objects this technology will be the 
only solution. 
o 
The influence of eyeglasses manifests itself in 
the extension of training time to start a 
‘normal’ perception of 3D content. 
 
If we want to use glasses-based 3D stereo displays 
the active glasses are more suitable for Telemedical 
application: 
o 
New technologies reduce flickers and crosstalk 
(example: the last generation of NVIDIA 3D 
Vision).  
o 
The ability to show up small details and/or 
objects many times, determines the quality of 
diagnosis. 
 
The passive 3D stereo technology can be applied in 
education, teleconference, VR and other kinds of 
simultaneous activities: the architecture of this type 
of systems will be similar to that in [3][4]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The 
movie 
“Star 
Wars” 
(1977) 
changed 
the 
understanding of computer graphics and animation. The 
industries that didvnot understand this lesson lost market 
positions dramatically.  
The movie “Avatar” (2009) changed the understanding 
of 3D video and audio realism. Today, many industries 
change their 2D-based tools and applications to 3D- and 4D-
based ones. This is the future and it is coming fast in our life. 
Telemedicine is part of this life and it is under pressure to 
shift its human interactions basis from 2D to 3D. 
In this papers, we did not discuss one of the most 
important questions – how to educate people to understand 
3D artificial images correctly. It is subject of other research 
work. 
Our world is computer-based. We need to understand 
computer limitations and we need to understand the future of 
computer technologies. Doctors want to be only doctors (not 
technicians) but computer technologies can increase doctors’ 
sensing. Researchers and industry need to create and 
implement 
new 
computer 
technologies 
for 
medical 
application that can increase the quality of the diagnoses and 
treatment. The presented here ideas, observations and results 
are part of this scientific and technological support. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is partially done under projects DO02-113 
and DRNF02-63 of Bulgarian NSF.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Dinevski, R. Kelc, and B. Dugonik, (2011). Video 
Communication 
in 
Telemedicine, 
in 
“Advances 
in 
Telemedicine: 
Technologies, 
Enabling 
Factors 
and 
Scenarios“, InTech, 2011, pp. 211-232 
[2] V. Gueorguiev, I.E. Ivanov, and D. Georgieva, (2013). New 
3D vision is the Future of Telemedicine, Med-e-Tel 2013, 
Luxembourg, April, 2013, pp. 420-423 
[3] D. Chotrov, S. Maleshkov, and A. Bachvarov. Augmented 
Reality Application for cooperative work based on visual 
markers. Reprints of the III-rd International Scientific 
Conference “e-GOVERNANCE”, Sozopol, 19-22 June, 2011, 
pp. 132-137. 
[4] S. Maleshkov and D. Chotrov. Affordable Virtual Reality 
System Architecture for Representation of Implicit Object 
Properties. International Journal of Computer Science Issues. 
Vol. 9, Issue 4, No 2, July 2012, pp. 23-29. 
[5] S. Tay, at al. (2008). An updatable holographic three-
dimensional display., Nature 451(7179): 694–698. URL: 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1038/nature06596, Sept. 2013 
[6] S. Reichelt, R. Häussler, N. Leister, G. Fütterer, H. Stolle,  
and A. Schwerdtner. (2010). Holographic 3-D Displays - 
Electro-holography within the Grasp of Commercialization, 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

chapter 29 in  "Advances in Lasers and Electro Optics", 
InTech , ISBN 978-953-307-088-9, 2010 
[7] J. Wattie,  (2005). STEREOSCOPIC VISION: Elementary 
Binocular Physiology, url: http://nzphoto.tripod.com/sterea/ 
3dvision.htm, [retrieved: Sept. 2013] 
[8] S. 
Baker, 
(2012). 
3D 
Display 
Technologies, 
url: 
http://www.tftcentral.co.uk/articles/content/3d_technologies.h
tm, [retrieved: Sept. 2013] 
[9] D. Woligroski, (2012). 3D Display Technology: Passive 
Polarized Vs. Active Shutter, tom’s HARDWARE, url:  
http://www.tomshardware.com/reviews/2311-gt-passive-3d-
review,3242-2.html, [retrieved: Sept. 2013] 
[10] www.nvidia.com ob ect 3d-vision-main.html , [retrieved: Oct. 
2013] 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

