 
 
The Implementation of Teledentistry for Pediatric Patients 
Rodrigo Mariño*, David Manton*, Parul Marwaha*, Kerrod Hallett†, Ken Clarke‡ 
Matthew Hopcraft§, Michael McCullough*, Ann Borda¥ 
*Oral Health CRC, Melbourne Dental School 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
rmarino@unimelb.edu.au, djmanton@unimelb.edu.au, pmarwaha@unimelb.edu.au, 
m.mccullough@unimelb.edu.au 
†Royal Children's Hospital Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
kerrod.hallett@rch.org.au 
‡Institute for a Broadband-Enabled Society 
University of Melbourne 
Melbourne, Australia 
clak@unimelb.edu.au 
§Australian Dental Council Ltd. 
Melbourne, Australia 
Matthew.Hopcraft@adc.org.au 
¥Health and Biomedical Informatics Centre 
University of Melbourne 
aborda@unimelb.edu.au 
Abstract—The present study tested a prototype teledentistry 
system in which regional Community Health Centers are linked 
to the Melbourne Dental School or the Royal Children’s 
Hospital 
in Melbourne 
(RCH). Three 
general 
dental 
practitioners (GDP) working in community dental clinics in the 
Australian state of Victoria were trained to manipulate an 
intraoral camera and to use existing ICT infrastructure to 
communicate with a dental specialist at RCH and transmit 
video images for remote assessment. Participants were 
recruited from the RCH’s patient database for cleft lip and 
palate (CL&P) and orthodontics, living in the selected rural 
locations. Patients/parents of patients participating in the study 
completed a questionnaire to assess their experiences with the 
program. Forty-two assessments/consultations were conducted; 
26 CL&P patients, and 16 in orthodontics. For most patients, 
the outcome of the consultation was the avoidance of trips to the 
centrally located RCH for initial assessment and/or follow-ups. 
This field trial provided initial evidence on how teledentistry 
might improve access to specialist care; identified broader 
community benefits for both the family and the services 
providers. From the RCH perspective, the potential reduction 
of inappropriate referrals with the concomitant reduction of 
waiting lists for specialist consultation, were important 
advantages of teledentistry. 
Keywords-oral health; teledentistry; intraoral camera; cleft lip 
and palate. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
In the last few decades, the implementation of 
teledentistry has been widely witnessed by various 
institutions and organizations concentrated mainly in the 
United States and Europe, but such trials also occur in many 
other parts of the world. A recent review of the teledentistry 
literature concluded that most reports referred to pilot 
projects, and the remainder concentrated on experimental 
stages and short-term outcomes, and were descriptive in 
nature. Despite these limitations, these trials prove that this 
technology can be successfully implemented in different 
health settings [1]. The positive outcomes and positive health 
professional-patient 
experiences 
described 
are 
very 
encouraging and clearly indicate that teledentistry works by 
delivering practical solutions [1] [2].  
Teledentistry is particularly well suited for children. 
Using teledentistry, children’s teeth were screened for early 
childhood caries, during which it was reported that all 
children liked seeing their teeth on the computer screen [3]. 
Dental imaging was seen as a game by them, rather than as a 
dental examination. Moreover, as no instruments are used 
and the camera head does not need to be inserted far into the 
child’s mouth to obtain dental images, there was less risk of 
uncooperative behavior by the very young child or toddler 
than that posed by a conventional dental examination. Child 
comfort is also increased when the teledentistry examination 
is conducted in a familiar environment, as opposed to a 
clinical environment. This resulted in children being more 
enthusiastic and co-operative during the imaging and 
recording procedures [3]. In addition, parents and children do 
not have to take time off work or school for travel, and a 
child can be tracked easily to determine whether treatment 
has been rendered, or if an emergency evaluation is needed. 
In the state of Victoria, Australia, general dental services 
are provided by the State to all school children and those 
adults from lower socioeconomic groups, with strict 
eligibility criteria and waiting times of up to 18 months [4]. 
Thus, to see a dentist specializing in pediatric dentistry, 
access in remote areas is limited, and often there is a long 
waiting list for both consultation and treatment, especially 
for specialist care.  
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
Teledentistry has advantages as a method of providing 
oral specialist services [5]. For example, there are clear 
advantages if patients could be examined by a dentist/dental 
therapist with links to a centralized pediatric dentistry 
specialist, who could provide support with diagnosis and 
treatment planning and prioritization via tele-consultation 
and the use of intraoral cameras. Rural community clinics 
and isolated dental practices are likely to benefit most from 
this approach. More patients could receive assessment and 
treatment, since patient care would be effectively triaged at 
the community level for future care in a specialist centre. For 
patients, it would reduce the cost of treatment and the need to 
travel to Melbourne to be seen by the specialist, because 
their problems were previously identified and planned via 
teledentistry. 
From a public health perspective (i.e., Royal Children’s 
Hospital), if this system is implemented, this screening 
would save considerable time and decrease waiting lists [6]. 
Specialists might conduct the teleconsultations from a 
computer in a dedicated room, this would mean that the time 
in the clinic could be used entirely to treat patients [7].  The 
result would be a more productive use of clinical time and 
resources. 
The present project builds on a University of Melbourne 
Institute for a Broadband Enhanced Society (IBES), Project 
Seed Grant, which tested the technology under laboratory 
conditions (proof of concept) and developed the instructional 
material for non-oral health professional operators [8]. The 
validity of the teledentistry approach was also investigated 
and there was no loss in quality compared to face-to-face 
examinations [8]. Thus, results demonstrate that the 
proposed teledentistry approach for oral health screening 
using an intraoral camera is feasible and reliable as an 
alternative to traditional oral health consultation.   
This paper is organized in six sections. The first Section 
provides the foundation for the need for teledentistry in this 
population. The second Section is concerned with the aims 
and objectives of the paper. Sections 3 describes the 
methodology used in this field trial of teledentistry.  Section 
4 describes the results of the trial, including interviews with 
personnel and responses from parents of the children 
involved in the program. Sections 5 and 6 discuss the results 
of the trial and conclude on its findings, respectively. Further 
steps are also discussed in last section. 
II. 
AIMS AND OBJECTIVES 
The specific objectives of this study were to: assess the 
feasibility of using teledentistry for pediatric teleconsultation 
in children and adolescents living in rural and remote areas 
of the Australian state of Victoria; and to assess the 
participants’ (patients and dental practitiners) views about 
the structure, content and delivery of the program.  
The working hypothesis of this study is that an initial 
assessment by a consultant, using teledentistry, would 
decrease the number of long-distance trips needed by 
patients located in remote areas to visit the RCH to see a 
specialist (i.e., orthodontist, pediatric dentist), thereby 
avoiding disruption and reducing costs. In addition, the use 
of teleconsultation as a method of screening patients would 
help to categorise treatment priority avoiding the need for 
unnecessary referrals and for the patient to travel to an often 
distant centre for additional assessment.  
Additionally, as there is some tension between the 
increased need for oral health care and a financial climate 
which limits the oral health budget, the study included an 
evaluation of whether this innovative oral health care 
program could be implemented under current financial 
arrangements. 
The plan was 
to 
conduct 
remote 
assessments/ 
consultations in three specific specialist service areas: 
1) Cleft lip and palate (CL&P). Support for the timely 
management of CL&P conditions, which have 
involvement of pediatric dentistry as part of the 
multidisciplinary team. 
2) Dental trauma.  Support for the management of oro-
facial trauma in rural or remote Community Health 
Centers, and isolated practices. Patients who present 
with a trauma can be imaged by trained personnel, a 
pediatric dental consultant views the case from a 
remote place and a rapid response is obtained [9]. 
3) Orthodontics. Malocclusions remain untreated due to 
lack of (or restricted access to services) (barriers 
include financial, geographic, access to specialist).   
It was considered that this assessment would provide 
initial understanding of the implementation challenges and 
associated issues to aid decision making in expanding those 
services to other underserved populations and locations. 
III. 
METHODS 
Three community dental health clinics in rural areas of 
Victoria were recruited to participate in this project. These 
clinics were located in Rosebud, Shepparton and Geelong, 
and worked in partnership with the University of 
Melbourne’s Melbourne Dental School and the Royal 
Children’s Hospital of Melbourne, which acted as the central 
site.  
Training was provided for the staff involved in the 
project and an instruction was manual prepared to assist with 
use of the intraoral camera. Three general dental 
practitioners (GDPs) working in community health centers at 
each of the three remote locations manipulated an intraoral 
camera. 
They 
used 
existing 
ICT 
infrastructure 
to 
communicate with the dental specialist at the Royal 
Children’s Hospital of Melbourne (RCH) and uploaded and 
distributed the images to the pediatric dentist at the RCH for 
remote assessment. 
For the purposes of this trial, assessment of fifty patients 
was considered to be adequate to meet the specific objectives 
of this study. The study included children that would 
generate payment for general consultation and for specialist 
consultation. Thus, participants were recruited from the 
RCH’s cleft lip and palate (CL&P) and orthodontics patient 
database who also lived in the selected locations.  
Patients were introduced to the study by the local GDP. 
When the patients, or their primary carers, expressed interest 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
in participating, each received a Plain Language Statement 
describing the study and a Consent Form. Once informed 
consent was obtained, patients underwent an oral health 
assessment. Patients/parents of patients participating in the 
study completed a questionnaire to assess their experiences 
with the various aspects of the program. This included 
satisfaction, acceptance and practical issues of the 
teledentistry approach and participants were also invited to 
discuss any concerns associated with the project.  
In the present study, a teledentistry installation was 
organized using a SOPROLIFE® [10] intra-oral camera 
(Acteon, France) to capture video and transmit both audio 
and videos in a high definition software platform (i.e., 
GoToMeeting®) over the Internet. Additionally, each GDP 
was sent a web camera (Logitech) to connect to his/her 
computer. Mpeg4 audio was also transmitted at 128kbit/s 
along with the images via the use of Clear One Chat 50 
model microphone/speaker units also connected via USB 
cables. This allowed excellent quality audio communications 
between the patient and clinician nodes. The RCH has an 
excellent review system available for teleconsultation as a 
two-way interactive consultation [11], however, it had been 
rarely used for dentistry prior to the present study.  
Rather than arranging video conferencing in an ad-hoc 
basis, it was thought to be more effective if the consultant 
would be available during a set time each week. 
Teleconsultations were organized once a week on Fridays 
afternoon. 
The trained GDP obtained the reason for the consultation, 
manipulated the intraoral camera and recorded findings for 
each participant. The remote pediatric dentistry/orthodontic 
consultant, in collaboration with the local GDP, recorded 
findings for each participant. An off-site pediatric dentistry 
consultant and orthodontist located at the RCH, performed 
the ‘virtual dental assessments’ and was available to discuss 
the case with the GPD in real-time teleconferences. 
Treatments needs were determined by the specialist and the 
specialist also evaluated whether a referral to the RCH was 
required. 
The remote examiner assessed the patient’s needs and 
provided advice and follow-up to the GDP on how to 
manage the condition either locally or by referral for 
specialist care (e.g., orthodontics, pediatric dentistry) as 
required. They could also organize a specialist consultant at 
the RCH or Royal Dental Hospital of Melbourne. 
Additionally, the remote examiner provided advice to the 
health staff at the local Community Health Centre, or to the 
parents of the child. 
Data collection extended between August and December 
2013. At the end of the cycle GDPs who collected the 
information were sent a summary evaluation form in which 
they reflected on their acceptance of the practice, and their 
experience as a whole. The utility of the instructional 
training kit and any other issues associated with the project 
were also assessed. The evaluation form consisted of 
statements that participants rated on a five 5-points likert 
scale, depicting their level of agreement with the statement 
(1 ’Strongly agree’; 3 ‘Neutral’; 5 ‘Strongly agree’). The 
summary evaluation also contained four open-questions, so 
participants could include their thoughts about their 
experience and critiques. 
Because of the small sample size, the analysis will only 
include basic descriptive information on the distribution of 
selected socio-demographic and outcome variables, and 
parents’ views about the format, content and delivery of the 
teledentistry program. In some cases, categorical and ordinal 
data were analyzed utilizing Chi square analysis () to 
compare results between different oral conditions and 
distribution of socio-demographic and outcome variables. To 
complement this quantitative description and to obtain a 
better understanding of the usefulness of this approach, from 
the perspectives of the users (i.e., parents), a qualitative 
process evaluation was organized to offer new insights. 
Ethical approval to conduct this study was sought and 
obtained from the University of Melbourne. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Three general dental practitioners were recruited for this 
project. Recruitment of patients took longer than expected as 
many did not want to participate.  The most common answer 
was that they would come to Melbourne anyway.  At the end 
of 
data 
collection, 
the 
three 
GDPs 
conducted 
assessments/consultations in two specific specialist service 
areas; 26 CL&P patients, and 16 in orthodontics. 
Additionally, one patient presented with Cohen’s syndrome. 
Trauma could not be assessed because no case with oro-
facial trauma presented during the period of data collection. 
The analysis that follows does not include the patient with 
Cohen’s syndrome.  
Seventeen examinations were conducted in Shepparton, 
thirteen in Geelong and another twelve in Rosebud. Mean 
age was 8.6 (4.2) years (See Table I) with significant 
difference in mean age by oral condition (p<0.01) and by 
location (p<0.05). CL&P were younger than orthodontics 
patients (7.2 vs. 10.9 years, respectively). By location, 
participants from Geelong were younger than those from the 
other two locations (6.1 vs. 9.3 and 10.3 years). Ages ranged 
from 1 year and 11 months to 18 years of age. The largest 
group of participants (41.9%) was between 4 and 8 years of 
age. The majority of participants (60.1%) were males, with 
no significant differences by location or oral condition.  
For most participants, the outcome of the consultation 
was the avoidance of trips to the centrally located RCH, for 
initial assessment and/or follow-ups.  For 7.3% of the cases, 
the follow-up consultation would occur in the three months 
following the teleconsultation. In about half of the 
teleconsultations (48.8%), the advice from the consultant 
was the need for a follow-up visit, which would occur within 
6 to 12 months. Another 7.3%, were advised to arrange an 
appointment at the Dental Department of RCH. For 17.1%, 
the consultant requested additional information (e.g., 
radiographs), or the type of general dental treatment that 
would be required (e.g., restorations, extractions, oral 
hygiene instructions, etc.) and were referred to their local 
clinic. For the remaining 20% (n = 8), the patient was not 
eligible for treatment at public clinics, and in those cases 
advice was provided on alternative treatment avenues for 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
initial evaluation (e.g., the Royal Dental Hospital of 
Melbourne or local specialists). This proportion would 
represent inappropriate referrals to the RCH. Inappropriate 
referrals represented 44% of the orthodontics consultations. 
TABLE I.  
PARTICIPANTS CHARACTERISTICS AND OUTCOME OF THE 
TELECONSULTATION BY ORAL HEALTH CONDITION 
 
Oral condition 
Cleft lip  
and palate 
Orthodontics 
Total 
Age (mean and s.d.) 
7.2 (4.3) 
10.9 (2.6) 
8.6 (4.2) 
Sex 
Male 
Female 
n (%) 
18 (69.2) 
8 (30.8) 
    n (%) 
8 (50.0) 
8 (50.0) 
  n (%) 
26 (61.9) 
16 (38.1) 
Location 
Shepparton 
Geelong 
Rosebud 
 
10 (38.5) 
13 (50.0) 
3 (11.5) 
 
7 (43.8) 
- (0.0) 
9 (56.2) 
 
17 (40.5) 
13 (31.0) 
12 (28.5) 
Outcome 
Review next 3 months 
Review at 6 months 
Review at 12 months 
Referral to CL&P/Ortho/RCHb 
Referral local clinic 
Referral other 
a 
3 (12.0) 
10 (40.0) 
8 (32.0) 
3 (12.0) 
- (0.0) 
1 (4.0) 
 
- (0.0) 
- (0.0) 
2 (12.5) 
4 (25.0) 
3 (18.8) 
7 (43.7) 
 
3 (7.3) 
10 (24.4) 
10 (24.4) 
7 (17.1) 
3 (7.3) 
8 (19.5) 
Total 
26 
16 
42 
a. 
Figures do  not add due to missing values 
b. 
Cleft lip and palate and orthodontic clinics at the Royal Children’s Hospital of 
Melbourne  
When parents were asked about their level of satisfaction 
with remote dental assessment, amongst those parents who 
answered the question (n=33), the majority was either 
strongly satisfied (82%) or slightly satisfied (12.0%). 
Another 5% of parents were neutral about the remote 
assessment (See Table II).  Parents described the service 
provided in these ways: 
“I believe this is a valuable service for rural 
communities” (Rosebud-2). 
“They did give us instructions on hygiene and 
checked up on our upcoming appointment at the 
RCH”.  …“This was our first experience and we 
were very impressed” (Shepparton-5). 
The majority of parents (75.6%) commented that the 
most valuable element of the remote dental assessment was 
the avoidance of travel to the city to visit a dental specialist 
which caused disruption to family routines, and was often 
difficult and expensive to organize. Parents commented: 
“Not needing to take the day off to drive to 
Melbourne 
for 
five 
minutes 
appointment” 
(Shepparton-9). 
“… the advantage of not having to travel to 
Melbourne 
is 
great, 
plus 
money 
saving” 
(Shepparton-2). 
Parents considered the teleassessment as appropriate and 
would ‘strongly recommend’ or ‘recommend’ the practice to 
other people (97%). One parent (3%) slightly would not 
recommend remote examinations to other parents.  No 
reason was given for that opinion. 
The majority of parents (90%) found it very easy/easy to 
understand the instructions received from the remote 
examiner. One parent indicated: “Amazing that they can 
consult this way” (Rosebud-8).  On the other hand, four 
parents (10%) were neutral about understanding of 
instructions received from the remote examiner. 
TABLE II.  
PARENTS’ RESPONSES TO TELEDENTAL ASSESSMENT 
QUESTIONNAIRE (%) 
1. How satisfied were you with the remote dental examination? a 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
82.0 
13.0 
5.0 
- 
- 
2. If remote examinations were available for patients, would you 
recommend them to other people? 
Strongly 
recommend 
Slightly 
recommend 
Neutral 
Slightly not 
recommend 
Strongly not 
recommend 
86.0 
11.0 
- 
3.0 
- 
3. Were instructions from the examiner in the remote examination 
clear and easy to understand? 
Very easy 
Slightly 
easy 
Neutral 
Slightly 
difficult 
Very 
difficult 
69.0 
21.0 
10.0 
- 
- 
4. How satisfied were you with the review of your dental needs by the 
remote dentist? 
Strongly 
satisfied 
Slightly 
satisfied 
Neutral 
Slightly 
dissatisfied 
Strongly 
dissatisfied 
74.0 
21.0 
5.0 
- 
- 
5. How appropriate was the format of the remote dental examinations? 
Very 
appropriate 
Slightly 
appropriate 
Neutral 
Slightly 
inappropriate 
Strongly 
inappropriate 
74.0 
20.0 
3.0 
3.0 
- 
a. 
N= 39 
When parents were asked about how satisfied they were 
with the review of oral health needs, the majority was either 
strongly satisfied (74%) or slightly satisfied (21%), two 
CL&P’s parents (5%) were neutral. 
The majority considered the format of the remote dental 
examination to be either very appropriate (74%) or slightly 
appropriate (20%). On the other hand, one parent (3%) was 
neutral about its format and another (3%) considered remote 
dental examination to be slightly inappropriate. No reason 
was provided for that view, but they were a child with 
CL&P’s parents. 
No statistically significant differences were present in the 
parents’ evaluations by oral conditions.  The exception was 
the level of satisfaction with the review, where CL&P 
parents tended to be more “Strongly satisfied” than 
orthodontics case’s parents (84% vs. 57%, respectively; 
p<0.05). 
The GDPs recruited were able to operate the camera, 
conduct intraoral examinations and transmit the information 
accurately. They provided feedback on the training material 
presented 
(i.e., 
a 
hard-copy, 
on-line 
manual 
and 
demonstrations). There was general agreement that the 
material presented was clear and relevant to the purposes of 
this project and that the information provided in the manual 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
and in the training was helpful in providing the necessary 
step-by-step information to conduct the oral examination, 
operate the camera, send the information, etc. However, 
they were neutral regarding the length of the material.  
GDPs considered that the manual provided less relevant and 
sometimes 
unnecessary 
information 
to 
oral 
health 
professionals, (e.g., dental anatomy).  
On the question about the training received, the GDPs 
indicated that they may need more practice before starting 
examinations outside the study. One GDP commented about 
the need of more practice time to manipulate the intraoral 
camera, in particular, to get good images of the maxillary 
arch.  
When asked about the relevance of the teledentistry 
model in their workplace, they indicated that the technology 
could be expanded to other areas in dentistry, for example 
dental trauma, dental emergencies, and the provision of 
treatment to those who cannot travel.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The main aim of the present study was to address key 
priorities (i.e., “Children and Adolescents”, “Improving 
services to rural communities” and “Potential benefits of 
technological innovations in dentistry”) established by 
Australia's National Oral Health Plan 2004-2013 [12]. The 
study targeted children and adolescents living in regional and 
remote locations, and proposed the use of teledentistry to 
provide an additional step in closing the gaps in the provision 
of sustainable oral health care services to underserved areas 
of the country (e.g., rural areas). Rural and regional Australia 
has major access to oral health workforce shortages, in 
particular oral health specialists (e.g., oral medicine, 
pediatric dentistry, maxillo-facial surgery).  
The major outcome of the present study was the 
successful trial of an alternative model for pediatric oral 
health service provision in remote and underserved areas via 
a teledental diagnosis and teleconsultation model. The trial 
provided general and specialist oral health care support to 
local facilities to assist in regular and timely oral health 
checks using a GDP in the first instance, and subsequent 
specialist dental services when the required treatment was 
identified. In so doing, the trial showed that pediatric 
teledentistry is a viable solution, in terms of time, stress, and 
money saved for parents and children who were able to 
avoid travel to the city for consultation. Furthermore, the 
concept of teleconsultation was well received by parents and 
patients and by the GDPs.  However, this support must be 
evaluated with caution in view of the sample size. 
Teledentistry can be a highly effective method for 
enhancing early diagnosis and referral for patients who 
otherwise might not receive timely care.  Additionally, 
today's high resolution and reliable digital and online 
technology makes it possible to be connected for distant oral 
health promotion, education, and assessment, transcending 
social and geographic barriers. 
Findings would indicate that this is a valid, efficient and 
time saving method for clinical screening. This teledentistry 
study via teleconsultation was successfully in improving 
accurate diagnosis and appropriate referrals. It was also 
extremely valuable in providing feedback to patients, for 
example, about the need to bring radiographies or about the 
eligibility of services.   
More specifically, in this project, there were reductions in 
costs to patients. This reduction of costs on the 
patients/parents side was achieved without increasing costs 
to the oral health provider. In this telehealth project, both the 
community health centres and the RCH, charged the services 
provided 
within 
current 
financial 
arrangements.  
Nonetheless, despite these arrangements, GDPs, and to a 
lesser degree the specialists, put a significant amounts of in-
kind time to self-train and setting up the teledentistry 
installation.  However, these must be considered as research 
driven costs. 
While acceptability and cost saving of the study, from the 
patient perspective, was established, a societal perspective 
should be the preferred one.  From a public health 
perspective, the evaluation of the success of the proposed 
model of care and its sustainability will be dependent on the 
ability to clearly demonstrate service and economic benefits 
from the services provider’s perspective.  Supportive 
business cases, to a large extent, have not been captured by 
earlier telehealth projects.  
The Australian government established funds to provide 
financial incentives for health teleconsultation with a 
specialist, 
consultant 
physician, 
etc. 
to 
provide 
teleconsultation to a range of health professionals (i.e., 
medical 
practitioners, 
nurse 
practitioners, 
midwives, 
psychiatrists, and Aboriginal health workers), but that did not 
include the provision of financial incentives for oral health 
services or teleconsultations.  This incentive ceased on the 30 
of June 2014 [13]. 
Results have been presented in a simple and descriptive 
fashion 
and 
therefore 
some 
limitations 
should 
be 
acknowledged when interpreting these findings. Firstly, as 
with any voluntary study, there is the possibility of a bias in 
self-reporting of information. Secondly, with respect to 
sampling, the sample was small in terms of numbers of 
respondents and not all CL&P or Orthodontics patients 
registered with the RCH or local community health centers 
participated in the study. The questionnaire data lacked, in 
some instances, the necessary depth for a detailed analysis of 
the overall clinical experience and its context.  
Despite these limitations, this field trail provided initial 
evidence of how teledentistry might improve access to and 
efficiency of specialist care in various ways; it showed a 
pathway to improvements in the quality of access and 
provision of oral health care; it identified potential broader 
community benefits such as the level of convenience for both 
the family and the dental specialist; and it provided evidence 
of the generally excellent levels of acceptance of the virtual 
examination 
by 
patients, 
parents, 
and 
oral 
health 
professionals. In the example of teledentistry presented in 
this paper, oral health screenings were performed by GDPs 
at distant sites, thus reducing the need for patients and 
dentists (or dental specialists) to travel to health care 
facilities, particularly 
those located in rural areas. 
Participants were practically unanimous in their satisfaction 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
with, and appreciation of, the various benefits of the 
teledentistry services delivered to them. 
From the RCH perspective, the potential reduction of 
inappropriate referrals with the concomitant reduction of 
waiting lists for specialist consultation, are important 
advantages of teledentistry, which are clinically important 
and also have budgetary implications. 
Nonetheless, a significant shortcoming of the current oral 
health system is its failure to take advantage of innovations 
in health promotion and e-technologies. This failure is also 
impacted by the paucity of research information informing 
oral health practices and identifying innovative ways to use 
e-health and m-health to make preventive and care 
intervention programs more accessible, particularly for those 
living in rural Australia. Findings from this study also add 
valuable information to the discussion about the value and 
feasibility of this technology, particularly where unmet needs 
for dental services among children and young people are 
high and accessibility is low. It is suggested that teledentistry 
can make a valuable contribution to the delivery of dental 
care in both the private and public dental settings.  
The project could easily be extended as an integrated part 
of the general adoption of telemedicine/ telediagnosis. 
Further research will be required to undertake economic and 
clinical outcome modeling to determine if the teledentistry 
approach is cost-effective and leads to a similar or better 
level of care being provided in comparison to the traditional 
model of oral health assessment. This will lead to more 
advanced stages of teledentistry implementation, including 
larger samples, multi-State community-based trials of longer 
duration of the technology, which will lead to sustained 
outcomes.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Findings suggest that teledentistry may be an important 
public health measure to improve access to oral health 
specialist services for populations where referral to 
specialists is not possible or feasible.  Real-time 
consultation with oral specialists could provide a new 
avenue for socially disadvantaged children (Poor, rural, 
immigrants) to receive these services. At present, these 
malocclusions remain untreated resulting in oral health 
inequalities. 
An important challenge for future trials would be to 
ensure that tele-oral health models and programs are 
maintained in a community for a length of time that is 
sufficient to achieve the stated goals. These trials would 
necessarily have a highly collaborative, partnership 
approach, with a strong academic base in rural health issues 
to ensure that the results of the present study can be further 
developed and implemented.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project was funded by a grant from Google/Institute 
for a Broadband-Enabled Society, The University of 
Melbourne. We would also like to acknowledge the 
pediatric dental consultants, the general dental practitioners 
and the parents and patients involved in this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Mariño, and A. Ghanim, “Teledentistry: a systematic 
review of the literature.” J Telemed Telecare. 2013;19:189-
194. 
[2] S. W. Chang, et al., “Teledentistry in rural California: a USC 
initiative. J Calif Dent Assoc 2003;31:601-608. 
[3] D. T. Kopycka-Kedzierawski, R. J. Billings, and K. M. 
McConnochie, “Dental screening of preschool children using 
teledentistry: a feasibility study.” Pediatr Dent 2007;29:209-
213. 
[4] Dental 
Health 
Services 
Victoria. 
Average 
waiting 
times.(https://www.dhsv.org.au/patients-and-public/waiting-
lists. [retrived: June, 2014]. 
[5] N.A. Mandall, K.D. O'Brien, J. Brady, H.V. Worthington, and 
L. Harvey, “Teledentistry for screening new patient 
orthodontic referrals. Part 1: A randomised controlled trial.” 
Br Dent J 2005;199:659-662. 
[6] J. Cook, C. Mullings, R.Vowles, R. Ireland, and C. Stephens, 
“Online orthodontic advice: a protocol for a pilot teledentistry 
system.” J Telemed Telecare 2001;7:324-333. 
[7] E.D. Bednar et al., “Application of distance learning to 
interactive 
seminar 
instruction 
in orthodontic residency 
programs.” Am J Orthod Dentofacial Orthop. 2007;132:586-
594. 
[8] R. Mariño, et al., ‘A teledentistry approach for oral health 
screening 
in 
nursing 
homes.’ 
Available 
at: 
http://www.slideshare.net/ifa2012/3-mariooral-health-if-
apresentation29may2012. [retrived: June, 2014]. 
[9] D. T. Kopycka-Kedzierawski, and R.J. Billings. Teledentistry 
in inner-city child-care centres. J Telemed Telecare 
2006;12:176-181. 
[10] SOPROLIFE: 
Light 
Induced 
Fluorescence 
Evaluator. 
http://www.soprolife.com. [retrived: June, 2014]. 
[11] S. Jury, A. M. Walker, and A. J. Kornberg, “The introduction 
of web-based video-consultation in a paediatric acute care 
setting.” J Telemed Telecare 2013;19: 383–387 
[12] Australian Health Ministers’ Advisory Council, Healthy 
mouths healthy lives. Australia’s National Oral Health Plan 
2004-2013. South Australian Department of Health, 2004. 
[13] Depatment 
of 
Human 
Services. 
Telehealth. 
http://www.medicareaustralia.gov.au/provider/incentives/tele
health/ [retrived: June, 2014]. 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

