 
A Finger Movement Evaluation Device to Monitor the Use of Paretic Hand During 
Daily Life Activities 
 
Bilal Debs, Eliane Mousallem, Ali Hage-Diab, 
Mohamad Hajj-Hassan, Hassan Khachfe, Soha Saleh 
Department of Biomedical Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
{30710021; 11031893}@students.liu.edu.lb; {ali.hagediab; 
mohamad.hajjhassan; hassan.khachfe; soha.saleh}@liu.edu.lb 
Nour El-Hoda Saleh, Ahmad Rifaii Sarraj 
Department of Physical Therapy 
Lebanese University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
nour_40@hotmail.co.uk; ahmadrifai@optl.org 
 
Houssam Yassine  
Sciences et Techniques des Activites Physiques et Sportives (STAPS) 
Claude-Bernard University Lyon 1  
Lyon, France 
houssam_yassine@hotmail.com 
 
Abstract— Hand movement tracking devices are important 
to monitor impaired hand function during daily activities. 
The study presented in this paper investigates the feasibility 
of using a hand glove device to monitor the use of paretic 
hand in daily life. A Finger Movement Evaluation Device 
(FMED) was developed for this purpose and it was tested on 
six stroke subjects who used it for two days. FMED records 
the flexion angle of two metacarpophalangeal (MCP) joints 
(for 
example, 
index 
and 
middle 
MCP 
joints). 
A 
questionnaire was used to evaluate subjects’ acceptance of 
FMED. Data collected by FMED were analyzed to calculate 
the ratio of finger movement episodes during the day and 
amount of movement as a sum of individual movement 
episodes. Results showed a high satisfaction of patients and 
the ability to acquire quantitative information about the 
quality of movement while using the device; these results 
concluded that FMED is a promising tool to monitor the use 
of impaired hand in real life whether as a regular routine 
test or as part of a home based therapy set up.  
Keywords- hand glove devices; movement impairmemt; 
stroke 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Stroke is the major cause of neurological disability all 
over the world [1]. However, upper extremity (UE) motor 
impairment, specifically hand paresis, is the most disabling 
and persisting residual impairment after this event [2], and 
it is evident that it limits basic activities of daily living [3]. 
For this reason, the role of stroke rehabilitation is to 
promote the independence in daily life activities [4]. 
Moreover, the use of outcome measures (OMs) in 
neurological physical therapy is essential to evaluate the 
improvement of function during rehabilitation [5]. So, an 
essential issue in the assessment after stroke is to 
determine how much the impairment of upper extremity is 
the source of loss of function, and if the selected 
rehabilitation intervention improves the activities of daily 
life of stroke survivors. 
Numerous standardized clinical measures are available 
for clinicians to evaluate UE function after stroke. Yet, 
these measures are rarely used in clinical practice because 
of time constraints, high level of difficulty, lack of 
equipment, and lack of knowledge regarding OMs [6]. 
Besides, most of these measures do not collect information 
about the use of UE in the Activities of Daily Living 
(ADLs) and they do not provide clinicians with 
quantitative and objective information about patients' use 
of impaired limb during the day [7]; thus, they do not 
reflect how the patients interact in their daily life and their 
real world [8]. The use of assessment tools at home and 
community is essential to evaluate the UE function during 
daily activities in order to improve therapeutic intervention 
and avoid having patients stop using the impaired limb due 
to pain or absence of confidence and eventually losing the 
ability to use it due to the learned non-use phenomena [9].  
Wearable measurement devices and home monitoring 
devices provide clinicians with additional assessment 
opportunities like collecting hand posture and movement 
data as individuals perform daily activities outside the 
clinic [10]. Despite their importance in measuring fingers' 
range of motion during dynamic tasks [11], different 
limitations exist; they are expensive, heavy and 
uncomfortable to be worn in daily life outside the clinic 
[12, 13] , and do not provide long term monitoring [12]. 
Preliminary research in the area of hand glove devices 
has focused primarily on testing protocols that evaluated 
glove devices characteristics [10-12, 14-17] and none of 
them has explored the use of these devices to monitor the 
impaired UE function during daily life. 
This article describes the design of a low cost device 
for the assessment of finger’s movement during daily 
activities. Section II describes the device design and 
implementation, Section III describes the feasibility study 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

methodology. Sections IV elaborates on the results and 
discussion, followed by conclusion in Section V. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Finger Movement Evaluation Device (FMED) 
The Finger Movement Evaluation Device (FMED) was 
designed to act as an offline electronic goniometer that 
measures finger flexion angle of 2 joints simultaneously. It 
includes two bending sensors (SpectraSymbol®, UT, 
USA) that can be placed on two fingers' MCP joints (for 
example index and middle fingers) at a time using 
VelcroTM. Only 2 joints are tracked in order to reduce the 
cost of the device letting the user focus on two fingers at a 
time with the flexibility in choosing which joints to track.  
Figure 1 illustrates the main parts of the device. A 
voltage regulator circuit was implemented to down 
regulate the power from a 12V (6500 mAh) rechargeable 
battery to 5V. A dc-dc converter was implemented before 
the voltage regulator to convert 12V to 7V in order to 
avoid too much heat dissipation in case of using the 
voltage regulator to down-regulate from 12 to 5V. A 
charged battery (12V, 6500 mAh) can power the device 
for more than 48 hours.  
The microcontroller (ATmega2560) reads input from 
the bending sensors through a voltage divider signal 
conditioning circuit. This is a low-power complementary 
metal–oxide–semiconductor 
(CMOS) 
8-bit 
microcontroller that supports a real Read-While-Write 
Programming mechanism. The microcontroller processes 
the data, and saves the values of each joint on an SD card 
in real time. The raw data are saved on the SD (Secured 
Digital) card in addition to the fractionation angle 
(difference in angle between the two joints). This device 
also gives patients a real-time feedback of their movement 
using a set of light emitting diodes (LEDs) indicating the 
level of fingers movement flexion with increments of 10º 
(10º, 20º, 30º, 40º, 50º, 60º, 70º,  80º, 90º) and 
fractionation with increments of 5º (5º, 10º, 15º, 20º, 25º). 
The main electronics of the device was chosen to be 
surface mounted in order to reduce the size and weight of 
the device.  FMED weighs 1.3 kg with battery. Figure 2 
shows FMED worn by a volunteer. 
B. Collected Data 
As mentioned in the last section, the device saves the 
values of the variation of angles for sensors 1 and 2 (for 
example, index and middle finger flexion angles) and the 
individuation (difference between angles recorded by 
sensor 1 and sensor 2) versus time. A customized Matlab® 
algorithm was written to process these data. The first 
processing step was to calculate differences between 
adjacent elements of the dataset in order to detect 
movement episodes (change in flexion and individual 
angles). A threshold of 2º was used to count the episodes 
of movement (flexion angle exceeding a 2º predefined 
threshold). The ration of counted samples over whole 
dataset provided the Ratio of Movement (RaOM) values of 
each finger.  
The other parameter that was calculated is related to 
the mean of difference in the angle between the two 
fingers (individual finger movement). Episodes or 
consecutive samples where there was a difference in 
flexion between index and middle fingers were reported. 
These episodes were counted to derive the Integral of 
Individuated Movement (IIM) episodes value. This value 
indicates how much the subject was moving the index 
finger independent of the middle finger and vice versa.  
IIM reflects how much the patient is capable of controlling 
one finger independent of the other during executing a 
functional task. The parameters (RaOM and IIM) 
calculated based on the recorded data were used as the 
main outcomes of FMED to effectively quantify the 
amount of movement during the day.  
III. 
FEASIBILITY STUDY 
A. Recruitment 
Subjects with stroke were recruited from multiple 
rehabilitation centers in Beirut, Lebanon. Six individuals, 
with a clinical diagnosis of stroke in the chronic phase (3 
males and 3 females, mean age 49.33±8.1, > 6 months 
post-stroke) participated in the study. 
Subjects were included because they had residual 
upper extremity impairments (Upper extremity Fugl-
Meyer [FM] scores, with a range of (45-56)/66; and with 
mean flexion fingers ROM ± 1 standard deviation: 73.3 ± 
7.4 degrees). 
Inclusion criteria was chosen to give a nearly 
homogenous group of subjects between 40-60 years, with 
similar representation of both sexes, and approximately 
same degree of hand function deficit. The participants 
signed informed consents approved by the Lebanese 
University, school of health ethical review board. 
B. Feasibility Testing Protocol 
The first step in the procedure was to meet the subjects 
to inform them about the study, the device, and train them 
to use it at home. Patients wore the glove at home for two 
days. In the first day, they were requested to wear the 
glove in the impaired hand and use it like they usually do 
 
Figure 1: Main components of FMED 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

during daily activities, and remove it before sleeping. In 
the second day morning, they received a call from the 
study personnel and they were asked to wear the glove and 
to do specific activities by their impaired hand during the 
day in addition to their daily routine. The research team 
did not supervise the patient at home; however, the device 
recorded the data of movement of the patient on the SD 
card.  The following day, FMED was collected from 
subjects, 
each 
subject 
filled 
the 
user 
feedback 
questionnaire, and the data saved on the SD card were 
collected for offline analysis. 
Acceptance of the device and patient’s feedback was 
evaluated based on a user feedback questionnaire [12], and 
an open-ended discussion, performed after using the 
device for two days. The participants were supposed to 
answer a list of 11 question by a scale of 1 to 7. 1 means 
strongly disagree and 7 means strongly agree, and 4 means 
neutral. The study personnel were mainly interested to 
know if the device was comfortable or not, and if it was 
effective in engaging the subjects in doing more home 
daily activities. The recorded data were inspected for 
quality, and movement quality parameters (RaOM and 
IIM) were calculated in order to inspect if these parameters 
change in the second day after the study personnel has 
asked the participants to do extra exercising.  
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
The following section presents the results of the user 
feedback questionnaire and the recorded data. Table I lists 
the questionnaire questions and the mean of responses on 
each question and the results of the t-test performed 
between the mean of responses of each question   and a 
hypothesized mean of 4 [neutral score]. Results show a 
significant difference from the neutral score (p<0.001). In 
the open ended discussion, subjects expressed high 
satisfaction and reported that the visual feedback by the 
LEDs was engaging and motivating to move the impaired 
hand more than usual. They also expressed their 
willingness to use FMED at home for a therapeutic 
intervention because of being passionate to intensify their 
hand use during daily activities.  
 
Figure 3:RaOM results for both fingers in days 1 and 2. 
 
 
Figure 2: Prototype of FMED worn by a volunteer. 
TABLE I. USER FEEDBACK QUESTIONNAIRE RESULTS 
Question 
Average 
SD 
t-value 
p-value 
I felt comfortable as the glove was put on 
6.33 
0.82 
7.0 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
< 0.001 
I did not feel like my fingers were put into any uncomfortable position as the glove was put on 
6.33 
1.21 
4.7 
I felt any restriction to movement with this glove is similar to other gloves I have worn 
6.67 
0.52 
12.6 
I would feel comfortable wearing this glove in public 
6.67 
0.52 
12.6 
I felt comfortable performing the activities in this study 
6.50 
0.84 
7.3 
I feel I can do most of my daily activities (except those involving water) while wearing this glove 
6.67 
0.52 
12.6 
The glove did not feel too tight (it did not make my hands or fingers tingle) 
6.83 
0.41 
17.0 
I feel like I can bend my fingers just like I can without wearing the glove 
6.83 
0.41 
17.0 
The glove did not feel too hot or too cold 
6.50 
1.22 
5.0 
I did not feel like my fingers were put into any uncomfortable position as the glove was removed 
6.33 
1.03 
5.5 
I felt comfortable as the glove was removed 
6.33 
0.82 
7.0 
Average 
6.55 
0.20 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
It should be noted here that the activity initially 
reported on day 1 might not faithfully reflect the regular 
activity of the participants without using the device; while 
wearing FMED subjects might be moving more than they 
usually do knowing that they are being watched. This is 
known as the Howethorne effect [18]. However, the 
participants are stroke survivors and they have movement 
impairments. Thus, the Howethorne effect will not 
increase the movement score beyond subject's true 
functional capability although it might increase the amount 
of his or her movement in comparison to regular days. 
This brings us back to another argument which says that it 
is helpful if these individuals with movement impairments 
felt they are watched so they move more according to their 
functional capability. In addition, being watched and by 
getting positive visual feedback of their movement (like 
the feedback by the LEDs in FMED), they will get better 
engaged in daily life functional activities, more than they 
averagely do. This is believed to be helpful in avoiding the 
learned non-use phenomena in stroke survivors where the 
less they use their impaired limb the harder it gets for them 
to recover their motor skills due to brain remodeling over 
time[9].   
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
FMED allows clinicians to evaluate the improvement 
of hand function in the context of home environment. It 
can be a useful tool to complement the role of standardized 
outcome measures by assessing the hand use in real life so 
that clinicians are not limited to the clinical setting. The 
high rate of acceptance of FMED by the participants in 
this study and high enthusiasm of patients to using it for 
therapy, especially due to the presence of visual feedback 
suggests the need to test the usability of FMED in a home-
based rehabilitation therapy intervention especially that it 
can be produced with a very low cost (~$100). Low cost, 
user friendly, and low weight, are the main advantages of 
FMED in comparison to other hand motion tracking 
gloves that are available in the market in addition to the 
presence of visual feedback setup which allows FMED to 
be useful as a therapeutic tool not just as movement 
recording device. In the future, additional testing will be 
done to evaluate FMED as a tool to evaluate the use of 
impaired hand during home-based therapy. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We would like to thank the subjects who participated 
in the study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
G. R. Williams, "Incidence and characteristics of total 
stroke in the United States," BMC Neurol, vol. 1, p. 2, 
Dec 18 2001. 
[2] 
A. Turolla, M. Dam, L. Ventura, P. Tonin, M. 
Agostini, C. Zucconi, et al., "Virtual reality for the 
rehabilitation of the upper limb motor function after 
stroke: a prospective controlled trial," J Neuroeng 
Rehabil, vol. 10, p. 85, 2013. 
[3] 
R. Goulding, D. Thompson, and C. Beech, "Caring for 
patients with hemiplegia in an arm following a stroke," 
Br J Nurs, vol. 13, pp. 534-9, May 13-26 2004. 
[4] 
J. C. Chen and F. Z. Shaw, "Progress in sensorimotor 
rehabilitative physical therapy programs for stroke 
patients," World J Clin Cases, vol. 2, pp. 316-26, Aug 
16 2014. 
[5] 
K. Potter, G. D. Fulk, Y. Salem, and J. Sullivan, 
"Outcome measures in neurological physical therapy 
practice: part I. Making sound decisions," J Neurol 
Phys Ther, vol. 35, pp. 57-64, Jun 2011. 
[6] 
D. U. Jette, J. Halbert, C. Iverson, E. Miceli, and P. 
Shah, "Use of standardized outcome measures in 
physical 
therapist 
practice: 
perceptions 
and 
applications," Phys Ther, vol. 89, pp. 125-35, Feb 
2009. 
[7] 
D. Rand, J. J. Eng, P. F. Tang, J. S. Jeng, and C. Hung, 
"How active are people with stroke?: use of 
accelerometers to assess physical activity," Stroke, vol. 
40, pp. 163-8, Jan 2009. 
[8] 
R. G. Navarathnam, I. Y. Wang, D. Thomas, and P. L. 
Klineberg, "Evaluation of the transcutaneous electrical 
nerve stimulator for postoperative analgesia following 
cardiac surgery," Anaesth Intensive Care, vol. 12, pp. 
345-50, Nov 1984. 
[9] 
R. P. Allred, S. Y. Kim, and T. A. Jones, "Use it and/or 
lose it-experience effects on brain remodeling across 
time after stroke," Front Hum Neurosci, vol. 8, p. 379, 
2014. 
[10] 
L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan, E. P. Elovic, X. Luo, Y. 
Jia, and D. G. Kamper, "Measuring finger flexion and 
activity trends over a 25 hour period using a low cost 
wireless device," Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc, 
vol. 1, pp. 6281-4, 2006. 
[11] 
L. Dipietro, A. M. Sabatini, and P. Dario, "Evaluation 
of 
an 
instrumented 
glove 
for 
hand-movement 
acquisition," J Rehabil Res Dev, vol. 40, pp. 179-89, 
Mar-Apr 2003. 
[12] 
L. K. Simone, N. Sundarrajan, X. Luo, Y. Jia, and D. 
G. Kamper, "A low cost instrumented glove for 
extended monitoring and functional hand assessment," 
J Neurosci Methods, vol. 160, pp. 335-48, Mar 15 
2007. 
[13] 
S. Wise, W. Gardner, E. Sabelman, E. Valainis, Y. 
Wong, K. Glass, et al., "Evaluation of a fiber optic 
glove for semi-automated goniometric measurements," 
J Rehabil Res Dev, vol. 27, pp. 411-24, Fall 1990. 
 
Figure 4: IIM results in days 1 and 2. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[14] 
L. K. Simone and D. G. Kamper, "Design 
considerations for a wearable monitor to measure 
finger posture," J Neuroeng Rehabil, vol. 2, p. 5, Mar 1 
2005. 
[15] 
N. W. Williams, J. M. Penrose, C. M. Caddy, E. 
Barnes, D. R. Hose, and P. Harley, "A goniometric 
glove for clinical hand assessment. Construction, 
calibration and validation," J Hand Surg Br, vol. 25, 
pp. 200-7, Apr 2000. 
[16] 
K. Li, I. M. Chen, S. H. Yeo, and C. K. Lim, 
"Development of finger-motion capturing device based 
on optical linear encoder," J Rehabil Res Dev, vol. 48, 
pp. 69-82, 2011. 
[17] 
N. P. Oess, J. Wanek, and A. Curt, "Design and 
evaluation of a low-cost instrumented glove for hand 
function assessment," J Neuroeng Rehabil, vol. 9, p. 2, 
2012. 
[18] 
F. Sciurba and S. I. Rennard, "Rationale for a 
redundant formulary. The hawthorne effect and the art 
of medicine," Am J Respir Crit Care Med, vol. 191, pp. 
1224-5, Jun 1 2015. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

