Introducing a Patient-Centered e-Health Record Over the Cloud 
 
Konstantinos Koumaditis, Marinos Themistocleous, George Vassilacopoulos, Andriana Prentza, Flora 
Malamateniou, Dimosthenis Kyriazis, George Pittas  
Digital Health Services Laboratory (DHSL) 
Department of Digital Sytstems  
University of Piraeus 
Piraeus, Greece 
e-mail: {konkoum,mthemist,gvass,aprentza,flora,dimos,gpittas}@unipi.gr  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— The aim of this paper is to highlight the 
Patient-Centered e-Health (PCEH) concept, introduce its 
importance and demonstrate a multidisciplinary project 
that combines advanced technologies. The project 
combines several aspects of PCEH functionality, such as: 
(a) homecare telemedicine technologies, (b) e-prescribing, 
e-referral, e-learning and (c) state-of-the-art technologies 
like cloud computing and Service Oriented Architecture 
(SOA), will lead to an innovative integrated e-health 
platform that delivers many benefits to the society, the 
economy, the industry and the research community. This 
paper provides insights of the PCEH concept and the 
current stages of the project. In doing so, we aim to 
increase the awareness of this significant work and 
disseminate the knowledge gained so far through our 
effort. 
Keywords-Personal Healthcare Record; Cloud Computing; 
Healthcare Information Systems Integration. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare Information Systems (HIS) integration has 
been associated with various aspects, amongst others: 
strategic, social, and/or organisational [1]. In this respect, 
there is a common trend to address HIS integration by an 
overall approach, seen as integrated patient centered care [2]. 
Integrated patient centered care reflects on integrated HIS 
(with elements as e-health services) requiring coordination 
across professionals, facilities, support systems that is 
continuous over time and between patient visits [3]. This 
approach is observed on national healthcare strategies that 
encourage patient involvement in their healthcare treatment. 
Moreover, in the USA and Europe, online personal health 
records that allow patients to manage their health data have 
emerged [4]. For example, in Finland, this integration trend 
can be observed in a legislation that allows citizens to access 
and interact with their own Electronic Healthcare Records 
(EHRs), ePrescriptions and audit-logs via the Internet [5].  
Following similar legislative opportunities worldwide, 
patients increase their involvement with HIS. This is a 
growing involvement, seen in parallel with mechanisms for 
the collection of information (obtained by mobile and other 
sources) in order to develop an enhanced, complete and 
integrated view of citizens health status. The latter is reflected 
in EHRs and Personal Health Records (PHRs), which are 
being enriched and exploited by different actors and 
stakeholders (i.e., health and care professionals, citizens, 
nutrition experts, hospitals, etc.) in the health ecosystem. 
Three general PHR models have been proposed [6]: a) the 
stand-alone model, b) Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
system, and c) the integrated one, which is an interoperable 
system providing linkage with a variety of patient 
information sources, such as EHRs, home diagnostics, 
insurance claims etc. The main types of health information 
supported by PHRs are problem lists, procedures, major 
illnesses, provider lists, allergy data, home-monitored data, 
family history, social history and lifestyle, immunizations, 
medications and laboratory tests [7][8]. Widely known PHR 
platforms in terms of centralized web-based portals include 
Dossia and Microsoft Health Vault platforms. Many systems 
presented in literature offer integration with already 
established PHRs platforms [9][10]. Early experiences from 
the adoption of PHR-based systems have been found to be 
positive, showing that such systems can be feasible, secure, 
and well accepted by patients [11]. Nonetheless, today’s 
EHRs and PHRs are far from being what the citizens consider 
as of value to their health, since for the public view, health 
means more than being disease-free. 
Following this trend for patients’ empowerment, 
academics, practitioners and patients advocate in favor of the 
patient centered healthcare systems. Still the aforementioned 
advocates have not yet reached a concise definition of Patient-
Centered e-Health (PCEH) that is shared across the research 
disciplines that focus on health and Information Technology 
(IT) [12]. The lack of consensus can be attributed, amongst 
other, (a) on the number of challenges that are involved in 
transitioning healthcare delivery to a more patient-centered 
system and (b) the lack of proof-of-concept through well-
documented and effective PCEH projects. 
Healthcare is unique and complex ecosystem that poses 
several challenges on developing PCEH [13]. The healthcare 
ecosystem consists of several networking organisations that 
constantly interact with each other, but also differentiate 
amongst them. The differentiation can be noted in issues, such 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

as: (a) medical specialisations, (b) socio-technical and IT 
capacities, (c) organisational cultures, (d) structures, (e) actors 
and (f) business process [1]. More precisely, healthcare tasks 
are distributed between several actors (physicians, nurses, 
residents, and other clinical support staff) and artefacts 
(information technology, healthcare specific machines, paper 
notes) [14]. 
Thus, the challenge to integrate and redesign existing 
healthcare systems towards a more patient-centered exists [2].  
This challenge is emphasized when integration efforts as the 
PCEH projects try to leverage the different actors and their 
sub-sequential attributes. Apparently, the professional 
healthcare actors with their many years of training, 
qualifications and expertise have much more medical 
knowledge than their patients. As a result, a paternalistic 
system has evolved where physicians expect, and patients 
expect them, to make the decisions about, or at least 
recommend, an appropriate course of treatment [15]. 
Therefore, an integrated system of personal healthcare 
information that is governed by the patient him/herself 
contradicts the established norms and highlights new 
challenges (e.g., validity and royalty of medical data, decision 
making culture etc.). For example following a more shared 
decision making or interpretation of the enclosed data, as the 
PCEH entails, requires (a) a plethora of the necessary medical 
data integrated in an easily accessible and comprehensible 
platform adequate for decision-making and (b) the physicians’ 
arbitration to support or contradict those decisions. This 
requires well-developed sophisticated systems with clear 
boundaries 
on 
decision-making, 
responsibilities 
and 
availability of data.  
Regardless the challenges, moving toward patient-
centeredness is important [12].  To this end, this paper aims to 
introduce: (a) the main concepts surrounding the PCEH and 
(b) a PCEH project utilizing cloud computing. These are 
depicted in the following sections. 
II. 
PATIENT-CENTERED E-HEALTH (PCEH) 
Most developed countries are facing important overall 
problems regarding health care services, such as: (a) aging 
population with increased demand on specialized health care 
services (e.g., Chronic diseases), (b) need for increased 
efficiency with limited financial resources (e.g., Staff /bed 
reduction), (c) requirements for increased  accessibility of 
care outside hospitals (e.g., home care) to name a few. To 
these problems, advances in information and communication 
technologies have provided considerable assistance in the 
form of EHRs [6]. Yet, it seems that traditional EHRs, which 
are based on the 'fetch and show' model, provide limited 
functionality that does not cover the spectrum of the patients’ 
needs. Therefore, new solutions as the PHRs appeared to 
narrow this gap. In more detail, PHRs’ data can come from 
various sources like EHRs, health providers (e.g., e-
Prescibing, e-Referal), and/or directly from the patient 
him/herself – including non-clinical information (e.g., 
exercise habits, food and dieting statistics, etc.) [16]. 
The PCEH concept is a new multidiscipline area of 
research, with crucial aspects as it deals with the wellbeing of 
patients.  
However, due to the length limitations of this paper we 
briefly present up-to-date research on the field, with the 
intention to fully present and analyse our rigorous research in 
a future publication. In this paper, we focus mainly on 
Wilson’s et al., (2014a) views. In more detail, Wilson et al., 
(2014b) depicts that the PCEH should integrate three themes:  
 
 
Patient-focus - In many cases, e-health developers have 
created systems designed for patients’ use that is not 
patient-focused but rather focused on healthcare 
organizations’ objectives. Patient-focus requires PCEH 
strategies to be centered first and foremost on the 
requirements and perspectives of patients. To this extent 
if the patient require e-health services tailored to their 
needs, developers need to accommodate these needs. For 
example, young web-savvy patients expect their e-health 
applications to be responsive to their medium of choice 
(mobile, tablet, etc.), while more unexperienced elderly 
patients require a more user friendly environment. 
 
 
Patient-activity 
- 
Patient-activity 
requires 
comprehensive, interactive input by patients in providing 
data about themselves and representing their own 
perspectives as well as consuming information of interest 
to them. Yet, achieving high patient-activity in other e-
health services may require reconceptualization of 
healthcare processes and information flows in order to 
provide opportunity to patients to add information they 
perceive to be relevant. The PHR is an example of such 
an e-health application.  
 
 
Patient-empowerment - in a technological perspective 
the empowerment happens through information-sharing, 
offering the patients a visual overview of their course of 
treatment, 
letting 
the 
patients 
take 
their 
own 
measurements, and letting them provide verbal and 
written inputs. From the PCEH perspective, however, 
patient-empowerment centers on providing similar levels 
of control via e-health that exist for patients in other 
modes of interaction with their healthcare providers. 
 
The value of the three introduced characteristics is to 
ascertain the generalizability and abstraction properties of 
patient-focus, patient-activity, and patient-empowerment to 
the theoretical domain and to explore relationships among the 
PCEH characteristics [17]. Although at an early stage Wilson 
et al., (2014b) arguments provide helpful guidance in the 
emerging issue of patient-centered e-health and can be of 
value in the development, design and evaluation of PHRs. 
These issues are included in our research agenda as well. 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

To this end, we introduce in this paper our own practical 
involvement with a PHR project and provide a brief 
introduction in the following section. 
III. 
PROVIDING INTEGRATED E-HEALTH SERVICES FOR 
PERSONALIZED MEDICINE UTILIZING CLOUD 
INFRASTRUCTURE (PINCLOUD) 
 
PINCLOUD seeks to integrate different application 
components, leading to the provision of an end-to-end 
personalized disease monitoring and medical data service 
“anytime, anywhere”, which ensures an independent living 
regardless of age [18].  
The scenario upon which PINCLOUD is based, as seen in 
Figure 1, is a patient governs his\her PHR that can be 
remotely monitored by a physician located either at a hospital 
or at an individual medical office. Complementary to the 
PHR’s stored information the doctor monitors the patient 
using a home care platform that receives and analyses 
patient’s medical data. The proposed home care platform will 
include among others the following services: (a) Asthma or 
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD) disease 
management; (b) Hyper-tension disease management; (c) 
Diabetes 
monitoring; 
(d) 
Electrocardiogram 
(ECG) 
monitoring; (e) Video/ Audio Access to physicians for remote 
consultation; (e) Remote picture and text archiving and 
communication service (back-up/long term archiving 
complementary to infrastructure operated by hospitals) and 
(f) Fall Prevention and Detection Services. The doctor can 
access the patient’s PHR on-line through a cloud computing 
service. The latter can support the doctor in decision making 
and results in better quality of health service. In more detail, 
the doctor retrieves and updates the patient’s medical data and 
can also use the proposed on-line system to: (a) prescribe a 
new medicine; (b) fill in an e-referral for specific exams (e.g., 
blood test); (c) inform and advise his/her patient or (d) ask the 
patient to visit the hospital. Following the doctor’s advice, the 
patient visits a pharmacy, or a diagnostic centre or a hospital. 
At the final stage, the healthcare service providers (doctors, 
hospitals, diagnostic centres) and pharmacies interact with 
the health insurance organisation to compensate all 
outstanding orders and medical actions. 
Currently, PINCLOUD [19] is in its implementation 
phase, upon which the various components, such as: (a) PHR 
platform, (b) e-prescribing and e-referral, and (c) homecare 
applications, are being developed and tested. 
 
 
Figure 1. Providing Integrated e-Health Services for 
Personalized Medicine utilizing Cloud Infrastructure 
(PINCLOUD) 
IV. MAIN IDEAS 
Service and data availability is crucial for healthcare 
providers who cannot effectively operate unless their 
applications are functioning properly and patients’ data are 
available in a consistent manner. This is also the case for 
PINCLOUD. PINCLOUD’s services (e.g. E-Prescription, E-
Referral, Home-Care and PHR) ought to be available 
continuously 
with 
no 
interruptions 
or 
performance 
degradation since they will be used for decision making 
regarding the patients wellbeing.  
New research projects, as PINCLOUD need to reinsure 
service availability to the participating healthcare providers 
and other organizations. In addition, hardware and software 
installations, upgrades, and reconfigurations have to be 
managed and maintained without any service interruptions 
that may cause problems. In order to achieve the availability 
in a cost efficient way the use of Cloud-Computing seems to 
be the appropriate solution and thus the PINCLOUD was 
designed based on its features. These features as cost-saving, 
agility, 
efficiency, 
resource 
consolidation, 
business 
opportunities and Green IT are relevant and applicable to the 
healthcare sector. 
Besides, PINCLOUD potentially will be responsible for 
the governance of a big volume of medical data. The 
protection and integrity of such data is vital for both the 
patients’ privacy and their wellbeing. At this stage of the 
project the protection of these data is achieved with a Private 
Cloud delivery model. A Private Cloud model is operated by 
a single organization. In the private cloud, the technology 
resides within an organization's own data center and the 
resources are deployed as needed to the different 
departments. In our project, a private IT company which is 
part of the consortium has provided the Private Cloud’s 
infrastructure. Thus, the developers can overcome the 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

challenges associated with other Cloud models (e.g., Public, 
Hybrid) since the ability to manage and control sensitive 
patient data remains within the organization.  
PINCLOUD is based on the well-known Cloud-
Computing three service models’ structure, namely: (a) 
Software as a Service (SaaS), (b) Platform as a Service (PaaS) 
and (c) Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS). Respectively, 
PINCLOUD provides the user interaction through SaaS. In 
theory, SaaS is the capability provided to the consumer to use 
the provider’s applications running on a cloud infrastructure. 
The applications are accessible from various client devices 
through either a thin client interface, such as a web browser 
(e.g., web-based email), or a program interface. PINCLOUD 
offers four applications, such as (a) E-prescription, (b) E-
referral, (c) Home-Care and (d) PHR. These applications 
provide the main functionality required and are being 
consumed 
by 
End-Users 
(e.g. 
Patients, 
Doctors, 
Hospitals/Labs and Insurance Bodies). All these users access 
the PINCLOUD through user interface provided as a service. 
For example, a PINCLOUD registered user can have access 
to his/her medical record online. 
In addition, PINCLOUD takes advantage of PaaS service 
model. Literature presents PaaS as the capability provided to 
the consumer to use and or deploy into the cloud 
infrastructure consumer-created or acquired applications 
created using programming languages and tools supported by 
the provider (NIST). Accordingly, it takes advantage of the 
PaaS model and provides open source components as Web-
Services and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs) that 
facilitate the integration with third (3rd) parties (e.g., Medical 
Data Providers, Hospitals). For example, when a hospital 
decides to be integrated in the PINCLOUD system, it can 
allocate and consume the Web-services’ API created.  
The processing and storage capability of PINCLOUD is 
based on IaaS model. IaaS is the capability provided to the 
consumer to provide processing, storage, networks, and other 
fundamental computing resources while the consumer can 
deploy and run arbitrary software, which can include 
operating systems and applications. PINCLOUD takes 
advantage of the IaaS and provides data processing and 
storage of medical data. IaaS consists of multiple Virtual 
Machines (VM), Medical Data Base and Network 
Infrastructure. In the given case, multiple VMs are utilized 
with each one dedicated to one service (e.g. Database, Access 
Control, Backup).  
V. 
EXPECTED BENEFITS 
The project shall build a reliable, secure and extensible 
platform warranting stakeholder collaboration and enjoying 
public trust. The expected benefits for all participant 
organizations include amongst others: (a) the development of 
integrated healthcare services that improve quality of service 
and reduce costs; (b) business process reengineering, 
improvement, simplification and integration; (c) enhanced 
decision making for health organizations and significant 
reductions to medical errors; (d) standardization, automation, 
synchronization, better control and communication; (e) 
improved coordination, management and scheduling of 
specific health supply chains and services; (f) development of 
monitoring systems that improve quality of care of patients at 
home; (g) establishment of an infrastructure that provides up-
to-date information; (h) development of an innovative 
organizational environment for the participating hospital 
using horizontal processes instead of the traditional 
hierarchical organization; (i) implementation of an extensible 
and maintainable infrastructure that can be enriched with 
other medical services; (j) development of an appropriate, 
sustainable technological framework that can be deployed 
and applied in other relevant situations and environments; (k) 
investigation of state-of-the art technologies and novel 
research that extends the body of knowledge; (l) significant 
research outcomes and publications of excellent quality; (m) 
production of new platforms, infrastructures and solution that 
can be further exploited, (n) knowledge and expertise gained 
can lead to competitive advantage and (o) production and 
export of technical know-how for all the participants.  
The results of the proposed project are of great importance 
for the businesses that deal with the medical/health sector as 
they will gain the potential to gain competitive advantages 
through the project. The area of healthcare is significant and 
the need for advanced and innovative IT solutions in this area 
is apparent too. Thus, the participant enterprises will have the 
opportunity to: (a) develop an integrated platform that can be 
used by other organizations in the future; (b) better 
understand and analyze the complexities of the Greek 
healthcare environment; (c) experiment and implement 
innovative integrated solutions that can be turned into 
products; (d) gain expertise and know-how on a complex 
area; (d) sell these products and know-how at national and 
international level since PINCLOUD seeks to develop an 
innovative solution; (e) obtain and reinforce experiences that 
can be used for the development of other network-oriented 
systems and (f) extend their business activities.  
The benefits for both healthcare organizations include 
among others: (a) specifications of processes for the 
management of healthcare processes; (b) simplification and 
acceleration of business processes; (c) better management of 
healthcare tasks; (d) personalized disease monitoring and cost 
calculation; (e) more efficient operation and (f) economies of 
scale. 
The academic institutions’ participation in the project is 
equally important and include benefits, such as: (a) 
knowledge exchange and transfer; (b) engagement in 
innovative research; (c) investigation of state of the art 
technologies; (d) opportunity to publish research articles of 
high quality; (e) prospect to conduct applied research and 
combine theory and practice.  
PINCLOUD will deliver the following benefits to the 
national economy and society: (a) enhancement of occupation 
and working activities for the participating partners; (b) the 
reinforcement of scientific research; (c) improved delivery of 
healthcare services at reduced cost; (d) patients’ and next of 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

keen satisfaction; (e) the development of innovative and state 
of the art healthcare systems; (f) more efficient allocation and 
management of computing resources; (g) the development of 
new products and jobs; (h) reduction of medical errors and 
consequently the amount of people that are affected or die due 
to them; (i) the reduction of the cost as an immediate effect 
of the reduction of medical errors; (j) technical, scientific and 
research benefits; (k) reduction of the amount of prescriptions 
and referrals and the associated cost; (l) improvement of the 
quality of life of people who live in islands or rural areas.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH AGENDA 
This paper introduces a Patient-Centered e-Health 
(PCEH) conceptual aspects alongside a multidisciplinary 
PHR project that combines state of the art technologies like 
cloud computing, Service-Oriented-Architecture (SOA), 
homecare telemedicine technologies, e-Prescribing, e-referral 
and e-learning in healthcare environment. The aim of the 
project is to create an integrated PHR platform that delivers 
many benefits to the society, the economy the industry and 
the research community. To this end, various technologies (e-
health, cloud, etc.) and healthcare issues (e.g., complexity, 
PCEH, etc.) were presented. Additionally, our intentions on 
the way we propose to address and combine these issues were 
explained and depicted. In the previous section the benefits 
of such an endeavor alongside the steps taken so far to realize 
the implementation of a secure and reliable system, were 
analyzed. Yet, further research is required both in the testing 
and evaluation of our design and implementation. 
To this end, the Research and Development (R&D) team 
engineered several mechanism to test and evaluate 
PINCLOUD and its components. For example, a proof-of-
concept test will be implemented to check the communication 
of various sensors with the main PHR. The results of this test 
will be examined by healthcare professionals and provide 
initial evaluation of the technologies used. Additional, testing 
mechanism have been designed for other components (e.g., e-
prescribing and e-referral) as well.  Besides, PINCLOUD will 
be implemented in two different cloud IaaS providers so as to 
study the interoperability in two different settings. The results 
of this test will again provide insights into the utilized 
technologies and if needed reconfigurations and adjustments 
will be implemented. The authors expect the results of this 
test to be the subject of our next publication. 
REFERENCES 
[1]. D. Finnegan and K. Hamid, Information systems (IS) 
integration approaches in healthcare: a critical review, in 
Integrating Healthcare With Information and Communications 
Technology, W. Currie and D. Finnegan, Editors. 2009, 
Radcliffe Publishing: London. pp. 35-63. 
[2]. T. Leventhal, P. K. Taliaferro, C. Wong, S. Hughes, and  S. 
Mun, The Patient-Centered Medical Home and Health 
Information Technology. Telemed J E Health., 2012. 18(2). 
[3]. S. Singer, et al., Defining and measuring integrated patient 
care: promoting the next frontier in health care delivery. Med 
Care Res Rev, 2011. 68(1): pp. 112-127. 
[4]. A. D. Black,  et al., The Impact of eHealth on the Quality and 
Safety of Health Care: A Systematic Overview. PLoS Med, 
2011. 8(1): pp. e1000387. 
[5]. P. Ruotsalainen, A. Iivari, and P. Doupi, Finland's strategy and 
implementation of citizens' access to health information. Stud 
Health Technol Inform., 2008. 137: pp. 379-85. 
[6]. D. Detmer, M. Bloomrosen, B. Raymond, and P. Tang, 
Integrated personal health records: transformative tools for 
consumer-centric care. BMC Medical Informatics and 
Decision Making, 2008. 8: pp. 45. 
[7]. P. Tang, J. S. Ash , D.W. Bates, J.M. Overhage, D.Z. Sands  
Personal Health Records: Definitions, Benefits, and Strategies 
for Overcoming Barriers to Adoption. Journal of the American 
Medical Informatics Association, 2006. 13(2): pp. 121-126. 
[8]. J. Halamka, K. Mandl, and P. Tang, Early Experiences with 
Personal Health Records. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 2008. 15(1): pp. 1-7. 
[9]. S. R. Reti,, H.J. Feldman, and C. Safran, Governance for 
Personal Health Records. Journal of the American Medical 
Informatics Association, 2009. 16(1): pp. 14-17. 
[10]. F. Zhou, Mobile Personal Health Care System for Patients 
with Diabetes, in Aging Friendly Technology for Health and 
Independence, Y. Lee, et al., Editors. 2010, Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg. pp. 94-101. 
11. 
P. Jennett and M. Watanabe, Healthcare and Telemedicine: 
Ongoing and Evolving Challenges. Disease Management & 
Health Outcomes, 2006. 14(1). 
12. 
V. Wilson and D. Strong, Editors’ Introduction to the Special 
Section on Patient-centered e-Health: Research Opportunities 
and Challenges,. Communications of the Association for 
Information Systems, 2014a. 34(15). 
[13]. K. Koumaditis, M.Themistocleous, M. Mantzana, and K. 
Souliotis, A Proposition of Critical Sucess Factors Influencing 
SOA Implementation in Healthcare, in European Conference 
on Information Systems 2012: Barchelona, Spain. 
[14]. T. Kannampallil, Schauer, G., Cohen, T., & Patel, V. 
Considering complexity in healthcare systems. Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, 2011. 44(6): pp. 943-947. 
[15]. S. A. Sherer, Patients are Not Simply Health IT Users or 
Consumers: The Case for ‘e-Healthicant’ Applications. 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
2014. 34(17): pp. 351–364. 
[16]. V. Koufi, F. Malamateniou, and G. Vassilacopoulos, An 
Android-Enabled PHR-based System for the Provision of 
Homecare Services. International Journal of Measurement 
Technologies and Instrumentation Engineering (IJMTIE), 
2013. 3(2): pp. 1-18. 
[17]. E. V. Wilson, W. Wang, and S. D. Sheetz, Underpinning a 
Guiding 
Theory 
of 
Patient-Centered 
E-Health. 
Communications of the Association for Information Systems, 
2014b. 34(16). 
[18]. M. Themistocleous, K. Koumaditis, and G. Vassilacopoulos. 
Providing Integrated e-Health Services for Personalized 
Medicine utilizing Cloud Infrastructure. in European, 
Mediterranean & Middle Eastern Conference on Information 
Systems 2013 (EMCIS2013), October 17-18. 2013. Windsor, 
United Kingdom. 
[19]. Lab of Medical Informatics. Providing Integrated eHealth 
Services 
for 
Personalized 
Medicine 
utilizing 
Cloud 
Infrastructure. 2014  [cited 2014 17th April]; Available from: 
http://pincloud.med.auth.gr/en. 
 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

