Sono-Contrast Spectroscopy for Cancer Virtual Biopsy in LMIC Settings 
 
Yan Yu 
Department of Radiation Oncology 
Thomas Jefferson University 
Philadelphia, U.S.A. 
Yan.Yu@Jefferson.edu 
Lydia Liao 
Department of Radiology 
MD Anderson Cancer Center at Cooper University Hospital 
Camden, NJ, U.S.A. 
Liao-Lydia@Cooperhealth.edu
 
 
Abstract—We present an initiative to adapt, optimize and 
productize a multimodal breast cancer detection technology, 
termed “Sono-Contrast Spectroscopy” (SCS), for use in Low- 
and Middle-Income Countries (LMIC) to facilitate point-of-
care early detection of breast cancer. The prototype SCS 
scanner was developed from proof-of-concept in vivo 
preclinical research and subsequently through a first-in-
human pilot clinical study. Quantitative evaluation with 
histopathology data from tissue biopsy of the interrogated 
lesions as ground truth demonstrated that the SCS technique 
achieved very high discriminating power as measured by 
sensitivity, specificity and Receiver Operating Characteristics 
(ROC) analysis; the Area Under the Curve (AUC) ranged from 
0.90 to 0.95 in racial/ethnic subgroup analysis, and was equal 
to 0.91 over the entire study group of 66 subjects. Particularly 
of relevance to global health applications in the LMIC settings, 
the SCS technique does not require clinical subspecialty 
interpretation, is easy to deploy and operate, has no disposable 
or 
consumable 
parts, 
reports 
diagnostic 
results 
instantaneously, and potentially offers an effective alternative 
to expensive and invasive large-core vacuum-assisted needle 
biopsy followed by subspecialty pathology evaluation, all of 
which may be inaccessible in LMICs. Significant steps towards 
global health deployment in these settings are outlined. 
Keywords-cancer diagnosis; spectroscopy; biopsy; near 
infrared; focused ultrasound. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
According to the World Health Organization, breast 
cancer is the top cancer in women in the developing world, 
and its incidence is increasing due to increases in life 
expectancy and urbanization; furthermore, the majority of 
breast cancers that develop in Low- and Middle-Income 
Countries (LMICs) are diagnosed in very late stages [1]. 
Therefore, early detection in order to improve breast cancer 
outcome and survival remains the cornerstone of breast 
cancer control. Population-based cancer screening is a highly 
complex 
public 
health 
undertaking. 
Mammography 
screening is very costly and is cost-effective and feasible 
only in countries with good health infrastructure that can 
afford a long-term organized population-based screening 
program. Breast cancer survival rates vary greatly 
worldwide, ranging from 80% or over in North America, 
Sweden and Japan to around 60% in middle-income 
countries and below 40% in low-income countries [2]. The 
low survival rates in less developed countries can be 
explained mainly by the lack of early detection programs, 
resulting in a high proportion of women presenting with late-
stage disease, as well as by the lack of adequate diagnosis 
and treatment facilities [1]. 
Early detection of breast cancer has been proven to 
reduce mortality by about 20% to 35% [3]. Histopathological 
examination is considered to be the “Gold Standard” for 
definitive diagnosis of cancer but requires adequate tissue 
samples that are collected through biopsy procedures capable 
of sufficient tissue retrieval. Of the two major approaches for 
breast biopsy, needle biopsy and open excisional biopsy, 
needle biopsy is the most commonly practiced standard in 
affluent countries because it is less traumatic, produces little 
or no scar, allows quicker recovery, and is less expensive. 
Relative to LMIC resources, however, these techniques 
can be prohibitively expensive (e.g., disposable large-core 
needle), requires tissue transfer to pathology facilities and 
expert review (not always available or timely), and results in 
patient call-back (often impractical in remote/rural settings). 
Open excisional biopsy suffers from these same drawbacks, 
and results in greater trauma and postsurgical care. At the 
same time, it is well known that current methods for breast 
cancer surveillance including breast self-exam (BSE), 
clinical exam, mammography, ultrasound and even Dynamic 
Contrast-Enhanced (DCE) MRI lead to high proportions of 
unnecessary biopsies (on average, only 1 in 3 to 4 biopsies 
results in a cancer diagnosis even in highly subspecialized 
breast care centers). In less affluent healthcare environments, 
some or many of these proven diagnostic modalities may be 
unavailable or not uniformly affordable by all patients. 
Clearly, there is a severe unmet need in LMICs for realizing 
adequate and accessible diagnosis of treatable early stage 
breast cancer. 
We have successfully developed and validated a breast 
cancer diagnosis tool using combined Near Infra-Red (NIR) 
Diffuse Reflectance Spectroscopy (DRS) and Low-Intensity 
Focused Ultrasound (LIFU) modulation of blood flow in 
vivo. We have shown, first in preclinical animal models and 
recently in a pilot clinical study, that focused ultrasonic 
pulses create different blood flow and tissue oxygenation 
signatures 
depending 
on 
whether 
the 
tissue 
being 
interrogated is malignant or normal; these differences can be 
markedly discriminated via NIR spectroscopy, with 
pronounced contrast in spectral parameters. Thus we termed 
the 
technique 
sono-contrast 
spectroscopy 
(SCS). 
Importantly, this technique overcomes a prevailing problem 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in using noninvasive optical tissue interrogation methods, 
i.e., the spatial or targeting certainty becomes highly 
degraded due to NIR light propagation in tissue. Numerous 
physical, mathematical or multimodal hardware devices have 
been applied to solve this fundamental “ill-posed” problem 
in biomedical photonics. Here we deploy the fundamental 
solution that the acoustic sonication is focused on the target 
lesion unequivocally; any change in spectrophotometric 
values before, during and after sonication is characteristic of 
the lesion being interrogated. Thus there is no need for 
multiple expensive source/detector arrays, inverse solutions, 
a priori multimodal information or multimodality encoding, 
leading to a simple, low-cost and somewhat elegant device. 
Importantly, the SCS in vivo scans are completely 
noninvasive: both the ultrasonic and NIR light intensities 
needed are well below U.S. Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) recommended safety levels. Additionally, computer-
aided discrimination of cancerous vs. normal findings can be 
made instantly, following a 2-min. or less sonication and 
light illumination/spectral acquisition time. If proven 
sufficiently accurate for breast cancer diagnosis, the 
proposed technique can be considered “virtual biopsy” with 
real-time reporting of study results offering rapid turnaround 
in busy LMIC breast clinics. 
There is no disposable component in the SCS exam; only 
routine cleaning/disinfecting is needed after each patient’s 
visit. In the long run, focused ultrasonic transducers (note: 
these are not sonographic probes), low-power NIR lasers and 
photodiodes can all be mass assembled from off-the-shelf 
components; RF signal generation can be achieved in 
software and dedicated amplification circuitry. Data 
transmission, analysis and diagnostic algorithm updates can 
make use of wireless technology (e.g., Bluetooth), consumer 
electronics (e.g., Smartphone apps) and cloud computing. 
Thus, it is entirely feasible that the fully productized device 
will be low-cost, battery-driven, and usable by non-
specialists. 
We envision that the eventual SCS device will be 
handheld, reports examination results instantly in two mode: 
(a) simple – such as green, yellow and red LEDs for benign, 
needing further interrogation and highly suspicious of 
malignancy; (b) comprehensive user-configurable interface 
where patient-specific factors such as age, racial/ethnic 
group, Body Mass Index (BMI), cup size, and other relevant 
health/lifestyle parameters can be associated with the 
diagnostic finding. The globally deployed SCS device will 
use cloud-computing and massively distributed learning 
paradigms to improve its diagnostic accuracy and adapt to 
new LMIC environments or racial/ethnic settings. The 
overall goal of this initiative is to push breast cancer 
diagnosis progressively earlier, so that low-cost treatment 
regimens such as surgery alone, or breast-conserving surgery 
plus simple whole breast tangential radiation, are still 
effective in eradicating the disease. 
Even in LMIC communities where breast ultrasound 
and/or mammography is accessible to patients, there is still a 
large gap between a suspicious imaging finding and positive 
diagnosis by surgical excision.  In affluent countries, this gap 
is being closed by improved accessibility of DCE MRI, 
Contrast-Enhanced 
Spectral 
Mammography 
(CESM), 
3D/tomosynthesis, and ultimately large core needle biopsy 
with tissue histology diagnosis and biomarker profiling. 
Absent of such expensive technologies, patients in LMICs 
are faced with the choice of surgical excision with high 
probabilities of negative result, or delayed diagnosis of 
cancer. The proposed SCS technology can be used as a low-
cost method to close this gap by identifying suspicious 
lesions that are associated with high likelihood of 
malignancy. 
Accurate surgical excision also requires technology 
guidance. In affluent countries, this is achieved by wire 
localization under stereoscopic imaging, ultrasound and 
MRI, or radioactive seeds. In LMIC communities where 
facilities or patient logistic does not permit such complicated 
precision guidance, the SCS technology may become a 
useful tool for the surgeon to identify the tumor 
extent/location immediately prior to incision. The standard of 
care for breast cancer treatment in the U.S. and many 
developed countries is lumpectomy plus radiation (or 
mastectomy). When radiation therapy is inaccessible in 
LMICs, the standard care is relatively unclear; however, 
anecdotal 
evidence 
suggests 
that 
limited 
excision/lumpectomy alone sometimes represents the entire 
treatment. In such cases, arming the surgeon with a real-time 
cancer delineation tool like the SCS probe can potentially 
change the probability of local control vs. recurrence. 
In affluent countries, modern standard of care consists of 
large-sample tissue histology diagnosis plus biomarker 
profiling. In LMICs, however, even the cost of large core 
sample retrieval can be prohibitive. The decision for open 
surgical excision biopsy is considerably more difficult 
because of its invasiveness. Through added diagnostic value 
in using the SCS technology, we hope to inform the patient 
more effectively before undergoing highly invasive and 
costly procedures that may be unnecessary, thus the concept 
of “virtual biopsy”. 
At the same time, the cancer screening initiative we plan 
to implement would serve as early sentinel events pointing to 
the need for comprehensive diagnostic workup in patients 
with highly suspicious breast lesions. In LMIC settings, low-
cost surgical excision (mastectomy or wide-excision 
lumpectomy) may be an accessible option. Radiotherapy 
may or may not be accessible; chemotherapy or targeted 
biologics may be out of reach. Early diagnosis of localized, 
non-metastatic breast cancer could be an important 
demarcation between curative vs. palliative treatment plans. 
In short, in the SCS technology we hope to achieve the 
complementary goals of eliminating unneeded invasive 
interventions and discovering breast cancer before it 
becomes expensive or impractical to treat. 
 
II. 
SONO-CONTRAST SPECTROSCOPY PRECLINICAL 
STUDIES 
In 1971, Dyson et al. reported that stationary ultrasound 
waves caused stasis of red blood cells in vivo [4]. In 2006, 
we reported our initial animal study, supported by NCI R21 
CA107860, in which this effect was first used to differentiate 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

tumor from normal leg muscle tissue in mice [5]. Under 
normal physiological conditions, oxygen dissociates from 
hemoglobin molecules in red blood cells to replenish the 
oxygen supply in tissues as blood flows through the vessels. 
When standing wave ultrasound is used to slow or stop the 
blood flow, the ratio of oxy- vs. deoxy-hemoglobin content 
decreases, which can be measured using NIR spectroscopy. 
We hypothesized that the effect of this acoustic radiation 
force on blood flow and stasis would be different in normal 
vessel network morphology vs. malignant, angiogenic 
morphology (lack of directionality, chaotic network, leaky 
vessel walls, etc.). The “sono-contrast”, i.e., changes in 
spectroscopic parameters due to administration of ultrasound 
acoustic force, was indeed found to be strong in normal 
vasculature and absent in tumors, thus serving as an excellent 
discriminator of benign vs. malignant vascular morphology 
in the in vivo model [6]. 
TABLE I.  
PANEL OF SPECTROSCOPIC PARAMETERS WITH 
STATISTICALLY SIGNIFICANT CORRELATION WITH IMMUNOHISTOCHEMICAL 
PARAMETERS 
Dependent 
Variable  
Statistically Significant (p < 0.05) 
Predictors from Regression Analysis 
p value  
Percentage of 
perfused vessel 
area in analysis 
area  
Maximum minus minimum of the ratio 
signal with baseline trend subtracted 
0.031  
Standard deviation of the ratio signal 
with baseline trend subtracted 
0.015  
Average 
distance 
between all 
vessels in 
analysis area  
Maximum minus minimum of the ratio 
signal with baseline trend subtracted 
0.008  
Standard deviation of the ratio signal 
with baseline trend subtracted 
0.005  
Mean EF5 
intensity for all 
vessels  
Difference between the endpoint values 
of the baseline trend line 
0.013  
Mean EF5 
intensity for 
perfused vessels  
Difference between the endpoint values 
of the baseline trend line 
0.012  
Standard 
deviation of 
average 
distance for all 
vessels  
Maximum minus minimum of the ratio 
signal with baseline trend subtracted 
0.023  
Standard deviation of the ratio signal 
with baseline trend subtracted 
0.014  
 
To study the physiological differences between normal 
vasculature and tumor vasculature, immunohistochemical 
studies were then conducted on the mouse muscle tissue and 
tumor samples following imaging and cryostat sectioning. 
Results of regression analyses showed that certain 
spectroscopy signals are significantly (p = 0.005 to 0.013) 
correlated with immunohistochemistry analysis of a panel of 
variables including percent area of perfused vessels, total 
number of vessels, mean distance between vessels (both total 
and perfused), and EF5 intensity (see Table 1) [5]. These 
findings further support the hypothesis that SCS is a 
functional 
reporter 
of 
vascular 
microenvironmental 
variability, and strongly suggest that SCS may be used to 
characterize tumor neoangiogenesis, proliferation and 
aggressiveness. 
 
 
III. 
SONO-CONTRAST SPECTROSCOPY PILOT CLINICAL 
STUDY 
A. Instrument Design 
Based on the encouraging animal study results, we 
designed a human breast SCS scanner [7][8] and conducted 
a pilot clinical study to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of 
this multimodal detection method. The scanhead was 
designed to deliver focused acoustic radiation fields up to 
about 2.4 cm deep in tissue. Two 1 MHz focused 
transducers (Channel Industries, Santa Barbara, CA) were 
aligned orthogonally inside the scanhead to create a focal 
area at the intersection of the axes. A commercial ultrasound 
probe (Philips L12-5, Valhalla, NY), located in the same 
plane as the focused transducers, was used for image co-
registration with the NIR spectroscopy information, tissue 
density information and blood flow information. The 
ultrasound probe and focused transducers have two degrees-
of-freedom, so that the focal zone can be scanned in tissue 
depth-wise and laterally. Three force sensors (Honeywell 
model 53, Morristown, NJ) were incorporated on the lower 
concave compression plate of the scanhead to measure the 
force exerted on the breast.   
The optical spectroscopy system consisted of 18 
customized 15-foot long and 2.5-mm diameter fiber bundles 
terminating at the concave bottom plate of the scanhead. 
Out of these 18 fiber bundles, 6 were used as sources and 12 
were used as detectors. The 6 sources were illuminated by 
two laser diodes (LG-Laser Technologies, Germany) 
through a multichannel optical switch (O/E land Inc., 
Canada) that had 2 input channels and 6 output channels. 
Diffuse reflectance signals were collected by the 12 
detectors, amplified by 12 avalanche photodiodes (APD) 
(Hamamatsu C5460-01, Bridgewater, NJ), and then 
transmitted through 1 multi-channel data acquisition card 
(National Instrument, Austin, TX) to the computer for 
analysis. 
The ultrasound imaging probe was connected to a 
commercial ultrasound system (Philips iU22, Valhalla, NY) 
for 
image 
co-registration. 
The 
focused 
ultrasound 
transducers were driven by a function generator (Agilent 
33250A, Santa Clara CA) connected to an RF amplifier 
(Amplifier Research 25A250A, Souderton, PA). During the 
operation, the forward and reverse power level was 
monitored via a directional coupler (Amplifier Research 
DC3010, Souderton, PA) using an oscilloscope (Tektronix 
TDS 2022, Richardson, TX), for ensuring electrical safety. A 
mobile hydraulic cart was used to host the instruments. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

According to ANSI Z136.1 (1993) Safe Use of Lasers, 
for wavelength 0.647-0.905μm, the maximum permissible 
exposure (MPE) to skin is 0.2-0.5 W·cm-2. We selected 0.2 
W·cm-2 as the threshold. Two Continuous Wave (CW) laser 
diodes were used in the spectroscopy system: one had a 
wavelength of 685 nm with the maximum output of 50 mW; 
the other had a wavelength of 830 nm with the maximum 
output of 110 mW. The power output for the two laser 
systems can be adjusted using the knob in the front panel. 
The threshold laser output at the source terminals was 
calculated to be 9.8 mW for the two laser units. A laser 
power meter system (Coherent LabMax, Santa Clara, CA) 
was used to calibrate and mark the corresponding threshold 
positions on the two units. 
Based on the FDA guideline, the derated global 
maximum acoustic output of the diagnostic ultrasound 
equipment should not exceed Pre-amendments acoustic 
output exposure levels, i.e., derated Spatial Peak Temporal 
Average Intensity ISPTA ≤0.72 W·cm-2. We calibrated the 
acoustic radiation fields to ensure that it was within the limit. 
The acoustic focal spot having the maximum peak-positive 
voltage signal on the oscilloscope was found at about 2 cm 
below the bottom plate, which is the designed intersection of 
the axes of the two focused transducers. The ISPTA was 
determined to be 0.4 W·cm-2, below the FDA ultrasound 
limits of 0.72 W·cm-2. The focal spot was then registered in 
the ultrasonography system for image guidance during the 
pilot clinical study. This calibration established the baseline 
of the dual-transducer focused acoustic radiation field. A 
Quality Assurance (QA) protocol was formulated based on 
the same procedure. 
B. Clinical Study Results 
Clinical study was carried out under an Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) approved protocol at Cooper University 
Hospital, NJ. The intended patient populations were those 
who present with a solitary mass in the breast that required 
ultrasound-guided tissue biopsy to rule out malignancies. 
The study was scheduled to be performed on the same day as 
biopsy. Once the patient signed the consent form for 
participation, the SCS scanning procedure would first be 
performed. After completing SCS scanning, the patient 
would be re-prepped using sterile technique for the standard 
needle biopsy procedure. Usually 3-4 core biopsy specimens 
were obtained for the same mass using large core biopsy 
needle. The approximate location of each core would be 
documented. Based on our clinical experience, the time 
taken from prep to first tissue removal was approximately 10 
min. This time interval should be sufficient for the reversible 
process of vascular compression by LIFU to recover fully to 
the original state [4,9]. Tissue histology was obtained for all 
patients from the standard pathology reports. This 
information served as ground truth for developing the 
Computer-Aided Diagnosis (CAD) algorithm and validating 
its effectiveness. 
The collected data stream consists of LIFU signals and 
NIR diffuse reflectance spectroscopy signals together with 
time stamp. They are first synchronized and segmented into 
12 channels (corresponding to the 12 detectors). The diffuse 
reflectance spectroscopy signals are first processed using 
moving average technique to remove the noise and smooth 
the data. Discrete wavelet analysis is then used to further 
process the data, which involves using filters of different 
cutoff frequencies to analyze the signal at different scales. 
A total of 66 patients were enrolled with informed 
consent under the IRB-approved protocol. Subsequent 
biopsy of each index lesion revealed 14 histologically-
proven cancers (8 IDC, 4 ILC, 1 metastatic adenocarcinoma 
in lymph node, 1 invasive mammary carcinoma with ductal 
and lobular features; final staging 1A to 4). Using histology 
gold standard as ground truth, the predictive accuracy of SCS 
incorporating sophisticated wavelet analysis was evaluated 
[10]. Results of this human study corroborated the animal 
study. By exploiting the sono-contrast differences and 
imaging features, we have developed a panel of spectral and 
imaging biomarkers that demonstrates high discriminating 
power. It was found that this methodology predicted cancer 
vs. non-cancer with sensitivity of 93% at specificity of 81%; 
the area under the ROC curve (“area under the curve”, or 
AUC), was determined to be 0.91 [11]. In comparison, 
reader-averaged AUC for mammography has been generally 
reported to be 0.70 [12]. Furthermore, additional subgroup 
analysis revealed that certain spectral and imaging 
biomarkers in the panel could discriminate between ductal 
and lobular cancer subgroups (p=0.022), and between HER2 
negative 0 vs. 1+ subgroups (p=0.044) [11]. These subgroup 
analysis results further reveal that SCS may be used to 
interrogate and characterize breast cancers. This first-in-
human trial clearly demonstrated the effectiveness of SCS as 
an in vivo probe of invasive breast cancers. 
We also performed secondary analysis of the clinical 
study data by racial/ethnic groups including “White” (non-
Hispanic), “Hispanic” and “African American” subgroups 
[13]. While the pilot study was not powered to generate 
definitive conclusions, it was found that subgroup-specific 
tuning of the diagnostic algorithms may lead to incremental 
improvements to diagnostic accuracy. For example, AUC 
was 0.95 for “White”, 0.92 for “African American”, and 0.90 
for combined “African American”+“Hispanic” subgroups, 
respectively. Bootstrap resampling method was applied to 
overcome the data limitation; thus, these results should be 
regarded as suggestive of potentially even more improved 
efficacy in LMIC-specific racial/ethnic populations. 
 
IV. 
SYSTEM ADAPTATION FOR LMICS 
A. Low-power, Portable Configuration 
The early generation instrument was tested with 
attenuated intensities in both the optical and the ultrasonic 
subsystems. The clinical data revealed that substantially low-
powered optical and ultrasonic modules would be effective 
in eliciting contrast in blood flow/oxygenation between 
benign and malignant masses. Additionally, as few as one 
well-selected light detector channel (out of 6) was sufficient 
for diagnostic data collection. Thus, we have identified 
significant opportunities to eliminate over-designs to achieve 
a modular system with portable ultrasonic generator, 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

miniaturized transducers and off-the-shelf optical bench. 
Furthermore, the original design incorporated an imaging 
ultrasound probe in the scanhead for image guidance. 
Considering the likelihood that sonographic equipment may 
not be readily available in LMIC clinics as well as the viable 
alternatives found in the pilot clinical study (such as using a 
standalone imaging probe to mark the location and depth of 
interrogation), the imaging probe has been eliminated from 
the second-generation device design. Also eliminated are all 
scanning mechanisms in the lateral and depth directions; 
probes with sonication depths of 0–1, 1–2, 2–3, and 3–4 cm 
will be selectable, with appropriate standoff bolus as needed. 
Thus the new device design is predominantly “point-and-
shoot” in operation. Together with near real-time CAD 
reporting of results, this design will offer a point-of-care 
virtual biopsy assay for cancer detection in low-resource 
healthcare environments. 
 
B. Smart Diagnostics and Cloud-based QA Repository  
Quality control of SCS clinical measurement data is 
critically important for diagnostic algorithm self adaptation 
and distributed learning (see Section C, below). The 
opportunity for non-expert or minimally trained healthcare 
providers to use a simple and noninvasive “point-and-shoot” 
device on patients further highlights the need for built-in QA 
surveillance. Excessive movement of the handheld probe 
during a point data acquisition period (which lasts for 105 
sec. in our initial clinical study and is reducible to 36 or 
minimally 24 sec. in the second-generation) will cause signal 
breaks or noise in DRS, and may perturb LIFU sonication 
pulses. Such unwanted movement will be detected using 
built-in 
accelerometer 
chip 
with 
associated 
user 
warning/guidance and, if necessary, repeat data acquisition. 
Poor acoustic field contact can potentially lead to false 
positive findings; thus it is important to ensure consistent 
probe-tissue coupling. This will be monitored using built-in 
hydrophone circuit at the probe side. Similarly, NIR light-
tissue coupling is essential for adequate illumination and 
DRS signal detection. Smart diagnostics on the collected 
spectral signal will be carried out in real-time to detect poor 
probe-tissue contact by analyzing the reflectance above 
ambient background signals, and communicated through 
simple user interface on the device. 
In addition to the self-diagnostic functionalities built into 
the device to prevent erroneous use or data collection, 
anonymized study data from each examination can be 
transmitted to centralized QA repository using modern 
wireless technology. To achieve best interconnectivity for 
these purposes, integrate wireless capabilities (Bluetooth, 
WiFi) 
and 
Smartphone/tablet 
compatibility 
will 
be 
incorporated in the final product. Where the device is not 
used in online mode (e.g., in rural settings where WiFi or 
wireless connection is off), the data transmission will occur 
when the system is docked with online connection after field 
use or in charge mode. These data will include: sonication 
pulse heights and widths at both input amplifier and 
hydrophone receiver ends, reference optical wavelength 
intensity received, the full spectral signal, and accelerometer 
signals, all synchronized to the same timeline. From these 
data, nearly every scenario in the data acquisition sequence 
can be reconstructed. More sophisticated cloud-based QA 
diagnostics algorithms can then be developed by aggregative 
analysis of signal deviations.  
 
C. Large Scale Distributed Learning to Improve Cancer 
Predictive Accuracy 
Another design consideration is to include a touch screen 
interface to give the user limited access to software 
configuration such as entering racial/ethnic profile (or 
complexion), age range, breast density estimate, cup size, 
BMI, etc. Although some of the patient-specific factors 
currently do not enter the diagnostic model, they are 
potentially useful in later software release/updates as 
additional algorithm self-training codes are developed. For 
example, if a false-positive or false-negative diagnosis is 
generated, the user will be able to enter the correct diagnosis 
and force the algorithm to learn from the data. Similarly, 
correct diagnosis can be used by the self-learning codes in 
conjunction with patient-specific factors to discover 
statistically significant influence factors for increased 
diagnostic accuracy. In the future, if users consistently enter 
patient-specific factors and definitive tissue diagnoses 
associated with the SCS exam data, it is possible to improve 
the diagnostic accuracy continually by aggregating this 
information from multiple devices in the field. De-identified 
data can be transmitted to cloud-based applications that 
aggregate and disseminate statistically significant data to 
generate refined diagnostic models. Alternatively, if 
transmitting patient data to central repositories is culturally 
or administratively unacceptable, then downloadable “app” 
can be developed for the user to run model extraction 
algorithms. The app can be designed to bring in collective 
knowledge from other downloaded apps (i.e., app on other 
SCS devices in the field), extract and abstract diagnostic 
features, spectral fingerprints, etc., that may be significant in 
model building, and upload the abstracted data (not the 
patient data) to cloud-based servers.  
Similarly to other large-scale distributed learning 
paradigms, it is anticipated that the predictive accuracy will 
continually improve with the frequency and variety of use. 
Importantly, it is envisioned that the SCS system be adaptive 
to population-specific signatures of cancer assay, with the 
ultimate goal of becoming a diagnostic and screening tool for 
global health. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Sono-contrast spectroscopy has been shown in preclinical 
and clinical studies to confer high discriminating power for 
diagnosing malignant breast masses. An adaptation strategy 
has been outlined to produce a portable device with 
uncompromised performance characteristics suitable for 
LMIC deployment. Additional use of modern wireless, cloud 
computing and large-scale distributed learning technologies 
will enable unprecedented cancer diagnosis algorithm’s self-
learning/adaptation and population-based tuning capabilities. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

To further meet the cancer burden needs in LMICs, it is 
envisioned that a set of end-firing and side-firing probes 
incorporating the SCS technology will be developed for 
detecting cancers of the cervix, prostate and rectum. Pilot 
clinical studies will be designed to evaluate the effectiveness 
of SCS as either adjunct or primary detection technology in 
the presence/absence of standard screening tests. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The preclinical in vivo study and the pilot clinical study 
described in Sections II and III were carried out under the 
support of U.S. NIH/NCI grants R21 CA107860 and R33 
CA107860, respectively. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] http://www.who.int/cancer/detection/breastcancer/en/ World 
Health Organization webpage, accessed on March 24 2014. 
[2] M. P. Coleman, M. Quaresma, F. Berrino, et al. “Cancer 
survival in five continents: A worldwide population-based 
study (CONCORD)”. Lancet Oncol., vol. 9, August 2008, pp. 
730-56. 
[3] J. G. Elmore, K. Armstrong, C. D. Lehman, and S. W. 
Fletcher, “Screening for breast cancer”. Journal of American 
Medical Association, vol. 293, October, 2005, pp. 1245-1256. 
[4] M. Dyson, B. Woodward, and J. B. Pond,  “Flow of red cells 
stopped by ultrasound”. Nature, Vol. 232, 1971, pp. 572-573. 
[5] B. A. Winey, V. Misic, L. Laio, K. Parker, B. M. Fenton, and 
Y. Yu, “In vivo cancer diagnosis with optical spectroscopy 
and acoustically induced blood stasis using a murine MCa35 
model”. Med Phys., vol. 33, June, 2006, pp. 1623-33. 
[6] V. Misic, B. Winey, H. Liu, L. Liao, P. Okunieff, K. Parker, 
et al., “Tumor detection in vivo with optical spectroscopy”. 
Conf. Proc. IEEE Eng. Med. Biol. Soc., vol. 5, May, 2005, 
pp. 4708-11. 
[7] K. Yan, T. Podder, K. Huang, Y. Yu, and L. Liao, “A 
noninvasive multimodal sono-contrast NIR spectroscopy 
system for breast cancer diagnosis”. BioInformatics and 
BioEngineering (BIBE), IEEE International Conference, 
2010, pp. 285-286. 
[8] K. Yan, T. Podder, K. Huang, L. Liao, and Y. Yu, “A 
multimodal sono-contrast NIR spectroscopy system for breast 
cancer diagnosis: System design and safety considerations”. 
3rd International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and 
Informatics (BMEI), 2010, pp. 1386-1390. 
[9] F. L. Lizzi, D. J. Coleman, J. Driller, L. A.  Franzen, and M. 
Leopold, “Effects of pulsed ultrasound on ocular tissue”. 
Ultrasound Med. Biol., vol. 7, March, 1981, pp. 245-252. 
[10] K. Yan, Y. Yu, and L. Liao, “A non-invasive multimodal 
sono-contrast NIR spectroscopy system for breast cancer 
diagnosis”. 4th Int. Conf. Biomed. Eng. Informatics. 2011, pp. 
1034-1037. 
[11] K. Yan, Y. Yu, E. Tinney, R. Baraldi, and L. Liao, “Clinical 
study of a noninvasive multimodal sono-contrast induced 
spectroscopy system for breast cancer diagnosis”. Med. Phys.; 
vol. 39, 2012, pp. 1571-8. 
[12] K. M. Kelly, J. Dean, S. J. Lee, and W. S.  Comulada, “Breast 
cancer 
detection: 
Radiologists’ 
performance 
using 
mammography with and without automated whole-breast 
ultrasound”. Eur Radiol. vol. 20, 2010, Nov., pp. 2557-64. 
[13] K. Yan, Y. Yu, and L. Liao, “Multimodal sono-contrast NIR 
spectroscopy 
for 
breast 
cancer 
diagnosis: 
Cancer 
characterization modeling and subgroup study”. IEEE 
ICSP2012 Proceedings October, 2012, pp. 2144-7. 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

