A Model for Global Health Virtual Communities 
 
 
Christo El Morr 
School of Health Policy and Management 
York University, Faculty of Health 
Toronto, Canada 
e-mail: elmorr@yorku.ca 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a model for Health Virtual 
Communities deployed on a Global Health level. It starts with 
an initial model built previously, and provides a thorough 
analysis of the components needed on a Global Health level, in 
order to provide a successful Global Health Virtual Community. 
The model provides a list of characteristics that a Global Health 
VC design should have in order for it to provide a viable, value-
added experience to the participants. 
Keywords-Community; Health; Global Health; Online 
Communities; Modeling 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the beginning of the 1990’s, people started to create 
online communities, also known as Virtual Communities 
(VCs). The phenomenon was due to the development of the 
World Wide Web. Researchers started to explore ways in 
which people use VCs. For instance, Kivimäki  et al. [1] 
investigated interaction patterns and identity formation in a 
VCs including mechanisms that supported identity formation 
(awareness, voice, text, voice, authentication) [1, 2]. In later 
stages, the emergence of deviant behavior in VCs pushed the 
researchers to propose trust tools [3-5].The ways in which 
teams are formed inside a community were also analyzed and 
coordination [6] and awareness [7] emerged as determinant 
factors in team formation. Later on, both tacit and explicit 
knowledge in VCs [8] [9] were captured and used of in 
different domains [10]. Health related Virtual Communities 
did also emerge, with their own opportunities and challenges 
[11] [12]. 
However, very little has been the effort to address the 
issues related to Global Health Virtual Communities and 
Challenges. In this paper, we will overview these challenges 
and suggest a preliminary model for Global Health VCs. 
In this paper, we will present a model for virtual 
communities in section II, and describe the types of global 
health virtual communities’ challenges in section III. A global 
health virtual community model is described in section IV, 
and section V concludes the paper. 
II. 
VIRTUAL COMMUNITY MODEL 
We will take as a starting point a model for collaborative 
virtual communities that has been suggested by El Morr [11] 
[13]: 
A. A Model for Collaborative VCs 
Four dimensions characterize the model, shown in Figure 
1: the degree of virtuality, the degree of mobility, the degree 
of cooperation and the degree of uniformity. 
The degree of mobility specifies if the VC members is 
‘Still or ‘mobile’ 
The degree of virtuality specifies if an encounter between 
members is ‘physical’ (members are physically in the same 
place) or ‘virtual’ (members meet online) . 
 The degree of cooperation specifies if the members’ 
awareness of each other passes through a simple notification 
mechanism, or if the members ‘collaborate’ dynamically and 
actively on a common aim 
The degree of uniformity specifies if the members are 
extremely ‘homogeneous’ (the VC is a community of 
practice); or ‘heterogeneous’ (having different occupations). 
 
Figure 1. The four dimensions of a collaborative virtual community 
This model is a generic one and we should update it to take 
into consideration the particularities of the health field and of 
the global dimension, inherent to a global health virtual 
community. 
Virtual Community
Degree of 
Mobility
• Still
• Mobile
Degree of 
Virtuality
• Physical
• Virtual
Degree of 
Cooperation
• Notification
• Collaboration
Degree of 
Uniformity
• Homogeneous
• Heterogeneous
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

III. 
GLOBAL HEALTH VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES 
CHALLENGES 
A global health virtual community presents particular 
challenges that should be dealt with in order for it to be 
successful. These challenges are related to the sensitivity of 
the health sector (e.g., confidentiality) and to the global reach 
of the community (e.g., cultures). In the next two paragraphs, 
we will analyze both of these types of challenges. 
A. Health related challenges 
A health VC could be patient centered, profession centered 
or dedicated for general public access. 
Patient-centered VCs focus their activities on care 
delivery mechanisms to provide support for patients while 
they are away from the point of care. Patient support is 
important because social factors, such as isolation and lack of 
social relationships, have a tremendous impact on health. 
Research has shown that social factors have an effect on cold 
[14], coronary heart disease [15][16], cancer, hypertension, 
tuberculosis, cirrhosis of the liver, suicide, and death rate [17]. 
This explain  the development of Health VCs that  support 
patients with conditions such as HIV, Cancer [5, 18-26] and 
depression [27], and others that provide tele-monitoring 
capacity of patients at home [28][29]. 
On the other hand, VCs can be Professional-Centered. 
Such VCs are dedicated to support professionals in their 
activities around patients; they can provide knowledge sharing 
mechanisms [8, 30-33], enable knowledge creation and 
dissemination, or educate the public and non-governmental 
organizations [10]. 
Public-Centered VCs aim to educate the population (e.g., 
self-management of their disease), which empowers the 
public and affect positively their health [34-41] [42] [43]. In 
this context, mobile-based health care VCs is expected to play 
a key role in self-managed care [44]. 
B. Global Virtual Communities Challenges 
A Global Health VC raises many challenges to the 
healthcare community. It shares some of these challenges with 
the local health virtual communities while it has specific ones 
tied to its global perspective. 
1) Common challenges 
Usability is still an issue in information systems 
development, and it is of paramount importance in healthcare. 
In Global Health VCs, it would be crucial to have a user 
interface built to enhance the user experience (e.g., patient, 
nurses, doctors, caregivers). The success of any global health 
VC is related to having a usable interface that enables users 
instead of disabling them.  We shall call this an inclusive 
design in our model. 
The other challenge is to build mechanisms to enable 
participation in the community; such mechanisms are 
essential to avoid lurking [45][46][47]. A participatory 
approach is then unavoidable. 
Many failures in healthcare related information systems 
are related to the lack of members’ support. A global health 
VC should be Supportive; such feature will boost adoption 
and minimize resistance to a disruptive technology. 
The global health VC should also be able to integrate in 
the workflow in place. On a global level, the workflows of 
different participants may differ drastically, having to adapt to 
heterogeneous workflows is necessary for the global health 
VC to operate seamlessly in its environment. A workflow 
adaptive dimension in the global health VC is therefore 
important. 
Security, trust, and privacy/confidentiality are important 
too; though, on a global level the question of data storage is 
sensitive. The geographical location where data is stored and 
the laws that would apply in case of a breach of confidentiality 
are global specific. However, this is a policy issue and not a 
mere technological challenge; policy mechanisms should be 
part of any global health VC model. Hence, the global health 
VC should be policy sensitive.  
Finally, personalization of the information and the 
interface presented to the user are important so that s/he is not 
overwhelmed with information and irrelevant interface 
features. A profile sensitive VC would be necessary. 
2) Global perspective challenges 
Some of the global challenges in Global Health VCs are 
the cultural differences, the environmental features, the 
asymmetry in the infrastructure, and the perceived VC value. 
A global health VC should adapt to many languages and 
possibly cultural differences. A successful global health VC 
should be culturally adaptive. 
Users should acknowledge the differences in the local 
environments; for instance, a disease in one country may be 
irrelevant in another. The global health VC should be 
environmentally adaptive. 
One of the challenges that may be faced is the asymmetry 
in infrastructural (e.g., a developed and a developing country 
may not have access to the same technologies). A global 
health VC should provide many channels for communication 
and cooperation, thus providing technology adaptive features. 
All parties involved from different countries should be 
able to perceive value in the VC. The global health VC can 
achieve this aim by providing means to share resource 
between stakeholders. A fruitful global health VC should be 
able to be poised as a value catalyst. 
IV. 
TOWARDS A GLOBAL HEALTH VIRTUAL 
COMMUNITIES MODEL 
Based on the above analysis, we can adjust the preliminary 
model presented in figure 1 adding to it the features discussed 
above; the result is shown in figure 2. 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 2. A Global Health Virtual Community Model 
A. A scenario 
Consider an example of a global health virtual community 
project, involving a developed and a developing country, 
dedicated for chronic diseases self-management. 
We will apply the above model to analyze the VC 
requirements and identify its high-level needs.  
Degree of Mobility 
Most of the parts of the system need not to be mobile. That 
includes a component of online education that can ne browsed 
on a PC/laptop/tablet. However, a mobile App should be 
provided for people having access to smart phones in both 
developing and developed countries. Besides, in the 
developing country, the e-education can take place using 
targeted SMS messages. For elderly, a DVD presenting the 
educational material would be most appropriate in developing 
countries. Thus, a hybrid approach would be chosen, to 
incorporate online, off-line, mobile and static access to the 
material. 
Degree of Virtuality: The community would be virtual 
since members would not be connected to it virtually and they 
are not present in the same physical space. 
Degree of Cooperation: Consumer members (i.e., 
patients) would need only loose cooperation. A forum would 
be enough if there were a need to connect patients together in 
order for them to exchange experiences. Administrators and 
researchers of the VC will require special tool to enable tight 
cooperation.  
Degree of Uniformity: The community would be 
heterogeneous since it would involve patients, researchers, 
doctors, nurses, field workers, etc. 
Design Inclusivity: The design would have to be inclusive 
since its inception. For instance, the patients can present 
different degrees of disability due to age and/or pathology. 
Therefore, patients would be included in the design in early 
stages. Besides, there would be a need to decide on the 
languages used to present the educational material. 
Participatory Approach: A participatory approach could 
be not needed since members would either seek participation 
for the sake of their own health (e.g., patients), or for the sake 
of providing healthcare advices and monitor the VC (e.g., 
researchers, doctors). 
Supportiveness: A VC administrator could be needed to 
support the members using the system.  
Workflow Adaptability: In this particular VC, the 
workflow is not an issue, since the VC is patient oriented and 
do not interfere with the day to day activities of the healthcare 
providers. 
Policy Sensitivity: The privacy and confidentiality laws 
and regulations would be implemented based on the local laws 
and regulations of the host server (e.g. developed country). 
However, policies regarding data extraction and use should be 
set in place in order for all parties to be able to use data without 
confidentiality breaches. 
Profile Sensitivity: The user interface should be adapted 
to the patient profiles. Age and pathology would be major 
factors in the adaptation process; for example, elderly would 
need a non-cluttered, simplified, user interface. 
Cultural Adaptability: The researchers would have to 
use both languages in effect in both countries. Therefore, the 
educational material should be translated. 
Environmental 
Adaptability: 
There 
was 
no 
environmental issue since the VC is educating patients having 
the same chronic diseases. 
Infrastructure Adaptability: Researcher could decided 
on many delivery strategies for the educational modules. A 
basic cellular communication infrastructure in the developing 
country could dictate an SMS delivery method for mobile 
users of that country. While a 4G network in the developed 
country would lead to developing Apps for patients with smart 
phone devices. Many delivery channels would then be in 
place. 
Value Catalyst: We could expect the VC to be perceived 
as adding value for patients in both developed and developing 
countries. Beside, healthcare and economic systems in both 
countries would benefit from the VC role in enhancing the 
patients quality of health. 
B. Consequences 
This scenario demonstrate how would the model be 
applied and how it would provide help in structuring the way 
we identify the high-level needs of a global health VC, leading 
us to ask the right questions and make the right analysis and 
design of the system. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper analyzed the virtual community features and 
the health field needs and challenges in a global perspective; 
it then proposes to enlarge a previous VC model to make it 
adaptive to a global health perspective. The model provides a 
list of characteristics a Global Health VC design should take 
into consideration to implementing a viable, successful, value-
added experience to the participants in a global health virtual 
Global Health Virtual 
Community
Degree of 
Mobility
Degree of 
Virtuality
Degree of 
Cooperation
Degree of 
Uniformity
Inclusive 
Design
Participatory 
Approach
Supportivnes
s
Workflow 
Adaptability
Policy 
Sensitivity
Profile 
Sensitivity
Cultural 
Adaptivity
Environment
al 
Adaptability
Infrastructure 
Adaptability
Value 
Catalyst
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

community. We provided a scenario to demonstrate the ability 
of the model to guide developers through the analysis phase 
of a global health VC project, and to provide a streamlined 
way to identify a suitable course of actions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Kivimäki, K. Kauppinen, and M. Robinson, "Identity in 
virtual communities," SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 19, 1998, pp. 29-
33 
[2] A. Malhotra, S. Gosain, and A. Hars, "Evolution of a virtual 
community: understanding design issues through a longitudinal 
study," presented at the Proceedings of the eighteenth 
international conference on Information systems, Atlanta, 
Georgia, United States, 1997, pp. 59-73 
[3] A. Abdul-Rahman and S. Hailes, "Supporting Trust in Virtual 
Communities," presented at the 33rd Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, Maui, Hawaii, 2000, pp. 1-9 
[4] A. Ali Shaikh and R. Omer, "Formalising trust for online 
communities," in Fourth international joint conference on 
Autonomous agents and multiagent systems, The Netherlands, 
2005, pp. 1245-1246. 
[5] W. Ebner, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "Trust in Virtual 
Healthcare Communities: Design and Implementation of Trust-
Enabling Functionalities," presented at the Proceedings of the 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS'04) - Track 7 - 
Volume 7, 2004, pp. 1-10 
[6] Y. Zhang and M. Weiss, "Virtual communities and team 
formation," Crossroads, vol. 10, 2003, pp. 5-5 
[7] D. G. Boyer, M. J. Handel, and J. Herbsleb, "Virtual 
community prescence awareness," SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 19, 
1998, pp. 11-14 
[8] Y. Merali and J. Davies, "Knowledge capture and utilization in 
virtual communities," presented at the Proceedings of the 1st 
international conference on Knowledge capture, Victoria, 
British Columbia, Canada, 2001, pp. 92-99 
[9] J. Yu, Z. Jiang, and H. C. Chan, "Knowledge contribution in 
problem solving virtual communities: the mediating role of 
individual motivations," presented at the Proceedings of the 
2007 ACM SIGMIS CPR conference on Computer personnel 
research: The global information technology workforce, St. 
Louis, Missouri, USA, 2007, pp. 144-152 
[10] C. El Morr, J. Subercaze, P. Maret, and M. Rioux, "A Virtual 
Knowledge Community for Human Rights Monitoring for 
People with Disabilities," presented at the IADIS International 
Conference on Web Based Communities, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands, 2008, pp. 78-84 
[11] C. El Morr, "Mobile Virtual Communities in Healthcare The 
Chronic Disease Management Case," in Ubiquitous Health and 
Medical Informatics: The Ubiquity 2.0 Trend and Beyond, ed: 
IGI Global, 2010, pp. 258-274 
[12] C. El Morr, "Health Care Virtual Communities: Challenges and 
Opportunities," in Handbook of Research on Developments in 
E-Health and Telemedicine: Technological and Social 
Perspectives, ed: IGI Global, 2010, pp. 278-298 
[13] C. El Morr and J. Kawash, "Mobile Virtual Communities 
Research: A Synthesis of Current Trends and a Look at Future 
Perspectives," 
International 
Journal 
for 
Web 
Based 
Communities, vol. 3, 2007, pp. 386-403 
[14] R. M. Heeler, "Social ties and susceptibility to the common 
cold," JAMA, vol. 278, January 22, 1992, pp. 1231-1232 
[15] R. B. Case, A. J. Moss, N. Case, M. McDermott, and S. Eberly, 
"Living alone after myocardial infarction. Impact on 
prognosis," JAMA, vol. 267, January 22, 1992, pp. 515-519 
[16] R. B. Williams, JC Barefoot, RM Califf, TL Haney, WB 
Saunders, et al., "Prognostic importance of social and economic 
resources among medically treated patients with angiographically 
documented coronary artery disease," JAMA, vol. 267, January 22, 
1992, pp. 520-524 
[17] R. B. Adler, R. F. Proctor, N. Towne, and J. A. Rolls, Looking 
Out Looking In, 3rd ed.: Thomson - Nelson, 2008. 
[18] D. H. Gustafson, R P Hawkins, E W Boberg, F McTavish, B 
Owens, M Wise et al., "CHESS: 10 years of research and 
development in consumer health informatics for broad populations, 
including the underserved," in The 10th World Congress on Medical 
Informatics (Medinfo 2001), London,UK, 2001, pp. 1459-1463 
[19] D. H. Gustafson, R P Hawkins, E W Boberg, F McTavish, B 
Owens, M Wise, et al., "CHESS: 10 years of research and 
development in consumer health informatics for broad populations, 
including the underserved," International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 65, November 12, 2002, 2002, pp. 169-177 
[20] Z. Temesgen, J. E. Knappe-Langworthy, M. M. S. Marie, B. A. 
Smith, and R. A. Dierkhising, "Comprehensive Health 
Enhancement Support System (CHESS) for People with HIV 
Infection," AIDS and Behavior, vol. 10, January 2006, pp. 35-
40, 
[21] Y. Arnold, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Virtual Communities in 
Health Care : Roles, Requirements and Restrictions," presented 
at the Multikonferenz Wirtschaftsinformatik (MKWI) 2004, 
Universität Duisburg-Essen, 2004, pp. 18-23 
[22] Y. Arnold, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "CoPEP: A 
Development Process Model for Community Platforms for 
Cancer Patients," presented at the The XIth European 
Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), 2003. 
[23] H. Krcmar, Y. Arnold, M. Daum, and J. M. Leimeister, 
"Virtual 
communities 
in 
health 
care: 
the 
case 
of 
"krebsgemeinschaft.de"," SIGGROUP Bull., vol. 23, 2002, pp. 
18-23 
[24] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Towards m-
communities: the case of COSMOS healthcare," in The 36th 
Annual 
Hawaii 
International 
Conference 
on 
System 
Sciences(2003), 2003. 
[25] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Towards mobile 
Communities 
for 
cancer 
patients: 
the 
case 
of 
Krebsgemeinschaft.de," International Journal for Web Based 
Communities, vol. 1, 2004, pp. 58-70 
[26] J. M. Leimeister, P. Sidiras, and H. Krcmar, "Success factors of virtual 
communities from the perspective of members and operators: an 
empirical study," in 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences(2004), 2004, pp. 1-10 
[27] T. K. Houston, L. A. Cooper, and D. E. Ford, "Internet support 
groups for depression: A 1-year prospective cohort study," The 
American Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 159, 2002, pp. 2062-2068 
[28] A. Pitsillides, B. Pitsillides, G. Samaras, M. Dikaiakos, E. 
Christodoulou, et al., "DITIS: A collaborative virtual medical team 
for home healthcare of cancer patients," in M-Health: Emerging 
Mobile Health Systems, R. H. Istepanian, S. Laxminarayan, and C. S. 
Pattichis, Eds., ed: Springer, 2005, pp. 247-266. 
[29] G. Demiris, D. R. Parker Oliver, D. Porock, and K. L. 
Courtney, " The Missouri telehospice project: background and 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

next steps," Home Health Care Technology Report, vol. 1, 
2004, pp. 55-57 
[30] H. Clark, "Formal Knowledge Networks: A Study of Canadian 
Experiences 
Helping 
Knowledge 
Networks 
Work," 
International Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg, 
1998. 
[31] T. 
Willard, 
"Helping 
Knowledge 
Networks 
Work," 
International Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg 
2001. 
[32] J. Davies, A. Duke, and Y. Sure, "OntoShare: a knowledge 
management environment for virtual communities of practice," 
presented at the Proceedings of the 2nd international 
conference on Knowledge capture, Sanibel Island, FL, USA, 
2003, pp. 20-26 
[33] P. Maret, M. Hammoud, and J. Calmet, "Muti Agent Based 
Virtual Knowledge Communities for Distributed Knowledge 
Management," in International Workshop on Engineering 
Societies in the Agents World (ESAW), Toulouse, France, 
2004, pp. 33-44. 
[34] E. T. Adolfsson, B. Smide, E. Gregeby, L. Fernström, and K. 
Wikblad, "Implementing empowerment group education in 
diabetes," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 53, June, 
2004, pp. 319-324 
[35] R. M. Anderson and M. M. Funnell, "Patient empowerment: 
reflections on the challenge of fostering the adoption of a new 
paradigm," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 57, May, 
2005, pp. 153-157 
[36] I. Aujoulat, W. d'Hoore, and A. Deccache, "Patient 
empowerment 
in 
theory 
and 
practice: Polysemy 
or 
cacophony?," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 66, April, 
2007, pp. 13-20 
[37] N. C. Elder, S. L. Regan, H. Pallerla, L. Levin, D. Post, and D. 
J. Cegela, "Development of an instrument to measure seniors' 
patient safety health beliefs: The Seniors Empowerment and 
Advocacy in Patient Safety (SEAPS) survey," Patient 
Education and Counseling, vol. 69, December, 2007, pp. 100-
107 
[38] C. Feste and R. M. Anderson, "Empowerment: from 
philosophy to practice," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 
26, 1995, pp. 139-144 
[39] P. K. Hansford, "Empowerment through choice - enabling 
speech to flow," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 34, 
May 1, 1998, pp. S76-S76 
[40] K. Johansson, S. Salanterä, J. Katajisto, and H. Leino-Kilpi, 
"Written orthopedic patient education materials from the point 
of view of empowerment by education," Patient Education and 
Counseling, vol. 52, , February, 2004, pp. 175-181 
[41] B. Luban-Plozza, "Empowerment techniques: from doctor-
centered (Balint approach) to patient-centred discussion 
groups," Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 26, 
September, 1995, pp. 257-263 
[42] J. Meuser, T. Bean, J. Goldman, and S. Reeves, "Family health 
teams: A new Canadian interprofessional initiative," Journal of 
Interprofessional Care, vol. 20, 2006, pp. 436-428 
[43] HealthCanada, Handbook 3A-Service Delivery Plan for the 
Home and Community Care Program, 2000. 
[44] B. H. Stamm, "Creating Virtual Community: Telemedicine and 
Self Care," in Secondary Traumatic Stress: Self-Care Issues for 
Clinicians, Researchers and Educators, B. H. Stamm, Ed., ed: 
Sidran Press, 1999, pp. 179-207. 
[45] J. Koh, Y.-G. Kim, B. Butler, and G.-W. Bock, "Encouraging 
participation in virtual communities," Commun. ACM, vol. 50, 
2007, pp. 68-73 
[46] B. Nonnecke and J. Preece, "Lurker demographics: counting 
the silent," in Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on 
Human factors in computing systems, The Hague, The 
Netherlands, 2000, pp. 73-80. 
[47] L. Sproull and S. Faraj, "Atheism, Sex, and Databases : The 
Net as a social technology," in Culture of the Internet, S. 
Kiesler, Ed., ed: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1997. 
 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

