Automated Measurments of Echocardiographic Global Longitudenal Strain 
Hisham Safawi, Mohamad Hajj-Hassan, Hussein 
Hajj-Hassan 
Department of Biomedical Engineering  
International University of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: mohamad.hajjhassan@b-iu.edu.lb,  
Hassan M. Khachfe 
Lebanese Institute for Biomedical Research and 
Application (LIBRA)
Lebanese International University  
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
Abstract— 
Echocardiographic 
determination 
of 
Global 
Longitudinal Strain (GLS) by manual tracing of endocardial 
borders is time consuming and operator dependent, whereas 
visual assessment is inherently subjective. In this paper, the 
development of a fully automated software using machine 
learning-enabled image analysis is presented. For a total of 30 
patients, apical 4, 2 and 3-chamber views were collected from a 
center that assessed GLS using manual tracing. Manual 
tracing was done by the same user to calculate user 
inimitability. In addition, datasets were saved in a centralized 
database, and machine learning-enabled software (AutoStrain, 
TomTec-Arena 
1.2, 
TomTec 
Imaging 
Systems, 
Unterschleissheim, Germany) was applied for fully automated 
GLS measurements. AutoStrain measurements were feasible in 
95% of studies and the average analysis time was less than 3 
sec/ patient. Interclass correlation coefficients and Bland-
Altman analysis revealed good ratios compared to manual 
tracing and user to user ratios. Fully automated analysis of 
echocardiography images provides rapid and reproducible 
assessment of left ventricular GLS compared to manual 
tracing. 
Keywords-Global longitudinal strain; Echocardiography; 
Machine learning. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
As medical technology in healthcare continues to get 
more advanced, medical companies invent new algorithms 
claiming to facilitate everyday workflow. Technology 
involves lots of research and development, which results in 
selling those algorithms in the form of software. The purpose 
of those pieces of software is to facilitate the everyday 
workflow of end-users making the workflow more atomized. 
Atomization, artificial intelligence, augmented intelligence 
and machine learning are all dependent on algorithms 
targeting time management and consistent reading.  
Cardiology is one of the major fields in healthcare where 
automated 
measurements 
have 
been 
widely 
spread. 
According to the results seen, critical decisions are taken by 
cardiologists towards their patients. Measurements like Left 
Ventricular Ejection Fraction (LVEF) were, for a long time, 
one of the main values cardiologists look into to evaluate the 
heart function. Lately, Two-dimensional STE-derived Global 
longitudinal Strain (GLS) appears to be reproducible and 
feasible for clinical use and offers incremental prognostic 
data over LVEF in a variety of cardiac conditions, although 
measurements vary among vendors and software versions 
[1]. 
The quantification of left ventricular (LV) size, 
geometry, and function represents the most frequent 
indication for an echocardiographic study and is pivotal for 
patient evaluation [2]. LV volumes, Ejection Fractions (EFs) 
and GLS can be measured using different imaging 
modalities. 2-dimensional echocardiography continues to be 
the most commonly utilized technique in clinical practice 
due to low radiation doses, feasibility and availability of this 
modality. Although the recommendations are to use 3D 
echocardiography to evaluate volumes and strains [3], 2D 
echocardiography is still by far the most common used 
technique.   
Visual assessment is still popular within cardiologists 
while manual tracing lacks reproducibility in a very sensitive 
marker in cardiac function [4][5]. In this study, we used a 
novel, fully automated software to generate GLS from 
biplane views of the LV and compare them with manual 
tracing. 
In Section 2, we will explain the methodology we used to 
prepare the data sample and extract numbers. In Sections 3, 
we will discuss the results. Section 4 will present the 
conclusion and future works.   
II.
METHODOLOGY
A total of 30 cases were collected from a Lebanese 
cardiology lab randomly. The collected studies were 
anonymized to ensure data privacy. Afterwards, Apical 4 
Chamber (4-C), Apical 2 Chamber (2-C) and Apical 3 
Chamber (3-C) views where selected with a minimum 1 
heart cycle; see Figure 1.  
    All studies were imported to TOMTEC-Arena 1.2 
(TOMTEC Imaging Systems, Unterschleissheim, Germany), 
a computer vision vendor-independent software package that 
applies a machine-learning algorithm for DICOM images 
[6]. AutoStrain, a fully automated software algorithm to 
calculate GLS in a very simple way was applied. A standard 
workflow requesting to allocate 4-C, 2-C and 3-C views was 
followed. The same workflow was followed all over the 
studies in Auto-Strain and manual tracing to ensure 
consistency and minimize any user workflow errors.  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 1. Apical 4C, 2C and 3C views. 
     The algorithm would then run the automated boarder 
detection and identify the end systole and end diastole; see 
Figure 2.  
Figure 2. AutoStrain software, tracing of 4-C, 2-C and 3-C views; GLS 
(3P) automatically calculated. 
GLS triplane, GLS (3P), will be saved and same frames 
will then be given to an expert investigator to manually 
change boarder detection in case the auto-tracing was not 
correct. As the boarders are being edited, software is 
automatically applying corrections all over the targeted 
heart cycle. New GLS (3P) is generated and saved offline to 
be compared with AutoStrain results. 
To measure imitability ratio, the same studies are 
manually traced again by the same investigator following 
the same workflow and using the same frames. New GLS 
(3P) measurements were collected.  
Due to poor image quality and missing Echo 
Cardiogram (ECG) data, for studies were eliminated (study 
1, 20, 22 and 30). ECG data is essential for the software to 
detect End-Systole and End-Diastole.  
III.
RESULTS
While Auto-strain has 100 % reproducibility, manual 
tracing has an obvious inimitability ratio; see Figure 3.  
Figure 3. Manual tracing imitability ratio. 
Figure 3 shows recordings for the GLS (3P) variance 
percentage between manual tracing 1 and manual tracing 2. 
Although same user was involved, same studies and frames, 
it is obvious that manual tracing lacks consistency. The 
average variance was 4% all over the data set in comparison 
with a 3% variance between manual tracing and automatic 
tracking; see Figure 4.  
Figure 4. Manual tracing to Auto-Strain ratio. 
Figure 4 shows recordings of the ratio between manual 
tracing results to Auto-Strain GLS values. Auto-strain has a 
huge advantage in terms of reproducibility and time saving 
in comparison to manual tracing. In the data sample we 
worked on, we had patients with poor GLS and others with 
normal GLS. Data accuracy does not depend on GLS value 
and patient condition, but on image quality and the right 
acquisition windows.   
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of the work reported here is to prove the 
functionality of machine learning automatic algorithms. 
Those algorithms can never replace cardiologists in the 
daily work they do, however, as they claim, their main 
purpose is to facilitate the workflow and increase 
reproducibility and accuracy. Physician will always have the 
superiority, especially when it comes to irregular anatomy, 
for example patients with congenital heart diseases, where 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

no algorithm can detect the anatomy and explain the 
physiology of the heart.  
As future work, increasing the number of analyzed 
studies will provide more accurate results. Moreover, 
comparing results from different user’s manual tracing ratio 
is a result to monitor.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful for the financial support given by Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of 
Canada, Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR), 
and the Canada Research Chair program. We would like to 
acknowledge the assistance of the McGill’s Nanotools and 
Microfabrication Laboratory in preparing the described 
neural microprobe samples. 
REFERENCES
[1]  R. M. Lang, L. P, Badano, V. Mor-Avi, J. Afilalo, A. 
Armstrong , L. Ernande, F. A. Flachskampf, E. Foster, S. A. 
Goldstein, T. Kuznetsova, P. Lancellotti, D. Muraru, M. H. 
Picard, E. R. Rietzschel, L. Rudski, K. T. Spencer, W. Tsang, 
and J. U. Voigt. Recommendations for Cardiac Chamber 
Quantification by Echocardiography in Adults: An Update 
from the American Society of Echocardiography and the 
European Associationof Cardiovascular Imaging. 
[2] M. Wong, G. Johnson , and R. Shabetai , for the V-HeFT VA 
Cooperative Studies Group. Echocardiographic variables as 
prognostic indicators and therapeutic monitors in chronic 
congestive heart failure. Veterans Affairs cooperative studies 
VHeFT I and II. Circulation 1993;87: pp.65–70.. 
[3] R. 
M. 
Lang, 
L. 
P. 
Badano, 
and 
V. 
Mor-Avi, 
Recommendations for cardiac chamber quantification by 
echocardiography in adults: an update from the American 
Society of Echocardiography and the European Association of 
Cardiovascular Imaging. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2015;28: 
pp.1–39.e14. 
[4] S. A. Reisner, P. Lysyansky, and Y. Agmon. Global 
longitudinal strain: a novel index of left ventricular systolic 
function. J Am Soc Echocardiogr 2004;17: pp.630. 
[5] J. U. Voigt, G. Pedrizzetti, and P. Lysyansky. Definitions for 
a 
common 
standard 
for 
2D 
speckle 
tracking 
echocardiography: 
consensus 
document 
of 
the 
EACVI/ASE/Industry Task Force to standardize deformation 
imaging. Eur Heart J Cardiovasc Imaging 2015;28: pp.183–
193. 
[6]   C. M. Bishop. Pattern Recognition and Machine Learning. 
New York, NY: Springer, 2006. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

