Implementing Thyroid Ontology for Diagnosis and Care 
 
Özgü Can, Emine Sezer, Murat Osman Ünalır, Okan Bursa, Mine Öz and Tuğçe Dülge 
Department of Computer Engineering, Ege University, 35100 Bornova, Izmir, Turkey 
e-mail:{ozgu.can, emine.sezer, murat.osman.unalir, okan.bursa }@ege.edu.tr,{mineoz621, dulgeetugce}@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Healthcare systems are changing their information 
systems 
with 
the 
increased 
advances 
in 
information 
technologies. With these improvements, patients expectations 
are also increased. Consequently, patients expect a quick 
diagnosis process and improvement in the treatment process. 
Additionally, it is important to share and reuse patients’ 
information between different healthcare organizations and 
healthcare workers. There are lots of data standards and 
ontologies developed in the health domain. In this work, we 
propose a thyroid ontology for the diagnosis and care of the 
thyroid-related diseases. The proposed thyroid ontology will be 
a part of the Semantic Web based health information system in 
order to provide interoperability and reuse of health data. The 
proposed thyroid ontology can be used for treatment 
suggestion systems. Therefore, the healthcare decision support 
system will be improved. 
Keywords-Thyroid 
Ontology; 
Healthcare 
Information 
Systems; Semantic Web; Ontology Development. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The continuous advancements in healthcare information 
technologies has lead to better opportunities for patients and 
also for healthcare workers. As healthcare is a consumer-
oriented domain, there are various challenges in the 
healthcare domain. One of these challenges is to provide a 
better diagnosis and care to patients.  
The thyroid gland is one of the most important organs 
that controls the metabolism of the body. The function of the 
thyroid gland, which assumes a vital function in the body, 
may deteriorate due to factors, such as genetics radiation, 
iodine deficiency and aging. As a result of this, diseases such 
as goiter, thyroiditis, hyperthyroidism, hypothyroidism, 
nodule, thyroid cancer can occur. Tests for these diseases are 
hormone and antibody tests. Hormone tests are based on the 
T3, T4 and TSH (Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone) values that 
are secreted by the thyroid. In antibody tests, Anti-TPO 
(Anti-Thyroidperoxidase) and Anti-TG (Anti-Thyroglobulin) 
values are more frequently observed.  
In this paper, we propose a thyroid ontology. The 
proposed thyroid ontology in this study has more than one 
test that refers to these values. Our ontology can identify the 
disease according to these reference values. In contrast to the 
ontologies presented in [1] [2] that are based on expert 
systems, the goal of this ontology is to develop a knowledge 
base for thyroid disease, to query and to reuse the stored 
information of patients’ test results for diagnosis and care. 
Therefore, it is possible to integrate the proposed thyroid 
ontology with other healthcare information systems in order 
to create an interoperable treatment system [3]. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents the 
lifecycle of the thyroid ontology and explains the 
development of the thyroid ontology. Section 3 presents rule 
examples for the thyroid ontology. Finally, Section 4 
concludes and outlines the direction of the future work. 
II. 
THE LIFECYCLE OF THYROID ONTOLOGY 
In order to develop the thyroid ontology, we followed the 
ontology development steps that are presented in [4]. 
According to this guide, the first step is determining the 
domain and scope of the ontology. Therefore, we defined the 
domain and scope of the thyroid ontology by answering 
some basic questions, such as: “What is the domain of the 
ontology?”, “Where do we use the ontology?”, “Who will 
use the ontology?”, etc. The answers to these questions lead 
us to develop the ontology. In our thyroid ontology, we 
describe the medical tests that a physician requests in order 
to diagnose thyroid-related diseases and also to follow her 
patient’s medical situation after the diagnosis. For the 
diagnosis of thyroid diseases, blood tests, thyroid ultrasound, 
thyroid scintigraphy and thyroid fine needle aspiration 
biopsy are used. The scope of the proposed thyroid ontology 
is only for blood tests. The patient is diagnosed based on the 
reference values according to the values of the blood test 
result. In addition to the test results and diagnostics, the 
laboratories where these tests are performed, the tasks and 
the patient information are defined in the thyroid ontology. 
The second step in the ontology lifecycle is to define the 
competency questions that the thyroid ontology should be 
able to answer. While creating these questions, we focused 
on questions about laboratory results. Some questions are 
listed below: 
• 
Does the gender and age affect thyroid tests? 
• 
What are thyroid gland diseases? 
• 
Which hormones should be analyzed for the 
diagnosis of the disease? 
• 
Which hormone tests should be performed to 
determine disease types? 
• 
How can blood tests be interpreted? 
• 
What is the relationship between TSH, T3 and T4 
hormones? 
• 
Are antibodies and hormones the same thing?  
• 
What are the conditions in which the thyroid 
antibody is used to diagnose the disease? 
• 
Which anti-TPO and anti-thyroglobulin antibodies 
show hyperthyroidism? 
• 
Is hyperthyroidism the same disease as goiter? 
• 
Is diffuse hyperplasia a goiter disorder or a thyroid 
disease? 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

• 
Which hormone level should be considered in order 
to keep track of the primary hyperthyroidism? 
After defining the competency questions, we identified 
the important terms in the thyroid ontology. For this purpose, 
we created a comprehensive list of terms without considering 
whether there is a relationship between concepts or not. After 
completing this list, we performed a distinction between 
classes and instances that are necessary for the next step. 
Then, we used the most common methods for developing the 
class hierarchy, such as "top-down" and "bottom-up". We 
described the basic class and subclass concepts of the thyroid 
ontology as seen in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The basic concepts of the thyroid ontology. 
The thyroid ontology includes the diagnostic test in order 
to make diagnoses. For this purpose, we created the 
diagnosticTest class. There are different tests for the 
diagnosis of each disease, so after establishing the disease 
hierarchy we created a separate class hierarchy for these 
tests. Many test methods are used for the diagnosis of the 
disease. But, in the proposed thyroid ontology we only 
included blood tests. Blood tests are divided into two 
subgroups: antibody tests and hormone tests. As seen in 
Figure 1, antibody and hormone tests are divided into 
subclasses. Each subclass diagnoses the disease by looking at 
the values of different hormone or antibody types. A separate 
class hierarchy has been established for the types of 
antibodies and hormones that these tests use in diagnostics. 
The thyroid ontology also includes information on where 
these tests are performed (laboratory), who owns them 
(patient), and who is responsible for the tests (staff). 
Figure 2 shows the subclasses of thyroid disease. Thyroid 
disease varies according to persons’ age. For this reason, we 
grouped the patients according to their age (ageRange) in 
order to determine at what age range the likelihood of being 
sick is greater. Patients within the ageRange class are kept 
by age groups. Thus, we can easily reach the age range of the 
diagnosed patients, and also get a detailed information like 
the most common disease in the adult age groups. 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  The subclasses of the thyroid class. 
After completing the definition of the class hierarchies, 
we continued to develop the thyroid ontology by specifying 
object properties in order to represent relationships between 
classes. The object properties of the thyroid ontology are 
given in Figure 3. The definition of these properties are listed 
below: 
• 
defines: Represents the relationship between the 
diagnosticTest class and thyroid class. 
So, the diagnosis of the test results will be easily 
accessed. 
• 
hasAgeRange: 
Represents 
the 
relationship 
between patient class and the ageRange class. 
So, it will be possible to determine the age range of 
diseases that are more common. By using this 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

relationship, patients within the ageRange class 
are kept according to their age groups. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  The object properties of the thyroid ontology. 
• 
hasDisease: 
Represents 
the 
relationship 
between patient class and thyroid class. 
• 
hasTest: Represents the relationship between 
patient class and diagnosticTest class. So, 
patients’ test information is easily accessed through 
this relationship. 
• 
hasValueType: Represents the relationship 
between 
Blood_Test 
class 
and 
testValuesType class. So, it is easy to learn 
which hormone value or antibody value are checked 
in a test. 
• 
isDoneBy: Represents the relationship between 
Blood_Test class and testValuesType 
class. 
• 
isDoneBy: Represents the relationship between 
diagnosticTest 
class 
and 
laboratoryTechnician class. The goal is to 
easily reach the knowledge of which technician 
made the test. 
• 
isRequestBy: 
Represents 
the 
relationship 
between diagnosticTest class and doctor 
class. By using this relationship, the doctor who 
requested the patient’s tests could be obtained.  
• 
isResponsibleBy: Represents the relationship 
between diagnosticTest class and nurse 
class. The aim is to access the information of the 
nurse in charge of the patient during the testing 
process. 
• 
testedIn: Represents the relationship between 
diagnosticTest class and laboratory 
class. By using this relationship, the information 
about the laboratory in which the tests are 
performed could be reached. 
After completing the creation of object properties, we 
continued to develop the thyroid ontology by specifying data 
properties. Figure 4 shows data properties of the thyroid 
ontology.  
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  The data properties of the thyroid ontology. 
The definition of these properties are listed below: 
• 
hasAge: Represents the age information of the 
patient. 
• 
hasPersonDefinition: 
Represents 
the 
information about the person. 
• 
hasName: Represents the name information of the 
person. 
• 
hasPatientDefinition: 
Represents 
the 
information about the patient. 
• 
hasGender: Represents the gender of the person. 
• 
hasTCno: Represents the social security number 
of the person. 
• 
hasStaffDefinition: 
Represents 
the 
information about the staff. 
• 
hasStaffID: Represents the identity number 
about the staff. 
• 
hasTestDefinition: 
Represents 
the 
information about the test. 
• 
hasTestName: Represents the name of the test. 
• 
hasTestResult: Represents the result of the test 
which is used to diagnose the patient by comparing 
it with the reference values of the patient. 
• 
hasValue: Represents the range values of the 
hormone and antibody types used in the test. 
• 
lowerLimit: Represents the lower limit of the 
hormone and antibody types used in the test. 
• 
upperLimit: Represents the upper limit of the 
hormone and antibody types used in the test. 
In Figure 5, all of the relationships between classes of the 
proposed thyroid ontology are shown.  
Finally, we created individuals of the given concepts of 
the thyroid ontology. The individuals of the thyroid ontology 
can be seen in Figure 6. 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 5.  The relationship between the classes of the thyroid ontology. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Individuals of the thyroid ontology. 
III. 
IMPLEMENTING RULES 
After creating the individuals of the proposed thyroid 
ontology, we wrote Semantic Web Rule Language (SWRL) 
[5] rules. Rules allow the ontology to reason about itself [6]. 
The rules are given in Figure 7. 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  SWRL rules for the thyroid ontology. 
The ageRules given in Figure 7 automatically set the 
hasAgeRange relationship between the patient and the 
“child”, “teenager”, “adult”, or “old” instances by comparing 
the value with the age range when the patient hasAge data 
property value is entered. Therefore, there is no need to enter 
the age range for the patient. 
Figure 8 shows the rule that is written for the diagnosis of 
the disease. This rule establishes the “defines” relationship 
between the test and the disease itself, and compares the 
result of the test with the min. or max. limit of the hormone 
or antibody that is considered as the reference value. 
Consequently, according to the result of the test, the disease 
is diagnosed. 
 
 
 
Figure 8.  Rule for the diagnosis. 
The thyroid ontology has ALCRF(D) expressivity. Before 
we run the rules in the proposed thyroid ontology, the axiom 
number was 472, after we execute rules this number has 
increased to 661. The related metrics are shown in Figure 9 
and Figure 10, respectively. So, this shows the ontology 
works properly and increases axioms. We also wrote Simple 
Protocol and RDF Query Language (SPARQL) [7] queries 
and saw that these rules work correctly. The thyroid ontology 
is still being developed and extended with new concepts, 
object and data properties. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
Figure 9.  The thyroid ontology metrics before executing rules. 
 
 
Figure 10.  The thyroid ontology metrics after executing rules. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we proposed a thyroid ontology that will be 
a part of the Semantic Web-based Health Information 
System. The aim of this work is to provide interoperability 
and to reuse health data. Therefore, the healthcare decision 
support system will be improved. The thyroid ontology is 
still being developed, and will be extended with new 
concepts. As a future work, we will integrate Friend of a 
Friend (FOAF) ontology to describe personal information 
[8]. Also, privacy concepts will be added to the proposed 
ontology in order to ensure patient privacy. 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Rawte and B. Roy, “OBESTDD: Ontology Based Expert 
System for Thyroid Disease Diagnosis”, In Prooceedings of 
International Conference on Nascent Technologies in the 
Engineering Field (ICNTE-2015), Navi Mumbai, India, 
January 9-10, 2015. 
[2] V. Rawte and B. Roy,“Thyroid Disease Diagnosis using 
Ontology based Expert System”, International Journal of 
Engineering Research & Technology (IJERT), Vol. 4, Issue 
06, pp. 365-370, 2015. 
[3] E. Sezer, O. Can, O. Bursa, and M. O. Unalir, “Towards 
Interoperable Ontologies: Blood Test Ontology with FOAF”, 
In Proceedings of The Tenth International Conference on 
Advances in Semantic Processing (SEMAPRO 2016), Venice, 
Italy, pp. 32-36, October 9-13, 2016. 
[4] N. F. Noy and D. L. McGuinness, “Ontology Development 
101: 
A 
Guide 
to 
Creating 
Your 
First 
Ontology”, 
http://www.ksl.stanford.edu/people/dlm/papers/ontology-
tutorial-noy-mcguinness.pdf. [Retrieved: October, 2017] 
[5] W3C, “SWRL: A Semantic Web Rule Language Combining 
OWL and RuleML”, https://www.w3.org/Submission/SWRL. 
[Retrieved: October, 2017] 
[6] T. Eiter, G. Ianni, T. Krennwallner, and A. Polleres, “Rules 
and Ontologies for the Semantic Web”, Reasoning Web, Vol. 
5224, pp. 1-53, 2008. 
[7] W3C, 
“SPARQL 
Query 
Language 
for 
RDF”, 
https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-sparql-query. 
[Retrieved: 
October, 2017] 
[8] The 
friend 
of 
a 
friend 
(FOAF) 
project, 
http://www.foafproject.org/. [Retrieved: October, 2017] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

