Impaired Hand Training Device with Wireless Data Communication
Majd Gahreeb1 Rabah Yehya1 Ali Hage-Diab2
Ali Bazzi1
Hassan M. Khachfe3
1 Department of Computer and Communication Engineering
2Department of Biomedical Engineering
3Center for Quality Assurance, Institutional Assessment, & Scientific Research
International University of Beirut, Beirut, Lebanon
Corresponding author’s email: majd.ghareeb@b-iu.edu.lb
Abstract— In this paper, we aim at combining assistive
technology with the Internet of Things in order to create a
system with an important health impact on the quality of life of
people with disabilities. In this system, an impaired hand
training device with real time data transactions has been
designed and developed. This device allows patients to practice
their hand rehabilitation routine daily at home avoiding the
exhausting transportation to the clinic or the hospital. Then, it
will wirelessly and automatically send the acquired data to a
Web system accessed by the physician and the patient as well.
Consequently, the physician will be able to view, monitor, and
adjust
the
requested
routines
for
each
patient
and
communicate this information with him/her in order to achieve
the best results in the shortest possible time.
Keywords-assistive
technology;
stretching
sensor;
hand
rehabilitation; Arduino Wireless communication; Web.
I.
INTRODUCTION
"Based on the Hebbian theory, Siegrid Löwel claims that
"Cells
that
fire
together,
wire
together"
[1]".
The
neuroscience
Hebbian
theory
explains
the
ability
of synapses to strengthen or weaken over time, in response to
the increase or decrease in their “synaptic plasticity”, which
is the ability of synapses to strengthen or weaken over time,
in response to increases or decreases in their activity. Hence,
this insures that neurons are able to adapt with the correct
learning process and clarifies how intensive training can help
patients
in
many
clinical
cases
to
overcome
their
impairments [1]. Relying on this finding, a lot of research
has been applied in the domain of assistive technology.
Assistive technology includes any item, tool, device or study
that is designed for assisting, adapting, and rehabilitating
people with disabilities. Wheelchairs, hand helpers, reaching
tools, prosthesis, etc., are all examples that could be included
under this umbrella. Nevertheless, research goes far beyond
these
traditional
pieces
of
equipment
to
follow
the
technology revolution with many assisting smart devices.
In the last decade, these devices have been seen on the
market and continue to develop. However, each of them still
raises concerns, such as, reliability, ease of use, weight, the
relatively expensive cost of such technology, the lack of a
database that stores the acquired information and the smooth
interface between the patient and the physician.
Approximately 315,000 patients in Canada live with the
after effects of strokes and it costs around 3.6 billion dollars
per year in hospitals and rehabilitation centers, and more
than 4.5 million days in a rehabilitation center and 639,000
days in the hospital [2].
A lot of research has already been done to develop a
hand rehabilitation glove. One solution was proposed in [3],
in which the angle achieved by the finger is observed. In this
work, in case of a slow or lacking healing process, a
physician can add a routine that may be considered as a
missing part of the system. This draws the attention to the
importance of having a flexible system that updates the
patient with the daily exercise routine to promote the healing
process.
Another solution is proposed by Panagiotis Polygerinos
et al. [4] and it is an automated glove for people with
practical handle pathologies to help improve the catch
movement. The results obtained were very promising in this
work and also in the work presented in [5] by Dominic E.
Nathan et al. This latter examines the design, development
and validation of a custom-made sensorized glove system
and its custom grasp prediction model. The validation studies
helped show the capability of this glove for real-time
tracking. However, both presented gloves need the direct
observation of the physician during the exercises and do not
provide any means to communicate remotely with him or to
save the obtained results into a database for future use and
analysis. Many commercial hand rehabilitation gloves are
available on the market. On the other hand, different other
proposed gloves are inefficient or relatively expensive [6].
Additionally, the noticeable wiring on some glove models
can be a problem [7].
Furthermore, patients, such as children and elderly, might
not be able to attend physical therapy due to the exhausting
road trips to and from the medical facilities and that might
hinder their healing process. We believe the “specificity of
learning” principle should be ensured [8], which predicts that
the learning of a new skill is improved when conditions of
practice match those of the task in real life [9]. Hence, home-
based rehabilitation could prove to be more advantageous
than hospital based or outpatient treatment based since it
permits a repeated practice of occupationally embedded tasks
in the individual’s own environment [10]. Many works have
been done with the objective of moving the clinic to the
home whenever possible. CNNTECH [11] is a biomedical
oriented company that developed a smart glove that helps
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stroke patients rehabilitate. However, the clinical studies are
still at an early stage. Another training device called
“RAPAEL Smart Glove for Hand Rehab [6]” was released
by NEOFECT and it is a sensory technology that captures
the patient’s hand movement data and transfers it via WiFi.
However, the cost is too expensive for many hand impaired
individuals since it costs $15,000 according to the digital
trend [6]. A recent low cost and light weight device [12] like
ours was developed by our colleagues in the Lebanese
International University in 2016. However, it lacked wireless
interface and real time data transmission.
From all the above mentioned needs and issues in the
existing work, we could observe the vital need for a reliable,
affordable, light-weighted, and portable hand assistive device
that can help patients to perform their hand repetitive
therapeutic routines at home and that can also provide an
interface between patients and their physicians.
In this paper, we present a prototype of an assistive glove
that can help patients in practicing their hand rehabilitation
routine daily at home. Via a Web based application and a
wireless communication, the system will automatically
transfer and save the achieved results of each exercise.
Hence, physicians can from their part approve or ask to
improve the followed routine by the patient to guarantee
faster recovery.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II
presents the general overview of our idea. Then, Section III
contains the user requirements and specifications of the
system. Section IV presents the tools used to implement the
system
with
a
few
important
details
about
the
implementation steps. Finally, we conclude the article in
Section V.
II.
SMART GLOVE SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
In addition to a previous work done by our colleagues at
the Lebanese International University last year [12], different
approaches have also explored the use of assessment devices
to monitor the impaired hand function during daily life
activities. However, even in the work presented in [12],
monitoring and data saving is basically done over an SD
card, an ultra-small flash memory card designed to provide
high-capacity memory in a small size, which makes data
reading, searching and retrieval a complicated mission,
especially for patients and physicians who are not familiar
with recent technology advances. Most of the already
existing solutions are to be used in clinics under physician
supervision. Nevertheless, we benefited from them to create
a standalone system that could be used by the patient, with
no need to go to the clinic or to be under the direct
supervision of an expert since all the needed utilities could
be managed by the patient at home.
The objective of the project presented in this paper is to
develop a smart assistive glove that will monitor the
improvement of the impaired hand, and save this information
directly into a permanent storage that could be accessed
remotely by the physician and the patient for review and edit.
As shown in Figure 1, our system is composed of the
assistive glove that is mounted by the same stretching
sensors used in [7][13]. These sensors are basically made
from elastic rubber and graphite, which have lower cost and
lighter weight compared to other existing sensors with the
high accuracy required to monitor the movement of the hand.
Moreover, these stretch sensors have a role in converting the
physical parameters into an electric signal, allowing them to
reflect the finger’s motion and angles as the individual
moves his/her digits.
The glove will be connected wirelessly to the Internet via
a node MCU (ESP8266) WiFi wireless module which is an
open source IoT platform. This node includes a firmware
which runs on the ESP8266 Wi-Fi SoC from Espressif
Systems and hardware which is based on the ESP-12
module. In addition, the sensor readings will be shown on an
LCD (Liquid Crystal Display) screen in order to help the
patient directly see his achieved results. Accordingly, the
results will be transmitted wirelessly to a website that will be
connected to a database which organizes all the requested
information by the physician and performed by the patient
for future monitoring and reviewing.
This real-time reading will allow the physicians to make
better treatment plans and optimize the given routines in
order to increase the number of patients who improve their
condition in a short period of time. Moreover, it will allow
easy access for both physicians and patients to check the
progress of the daily routines requested for rehabilitation and
to facilitate and declare the aforementioned missions by each
one of them according to their roles.
Patients can access the website by logging in their
specific page where they are able to check what they have to
do and their progress. This process will help in improving
patient
health,
since it is proved
that
integration of
augmented feedback and exercises can stimulate the learning
process in rehabilitation therapy by making patients more
Figure 1. System architecture design
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

conscious of their performance [14]. An additional feature of
the smart glove system is to communicate with the patient
via SMS (Short Message Service) messages from the website
to inform him about his progress or about any urgent issues.
Finally, the cost of our system is very low taking into
account the parts used to build it, the expected delivered
service, and the flexibility of use in different aspects.
III.
USER REQUIREMENTS AND SPECIFICATIONS
Our proposed system consists of two main components
that are the assistive glove used by the patient at home to
rehabilitate his routines, and the website that could be used
by the physicians and the patients as well, each according to
his/her role. Below, we list the requirements of each
component of the system. This is also shown in the use case
diagram presented in Figure 2.
A. Glove (Patient side):
• Easily wearable with hidden wires and flexible
stretch sensors.
• Easy to change the battery by simply plugging the
corresponding cable into the box.
• Enable monitoring the angle value using an LCD.
• Wirelessly connected to the WiFi router at home
in order to send the corresponding information to
the server.
B. Website (Physician side):
• Ability to login/out, change/reset the password.
• Ability to add to the patient’s list their patients
and their general information that will be directly
saved in the database.
• Ability to submit a mission or, in other words, the
tasks the patients should try to do in the routine
process by adding a specific routine to each
patient.
• Ability to check all their patients’ routines that
they have submitted.
• Ability to check the routine progress analysis of
their patients (advancement) in a table and in a
graphical form.
• Ability to send an SMS text directly from the
website to their patients’ mobile phone according
to the phone number that has been registered in
the patient page.
C. Website (Patient side):
• Ability to login/out, change/reset their password.
• Ability to check his routine only and the remarks
added by the physician.
• Ability to check his routine progress analysis
(advancement) in a table and graphical form.
Figure 2. Use case diagram of the system
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS AND SUMMARY
As indicated in Section III, the smart assistive glove
system consists of two major components that are the glove
and the website. We will start this section by listing the
technical tools that we used for creating these components.
Then, we present the details followed to implement the
glove. A summary of the main pages of our website are then
listed and explained.
A.
Implementation tools:
Glove:
• Arduino -Node mcu 0.9 (ESP8266 – 12 Module)
• Accelerometer ADXL 345.
• Stretch sensor.
• LCD monitor 16 x 2.
• A light-weighted medium thickness glove
• Connecting wires, resistors, a 10K potentiometer,
regulators, and a 9V battery.
Web application:
• Use XAMP to run the servers APACHE [15] and
MYSQL [16].
• Use PHP for server side programming [17]
• Use PHP MyAdmin and MYSQL to create
database [18]
• Use Arduino Software [19].
• API for SMS.
After listing the technical tools used in the development,
we briefly explain below the steps followed to implement
the system.
B.
Glove Implementation
As presented in the previous work in [12] and [13], the
stretch sensors are made from elastic rubber dipped in finely
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

grated graphite-alcohol mixture, then dried out and fixed
with a thin layer of white glue to keep the graphite from
falling off the rubber. Since graphite is a good electrical
conductor, the nonconductive rubber will turn into a stretch
sensor that converts the physical parameter into an electrical
signal to be acquired by the board for monitoring and
control.
A voltage divider is used to convert the change of the
resistance into an electric analog voltage readable by the
Node MCU module. This voltage will be mapped into
angles indicating the flexion or extension of the digits. The
patient should reach the desired angles set by the physician
during each routine and repetition, so in order to do that, an
LCD monitor will display the values of the angles and the
position of the patient’s hand indicated by the attached
accelerometer on the wrist.
In order to map the stretch sensor, one must wear the
glove, extend his/her fingers and note the measured value as
zero, then flex the fingers to the maximum point and note
the obtained value as 90. Mapping these two values will
serve as a range for the voltages with their corresponding
angles.
The stretch sensor is connected to another resistor of
similar resistance to create a voltage divider, thus converting
the changes in resistance into changes in voltages. Then, the
voltage divider’s output is connected to the only analog pin
A0 of the Node MCU to acquire the data.
An accelerometer is also connected to the Node MCU
input digital pins to measure the wrist’s acceleration and
map it into an angle. The LCD is connected to the Node
MCU in order to display the values of the stretch sensor and
accelerometer clearly visible to the patient.
C.
Website Implementation
The implemented website consists of two main users that
are the physician and the patient. Each can access the
system using his own credentials. Below, we list for each of
the two roles the main activities and actions that could be
implemented.

Physician’s Side
When the physician logs into his page, a list of his
patients appears with their information (name, phone
number, gloveID and email address). Moreover, a button for
each patient will take him to this latter corresponding page
to display every patient’s routine separately, add routine to
every
patient,
check
his
routine
progress
analysis
(advancements) in a table and in a graphical form and send
him/her an SMS to the number saved in the database for that
patient.
Figure 3 shows the “Add routine” page where the
physician is supposed to submit the routine (the required
angle that the patient is supposed to practice with, the
number of times he is supposed to repeat the exercise, etc.).
On the other hand, the patient will be able to see this
information directly and hence could start his routine on the
given date.
Figure 3. Add Routine

Patient Side
When the patient logs into his page, his achievements
records appear with a well specified number of repeats and
desired angle for every repeat that he is supposed to do
during a certain period of time, as shown in Figure 4.
We notice from this figure how routines are organized
according to the date of their occurrence, with the required
angle to be done by each requested repeat and the achieved
angle that could be reached by the patient during practice
time. Moreover, the system automatically generates these
records in graphical form to make result observation easier
for the patient and the physicians as well, since both are able
to show the results as presented in Figure 5.
Figure 4. Data transferred saved in a table form
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 5 shows graphically the comparison between the
asked and the achieved angles.
Figure 5. Data transferred shown in a graphical format.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The proposed system could save a lot of time and effort
for all involved users. This can be achieved by spending less
time
at the clinics, analyzing
patient’s
activities and
planning. These activities could be done at home where
patients are more comfortable, thus increasing the benefits of
the session.
Physicians can take their time interpreting the results and
conducting a detailed analysis of the data obtained and
taking the appropriate next steps. In addition, the system is
based on a database that will always be reachable and
secured. Physicians and patients can easily access this
website that is clear enough and simple to use.
The contribution proposed in this paper is the preliminary
step towards a more developed and stable system that would
surely take its place among other existing conventional
devices in terms of accuracy, speed, etc.
Smart assistive glove is a very helpful device for people
with impaired hands and there will always be room for
improving system functionality. The accuracy of the stretch
sensor can be improved by using more stretch sensors. The
standard deviation can be computed after conducting many
experiments and improving the calibration of the sensors.
Moreover, the website could be improved and augmented
in different pages. Besides, all the trails on the website were
done locally and it should be tried on a real domain to make
sure everything is working perfectly to be prepared for using
the smart glove on the market.
REFERENCES
[1]
Carew, T. J., Hawkins, R. D., Abrams, T. W., & Kandel, E. R.
(1984). A test of Hebb's postulate at identified synapses which
mediate classical conditioning in Aplysia. Journal of Neuroscience,
4(5), 1217-1224.
[2]
Hoda, M. (2016). SHECARE: Shared Haptic Environment on the
Cloud for Arm Rehabilitation Exercises (Doctoral dissertation,
Université d'Ottawa/University of Ottawa).
[3]
Polygerinos, P., Galloway, K. C., Savage, E., Herman, M., O'Donnell,
K., & Walsh, C. J., “Soft robotic glove for hand rehabilitation and
task specific training”. International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), May, 2015 (pp. 2913-2919).
[4]
Connelly, L., Stoykov, M. E., Jia, Y., Toro, M. L., Kenyon, R. V., &
Kamper, D. G., “Use of a pneumatic glove for hand rehabilitation
following stroke”
International Conference in Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society, 2009, (pp. 2434-2437).
[5]
Nathan, D. E., & McGuire, J. R., “Design and validation of low-cost
assistive glove for hand assessment and therapy during activity of
daily living-focused robotic stroke therapy”. Journal of rehabilitation
research and development, 46 (5), 2009.
[6]
S. Larson., "Smart glove helps stroke patients rehabilitate," January 5,
2017.
[7]
Osman, O., Haydar-Ahmad, I., & Hage-Diab, A. (2015, September).
Thoracic
kyphosis
alert
system.
In
Advances
in
Biomedical
Engineering (ICABME), 2015 International Conference on (pp. 182-
184). IEEE.
[8]
Proteau, L., Marteniuk, R. G., & Lévesque, L. (1992). A sensorimotor
basis for motor learning: Evidence indicating specificity of practice.
The Quarterly Journal of Experimental Psychology, 44(3), 557-575
[9]
Debs, B., Mousallem, E., Hage-Diab, A., Hajj-Hassan, M., Khachfe,
H., Saleh, S., & Yassine, H. (2015). A Finger Movement Evaluation
Device to Monitor the Use of Paretic Hand During Daily Life
Activities. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Global Health Challenges (pp. 45-49).
[10] Holden, M. K. (2005). Virtual environments for motor rehabilitation.
Cyberpsychology & behavior, 8(3), 187-211.
[11] Hiob, M. (2016). Interactive glove for mobility training and
rehabilitation after stroke. Certec report.
[12] Hneineh, Houssam N., Alaa A. Moselmani, Ali Hage-Diab, and Soha
Saleh. "Impaired hand movement tracking device with real-time
visual feedback." In Biomedical Engineering (MECBME), 2016 3rd
Middle East Conference on, pp. 72-75. IEEE, 2016.
[13] Debs, B., Mousallem, E., Hage-Diab, A., Hajj-Hassan, M., Khachfe,
H., Saleh, S., ... & Yassine, H. (2015). A Finger Movement
Evaluation Device to Monitor the Use of Paretic Hand During Daily
Life Activities. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on
Global Health Challenges (pp. 45-49).
[14]
Henderson, A., Korner-Bitensky, N., & Levin, M. (2007). Virtual
reality in stroke rehabilitation: a systematic review of its effectiveness
for upper limb motor recovery. Topics in stroke rehabilitation, 14(2),
52-61.
[15] "https://www.apachefriends.org/index.html"[acessed October 2017].
[16] B. Schwartz, P. Zaitsev, B. Tkachemko, J. Zawodny, A. Lentz, "High
Performance MySQL, 3rd Edition ", March 2012, O'Reilly Media.
[17] "http://www.php.net/," [acessed October 2017].
[18] H. Garcia-Molina, J. D. Ullman, and J. Widom. 2008. “Database
Systems: The Complete Book (2 ed.)”. Prentice Hall Press, Upper
Saddle River, NJ, USA.
[19] Arduino, M. Available online: https://www. arduino. cc/en/Main.
ArduinoMKR1000 [accessed January 2017].
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

