A Monte Carlo Simulation Based-Approach for Medical Equipment Risks 
Forecasting 
 
Sahar Ismail, Hassan Nehme, 
Mohamad Hajj-Hassan 
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering  
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email:sahar.ismail93@gmail.com 
Email:hassan.nehme@live.fr 
Bassam Hussein 
Department of Industrial 
Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: bassam.hussein@liu.edu.lb 
 
Hassan M. Khachfe 
Center for Quality Assurance and 
Scientific Research 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
Email: 
mohamad.hajjhassan@liu.edu.lb 
 
Abstract—As any technology, medical equipments provide 
benefits to patients, but they also present significant risks that 
can affect and compromise patient safety. In healthcare 
organizations, clinical engineering departments play a vital 
role in maintaining the safety and reliability of medical 
equipments. In order to mitigate failures of such equipments 
and control risks, a proper Medical Equipment Management 
Program (MEMP) should be established. The purpose of this 
paper is to forecast risks by using Failure Mode and Effect 
Analysis (FMEA) method and apply it on Monte Carlo 
simulation which adds risks analysis to Excel® by @RISK tool. 
The data of some medical devices is extracted from a hospital’s 
maintenance management system and are identified according 
to their likelihood, severity, and difficulty of detection. 
However, the results of this mathematical simulation are 
integrated in a probability distribution function that enables us 
to identify medical equipments risks that affect patients, staff, 
and the work environment and reduce them by providing 
contingency plans, policies, strategies, and other risk 
management tactics. 
Keywords-medical equipment; risk management; FMEA; 
Monte Carlo simulation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
As medical technology becomes more complicated, a 
MEMP must be deployed in healthcare facilities to ensure 
that medical devices operate according to safety, accuracy, 
reliability, and performance criteria. Maintenance is one of 
the most important processes to improve safety, decrease the 
risk of equipment failure, and minimize the unplanned 
downtime [1]. However, the money spent on maintenance 
and failure of equipment is rapidly increasing because of the 
development of many types of complex medical equipments, 
the stringent environment they are operating under, and the 
lack of proper management. 
The management program includes a risk management 
process, which comprises the identification, assessment, and 
prioritization of risks (defined in ISO 31000 as the effect of 
uncertainty on objectives) followed by coordinated and 
economical application of resources to minimize, monitor, 
and control the probability and/or impact of unfortunate 
events [2]. The causes of the risks are identified and relevant 
changes in the system are made accordingly in order to 
reduce the probability of the error occurring in the future 
thus reducing harm to patients and providing a safer patient 
care experience. 
Most healthcare organizations follow the manufacturer’s 
recommendations concerning the maintenance program [3]. 
Campbell and Jardine [4] defined the maintenance 
excellence as the balance of performance, risk, resource 
inputs and cost to reach to an optimal solution. In the last 
decade, 
maintenance 
techniques 
have 
been 
notably 
improving, but most of the healthcare organizations do not 
profit from the maintenance excellence that Campbell and 
Jardine established. Moreover, some devices that are similar 
in 
their 
function 
and 
design 
have 
manufacturer-
recommended intervals that vary by one or two factors thus 
leading to potential financial and time losses. In addition, 
excessive maintenance can have the same impact as an 
insufficient level of maintenance; moderation should be the 
rule. 
The status of research on maintenance of medical devices 
is presented in different models. A model proposed by 
Fennigkoh and Smith [5] classified equipments according to 
three parameters: function, physical risks, and maintenance 
requirements. It was known later as risk-based inclusion 
criteria that allowed clinical engineering professionals to 
apply maintenance on limited parts of medical devices. 
Ridgway, in the beginning, noted that Preventive 
Maintenance (PM) is an important factor in terms of 
reliability, but later on, he indicated that PM does not prevent 
failure for all equipment and it is not the ideal solution. 
However, Ridgway provided methods for equipment 
management such as Reliability Centered Maintenance 
(RCM). This technique is a corporate-level maintenance 
strategy that is implemented in any healthcare organization 
to optimize the maintenance program. Endrenyi [6] indicated 
that RCM selects the critical component in the equipment 
and initiates a maintenance management process to correct 
the failure. Further on, he recognized that RCM is good for 
indicating the budget and for comparing policies, but it 
cannot help in achieving real optimization. 
According to Hall [7], the two keys of RCM are having a 
good maintenance history of the medical equipment and the 
age of the equipment. Furthermore, he indicated that RCM is 
applicable for younger equipments. However, to balance 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

between preventive and corrective maintenance, Condition 
Based Maintenance (CBM) is presented to observe and 
forecast real-time status of machines [7]. CBM is performed 
when some indicators show that the equipment will fail. 
Taghipour et al. [8] presented a multi-criteria decision-
making model to prioritize medical devices according to 
their criticality. Furthermore, in terms of prioritization, 
Jamshidi et al. [9] developed a fuzzy healthcare failure 
modes and effect analysis (HFMEA). HFMEA is a 
systematic method that identifies and prevents equipment 
problems before they occur by ensuring a safe and clinically 
desirable outcome [10]. 
To minimize risk and optimize the cost-effectiveness of 
medical equipment, a maintenance model is suggested by 
Khalaf et al. [11]. They evaluated both elements and the 
results showed poor performance concerning cost and risk 
management. Therefore, Khalaf et al. [12] developed a new 
model in order to be used in Palestinian hospitals, which is a 
mathematical model that uses a mixed integer based 
approach for maintenance operations schedules for medical 
equipments. They also proposed a greedy algorithm for an 
initial solution for the model. In addition, some data 
extracted from maintenance history of infusion pumps and 
ventilators were used in a global model that measures the 
probability of equipment being available and they were 
analyzed using Matlab. However, this model was validated 
by developing a model that measures the survival of 
equipment as function of maintenance and age of equipment 
using survival analysis approach. 
The studies reported above proposed models that share a 
common theme; different risks are calculated using a single 
measure that is defined and applied to lead safety, 
performance inspections, and preventive maintenance 
activities. These models are simple to use and effective in 
reducing general risks; yet they lack the ability to identify 
specific risks. They are far from achieving optimal risk 
minimization. 
Also, 
research 
into 
comprehensive 
frameworks for prioritizing critical medical devices or 
outsourcing of medical device maintenance is still in its 
infancy. 
Researchers 
should 
apply 
new 
risk-based 
maintenance models including different new uncertainties to 
replace the traditional empirical models.  Existing advances 
in risk management for other disciplines should be 
investigated and taken advantage of.   
In our model, a Complete Risk and Decision Analysis 
Toolkit from Palisade: “The Decision Tools Suite” is used. It 
is an integrated set of programs for risk analysis and 
decision-making under uncertainty that runs under the 
popular Microsoft Excel®. The main tool that was used is 
@RISK, which adds risk analysis to Excel® using Monte 
Carlo simulation. The Monte Carlo simulation is a technique 
used to understand the impact of risk and uncertainty in 
financial, project management, cost, and other models to 
identify risks related to medical equipments [13]. FMEA 
method was also used to prevent failure of equipments. Data 
related to maintenance and failures of equipments was 
obtained from a Lebanese hospital to apply it in our proposed 
model in order to verify and validate its functionality,  
applicability, and performance. 
The proposed methodology is presented in Section II. 
The implementation process is presented in Section III. This 
latter, includes collecting data, and integrating FMEA 
method using Monte Carlo simulation. This is followed by 
results and discussion summarized in Section IV. Finally, a 
conclusion and our further expectations are presented in 
Section V.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
 
 Medical devices are used in healthcare organizations to 
support patient care in terms of health and safety. Currently, 
modern medical devices are complex and operate under 
severe conditions because of the rapid development and 
evolution of equipments due to substantial advances in 
technology. Most of the existing strategies in hospitals have 
difficulties and challenges in identifying risks and applying 
optimal risk reduction activities because they lack proper 
management 
processes. 
Therefore, 
a 
well-operated 
management process could be expected to enhance the 
functioning of medical devices across different healthcare 
organizations. 
The proposed model is meant to identify and assess risks 
of medical equipments according to q mathematical 
approach using different parameters. It starts with collecting 
data concerning medical devices from the healthcare 
institution in question; a Lebanese hospital in our case. The 
needed numbers such as the likelihood, detectability, and 
impact of medical equipment failure are then extracted and 
analyzed. 
 There are several methods to calculate the risk value, 
yet the FMEA method is used as the preferred choice in the 
current model. FMEA is selected among other methods 
because it contributes to improved designs for products and 
processes, to cost savings, and to the development of control 
plans, testing requirements, optimum maintenance plans, 
reliability growth analysis and related activities [14].  
Furthermore, it is a well-established and widely used 
method in many other disciplines and has been proven to be 
effective and efficient by numerous researchers.  The FMEA 
procedure starts with determining the ways in which the 
input can go wrong, and then determining effects for each 
failure mode. After that, it identifies potential causes for 
each mode and list current controls for each cause. 
Consequently, a risk priority number can be determined and 
contingency plans and actions should be developed 
accordingly. 
     After applying the FMEA method, it will be integrated in 
Monte Carlo simulation tool that includes @Risk toolkit. 
@Risk adds risk analysis to Excel® using Monte Carlo 
simulation. Then the simulation will be performed and the 
results will be assessed to draw a conclusion. 
   The methodology may be summarized in the following 
flowchart: 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 1. The proposed methodology 
Fig. 1 summarizes the required steps to accomplish our 
evaluation. Such assessment requires some parameters and 
equations.  The derivations of all those relations are 
explained in the subsequent sections. 
 
III. 
IMPLEMENTATION PROCESS 
A. Collecting and Extracting Data 
 
     First, to apply the FMEA method, specific data 
concerning medical devices is collected. 
   Likelihood of the medical device in this case is the 
probability of failure of the machine. Fig. 2 shows the 
number of repeated failures per year with respect to medical 
devices. These numbers are then converted to a scale of 1-
10 as shown in Table I using the following equation: 
Number of repeated failures*(10/ Highest number of 
repeated failures) 
 
Figure 2. Number of repeated failure. 
The scores of likelihood of medical devices failures are 
assigned according to the following criteria [15]: 
{1, 2}: Improbable, manifestations of the hazard are very 
unlikely 
{3, 4}: Remote, manifestations of the hazard are possible 
but not likely 
{5, 6}: Occasional, some manifestations of the hazard are 
likely to occur 
{7, 8}: Probable, hazard will be experienced 
{9, 10}: Frequent, hazard likely to occur 
     Severity of medical device is defined as the extent to 
which the defect of equipment can affect patients. The 
scores of severity are assigned according to the following 
criteria [15]: 
{1, 2}: Negligible, no significant risk of injury 
{3, 4}: Minor, potential for minor injury 
{5, 6}: Moderate, potential for minor injury  
{7, 8}: Critical, potential for severe injury  
{9, 10}: Catastrophic, likely to result in death 
   Detection is the ability of the current control scheme to 
detect and then prevent a hazard from occurring. The scores 
of detection are assigned according to the following criteria 
[11]: 
{1, 2}: Almost certain (detection probability is between 81-
100%), potential hazard will almost certainly be detected
 
{3, 4}: High (detection probability is between 51-80%), 
high chance that potential hazard will be detected 
{5, 6}: Moderate (detection probability is between 26-50%), 
moderate chance that potential hazard will be detected 
{7, 8}: Low (detection probability is between 10-25%), low 
chance that potential hazard will be detected 
{9, 10}: Remote (detection probability <10%), very remote 
chance that potential hazard will be detected 
 
TABLE I. EXTRACTED PARAMETERS. 
Equipment 
Likelihood 
Severity 
Difficulty of 
Detection 
Beds 
10.00 
6 
1 
Sphygmomanometer 
7.43 
5 
1 
Defibrillator 
3.14 
10 
4 
Ultrasound 
0.57 
3 
3 
 
All values of likelihood, severity, and difficulty of detection 
of equipment were provided by the hospital. Table I shows 
the scores of likelihood, severity, and difficulty of detection 
for twenty-six medical devices on a scale of 1-10. 
 
B. Integrating  FMEA Method in Monte Carlo Simulation 
Tool 
 
The parameters extracted from the collected data will be 
employed in a systematic technique called FMEA. 
FMEA is one of the first highly structured, systematic 
techniques for failure analysis. It was developed by 
reliability engineers in the late 1940’s to study problems 
that might arise from malfunctions of military systems [16]. 
It is a step-by-step systematic approach for identifying all 
possible failures in a design, a manufacturing or assembly 
process. 
Collect data concerning 
medical devices from the 
healthcare facility (A Lebanese 
hospital in this case) 
Extract the needed parameters 
(likelihood, severity, difficulty 
of detection) from the collected 
data 
Integrate the FMEA method by 
defining the extracted parameters as 
inputs and the calculated RPN as 
output in the Monte Carlo 
simulation tool. 
Conduct the simulation, obtain, 
and dicuss the resutls. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Failures are prioritized according to how severe their 
consequences are, how likely they may occur and how 
difficult is it to detect them. The main purpose of the FMEA 
is to take preliminary actions to reduce failures, starting 
with the highest priority ones [17]. 
In order to quantify the risk value, a Risk Priority Number 
(RPN) is used as a measure when assessing risk to help 
identify critical failure modes. The RPN values range from 
1 (absolute best) to 1000 (absolute worst). It is the product 
of three ratings on a scale of 10 (likelihood of occurrence, 
severity of impact, and difficulty of detection): 
 
 
𝑅𝑃𝑁 =  𝐿𝑖𝑘𝑒𝑙𝑖ℎ𝑜𝑜𝑑 𝑥 𝑆𝑒𝑣𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑡𝑦 𝑥 𝐷𝑖𝑓𝑓𝑖𝑐𝑢𝑙𝑡𝑦𝑜𝑓𝐷𝑒𝑡𝑒𝑐𝑡𝑖𝑜𝑛 
 
 
Table II illustrates the extracted parameters and the 
calculated RPN for each equipment: 
 
 
TABLE II. CALCULATED RPN. 
 
Equipment 
 
Likelihood 
 
Severity 
Difficulty 
of 
Detection 
RPN 
Beds 
 
10.00 
6 
1 
60.00 
 
Sphygmomanometer 
 
7.43 
5 
1 
37.15 
Defibrillator 
3.14 
10 
4 
125.60 
Ultrasound 
0.57 
3 
3 
5.13 
 
After calculating the risk priority numbers, the model is 
now ready to be integrated in the @Risk simulation tool. 
The first step is to insert Table II in an Excel® sheet and 
define inputs (likelihood, severity and difficulty of 
detection) as normal distributions. Usually, high standard 
deviation is selected in situations where resources are 
limited or gathering real data would be too expensive or 
impractical. In this situation, the data is extracted from a 
real hospital management system, hence a very small 
standard deviation is selected (0.1); as depicted in Fig. 3: 
 
 
Figure 3. Definition of inputs as normal distributions. 
 
RPN is the output in our model; Fig. 4 illustrates how 
RPN is defined as an output in the Monte-Carlo simulation 
tool “RiskOutput(“RPN”)”: 
 
 
Figure 4. Adding @Risk output. 
C. Simulation and Results 
 
@RISK monitors a set of convergence statistics on each 
output distribution during a simulation. During monitoring, 
@RISK calculates these statistics for each output at selected 
intervals (such as: every 1000 iterations) throughout the 
simulation. 
As more iterations run, the amount of change in the 
statistics becomes less and less until they reach the 
Convergence Tolerance [18]. 
Convergence tolerance specifies the tolerance allowed for 
the statistics being tested. For example, the current applied 
settings specify that the estimated mean of each output is 
simulated within 3% of its actual value [18]. 
 
In our model in Fig. 5, we will be performing 5000 
iterations in one simulation: 
 
 
Figure 5. Changing the number of iterations and starting simulation. 
 At the end of the simulation, the results are integrated in 
a probability distribution function. A probability distribution 
is a statistical function that describes all the possible values 
and likelihoods that a random variable can take within a 
given range [19]. This range will be between the minimum 
and maximum statistically possible values, but where the 
possible value is likely to be plotted on the probability 
distribution depends on a number of factors, including the 
distributions mean and standard deviation. 
 
 
Figure 6. Results after simulation. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fig. 6 illustrates one example of the results obtained; the 
risk priority number of hospital Beds (60) is centered 
between 49.98 and 70.09 for 90% of the probability 
distribution. The x-axis represents the possible risk priority 
numbers and the y-axis represents the probability of 
occurrence for each probable RPN incrementing by 0.02 on 
a scale of 0.1. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
 
 The result of the Monte Carlo Simulation via @RISK is 
a probability distribution. Figs. 6 and 7 show the probability 
density for the chosen examples: beds and defibrillator. 
 
Figure 7. Probability distribution for defibrillator. 
 
TABLE III. SUMMARY OF THE RESULTS. 
 
Beds 
Defibrillator 
Minimum 
34.97 
108.23 
Maximum 
83.82 
145.19 
Mean 
59.99 
125.6 
 
The results presented in Fig. 6, Fig. 7, and Table III are 
interpretable as follows: 
 
1. The mean figure for RPN will be 60 for beds 
and125.6 for defibrillator. That means, the 
simulated result will be equal to the original 
calculated RPN. 
2. The minimum figure for RPN will be 36.57 for 
beds and 108.23 for defibrillator. This means that 
the minimum probability will be lower than the 
calculated RPN by 23.43 for beds and by 17.37 for 
defibrillator. But these figure are the bottom lines 
and will only be achieved if all negative 
circumstances would occur. Hence, with a 
probability of 5 %, the figure for RPN will fall low 
to 36.57 and 108.23.  In other words, with a 
probability of 95 % the RPN will not fall below 
these numbers. 
3. The maximum value for RPN will be 85.69 for 
beds and 145.19 for defibrillator. That is, the 
maximum probability will be higher than the 
calculated RPN by 25.69 for beds and by 19.59 for 
defibrillator. But these figures are the upper limits 
and will only be achieved if all positive 
circumstances would occur. Hence, with a 
probability of 95 %, the figure for RPN will not 
exceed 85.69 and 145.19. In other words, with a 
probability of 5% the RPN will exceed these 
numbers. 
An additional evaluation is possible to show where an 
individual risk has a main influence of the final risk priority 
number. Figs. 8 and 9 show the results of those evaluations 
as regression coefficients. This indicates that the difficulty 
of detection has a huge influence of the RPN of beds and the 
likelihood has the higher influence on the RPN of the 
defibrillator. Therefore, these risk factors have to be 
monitored very carefully within an effective healthcare 
management system. 
 
Figure 8. Regression coefficients for beds. 
 
Figure 9. Regression coefficients for defibrillator. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Finally, a risk severity matrix is employed to raise 
awareness and increase visibility of risks so that proper 
decisions on certain risks can be made. The risk matrix is 
shown in Fig. 10. Once the risks have been placed in the 
cells of the matrix that corresponds to the appropriate 
likelihood, severity and difficulty of detection, it becomes 
visibly clear as to which risks must be managed at what 
priority.  This is a well-known and widely used tool in the 
world of risk management. 
Each of the risks will fall under one of the categories, for 
which different colors have been used. Here are some 
details on each of the categories: 
High: The risks that fall in the cells colored in red are the 
risks that are most critical and that must be addressed on a 
high priority basis. Example: ‘D’ Defibrillator. 
Medium: If a risk falls in one of the yellow zone, it is best 
to take some reasonable steps and develop risk management 
strategies in time, even though there is no hurry to have 
such 
risks 
dealt 
with 
early. 
Example: 
‘B’ 
Sphygmomanometer and ‘C’ Beds. 
Low: The risks that fall in the green cells can be minimally 
monitored and managed as they usually do not pose any 
significant problem. However, if some reasonable steps can 
help in fighting these risks, such steps should be taken to 
improve overall performance Example: ‘A’ Ultrasound 
Machine. 
 
 
 
 
 
After analyzing the results, some recommendations 
could be deduced to reduce risks such as having alternative 
or redundant devices in the healthcare facility, pay special 
attention to the to the life span of the equipment and its 
working hours when purchasing used devices, and to have a 
well operated maintenance program. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
The rapid evolution of medical equipments had a huge 
impact on the improvement and progress of medical 
services. Accordingly, medical devices are expected to 
operate under stringent safety, accuracy, and reliability 
criteria to ensure a protected and efficient environment for 
patients, staff, and the surrounding work setting. As such, 
this research work provided a new methodology for 
identifying and assessing risks based on a mathematical 
approach and not only empirical ones. This method results 
in a more precise scheme that would most likely reduce the 
risks resulting from medical equipments and further provide 
proper management practices in healthcare organizations. 
Moreover, this model can be integrated in healthcare 
facilities to identify and forecast risks according to risk 
distribution of Monte Carlo simulation and risk severity 
matrix that classifies and prioritizes medical devices risks.  
   This proposed assessment maybe further enhanced to 
achieve risk response development, and risk response 
control of medical equipment by developing a complete tool 
that can be used in the medical equipment industry across 
the world. Thus, manufacturers, organizations, and clinical 
engineering departments can use this tool in planning for 
maintenance and for the development of medical equipment. 
Also, it can be deployed as monitoring system in service at 
healthcare facilities where it can provide real time data on 
the risks of operating medical equipment.  Another venue 
for future work in this area would involve further research 
in the field of optimal outsourcing of medical devices. 
  
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  K. Wilson, K. Ison, and S. Tabakov, Medical             
Equipment Management: CRC Press, 2013. 
 
[2]   D. Hubbard, The Failure of Risk Management: Why 
It's Broken and How to Fix It.: John Wiley & Sons,         
2009. 
 
[3]    A. Jamshidi, S. Abbasgholizadeh-Rahimi, and D. Ait-
Kadi,"Medical 
Devices 
Inspection 
and 
Maintenance;Literature Review," in Industrial and 
Systems Engineering Research, Canada, 2014. 
 
[4] 
J. 
Campbell 
and 
A. 
Jardine, 
Maintenance 
Excellence:Optimizing 
Equipment 
Life-Cycle 
Decisions.: CRC Press, Feb 13, 2001. 
 
[5]  L. Fennigkoh and B. Smith, Clinical equipment 
management.JCAHO PTSM Series, 1989, vol. 2. 
 
[6]   J. Endrenyi, "Aging maintenance and reliability," IEEE 
Power & Energy Magazine, pp. 59-67, May 2006. 
 
[7]   A. Hall, Risk-based approach to device management 
has multiple pathways.: Biomedical Instrumentation      
& Technology, 2006, vol. 40. 
Figure 10. Risk severity matrix. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
[8] 
S. 
Taghipour, 
D. 
Banjevic, 
and 
A. 
Jardine, 
"Prioritization of Medical Equipment for Maintenance 
Decisions,"  Journal of Operational Research Society, 
vol. 9, no. 1666-1687, p. 62, 2010. 
 
[9]    A. Jamshidi, S. Abbasgholizadeh-Rahimi, D. Ait-kadi, 
and A. Ruiz, "A risk-based Maintenance Strategy 
using Fuzzy HFMEA for prioritization of Critical 
Medical Equipment.," in Proceedings of the 1st 
Annual World Conference of the Society for Industrial 
and Systems Engineering, Washington, USA, 2012. 
 
[10] Maintenance Assistant™. (2015) MA CMMS. 
[Online].https://www.maintenanceassistant.com/reliab
ility-centered-maintenance/ 
 
[11] A.B Khalaf, Maintenance model for minimizing risk 
and 
optimizing 
cost-effectiveness 
of 
medical 
equipment in Palestine.:JClinEng, 2004, vol. 14. 
 
[12] A.B Khalaf, K. Djouani, Y. Hamam, and Y. Alayli, 
"Evidence-based mathematical maintenance model for 
medical equipment," in International Conference on 
Electronic Devices, systems and Applications, 2010. 
 
[13] Risk Analysis and Simulation. New York, USA: 
Palisade Corporation, September, 2010. 
 
[14] L.S. Lipol and J. Haq, "Risk Analysis Method: 
FMEA/FMECA in the Organizations," International 
Journal of Basic & Applied Sciences, vol. 11, October 
2011. 
 
[15] lloyd. (2010, August) Medical Device and Diagnostic 
Industry.[Online].http://www.mddionline.com/article/r
isk-analysis-beyond-probability-and-severity 
 
[16] U.S. Department of Defense, Procedures for 
Performing a Failure Mode, Effects and Criticality 
Analysis., 1949. 
 
[17] ASQ (American Society for Quality). [Online]. 
http://asq.org/learn-about-quality/process-analysis-
tools/overview/fmea.html 
 
[18] Palisade Corporation, Guide to Using @Risk: Risk  
Analysis and Simulation,add-In for Microsoft® Excel, 
2010. 
 
[19]Investopedia.[Online].http://www.investopedia.com/ter
ms/p/probabilitydistribution.asp 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

