Cognitive Stimulation, Maintenance and Rehabilitation 
Designing the user interface, research and practical results 
 
José Carlos Teixeira 
Dep. de Matemática (FCTUC) / IT Coimbra / MediaPrimer 
Coimbra, Portugal 
teixeira@mediaprimer.pt 
Patrícia Alecrim 
MediaPrimer 
Coimbra, Portugal 
palecrim@mediaprimer.pt 
 
Sandra Freitas 
CNC - Centro de Neurociências e Biologia Celular 
Universidade de Coimbra 
Coimbra, Portugal 
sandrafreitas0209@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract — Significant demographic changes in developed 
countries in recent decades have reflected the worrying trend 
of an ageing population, including the Portuguese population. 
In light of this scenario, there is an urgent need to create 
solutions that help to mitigate the collateral effects of ageing. 
This paper describes the development of an occupational 
health component aimed at enabling technicians and specialists 
to define and personalize therapeutic intervention programs 
for cognitive rehabilitation and maintenance, specific to 
various types of cognitive disabilities. The occupational health 
component of Mind.Care is being developed under the 
TICE.Healthy project, whose main objective is to provide a 
range of activities for the cognitive stimulation, maintenance, 
monitoring and rehabilitation of the cognitive functions – 
memory, attention, language, executive functions, visual and 
special abilities – suited to different user profiles. In addition to 
the scientific framework, there is an emphasis on conceptual 
and development decisions, illustrated by the various stages of 
functional specification, with a definition of usability and 
accessibility guidelines, design and implementation. The work 
has a strong scientific foundation and has been developed with 
great care in terms of design and technological issues, with a 
view to making a significant contribution to healthy ageing. 
Keywords-mind.care; 
cognitive 
stimulation; 
cognitive 
maintenance; cognitive rehabilitation; user centered design 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cognitive impairment and dementia are the major health 
issues among older people. By consensus, age has been 
considered as a major risk factor for developing dementia, 
including Alzheimer's disease (AD) [1 – 4] and, more 
recently, Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) [5].  
It is estimated that the number of patients with dementia 
will double every 20 years, approaching the 42 million mark 
in 2020 and reaching 81 million by 2040, in the absence of 
effective treatments or preventive strategies [6]. In Portugal, 
it is estimated that there are approximately 153.000 patients 
with dementia [7]. The serious impact of the aging 
population and specifically of the AD in health-care systems 
worldwide [8, 9] and the dramatic projections for the coming 
years [6, 10], also expected in the Portuguese population, 
stress the need for new effective strategies able to address 
with this scenario. 
Besides a brief description of the Mind.Care’s 
occupational health component and the importance of 
cognitive stimulation, this paper describes the user-centered 
design methodology adopted in the project development and 
all the constraints of the target users. There is an emphasis 
on conceptual and development decisions, illustrated by the 
various stages of functional specification, with a definition 
of usability and accessibility guidelines, design and 
implementation. After describing a typical cognitive activity 
experience, Mind.Care’s project is also presented as an 
integrated project. 
A. The importance of cognitive stimulation 
With aging, the ability to receive, process and remember 
information tends to deteriorate. Healthy aging and 
stimulation of the various cognitive skills is clearly a way to 
mitigate this situation. Numerous studies clearly prove that 
older people, with a lifestyle which includes intensive 
cognitive stimulation, have a better global cognitive 
functioning, a greater ability to think and tend to delay the 
onset of cognitive decline [11, 12]. 
Frequent cognitive activity protects and slows cognitive 
decline because it stimulates different parts of the brain 
involved in memory and information processing, making 
them more efficient and resilient. The resultant increase in 
the number of brain cells and the connections between them 
contribute to a greater cognitive reserve and reduces the risk 
of dementia. 
Several studies have confirmed the increased risk for the 
development of dementia in patients with MCI. Currently, 
recent studies reporting incidence rates of MCI close to 6.4% 
[13] and prevalence rates about 16% [14]. In this context, the 
MCI phase is the ideal target for implementation of 
stimulating activities and cognitive training, allowing early 
intervention in times of incipient cognitive decline and 
reducing its severity. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

B. Our solution 
The component for occupational health Mind.Care is 
focused 
on 
stimulation, 
maintenance 
and 
cognitive 
rehabilitation of seniors. This component will provide a 
range of brain training activities that stimulates several 
cognitive functions, including: memory, attention, language, 
executive functions and visuospatial abilities. 
Following any brain damage, cognitive disorders, in 
particular memory deficits, are common in patients and have 
a major impact on their lives and those of their caregivers. 
Given the small number of platforms targeted at 
cognitive training, specifically for the Portuguese population, 
it is a matter of some urgency to create and encourage those 
activities that can best help experts in the field of 
neuroscience to stimulate, rehabilitate and maintain the 
various cognitive functions of their patients. 
The component for occupational health Mind.Care will 
provide a set of services that will:  
 
Allow health professionals and experts to define and 
customize the therapeutic intervention programs for 
cognitive rehabilitation or maintenance, specific to 
various types of cognitive disorders, by selecting 
multiple activities that meet the needs and 
difficulties of each patient; 
 
The 
activities 
suited 
to 
different 
needs 
of 
stimulation/maintenance/rehabilitation of various 
neurodegenerative diseases, which can stimulate 
various cognitive functions including memory, 
attention, language, executive functions, spatial 
perception; 
 
Enable health professionals and experts to monitor 
and measure the  performance and clinical evolution 
of each patient; 
 
Allow any healthy senior the access to stimulating 
activities and cognitive training. 
The early stage of preliminary studies first surveyed the 
state of the art, focusing on identifying and analyzing a range 
of comprehensive brain training and diagnostic support, 
maintenance and monitoring platforms for patients with 
various 
types 
of 
neurodegenerative 
pathologies. 
It 
subsequently looked at the important aspects of usability and 
accessibility in the context of cognitive impairment and 
appropriate technologies to implement the activities to be 
developed. 
After these studies, we went on to identify and define the 
various 
user 
profiles, 
associated 
services 
and 
the 
characterization of the activities to be developed. 
The practical validation of all such activities will be done 
through a pilot study with clinical and control groups, and 
should be able to assess not only the preventive capacity and 
improvement, but the acceptance by and interaction of users. 
In short, we intend to find out if the activities are appropriate 
to the clinical profiles and really appraise what is wanted for 
a subsequent clinical validation. 
II. 
USER CENTERED DESIGN  
To create a system like the one presented in this paper, it 
is crucial to ensure the end result is easy to use, but it is also 
necessary for it to meet the needs of all the actors involved. 
Therefore, from concept generation to testing, via the 
entire implementation phase, a user-centered methodology 
was adopted. 
“User experience” was also one of the key concepts that 
informed the development of this system and carried 
significant weight, seeing as this is a system aimed at healthy 
seniors, but also users with a clinical profile, within the remit 
of cognitive impairments. 
In brief, this system comprises a clear understanding of 
its target users, it communicates its scope and objectives in 
an 
unambiguous 
and 
straightforward 
manner, 
thus 
embodying something useful, easy to use and appealing. 
A. User profiles 
These activities, their degrees of difficulty and progress 
metrics have been defined according to the different user 
profiles. Each user profile is intended for individuals with 
different levels of cognitive impairment in the continuum 
between the cognitive changes due to normal aging (Healthy 
Profile) and clinical conditions of mild cognitive impairment 
(Light Profile). 
The Healthy Profile is applicable to all healthy adults and 
seniors who wish to enhance their cognitive skills through 
cognitive training. 
The Light Profile will include all adults and seniors who 
have mild cognitive impairment, clinically significant, non-
normal to the aging process but insufficient for clinical 
diagnosis of dementia. This profile is designed for all 
patients with a clinical decline beyond that expected for age 
and education of the individual and which may precede 
various clinical conditions, particularly but not exclusively 
dementia diagnosis. 
Each activity will always be presented with a level of 
increasing difficulty (variable in each of the profiles) and 
accompanied by simple guidelines to follow. 
B. Designing for older adults 
When creating systems for older adults it is essential to 
consider the changes that occur naturally with ageing, in 
particular regarding mobility, hand-eye coordination and 
motor coordination, the senses, such as hearing and vision, or 
cognitive abilities, such as short-term memory [15, 16]. 
In terms of vision, this includes difficulty in 
distinguishing certain colors, adapting to changes in lighting 
levels, and a growing difficulty in concentrating, especially 
when reading, since the ability to focus decreases and so the 
ability to see close-up becomes increasingly difficult [15]. 
Changes in the musculoskeletal system can also very 
often restrict people’s functional ability and even prevent 
them from performing basic daily activities unaided. As 
mentioned in [17], the review of clinical studies carried out 
in Portugal up to 2002, which quantified the prevalence of 
rheumatic diseases and their economic and social impact, 
showed that rheumatic diseases were the most prevalent 
chronic pathology (accounting for 28% to 37% of chronic 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

illnesses). This makes them the foremost reason for 
Portuguese people attending primary healthcare facilities: 
20% of general practice appointments are prompted by 
rheumatic diseases. 
These changes are important and should be taken into 
consideration because they may make it hard for some 
people to use certain devices such as the computer mouse or 
keyboard. 
Understanding the main characteristics and limitations of 
healthy senior users was extremely important. While creating 
the system, these factors influenced the definition of 
usability guidelines and clearly interfered in areas like 
human-computer interaction, browsing (user experience 
design), information design, functional model, graphic 
interface (user interface design) and definition of content. 
 
C. Designing for people with cognitive disabilities 
Cognitive limitations cover a vast field, with specific 
needs that depend on the type of pathology. They give rise to 
a wide range of characteristics/limitations that need to be 
considered when creating systems for users with this clinical 
profile. Nevertheless, it is possible to identify the abilities 
that are most affected by limitations of this type and the main 
difficulties experienced by individuals with cognitive 
disabilities [18]. Among them are perception and processing, 
memory, ability to solve problems, and attention. 
We therefore face several challenges: 
 
Individuals with learning difficulties usually have 
serious limitations in terms of interpreting and 
understanding texts, numbers, spoken instructions 
and difficulty with spatial orientation [19].   
 
Individuals with a brain injury or cognitive 
impairment often need more time to interpret and 
respond to online stimuli [20].  
 
Individuals with memory problems find it harder to 
deal with sequential operations or understand and 
retain information inserted into a complex interface 
and presented in a haphazard manner [21].   
 
Individuals with low reflexes or memory and 
perception problems have a greater difficulty in 
using buttons on a computer mouse for separate 
actions [21].   
III. 
CONCEPT 
During the whole process of conceiving (functional 
design, graphic design and technical development) special 
specificities were taken into account [22]. Design was 
focused on following concepts - User Centred Design 
(UCD), User Experience (UX) and User Interface Design 
(UID) - and a special attention was given to high level of 
usability. 
The most relevant tasks considered during Mind.Care´s 
concept process were: 
 
During the specification phase, functional mockups 
were designed with the main objective to ensure 
that all users will be able to simply and accurately 
manipulate all interface and navigation components 
of cognitive training activities. 
 
General usability guidelines were also defined to 
ensure that all interface components were designed 
so that users of all ages can understand them, even 
if they have vision impairment or cognitive 
disabilities. 
 
A library of simple icons, easy to understand and 
appropriate to all main actions, was created. 
 
To guarantee good readability and increase 
legibility, different typefaces were tested to select 
those fonts which were best suited to complement 
the icons and ensure clarity.  
 
A contrast analyzer was also used to check the 
combination of colors, based on the requirements of 
the Web Content Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) 
2.0, ensuring there is sufficient contrast between 
foreground and background elements. 
Following 
analyses 
and 
development 
of 
these 
requirements, the base interface was designed for use in all 
activities. 
A. User interface 
Much of the literature related to senior users and the 
internet eventually suggest guidelines that are reflected in 
best practice in the creation of systems for any age group and 
any type of user, from the consistency of browsing, to how to 
write clearly or how to handle the whole graphical interface 
[23]. 
Overall, the approach to reconciling to the full the 
requirements of the different target audiences of the system 
to be developed concerns the adoption, where possible, of 
the principles of universal design. Thus, the end result is 
meant to deliver a system that is suitable for both healthy 
senior users and users with cognitive limitations. 
The authors of the principles of universal design specify 
seven principles to consider during the design process and as 
a way to evaluate products, systems or environments already 
created - Equitable use, Flexibility in use - Simple and 
intuitive, Perceptible information, Tolerance for error, Low 
physical effort, Size and space for approach and use [24]. 
The main guidelines identified and considered to put into 
practice the principles mentioned above were: 
 
To create an interface as intuitive and simple to use 
as possible, with information organized and 
structured in a clear, logical and relevant manner for 
those who use it, but attractive to atract the attention 
of various types of user. 
 
To create a system that, whenever possible, is 
flexible and adaptable to aptitude of each user; 
 
To integrate a system for speech recognition that 
could be an alternative mode of interaction through 
commands made by you. 
 
To 
clearly 
provide 
multimodal 
sequential 
instructions that would help with performing 
complex operations. 
 
To 
create 
a 
browsing 
structure 
consistent 
throughout the system, maintaining the coherence 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

of elements that perform the same type of functions, 
using graphics and easily recognizable icons, which 
should aid understanding and browsing. 
 
To use familiar pictures and graphics that are easy 
to understand and retain, alongside a simple, clear 
language – short, concise sentences. 
 
To ensure maximum contrast between the interface 
elements (content / background). 
 
Within the navigation menus and buttons that 
trigger actions, to associate (whenever possible) 
graphics with words in order to facilitate 
understanding. 
 
To 
use 
graphic 
elements 
that 
efficiently 
communicate what was intended and that are as 
simple as possible. 
 
To use sound to supplement the information 
presented. 
 
To use sounds that reflect the interaction of the user 
interface elements, and catch the attention of the 
user.  
 
To limit the number of options to avoid 
overwhelming the level of understanding and 
retention of information. 
 
Where justified, to allow the user to cancel 
accidental and wrong interactions. 
 
To avoid simultaneous tasks and keep to a 
minimum the number of steps required for the 
interaction. 
 
To increase the size of the clickable areas so as to 
facilitate interaction for people with impaired vision 
or motor coordination. 
 
To allow sufficient time for the user to interact with 
the content.                         
IV. 
PROTOTYPE 
Each cognitive activity has an introduction (e.g., name of 
the activity, cognitive domains to stimulate, the level at 
which the user is located), a brief presentation, the proposed 
objectives and is accompanied by a demonstration (Fig. 1). 
Before beginning an activity, the user has access to the 
different levels of difficulty available, and can refer to the 
parameters that vary between them (Fig. 1). 
In performing each activity, the user receives instructions 
on how to proceed (Fig. 1). 
At the end of the activity, the user always has access to 
an evaluation of performance and may consult, when 
appropriate; responses are marked as correct or incorrect, 
when applicable (Fig. 1). 
A. The cognitive activity “Spot the differences” 
In this activity [22], two seemingly identical pictures are 
presented simultaneously. The participant must identify and 
flag the differences between the two images. As the level of 
difficulty increases, the number of differences increase and 
these 
differences 
become 
less 
and 
less 
apparent. 
Additionally, at lower levels of difficulty, images 
specifically designed for the activity are used, while higher 
levels of difficulty use images from real situations. 
This 
activity 
involves 
predominantly 
attentional 
capacities. The task of finding differences between two 
seemingly identical images implies a flexible mediation 
between concentration, inhibition of distraction and the 
ability to shift consciousness from one focus to another. 
Through the attentional cognitive processes, there is a 
selection of relevant stimuli to perform a comparative 
analysis of the details of the figures, while irrelevant 
information is inhibited, i.e., the various aspects of the 
images that are not different. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Mind.Care - The cognitive activity “Spot the differences” 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

V. 
MIND.CARE’S PROJECT 
The Project, Product or Service (PPS) named Mind.Care 
is framed in the mobilizing project TICE.Healthy. This 
project, according to the mission and goals of the main 
TICE.PT, is aimed at enhancing the contribution of 
Portuguese companies and organizations in global markets of 
the strategic area "Health and Quality of Life”. 
TICE.Healthy, 
where 
MediaPrimer 
(www.mediaprimer.pt) is the leading partner, represents a 
collaborative initiative of Portuguese companies and entities 
of the Scientific and Technological Sector for the 
development and marketing of innovative products in the 
field of e-health. 
The Mind.Care project aims to provide services, 
equipment and aids for the relatives, caregivers and 
healthcare professionals of persons affected by dementia 
diseases. The goal is to improve the quality of life and well-
being of people suffering from Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s 
diseases, while at the same time significantly reducing the 
cost of treatment and follow-up of these patients. All is 
intended to be achieved through the use of a system 
supported 
by 
internet 
and 
mobile 
communications 
technology. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Mind.Care, is being developed with professional input at 
all levels. The Centre for Neuroscience and Cell Biology 
(CNC) of the University of Coimbra provides the scientific 
support and MediaPrimer is responsible for the design and 
implementation of the occupational health component, in its 
various aspects, from graphic design to technological 
solutions. 
Currently, clinical and functional validations of the 
cognitive activities of the Occupational Health component 
are being planned. In the near future, the validation of the 
activities will be initiated expecting to: 
 
Be carried out through a pilot study with clinical 
groups 
who 
underwent 
a 
comprehensive 
neuropsychological 
assessment 
and 
complete 
clinical evaluation, either at the beginning or at the 
end of the validation period; 
 
Perform 
psychometric and 
clinical 
validation 
studies, in order to confirm that the several activities 
of cognitive training are appropriated and useful 
both user profiles; 
 
Evaluate the improvement capacity; 
 
Evaluate 
the 
preventive 
capacity 
through 
a 
longitudinal study; 
 
Evaluate the acceptance and interaction from users. 
After completing the analysis of the data from the clinical 
observation, technical observation and personal experience 
of all the actors involved in the pilot study, the next step will 
be to correct and improve the usability and functionality. 
These will look at all the difficulties expressed and the 
improvements suggested that are deemed relevant and 
essential.  
The number of levels for each activity, the respective 
parameters and degree of difficulty, the type of content and 
its characteristics, the execution time, and functions available 
will be reviewed according to the findings of the pilot study. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Special thanks are due to the members of the project 
development team - Vera Cardoso, João Costa and Tiago 
Mano. 
The project TICE.Healthy is co-funded by the European 
Union under the European Regional Development Fund 
(ERDF) and by the Operational Competitiveness Programme 
(COMPETE), as part of the National Strategic Reference 
Framework (QREN). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. L. Barranco-Quintana, M. F. Allam, A.S. Castillo, and R. F. 
Navajas, “Factores de riesgo de la enfermedad de Alzheimer” 
[Risck fators for Alzheimer’s disease], Revista de Neurología, 
vol. 40, no. 10, May 2005 pp. 613-618. 
[2] J. Chen, K. Lin, and Y. Chen, “Risk factors for dementia” 
Journal of Formosan Medical Association, vol. 108, no. 10, 
Oct. 2009, pp. 754-764. 
[3] M. Herrera-Rivero, M. E. Hernández-Aguilar, J. Manzo, and 
G. E. Aranda-Abreu, “Enfermedad de Alzheimer: Inmunidad 
e 
diagnóstico” 
[Alzheimer’s 
disease: 
immunity 
and 
diagnosis], Revista de Neurología, vol. 51, no.3, Aug. 2010, 
pp. 153-164. 
[4] S. Seshadri et al., “Lifetime risk of dementia and Alzheimer’s 
Disease: The impact of mortality on risk estimates in the 
Framingham study”, Neurology, vol. 49, no. 6, Dec. 1997, pp. 
1498-1504. 
[5] T. Luck, M. Luppa, S. Briel, and S. G. Riedel-Heller, 
“Incidence of mild cognitive impairment: A systematic 
review”, Dementia and Geriatric Cognitive Disorders, vol. 29, 
no. 2, Apr. 2010, pp. 164-175. 
[6] C. P. Ferri et al., “Global prevalence of dementia: A Delphi 
consensus study”, Lancet,  vol. 366, no. 9503, Dec. 2005, pp.  
2112-2117. 
[7] European Comission (2009). Estimated number of people 
(2006) 
with 
dementia. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/health/ph_information/dissemination/echi/
docs/dementia2_en.pdf [retrieved: may, 2013] 
[8] A. Comas-Herrera et al., “Future costs of dementia-related 
long-term care: exploring future scenarios”, International 
Psychogeriatrics, vol.23, no. 1, Feb. 2011, pp. 20-30. 
[9] K. M. Langa et al., “National estimates of the quantity and 
cost of informal caregiving for the elderly with dementia”, 
Journal of General Internal Medicine, vol. 16, no. 11, Nov. 
2001, pp. 770-778.  
[10] A. Wimo, B. Winblad, H. Aguero-Torres, and E. von Strauss, 
“The magnitude of dementia occurrence in the world”, 
Alzheimer Disease and Associated Disorders, vol. 17, no.2, 
Apr. 2003, pp. 63-67. 
[11] K. Ball et al., “Effects of cognitive training interventions with 
older adults: a randomized controlled trial”, Journal of the 
American Medical Association, vol. 288, no. 18, Nov. 2002, 
pp. 2271-2281. 
[12] C. K. Casel, “Use it or lose it activity may be the best 
treatment for aging”, Journal of the American Medical 
Association, vol. 288, no. 18, Nov. 2012, pp. 2333-2334.  
[13] R. O. Roberts et al., “The incidence of MCI differs by subtype 
and is higher in men: The Mayo Clinic study of aging”, 
Neurology, vol. 78, no. 5, Jan. 2012, pp. 342-351. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[14] R. C. Petersen et al., “Prevalence of mild cognitive 
impairment is higher in men: The Mayo Clinic study of 
aging”, Neurology, vol. 75, no. 10, Sept. 2010, pp. 889-897. 
[15] A. Arch (2008, May 14). Web accessibility for older users: A 
literature 
review 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/wai-age-literature/#whatvision 
[retrieved: may, 2013] 
[16] AgeLight (2001, Sept. 10). Interface design guidelines for 
users 
of 
all 
ages 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.agelight.com/webdocs/designguide.pdf [retrieved: 
may, 2013] 
[17] R. Lucas and M. T. Monjardino, "Revisão da epidemiologia 
da patologia reumática em Portugal" [Review of the 
epidemiology of rheumatic disease in Portugal], in O estado 
da reumatologia em Portugal,  Observatório Nacional das 
Doenças Reumáticas, 2010, ch.4, sec. 4.3,  p. 42. 
[18] WebAim. Cognitive disabilities part 2: Conceptualizing 
design 
considerations 
 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://webaim.org/articles/cognitive/conceptualize/ [retrieved: 
may, 2013] 
[19] J. Brewer (2005, May 5). How people with disabilities use the 
web: Working group internal draft [Online]. Available: 
http://www.w3.org/WAI/EO/Drafts/PWD-Use-Web/ 
[retrieved: may, 2013] 
[20] M. Serra and J. Muzio, “The IT support for acquired brain 
injury patients: The design and evaluation of a new software 
package”, in HICSS-35, Island of Hawaii, Proc., 2002. 
[21] K. Jiwnani (2001). Designing for users with cognitive 
disabilities. 
Universal 
Usability 
in 
practice 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.otal.umd.edu/uupractice/cognition/ 
[retrieved: april, 2013]  
[22] J. Redish and D. Chisnell (2004). Designing web sites for 
older adults: A review of recent literature [Online]. Available: 
http://assets.aarp.org/www.aarp.org_/articles/research/oww/A
ARP-LitReview2004.pdf [retrieved: may, 2013] 
[23] The Center for Universal Design (1997). The Principles of 
Universal Design, Version 2.0. Raleigh,  NC: North Carolina 
State University. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-314-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013 : The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges

