Wearable Inertial Sensors as a Tool for Quantitative Assessment of Progress during 
Rehabilitation  
 
Salvatore Tedesco1, Andrea Urru1, James Peckitt2, Brendan O’Flynn1 
1WSN Group, Micro & Nano Systems - Tyndall National Institute  
2 Mardyke Arena Clinic 
University College Cork  
Cork, Ireland 
e-mail: salvatore.tedesco@tyndall.ie 
 
Abstract— Biomechanics analysis is frequently used in both 
clinical and sporting practice in order to assess human motion 
and performance of defined tasks. Whilst camera-based 
motion systems have long been regarded as the ‘Gold-
standard’ for quantitative movement-based analysis, their 
application is not without limitations as regards potential 
sources of variability in measurements, high costs, and 
practicality of use for larger patient/subject groups. Another 
more practical approach, which presents itself as a viable 
solution to biomechanical motion capture and monitoring in 
sporting and patient groups, is through the use of small-size 
low-cost wearable Micro-ElectroMechanical Systems (MEMs)-
based inertial sensors. The clinical aim of the present work is 
to evaluate gait during rehabilitation following knee injuries 
and to identify gait abnormalities through a wireless inertial 
sensing system. This system was developed at the Tyndall 
National Institute to meet clinician-defined needs, and is able 
to provide a complete biomechanics assessment without the 
constraints of a motion capture laboratory. The derived 
motion parameter outcomes can be analyzed by clinicians and 
sport scientists to study the overall patients’ condition and 
provide accurate medical feedback as to their rehabilitative 
progress. Detection of atypical movement characteristics is 
possible by comparing the performance and variability in 
motion characteristics in the patient’s affected and unaffected 
lower-limbs. The work is ongoing, and to date the system has 
been tested on only one impaired subject, additional clinical 
trials are currently being planned with an enhanced number of 
injured subjects. This will provide a more robust statistical 
analysis of the data in the study. The present feasibility study 
proved that inertial sensors can be used for a quantitative 
assessment of knee joint mobility, and gait mechanics during 
the rehabilitation program of injured subjects and can provide 
valuable information to clinical experts as regards patient 
rehabilitation.  
 
Keywords- 
Inertial 
Sensors; 
Wearable 
Microsystems; 
Rehabilitation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Biomechanics analysis is frequently used in both clinical 
and sporting practice by clinicians to track patient progress 
and to define rehabilitations programs through the 
assessment of human motion during the performance of 
defined tasks. Common examples include the use of camera-
based motion analysis systems during formal gait analysis by 
rehabilitation professionals to ascertain measurements of 
Temporal (Time) & Spatial Characteristics associated with 
gait parameters. This enables clinicians to identify gait 
deviations in paediatric and amputee populations, screening 
elderly people for risk of falling, to objectively monitor 
patient’s progress, and to help determine the efficacy of 
surgical and therapy interventions [1]-[4]. 
Whilst camera-based motion systems have long been 
regarded as the ‘Gold-standard’ of quantitative movement-
based analysis, their application is not without limitations as 
regards potential sources of variability in measurements, 
relatively high costs of instrumentation including access to 
specialist motion labs, as well as practically of application 
for larger patient/subject groups, as has been discussed by 
Chau et al. [5].  
From a clinical perspective, observational forms of 
clinical gait analysis frequently forms the corner stone of 
patient knee joint assessment, and is typically used in 
parallel with manual clinical assessment techniques, such as 
stress-testing evaluation of joint laxity, range of movement 
(ROM), and manual and/or isokinetic strength assessment, 
as well as contextual subjective patient questionnaires, such 
as International Knee Documentation Committee (Form) 
IKDC [1][3]. 
However, the use of observational gait analysis (non-
empirical assessments), even when used by experienced 
clinicians, may not be adequate or sensitive enough to detect 
subtle clinical pathological changes in movement following 
knee surgery [3][4]. 
Another approach, which has been explored as a more 
practical and viable solution to biomechanical motion 
capture and monitoring in sporting and patient groups, is 
through the use of  small-size low-cost wearable inertial 
sensors [1][3][4].  
 
 
Figure 1.  Tyndall Wireless Inertial Measurement Unit (WIMU) 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Nevertheless, despite the great amount of work 
presented in literature on inertial sensors for biomechanics, 
such a technology has been adopted for monitoring lower-
limbs during rehabilitation or tele-rehabilitation only in few 
cases (for example [6][7]). In even fewer cases, inertial 
sensors were adopted to assess injured athletes’ joint 
movement during rehab (such as, ankle [8] or shoulder [9]). 
To the best of authors’ knowledge, only one study [10] has 
investigated athletes’ movement following knee injuries; 
however, the proposed solution (e.g., a full-body suit 
equipped with 10 wearable sensors) may be cumbersome. 
The clinical aim of the present ongoing work is to 
evaluate gait during rehabilitation following knee injuries 
and to identify gait abnormalities through a wireless 
portable easy-to-use inertial sensing system. The wireless 
sensing system, developed at the Tyndall National Institute, 
consists of two sensors per limb, and is able to provide a 
complete biomechanics assessment (without the constraints 
of a laboratory) for a series of scripted activities. The 
derived outcome can be analyzed by clinicians and sport 
scientists to study the overall patients’ condition and 
provide accurate medical feedback, thus proving that inertial 
sensors can be used for a quantitative assessment of knee 
joint mobility, and gait mechanics during the rehabilitation 
program of injured athletes. 
This work was a phase one feasibility study. In order to 
further validate the drawn conclusions in statistical terms, 
additional clinical trials, with larger and homogeneous 
populations, are needed and currently being planned. This 
feasibility study represent a prerequisite to a larger cross-
sectional/cohort trial that will assess sport performance 
analysis and movement pattern alterations detection in 
people following knee injuries pathologies through wearable 
inertial sensing technology. Ethics approval has been 
secured for this proof-of-concept work and larger scale 
validation trials. 
The present work is organized as follows. The 
methodology of the study, with a description of the 
hardware and of the protocol used during the test, are 
described in Section II. The obtained results are shown in 
Section III and exhaustively analyzed and discussed, also 
providing new requirements for future clinical trials. 
Finally, conclusions are drawn in the last section.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY, HARDWARE, AND PROTOCOL 
The parameters taken into account for a complete 
assessment are as follows: 
 
Temporal events: toe-offs, heel-strikes, mid-stance;  
 
Temporal intervals: gait cycle duration, stance 
phase, swing phase, single and double support, 
cadence (or step rate), number of cycles, swing 
symmetry; 
 
Spatial parameters: stride length, stride velocity (or 
speed), peak angular velocity, shank clearance; 
 
Knee range of motion.  
For each of those parameters, it is possible to calculate 
min, max, mean, median, standard deviation values and 
extrapolate the related Coefficient of Variability (CV). 
The system consists of two Tyndall Wireless Inertial 
Measurement 
Units 
(WIMUs) 
per 
leg 
with 
3D 
accelerometer/gyro (@ 400 Hz) and Bluetooth Low-
Energy/SD cards (Fig. 1). WIMUs have been attached to the 
anterior tibia, 10 cm below the tibial tuberosity, and to the 
lateral thigh, 15 cm above the tibial tuberosity using surgical 
adhesive tape. 
The data fusion algorithms are implemented in Matlab, 
and the scenarios considered are walking and hamstring curl 
– defined by physiotherapists as good indicators of 
rehabilitation progress. In the walking scenario, the subject 
stands on a treadmill, which is then being operated at 
different speeds (3 and 4 km/h) for approximately one 
minute per test. In the hamstring curl scenario, the subject 
stands and bends the knee raising the heel toward the ceiling 
as far as possible without pain, relaxing the leg after each 
repetition. A significant number of repetitions for each 
scenario was carried out, so as to provide an accurate picture 
of the conditions. The system has been tested with an 
impaired subject. The impaired subject is a female athlete, 
age: 44, height: 161 cm, and weight: 52 kg, with good 
general health status, with history of knee injuries in the last 
2 months before testing (reconstructed anterior cruciate 
ligament in the left leg following a sporting injury), and 
tested for 3 months starting from one month after surgery. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Knee joint angles have been estimated for the participant. 
Results are shown for the hamstring curl scenario in Fig. 2 
(left leg on the left, and right leg on the right), where each 
line indicates the reference joint angle values extrapolated 
from the exercises performed by the unimpaired subject at 4, 
6, 8, and 10 weeks following the knee surgery. Those lines 
represent the average characteristic of all the individual 
repetitions carried out at each testing session. While the lines 
for the right lower-limb are always consistent throughout the 
rehabilitation process, the left impaired lower-limb shows a 
great difference in the results obtained in the first session 
(after 4 weeks) compared to the other ones. All the following 
sessions are comparable also for the left lower-limb.   
Finally, 
all 
the 
gait 
spatio-temporal 
parameters 
mentioned in Section 2 have been calculated for the walking 
scenario (at 3 and 4 km/h) for both legs of the impaired 
subject. Results are summarized in Fig. 3.  
As per the temporal variables, the first session after 4 
weeks shows a strong difference between left and right leg 
due to injury’s effects on gait, especially highlighted by the 
CV. In the following testing sessions, performance from 
affected and unaffected lower-limbs become comparable. 
Those considerations are valid for both speeds of the 
walking scenario.  
Dissimilarities are also clear as per spatial parameters.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
Figure 2.  Joint Angles for left leg (left) and right leg (right) measured throughout rehabilitation (hamstring curl exercise). 
     
 
Figure 3.  Walking spatio-temporal parameters at 3 (up) and 4 (down) km/h for each testing session. Mean and St. Dev. shown. CV is indicated in brackets 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

For instance, the evident difference (roughly 30 cm) 
between left and right stride length in the injured subject at 
3 and 4 km/h in the first session is much larger compared to 
the same divergence measured during the remaining testing 
sessions. Indeed, the left stride length for the impaired 
athlete is always shorter compared to her right stride length 
at every speed and for every session.  
The CV associated to the stride length is an additional 
parameter that further shows this dissimilarity. The average 
CV for the right stride length is always consistent at each 
session, whilst this is not evident in the CV measured on the 
subject’s left lower-limb, especially on the session after 4 
weeks. 
The same characteristics are observed in the estimation 
of stride speeds and shank clearance. The difference 
between left and right stride speed in the following sessions 
is much limited compared to the same variable measured 
during the first one. The associated CV for right and left 
stride speed proves this conclusion as well.  
Finally, while the difference between the mean values of 
left and right shank clearance is consistent at the first 
session at 3 km/h, and is limited in the following weeks, 
such a difference remain visible until the 4th session (after 
10 weeks) when considering the speed at 4 km/h, which 
involves higher dynamic movements. 
All those results indicate that the gait measurements 
gathered from the subject after 6 weeks are far more 
repeatable and stable than the gait variables collected at the 
first session. Therefore, this feasibility study has proved that 
the studied wearable inertial sensing technology is able to 
potentially detect atypical gait movement characteristics 
accurately and reliably by comparing performance and 
differences in the affected and unaffected lower-limbs. 
Those results also proved how critical and important the 
first 6 weeks of rehabilitation after knee surgery may be, 
which should be targeted and analyzed with much frequent 
data captures in the following studies. Moreover, it has been 
shown how only joint angles or gait spatio-temporal 
parameters may be too limited in order to provide a 
complete picture of the subject’s condition after the first 
phase of rehabilitation. Therefore, new variables should be 
considered so as to define also more subtle aspects of the 
gait change, such as postural sway, the energy expenditure 
and the movements’ smoothness.  
Finally, given that alongside re-education of motor 
patterning, muscular reconditioning is an important 
rehabilitation goal during the restoration of function after 
injury, further exercises targeting fatigue and muscle 
strength/power estimation should be included into the 
protocol for the following studies, so as to have a better 
understanding of the overall patient’s progress throughout 
the procedure. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS & FUTURE WORK 
This work presented a wearable inertial system for an 
objective assessment of lower-limbs. Detection of atypical 
movement characteristics was measured by comparing 
performance and differences in the affected and unaffected 
lower-limb. The test subject will continue to be monitored 
throughout the complete rehabilitation in order to measure 
her response to therapeutic treatment. An enhanced number 
of subjects, with homogeneous characteristics, will also be 
tested in the future so as to have a more robust base for the 
study and further validate the drawn conclusions in statistical 
terms. These additional clinical trials are under development.  
However, the present feasibility study proved that 
inertial sensors can be used for a quantitative assessment of 
knee joint mobility, and gait mechanics during the 
rehabilitation program of injured subjects.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This publication has emanated from research supported in 
part by a research grant from Science Foundation Ireland 
(SFI) and is co-funded under the European Regional 
Development Fund under Grant Number 13/RC/2077 – 
CONNECT as well as the European funded project 
SAFESENS under the ENIAC Program in association with 
Enterprise Ireland (IR20140024). 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Hagemeister, L. H. Yahia, N. Duval, and J. A. de Guise, 
‘‘In vivo reproducibility of a new non-invasive diagnostic tool 
for three-dimensional knee evaluation,’’ The Knee, vol. 6, no. 
3, pp. 175-181, Aug. 1999. 
[2] J. W. Youdas, et al., ‘‘Agreement between the GAITRite 
walkway system and a stopwatch–footfall count method for 
measurement of temporal and spatial gait parameters,” Arch 
Phys Med Rehabil, vol. 87, no. 12, pp. 1648-1652, 2006. 
[3] S. Lustig, R. A. Magnussen, L. Cheze, and P. Neyret, ‘‘The 
KneeKG system: a review of the literature,’’ Knee Surg 
Sports Traumatol Arthrosc., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 633-638, 2012.  
[4] B. Shabani, et al., ‘‘Gait knee kinematics after ACL 
reconstruction: 3D assessment,’’ International Orthopaedics 
(SICOT), vol. 39, no. 6, pp. 1187-1193, June 2015. 
[5] T. Chau, S. Young, and S. Redekop, “Managing variability in 
the summary and comparison of gait data,” J Neuroeng 
Rehabil., vol. 2, no. 22, pp. 1-20, 2005. 
[6] O. M. Giggins, K. T. Sweeney, and B. Caulfield, 
“Rehabilitation exercise assessment using inertial sensors: a 
cross-sectional analytical study,” J Neuroeng Rehabil., vol. 
11, no. 158, pp. 1-10, 2014. 
[7] R. Nerino, et al., “An improved solution for knee 
rehabilitation at home,” 9th Int Conf Body Area Networks, 
pp. 62-68, 2014. 
[8] S. Zhang, F. Naghdy, D. Stirling, M. Ros, and A. Gray, 
“Ankle 
injury 
assessment 
using 
inertial 
3D 
data,” 
IEEE/ASME Int Conf Adv Intell Mech, pp. 810-815, 2013. 
[9] C. Tranquilli, A. Bernetti, and P. Picerno, “Ambulatory joint 
mobility and muscle strength assessment during rehabilitation 
using a single wearable inertial sensor,” Medicina dello Sport, 
vol. 66, no. 4, pp. 583-597, Dec. 2013. 
[10] D. Fitzgerald, et al., “Development of a wearable motion 
capture suit and virtual reality biofeedback system for the 
instruction and analysis of sports rehabilitation exercises,” 
29th Ann Int Conf IEEE EMBS, pp. 4870-4874, Aug. 2007. 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

