Usage of E-Health Services in Health Institutions and Opinions of Patients
Merve Deniz Pak, Andaç Anıldı, Meriç Yavuz Çolak 
Baskent University 
Faculty of Health Sciences 
Healthcare Management Department 
Ankara, Turkey 
mervedenizpak@gmail.com, andacanildi@hotmail.com, meric@baskent.edu.tr 
 
 
 
Abstract— 
E-Appointment, 
E-Family 
Practice, 
E-
Information, 
E-Prescription, 
E-Pharmacy, 
Electronic 
Health Registration (E-Registration), Nursery Information 
System, E-Radiology, E-Laboratory, E-Smart Card, Tele-
Medicine, Biometric Authentication System, are used 
within the E-Healthcare system in Turkey. Main objective 
of this research is to evaluate opinions of patients about E-
healthcare services provided in healthcare institutions and 
utilization status of these services. The research is 
important in terms of understanding the E-healthcare 
using patients' views on the national usage of technology in 
healthcare in Turkey. The public survey consists of 19 
questions and among them there are questions to measure 
the participants’ sociodemographic status along with the 
ones to evaluate participants’ awareness of E-Healthcare 
services and their satisfaction of these services.  
 
Keywords- 
E-Healthcare; 
Patient 
Opinions; 
Hospital 
Information System; Healthcare Institutions; Healthcare 
Informatics in Turkey. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 
Nowadays, technology is one of the best ways to 
gather information. Storage of information, systematic 
arrangement, processing, transmission and accessibility are 
possible thanks to the existing technology [1].  In healthcare 
services, hospitals and healthcare institutions also use 
computers to interact with complicated environments in order to 
be effective [2] [3].  Quick developments in both healthcare and 
computer science sectors result in both of this sectors to be 
intertwined and to change drastically [4] [5].   
 
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 
Technology concept in terms of healthcare technology can 
greatly contribute to the solution of a medical problem, and 
including its users; is a combination of methods, technique and 
equipment [6]. E-Healthcare is defined as the usage of 
communication and information technologies in their full 
function to improve the health of individuals and the 
accessibility of healthcare services provided in forms of high 
quality, efficient and effective healthcare services [7]. Also, E -
Healthcare is used for healthcare services that are supported by 
communication and information technologies [4] [8].    
 
 
In this paper, patients’ opinions about E-healthcare 
services and evaluation of usage status of these services in 
Turkey are the main objective of the research. In parallel with 
the main objective of the research within the extent of E-
healthcare services concept, it is aimed to evaluate patients’ 
opinions about services that are executed in healthcare 
institutions like Electronic Patient Registration (E-Registration), 
E-Prescription, 
E-Appointment 
System, 
Biometric 
Authentication, E-Radiology, Pharmacy, Laboratory, Surgery 
Room Information systems and their knowledge, opinions about 
Tele-medicine and also, usage status of the current services. 
The research is important in terms of understanding the E-
healthcare using patients' views on the national usage of 
technology in healthcare in Turkey. The research was 
conducted between the dates of 1 of June 2013 and 31 of 
August-2013. Therefore, time can be boundary of this project. 
 
In Section II, we give state of the art in E-Healthcare. 
In Section III, we introduce E-healthcare applications in 
Turkey. More details of historical development of the E-
healthcare services in Turkey are described in Section IV.  In 
Section V, we give methods of research.  Results of the research 
are given in Section VI. Finally, we drew a conclusion and 
suggestions for future work in Section VII. 
 
II. STATE-OF-THE-ART IN E-HEALTHCARE 
 
In the article “Acceptance of Swedish E-Health 
Services” which was written by Mary-Louise Jung and Karla 
Loria in Sweden, 12 old patients were interviewed in order to 
determine the attitude towards technology usage in healthcare 
sector [9]. The research contains only the inspection of services 
that are provided by public healthcare hosts in Sweden that 
provide online healthcare services, online doctor and e-
prescription services. In order to collect data, interviews were 
conducted about the difficulty level of e-health systems and 
about the attitude towards each one of the services.  
In the research that was conducted by Fatma Gül Altın 
in Turkey “Application of Information Technologies in The 
Healthcare Sector” doctors’ opinions towards usage of e-health 
services were evaluated [10].  
Opinions of the patients that use e-health services 
directly and the evaluation of these services’ usage status are 
significantly important. There is no research about usage of e-
health systems with patients in Turkey. Our work is the one and 
only in this perspective. In order to conduct the research, a large 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

focus group was considered (656 Patients). The evaluation of all 
the e-health services that are used in public and private sector is 
the main purpose of this research. 
 
III. E-HEALTHCARE APPLICATIONS IN TURKEY 
 
By using E-Healthcare services, healthcare institutions’ 
expenses will be lowered, thus their efficiency will be improved 
along with the efficiency of serving healthcare services and 
distribution of sources and the communication among 
healthcare staff. It will be easier to benefit from healthcare 
services for individuals who have problems such as 
accommodating in rural areas or having hardship with 
transportation. Individuals and healthcare staff will be able to 
reach information more easily thus time will be used much 
more efficiently [10] [11].   
 
Services that are already in use in Turkey are E-Family 
Practice, E-Appointment, E-Information, E-Prescription, E-
Pharmacy, E-Registration (Electronic Healthcare Registrations), 
Nursery Information Systems, E-Radiology, E-Laboratory, Tele 
medicine, Biometric Authentication Services [9].  
 
Electronic Patient Registration is a storage, in which all the 
information about a patient is stored virtually, to be used when 
needed [12] [13]. 
 
Family Practice is a computer program for the use of 
the family doctor on duty under the extent of “Family Doctor 
Implementation” and  healthcare staff who works in the field of 
family healthcare [4] [14].  
 
E-Appointment System is the scheduled acceptation of 
patients to the polyclinics through a set of pre-determined rules. 
Patients that are going to be examined are given a certain date. 
Scheduling is about using time and sources efficiently [15] [16].   
 
Radiology, also known as Medical Visualization, creates, 
stores, processes, and saves images [17].  Visualization devices 
work through the use of computer technology and data process 
techniques and help doctors to reach proper diagnosis and to 
prepare disease diagnosis and a treatment plan [18].  
 
E-Prescription 
provides 
digital 
input, 
storage, 
and 
transmission of prescription information electronically among 
institutions. The era of writing prescription on paper has come 
to an end due to switching to the E-Prescription System. With 
the system, doctors write prescriptions on digital environment 
and pharmacists can see which doctor prescribed which 
medicines online. Being supported simultaneously by smart 
card, this system ended health certificates and referral notes, 
thus all transactions passed upon digital environment [19].  
 
Nursing Informatics System contains systems on which 
information and communication systems focuses on procedures 
and fields about nursery. The system makes information process 
and management easier [5] [12].   
 
Telemedicine provides distant patient treatment services 
with the help of technology [20].  
 
E-Information Services is one of the services that the 
Ministry of Health delivers. With this procedure, service can be 
received via double sided, sound-video transmitting, interactive 
screen located in the patient’s house which provides 
communication between healthcare staff and the patient.  
 
Biometric Authentication has been developed to identify 
individuals by recognizing their physical and behavioral 
characteristics features [21]. The most important feature of 
biometric systems is developing personal features. These 
features provide such security that it cannot be transferred to 
another individual. 
 
IV. 
HISTORICAL 
DEVELOPMENT 
OF 
THE 
E-
HEALTHCARE SERVICES IN TURKEY 
 
E-Healthcare service works has started with the projects of 
the Ministry of Health with the help of the World Bank in 1991 
and the Healthcare Information Systems started in 1995. The 
studies in the field of healthcare information systems have been 
improved with the Ministry of Health Project in Healthcare 
Project (CHP) which started in 2003 to create a Heath 
Information System (HIS) that covers every aspect of the 
healthcare sector. Studies for this are called E-Healthcare 
Project. Healthcare ministry undertook the coordination of E-
Healthcare Work Group in the extent of “E-Transformation 
Turkey Project”, created and executed a Schedule in 2006. It 
includes projects like E-healthcare Project, Central Hospital 
Appointment 
system 
(E-appointment), 
E-prescription, 
Electronic Referral system (E-referral), Family Practice, 
Electronic Identity Card, and Tele-Medicine. The Healthcare 
Informatics Congress from 2006 and the Healthcare Informatics 
Congress from 2007 were held to discuss this matter. “E-
Healthcare System in Turkey Project” has been improved by 
holding E-Healthcare/Tele-Medicine Congress  in the extent of 
Informatics Summit in 2008 [22] [23]. 
 
V. METHODS 
 
The research was conducted between the dates of 1 of 
June 2013 and 31 of August-2013 in Ankara Private 
Sanatorium Health Center. The basis of the research is created 
total 5000 patients who had applied to receive medical service. 
The sampling of the study consists of 656 patients. 
 
The research is a descriptive, cross-sectional study. 
Data were gathered via public survey form. The public survey 
consists of 19 questions and among them, there are questions 
to measure participants’ sociodemographic status along with 
the ones to evaluate participants’ awareness of E-healthcare 
services, usage of services and satisfaction level of these 
services, opinions about E-healthcare services protecting 
participants’ privacy, information sources about application of 
the services and problems occurred using the services.  
 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The surveys were done in the waiting room while the 
patients were waiting for examination. They usually lasted 
about 5 minutes. Participation in the survey is completely 
voluntary. Likert Scale 5 Point is applied to the poll. During 
data analysis, analysis was done via combining the participants 
that gave the answers of “bad” and “very bad” with the ones 
gave the answers of “good” and “very good”. The data which 
had been gathered by poll results was analyzed via SPSS 18.0 
package program. 
 
VI.  RESULTS 
60.4% (n=396) of the patients are female, 39.6 
%(n=260) are male. 30.6% (n=201) of the patients are 
elementary school graduates, 10.2% (n=67) are middle school, 
28.7% (n=188) are high school graduates, 8.5 % (n=56) have 
two-year degree, 19.7% (n=129) have bachelor’s degree, 1.5% 
(n=10) have master’s degree, 0.8% (n=5) have doctorate. 
74.7% (n=490) of the participants are married, 21.3% (n=140) 
are single, 0.9% (n=6) are divorced, 3% (n=20) are widower. 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Participant’s Awareness Status Of The E-Healthcare Services E-
Healthcare Application 
 
It can be seen on the figure that the service patients 
are aware of most is E-Registration 26.0 %, with E-
appointment following with the second highest ratio of 24.0 % 
(Figure 1). 
 
While 51.8% (n=340) of the participants encountered 
problems about E-Healthcare procedures, 9.8% (n=64) of them 
did not.  While 17.7% (n=116) of the participants pointed out 
that there has been no difference regarding services after E-
Healthcare procedures took effect, 20.7% (n=136) of them 
have no idea about the matter. 
 
TABLE 
I. 
SATISFACTION 
AND 
USAGE 
STATUS 
OF 
THE 
PARTICIPANT ABOUT E-PRESCRIPTION, E-APPOINTMENT AND E-
REGISTRATION SERVICES 
 While 39.2% of the participants are satisfied with E-
prescription services, satisfactory ratio of E-registration 
services is 72.8%. 26.1% of the participants are dissatisfied 
with E-appointment services (Table 1). 
 
Among the patients who use the E-prescription system 
40.1% pointed out that they think that the system is secure in 
terms of protecting personal privacy, 31.3% are indecisive, and 
28.7% pointed out that the system is insecure in terms of 
protecting personal privacy. It is observed that 61.4% of the 
patients who participated in the research use E-registration 
system in registration before examination, 13.1% occasionally 
use it, and 25.5% of the patients do not use it. When it is 
analyzed that if electronic 
registration system 
makes 
procedures easier in the hospitals, according to the participants, 
66.6% of them think the system makes it easier to benefit from 
medical services, while 14.3% thinks otherwise. According to 
the 10.7% of the participants, even with the help of E-
registration system there is no difference, while 8.4% are 
indecisive. 
 
TABLE II. SOURCES OF THE PROBLEMS IN E-HEALTHCARE 
SERVICE PROVISION ACCORDING TO THE PARTICIPANT 
 
 
According to the participants, most of the problems 
about the E-healthcare services mostly occur because of 
software and substructure inadequacy 79.0% (Table 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.    Information Sources Of The Participant About The E-Healthcare 
Practices 
 
Hospitals (26.0%) and Television (25.0%) are at the 
top of the information sources which are for E-healthcare 
practices (Figure 2).  
 
 
Poor 
Good 
Excellent 
No Usage 
n 
% 
n 
% 
n 
% 
n 
% 
E-Prescription 
41 
6.2 
42 
6.4 
257 
39.2 
316 
48.2 
E-Appointment 171 26.1 
111 
16.9 295 
45.0 
79 
12.0 
E-Registration 
64 
9.7 
78 
11.9 477 
72.8 
37 
5.6 
 Sources Of The Problems* 
n 
% 
Healthcare Staff               
432 
66.0 
Software and Substructure Inadequacy                      
521 
79.0 
Lack of Information             
499 
76.0 
Healthcare Policies 
234 
36.0 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
Healthcare sector is affected by the changes and 
innovations which are brought by technology. Each passing 
day new treatment methods and products become available. 
These days, intense usage of technology in healthcare sector 
makes the usage of E-healthcare services more important, and 
it is of great importance for serving these services more 
efficiently, more effectively and of h igher quality. It is obvious 
that generating information, reaching information and using 
information with the help of technology has great importance 
to the healthcare institutions and to the individuals who want to 
make use of these institutions’ services. 
 
 The main objective of this study is the evaluation of 
the services that are provided in healthcare institutions based 
on the patients’ opinions. We also discuss the usage status of 
these services. We surveyed patients about their awareness of 
the E-healthcare services, usage ratio of the services, 
satisfaction level, problems about the services, information 
sources about the services, and problem sources of the patients. 
 
In conclusion, these can be suggested: 
• 
It is observed that with respect to telemedicine 
practices, healthcare information systems usage ratio is not 
enough. Because of this, hospitals should try improving R&D 
activities. 
• 
Aspects like data transfer, data transfer security, 
adaptation convenience, access convenience, response time, 
determines E-healthcare services’ quality. Improving these 
aspects will  improve the satisfaction level and usage ratio of 
these services. 
• 
Healthcare Ministry should raise awareness about the 
importance of informatics systems on general healthcare 
systems. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
We are thankful for the help received from Başkent 
University that participated in this study. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] G. Eti İçli, F. Eti Aslan and S. Kuğuoğlu Importance of computer 
usage and computer based registration system in the healthcare 
institutions that are service business , Trakya University Journal of 
Social Science, vol.2 2005, pp. 33-45. 
[2] M. Öztürk, Information management’s contribution to the 
productivity in healthcare management, 2003, pp. 197-201.  
 [3] A. Köksal and E. Esatoğlu, Analysis of electronic the information 
systems that are used in private and university hospitals in the 
province of Ankara, Ankara University Journal of Dikimevi 
Vocational School of Health,  vol.7 2005, pp.53-65. 
[4] M. Özata Effects of e-healthcare projects that are conducted by the 
ministry of health and social security institution on healthcare 
services, Journal of Azerbaijani Studies  2009, pp.444-464. 
[5] F. Ay, International electronic registration systems, nursery 
practices and computer relation , Gulhane Medical Journal , vol.51  
2009, pp.131-136. 
[6] E.A. Sargutan, Healthcare Technology Management,  Hacettepe 
Journal of Health Administration, vol.8 2005, pp.113-144. 
[7] H. Moghaddasi ,F.  Asadi  , A. Hosseini and Z. Ebnehoseini, “E-
health: a global approach with extensive semantic variation” , J Med 
Syst vol. 36  2012 , pp.3173–3176.  
[8] Z. Onay, Information systems in healthcare sector, Dokuz Eylül 
University Journal of EAS vol.13  1998, pp. 35-46. 
[9] Mary-Louise J. and Karla L. Acceptance of Swedish e-health 
services, Journal of Multidisciplinary Healthcare, vol.3, 2010,pp.55-
63. 
[10] F.G. Altın, Application of information Technologies in the 
healthcare sector; Example Izmir, Süleyman Demirel University 
Institute 
of 
Social 
Sciences 
of 
Department 
of 
Business 
Administration, Thesis of Master, Isparta ,2008. 
[11] M. Yılmaz, and A.E. Demirkan, Hospital management and 
evaluation of the utility of the information system, Journal of 
Informatics Technology, vol.5 2012, pp.19-28. 
[12] M. Rezai-Rad , R. Vaezi, and Nattagh , F. “E-Health readiness 
assessment framework in Iran”,  Iranian J Publ Health vol.41 2012, 
pp. 43-51. 
 [13] V. Bal, The measurement of information systems’ effects on the 
healthcare institutions via data envelopment method, the research in 
Turkey, Süleyman Demirel University Institute of Social Sciences of 
Department of Business Administration, Thesis of PHd. Isparta, 2010. 
[14]http://www.ailehekimligi.gov.tr/index.php?option=com_content&
view=article&id=760:aile-hekimlii-bilgi-sistemi-ahbs-
nedir&catid=88:personel-cin-&Itemid=227  
[Accessed: 21-April-2013].  
[15] B. Şahin,  Hospital Management processes and healthcare 
management information systems, Kadir Has University, Institute of 
Social Sciences of Department of Business Administration, Thesis of 
Master, İstanbul,2010.  
[16] T. Yua, and H. Hob,  “ the design and development of a 
physician-oriented pacs for the enhancement of e hospital facilities”, 
International Journal of Medical Informatics vol.77  2008, pp.836–
847. 
[17] U. Şenol, A. Aktaş and O. Saka, Radiology information system 
Academic Enformatics IX Academic enformatics conference notices, 
2007, pp. 431-433. 
[18] S. Taşdemir, The evaluation of the computer system integration 
that are existed in the healthcare ministry hospitals in Ankara and the 
Ministry of Health  healthcare informatics system projects, Hacettepe 
University, Institute of Health Sciences, Department of Healthcare 
Management, Thesis of Master, Ankara, 2005.  
[19] R. Latifi “International virtual e-hospital” The Balkans Journey,  
Current Principles and Practices of Telemedicine and E-Health  2008, 
pp. 3-20. 
[20] 
http://www.saglik.gov.tr/SBSGM/belge/1-15487/tele-tip.html 
[Accessed: 4-April-2013].  
[21] M. Akçay, H. Çetinkaya, New biometric systems that are used in 
campuses, Academic informatics, XIII Academic Informatics 
Conference Notices, 2011, pp. 8-52. 
[22] S. Ertek, Tele-health and tele-medicine applications in 
endocrinology, Acıbadem University, Journal of Health Sciences 
vol.2 2011,  pp.3. 
[23] R. Akdağ, Progress report, transformation in health program of 
Turkey,  Ministry of Health in Turkey Publishing, Ankara, 2008.
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

