Person-centred Health Care Resting on Digitization and Systematic Processes 
A position paper 
 
Karin Ahlin 
Computer and System Sciences 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: Karin.ahlin@miun.se 
Kristen Snyder 
Quality Management and Mechanical Engineering 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: Kristen.snyder@miun.se
 
 
Abstract—This position paper argues for further research 
within person-centered healthcare using digitization and 
systematic process within the fields of information systems and 
quality management. The included state of art shows the 
existence of both digital applications and innovation, whereas 
there is lack of knowledge on how to engage users, especially 
when it comes to older citizens. Besides the digital application, 
we should focus on developing related systematic processes to 
increase both organizational value and patient value.          
Understanding user-design and development are necessary 
prerequisites to engage in digitalization and is also key to 
transformation in health care.  
Keywords-e-health; 
person-centred 
healthcare;quality 
management; information systems; position paper. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The world-wide paradigm shift to a Person-Centered 
model of health Care (PCC) is stimulating innovation in the 
organization, delivery, and management of services and 
changing the relationship between patient and healthcare 
worker by increasing collaboration [1], [2]. As healthcare 
workers work more closely with patients to ensure PCC, the 
assembly line disease-oriented model of care is replaced. In 
PCC, the importance of involving the patient and their 
family is emphasized while planning and delivering care.   
As part of the Swedish national vision, “In 2025, 
Sweden will be the best in the world at using opportunities 
offered by digitalization and e-health to make it easier for 
people to achieve good and equal health and welfare.” [3]. 
Through technology, innovations can emerge to bridge the 
gap between the pragmatic and the value-based and help to 
engage patients more autonomously in their own care, as 
well as provide greater possibilities to meet their needs. The 
key areas of innovation relate to communication, 
operational support, and access to services, with an 
emphasis on tailored-made solutions to the individual, 
reinforcing the shift to a more patient-centered approach to 
health care.  
While it is recognized in Sweden that welfare 
technology holds promise to transform the health care 
system to a PCC model, existing challenges are also 
acknowledged [4]. Among them are questions of personal 
integrity, data management, work processes and routines 
that enhance both the healthcare workers’ procedures [5] 
and foster collaboration with patients to strike a balance 
between technological solutions and social interaction. 
Ahlin et al. [6] argue that digitalization is complex and often 
technological challenges become barriers to human 
connection. In their study, they found a need to develop 
social presence to achieve a complete transformation and 
quality in health care through welfare technology.  
The World Health Organization (WHO) [7] suggests the 
need for a categorical framework for examining and 
developing e-health based on two categories: Digital Health 
Interventions 
and 
Digital 
Applications. 
Within 
the 
framework, six primary areas of development are identified 
including: client-to-provider telemedicine, provider-to-
provider telemedicine, targeted client communication, 
health worker decision support, digital tracking of patient 
status, provision of educational training. While this model is 
helpful in making visible the complexities underlying the 
system of health care, it also invites critical reflection about 
how 
research 
can 
be 
designed 
to 
examine 
the 
interconnectedness of the components to achieve greater 
understanding about designing PCC. Much of the research 
to date focuses on single dimensions in the application and 
use of digital solutions in health care. Fewer focus on the 
interconnectedness 
of 
the 
elements 
to 
arrive 
at 
understanding how health care systems can achieve a 
balance between the pragmatic and the value co-creation 
[8].   
In the field of information systems, studies in human 
communication 
online 
reinforce 
the 
complexity 
of 
participation in a digitally supported environment [9]. Use of 
digital technologies requires knowledge and competence to 
achieve the intended high quality of collaboration [10], [11]. 
In the field of quality management, innovations are taking 
place through service design and value co-creation, which 
involve the end-user in the needs assessment and design of 
services.  
We suggest that an interdisciplinary approach, combining 
perspectives from Information Systems and Quality 
Management will contribute valuable new insights about 
how health care systems can transform to a PCC designed to 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

balance the pragmatic and the social value-based. Therefore, 
the aim of this position paper is to highlight central elements 
from both theoretical perspectives to contribute with insights 
about how welfare technology can be used as a driving force 
to transform and innovate health care system. The foundation 
for our argumentation will come from two research fields, 
quality management and information systems.  
We base our position paper on interventions and 
innovations within home-care for older persons.  In Sweden, 
Home Health Care is provided within a system of care, in 
which collaboration among all actors is central [3]. The 
health care plans serve as the bridge to enable participation 
and collaboration of all parties in the planning and follow-up 
of individual plans for a patient. This provides an important 
context in which to study how digital solutions can innovate 
to foster collaboration and co-creation. The population of 
older persons is selected based on studies showing persons in 
the older generation require a different kind of support when 
using technology, and also have different kinds of 
expectations about being actively engaged in their health 
services. Statistics reports that almost 50% of respondents in 
a study experience they lack competencies for using digital 
tools and services.  A second motivation to focus on older 
populations is stimulated by the current pandemic in which 
digital solutions may help to combat challenges in providing 
care to persons in high-risk groups [12].  
We present state of the art in Section II and conclusion in 
Section III.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
 Research and development in the transformation to a 
patient-centered approach to health care supported by digital 
solutions is broad. The research reflects an evolution beyond 
the mere application of digital solutions for management 
systems into the human dimension, under a variety of terms 
including e-health, mhealth, and telemedicine for example. 
In this state of the art, we present research on the application 
of digital technologies in health care as part of the paradigm 
shift to Patient-Centered Care. The research illustrates the 
need for a broader approach to developing PCC, which we 
suggest can be addressed by drawing on the knowledge, 
processes and tools from information systems and quality 
management. To better understand this argument, we also 
highlight key studies from these two fields. Among the 
factors identified as both promising and challenging are: 
accessibility, user-capacity, patient-involvement in co-
creation and quality management systems that bridge internal 
efficiency with customer value. 
A. Detailing Patient-Centred Care 
Haglund [3] defines “people-centered health care as an 
approach to care that consciously adopts the perspectives of 
individuals, families, and communities, and sees them as 
participants as well as beneficiaries of trusted health systems 
that respond to their needs and preferences in humane and 
holistic ways” ([3], pp. 1). Shaller [13] has identified eight 
dimensions of patient-centered care: “1) Respect for patients’ 
values, preferences and expressed need; 2) Coordination on 
and integration on of care; 3) Information, communication 
and education; 4) Physical comfort; 5) Emotional support 
and alleviation of fear and anxiety; 6) Involvement of family 
and friends; 7) Transition and continuity 8) Access to 
care”.  ([13], pp. V). Epstein and Street [14] argue that 
achieving a patient-centered approach to health care 
necessarily transforms the system of care from an assembly 
line model to a model of care, but putting people at the heart 
of health services. Moreover, it alters the relationship 
between patients and care-givers inviting the patient to be 
actively engaged at all levels of their own health care, 
shifting focus to people rather than disease [2]. 
Transformation to a PCC approach is supported by 
digital technologies, which are guided by both a pragmatic 
and value-based intent. Pragmatically, digital solutions aim 
to develop tools and services supporting reduced healthcare 
costs, improved diagnostic procedures, management of 
health, communication and collaboration between patient 
and caregiver, independent living [15], and access to services 
[1]. Value is added through the use of digital solutions to 
make services more accessible, to collaborate, and to provide 
individuals with tools and services to support independent 
living, thereby enhancing quality of life [14].  At the same 
time, [7] cautions the need to strike a balance between 
technological solutions and human social connections. They 
argue that digital solutions,” should complement and 
enhance health system functions through mechanisms such 
as accelerated exchange of information...An understanding 
of which health system challenges can realistically be 
addressed by digital technologies, along with an assessment 
of the ecosystem’s ability to absorb such digital 
interventions, is thus needed to inform investments in digital 
health.” ([7], pp. iii).  
The move to PCC in Sweden is supported by national 
and regional policy to develop PCC [3], [16]. Under the 
Swedish healthcare reform Näravård (“Accessible Health 
Care”) [16] regional governments are redesigning health care 
systems to provide greater accessibility to care, and stimulate 
patient co-involvement. Value is placed on the individual, 
and recognizes co-creation as an important ingredient to 
better understanding of the needs of the individual. Included 
in the reform is a recognition that health care services can 
and should also aim to promote greater equality and the 
possibility for individuals to live more independently, taking 
charge of their health [16]. An active agent in the new model 
is digitalization, under the terms e-health and “welfare 
technology”, which reflect a comprehensive approach to e-
health with the intent to both deliver equal care to all 
persons, as well as strengthen resources in the delivery and 
quality of services, and create systems to engage the 
individual in their own care by enhancing both independence 
and participation [17]. 
Research and development in the transformation to a 
patient-centered approach to health care supported by digital 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

solutions is broad. The research reflects an evolution beyond 
the mere application of digital solutions for management 
systems into the human dimension, under a variety of terms 
including e-health, mhealth, and telemedicine for example. 
In some countries, the term Connected Health [1] is used to 
reflect an overarching model that incorporates the myriad of 
perspectives, reflecting a “distinct balance of technology use 
for information sharing and connectedness together with 
proactive care and integrated healthcare services. Moreover, 
it has opened up a new vista in healthcare by digitally 
connecting clinicians to clinicians, patients to clinicians and 
patients to other patients” ([1], pp. 3). The WHO [2], 
cautions the need to strike a balance between technological 
solutions and human social connection. They state, ”Digital 
health interventions should complement and enhance health 
system functions through mechanisms such as accelerated 
exchange of information, but will not replace the 
fundamental components needed by health systems such as 
the health workforce, financing, leadership and governance, 
and access to essential medicines. An understanding of 
which health system challenges can realistically be addressed 
by digital technologies, along with an assessment of the 
ecosystem’s ability to absorb such digital interventions, is 
thus needed to inform investments in digital health. ” ([2], 
pp. iii). 
B. Digitalization and Value Co-creation in Health Care 
In the area of patient-centered health care, value co-
creation and service design methods have been explored to 
foster patient-involvement [5], [16], [18], [19], [20]. Yet as 
[5] found, the rhetoric still outweighs the practice. They 
found that patients have the ability to contribute to 
development of their care, but that systematic processes, 
methods and tools to enable patient co-creation were often 
lacking. [19] found similarly, that there is an awareness 
about the value of patient knowledge, but few practical 
examples exist in which patients are included in the 
development processes. In a more recent study, [18] 
identified knowledge gaps in how organisations navigate and 
bridge knowledge from different perspectives, suggesting the 
need for continued research to bridge the gap. These studies 
illustrate the need to better understand and develop 
systematic approaches that foster co-creation to enhance 
quality in health care toward a PCC.  
Other studies of innovation health among the elderly 
draw similar conclusions about the lack of patient 
involvement. In a Swedish study, [8] provide a critical 
reflection on the promises and realities of digital care among 
the elderly, in particular in rural communities. Through an 
examination of innovations in the “Virtual Health Care 
Room”, they note that digital health services are not always 
accessible for everyone, and that they can also lack a patient-
centered perspective (ibid). They highlight the need for 
continued research, in particular in Sweden among the 
elderly, that examines health care and not just the 
technology. As they point out, there is little to no research on 
the way in which digital solutions are advancing health care 
among the elderly in Sweden.  
In  a  study  of  digital solution to support adherence to 
daily medication intake  among  the  elderly (over 65 years 
of age), Crawford et al. [20] found that participants were 
open to technology. However, factors that need to be 
improved upon include access, patient-specific solutions and 
designs. As well, gender and educational background 
affected patient experience. Their findings also demonstrated 
a positive relationship between autonomy and digital 
solutions. The greater the use and reliance on digital 
solutions the less autonomous patients felt. Among some of 
the respondents, technical solutions threatened self-
determination and sense of self-reliance. This study indicates 
both the potential for continued development in the use of 
digital medicine, as well as the need for further research to 
better understand how to secure an effective and successful 
application among the elderly.  
Other related studies, where access to services was 
examined, reveals complexities in the challenges that are 
both person specific and organizational.  Wildenbos et al. 
[22] found that although access to technology was made 
available, rates of usage and adoption were low and 
inconsistent. Among the barriers they identified through a 
systematic literature review were, cognition, physical ability, 
perception and motivation. Suslo et al. [23] suggest that 
digital solutions hold promise for meeting the unique needs 
of the elderly, which is often complex and requires both 
healing and support. Yet the challenge, they suggest, is to 
secure digital literacy among the elderly, sufficient to benefit 
from the digital solutions.  
A Danish study of digital service delivery among older 
adults [24] found that age was not a primary factor in the 
lack of use of e-health services, nor was accessibility. Rather, 
the primary reasons for “digital disengagement was lack of 
computer skills and lack of interest or confidence in using 
the internet.” ([24[, pp. 48).  Based on their findings, they 
propose that policy and programming should focus on ways 
to bridge the gap, targeting skills and attitudes related to 
technology. More significantly, they found that use of the 
digital technology among older populations did not 
necessarily result in improved communication. In fact, many 
respondents indicated concern that they were less understood 
by their caregivers. This has direct bearing on the national 
and 
international 
policies 
that 
aim 
to 
improve 
communication for patients.  
In an extensive review of the research on mHealth 
(digital healthcare solutions) for the elderly, [25] concluded 
that numerous studies focus on the development of mobile 
applications, with particular emphasis on providing service 
to the end users. They suggest an exciting area of future 
studies exists around delivery of health care at a distance and 
the coordination of emergency response. Among the 
challenges that they highlight for future innovation are 
quality assurance in the use and application of mHealth, data 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

privacy and security, data mining and machine learning, and 
finally, user acceptance.  
C. Model of prerequisites for participating in the digital 
society 
Digital 
technologies 
like 
social 
media 
have 
fundamentally changed the way we communicate, consume, 
and create [26], and not least how we collaborate. Using 
digital technologies for collaborative purposes is simply 
becoming the new normal [27], [28], solving challenges with 
information 
shortages 
[11], 
but 
also 
facilitating 
communication [29], enabling knowledge sharing and 
development [30], [31], and are used for negotiating, 
building awareness, sense making, and learning [32].  Digital 
technology as a facilitator of collaboration has been 
theorized in, for example, the boundary object theory [11] 
and the distance framework [10]. In these theories, it has 
been illustrated how digital technology can be applied and 
configured for collaborative purposes, but also the 
importance of support of and competence in using the 
technology, as well as the configuration of processes 
supposed to be supported by technology. At the same time 
research on, for example, digital technologies as a boundary 
object has been criticized for focusing too much on the 
technological properties [33], [34], missing out on the 
“hows” and “whys” related to technology use [34]. Of 
course, digital technology and access to it are critical aspects 
of the ongoing digitalization and impact our possibilities to 
collaborate. But health-care workers and patients must have 
support to actively engage in digitalized collaboration, as is 
indicated above as well as by the model of different 
prerequisites for participation in the digital society developed 
by [9] (see Fig. 1). Digitalization is more than just a matter 
of technology.  
 
 
  
Fig. 1.  Prerequisites for Digital Participation [9] 
Johansson’s [9] model summarizes a wide variety of 
prerequisites affecting individuals' possibility to participate 
in the digital society. For example, individuals need access to 
digital technology, support, and competence to use the 
technology. Even though the model is developed focusing on 
people with different disabilities or people being homeless, it 
can also be viewed as an illustration of the complexity of 
digitalization as a transformative process and aspects that 
must be considered to span distance with digital 
technologies. It illustrates that it is not enough to just make 
technology accessible or enact laws. There are several other 
prerequisites that also need to be in place for a digital 
transformation to take place and succeed. This complexity is 
what makes effective digitalization very challenging. 
D. Quality Management and Value Co-Creation 
Quality management is a systems approach to 
organizational, service and product development with the 
primary intent to meet and exceed customer needs [35], [36]. 
In recent years, traditional approaches to customer 
satisfaction have been expanded by digitalization and service 
design to focus on value co-creation [37]. Rather than 
designing services to meet the needs of customers, service 
design aims to engage the customer in the process of 
identifying needs and designing service solutions that best fit 
their needs [38]. Galvagno and Dalli [39] define co-creation 
as the “joint, collaborative, concurrent, peer-like process of 
producing new value, both materially and symbolically.” (p. 
644). Creating conditions for collaborative innovation, is 
according to [40] “the new imperative” emphasizing among 
other things value co-creation and the importance of 
engaging people as active collaborators.  
In a recent study of digitalization and quality 
management, [5] argue the need for research to go beyond 
focus on technological innovations to the impact on business 
models, and organizational systems that support value co-
creation. Seen within a system view, digital solutions impact 
both internal structures, systems and processes as well as 
interactions between external factors. Referring to [41] they 
include the following levels of interaction: process level, 
organizational 
level, 
business 
domain 
and 
societal 
level.  Further, [5] propose an analytic framework for 
understanding how quality management can develop to 
foster value co-creation in digitalization initiatives. The 
framework examines value creation from a variety of roles 
including the customer/patient and the provider/organization, 
postulating the need for organizational flexibility to foster 
adaptability and innovation. Findings from their study 
recommend levels and forms of digitalization that need to be 
further examined and developed to achieve the balance 
between organizational efficiency and creating customer 
value.   
III. 
CONCLUSION 
The Resolution on Digitalization suggests the need for a 
comprehensive framework to better understand how to 
develop an effective PCC to improve health care. This 
position paper suggests that knowledge and practical 
approaches from both information systems and quality 
management can well serve this agenda.  In particular, we 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stress the importance of development knowledge and 
understanding about user-involvement, co-creation, and 
systematic processes to support involvement as necessary 
components to achieve the 2025 Agenda in Sweden. While a 
PCC is intended for all populations, there are unique 
challenges to applying welfare technology in Home Health 
Care that both advance and challenge services and user-
experience. Statistics show that almost 50% of older persons 
experience lack of competencies for using  digital tools and 
services.  A second motivation to focus on older populations 
is stimulated by the current pandemic in which digital 
solutions may help to combat challenges in providing care to 
persons in high risk groups [12].   This provides an important 
context to study how digital solutions can innovate to foster 
collaboration and co-creation.  
This position paper demonstrated the need for continued 
research into the ways in which welfare technology can be 
used to achieve the E-health vision 2025, and in particular 
with older populations. While there is good evidence of 
advancement and innovation in the application of digital 
solutions in health care, evidence also pointed to a lack of 
knowledge about how to engage patients in health care 
planning and development. Also, systematic processes need 
to be further developed to balance goals of organizational 
efficiency with patient value. Therefore, we emphasized that 
understanding user-design for developing PCC is key to 
transformation in health care. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M.A. Muammar, Z. Ahmed, and A.M. Aldahmash, “Paradigm 
Shift 
in 
Healthcare 
through 
Technology 
and 
Patient-
Centeredness”, Int Arch Public Health Community Med, vol. 2,  
pp. 1- 8, December 2018. 
[2] World Health Organization, “Health Systems Strengthening 
Glossary”, 2018. 
[3] B.J. Haglund, “Primary Health Care - Three Stories about 
Equal Health Care”, Social Medical Journal, nr 95, vol. 4,  pp. 393-
398, 2018. 
[4] Forte, “Strategic Research Agenda for the National Program on 
Applied welfare research”, FORTE - The Research Council for 
Health, Working Life and Welfare. Stockholm, 2019. 
[5] M. Elg, J. Engström, L. Witell, and B. Poksinska, “Co-creation 
and Learning Healthcare Service Development”, Journal of Service 
Management, vol. 23, no 3, pp. 328-343, 2012. 
[6] K. Ahlin, M. Zingmark, and T. Persson Slumpi, “A Transition 
Towards Digital Home Visits in Social Care and Home Health 
Care during the Corona Pandemic”, in press, Global Health, 2021. 
[7] 
World 
Health 
Organization, 
“WHO 
Guideline: 
Recommendations on Digital Interventions for Health System 
Strengthening”, World Health Organization, 2019. 
[8] J. Lindberg and E. Carlsson, “Digital Care Landscape: 
Reflections on e-health in Sparsely Populated Areas”, Social 
Medical Journal, vol. 1, pp. 62-69, 2018. 
[9] S. Johansson, “Design for Participation and Inclusion will 
Follow: Disabled People and the Digital Society”, Doctoral Thesis, 
KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 2019. 
[10] G.M. Olson and J.S. Olson, “Distance Matters”, Human–
computer interaction, vol. 15, no. 2-3, pp. 139 – 178, 2000. 
[11] S.L. Star and J.R. Griesemer, “Institutional Ecology, 
Translations' and Boundary Objects: Amateurs and Professionals 
in Berkeley's Museum of Vertebrate Zoology”, 1907-39. Social 
studies of science, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 387 – 420, 1989. 
[12] M. Granberg, M. Rönnberg, M. Padden, J. Tangnäs, and A. 
Öjehag, “Debate: Covid-19 and Sweden’s Exceptionalism—a 
Spotlight on the Cracks in the Social Fabric of a Mature Welfare 
State”, Public Money & Management, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 223-224, 
2021. 
[13] D. Shaller, “Patient-centered care: what does it take?”, 
Commonwealth Fund New York, 2007. 
[14] R.M. Epstein and R.L. Jr. Street, “The Values and Value of 
Patient-Centered Care”, Annals of Family Medicine, vol. Mar 9, 
no. 29, pp.  100-103, 2011. 
[15] A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius, and K. Ahlin, “Factors Influencing 
Acceptance of Technology-enhanced Speech and Language 
Relearning for Stroke Survivors–A Systematic Review”, in 7th 
International Conference on e-Society, e-Learning and e-
Technologies, Portsmouth, United Kingdom, June 10-12, 2021, 
2021. 
[16] K. Kandelaki, G. Marrone, and C.S.  Lundborg, “Patient-
Centredness as a Quality Domain in Swedish Healthcare: Results 
From the First National Surveys in Different Swedish Healthcare 
Settings”, BMJ Open, vol. 6, 2016. 
[17] K. Axelsson, C. Harrefors, S. Sävenstedt, and B. M. 
Wälivaara, “E-Health in Care of Older Persons in the Future”, 
Journal of Clinical Nursing, vol. 19, no. Suppl 1, pp 54 -  , 2010.  
[18] J. Boström, “Knowledge for Improving Healthcare Service 
Quality: Combining Three Perspectives”, Licentiate Thesis, Mid 
Sweden University, 2020. 
[19] J. Boström, H. Hillborg, and J. Lilja, “Cultural Change of 
Applying User Involvement for Improving Healthcare Quality : A 
Review of the Impact on Attitudes, Values and Assumptions 
among Healthcare Professionals and Users”, Quality Innovation 
Prosperity, vol. 21,no. 3, pp. 158-172, 2017. 
[20] M. J. Crawford, D. Rutter, C. Manley, T. Weaver, K. Bhui, N. 
Fulop, and P. Tyrer, “Systematic Review of Involving Patients in 
the Planning and Development of Health Care”, Bmj, vol. 325, no. 
7375, pp. 1263- 1267, 2002. 
[21] M. Hermann et al., “Digital Competencies and Attitudes 
Towards Adherence Solutions Among Elderly Patients Treated 
with Novel Anticoagulants: A Qualitative Study”, Journal of 
Medical Internet Research, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 1- 13, 2020. 
[22] G.A. Wildenbos, L. Peute, and M. Jaspers, M, “Aging 
Barriers Influencing Mobile Health Usability for Older Adults: A 
Literature Based Framework”, International Journal of Medical 
Informatics, vol. 144, pp. 66-75, 2018. 
[23] R. Suslo, M. Paplicki, K. Dopierała, and J. Drobnik,  
“Fostering Digital Literacy in the Elderly as a Means to Secure 
Their Health Needs and Human Rights in the Reality of the 
Twenty-First century”, Fam Med Prim Care Rev, vol. 20, no. 3,pp.  
271–275, 2018. 
[24] A. Siren and S. Grønborg Knudsen, “Older Adults and 
Emerging Digital Service Delivery: A Mixed Methods Study on 
Information and Communications Technology Use, Skills, and 
Attitudes”, Journal of Aging & Social Policy, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 
35-50, 2018. 
[25] J.O. Paiva et al., “Mobile Applications for Elderly Healthcare: 
A Systematic Mapping”,  PloS one, vol. 15, no. 7, pp. 1- 21, 2020. 
[26] S. Aral, C. Dellarocas, and D. Godes, “Introduction to the 
Special Issue—Social Media and Business Transformation: a 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Framework for Research”, Information Systems Research, vol. 24, 
pp. 3-13, 2013. 
[27] P. Bjørn, M. Esbensen, R.E. Jensen, and S. Matthiesen, “Does 
distance still matter? Revisiting the CSCW Fundamentals on 
Distributed Collaboration”, ACM Transactions on Computer- 
Human Interaction (TOCHI), vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 1- 26, 2014. 
[28] P. Bjørn, “New Fundamentals for CSCW research: From 
Distance to Politics”, Interactions, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 50-53, 2016. 
[29] Q. Wang, C. Huang, and C.L. Quek, “Students’ Perspectives 
on the Design and Implementation of a Blended Synchronous 
Learning Environment”, Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 1- 13, 2018. 
[30] P.R. Carlile, “A Pragmatic View of Knowledge and 
Boundaries: Boundary Objects in New Product Development”, 
Organization Science, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 442-455, 2002. 
[31] P. R. Carlile, “Transferring,Translating, and Transforming: 
An Integrative Framework for Managing Knowledge Across 
Boundaries”, Organization Science, vol. 15, no. September-
October, pp. 555-568, 2004. 
[32] M.  Marheineke, V.K. Velamuri, and K. M. Möslein, “On the 
Importance of Boundary Objects for Virtual Collaboration: a 
Review of the Literature”, Technology Analysis & Strategic 
Management, vol. 28, pp. 1108-1122, 2016.  
[33] S.J. Landry, K. Levin, D. Rowe, and M. Nickelson, “Enabling 
Collaborative Work Across Different Communities of Practice 
through Boundary Objects: Field Studies in Air Traffic 
Management”, 
International 
Journal 
of 
Human-Computer 
Interaction, vol. 26 , no. 1, pp. 75 – 90, 2009. 
[34] Y. Tim, S.L. Pan, P. Ractham, and L. Kaewkitipong, 
“Digitally Enabled Disaster Response: the Emergence of Social 
Media as Boundary Objects in a Flooding Disaster”, Information 
Systems Journal, vol. 27, pp. 197-232, 2017. 
[35] B. Bergman and B. Klefsjö, “Quality from customer needs to 
customer satisfaction”, Studentlitteratur AB, 2010. 
[36] J.J. Dahlgaard and S.M. Dahlgaard‐Park, “Lean Production, 
Six Sigma Quality, TQM and Company Culture”, The TQM 
magazine, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 263 – 281, 2006. 
[37] K. Snyder, P. Ingelsson, and I. Bäckström, “Using Design 
Thinking to Support Value-Based Leadership for Sustainable 
Quality 
Development”, 
Business 
Process 
Management 
Journal, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 1289-1301, 2018. 
[38] B. Rill, “Resonant Co-Creation as an Approach to Strategic 
Innovation”, Journal of Organizational Change Management, vol. 
29, no. 7, pp. 1135-1152, 2016. 
[39] M. Galvagno and D. Dalli, “Theory of Value Co-Creation: a 
Systematic Literature Review”, Managing Service Quality, vol. 24, 
no. 6, pp. 643-683, 2014. 
[40] B. Leavy, “Collaborative Innovation as the New Imperative—
Design Thinking, Value Co-Creation and the Power of “Pull”, 
Strategy & Leadership. vol. 40, pp. 25-34, 2012. 
[41] P.M. Parviainen, J. Tihinen, J. Kääriäinen, and S. Teppola, 
“Tackling the Digitalization Challenge: How to Benefit from 
Digitalization in Practice”, International Journal of Information 
Systems and Project Management, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 63-77, 2017. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

