Smart Military Healthcare Monitoring and Tracking System on Raspberry Pi and
Arduino
Ali Bazzi, Moslem Ghamloush, Mostafa Ibrahim, Majd Ghareeb, Samih Abdul-Nabi, Hassan Khachfe
International University of Beirut - Department of Computer and Communication Engineering
Lebanon, Beirut, 146404 Mazraa, LIU Campus, Block F, 2nd Floor
Email: firstname.lastname@b-iu.edu.lb
Abstract— Although technology advances cannot help in
limiting the dreadfulness of war, they can at least be deployed
to reduce war effects and casualties. One way to help in this
aim could be by tracking and monitoring the location and
health situation of troops in the battle. The main objective of
the work presented in this paper is to design and implement a
complete tracking system that is composed of a mini portable
server as a central unit hosted on a Raspberry Pi to read
soldier’s location, state, and health information through
wireless communication from a small monitoring unit that is
attached to the soldier's arm. Moreover, the system provides
an emergency button that requests help when pressed if a
soldier is facing an urgent problem. A set of test cases has been
applied and the results achieved by our prototype have
presented a promising accuracy and efficiency when applying
such a system.
Keywords—Healthcare
monitoring;
tracking
system;
Raspberry
Pi;
Raspbian;
ESP8266;
Arduino;
Wifi
communication.
I.
INTRODUCTION
On
September
28
1951,
Daniel
Hunt,
18,
of
Columbiaville was a member of Company A, 1st Battalion
conducting operations near an area referred to as Heartbreak
Ridge [2]. The Chinese launched an attack, which the
company repelled. Prior to their attack, the Chinese
launched a barrage of mortar fire against the Americans in
which survivors withdrew to friendly lines. Hunt was
reported missing in action. During an investigation by the
U.S. Army Casualty office, three members of Hunt’s unit
reported that he had been killed during the fight, so the
Army declared him deceased. Today, 7780 Americans
remain
unaccounted
for
from
the
Korean
War
[1]. Thousands of cases like “Hunt” are encountered around
the world, showing that the issue of unaccounted soldiers is
a common in war zones.
Some people believe that known military communication
tools can help to avoid the above mentioned issue. However,
natural factors, lack of knowledge about the battlefield, loss
of connection between soldiers, power failure of these tools,
barrage jamming and so on, constitute other obstacles for
soldiers and their leadership.
These and many other problems have led researchers to
think about new solutions benefiting from the evolution of
technologies. Throughout the years, many technologies have
been invented to solve the Missing-In-Action problem, but
they remained weak. Most of these systems are based on
tracking the soldiers’ movements, which is not always an
efficient way to detect the real situation on the ground.
Navigation and situating are important, but need tiring
activities which GPS (Global Positioning System) makes
easier. The GPS has turned out to be a significant
technology for the U.S. military and other defense forces
around the world since the 1980's [2]. With the ability to
provide accurate positioning continuously, day or night, in
any conditions, GPS has helped ground troops in Iraq and
Afghanistan navigate across expansive, barren deserts that
have few markers or distinguishable features. Although GPS
provides the position of soldiers in battle, it is still
considered weak and far away from healthcare when any of
health issues are faced during battle.
From all the above-mentioned issues, we arrived at the
objective of our paper, which is designing a new “smart
military healthcare monitoring and tracking system” that
would
significantly
reduce
the
effects
of
problems
encountered during the combat. Our system grants the
leader the ability to track his troops on the map application
and monitor their health statuses continuously in battle,
even in advanced lines, by accessing the Web page directly
from the small central server or by using a mobile
application.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section
II, we talk about some similar applications to our system.
Section III gives an overview of the system architecture.
Section IV talks about the used components and describes
the implementation in detail. Section V summarizes the
main contributions of this paper.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Medically,
health
statuses
of
patients
with
critical
conditions are a great concern for doctors who seek new and
innovative healthcare systems. In the past, militarily armies
monitored
their
soldiers
with
the
aid
of
primitive
communication systems, such as walkie-talkie, until the
technological development enabled tracking systems using
satellites.
A.
Movement/traking system
The United
States
Army
invented
a
Movement
Tracking System (MTS) that is a logistics communication
platform under the Program Executive Office (PEO) for
Enterprise Information Systems (PEO EIS) [3]. It is
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

designed for commanders to track assets on the battlefield
with encrypted text messaging. It is a satellite-based
tracking and communicating system designed to provide
command and control between the leader and the soldiers.
This device can continuously monitor the soldier’s
location during battle, which improves the leader’s control
of the troops without the need for primitive communication
tools
which
require
manual
usage.
MTS’s
main
disadvantage is that the health statuses of soldiers remain
absent from such systems.
B. Smart systems for healthcare monitoring using
communication means
Health
monitoring
systems
have
rapidly
evolved
recently, and smart different systems have been proposed to
monitor patient’s current health conditions. In a recent work
[4], authors are proposing a “Smart real-time healthcare
monitoring
and
tracking
system
using
GSM/GPS
technologies”, which concentrates on checking the patient’s
blood pressure and body temperature. This system was built
for social healthcare in light of GSM and GPS innovations
and as a compelling application for real time health
monitoring and tracking. In case of emergency, a short
message service (SMS) will be sent to the doctor’s mobile
number along with the measured values through the GSM
module. Moreover, the GPS gives the location data of the
patient who is under observation all the time. While this
system covers the issue of healthcare status provision, it
cannot continuously track the person’s required information.
In addition, the usage of GSM to send short messages is
more expensive and can face some mistakes, such as when
the doctor’s phone is out of service or due to man-made
confusion (in the military case), etc.
In another work [5], authors proposed “Patient Health
Management System”. This system is based on smart
devices and wireless sensor networks for real time analysis
of various parameters of patients. This system is aimed at
developing a set of modules which can facilitate the
diagnosis
for
the
doctors
through
tele-monitoring
of
patients. It also facilitates continuous investigation of the
patient for emergencies looked over by attendees and
caregivers. A set of medical and environmental sensors is
used to monitor the health, as well as the surroundings, of
the patient. This sensor data is then relayed to the server
using a smart device or a base station.
Each of the systems discussed above provides a feature
needed before, during and after a combat. MTS provides
continuous tracking of soldiers’ movements, but their health
statuses
are
missing,
“Smart
real-time
healthcare
monitoring” system provides health statuses tracing, but not
continuously,
“Patient
Health
Management
System”
provides health monitoring using smartphones over The
Internet or using servers to extract information.
In our design, we are trying to achieve the goals of
existing systems by combining their features in one small
wearable device. The importance of our system compared to
other products is manifested in its ability to simultaneously
keep an eye on soldiers’ health status alongside their
locations without the need for manual control, which
facilitates leader-troops communication, even on the front
line.
Moreover,
the
central
unit,
unlike
the
systems
discussed, is a small portable device to be held by the
leader. It hosts the information locally without any need for
huge servers or access points between soldiers and their
leader.
III.
SYSTEM OVERVIEW
As depicted in Figure 1, we have two main components.
The first one is the central unit that plays the role of a server
and it is usually controlled by the group leader. The second
one holds the monitoring units worn by the soldiers in the
battle.
Figure 1. System Architecture diagram
The central unit will be portable with light weight and
small size. For simplicity of connection, this unit could
provide an access point to the soldiers to make sure no
intermediate equipment is needed. This server will host all
the needed information, such as the database and the Web
pages. Hence, data retrieval will be done locally and no
need for any external connection such as GSM or Internet
will be needed. This will help in increasing the system
security, connection speed and data localization, since the
information of a group of soldiers does not need be be
published on a large scale. This unit can be controlled via a
Web application that could be accessed directly from it or
via a mobile application that is designed to do the same
objective. The other main component of our system is a
small wearable glove that is equipped with all the sensors
and detectors to connect soldiers to their operations
campaign. This will be done by detecting body temperature,
oxygen level in blood, heart beat rate, speed and location of
each soldier. All this information will be sent periodically
and
automatically
to
the
central
unit
notifying
the
commander
of
any
issue,
injury
or
maybe
death.
Additionally, our system provides an emergency button that
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

gives the soldier the possibility to request help when facing
a non-medical urgent problem.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION TOOLS AND DETAILS
A. Monitoring unit implemetation
In our system, the monitoring unit is composed of a
microcontroller connected to a heart pulse sensor, oxygen
level and body temperature sensor, serial GPS, emergency
button, and ESP8266, as shown in Figure 2.
The Arduino Uno is a small, complete, and breadboard-
friendly board. It has 14 digital pins, and each of them can be
used as an input or output. It also has 8 analog pins, each of
which provides 10 bits of resolution.
We connected the heart pulse sensor to an analog pin of
the microcontroller. The pulse sensor reads a waveform and
calculates the BPM (Beats Per Minute), as well as the IBI
(Inter Beat Interval), which is the time between beats [7].
The oxygen level and body temperature are both
measured using the MAX30100 chip. The only required
connection to the sensor is the I2C bus (SDA, SCL lines,
pulled up). The MAX30100 is an integrated pulse oximetry,
body temperature, and heart-rate monitor sensor solution
[8]. The accuracy of the pulse sensor was better, so we
ignored the heart rate value measured by MAX30100 and
we used it as a supporter in case we have any fail in the
heart pulse sensor.
In addition, we used NEO-6M GPS Module to measure
the speed of each soldier beside his location as latitude and
longitude values. The serial GPS communicates serially
with the microcontroller. This GPS Module uses the latest
technology to give the best possible position information.
Also, it comes with ceramic antenna.
Finally, the microcontroller sends all measured values
using serial communication to the Wi-Fi module which is
connected to digital pins. The Wi-Fi Module (ESP8266) is
programmed
to
get
values
from
the
microcontroller
following a specific algorithm; then, it sends these values
through WIFI to the central unit where the leader monitors.
The ESP8266 is a self-contained system on chip with
integrated
TCP/IP
protocol
stack
that
can
give
any
microcontroller access to any WIFI network. The ESP8266
is capable of either hosting an application or offloading all
WIFI
networking
functions
from
another
application
processor.
B. Central unit impelementation
Raspberry Pi with Linux operating system is the central
unit. The leader can browse the Web page built for the
system to track and monitor his soldiers. In addition, we
added a 7 Inch LCD touchable screen and a keyboard to
allow the leader to access the Web site directly from the
server. As shown in Figure 3, the central unit is a portable
device with small dimensions (15cm width x 15cm height
and less than 10cm depth) so the leader can hold it in the
battle even in advanced lines and stay connected to his
soldiers.
Figure 3. Portable central unit based on Raspberry Pi.
The original Raspberry Pi is a small computer with a
processor, RAM (Random Access Memory) and graphics
chip. It has various interfaces and connectors for external
devices communication [9]. In our system, we configured it
as a server. We used Raspberry Pi V3 Model B which has
512 MB of RAM.
C. Web page and Android Application implementation
Each soldier in the battle held a user-friendly wearable
device composed of the microcontroller, sensors required
and a WIFI Module. A real prototype of soldier's device is
shown in Figure 4. The microcontroller gets all sensors’
values and sends them to the central unit directly using
WIFI signals without passing through any access point.
Each soldier must turn on his own device, which is
programmed only for his unique id, without any need for
any manual configuration. This device will send the
soldier’s
id,
health
status
and
location
information
continuously. In addition, any soldier with normal health
status can notify his leader by pressing an emergency button
if he needs any help. The leader can track and monitor his
soldiers directly from the small portable access unit, or any
other PC connected locally to this unit, by accessing the
Web page built for the system from any browser. After
login, the Web page displays a map showing all the soldiers
in the battle, as shown in Figure 5. The soldiers are
Figure 2. Monitoring unit implementation board.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

represented by markers; the icon of a marker changes
depending on the health status, or in case of an emergency.
The leader can also use the Web page to add, remove, and
view his soldiers and their personal information.
Figure 4. Soldier’s wearable device.
Figure 5. Main Web page shows soldiers on Map.
We developed an Android application to allow the
leader to use it instead of the Web page to track and monitor
his troops on a map, as shown in Figure 6. This application
allows the leader to add and show soldiers health statuses
and personal information displaying them in a list, as shown
in Figure 7.
V.
CONCLUSION
The main objective of this paper was to design and
implement a complete system for monitoring and tracking
soldiers’ health information and location in a battle. Our
system provides a wearable device for each soldier and a
portable device for the leader. This enhances his ability of
caring about the band benefiting from a Web page and an
Android application. This system has a humanitarian aim
since it can decrease the effects of many issues in battle
including soldiers unaccounted for and the difficulty of
health status monitoring. The system security can be
addressed using encryption technologies, such as AES
(Advanced Encryption Standard) for the data exchanged
between the central unit and the soldiers. This system could
be tested on real soldiers to prove its applicability. Another
enhancement on the system could be by providing an agreed
upon secret code to be sent with the emergency button in
order not to abuse this facility by the enemy. Moreover, the
range of the WIFI signals is limited 100 m, and the GSM
cannot be used because its signals are weak in the battle area
or they do not even exist. Our system can be improved by
introducing a new communication system using microwave
signals with frequencies lower than WIFI band (around 2.4
GHz).
Figure 6. Maps and leader’s control panel on Android.
Figure 7: List of battle soldiers and their health.
REFERENCES
[1]
Deffensive POW/MIA Accounting Agency. Soldier Missing
From
Korean
War
Accounted
for
Hunt.
http://www.dpaa.mil/News-Stories/News-
Releases/Article/1011148/soldier-missing-from-korean-war-
accounted-for-hunt/ [retrived June 2017]
[2]
S. Smith. GPS-An important technology to U.S. troops.
https://www.thebalance.com/gps-an-important-technology-to-
u-s-troops-3345076 [retrived June 2017]
[3]
CPT Hilt, Jeffrey J.; SFC Jones, Ronald L. MTS: An Untold
Commo
Success
Story
in
OIF.
http://sill-
www.army.mil/FAMAG/2004/SEP_OCT_2004/30-32.pdf
[retrived June 2017]
[4]
Kahtam A., Saed T., Salah H. Smart real-time healthcare
monitoring
and
tracking
system
using
GSM/GPS
technologies. Big Data and Smart City (ICBDSC), 2016 3rd
MEC International Conference on.
28 April 2016. Muscat,
Oman
[5]
Srijani
M.,
Koustabh
D.
Soumya
K.
Patient
Health
Management System using e-Health Monitoring Architecture.
Advance
Computing
Conference
(IACC),
2014
IEEE
International. 21-22 Feb. 2014. Gurgaon, India.
[6]
Arduino
Uno
Overview
https://www.arduino.cc/en/main/arduinoBoardUno
[retrived June 2017]
[7]
J.
Murphy,
Y.
Gitman.
Pulse
Sensor
Advanced”
https://pulsesensor.com/pages/code-and-guide/
[retrived June 2017]
[8]
Maxim,
“Pulse
Oximeter
and
Heart-Rate
Sensor
IC”
https://datasheets.maximintegrated.com/en/ds/MAX30100.pdf
[retrived June 2017]
[9]
David
Thompson,
“Raspberry
Pi
3
Model
B”
https://www.raspberrypi.org/products/raspberry-pi-3-model-b
[retrived
June
2017]
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

