Effect of Communicable Disease on the Performance of Elementary School Students  
A Case Study of Leishmaniasis among Syrian Refugees in Some Bekaa (Lebanon) Area Schools 
 
Firyal J. Zayyoun 
School of Education 
Lebanese International University 
(LIU) 
Nabatieh, Lebanon 
Email: 30831028@students.liu.edu.lb 
 
Ehssan Sharif-Askari, Wiam 
Ramadan, Nancy Hallal 
School of Arts and Sciences 
International University of Beirut 
(BIU) 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: {ehssan.askari; wiam.ramadan; 
nancy.hallal}@b-iu.edu.lb 
 
Hassan M. Khachfe 
Business, Educational, & Medical 
Optimization Research Institute (BE-
MORE) 
Lebanese International University 
(LIU) 
Nabatieh, Lebanon 
Email: hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
 
Abstract– It is well known that education in a child life has the 
power to develop him/her personally, socially, as well as 
economically. Due to the value of education and its 
significance, governments, Non-Governmental Organizations 
(NGOs), as well as educational institutions are investing more 
than ever before on education. In order to bring improvements 
to this sector, some of the factors influencing the academic 
performance of the students such as attitude of the students, 
the leadership aspects, and psychological and health related 
factors are being studied. Since the Syrian conflict started, 
Lebanon became a common destination receiving a huge 
number of Syrian refugees that are living in camps spread all 
over the country, with the largest concentration in the Bekaa 
Valley. Generous steps are being taken to increase the access to 
formal education, such as offering free public education and 
opening second shifts in the afternoon. Yet barriers, such as 
child labor and health related factors, like the spreading of the 
communicable disease leishmaniasis are keeping children out 
of classroom. The present study was done with the aim of 
investigating the effect of leishmaniasis on the performance 
and the academic achievement of Syrian children. The results 
showed varying degrees of knowledge and dealing with the 
case of leishmaniasis. The disease clearly had an effect on the 
students’ attendance in schools, and by proxy on their 
academic performance.  
Keywords–communicable 
diseases; 
leishmaniasi; 
Leishmania; attendance; absenteeism; Syrian refugees. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since the eruption of the Syrian conflict, Lebanon began 
hosting fleeing refugees. To date, the country has sheltered 
around 1.5 million Syrian refugees, as estimated by the 
Lebanese government and a number of local NGOs.  
According to a report published by the United Nations High 
Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) in 2016, the refugees 
were spread all over the country as follows: Bekaa (36%), 
Beirut (26%), North Lebanon (26%), and South Lebanon 
(12%) [1]. Unfortunately, Syrian refugees live under very 
poor conditions. Inadequate sanitation, lack of access to 
clean water, overcrowding in their temporary settlements as 
well as limited access to healthcare infrastructure favor the 
spreading of communicable diseases, such as leishmaniasis. 
Leishmaniasis has emerged in Lebanon, but it has been 
mainly contained to refugee populations. Young people 
usually are the most affected due to their lack of previous 
exposure to the disease. The present study aimed at 
assessing the effect of leishmaniasis on the academic 
performance of elementary school students. The data was 
collected through a survey identifying the type of infection, 
the level of academic performance, the awareness among 
school’s administration, teachers and parents. In addition, 
the negative impact of infection on the students’ 
performance due to their absence from the class was 
investigated by directly interviewing the patients. The data 
clearly revealed that leishmaniasis has a direct effect on 
students’ academic performance. This effect is in particular 
due to their absence from schools due to infection.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II introduces the topic. Section III describes the 
methodology used. Section IV presents the results. Section 
V discusses the results obtained.  The conclusion and 
acknowledgement close the article. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Leishmaniasis is an endemic disease in Syria, and the 
presence of war has greatly increased the risk for new cases 
in Syria as well as in the surrounding areas of the Middle 
East. The population displacement, poverty, and the poor 
living conditions, among other factors, help in the rapid 
transmission of the infection [2] [3]. Following the civil war 
in Syria, the Syrians started migrating to Lebanon and living 
in Syrian camps on the border with Syria, where the highest 
prevalence of leishmaniasis is recorded. School students are 
one of the main populations that are affected by this problem 
[4]-[6].  
A. Communicable diseases 
Communicable diseases are a main cause of morbidity 
and mortality caused by microorganisms in human beings [7] 
[7]. The risk of communicable disease is related to the 
characteristics 
of 
the 
affected 
population, 
such 
as 
malnutrition, host immune response, the access to health care 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

services, and availability of safe clean water. Leishmaniasis 
is a parasitic zoonosis caused by protozoans of the genus 
Leishmania transmitted by insects known as phlebotomines 
sand flies, which are found in wild or urban environments 
[8]. Transmission of the disease occurs mainly through the 
infected insects; non-vector transmission is rare. The 
Leishmania protozoan was first described by Leishmania and 
Donovan in 1903 [9] and more than 50 Leishmania species 
have been identified worldwide; at least 21 of these species 
have significant medical importance. This parasite is 
endemic in at least 98 countries, including the eastern 
Mediterranean region [10].  
There are three main forms of leishmaniasis: visceral 
leishmaniasis (VL), cutaneous leishmaniasis (CL) and 
mucocutaneous leishmaniasis (ML). CL is the most common 
form of leishmaniasis, characterized by skin manifestation 
causing skin lesions, papules, and nodules that may ulcerate 
leaving scars and serious disability. Despite a wide 
distribution, around one third of CL cases occur in the 
Americas, the Mediterranean basin, mainly in Iraq, 
Afghanistan, 
Iran, 
and 
Syria 
[10]. Mucocutanueous 
leishmaniasis is the result of untreated lesions of cutaneous 
infection causing total or partial destruction of mucus 
membrane of mouth, throat, and nose, and may spread to the 
adjacent mucosal surface.  The most severe form of 
leishmaniasis is VL that is potentially fatal in over 95% of 
cases, if left untreated. VL affects internal organs including 
kidney, bone marrow, liver and spleen, causing enlargement 
in these organs, weight loss, fever and anemia. The 
epidemiology of these types of leishmaniasis depends on the 
characteristics of each parasite species [11].  
Even though the risk of leishmaniasis is increasing 
worldwide due to many factors, they are gaining lesser 
attention than other communicable disease such as Malaria 
and AIDS [12]. Every year, 1.3 million new cases are 
reported with 20000 to 40000 cases of death [12]. According 
to the World Health Organization (WHO), the major risk 
factors of leishmaniasis are socioeconomic conditions, where 
poverty increases the risk of infection due to lack of waste 
management, little access to health care services, and open 
sewerage. These conditions may increase the breeding of 
female sand fly. In addition, lacking of different proteins, 
some vitamins and minerals due to undernourishment have 
been shown to increase the risk of VL [11]. Moreover, 
climate change such as change in temperature, rainfall and 
humidity affect strongly the distribution of vectors and 
reservoir hosts and their survival. More importantly, 
population mobility and displacement of non-immune people 
into areas with existing transmission cycles will increase the 
spread of the infection [11].  
According to Alawieh et al. [3], no vaccine for 
Leishmania is available even though vaccination remains the 
most promising approach for the prevention. Nevertheless, 
the main way to prevent leishmania infection is by limiting 
exposure to the vector through insect repellent, insecticide, 
and controlling sand flies multiplication [4]. Another 
efficient method of prevention is through the establishment 
of a control program, awareness campaign for the 
community, in addition to increase coordination among the 
agencies [11]. Early diagnosis helps in reducing the 
prevalence of leishmeniasis and its spreading. The diagnosis 
of different forms of leishmaniasis is based on clinical 
manifestation with serological tests and it is type dependent 
[4].  
B. Communicable disease among Syrians  
Leishmania is one of the most important protozoan 
infections in Middle East and North Africa region [4]. One 
of the endemic countries of CL is Syria [13]. 90% of CL in 
Syria are caused by Leishmania tropica and the remaining 
cases are caused by Leshmania infantum [13]. Since Syria 
has the highest prevalence of CL mainly in Aleppo, 
leishmaniasis is known there as “Aleppo boil” [4]. The 
socioeconomic and environmental factors in 1990 caused the 
rapid spreading of CL in Syria [14]. During this time, the 
Syrian people migrated from rural to urban areas, thus, 
resulting that people with no or low immunity became highly 
exposed to CL. Despite the governmental effort in 
controlling sand fly multiplication through insecticidal 
treatment in 1991 [14], the CL incidence in Syria began to 
rapidly rise again. The increase in CL incidence was mainly 
due to the inability of municipal departments to provide 
adequate health care services, sanitation hygiene, and 
insecticide treatment [15]. 
C. Student performance in relation to class attendance   
Education is a special process that improves skills and 
knowledge of individual to be able to participate in social 
activities and to promote and empower a community. 
However, Sintayehu Mekonnen in his study conducted to 
examine problems that confronted academic performance [5] 
concluded that the end result of educational process is 
challenged by different factors that may affect high quality 
of academic performance of learners. 
Different studies explored factors affecting student’s 
performance and student’s achievements [16]-[18]. In a 
study published in 2011 by Saleem and Qureshi to identify 
different factors affecting student’s achievements in higher 
education revealed that achievements are directly affected by 
academic factors, personal factors and socio-economic 
factors [16].  
In addition, the academic performance of individuals is 
strongly affected by the type of education and the ability to 
provide the appropriate environment to accommodate 
individuals learning and educational needs. Karemera et al. 
[19] found that technology including computer lab, and the 
quality of library in institutions are directly related to 
students’ performance. The study also revealed that student’s 
achievement is positively affected by the service received 
and concluded that academic performance and school 
achievement are not associated with family income level. 
Furthermore, a study by David Romer confirmed that 
absenteeism 
and 
entry 
qualification 
affect 
learning; 
attendance should be mandatory [20]. In addition, the study 
found that environmental and motivational factors have a 
moderate effect in student academic performance.  
In accordance with the above study emphasizing the 
effect of absenteeism on student’s performance, Harb and El-
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Shaarawi examined the effect of family size, gender, and 
place of living on students’ performance [18]. They 
concluded that the most important factor affecting students’ 
academic performance is class participation and students 
competence in English [18]. 
Shehry and Youssif in their assessment of factors 
affecting student’s performance [21] attributed the bad 
academic performance to the long distance between schools 
and home. In addition to repeated absence, arriving home 
late and tired, the inability to complete and concentrate on 
homework, were additional factors that affected significantly 
students’ performance [21].  
In another study published by Hijazi and Naqvi, the 
authors have investigated different factors affecting student’s 
performance, such as mothers’ age, mothers’ education, 
family income, study hours, and class attendance percentage. 
The data collected by authors showed clearly that class 
attendance is one of the main factors that have a positive 
effect on student’s performance; regular attendance in 
college does contribute to a student’s performance [22].  In 
addition, the authors 
found that educated mothers 
significantly affected their children performance, as 
compared to non-educated mothers, by keeping proper check 
on kids’ activities [22].  
Osaikhiuwu investigated, in his study, the institutional 
factors affecting students’ performance, such as overcrowded 
lecture rooms, students’ relationships, water supply, physical 
environment, and conditions of the facilities in higher 
educational institutions [17]. The author found that facilities 
in the system and favorable learning environment including 
water and electricity supply enhance students’ performance. 
These findings are consistent with Karemeras’ study [19] 
where he found that students’ academic performance 
significantly correlated with overcrowded lecture rooms that 
cause unfavorable learning environment. In addition to 
institutional factors, other factors such as self-motivation, 
socioeconomic status, students’ age, and some others could 
play a major role in determining students’ performance [5].   
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
For this study, we use and apply a descriptive mixed 
method. Creswell defines the term mixed method as a 
research approach that arises from merging both qualitative 
and quantitative methods in a constant long term program of 
investigation to address their research questions. Such 
integration allows more harmonious usage of data than 
selectively using each type alone [23]. According to the 
author, using mixed study has several advantages: 
1. 
In a mixed method, we confirm our quantitative 
results using qualitative experiment. As a result, this method 
will enable the researcher to relate and confirm the effect of 
leishmaniasis on the performance of elementary school 
students, by using the data from both an interview 
(qualitative), as well as a survey (quantitative), in the Bekaa 
schools. 
2. 
The mixed method gives us multiple perspectives 
and more understanding of the topic by having results not 
only from Bekaa schools but also from directly interviewing 
parents of infected students at refugee camps. 
This study is classified as descriptive mixed method as it 
analyses data collected from survey, interviewing teachers/ 
parents of infected students and mangers at Bekaa schools. 
A. Data collection  
Primary approval from the University’s Institutional 
Review Board (IRB) was granted to conduct research at 
Bekaa schools, where students are potentially infected by 
leishmaniasis. The surveys were distributed, and the data 
were collected by hand, to ensure that the queried people 
understood the questions: an important aspect due to the 
social circumstances in which the study was conducted. 
Also, personal interviews with Bekaa school principals, the 
head of Communicable Diseases Department at the Lebanese 
Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), some NGOs, and 
managers of drug dispensaries in Western Bekaa were also 
conducted. 
B. Data analysis  
For quantitative data, all statistical analysis was done 
using the statistical package SPSS [24]. Analysis of the 
Variance (ANOVA) was used to see if there is a relation 
between student absence and academic achievements. For 
qualitative data, the interviews were analyzed. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
Ninety percent of the surveyed schools reported having 
Syrian refugees among their student bodies. 83.6% of these 
schools testified that they have formal medical supervision of 
the students. What was alarming, however, was that only 
20% of the schools had a formal awareness campaign about 
communicable diseases. While 4% of the schools had no 
form of health awareness, 53% did have some scattered 
activities in that regard, ranging from seminars, to weekly 
sessions, to some publications, with the different schools 
approaching the matter differently.  Such a fragile awareness 
affected – of course – the student knowledge about the 
disease. Only 27% answered correct queries about 
leishmaniasis, whereas 20% had completely wrong answers, 
and the rest showed some degree of knowledge. The above 
information becomes somehow important when the sample 
showed that 97% of the interviewed reported encountering at 
least one case of leishmaniasis. 
In terms of gender, the percentages of affected boys and 
girls were 60.3 and 39.7, respectively. The reported cases 
ranged from 3 to 14 years of age, with 52% of the cases in 
the 6-10 years bracket, 7% in the upper age (10-14 yrs) and 
7% in the lower age (3-5 yrs) brackets. 93% of the reported 
cases were of the type “visceral leishmaniasis”. 
The academic performance of the students under survey 
was probed prior, during, and after being diagnosed with – 
and later on treated from – leishmaniasis. The data is 
presented in Table I. Next, the effect of attendance was 
investigated, and the results are shown in Table II.  
As for the parents of affected students, 75.9% of them 
received general health awareness, 3.4% received published 
material specific to the disease, and 3.4 % were trained to 
deal with such cases, whereas some 17.2 % showed complete 
indifference. It was worth noting that 80% of the institutions 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

(schools, NGOs, etc.) dealing with the above cases provided 
access to social workers that were trained to deal with both 
the infected students, their parents, and their teachers. 
 
 
TABLE I. THE ACADEMIC PERFORMANCE OF THE STUDENTS IN THE 
DIFFERENT PHASES OF THE INFECTION. 
 
Weak 
Acceptable 
Good 
Very 
Good 
Excellent 
Pre-
infection 
0 % 
10.3 % 
75.9 % 
6.9 % 
6.9 % 
During 
infection 
55.2 % 
34.4 % 
10.4 % 
0 % 
0 % 
Post-
infection 
24.2 % 
41.4 % 
27.6 % 
3.4 % 
3.4 % 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The Lebanese health system is composed of services 
rendered by the public and the private sectors, as well as the 
nongovernmental organizations’ sector. The dominant sector 
is the private one, since it provides most of the services [25]. 
In addition, there is a large number of primary health care 
centers that provide health services, including vaccination, 
management of communicable diseases, and medicines [25]. 
Around 50% of Syrian refugees live in the poorest areas of 
Lebanon informally [25]. According to an assessment 
conducted by UNHCR in 2016, 310,000 individuals among 
the Syrian refugees in Lebanon received primary healthcare, 
and 98,861 individuals benefitted from several lifesaving and 
obstetric healthcare services. According to Reidner and 
Sabbah, “limited funds are available for ensuring equitable 
provision of health services to meet essential health needs at 
the primary, secondary and tertiary health care levels.” 
Consequently, in the six years of the Syrian crisis, the 
healthcare services rendered across the Syrian refugee 
population in Lebanon remain a serious concern [25].  
 
TABLE II. THE ATTENDANCE OF THE STUDENTS IN THE DIFFERENT 
PHASES OF THE INFECTION. 
 
Extremely 
low 
Lower 
than 
Normal 
Normal* 
Permanent‡ 
Pre-
infection 
0 % 
0 % 
62.1 % 
37.9 % 
During 
infection 
6.9 % 
72.4 % 
20.7 % 
0 % 
Post-
infection 
6.9 % 
41.4 % 
44.8 % 
6.9 % 
* Normal attendance was based on the average attendance of no-
infected students in the same class  
‡ No absence was reported during the timeframe of the study 
 
The wide distribution of Syrian refugees in Lebanon 
caused sudden increase in leishmania cases, where this new 
outbreak of leishmaniasis in Lebanon is the first of its kind 
for more than a decade [4]. According to [4], the Lebanese 
Ministry of Public Health (LMoPH) implemented an active 
surveillance for leishmaniasis since the beginning of the 
Syrian conflict; LMoPH diagnosed the cases by traditional 
techniques of smear, histological analysis of skin biopsies 
and parasite culture [4]. The USA and several developed 
countries put together collaborative efforts to prevent the 
globalization of this disease through its transmission by 
troops, travelers, immigrants, NGO workers and tourists 
visiting or passing through countries with endemic 
leishmaniasis in the Middle East [4]. According to Tokajian 
et al. [2], leishmaniasis is considered one of the most 
neglected diseases in the world, in the time where the 
parasite may be able to propagate in different areas in 
Lebanon, particularly in Bekaa district, where the vector may 
find a favorable habitat and where appropriate zoonotic 
reservoirs are present [4]. 
The current study was conducted solely on students aged 
3-14 years, and who were – at the time of the data collection 
– matriculated in some West Bekaa area schools. The results 
showed varying degrees of knowledge and dealing with the 
case of leishmaniasis. The disease clearly had an effect on 
the students’ attendance in schools, and by proxy on their 
academic performance.  
Part of the causes of such variations in dealing with the 
problem is due to the political strings attached to the 
different Lebanese ministries (e.g., Public health, Social 
affairs, Refugees and Displaced, Education, etc.), and the 
conflicts that may exist between the heads of these 
ministries. A clear indication to such an argument was the 
lack of coordination between the schools (under the control 
of the Ministry of Education), the NGOs (under the control 
of the Ministry of Social Affairs), and the Primary 
Healthcare Centers (under the control of the Ministry of 
Public Health). Our study reported that 64.3 % of the schools 
lacked any kind of coordination with the MoPH centers, 
whereas on 28.6 % of the schools were in direct relationship 
with the MoPH offices. Such an argument is further 
corroborated by the fact that the MoPH provided the 
necessary medicines and vaccines to 70% of the reported 
cases.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
More evidence is accumulated that refugee camps are not 
good for anyone, especially for kids. In this study, we 
addressed one communicable disease; however, there are 
still more issues that will remain to be answered. These 
factors include – but are not limited to – psychological 
stresses during and post-migration, challenges that affect the 
ability of the refugee students to adapt to the host schools 
system, etc. This is despite the fact that educational access 
and opportunities for camps refugee children remains low. In 
conclusion, our study raises a critical point of the effect of 
communicable diseases on the performance of elementary 
students, in particular the Syrian refugees. Leishmaniasis is 
an example of one factor that keeps children out of the 
classroom.  How other health related factor may also affect 
could be further evaluated. In addition, public awareness 
within Syrian refugees might also be a subject of further 
investigation to assess its effect on children education. This 
can be further implemented by school administration and 
their partnership with parents and/or guardian of the refugee 
students. The main question that remains to be answered 
with respect to the Lebanese community is whether the 
Lebanese authorities have enough knowledge in dealing with 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

such education-related health problems despite the fact that 
leishmaniasis is not endemic in Lebanon. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank all participating schools 
in the West Bekaa District, the Head of the Communicable 
Diseases Department at the MoPH, Dr. Atika Berry, and the 
Officers at the Beyond Association in Nabatieh. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] UNHCR , "UNHCR Lebanon: back to school," 8 January 
2016. 
[retrieved: 
October, 
2018]. 
Available: 
www.data.unhcr.org. 
[2] T. Salloum, I. Khalifeh, and S. Tokajian, "Detection, 
molecular typing and phylogenetic analysis of Leishmania 
isolated from cases of Leishmaniasid among Syrian refugees in 
Lebanon," Parasite Epidemiology and Control, pp. 159-168, 
2016.  
[3] M. Douba, A. Mowakeh, and A. Wali, "Current status of 
cutaneous leishmaniasis in Aleppo, Syrian Arab Republic," 
Bulletin of the World Health Organization, pp. 253-259, 1997.  
[4] A. Alawieh et al., "Revisiting leishmaniasis in the time of war: 
the Syrian conflict and the lebanese outbreak," International 
Journal of Infectious Diseases, pp. 115-119, 2014.  
[5] S. 
Mekonnen, 
"Problems 
Challenging 
the 
Academic 
Performance of Physics Students in Higher Governmental 
Institutions in the Case of Arbaminch, Wolayita Sodo, 
Hawassa and Dilla Universities," Scientific Research, pp. 362-
375, 5 March 2014.  
[6] N. Khalid and K. Mehmood, "Effect of Absenteeism on 
Students Performance," International Journal of Scientific and 
Research Publications, pp. 151-168, September 2017.  
[7] World Health Organization, "Disaster Risk Management for 
Health, “Communicable Diseases," Global Platform, 2011.  
[8] E. Petersen, S. Baekeland, Z. A. Memish, and H. 
Leblebicioglu, "Infectious disease risk from the Syrian 
conflict," International Journal of Infectious Diseases, pp. 666-
667, June 2013.  
[9] K. 
Bathena, 
"A 
Mathematical 
model 
of 
cutaneous 
leishmaniasis," 1 June 2009. [retrieved: October, 2018]. 
Available: www.scholarworks.rit.edu. 
[10] M. Saroufim et al., "Ongoing Epidemic of Cutaneous 
Leishmaniasis among Syrian Refugees, Lebanon," Emerging 
Infectious Diseases, pp. 1712-1714, 2014.  
[11] World 
Health 
Organization, 
"World 
Health 
Organization:Media Centre," April 2017. [retrieved: October, 
2018]. Available: www.who.int. 
[12] N. Salam, W. M. Al-Shaqha, and A. Azzi, "leishmaniasis in 
the middle east: incidence and epidemiology," PLOS 
Neglected Tropical Diseases, pp. 1-6, 2014.  
[13] N. Haddad, H. Saliba, A. Altawil, J. Villinsky, and S. Al-
Nahhas, "Cutaneous leishmaniasis in the central provinces of 
Hama and Edlib in Syria: Vector identification and parasite 
typing," Parasites & Vectors, 2015.  
[14] R. Du, P. Hotez, W. Al-Salem, and A. Acosta-Serrano, "Old 
World Cutaneous Leishmaniasis and Refugee Crises in the 
Middle East and North Africa," PLOS Negleceted Tropical 
Diseases, pp. 1-11, 26 May 2016.  
[15] R. Du, P. J. Hotez, W. S. Al-Salem, and A. Acosta-Serrano, 
"Old World of Cutaneous Leishmaniasis and Refugee Crises in 
the Middle East and North Africa," PLOS Neglected Topical 
Diseases, pp. 1-11, 26 May 2016.  
[16] M. A. Saleem and M. I. Qureshi, "Credentials and 
examination of the factors affecting the students’ academic 
achievement in higher education (A case study of universities 
in public and private sector at D.I.Khan), Dera Ismail Khan, 
Gomal University Journal of Research, 27(2), pp. 74-80, 
December, 2011. 
[17] O. C. Osaikhiuwu, "Institutional Factors Affecting the 
Academic Performance of Public Administration Students in a 
Nigerian University," Canadian Center of Science and 
Education, pp. 171-177, 29 October 2014.  
[18] N. Harb and A. El-Shaarawi, "Factors Affecting Students' 
Performance," Munich Personal RePEc Archive, p. paper No. 
13621, 2006.  
[19] D. Karemera, L. J. Reuben, and M. R. Sillah, "The Effects of 
Academic Environment and Background Characteristics on 
Student Satisfaction and Performance: The Case of South 
Carolina State University's School of Business," June 2003. 
[retrieved: 
October, 
2018]. 
Available: 
www.questia.com/read/1G1-103563753/the-effects-of-
academic-environment-and-background. 
[Accessed 
June 
2003]. 
[20] D. Romer, "Do Students Go to Class? Should they?," The 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, pp. 167-174, 1993.  
[21] A. A. Shehry and S. M. A. Youssif, "Factors affecting 
academic performance of undergraduate students at Najran 
preparatory year for girls-Najran Unuversity 2015-2016," 
International Journal of Asia Social Science, pp. 1-18, 2017.  
[22] S. T. Hijazi and S. R. Naqvi, "Factors affecting students’ 
performance," Bangladesh e-Journal of Sociology, vol. 3, pp. 
1-10, January 2006. 
[23] J. W. Creswell, "Steps in Conducting a Scholarly Mixed 
Methods, DBER Speaker Series. 48,  2013.  
[24] M. Norusis, “SPSS 17.0 guide to data analayis,” Upper 
Saddle River, NJ: Prentic Hall, 2009. 
[25] G. Reidner, R. Sabbah, and C. Diaz-Herrera, "WHO support to 
the humanitarian response in Lebanon," 2014-2015. [retrieved: 
October, 2018]. Available: www.limelightprod.com. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

