Engaging With Online Patient Experiences: Exploring Differences Between Health 
Groups 
Claire Hardy, Elizabeth Sillence, Pamela Briggs  
Department of Psychology, Northumbria University 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK 
e-mail: claire2.hardy@northumbria.ac.uk, 
elizabeth.sillence@northumbria.ac.uk, 
p.briggs@northumbria.ac.uk 
Peter Harris 
Department of Psychology 
University of Sheffield 
Sheffield, UK 
e-mail: p.harris@sheffield.ac.uk
 
Abstract— In this paper, data from qualitative investigations 
with three discrete health groups were pooled in order to 
identify factors that affect engagement with online material. A 
total sample of 74 participants (29 asthma sufferers, 25 
smokers considering quitting, and 20 personal carers of people 
with multiple sclerosis (MS)) took part in a study in which they 
examined and commented on e-health information, including 
shared patient experiences available online. The findings 
suggest that engagement is influenced by the availability of off-
line information, the ability to cure or control the health 
condition, and the daily impact the of health condition.  Some 
health conditions (e.g., individuals with MS and their carers) 
may be more likely than others to engage with websites 
containing patient experiences, therefore targeting such groups 
with e-health initiatives could be advantageous. 
Keywords-online 
patient 
experiences; 
engagement; 
secondary analysis; asthma; smoking cessation; multiple 
sclerosis carers 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
It is widely acknowledged that the Internet is a 
commonly used resource for health information. In the UK, a 
survey by Ellins and Coulter [1] found that second to the 
doctor, the Internet is a key resource for those seeking health 
information. Using the Internet as a health information 
resource has been steadily increasing over the past decade, 
and is often used as an initial information source before 
turning to other methods [2]. One form of health information 
that is sought is other patients’ experiences.  
Preece [3] noted that “Physicians can provide the facts, 
but other patients can tell you what it really feels like and 
what to expect next, in a way that only someone with 
personal experience can” (p. 63). Other patient experiences 
of a disease, condition, or treatment can provide information 
otherwise inaccessible from other sources of health 
information. From the 2011 Pew Internet Survey, 34% of the 
Internet users had read someone else’s experience or 
commentary about health or medical issues [4]. Such shared 
online patient experiences can come from forums, blogs, 
case studies and testimonials, which can be viewed as text, 
audio, and video. A recent review of such peer-to-peer online 
patient experiences suggests their impact can be potentially 
positive and negative, including providing information, 
improving health service use, affecting real world 
relationships, and changing behavior [5]. Empirical studies 
in this area have focused on a variety of health conditions, 
but particularly on those considered relatively rare, life 
threatening, or chronic (e.g., breast cancer [6]; HIV/AIDS 
[7], arthritis and fibromyalgia [8]). Such investigations have 
typically focused on a single health condition, and/or 
multiple conditions considered similar (e.g., degenerative 
neurological diseases, [9], [10]). Whilst such research is 
important and insightful, the narrowed focus limits the 
degree to which comparisons can be made across different 
types of health conditions.  
A large National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) 
program is currently seeking to explore the role of online 
patient experience for health decision making in three 
different kinds of health groups: asthma sufferers, smokers 
wanting to quit, and carers of someone with multiple 
sclerosis (MS). These three patient groups were chosen to 
reflect different types of health conditions (i.e., patients with 
a chronic health condition, individuals looking for a health 
behavior change, and individuals who are responsible for 
someone with a serious life threatening health condition). 
Whilst collecting data from the groups in three studies, the 
researchers noticed engagement disparity with the online 
health information and patient experiences. This was 
observed in terms of reaction and interest in the materials 
shown during the study, participant’s engagement with 
similar material before and after the study, and whether they 
thought online patient experiences were useful. Of the three 
groups, the MS carers were the most engaged, with the 
asthma group and then the smokers showing the least 
engagement.  
Although not primary research questions of the program, 
it became evident to the researchers during their analyses 
that recurring themes were present across the data, which 
may contribute to understanding the observed variations. 
Therefore, the aim of the present paper is to present 
evidence for three potential factors: 1) availability of off-
line information; 2) control over or cure for the health 
condition; and 3) the daily impact of the health condition. 
The remainder of the paper is structured in the following 
way. Firstly, the method(s) and analysis strategy are briefly 
outlined, before going on to present the findings of the study. 
The results are presented in three sections reflecting the three 
proposed factors that may influence online patient 
experience engagement. These results are then discussed in 
relation to other relevant research, before highlighting 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

implications and limitations of the study. The paper 
concludes with some lessons learnt, and suggestions for 
future research in light of the paper’s findings.  
II. 
METHOD 
This paper is based on secondary analysis of data from 
three studies conducted in the UK between 2011 and 2012 
by the authors. The studies employed multiple methods and 
involved asking participants to look at and comment on 
websites containing health information, and shared patient 
experiences. For this study, qualitative data from focus 
groups and interviews (including follow-up telephone 
interview in studies two and three) were used. In total, the 
pooled-sample comprised of 74 participants, including 29 
asthma sufferers, 25 smokers considering quitting, and 20 
personal carers of people with MS. The analysis was carried 
out using a similar approach to those adopted by other 
secondary analyses published within the field (e.g., [9]; 
[10]), largely derived from guidelines suggested by Heaton 
[11], and West and Oldfather [12]. Selected data was pooled 
from the verbatim transcripts to provide relevant material on 
the selected themes, which had been identified in previously 
analyses but not relevant to the primary research questions. 
This process of ‘data sorting’ [11] was carried out by the 
primary researcher (CH), who contained a bank of 
knowledge and ‘participatory knowing’ [13] of the data, 
allowing a deeper contextual understanding of the sampled 
data [12]. The data and themes across the health groups was 
explored and discussed with the second author (ES, whom 
was also very familiar with the full transcripts) to ensure 
interpretations were shared and agreed. Final interpretations 
were then presented to the remaining two authors (PB, PH), 
who considered the interpretations of based on their own 
familiarity with the data. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Each theme from the analysis will be presented in turn, 
including separate sub-sections for each health group to 
illustrate variations. These findings are illustrated with 
quotations, using St1, St2, or St3 to indicate the study 
quotes were derived, and FG (focus group), INT (interview), 
or FINT (follow-up interview) to indicate which method.  
A. Availability of Off-line Information 
The present data suggests that if information is widely 
available off-line or already known by the individual (either 
through previous information search enquires or general 
public exposure), then using the Internet and the experiences 
shared online as a health and decision-making resource may 
not be utilized or valued. 
1) Asthma 
For the asthma sufferers, information about the condition 
was unanimously provided by the individual’s physician. 
Participants felt very confident their physician had given 
them all the information they needed and in turn, understood 
the condition well enough. 
“I got given an information pack from the doctor that was 
from the NHS, but have not really looked online. Because 
they just gave me the pack, so I thought that would have all 
of the information that I needed” (St3, INT, Participant 7) 
Some participants also commented on the input from their 
family. The condition’s heritability meant they were 
exposed to it from other sufferers and could speak to them 
off-line for any help or advice. 
“I suppose what most information that I got was from my 
dad…[…]…people in that family who suffer from asthma, 
and they can offer you some advice”(St2, FG, Participant 3)  
Some Internet searches had been carried out by some of 
the asthma sufferers. However, participants commented that 
the information they retrieved then, and what they saw 
during the Internet sessions in the study was generally what 
they already knew and/or what an off-line source (e.g., 
physician or nurse) had provided.  
“I’d say that I probably have initially in the past when I was 
kind of first diagnosed and particularly times when I’ve 
been ill, more ill with it than I have over times I’ve maybe 
looked to see if there’s anything I can kind of do but I’ve 
never found anything more so I’d say what the asthma 
nurses told me” (St2, FG, Participant 2) 
2) Smokers 
From the discussion with smokers, there was a consensus 
that health information about smoking and quitting can be 
found from various sources without the need to go looking 
online. 
Participant 3: “I don’t think you need to look for on the 
Internet. It’s on buses. It’s on the TV. You don’t need to go 
looking for it they tell you every time stop smoking it’s bad 
for you…” 
Participant 4: “It’s kind of told to you. A lot of people just 
tell it to you.” 
Participant 5: “You just know it. You don’t have to look for 
it.” 
Participant 3: “It’s everywhere like at the doctors on buses 
metros it’s in bus stops. It’s just everywhere.” 
Participant 4: “Everything you find on the Internet you know 
already.” (St1, FG) 
Health information on this topic is even available when 
the smoker is not looking for it. Smokers wanting to find out 
information about quitting have gone to their physician, 
pharmacists, or spoken to friends. They have access to many 
off-line resources and feel that the information they receive 
online is typically what they already know or can obtain 
easily from these other off-line resources.  
“Yeah first I found some facts I didn’t know about which is 
good, but then they started to get repetitive, for all the 
websites I looked at, but yeah, I did found out something I 
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

didn’t know so it was kind of helpful and in terms of the 
advice page I looked at, didn’t really help. Well, you see 
them on TV all the time and you know, I don’t know, just 
kind of I knew already.” (St1, FG, Participant 9) 
3) MS Carers 
The perceived amount of information provided by off-line 
sources, such as physicians, was markedly inferior in this 
group relative to the other health groups studied.  
“Yes, I’ve used the Internet when he, when we first had the 
diagnosis, we looked on some of the MS sites to find out 
some information because we’d had very little information 
from the hospital…[…]…The only other help we’ve had is 
actually once a year contact with the [hospital name] but 
that dropped out because it wasn’t any use.” (St3, INT, 
Participant 3) 
Information had been obtained from charities and support 
groups, through magazines and meetings, but was still felt to 
be limited. Participants acknowledged that this was in part 
due to the unknowns surrounding the condition itself.  
“No, not the doctor, he was as much use as a chocolate fire 
guard…[…]… There we are ‘ I took various Sativex 
documents to my GP for her to read and decide if I was a 
good candidate for the drug.  When I handed them over she 
said ‘is this this cannabis spray’ In other words she didn’t 
know, in other words the GP didn’t know. ‘I said yes, what 
do you think’ before I could finish that short question, she 
put her hands up in front of her and backed up quickly, 
banging into the table. Anyone watching would have 
thought I was handing her an envelope with anthrax’.  And 
that’s the sort of attitude we’ve got but by people putting 
this sort of thing up and say look I know this is what the 
doctors think but this is available to us. And you ought to 
read up.  And we used to get two copies of MS Matters, 
which is the in house magazine from the MS Society… And 
so I used to send one down to the doctors surgery and it has 
improved her appreciation of the illness.  But that was the 
case pretty much.” (St3, INT, Participant 7) 
Due to professional off-line help seemingly limited 
across this health group, these participants often felt like 
information from the Internet was useful (or potentially 
useful) and the first port of call for finding out about 
symptoms of the conditions and other people’s experiences.  
“Yeah, yeah I think nowadays it [the Internet] tends to be 
kinda a first port of call.  I think we kind of resolved that we, 
the experience we get at the yearly consultants appointment. 
Usually a 10-15minute conversation with the consultant 
where she basically tells them what their symptoms have 
been so far and give it another year. We don’t get any more 
information” (St3, FINT, Participant 1) 
B. Control Over or Cure for the Condition 
Each group talked about the level of control they felt 
they had over their or their loved one’s health condition, or 
whether or not it was curable. In this respect, the three 
health groups varied and this in turn influenced whether 
they were interested in, or saw value in, the experiences of 
other patients posted online.  
1) Asthma 
For the majority of these participants, they perceived 
their asthma to be well controlled. Many had lived with it 
for a long time and knew the triggers that could worsen their 
condition. 
“Well I’ve had it since I was about thirteen so I would say 
twenty year ago erm ... erm ... I’ve never really had a ... had 
it really bad. Only in the winter when I get a cold or 
something like that. That’s the only time it’s really bad. But 
apart from that it’s really well controlled.” (St3, INT, 
Participant 6) 
When participants had experienced something in relation 
to their asthma (such as an asthma attack) then they had 
engaged with the Internet and were more receptive to some 
of the experiences shared on the websites they examined 
during the Internet session. 
“Just kind of like, like symptoms, whether they’re normal or 
if there’s anything like, I used to have a lot of difficulties 
sleeping so if there’s any techniques or anything I could do 
on a night to make me sleep better, just things like that.” 
(St2, FG, Participant 6) 
However, participants had regular check-ups with their 
physician and generally felt that unless they had a problem, 
they did not feel the need to look online or act on any 
information or advice given online. They and their physician 
or other health professional were able to help control their 
condition. 
2) Smokers 
For these smokers, participants believed that quitting was 
down to them. Participants were aware that whilst smoking 
is bad for their health and there are quitting aids available, it 
is entirely their own personal drive that could accomplish 
cessation.  
“I think if you want to quit smoking it’s mostly about will 
power rather than reading about what could happen to you. 
Everyone knows the facts everyone knows what will 
happen” (St1, FG, Participant 2)  
Participants were not typically engaged with online 
information of experiences because no one else could do it 
for them; they themselves have full control of this health 
issue. 
“I think as well you kind of know in your head if you want to 
quit, so if you want to quit, the chances are like you’ll go 
around yourself, I don’t think you need other people’s 
advice, you really want to quit you gonna do it… I think” 
(St1, FG, Participant 14) 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Participants sometimes liked hearing that others found 
quitting difficult and welcomed any novel tips or advice. 
However, ultimately, they felt their health condition was 
entirely under their control and knowing that others could do 
it may be helpful in terms of inspiration but not a strong 
reason to return to patient experiences online.  
3) MS Carers 
Resoundingly, carers commented on the fact that there 
was yet to be a cure for MS. Research was being carried out, 
but nothing concretely acknowledged as a drug or therapy 
had been produced for use within the NHS.  
“He [PARTNER] won’t admit he got it. He thinks he’s 
gonna get better. Even now he thinks he’s gonna get 
better…[…]… you really realise that you’re clutching at 
straws. There isn’t anything out there to help” (St2, FU, 
Participant 7) 
Carers experienced frustration toward the disease 
because of its variability across different people, which 
contribute to the difficulty of treating and controlling the 
condition. The one certainty participants acknowledged was 
that the condition would get worse and this was beyond their 
control. 
“You know things aren’t going to get any better. They’re 
only just going to go downhill.” (St2, FINT, Participant 8) 
Due to this variability and lack of knowledge of the 
condition, carers felt that using the Internet to share 
experiences and learn from one another had significant 
potential benefits for people living with a health condition.  
“I think I think particularly for MS because it’s one of those 
things which’s such a broad spectrum…[…]...that a lot time 
it is that kind of personal information that does make a big 
difference” (St2, FG, Participant 2) 
C. Daily Impact 
The daily impact of the condition was another observed 
theme across the three health groups. Responses highlight a 
positive relationship between level of daily impact and 
engagement with online information and experiences. 
1) Asthma 
For most of the asthma sufferers, this health condition 
was not regarded as something that had a huge impact on 
their life and to some, was not even considered a health 
problem.  
“With asthma I don’t even think of it as an illness or 
anything like that it’s you know a bit of an irritation that I 
totally forget once I’ve taken my inhaler I don’t think about 
it really so I don’t search the Internet for anything.” (St3, 
INT, Participant 1) 
Asthma was regarded as something these individuals 
were aware of and took the necessary precautions to ensure 
it was managed (i.e., take their inhalers). However, once 
they had done that, the condition could on the whole be 
forgotten about as it did not impact on their daily life. Some 
sufferers did think that perhaps they would be more 
interested in online information and experiences if their 
asthma was more severe, but otherwise it was something 
easily controllable with the help of their physician and 
medication, which in turn means little significant impact on 
their daily life.  
“I mean if I felt kind of more, in a house bound of asthma 
really affect me I would seek other people’s experiences or 
opinions online but since it didn’t seem to be very part of my 
life I certainly wouldn’t use the forums, it work different 
maybe, more appealing.” (ST2, FG, Participant 3) 
2) Smokers 
The only highlighted daily impact of stopping smoking 
was attempting to deal with craving. The Internet and 
reading others experiences online was suggested by one 
participant as having the potential to be beneficial in this 
respect.  
“I think actually if you just got craving, like I think if you 
did have a craving for the day, these websites, just maybe 
kind of distract yourself going onto the website, I think it 
can help you get pass that initial craving and you go for the 
next jerk, like half hour to an hour before you start thinking 
about it, yeah.”(St2, FG, Participant 6) 
However, largely participants did not see smoking 
cessation as something that had a daily impact, at least not 
in a negative way. Therefore, there was little need to engage 
with online resources. 
3) MS Carers 
The daily impact of caring for someone with MS was 
pronounced in this group.  
“From my end obviously I’ve not suffered with the illness 
but I still, there’s an impact on me, there’s an impact on the 
relationship.” (St2, FINT, P2) 
During the later stages of MS, carers often have to give 
up employment because the impact of the condition 
increases to the point where the patient needs full time care. 
“Yes, 96, my husband was diagnosed.  Erm actually became 
a non employed carer after 2000. I gave up work 
then…[…]…and it’s just increased the workload, has 
increased from erm assistance around the house, assistance 
with getting dressed to erm full 24/7, just about covering 
every physical need.” (St3, INT, Participant 3) 
Carers saw the value of using the Internet for 
information and seeing other people’s experiences as it 
could help them understand their own position as a carer 
and how they can cope with the progressive impact of the 
condition on their own daily life. 
Interviewer: “Do you think websites with personal 
experiences on them are useful?” 
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Participant 2: “Yes. I do. Say I think particularly in the early 
stages. Just as an ongoing basis...I think that’s what’s 
missing sometimes a lot of the more clinical stuff on the 
websites, there’s a limit to the amount of information you 
can be told about MS. There’s a limit to what’s known. But 
there’s a lot underneath that. I mean a lot of the questions 
people ask are ‘how’s this gonna impact me? Is it gonna 
break up my life? How am I gonna cope with 
it?...[…]…This kind of thing. Most of the time the only 
people who can tell you that are the people who suffer form 
MS themselves. Em, so yeah I think there is a lot of value in 
that.” (St2, FINT) 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The increasing use of the Internet for health information, 
and in particular, the experiences of others with a specific 
health condition has spurred researchers from various 
disciplines to explore this phenomenon. However, evidence 
from the present research indicates that people with certain 
health conditions or problems may be more likely to engage 
with online patient experiences than others. This paper 
suggests that individuals living with a health condition 
where: a) little off-line information about the condition is 
available (e.g., from their physician; b) is non-curable or 
non-controllable; and/or c) has a high impact of the 
individual’s daily life, are more likely to seek out and 
engage with shared online patient experiences. 
These findings are consistent with other findings that 
individuals with chronic or debilitating conditions (or their 
carers) are likely to seek information online [4; 14]. Other 
research has also shown that the Internet is a preferred 
resource for health information when patients felt 
dissatisfied 
with 
the 
patient-physician 
interaction, 
particularly when needs (e.g., the provision of information) 
have not been met [15]. Research has revealed that 
households would often use the Internet to find out 
information for their needs regarding health issues that were 
affecting everyday routines [16]. The present study’s 
proposed factors could explain these higher levels of online 
engagement in terms of unsatisfactory off-line information 
(e.g., from a physician) and having a health problem with a 
daily impact, which is not under the individual’s.  
In other research, however, Tian and Robinson [17] 
found that adult cancer patients who visited their doctors 
more frequently were more likely to pay attention to health 
information from other mediums (e.g., magazines and on the 
Internet), even after controlling for condition severity. The 
researchers proposed that these findings supported the 
complimentary theory of media use (i.e., use of one media 
increases the likelihood of using another). More recently, 
other research has also shown that online support group 
members, who believed they had high control over their 
illness, were also more likely to use online resources [18]. 
These studies seem to contradict the present study’s 
findings.  
However, interestingly, in another study on breast cancer 
patients Sandaunet [20] found that online support group 
members withdrew from online participation when they no 
longer felt ‘ill enough’ or when they were at a particular 
phase of the illness which felt manageable. It may therefore 
be the case that these cancer patients felt in control of their 
condition, and that the daily impact on their lives was 
insufficient to warrant continued engagement with an online 
support group. Therefore, it could be that complementary 
use of media resources are more likely to result when low 
levels of control and/or daily impact is high, which may 
vary over time. In addition, utilizing the additional resource 
of online support groups may contribute to perceived 
control over the health condition. 
These research findings, together with the present paper, 
suggest that understanding engagement with online health 
resources is a complex phenomenon, and further research is 
needed. Of course, even within health conditions there may 
be individual or dispositional variations in the likelihood to 
engage with the Internet and seek other online patient 
experiences (e.g., [20]). However, the present research 
suggests it may be possible to predict why some health 
groups may be more likely than others to use the Internet 
and look for others who are experiencing similar health 
issues. These findings could have important implications for 
policy makers, investors, and health providers in terms of 
future ehealth initiatives. For example, it is often advocated 
that physicians have a list of recommended websites for 
referring patients to so they can seek out such information in 
relation to their condition. However, the present study 
suggests that it may not be necessary for physicians to do 
this for every patient they see. Not all patients with health 
conditions may be equally interested in websites related to 
their condition. It may only be useful for certain conditions 
where physicians know there is a limited amount of 
information or help they can provide to the patient, and/or 
where they know the impact on the patient’s daily life will 
be high.  
For policy makers and investors, these results also 
suggest where a society or population may already know or 
be exposed to a lot about a health condition, individuals 
may feel saturated or de-sensitized to attempts to change 
their behaviors or decisions in relation to their health 
condition. Therefore, ehealth policies and strategies aimed 
at such conditions may provide a smaller return on 
investment than less well known conditions, conditions that 
cannot be cured/controlled, and/or may have a significant 
impact on the individual’s daily lives. This is a particularly 
significant implication when there are limited time and 
resources available for such ehealth initiatives. 
Despite such useful insights from the present study, it is 
not without its limitations. The data collected represents a 
UK sample. Other countries have different health care 
services and provisions, and cultural variations may affect 
engagement factors. Whilst representing a variety of types 
of health user, it may be that the health conditions examined 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

do not cover all the possible levels of engagement with 
patient experiences. It is also important to note that for 
practical and ethical reasons, our sample did not contain any 
very severe health cases. These limitations impose some 
restrictions on the generalizability of the results. However, 
they give rise to important suggestions for future research 
and collaborations on this topic.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
From this study, we have learnt that different health 
conditions may vary in terms of the levels of engagement 
with online health information and shared patient 
experiences. In particular, engagement appears to be 
influenced by the level of off-line information, the ability to 
cure or control the health issue, and the daily impact the 
condition. 
These 
lessons 
provide 
some 
important 
implications for policy makers, investors, and service 
providers on ehealth initiatives, as well as highlighting the 
potential value that this line of research. Continuing this 
research across a broader range of health topics would 
therefore be worthwhile. Future research could also examine 
the degree of influence of each factor, and whether higher 
levels in just one factor (e.g., daily impact) would still result 
in engagement when there are lower perceived levels in the 
other factors (e.g., off-line information and control/cure of 
health condition). Longitudinal research would also allow 
researchers to see how and if engagement varies over time 
in relation to the proposed factors. Finally, the paper 
highlights the potential of using innovative methods of 
recycling existing data. We therefore encourage future 
pooled case comparisons of existing data to help explore 
online patient experience engagement, ehealth, and health in 
general. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
publication 
presents 
independent 
research 
commissioned by the National Institute for Health Research 
(NIHR) under its Programme Grants for Applied Research 
programme (RP-PG-0608-10147). The views expressed in 
this publication are those of the author(s) and not 
necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or the Department 
of Health.  
REFERENCES 
[1]  J. Ellins and A. Coulter. “How engaged are people in 
their health care? Findings of a nationaltelephone 
survey”. 
Retrieved 
June 
2012 
from 
http://www.collaborationhealthcare.com/7-11-
11Patient-Activation-Survey.pdf , 2005.  
[2]  W. H. Dutton and G. Blank, “Next generation users: the 
Internet in Britain”, Oxford Internet Survey 2011 
Report, Oxford Internet Institute, Univeristy of Oxford.  
[3] J. Preece, “Online communities: designing usability, 
supporting sociability”, Chichester, UK: John Wiley & 
Sons, 2000.  
[4]   S. Fox, “The social life of health information”, 
Retrieved June 2012. Retrieved from 
http://pewinternet.org/~/media/Files/Reports/2011/PIP
_Social_Life_of_Health_Info.pdf, 2011.  
[5]    S. Ziebland and S. Wyke, “Health and illness in a 
connected world: How might sharing experiences on 
the Internet affect people’s health?”, Millbank 
Quarterly, 90(2), 2012, pp. 219-249. 
[6]    B. Sharf, “Communicating breast cancer on-line: 
support and empowerment on the Internet”, Women 
and Health, 26(1), 1997, pp. 65-84.  
[7]    P. K. H. Mo and N. S. Coulson, “Living with 
HIV/AIDS and use of online support groups”, Journal 
of Health Psychology, 15(3), 2010, pp. 339-350.  
[8]   C. F. van Uden-Kraan, C. H. C., Drossaert, E. Taal, B. 
R. Shaw, E. R. Seydel, and M. A. F. J. van de Laar, 
“Empowering processes and outcomes of participation 
in online support groups for patients with breast 
cancer, arthritis, or fibromyalgia”, Qualitative Health 
Research, 18(3), 2008, pp. 405-417.  
[9]  L. Locock and J. B. Brown, “All in the same boat’? 
Patient and carer attitudes to peer support and social 
comparison in motor neurone disease (MND)”, Social 
Science & Medicine, 71(8), 2010, pp. 1498-1505.  
[10] F. Mazanderani, L. Locock, and J. Powell, “Being 
differently the same: The mediation of identity 
tensions in the sharing of illness experiences”, Social 
Science & Medicine, 74, 2012, pp. 546-553.  
[11] J. Heaton, “Secondary analysis of qualitative data: A 
review of the literature”, York: Social Policy Research 
Unit (SPRU), University of York, 2000.  
[12] J. West and P. Oldfather, “Pooled case comparison: an 
innovation for cross-case study”, Qualitative Inquiry, 
1, 1995, pp. 452-464.  
[13] L. Heshusius, “Freeing ourselves from objectivity: 
managing subjectivity or turning toward a participatory 
mode of consciousness?” Educational Researcher, 
23(3), Apr., 1994, pp. 15-22.  
[14] D. P. Lorence, H. Park, and S. Fox, “Assessing health 
consumerism on the Web: a demographic profile of 
information-seeking behaviors”, J Med Syst 30, 2006, 
pp. 251–258.  
[15] N. Tustin, “The role of patient satisfaction in online 
health information seeking”, Journal of Health 
Communication: International Perspectives, 15(1), 
2010, pp. 3-17.  
[16] J. Kivits, “Everyday health and the Internet: a mediated 
health perspective on health information seeking”, 
Sociol Health Illn., Jul;31(5), 2009, pp. 673-87.  
[17] Y. Tian and J. Robinson, “Media use and health 
information 
seeking: 
an 
empirical 
test 
of 
complementarity theory”, Health Communication, 
22(2), 2008, pp. 184-190.  
[18] X. Hu, R. A. Bell, R. L. Kravitz, and S. Orrange, “The 
prepared patient: information seeking of online support 
group members before their medical appointments”, 
Journal of Health Communication: International 
Perspectives, 2012, pp. 960-978.  
[19] A. G. Sandaunet, “The challenge of fitting in: non-
participation and withdrawal from an online self-help 
group for breast cancer patients”, Sociology of Health 
& Illness, 30, 2008, pp. 131–144.  
[20] M. J. Dutta, and H. Feng, “Health orientation and 
disease state as predictors of online health support 
group use”, Health Communication, 22 (2), 2007, pp. 
181-189. 
 
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

