Security Factors for Healthcare Data 
Comparing the Security Threats of Online Banking and Healthcare Information Systems 
 
Young-Sil Lee and Hoon-Jae Lee 
Division of Computer and Information Engineering 
Dongseo University Graduate School 
Busan, Rep. of Korea 
e-mail: youngsil.lee0113@gmail.com 
Esko Alasaarela and Risto Myllylä 
Department of Electrical Engineering 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
e-mail: esko.alasaarela@ee.oulu.fi 
 
 
Abstract—The number of information security threats in 
healthcare information systems is increasing tremendously. 
There are various factors that contribute to these information 
security threats; most researchers are mainly focused on 
certain factors such as virus attacks and malware. Thus, 
certain important factors may have still remained unexplored. 
In addition, the lack of tools and technologies can also 
contribute to the limited number of threats recorded in the 
healthcare system. In this paper, we summarize the security 
threats in online banking and healthcare information systems 
(HIS) and analyze the relationship of risk factors through 
comparison. The findings will serve as recommendations for 
healthcare service organizations to fill the technology gap 
between the online banking and HIS security systems. 
Keywords - Online banking security; Healthcare security; 
Information security; HIS; Security threats. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION 
Nowadays, computer and network-based systems are 
expanding in order to support more healthcare activities, 
especially in isolated regions (i.e., isolated rural areas in 
Greece, Scandinavia and Germany), where there is often no 
availability 
of 
central 
general 
hospitals. 
Networked 
healthcare information systems can fill this gap, by 
connecting local healthcare service providers with central 
regional or peripheral hospitals to make tele-consultation, 
tele-diagnosis and exchange of views possible between 
remote located doctors in certain patient treatment cases. 
Furthermore, medical data maintained in a health 
information system is directly related to the patients’ health 
and safety. According to the recommendation on the 
protection of medical data issued by the Council of Europe 
[1], appropriate technical and organizational measures must 
be taken to protect personal data against any accidental or 
illegal destruction, accidental loss, as well as against 
unauthorized access. These possible threats can severely 
damage a health information system’s reliability and 
discourage professional use in the future. Therefore, the 
execution of a risk analysis is a necessity in order to assure a 
health information system’s safety and Quality of Service 
(QoS) [2]. 
This study intends to analyze the security threats of 
health data. First, a review of the information security threats 
are included and discussed. Beside this, we also compare the 
existing security threats of online banking with the 
healthcare information system (HIS). In both cases, the 
security factors include hacking and blocking as well as 
accidental and deliberate cases, and also the possibility to 
change a sensor from one patient to another. 
Personal medical information is in various aspects similar 
to financial data. Accidents caused by incorrect medical 
information can lead to large-scale litigation, and also 
translate directly damage to a person’s life. According to the 
estimation of the IOM (Institute of Medicine) under the U.S. 
Department of Health and Human Services, as many as 
98,000 patients per year are estimated to die due to wrong 
medical information [3]. This occupies eighth place in the 
United States on the list of the 10 leading causes of death; it 
is higher than the mortality due to traffic accidents, breast 
cancers and AIDS. 
As for financial institutions, in 2007, one million people 
in Japan lost their pension paid records. Due to government 
mismanagement, the data quality may be lost, which may 
lead to pay back in 25 years according to pension 
specifications. 
Through these incidents, we can see how huge the impact 
is to the society, both in case of healthcare and financial data, 
when an incident is about money loss or threat to human life. 
Currently, there is a clear need for efficient security models 
in banks or medical institutions, which offer their customers 
access into their system via Internet. 
Online banking started with Security First Network Bank 
(SFNB) in 1995 [4], and is now rapidly increasing with 
hundreds of millions of users’ across the globe. Many 
researchers have studied various security threats and its 
solutions for online banking. On the other hand, the security 
of personal health information is still not well in order. For 
this reason, even though it cannot prevent all kinds of 
security threats, the online banking system has a better 
security model. 
Since healthcare data is at least as important as financial 
data, the purpose of this paper is to comprehend the factors, 
which are important in healthcare through this study. We 
attempt to classify the security threats on each side and 
analyze the security threats of healthcare information 
through a comparison with the existing threats of online 
banking. Also, we describe some online banking security 
models that can be applied to HIS. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The next section describes the previous studies related to 
this research. Section III presents the comparison of online 
banking security and healthcare information system, and 
Section IV describes some Internet banking security models 
that can be applied to HIS. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
In this section, we describe the information security 
threats as well as summarize the existing security threats in 
online banking [5] and healthcare information systems [6]. 
A. Threats to information security 
Information security threats can be classified into three 
categories, as found below [7][8]. 
First, there are environmental threats, which include 
natural disasters and other environmental conditions. 
Earthquakes, fire, floods and storms are examples of natural 
disasters. The likelihood of a natural disaster affecting an 
organization is greatly dependent on its location, information 
processing facilities and stored data. For example, a 
computer facility near bush land will be more likely to be 
affected by bushfire than one that is located in the city area. 
The failure of a power supply is an example of an 
environmental conditions threat, when uninterruptible power 
supply equipment and back-up file systems are not available. 
Secondly, deliberate threats are those threats that involve 
the destruction or manipulation of data, software or hardware. 
These threats include denial of service, malicious code such 
as viruses and worms, theft and fraud. Various vulnerabilities 
are identified to be the cause of these threats such as 
inadequate network management (resilience of routing), lack 
of firewall, not using the latest version of the operating 
system and lack of physical security. 
Lastly, accidental threats are threats that are related to 
errors and omissions. Errors and omissions by employees or 
insiders are the main causes of information security problems 
[9]. 
A communication failure could be caused by accidental 
damage to network cabling, loss of network equipment such 
as routers or servers and software failure. Examples of 
vulnerability, which could lead to an incident, include lack of 
redundancy and back-ups, inadequate network management, 
lack of planning and implementation of communications 
cabling or inadequate incident handling. Due to the existence 
of so many variables that can possibly occur as threats to a 
computer system, it is useful to have an appropriate tool for 
threat analysis [10]. 
Since there are many variables that have no possibility to 
become threats to a computer system, it is very important to 
come out with an appropriate tool to perform threat analysis. 
Using an appropriate tool will enable the system to analyze 
threats accurately and come up with the best solution on how 
to overcome these security threats. 
B. Online banking security threats 
Due to its benefits, which allows internet users to access 
and manage their bank accounts from anywhere on the world 
at any time, online banking has now grown rapidly from a 
niche service to a major new way of banking. However, 
since the Internet is not originally designed for online 
banking, online banking is now facing a wide range of 
security risks for both the banks and the online banking users 
such as brute-force attacks, distributed attacks and social 
phishing. Therefore, the banks have to improve their online 
banking security systems constantly, which means the banks 
have to keep investing in security systems all the time. 
Online banking is a series of processes in which a bank 
client logs onto the website of the bank through a web-
browser installed on the PC and carries out various 
transactions such as account transfers. Online banking is 
carried out in four major stages, illustrated below in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Online Banking Transaction [5]. 
a. 
The user turns on the PC and boots the OS. 
b. After the web-browser is open, the end user accesses 
the online banking website of the bank and enters the 
ID or Personal Identifying Number (PIN) and the 
password by using the keyboard. 
c. 
The data input is encrypted by SSL (Secure Socket 
Layer) and transmitted to the bank’s server. 
d. The 
bank’s 
server 
decrypts 
the 
transmitted 
information and processes the user’s authentication, 
account inquiry, account transfer, etc. 
The ordinary PC environment is exposed to many types 
of threats because of insecure web surfing and use of a 
variety of unverified programs. If a user carries out an online 
banking transaction in an environment that is exposed to 
such kinds of threats, there is no way to guarantee the safety 
of that online banking transaction. 
Most of the recent hacking tools are circulated 
throughout the web and they can be inadvertently 
downloaded and executed in the user’s PC while the user is 
enjoying of web surfing or checking e-mail. 
Once these hacking tools are planted into a user’s 
computer, they will then capture the password, account 
number and personal data, which the user is typing. 
Furthermore, they are even capable of replacing the input 
screen that the user is watching with a counterfeit website of 
the bank, which the hacker had installed in advance. The 
user’s input data are not transmitted to the bank because 
these hacking tools redirect the user’s input data to the 
hacker’s server instead for illegal account transfers. Thus 
hackers and hacking tools can attack the system using many 
tricks in a number of different ways during the online 
banking process, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 2.  Threat can pervade every stage of the transaction [5]. 
C. Healthcare information system security threats 
Today, the usage of information systems in the healthcare 
environment provides many potential benefits such as 
improving the quality of care, reducing medical errors and 
enhancing the readability, availability and accessibility of 
information. However, HIS security threats have increased 
significantly in recent years as well. Therefore, storing health 
information in electronic form has raised concerns about a 
patient’s health, privacy and safety. Basically, HIS is 
threatened by both accidental events and deliberate actions, 
which can severely damage the reliability of HIS and 
consequently discourage professionals to use it. 
Furthermore, the lack of adequate protection for 
sustaining confidentiality, integrity and availability aspects 
leads to the need to investigate potential threats, particularly 
in the HIS domain. In addition, weakly organized security 
management and unawareness of risk analysis practices, 
especially in the healthcare organizations, need particular 
attention. 
The International Standard for Health Informatics for 
Information Security Management in Health, using ISO/IEC 
27002 (ISO27799: 2008) [11], has defined HIS as a 
repository of information regarding the health of a subject of 
care in computer-processable form, stored and transmitted 
securely and accessible by multiple authorized users. There 
are various types of threat categories introduced in this 
standard. It classifies HIS threats into 25 types. 
Basically, the HIS threats have been classified into two 
main categories, namely, internal threats and external threats 
[12]. The internal threats include various types of employees’ 
behavior such as an employee’s ignorance, curiosity, 
recklessness, inadequate behavior, taking someone else’s 
password and giving a password to another employee. The 
external threats include viruses and spyware attacks, hackers 
and intruders on the premises. 
In addition, HIS threats can be categorized into 19 types 
based on case studies conducted using the selected risk 
analysis method [2]. One finding shows that the most critical 
threat to the HIS is a server power failure. Furthermore, a 
power failure in a workstation, a network software failure 
and a tele-monitoring software failure also present high-risk 
threats. Besides this, there are also a number of high-risk 
threats related to human factors, such as user errors in using 
the HIS and the masquerading of the user’s identity during 
system operation. 
Furthermore, another study has identified 25 types of 
patient monitoring system threats [13]. The most critical 
threat is a power failure of the server, while the power failure 
of a personal home computer is the second most critical 
failure for the system. Also, air-conditioning failures, system 
and network software failures, monitor support software 
failures and medical record software failures are also treated 
as the high-risk threats. However, this study also identified a 
number of high-risk threats related to human factors, such as 
user errors in using masquerading software. 
III. 
COMPARISON OF INTERNET BANKING AND 
HEALTHCARE INFORMATION SYSTEM 
In this section, we provide a classification of security 
threats based on existing research results and comparison 
between online banking and healthcare information systems 
based on important security comparison factors. 
A. Classification of threats 
Figure 3 presents the known threats, which affect each 
security method discussed in this paper. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Classification of threats. 
It does not present all the threats, which may exist in 
such a method, but it shows that those methods are currently 
vulnerable to several attacks. Basically, the threats were 
categorized based on relevant standards [11][14] and also 
based on a comparative study of previous works and 
publications in this research. 
We have classified the threats into three categories, 
which include technical threats, human threats and natural 
disasters. First, technical threats are caused by a technical 
problem, such as the technical failure of a network or system, 
a variety of malicious attacks through malicious code, etc. 
Human threats belong to information leakage by insiders or 
staff, and unauthorized user access, user’s negligence, etc. 
Finally, there are threats of natural disasters, caused by a 
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

variety of adverse circumstances, such as water damage, fire 
and earthquake, etc. 
In Figure 4, the technical and human threats are classified 
in more details. 
 
Figure 4.  Classification of technical and human threats. 
B. Comparison factors 
Table I depicts 13 types of factors according to the major 
threat 
categories. 
We 
consider 
four 
categories 
for 
comparison, such as authenticity, confidentiality, integrity 
and availability, which are general factors in cryptography. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON FACTORS 
 
Factors 
Description 
Authenticity 
Password 
How many digits and what kind of 
combinations are used? 
Authentication 
How to provide authentication? 
Transfer protocol 
What kind of protocol to be used 
for data transfer? 
Unauthorized access 
How 
can 
the 
access 
of 
an 
unauthorized user be prevented? 
Confidentiality 
Communication 
interception 
How 
can 
interception 
by 
a 
malicious third party be prevented? 
Data encryption 
What kind of algorithm is used for 
data encryption? 
Non-repudiation 
How to achieve non-repudiation? 
Integrity 
Social 
engineering 
attacks 
Impersonation, persuasion, bribery, 
shoulder surfing and dumpster 
diving, etc. 
Malware attacks 
Malicious virus, worm, Trojan 
horses, spyware and adware, etc. 
Acts of human error 
or failure 
Entry of erroneous data by staff, 
accidental deletion or modification 
of data by staff 
Availability 
Power failure 
Server down due to power failure, 
Air-conditioning failure of the 
server, Interruption by service 
provider 
Hardware/software 
failures or errors 
Insufficient 
storage 
software, 
Hardware/Software 
maintenance 
error, Application software failure 
Natural disaster 
How can the failures from fire, 
water-damage etc. be prevented? 
 
At first glance, it might seem that authenticity is included 
in the concept of integrity. Integrity is more specifically 
about the content of the data itself. Authenticity involves the 
assurance that the data was created or sent by the source it 
appears to be from. 
Integrity, as a concept, means that there is resistance to 
alteration or substitution of data, and/or that such changes are 
detected and traceable. When data might be changed by 
accident or malice, preventing the change is of the first 
concern, and detecting it is the second. Integrity can be 
maintained on many levels, from hardware to application 
logic. 
Confidentiality means, at the core of the concept, that the 
data is hidden from those are not supposed to see it. We can 
accomplish confidentiality in a number of ways such as 
ensuring encryption of the data so that it cannot be 
intercepted or accessed during transmission or transport etc. 
While encrypting is a sure way of keeping the data 
confidential, it is not the only way. 
In any information system, the information must be 
available when it is needed. This means that, the security 
controls and the communication channels used to access it 
must be functioning correctly. High availability systems aim 
to remain available at all times. It attempts to prevent service 
disruptions due to power outages, hardware failure, and 
system upgrades. Ensuring availability also prevents denial-
of-service attacks. 
 
C. Results and analysis 
From Table II, we can see that the result of comparison 
between online banking and healthcare information systems 
applies various factors. We have analyzed the requirement 
per each item for providing sufficient security and also 
provided information on the currently used technologies. For 
the analysis we have investigated the most common 
technologies both in online banking and healthcare 
information systems.  
First, in online banking, a password is employed 
combining characters and numbers within 30 digits using a 
virtual keyboard to prevent a key logger. In addition, to 
authenticate the use of OTP (One-time password) and 
certificate, it uses the HTTPs, SSL/TLS protocols for secure 
communications. Some technologies are dependent on a 
system, such as a firewall, browser protection, backup 
system, etc. Also, to prevent communication interception, a 
pass-phrase, firewall, SMS and transaction monitoring are 
commonly used. The pass-phrase is a security model based 
on information held by the user. It is usually used as a 
second authentication method in a transaction that involves 
money transfers. 
Some cases of healthcare information Systems (HIS) are 
using a six-digit character password, depending on the 
system. The transport protocols are TCP/IP (Transmission 
Control Protocol/Internet Protocol) and FTP (File Transfer 
Protocol) for file transfers and data encryption formed using 
WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy) or WPA (Wi-Fi Protected 
Access), if using wireless communication; it also performs 
data encryption using PKI (Public Key Infrastructure).  
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II.  
COMPARISON RESULTS 
 
Factors 
Requirement 
Online Banking 
HIS 
Authenticity 
Password 
Combination of numbers and 
characters of more than 8-digits or 
Bio-metrics 
Mixed numbers and characters 
within 6 to 30-digits, virtual 
keyboard 
6-characters (depending on the 
system) 
Authentication method 
Using high-grade security media 
Digital certificates, OTP, security 
card, etc. 
No fixed rules 
Transfer protocol 
Mutual and secure authentication 
protocol 
HTTPS, SSL/TLS 
TCP/IP, FTP 
Unauthorized access 
Strong password techniques 
One-way hash functions 
Use of personal characteristics 
Firewall, Access control 
technologies 
Firewall, Access control 
technologies (depending on 
the system) 
Confidentiality 
Communication 
interception 
Transaction monitoring secure 
Pass-phrase, Firewall, SMS, 
Transaction monitoring 
WEP/WAP 
Data encryption 
Cryptographic algorithm (i.e., AES-
128, SEED) 
128-bit SSL encryption 
256-bit SSL encryption (EV SSL) 
PKI (Public key infrastructure) 
Non-repudiation 
Digital signature 
Digital signature through 
certificates 
Digital signature 
Integrity 
Social engineering attacks 
defined consequences for violating the 
policies, education and training 
Positive identification 
Positive identification 
Malware attacks 
Firewall, anti-virus software, real-time 
monitoring  
Browser protection 
Browser protection 
Acts of human error or 
failure 
Regular security audits 
Limited access to system 
Regular security audits 
Limited access to system 
Depending on the company 
policy 
Availability 
Power failure 
Auxiliary power, Backup system, 
alarm, etc. 
Backup system  (depending on the 
system) 
Backup system (depending on 
the system) 
Hardware/software failure 
or errors 
Regular system maintenance 
Regular system update and 
maintenance 
Regular system update and 
maintenance 
Natural disaster 
environment monitoring (i.e., Fire 
detection sensor) 
Real-time environment 
monitoring in server room 
Real-time environment 
monitoring in server room 
 
On the other hand, to prevent availability breakdowns, 
through such incidents as power failure, system errors, 
system failure or natural disaster, both systems provides a 
backup system, regular system updates and maintenance, etc., 
but it depends on the system. In the case of integrity 
maintenance, the use of positive identification, browser 
protection software or the introduction of some policy such 
as regular security audits and limited access to system, were 
implemented. However, those also depend on the system. 
For reference, positive identification is a model where the 
user is required to input some secret information only known 
to him in order to identify himself. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this section, we describe some online banking security 
models that can be applied to HIS. Many different advanced 
fraud detection technologies are being applied for fraudulent 
detection and prevention of online banking transactions. 
Hence, if a system has better security control, the threats can 
be reduced.  
A basic knowledge of authentication is an important step 
towards security control. Authentication is any process by 
which you verify that you are who you claim to be and have 
been permitted to access to a system. In the online banking 
case, there are a variety of technologies and methodologies 
financial institutions can use to authenticate a customer. 
These methods include the use of customer passwords, 
personal identification numbers (PINs), digital certificates 
using a public key infrastructure (PKI), physical devices 
such as smart cards, one-time passwords (OTPs), USB plug-
ins or other types of “tokens”, transaction profile scripts, 
biometric identification, among others. The level of risk 
protection afforded by each of these techniques varies. Thus, 
online banking systems are used according to their 
combinations. The selection and use of authentication 
technologies and methods should depend upon the results of 
the financial institutions’ risk assessment process. If we can 
apply these various techniques to HIS, this can be a 
safeguard against unauthorized access and use. 
The following proposals are examples of security models 
that can be help to provide authentication. Hiltgen et al. [15] 
presents 
two 
challenge-response 
online 
banking 
authentication solutions – one based on short-time passwords 
and the other on certificates – and then describes how easily 
these solutions can be extended if sophisticated content-
manipulation attacks arose. The short-time password solution 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

use symmetric cryptography in combination with a hardware 
security module (smart card) and an offline (stand-alone) 
smart-card reader. This solution provides convenient 
mobility for people who want to bank online anytime 
anywhere, not just from their homes.  
In the certificate-based solution, a two-stage, PKI-based 
online banking authentication solution is used. It is 
characterized by open standards and a programmable, 
certified, secure, smart-card reader connected to a potentially 
exposed PC. This solution uses a dedicated FCR (FINREAD 
card reader) along with an appropriate financial transactional 
IC card reader (FINREAD) and financial card reader 
identification application (FCRIA), both of which are loaded 
onto the user’s FCR to secure the authentication process. 
Tiwari et al. [16] proposes an authentication system that 
is both secure and highly usable, based on a multi-factor 
authentication approach.  It uses a novel approach to create 
an authentication system based on TICs (Transaction 
Identification Code) and SMS to enforce an extra security 
level for the traditional login in a username/password context. 
TICs are user specific unique transaction identification codes, 
which are issued by banks or financial institutions for their 
users. This code is similar to the One-time Password (OTP) 
and the code is used only once. This paper also suggests an 
encryption/decryption technique that would be used to keep 
TICs as secret codes on cell phones/PDA. The user can 
easily pick up a TIC (from the stored list of TICs) to initiate 
a secure web transaction using her/his cell phone/PDA, 
instead of typing a complicated TIC code in each transaction. 
Dandash et al. [17] presents a security analysis of a 
proposed online banking model compared with current 
existing models used in detection and prevention of 
fraudulent Internet payments. Their proposed model 
facilitates online banking Fraud Detection and Prevention 
(FDP) by applying two new secure mechanisms, a Dynamic 
Key Generation (DKG) and a Group Key (GK). Such 
mechanisms satisfy all transaction security properties of 
payment systems as they enforce strong authentication and 
authorization methods. 
Hu et al. [18] proposes a secret key based security 
scheme for achieving secure online banking. Encryption 
equipment is adopted at certification servers and client 
terminals and a secure certification protocol is established by 
using secret key encryption, combined secret key and smart 
card techniques. In this paper, the encryption hardware and 
secret key encryption algorithm passed the security tests 
performed by an authorized department. Along with this, the 
use of authentication and digital signature certification 
guarantee double security. Also, a one-time secret key is 
generated automatically according to a generation algorithm 
and is unrepeatable. 
In addition to this, a mutual authentication, also called 
two-way authentication, is a process or technology in which 
both entries of a communications link authenticate each other. 
In a network environment, the client authenticates the server 
and vice-versa. In this way, network users can be assured 
that they are doing business exclusively with legitimate 
entities and servers can be certain that the users are 
attempting to gain access for legitimate purposes. Currently, 
mutual authentication is gaining acceptance as a tool that can 
minimize the risk of online fraud in e-commerce. If we can 
apply this to HIS, it can reduces the risk that an unsuspecting 
network user will inadvertently reveal security information 
to a malicious or insecure web site. 
Institutions should establish a firm policy to provide 
availability in case of power failure, hardware/software 
failure or error and human failure or error. The policy, such 
as regular security audits, system updates or limited access, 
could help to reduce security accidents.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper aims to investigate the current debate 
regarding the threats and vulnerability of healthcare data. It 
reviews some possible remedial actions to defend against 
these threats. The aim of this research was to critically 
analyze existing research and findings dedicated to 
healthcare security issues and its information security 
problems. 
We found that although the findings of the reviewed 
research are somewhat contradictory, the Internet is mostly 
seen as a security threat. Some technologies, such as anti-
virus software; spam guard; email filtering and encryption; 
firewalls and so on, are used successfully by the service 
provider organizations to protect the information. However, 
some areas are still vulnerable to security threats. 
The awareness of information security is now growing 
rapidly. In the long run, information security will be one of 
the most important issues for modern organizations. The 
inclusion of biometrics, encryption, digital signatures, 
intrusion detection systems, security education and training, 
virus control and compliance with data protection legislation 
and policy will be of primary importance. The findings of 
this study will serve as recommendations for healthcare 
service organizations when defining requirements for the 
security issues.  Simply speaking, it is a question of filling 
the technology gap between the security solutions in the 
online banking and healthcare information systems. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the SIMSALA project, 
in the Optoelectronics and Measurement Techniques 
Laboratory of the University of Oulu, and its funders for the 
resources and environment to do this study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Council of Europe, “Recommendation No. R (97) 5 on the 
Protection of Medical Data,” adopted by the Committee of 
Ministers on 13 of February 1997 at the 584th meeting of the 
Ministers’ Deputies. 
[2] I. Maglogiannis and E. Zafiropulos, “Modelling Risk in 
Distributed Healthcare Information Systems,” The 28th 
Annual International Conference of the IEEE on Engineering 
in Medical and Biology Society (EMBS), 2006, pp 5447-5450. 
[3] L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson (editors), 
“To Err Is Human: Building a Safer System,” The National 
Academies Press, 2000.  
[4] B. B. Christopher, “Recent Developments Affecting 
Depository Institutions,” FDIC Banking Review, Vol. 8, No. 
3, 1996. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[5] AhnLab, "Online Banking: Threats and Countermeasures", 
White paper, 2010.  
URL  http://www.techrepublic.com/whitepapers/online-
banking-threats-and-countermeasures/2557803, last accessed 
13.10.2012. 
[6] G. N. Samy, R. Ahmad, and Z. Ismail, “Threats to Health 
Information Security,” Proceedings of the Fifth International 
Conference on Information Assurance and Security (IAS), 
Xi’an, China, 2009.  
[7] T. R. Peltier, “Information Security risk Analysis,” Auerbach 
Publications: Boca Raton, FL, 2005. 
[8] B. Jung, I. Han, and S. Lee, “Security threats to internet: a 
Korean 
multi-industry 
investigation,” 
Information 
& 
Management, Vol. 38, No. 8, 2001, pp. 487-498. 
[9] R. Power, “CS/FBI Computer Crime and Security Survey,” 
Computer Security Issues & Trends, Vol. 8, No. 1, Spring 
2002. 
[10] R. Ahmad, G. N. Samy, N. Khilwani, P. A. Bath, and Z. 
Ismail, “Threats Identification in Healthcare Information 
Systems using Genetic Algorithm and Cox Regression,” In 
Fifth International Conference on Information Assurance and 
Security (IAS), Xi’an, China, 2009. 
[11] British 
Standards 
Institution, 
“Health 
Informatics 
- 
Information Security Management in Health using ISO/IEC 
27002,” (ISO27799:2008), London, 2008. 
[12] E. Vaast, “Danger is in the eye of the beholders: social 
representations 
of 
information 
systems 
security 
in 
healthcare,” Journal of Strategic Information Systems, Vol. 
16, Issue 2, June, 2007, pp. 130-152. 
[13] I. Maglogiannis, E. Zafiropoulos, A. Platis, and C. 
Lambrinoudakis, “Risk analysis of a patient monitoring 
system using Bayesian Network modelling,” Journal of 
Biomedical Informatics, Vol. 39, Issue 6, 2006, pp. 637-647. 
[14] British Standards Institution, “Information Technology - 
Security Techniques: Code of Practice for Information 
Security Management,” BS ISO/IEC 27002:2005 BS 7799-
1:2005, London, 2005. 
[15] A. Hiltgen, T. Kramp, and T. Weigold, “Secure Internet 
Banking Authentication,” IEEE Security & Privacy, Vol. 4, 
Issue 2, 2006, pp. 21-29. 
[16] A. Tiwari and S. Sanyal, A. Abraham, S. J. Knapskog, and S. 
Saynal, “A Multi-factor Security Protocol for Wireless 
Payment-Secure Web Authentication using Mobile Devices,” 
IADIS International Conference Applied Computing, pp. 160-
167, 2007 
[17] O. Dandash, P. D. Le, and B. Srinivasan, “Security Analysis 
for Internet Banking Models,” Eighth ACIS International 
Conference on Software Engineering, Artificial Intelligence, 
Networking and Parallel/Distributed Computing, pp.1141-
1146, 2007. 
[18] X. Hu, G. Zhao, and G. Xu, “Security Scheme for Online 
Banking Based on Secret Key Encryption,” Second 
International Workshop on Knowledge Discovery and Data 
Mining, pp.636-639, 2009. 
 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

