 
 
Ello pas 
Big Data & Wearable Sensors Ensuring Safety and Health @Work 
 
 
 
Farhad Abtahi, Mikael Forsman 
Institute of Environmental Medicine 
Karolinska Institutet 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: farhad.abtahi@ki.se,  
mikael.forsman@ki.se 
Jose A. Diaz-Olivares, Liyun Yang, Ke Lu, Jörgen 
Eklund, Kaj Lindecrantz 
School of Technology and Health 
KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: jadiaz@kth.se, liyuny@kth.se, kelu@kth.se, 
jorgen.eklund@sth.kth.se, kaj.lindecrantz@sth.kth.se  
 
Fernando Seoane, Heikki Teriö 
Department of Biomedical Engineering  
Karolinska University Hospital  
Stockholm, Sweden 
e-mail: fernando.seoane@ki.se, heikki.terio@karolinska.se 
 
Cesar Mediavilla Martinez, Santiago Aso  
ATOS Spain S.A 
Madrid, Spain 
cesar.mediavilla@atos.net, santiago.aso@atos.net 
 
Christian Tiemann 
Philips Research 
Eindhoven, Netherlands 
e-mail: christian.tiemann@philips.com 
 
 
Abstract—Work-related injuries and disorders constitute a 
major burden and cost for employers, society in general and 
workers in particular. We@Work is a project that aims to 
develop an integrated solution for promoting and supporting a 
safe and healthy working life by combining wearable 
technologies, Big Data analytics, ergonomics, and information 
and communication technologies. The We@Work solution aims 
to support the worker and employer to ensure a healthy working 
life through pervasive monitoring for early warnings, prompt 
detection of capacity-loss and accurate risk assessments at 
workplace as well as self-management of a healthy working life. 
A multiservice platform will allow unobtrusive data collection at 
workplaces. Big Data analytics will provide real-time 
information useful to prevent work injuries and support healthy 
working life.  
Keywords-Preventive Occupational Healthcare; Ergonomics; 
Wellbeing at Work. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Currently, work–related disorders yield a significant cost 
for society. In Europe, this cost has been estimated to range 
between 2.6 and 3.8% of gross national product (GNP) [1]. 
For Sweden, this cost has been calculated to more than 5 
billion € annually. The economic impact for occupational 
stress in the USA exceeds 300 billion USD per year [2]. In 
addition to quality and productivity losses, a poorly designed 
workplace can generate a direct cost of over 50000 € for a 
single company.  
Statistics indicate that human error is common in work 
accidents especially among heavy machinery operators and 
truck drivers. In 87% of truck accidents caused by the driver, 
the driver was not fit for driving due to fatigue or use of 
prescribed drugs [3]. Additionally, it has been shown that 
implementing health and wellbeing initiatives in companies 
may not only reduce work absenteeism with average of 25% 
but also decrease up to 40% workers compensation cost [4, 5]. 
Thus, there is a great need for solutions enabling prevention of 
occupational health-risks, preventing accidents in the 
operation of dangerous machineries, and also improving 
employee’s health and wellbeing at work. The rest of the 
paper is structured as follows. In Section 2, the main 
hypothesis of project is described.  Project goals are described 
in section 3 and followed by introducing the consortium in 
section 4. Use case specification and system architecture are 
described in section 5 and 6, respectively. Finally concluding 
with a short summary.  
II. WORKING HYPOTHESIS 
New technologies provide a basis for practical actions 
enabling opportunities to ensure a healthy and safe working 
life. Current rapid developments in sensor technology, mobile 
data acquisition, improved risk assessment methodologies 
combined with Big Data analysis allow the development of 
pervasive and unallocated solutions. We hypothesize that this 
combination can usually predict the risk at workplaces, the 
individual’s risk of developing work-related disorders and 
assess the capacity for operating demanding and dangerous 
machinery (including cranes trucks, buses, trains and 
airplanes) to a cost that is realistic for the main working 
environment 
actors 
and 
different 
stakeholders, 
e.g. 
occupational health services. 
III. PROJECT GOALS 
We@Work 
[6] 
aims 
to 
transform 
the 
current 
implementation of occupational health services achieving the 
following objectives:  
A) To implement a service enabling self-management of 
health and wellbeing @work for employees.  
B) To implement a service enabling screening for 
psycho-physical capacity to operate demanding equipment. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
C) To implement a service for early warning of risks for 
musculoskeletal disorders caused by adverse work design. 
D) To develop such a scalable solution hosting the 
previous services to a pre-commercial development level. 
IV. CONSORTIUM & KEY COMPONENTS 
A multidisciplinary consortium involving seven partners 
from Spain, Netherlands and Sweden has been created: 
 Industry and Occupational Health Enterprise: Atos 
Spain S.A. (project leader), Philips Research, Z-Health 
Technologies AB (Z-HT) and QuironPrevencion. 
 University 
Hospital 
and 
Academia: 
Karolinska 
Institutet, KTH – Royal Institute of Technology, 
Karolinska University Hospital a part of Stockholm 
County Council. 
Phillip’s 
cloud 
platform 
combined 
with 
wearable 
monitoring technologies like garments sensorized with 
Z-HT’s ECGZ monitors (see Figure 2), [5], inertial motion 
units and the Phillip’s Health watch(see Figure 1), [7] will 
boost the potential impact of Atos’ Pocket mHealth app for 
self-health assessment and QuironPrevencion’s screening tool 
for predicting loss of psychophysical capabilities: the VAPEL 
system [8]. 
V. USE CASE SPECIFICATIONS 
In order to validate the different technological solutions 
developed in this project, two different scenarios have been 
selected as use cases. The main objective of these is to test the 
detection of detrimental changes in the workers, produced 
either by the working or the individual’s conditions, by 
monitoring the variables acquired from the collection of 
sensor systems. If certain pre-established ranges are 
surpassed, which could indicate that a loss of the worker’s 
capacity is occurring, immediate actions can be possibly taken 
to alleviate or avoid this circumstance. 
Initially, a risk assessment of the health status of the worker 
will be carried out, making use of Goldberg's General Health 
Questionnaire [9]. If the health situation of the worker is 
especially complex, the platform will communicate it, 
avoiding sending messages and notifications that may entail a 
risk. The user could control the maximum amount of 
notifications to receive per day (except for some priority 
alarms related to health risks). 
Some thresholds for heart and respiratory rates could be 
included to send urgent warnings if these limits are surpassed. 
Following the acquisition of data from the sensor system, the 
analytic layer will request the data from Pocket mHealth for 
the further analysis, making use of stored health and 
monitoring data to offer recommendations, suggestions and 
advices being these displayed by Pocket mHealth. On the 
other hand, the worker could decide if they want to store some 
of the gathered data in his/her personal health record. The two 
different scenarios that are included in this use case 
specification are the following:  
A. Sterilizing Unit at a hospital 
The setting comprises a real working scenario with 12 
employees at the new Karolinska University Hospital 
environment. These workers are exposed to repetitive 
movements, awkward postures and strenuous pushing and 
pulling efforts, in a situation of medium to high activity rate, 
with manual handling of medical instruments and three 
different work shifts in a 24-hour time-lapse. It is common to 
find musculoskeletal disorders in this scenario, especially pain 
in elbows and shoulders. 
In the first stage, data is collected regarding the individual’s 
basic parameters like age, gender, level of daily activity. 
After, the self-health assessment and VAPEL screening tool 
are used for monitoring any potential loss of capabilities. The 
VAPEL tool will be used several times during the day, 
typically 4 times. 
Through the sensor system mentioned before, instant values 
of biomedical data are acquired. These monitored variables 
consist of the individual’s heart rate, energy expenditure, 
postures and movements of upper arms, back and wrists, as 
well as the worker’s physical activity (time in sitting / standing 
/ walking / other activities). 
Once these variables are stored in the system, algorithms 
developed by Karolinska Institutet and KTH Royal Institute of 
Technology (KTH) will be applied, in order to check if the 
values are inside pre-established ranges. If these ranges are 
surpassed, an alarm signal will be produced by the system, 
notifying the worker through the Pocket mHealth, he/she may 
inform his/her manager, and they may together search for 
solutions. 
a 
b 
c 
 
Figure 2: Textrode Sensorized Vest;(a) electrode placement in the inner 
side view (b) front view and monitoring device, (c) back view. 
 
Figure 1: The Philips health watch. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 
B. Wellbeing at the office 
The setting is comprised of two different scenarios, located 
in Stockholm (KTH) and Madrid (Atos), accounting for a total 
of 24 workers and a time term of project of 2-4 weeks, in an 
office daily schedule. 
In the context of white-collar workers and the office 
workplace, it is intended to validate the system as a tool to 
promote and support a healthy and safe working life, reducing 
the number of work incidences or occupational health 
problems. 
We will make use of real-time data, ergonomic analysis and 
Pocket mHealth as the user interface, in order to provide 
notifications, recommendations and warnings to employees. 
The system will always provide clear and simple messages 
(feedback, suggestions and advises), avoiding any kind of 
misunderstanding. 
Specifically for the Atos scenario, Premap will support in 
the identification of risky situations, measuring the variation 
of response times according to the time of the working day and 
the day of the week, by means of a mobile device type test. If a 
risky situation is identified, actions will be done to check if a 
loss of capability of the worker has been produced, including 
the realization of the VAPEL test. 
VI. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
In order to structure how the We@Work innovation project 
will meet the goals defined by use cases, the architecture of the 
pervasive monitoring solution, see Figure 3, is described. 
The We@Work platform consists of a cloud based 
infrastructure, wearable sensor units and mobile applications. 
The cloud based backend infrastructure will be developed by 
Philips and makes use of Amazon Web Services. Android 
applications by Atos, KTH, Philips and Premap will use the 
cloud platform for communication, storage, user management, 
potential big-data analysis and pushing notifications and 
feedbacks. Each application will have a specific functionality 
dedicated to data gathering from sensors through Bluetooth or 
other sources like questionnaires. The communication 
between sensing layer and cloud system is based on HTTPS 
protocol through representational state transfer (RESTful) 
application programming interface (APIs). 
According to the use case specifications, the technologies 
included will be: 
 Philips Health watch, a wrist-worn Bluetooth equipped 
wearable sensor that will allow keeping track of periods 
of physical activity. This data is synced to a backend 
system where it can be used for further processing to 
generate specific outputs for the defined use cases.  
 Z-Health ECGZ and garment, which allow the sensing of 
biopotentials and electrical bioimpedance. Together 
with a vest or underwear t-shirt equipped with textile 
electrodes on the chest it is possible to obtain an ECG 
LEAD II that allows an uncomplicated detection of the 
R-peak and straightforward extraction of heart rate, 
enabling heart rate variability analysis. 
 Inertial measurement units, in addition to built-in 
accelerometers Philips Health Watch, with 3-axis 
accelerometer, 
3-axis 
gyroscope 
and 
3-axis 
magnetometer that will be used to measure the exposure 
of different limbs e.g., arm, shoulder, wrist and/or 
activity recognition. 
 Pocket mHealth, as the main component for the 
communication with users of We@Work. It will display 
visualization of relevant data from the user, including 
reception of the notifications generated by the analysis 
components based on the data collected from the use, 
and will serve as a possible source of data collected from 
the users. 
 Analytics algorithms (KTH), to provide workers with 
feedback, advice and suggestions to health and 
wellbeing, with the pre-establishment of ranges and 
decision rules to enable alarms and recommendations. 
For physical workloads, these will be based on energy 
expenditure while for repetitive movements and 
uncomfortable postures this will control relative angles 
and angular velocity. Physical activities are also 
evaluated with time sitting / standing / walking. The 
parameters will be presented on the platform allowing 
for feedback. Warnings will be triggered when the 
signals exceed the recommended limits accordingly. The 
warnings can be shown as notifications on the platform 
(Pocket mHealth), including both visual and auditory 
forms. 
 
Figure 3: We@Work Architecture Framework 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
 
 Cloud computing platform, to request/send data from/to 
the data backend, store data and run analytics. The result 
of these analyses will be stored in the database by using a 
custom API. In case of need for a feedback, notifications 
will be generated through notification system APIs.     
 VAPEL, to assess the psychophysical capacity of 
workers (sufficient or not), through a series of tests that 
value the basic executive functions. The aim of VAPEL 
is to get a new system, which is able to assess and 
measure psychophysical skills of workers in order to 
ensure a safety workplace. 
The system must be secured by providing confidentiality, 
integrity and availability and must implement basic security 
behaviors, 
such 
as 
authentication, 
authorization, 
confidentiality and data integrity. 
CONCLUSION 
We@Work project aims to integrate unique and currently 
available technological systems to obtain a completely 
integrated information communication technology (ICT) 
platform for occupational health. The platform will be 
validated during 2018 in real work scenarios at Karolinska 
University Hospital as well as within other partners associated 
with the consortium directly or indirectly. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The project has been granted by the Innovation Projects 
program by the EIT Health with project number 17102. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
E. Osha, "Economic impact of occupational safety and health 
in the member states of the European Union," European 
Agency for Safety and Health at Work, 2001. 
[2] 
L. R. Murphy and T. F. Schoenborn, Stress management in 
work settings. DIANE Publishing, 1993. 
[3] 
R. Craft, "The Large Truck Crash Causation Study. Analysis 
Brief: 
LTCCS 
Summary. 
Publication 
No," 
FMCSA-RRA-07-017. 
Federal 
Motor 
Carrier 
Safety 
Administration, Office of Research and Analysis2007. 
[4] 
L. S. Chapman, "Meta-evaluation of worksite health 
promotion economic return studies: 2012 update," American 
Journal of Health Promotion, vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 1-12, 2012. 
[5] 
I. Mohino-Herranz, R. Gil-Pita, J. Ferreira, M. Rosa-Zurera, 
and F. Seoane, "Assessment of Mental, Emotional and 
Physical Stress through Analysis of Physiological Signals 
Using Smartphones," Sensors, vol. 15, no. 10, p. 25607, 2015. 
[6] 
We@Work, a comprehensive solution to promote and support 
a healthy and safe working life. Available: http://weatwork.eu/ 
[7] 
B. H. Lee, "Health watch," ed: Google Patents, 2001. 
[8] 
P. J. A. Cobo, A. J. M. Auría, Z. J. J. Marin, and M. J. C. Tena, 
"System and method for evaluating the basic executive 
functions of a subject," ed: Google Patents, 2016. 
[9] 
D. P. Goldberg and V. F. Hillier, "A scaled version of the 
General Health Questionnaire," Psychological medicine, vol. 
9, no. 1, pp. 139-145, 1979. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

