Implantation of Elongated Silicon Neural Probe Array in Rat Cortex 
 
 
Mohamad Hajj-Hassan, Rayan Fayad, Soumaya Berro 
Houssein Hajj-Hassan  
Department of Biomedical Engineering  
International University of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: mohamad.hajjhassan@b-iu.edu.lb,  
Vamsy P. Chodavarapu 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  
University of Dayton  
Ohio, USA 
Email: vchodavarapu1@udayton.edu 
rayanfayyad@gmail.com, soumaya.berro@b-iu.edu.lb, 
houssein.hajjhassan@b-iu.edu.lb 
Sam Musallam 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  
McGill University  
Montreal, Canada 
Email: sam.musallam@mcgill.ca 
 
 
Hassan M. Khachfe 
Lebanese Institute for Biomedical Research and 
Application (LIBRA) 
Lebanese International University  
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb
 
 
Abstract— Neural microprobes represent an important 
component of neural prosthetic systems where implanted 
microprobes record the electro-potentials generated by specific 
thoughts in the brain and convey the signals to algorithms 
trained to interpret these thoughts. Here, we present novel 
elongated multi-site neural probe that can reach depths greater 
than 10mm. We hypothesize that reaching such depth allows 
the recording of cognitive signals required to drive cognitive 
prosthetics. The impedance of the recording sites on the probes 
was in the order of 500 kΩ at 1 kHz, which is consistent with 
probes used for neurophysiological recordings. We implanted 
the elongated probe in rats and showed that the elongated 
probes are capable of recording spikes from various recording 
sites. 
Keywords-Cognitive neural prosthetics; Brain machine 
interfaces; Porous silicon; Microprobes. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Brain Machine Interfaces (BMIs) have the potential to 
improve the lives of paralyzed patients by allowing them to 
use their neural activity to operate computers, robots, or even 
their own limbs [1] [2]. BMIs are designed to function in real 
time and benefit from real or simulated feedback. The 
development of BMIs as a direct communication pathway 
between the brain and external devices has generated novel 
methods and techniques to interface with and to study the 
brain. A BMI platform is comprised of 1) a system to record 
neural signals, 2) algorithms to interpret the neural signals 
and 3) the device to be controlled. In this paper, we focus on 
recording platforms composed of multiple probes implanted 
in the brain. These platforms must be biocompatible, must be 
designed to minimize the short term and long-term trauma 
inflicted during and after insertion. The probes must also be 
long enough to reach variable depths. Thus, probes must be 
made durable without increasing their width. Implantable 
probe arrays have traditionally been metal microprobes [3]-
[5]. However, these have been recently supplanted by silicon 
probes [6]-[10]. Implanting probes into the brain elicits a 
tissue response that degrades the recorded signals. 
Regardless of substrate, probe design must curtail this 
response to ensure long-term recording. 
Relative movement of the probes within the brain causes 
long-term tissue response due to the difference in mechanical 
properties between the probes and the neural tissue [11]-[13]. 
This process is exacerbated by arrays implanted deep in the 
brain due to their longer moment arm.  Silicon probes can be 
made thin enough to increase compliance in the brain but 
without some rigidity, thin probes cannot penetrate neural 
tissue. Devices to assist implantation have been tested but 
may still cause neural damage during insertion and can only 
be used for surface arrays [14] [15].  
We 
previously 
researched 
methods 
to 
develop 
implantable arrays made from silicon that can record signals 
from areas that are 6.5mm deep in the brain [16] [17]. 
Considerable progress in the design and fabrication of 
elongated silicon probes that can reach depths in the brain 
required for our applications were made. Silicon probes were 
reinforced probes with metallic structures making them more 
stable [10]. The rest of the paper is structured as follows: 
Section 2 details the fabrication process of the proposed 
probes. In section 3, the characterization and testing of the 
neural probes are presented. Section 4 is the conclusion 
where a summary of the work, main challenges, lessons 
learned, and future work are presented.  
II. 
MICROFABRICATION PROCESS 
The microfabrication process for the non-porous probe 
array has been described in detail in our previous publication 
[17]. In the current work, the microfabrication process 
follows similar steps at the beginning to form the probe array 
structure. During the end of the process, we perform 
additional processing to obtain porous probes. In brief, the 
microfabrication process begins with dicing a 50 µm thick 4” 
diameter double side polished silicon wafer (boron doped, 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

resistivity of 20 ohm-cm and <100> oriented) into small 
square pieces by using a dicing saw. 
Metal layers of titanium (adhesion layer, 500 nm thick) 
and gold (conducting layer, 750 nm thick) are then deposited 
by sputtering process on the silicon wafer, as depicted in 
Figure 
1(a). 
The 
gold 
and 
titanium 
layers 
are 
photolithographically patterned and wet etched, with 
solutions of 1:2:10 I2:KI:H2O and 20:1:1 H2O:HF:H2O2, 
respectively, to define the recording pads, interconnects 
between the recording sites, and bonding pads as illustrated, 
in Figure 1(b). The silicon substrate was then patterned using 
photolithography and etched using isotropic xenon difluoride 
(XeF2) dry etching system to form the probe structures, as 
illustrated in Figure 1(c).  
 
 
Figure 1. Schematic illustration of the steps involved in the fabrication 
process of the neural probe array (The Figure is not to scale). 
       
      The photoresist mask used in the previous step is 
removed and the silicon probe array is exposed etched using 
isotropic XeF2 dry etching system to form porous surfaces 
on the probe array. The formation of porous silicon using 
XeF2 dry etching system is described in our previous 
publications [18]-[20]. A 2µm thick layer of parylene-C, a 
biocompatible material widely used for coating a wide 
variety of implantable biomedical devices, such as 
pacemakers and silicon [21] and metal-wire neural probes 
[3], is conformably deposited, at room temperature using a 
Chemical Vapor Deposition (CVD) system, on the top side 
of the probe. It is mainly used to insulate the interconnects 
between the recording sites and bonding pads. Openings to 
expose the recording sites (used to measure the neural 
electrical activities) and the bonding pads (for wire-bonding 
to an external Printed Circuit Board (PCB) for read-out) 
were defined with photolithography. The exposed parylene-
C is etched with oxygen Plasma Ashing System (PVA TePla 
Inc., Model: 200).   
 
       Figure 2(a) is a close-up view of the probe clearly 
showing the chisel-shaped tip, the titanium-gold recording 
site, and interconnects. Figure 2(b) is a magnified top view 
of the base of the probe showing the bonding pads used to 
connect the recording sites to external circuitry. 
 
 
Figure 2. Images of the fabricated porous neural probe array. (a) Close-up 
image of the probe probes with recording sites; (b) Bonding pads. 
 
      The recording probe impedance is critical in the design 
of neural probes and is dominated by the size of the 
recording probe site. 
 
 
Figure 3. Impedance of the recording sites at 1 KHz. 
 
The values of the impedance of the recording sites are 
obtained by recording the electric current while submerging 
the neural probes in saline solution and injecting current 
through them. Figure 3 shows the measured impedance for 
the twelve recording sites forming the current neural probe 
at 1 kHz and was found to be approximately 500 kΩ, a 
suitable impedance to record both single neuron activity and 
Local Field Potentials (LFPs) [3]. 
III. 
TESTING AND RESULTS 
The developed neural probe was tested in the barrel 
cortex of a rat. All procedures were approved by the McGill 
University Animal Care Committee on May 18, 2010 and 
were also in compliance with the guidelines of the Canadian 
Council on Animal Care. The protocol number is 5314. A 
Sprague–Dawley rat was handled for several days before the 
surgery in order to accustom it to handling by the 
investigators. We tested the probe array in the barrel cortex 
of a rat using a procedure described previously in [3]. Our 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

target was subcortical nuclei. The probe was centered at 3 
mm lateral and 2 mm anterior of the bregma and lowered 
100-200-micron steps to a depth of 5 mm.  The dura of the 
rat was not dissected prior to silicon probe insertion. A thin 
silver wire was placed under the skin and attached to a screw 
in the skull for use as an additional ground.  
Spiking activity was recorded using a multi-channel 
acquisition processor (MAP, Plexon Inc., Dallas, TX, USA) 
where single units were isolated online using time–voltage 
windows and their timing and spike waveforms stored on 
computer. 
 
Figure 4. Neural recordings from six recording sites from the developed 
neural probe array. 
 
Figure 4 shows recordings from one recording site of the 
developed neural probe array. Action potential waveforms 
from multiple neurons are visible in the signal. Multiple 
implantations are planned to gauge longevity of recordings. 
The rat was given pain, anti-inflammatory and antibiotic 
medication, as directed by our protocol and the McGill 
veterinarian. The rat was allowed to recover for at least 1 
week before recordings were performed. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The goal of the work reported here is to prove the 
functionality of the developed neural probe in accurately 
recording 
neural 
activity. 
We 
described 
a 
novel 
methodology to fabricate elongated multi-site neural 
microprobes. The probes were inserted through the pia and 
cortex of live rats to test their penetration ability. Results 
show a full insertion of the probes was successful without 
any bending, buckling, or breakage. Spiking activity was 
recorded simultaneously from the probes. The greatest 
challenge facing the use of neural probes is the resultant 
tissue response to the neural injury which effects the long-
term functioning of the implanted neural probe. Future work 
will focus on improving the biocompatibility of these 
probes.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We are grateful for the financial support given by Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of 
Canada, Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR), 
and the Canada Research Chair program. We would like to 
acknowledge the assistance of the McGill’s Nanotools and 
Microfabrication Laboratory in preparing the described 
neural microprobe samples. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. A. Andersen, E. J. Hwang, and G. H. Mulliken, "Cognitive 
Neural Prosthetics," Annual Review of Psychology, vol. 61, 
pp. 169-190, 2010. 
[2] J. Bartels, et al., "Neurotrophic electrode: Method of 
assembly and implantation into human motor speech cortex," 
Journal of Neuroscience Methods, vol. 174, pp. 168-176, 
9/30/ 2008. 
[3] A. W. Bridges, et al., "Chronic inflammatory responses to 
microgel-based implant coatings," J Biomed Mater Res A, vol. 
94, pp. 252-8, Jul 2010. 
[4] D. P. O. Brien, T. R. Nichols, and M. G. Allen, "Flexible 
microelectrode arrays with integrated insertion devices," in 
Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, 2001. MEMS 2001. The 
14th IEEE International Conference on, 2001, pp. 216-219. 
[5] P. K. Campbell, K. E. Jones, R. J. Huber, K. W. Horch, and 
R. A. Normann, "A silicon-based, three-dimensional neural 
interface: manufacturing processes for an intracortical 
electrode array," IEEE Trans Biomed Eng, vol. 38, pp. 758-
68, 1991. 
[6] M. C. K. Cheung, P. J. R. Roche, M. Hajj-Hassan, A. G. Kirk, 
Z. T. Mi, and V. P. Chodavarapu, "Controlling optical 
properties and surface morphology of dry etched porous 
silicon," Journal of Nanophotonics, vol. 5, May 13, 2011. 
[7] K. L. Drake, K. D. Wise, J. Farraye, D. J. Anderson, and S. L. 
Bement, "Performance of Planar Multisite Microprobes in 
Recording Extracellular Single-Unit Intracortical Activity," 
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 35, pp. 
719-732, Sep 1988. 
[8] M. Hajj-Hassan, M. Cheung, and V. Chodavarapu, "Dry etch 
fabrication of porous silicon using xenon difluoride," Micro & 
Nano Letters, vol. 5, pp. 63-69, Apr 2010. 
[9] M. Hajj-Hassan, M. C. Cheung, and V. P. Chodavarapu, 
"Ultra-thin porous silicon membranes fabricated using dry 
etching," Micro & Nano Letters, vol. 6, pp. 226-228, Apr 
2011. 
[10] M. Hajj-Hassan, V. Chodavarapu, and S. Musallam, 
"NeuroMEMS: Neural Probe Microtechnologies," Sensors, 
vol. 8, pp. 6704-6726, Oct 2008. 
[11] M. Hajj-Hassan, V. Chodavarapu, and S. Musallam, 
"Reinforced silicon neural microelectrode array fabricated 
using a commercial MEMS process," Journal of Micro-
Nanolithography Mems and Moems, vol. 8, p. 033011, Jul-
Sep 2009. 
[12] M. Hajj-Hassan, V. P. Chodavarapu, and S. Musallam, 
"Microfabrication of ultra-long reinforced silicon neural 
electrodes," Micro & Nano Letters, vol. 4, pp. 53-58, Mar 
2009. 
[13] M. Hajj-Hassan, M. Khayyat-Kholghi, H. F. Wang, V. 
Chodavarapu, and J. E. Henderson, "Response of murine bone 
marrow-derived mesenchymal stromal cells to dry-etched 
porous silicon scaffolds," Journal of Biomedical Materials 
Research Part A, vol. 99a, pp. 269-274, Nov 2011. 
[14] N. G. Hatsopoulos and J. P. Donoghue, "The science of neural 
interface systems," Annu Rev Neurosci, vol. 32, pp. 249-66, 
2009. 
[15] W. He, G. C. McConnell, T. M. Schneider, and R. V. 
Bellamkonda, "A novel anti-inflammatory surface for neural 
electrodes," Advanced Materials, vol. 19, pp. 3529-3533, Nov 
5 2007. 
[16] J. F. Hetke, D. J. Anderson, and K. D. Wise, "Design ranges 
for silicon multichannel neural probes," Proceedings of the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

18th 
Annual 
International Conference 
of 
the 
IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Vol 18, Pts 1-5, 
vol. 18, pp. 266-267, 1997. 
[17] B. Howell and W. M. Grill, "4 - Design of electrodes for 
stimulation and recording A2 - Kilgore, Kevin," in 
Implantable Neuroprostheses for Restoring Function, ed: 
Woodhead Publishing, 2015, pp. 59-93. 
[18] C. H. Thompson, M. J. Zoratti, N. B. Langhals, and E. K. 
Purcell, "Regenerative Electrode Interfaces for Neural 
Prostheses," Tissue Engineering Part B-Reviews, vol. 22, pp. 
125-135, Apr 1 2016. 
[19] J. N. Turner, W. Shain, D. H. Szarowski, M. Andersen, S. 
Martins, M. Isaacson, et al., "Cerebral astrocyte response to 
micromachined silicon implants," Exp Neurol, vol. 156, pp. 
33-49, Mar 1999. 
[20] R. 
Wadhwa, 
C. 
F. 
Lagenaur, 
and 
X. 
T. 
Cui, 
"Electrochemically controlled release of dexamethasone from 
conducting polymer polypyrrole coated electrode," J Control 
Release, vol. 110, pp. 531-41, Feb 21 2006. 
[21] J. C. Williams, R. L. Rennaker, and D. R. Kipke, "Stability of 
chronic multichannel neural recordings: Implications for a 
long-term neural interface," Neurocomputing, vol. 26-7, pp. 
1069-1076, Jun 1999. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

