Designing the Parents-to-Infant Bonding Experience in the NICU 
 
Sibrecht Bouwstra, Wei Chen,  
Loe Feijs 
Department of Industrial Design  
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
{s.bouwstra, w.chen, 
l.m.g.feijs}@tue.nl 
 
Sidarto Bambang Oetomo 
 
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
Máxima Medical Center  
Veldhoven, the Netherlands 
s.bambangoetomo@mmc.nl  
 
 
Willeke van der Linden,  
Wijnand IJsselstein 
Industrial Engineering and Innovation Science 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
w.m.j.h.v.d.linden@student.tue.nl, 
w.a.ijsselsteijn@tue.nl
Abstract— This paper describes the research work on the 
search for design opportunities through explorative interviews 
within the case study ‘designing the parent-to-infant bonding 
experience’. In the complete case study we explore how to 
design for support of such a complex, flexible, individualized 
and difficult-to-measure process as bonding. Based on a prior 
literature review, a theoretical design framework was 
constructed, focusing on experience design as the most suitable 
design approach. In this paper we report on a set of in-depth 
interviews conducted to further elucidate parents' experience 
of bonding during their time at the Neonatal Intensive Care 
Unit (NICU). These experiences are structured in the form of 
experience flows and used in a creative clustering session to 
identify design opportunities and as design inspiration. The 
three resulting opportunities are: (I) specific monitor design 
for parents as a means to get to know their child, (II) 
supporting a meaningful and active contribution while sitting 
next 
to 
the 
incubator 
and 
(III) 
supporting 
the 
acknowledgement of the difference the baby knows between 
parents and medical staff. Furthermore, we share the lessons 
learnt applying the design method of experience design to the 
case of parent-to-infant bonding. 
 
Keywords-experience design; parent-to-infant bonding; case 
study; disruptive design process; experience flows. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Bonding between parents and babies admitted to the 
NICU is important for the well-being of both. In practice, 
the development of the bond is however hampered by 
factors introduced in case of a premature birth: separation, 
the baby’s fragile health and parents having to rely on 
medical professionals to take care of their premature infant. 
In the collaboration between the department of Industrial 
Design at the Eindhoven University of Technology and the 
NICU at the Máxima Medical Center Veldhoven, one of the 
goals is to shift from a medical focus in the NICU, to 
patterns where the experiences from the user’s perspective 
become central. The topics of bonding and comfort are of 
particular interest. Designing for an improved bonding 
experience between parents and prematurely born babies, is 
a typical design case involving a ‘disruptive design process’ 
[1]. The design process is disruptive due to the fact that we 
are designing for a goal that is ill-defined, in this case 
‘bonding’, and the designed product/service’s impact cannot 
be measured in a straightforward manner yet. Additionally, 
the user group and test environment require consideration to 
avoid extra stress while gathering data and introducing 
interventions. The NICU forms the Experiential Design 
Landscape for this case study [1]. In the complete case study, 
we explore how to design for parent-to-infant bonding and 
how to cope with the uncertainties in the disruptive design 
process: ‘Which design strategies can overcome the 
challenges in the disruptive design process involved when 
designing for improved social connectedness?’. Compared 
to existing designs which support parent-infant bonding in 
the NICU in varying ways [2-5], this case study offers the 
opportunity to design a product/service specifically to 
impact bonding, starting the design process with this goal in 
mind. In this paper, we describe the search for the design 
opportunities and inspiration: how do parent experience 
bonding in the NICU and what kind of design intervention(s) 
could effectively support this?  
 
 
Figure 1.  Theoretical Design Framework for Bonding [2]. 
The first step in the case study was a literature review [2] 
resulting in a design framework for bonding including a 
definition, a list of existing measurement tools for bonding, 
the selection of a design approach and a confined design 
space. In Figure 1 the design framework, which combines 
findings from a variety of sources [6-11] and conversations 
with parents in the NICU, is shown. The circular Section (a) 
illustrates that bonding is a ‘feeling state’, partially 
expressed in behavior, which evolves influenced by pre-
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

conditions (such as responsiveness, privacy, stress, distance 
to hospital, interaction with medical staff). The timeline in 
Section (b) shows the time span of experiences involved. In 
Section (c), the two directions of bonding are shown and the 
physical and psychological elements involved. Summarized, 
bonding is defined as a feeling state of ‘love’ which “grows 
with repeated (initially physically close) reciprocal 
pleasurable experiences” [2]. Although the process of 
bonding is complex, flexible and highly individualized, the 
determinants essential for the bonding experience described 
in the definition above, appear to apply to all parent-infant 
dyads. Likely, some pre-conditions (such as comfort, 
atmosphere in the room and approachability of the baby 
with 
technology 
around) 
indirectly 
impact 
these 
determinants required for the experience, others more 
directly. We assume the following: pre-conditions -> 
experience -> bonding -> development infant. 
Previously, we proposed to design for the ‘experience’ 
[12, 13] because it is not one single determinant that 
guarantees bonding, but it is a highly complex multi-modal 
combination of pre-conditions impacting the feeling over 
time. The pre-conditions that set the stage for the bonding 
experience are the things we can change and design for. 
Considering that bonding is affected by experiences over a 
life-time, we limited the design space to the period of 
hospital admission. The bonding experience within a 
defined time span and location can be more easily measured, 
compared to the actual level of bonding. We chose to design 
for the experience as perceived by the parents, which is 
measurable through self-report and behavioral studies. 
For the design process, we previously proposed the 
‘Experience Design Method’ as published by Philips [14, 15] 
suitable for application in the medical field. This process 
guides the gathering of design input and design for, or 
measure of the complete experience, widening the scope 
beyond one usability aspect, resulting in rich information. 
This approach can help in finding under which pre-
condition the experience of bonding flourishes. The 
experience includes the patient’s personal view, the effect of 
the environment, the encounters with medical staff and the 
flow of experiences before and after use of the 
product/service. The core of experience design is the 
inquiring of user experience and the creation of persona/ 
experience flow-charts. 
Based on the design framework and selected approach 
resulting from the first step, the second step is gathering the 
user’s experiences, creating experience flows and analyzing 
the data. In this paper, we gather the bonding experiences 
and distill the design opportunities, which could be expected 
to have a large impact on the experience of bonding. 
Practical outcomes, such as design guidelines are shared, as 
well as reflection on this phase of the design process. 
II. 
DESIGN APPROACH 
The design process (Figure 1) for the complete case study 
is fairly traditional (literature search, gathering user design  
 
Figure 2.  Schematic overview of design approach 
input, design phase 1, gathering stakeholder’s feedback, 
design phase 2 and a validation). The choice in method for 
collecting user data depends on what is suitable a specific 
case study. As part of this case study, we chose to conduct 
interviews with parents about their experiences and feelings 
towards their infant related to the environment, while the 
experience is fresh in their mind. Interviews were 
transcribed and coded, forming the basis for the experience 
flows. Initially, personas based on the interviews would be 
created in order to design for a type of parent. However, as 
explained in the discussion, a creative clustering session was 
found to be more suitable. 
A. Interview design 
Five mothers (together with the fathers) were interviewed 
about their bonding experiences during the time their child 
was admitted. Three of the interviews have been held by a 
designer and two by a social scientist. The interviews were 
semi-structured, in order to give the parents room to freely 
introduce themes relating to bonding, and on the other hand 
to have topics on hand to maintain the interview flowing. In 
all interviews the parents were asked to describe their 
experience of bonding along the journey through the 
hospital; from giving birth, to being in the NICU/High Care 
for several weeks. The questions asked were about how the 
parents felt about the atmosphere, the interaction with the 
medical staff, first impressions, what they did, and how it 
influenced the way they felt towards their child. We asked 
what supported and what held them back in different stages 
and places. Examples of questions asked: “How would you 
describe the bond with [name]?”, “What has strengthened 
the feeling of the bond?”, “Was there something holding 
you back from entering the NICU?”, “What was a good 
experience you had in the NICU?” and “Did you perform 
care tasks? If so, which care tasks?”. The interviews lasted 
from 45 minutes to 1.5 hour and took place in the family 
room in the Máxima Medical Center, Veldhoven, in the 
Netherlands. The interviews were audio recorded, literally 
transcribed and names and places were replaced. 
B. Participants 
The parents included in the study had one or more 
babies admitted to the NICU or High Care department. The 
criteria for selecting the participants were that the baby was 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in stable health at the time of the interview and the parents 
had spend a few weeks in the NICU to be acquainted to the 
rhythm. In order to gain a broad picture, the parents differed 
in whether they were first time parents, were a single parent, 
stayed in the Ronald McDonalds house or their child had 
temporarily been transferred to a specialized hospital. The 
experiences of both mothers and fathers were included 
because the study is of an explorative, inspirational nature 
with a low number of participants. Four participants were 
native Dutch speaking and one participant was non-native 
English speaking. The quotes have been analyzed in their 
original spoken language. 
C. Experience flows 
In the experience flows, the interviews are presented with 
the goal of providing an overview of how the parents’ 
feelings towards their child developed throughout the 
medical journey. In order to create the experience flows, 
distillation of factual data about places and procedures, and 
quotes about bonding experiences, from the transcript was 
necessarily. The transcripts were color coded, as in Figure 3. 
Factual data was marked yellow (regular black text). Literal 
experience quotes were marked blue (bold black text). 
 
Figure 3.  Coding transcripts anonymous sample. 
 
Figure 4.  Experience flow anonymous sample 
Parents repeated certain ideas within an interview, 
therefore in order to maintain the manageability of the data, 
the most representative quote was selected and the repetition 
marked in gray (regular white text). This ensured the entire 
transcript was considered. Since the questions were open, 
parts about the interviews about non-related topics were left 
unmarked, such as medical details about the baby or the 
delivery. In Figure 4 the elements for the experience flows 
drawn in CorelDRAW are shown. It contains the institutes, 
departments and rooms, with the journey as a yellow line 
running through. Along the journey the selected experience   
quotes are positioned in text balloons. 
D. Creative clustering session 
An open coding clustering session was held to start the 
discussion about how parents experience bonding, what the 
design implications are and point out design opportunities. 
The session was held with another designer and a computer 
engineer, both new to the topic of bonding, in order to gain 
a fresh view and stimulate creativity. In a span of a few 
hours the designers created clusters on post-its until all the 
quotes could be placed. The discussions were documented. 
Afterwards, the clusters were organized in more detailed 
clusters of which the conclusions are drawn. The five 
experience flows together contained too many quotes for 
clustering, namely 253. Therefore, the quotes most relevant 
to bonding feelings or activities were selected, which 
brought the number down to 144. The quotes were given a 
color specific for the interview, in order to be able to 
differentiate the original interviews when they were mixed 
in clustering.  
III. 
RESULTS 
The coding of the interviews resulted in five experience 
flows, with a variation of medical journeys including 
contextual facts, activities and feelings related to bonding. 
The clustering exercise resulted in an extensive report 
containing conclusions for each cluster of quotes. Here the 
summary is presented in themes, each conclusion 
accompanied with one representative quote. 
Separation after birth - Several mothers felt empty 
seeing the baby only shortly directly after birth. They wish 
to be with their child as soon as possible, but realize that 
medical care for themselves and the baby is required which 
they don’t want to disturb. “At the time it was just important 
to deliver her and connect her as quickly as possible to all 
contraptions”, “So the period directly afterwards was a 
little strange. Perhaps also a little bit empty”.  
NICU environment - Parents’ are overwhelmed during 
the first impression of the NICU. They are attracted by a 
homely design, however feel it is not appropriate for a 
medical environment. “It all went so fast and I actually 
can’t remember it all too well”, ”The moment I entered I 
definitely noticed it is only for premature babies”, “You 
know that he requires a lot of support and that just does not 
go well with a blue crib with a bell on it”.  
Baby’s fragile health - Parents report that in the 
beginning they struggle with the fear of becoming attached 
to the child that they might lose. For the interviewed parents 
this fear diminished over time as the baby’s health stabilized. 
In time they could participate more and the baby became 
more responsive. “I went through a lot of emotions, not 
wanting to get too attached to the child, certainly during the 
first week, weeks, I think. Because, well, you don’t know 
how long he will be around”, “…earlier he was connected 
to the CPAP [continuous positive airway pressure], and then 
you do require some help with all these tubes. Now he is 
only connected to the lowflow and we can do it ourselves”, 
“She is getting stronger and stronger. You develop a 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stronger connection. We can do more with her, and she 
responds more and more.”. In case of a premature birth it 
can be too overwhelming being confronted with the baby’s 
fragile health. Instead of being on top of everything, parents 
sometimes ‘chose’ trust in the care provided. Or, sometimes, 
parents observe or participate as much as possible, thereby 
obtaining a sense of control. Parents react differently to live-
stream of information. There is a large difference between 
whether the news is positive and whether the parents are in a 
position to act on it or not. “I am almost more at ease while 
I am there, observing what is happening. Opposed to while 
being away and having to maintain faith”, [About 
witnessing the fragile moments] “it makes you feel insecure 
and wonder ‘Oh, will he pull through?”, “You record the 
good times on film”, “therefore the videos that you have are 
fun to watch”, “That you can see her [on a live-stream], 
that is much more intense. It makes me realize I can’t be 
with her 24 hours a day”, [about a NICU webcam] “So let’s 
say maybe if I was at home, and I could see she is awake, I 
could rush here and maybe we could play together”, [about 
monitor alarms] “You can only review the past hour or so”, 
“but it does give you the feeling that you are updated on 
what happened during your absence”.  
Participation in care - Mothers expressed their wish to 
participate in care. It strengthens their parental role. Yet 
with the fragile health of the baby they feel insecure, 
especially in the beginning. If the staff can do a nonmedical 
task such as changing diapers faster or better, they rather 
give it out of hand. “then you actually have the feeling that 
there is something that you can do. [When she is excluded, 
she feels] “Less like a mother”, “it is not that you can just 
go ahead and pick her up, and hold her to your chest. No, 
there is always a preceding action. You have to notify them 
how it is going, or ask if we can do this?”. A premature 
baby requires much rest, which often leaves the parent 
sitting next to the incubator. Parents want to actively 
contribute, have a reason to be there. They talk and observe, 
bring personal items such as a scent cloth or toy, read 
something, write in a journal or take a nap. “The fact that 
you may not touch him, that was a bitter pill to swallow”, 
“’Well enjoy’, ‘Oh’, I contemplated, ‘Enjoy what?’, I am 
lying here staring at a box”, “Of course there isn’t all that 
much you can do next to the incubator. And yet there is. 
Having the feeling, of yes, I do love you, I am there for you. 
That. And I think that applies the other way around as well”, 
“then I just look at her for a moment and continue reading. 
Then I do get the feeling of being there”, “You really want 
to take the pain away from the little guy”, “You feel so 
helpless, powerless”. 
Getting to know each other - Parents learn along the 
way to interpret the signs of the baby, which differ from a 
full term baby. They use the monitoring data to get to know 
their child. They compare the monitoring data to their 
observations for confirmation. “You can see whether he is 
comfortable or not. However, the first days you are not so 
aware of all these things. It comes naturally with Kangaroo 
care and caring for him. Then you just start to notice 
things”, ”Sometimes you mix it in your head”, “And you do 
look at her, but look for confirmation in the monitor as 
well”, “Am I right? Or do I know that already? Or am I not 
seeing it correctly now”. Parents are insecure about whether 
their child responds differently to them than to the medical 
staff. Three mothers mentioned that the baby recognizes 
them, but others strongly doubt it. Explanation about how 
the baby interacts and behaves supports parents. They notice 
that the child looks for them when hearing their voice. It 
motivates parents when they notice that they can calm their 
child. “are you responding to me, or do you also do that 
when a random nurse opens the door?”, “It is purely his 
eyes, the fact that he opens them when I am speaking to him. 
And I can see he does not do that with everyone. You do 
notice that”, “I don’t feel that she, when I am sitting next to 
her, is thinking ‘Oh, that’s my mother again’, “It is very 
strange that you… although you don’t know him at all. I am 
here twice a day, I have never had him with me for 8 hours, 
but these nurses, they are in his presence the entire day”, 
“That give me something to hold onto, ‘Oh, so when she 
does this, she may actually recognize me’”, “when she does 
this with her eyes and they are quite capable of making a 
connection”, “Kangaroo Care is important. If you notice 
that he is calming down, his breathing improves et cetera,  
then that feels very good. Then you really want to pull him 
close. It has a positive effect”. Kangaroo care physical 
contact is experienced as very positive. It has however 
limitations, such as not seeing the baby’s face, not being 
able to smell or give a kiss. “It is a special feeling. However 
you do miss lifting your child, or holding her pleasantly 
against your shoulder. Or… yes you hold her, but that is 
all”, “I had him on my arm”, “and thought ‘wow’”, “’Oh, 
my baby!!. Then I was studying him so intently, when I had 
him really right in front of me”.  
Monitor system - All parents look at the monitor, but 
with different intensity. It is not sure whether parents always 
interpret the data correctly. The monitoring requires 
professional interpretation and does not predict the future. 
The sensors of the monitoring system are in first instance 
restraining parents from interacting, however with support 
of the medical staff this is overcome. The fragile health of 
the baby has the main impact. “At some point, you are just 
sitting there [pretending to watch the monitor] even though 
your child is lying over there”, “I would for example see his 
saturation drop, and would think: ‘Oh, there he goes. How 
often would he do that a day, and how harmful would that 
be and…”, “I think that I am a bit clumsy, but that is also 
caused by maneuvering your hands through these holes”, 
“And in addition there are all these wires, which tend to 
intimidate you a bit.”, “Very small. Really. Very small. So 
sometimes and I must be frank, when I come here and I look 
at my baby and then I begin to cry”.  
Spending time in the NICU - Parents spend different 
amounts of time next to the incubator. If the parents can 
participate in care or perform Kangaroo care they tend to 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

stay longer. Also when they arrive at the right moment. 
Planning (with the medical staff) is important. “I reckon 
that I sit there each day for 6 hours watching her”, “Then 
you just lie on your bed and you can look at him. That’s all 
fine, but after fifteen minutes or half an hour, you have seen 
enough”, “And you are aware that he mostly benefits from 
rest, rest and more rest”, “Now it easily happens that you 
are applying Kangaroo-care for one and a half hours. And 
then there is care before and after. At first you were only 
sitting in front of the incubator, and as a result your stay is 
shorter”, “sometimes, lucky, I try to be in time”, “Maybe 
she is then awake”, “Here you arrive at a convenient time 
and often his diaper has been changed already. Or 
sometimes you are in luck that you arrive on time and can 
do it together”. For the parents days are filled with being at 
the NICU, traveling back and forth, pumping breast milk 
every 3 hours, caring for the children, house, eating, 
working and sleeping. A parent that spends much time at the 
NICU might benefit from more relaxation. Especially the 
days after birth, the mother needs to focus on her own 
recovery. Parents that spend little time, might benefit from 
being supported to stay longer. Some parents go home with 
a good feeling and are able to rest. Other parents worry and 
call in often. [single mom] “I am with another child, really I 
try to manage the time to come here also”, “You are 
recovering from a caesarian and everyone tells you: ‘Make 
sure you get some rest as well. Because once you have your 
child at home, you will also want to be a mother that can 
care”, “I am not going home with the idea of all the things 
that might happen. I mean, I do trust everything here”, 
[recommended by a nurse] “It is so pleasant. Just being at 
home with your child and husband…. I don’t have to go to 
my child, because I know he is in the right place”, “If you 
call, you are again afraid of what they might say. You would 
almost consider not to call. But then you cannot sleep, so 
that does not work either”, “It was also not pleasant when I 
was not around, when I was at home. I felt guilty and 
wanted to be there”, “I think of her every day, every minute, 
every hour” 
Trust in care provided - Staying updated is of main 
concern to the parents. Parents notice the difference in 
communication styles between hospitals when they are 
(temporarily) 
transferred. 
If 
the 
communication 
is 
inadequate, parents can start to worry at home. Relying on 
the care provided is sometimes difficult. Most parents put 
their faith into it or say they simply have to and meanwhile 
keep a close eye on things. “I should know what is going on 
with my daughter”, “Every time that you’re there, they 
would approach you and tell you about things that have 
happened and how he was doing”, “You would spot a note 
and then you would think: ‘Hey, this says something about 
morphine’. That was not exactly shared with me, so in turn 
you would ask ‘Did he receive morphine’, and only then 
they would explain”, “Yes, and when I would lay in bed at 
night I would think ‘Yes it went well today’, but yes, did it 
really go as well as they said it did?”, “Would they be 
doing something with him?”, [about a nurse of which the 
mother feels she does not know her child well enough] “If I 
wouldn’t be here now, you would consider this as normal”, 
“Here they are the experience experts really, here are the 
people who know about what could happen to your child”.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The interviews showed the complexity of how the feeling 
of bonding develops over time, and the highly intertwined 
processes affecting parents in an individualized way. 
Parents expressed contrasting thoughts about needs, e.g., 
that some parents would want to see their child live via a 
webcam at home, and others would find it confronting to be 
faced with the fact that they are away from the child at that 
moment. These contractions, also within individuals, result 
in a fine line to walk when designing an intervention. The 
interviews also show that pre-conditions affect each other: 
when e.g. the mother has comfort, the baby relaxes in turn, 
resulting in higher responsiveness when the baby is in an 
alert awake state. The design opportunities are therefore tied 
closely together; as soon as a concept emerges, it is easy to 
imagine how another opportunity is affected as well. It is 
unpredictable which pre-conditions will have the largest 
impact on the experience of bonding, because it is such a 
complex individualized process. The proposed opportunities 
therefore are not a guarantee, and user tests with prototypes 
are required in order to gain insight into the actual effect of 
the intervention. 
A. Design oppertunities 
We identified the following design opportunities: 
1.  Health info is being used to get to know the baby: do 
parents interpret correctly? 
2.  Parents sitting next to the incubator wanting to 
contribute while the baby needs to rest. 
3.  During Kangaroo care not being able to really see or 
interact as parents would ‘normally’ do. 
4.  Helping parents to feeling more secure about the baby’s 
ability to distinguish between parent and medical staff. 
5.  Health info; the balance between wanting to know 
everything all the time, and resting with peace of mind. 
6.  Planning and being ‘in luck’ of arriving at the right 
moment for care tasks or interaction. 
7.  Care info: wanting to know everything that was done 
with baby. Trust in care while away. 
8.  Recording the good moments to re-live at home. 
9.  Wanting to see and be with the baby right after birth.  
 
The three design directions selected as the most 
promising to proceed the design phase 1 with are (I) 
‘specific monitor design for parents as a means to get to 
know their child’, (II) ‘supporting a meaningful and active 
contribution while sitting next to the incubator’ and (III) 
‘supporting the acknowledgement of the difference the baby 
knows between parents and medical’. These three 
opportunities are well represented in the interviews and are 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

likely to affect the experience early on, right from hospital 
admission. Furthermore, they aim for ‘co-located’ bonding, 
which has not been addressed much previously.  
B. Design guidelines for bonding experience 
Based on the literature research, the experience flows 
and clustering sessions, the following design guidelines 
were formulized: 
1.  The intervention must positively affect the experience of 
bonding under which the bond between parents and 
infants grows: “Repeated (initially physically close) 
reciprocal pleasurable experiences”. 
2.  The intervention may not obtrusive; parents must have 
the option to use (certain functions within) the 
intervention. (a) The amount of information the parents 
receive about their child’s health status must be 
adjustable according to their personal needs. (b) The 
privacy settings must be adjustable to the parent’ 
personal needs with privacy ensured in all settings. 
3.  The intervention may not restrict the parent’ autonomy, 
but rather support a higher level of autonomy. 
4.  The intervention must be safe.  
5.  The intervention may not introduce opportunities that 
negatively affect bonding, such as stimulating the 
parents spending less time at the NICU with their child. 
6.  The intervention may not relay on intensive instruction 
or support by the medical staff, unless it is saving time 
by optimizing time consuming in another tasks. 
7.  The intervention may not cause any discomfort for the 
baby, which conflicts with the goal of improving the 
developmental outcome by reducing stress. 
8.  The intervention may not stimulate the parents to wake 
the baby or provide stress when he or she needs to rest. 
9.  It is preferable that the parent’ focus is pointed towards 
the baby than away. 
10. It is preferable that the intervention stimulates natural 
interaction between parent and child. 
C. Benefits and challenges of experience design 
Conducting interviews while the parents are in the 
middle of the experience, resulted in spontaneous reactions. 
We noticed that the topic of bonding had not been 
considered extensively yet by the parents, because health 
had been of their main concern. The downside introducing 
the heavy topic is that it resulted in emotionally intensive 
interviews. It faced parents with the undesired situation. 
Nurses reported that it lingered with parents, even days after. 
Asking the parents in a later stage likely causes less stress, 
however probably provides more socially desired answers.  
At first the goal was to create personas in order to design 
for a certain ‘type’ of parent. However, five interviews were 
too few in order to build stereotypes. Although in the 
clustering session indeed certain ideas were repeated, ‘sets’ 
of these responses did not repeat in the five interviews. 
The ordering of the data in the form of experience flows 
in this case study did not result in additional insights. 
Perhaps the scope was too large. We do expect that the rich 
experience flows will be useful later on for concept 
scenarios. Once the concepts are there, it is interesting to 
imagine how the intervention would impact the experience 
flows and in which stage. Would these parents use the 
proposed concepts in different ways? The experience flows 
contain the complete story with personal insights in an 
organized way, opposed to the generalized clustered data. 
 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The bonding process between parents and prematurely 
born babies is important for the well-being of both, however 
in practice the process is hampered due to separation, fragile 
health of the baby and parents having to rely on the care by 
medical professionals. Designing for the support of bonding 
experience, raises questions about the definition of bonding, 
how bonding can be effectively supported through design 
and how to measure the impact of such an intervention. In 
the complete case study ‘designing for the parent-to-infant 
bonding experience’ we explore how to design for such a 
complex, flexible, individualized process. In this paper we 
describe the search for inspiring design opportunities that 
are expected to impact the bonding experience, through 
conducting in-depth interviews about bonding experiences 
of parents with a premature baby admitted to the NICU. 
Five interviews resulted in five experience flows and 
thematic conclusions derived from a creative clustering 
session. The interviews illustrate the complexity of how the 
feeling of bonding develops over time, and the highly 
intertwined processes affecting parents in an individualized 
way. We identify three design opportunities and a set of 
design guidelines, which form the inspiration and focus for 
the design process. We conclude that user experience tests 
with prototypes are required in order to gain insight into the 
actual effect of the intervention(s).  
The design case is continued with the development of 
concepts and prototypes. The goal is to create one functional 
prototype of which the effect of the intervention on the 
bonding experience can be measured.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 
Innovation-Oriented Research Programme ‘Integral Product 
Creation and Realization (IOP IPCR)’ of the Netherlands 
Ministry of Economic Affairs, Agriculture and Innovation.  
We thank the medical staff at the MMC for all their 
support and the parents for sharing their stories with us. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  S. H. van Gent, C. J. P. G. Megens, M. M. R. Peeters, C. C. M. 
Hummels. Y. Lu and A. C. Brombacher, "Experiential design 
landscapes as a design tool for market research of disruptive 
intelligent systems," Proc. CADMC 2011, Cambridge, UK, 
Sept. 2011. 
[2] S. Bouwstra, W. Chen, L. M. G. Feijs and S. Bambang Oetomo, 
"A theoretical framework for parent-to-infant bonding design 
at the NICU," Proc. the 25th annual Gravens Conference on 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the Physical and Developmental Environment of the High Risk 
Infant, Clearwater Beach, 2012. 
[3]  M. Croes, S. Bambang Oetomo and L. M. G. Feijs. "Designing 
remote connectedness between parents and their premature 
newly born: a design proposal", in Neonatal Monitoring 
Technologies: Design for Integrated Solutions, W. Chen, S. 
Bambang Oetomo, L. M. G. Feijs, Eds., IGI Global, pp. 386-
413, 2012.  
[4]  H. Willemsen. http://www.babybloom.nl/, 14-09-2012. 
[5]  J. Panagiotidis and A. Lahav, "Simulation of prenatal maternal 
sounds in NICU incubators: a pilot safety and feasibility 
study," Journal of Maternal-Fetal and Neonatal Medicine, vol. 
23, pp. 106- 109, 2010. 
[6]  M. H. Klaus, J. H. Kennel and P. H. Klaus, Bonding, building 
the foundations of Secure Attachment and Independence, 1 ed.: 
Da Capo Press, 1996. 
[7]  K. S. Robson and H. A. Moss, "Patterns and determinants of 
maternal attachment," Journal of pediatrics, vol. 77, pp. 976-
985, 1970. 
[8]  J. Bowlby, "Attachment and loss," Attachment, Basic Books 
New York, vol. 1, 1969. 
[9]  K. Uvnäs-Moberg and M. Petersson, "Oxytocin, a mediator of 
anti stress, well-being, social interaction, growth and healing," 
Z Psychosom Med Psychother, vol. 51, pp. 57-80, 2005. 
[10] M. D. S. Ainsworth, "Object relations, dependency and 
attachment: a theoretical review of the infant-mother 
relationship," Child development, vol. 40, pp. 969-1025, 1969. 
[11] M. M. A. Bialoskurski, C. L. Cox and J. A. Hayes, "The 
nature of attachment in a neonatal intensive care unit," Journal 
of Perinatal & Neonatal Nursing, vol. 13, p 66-77, 1999. 
[12] M. Hassenzahl, Experience Design: technology for all the 
right reasons: Morgan & Claypool, 2010. 
[13] I. McClelland, "'User experience' design a new form of design 
practice takes shape," presented at the CHI '05 extended 
abstracts on Human factors in computing systems, Portland, 
OR, USA, 2005. 
[14] S. Kozlov, L. Rameckers and P. Schots, "People research for 
experience design, Generating great stories - new product 
development," Royal Philips Electronics, 2007. 
[15] L. Parameswaran and J. Raijmakers, "People-focused 
innovation in healthcare, How Philips Design supports 
development of solutions for the ever-changing healthcare 
landscape," Royal Philips Electronics 2010. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

