Personal and Social Communication Services for Health and Lifestyle Monitoring 
 
Jean Bacon1, Jatinder Singh1, Dirk Trossen1, Dana Pavel2, Andreas Bontozoglou2, Nikolaos Vastardis2, Kun Yang2, 
Sarah Pennington3, Sarah Clarke3, Glyn Jones3 
1Computer Lab 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK 
{jean.bacon, jatinder.singh, dirk.trossen}@cl.cam.ac.uk 
2School for Computer Science and Electronic Engineering,  
University of Essex, Colchester, UK 
{dmpave, abodoz, nvasta, kunyang}@essex.ac.uk 
3Thales UK Research and Technology 
Reading, UK 
{sarah.pennington, sarah.clarke, glyn.jones}@uk.thalesgroup.com 
 
Abstract—The focus of the PAL project is to study how future 
requirements for healthcare services impact current and future 
communication infrastructures. Current assisted living scenarios 
work only in restricted environments and are unable to provide 
continuous user support. Systems in this space tend to be closed, 
providing only particular functionality and/or operating on 
specific infrastructure. Our aim is to deploy appropriate 
interface and interaction paradigms, regardless of the underlying 
networking and software technologies, to enable users to achieve 
self-monitoring and self-management of their lifestyle and health. 
We also consider the integration of social and professional 
support networks, while ensuring appropriate access controls. 
This paper details a layered architecture for supporting a diverse 
range of care services. We provide an integration framework to 
demonstrate the practicality of our approach, and present results 
highlighting design considerations for user-centric care systems. 
Keywords-self-monitoring; 
lifestyle; 
healthcare; 
privacy; 
security; communications; networks; middleware 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The number of people living with long-term health 
conditions is growing as people’s lifespans increase, placing a 
heavy burden on healthcare systems and support networks. 
Data from the World Health Organization shows 75% of the 
total population with one chronic condition and 50% with two 
or more conditions [1]. The risk factors for chronic diseases are 
often related to lifestyle choices like smoking, alcohol intake, 
physical inactivity, or poor diet. Lifestyle choices have such an 
influence on health that prevention of disease through self- 
monitoring is becoming increasingly important.  
Self-monitoring systems give people additional knowledge 
to understand the effect that their actions have on their well-
being and support them in making better lifestyle choices. 
Prevention can make a real difference for the low risk category 
of patients, around 70-80% in the UK [1]; with suitable support 
and engagement they can learn how to manage their conditions 
and prevent further deterioration. 
Monitoring 
and 
communications 
technology 
have 
developed to the extent that they are potentially exploitable in 
large-scale, widespread healthcare. At the same time, people 
are becoming increasingly familiar with and accepting of a 
wide range of technologies. The time is right to consider 
technology-assisted lifestyle monitoring to help in detecting 
and preventing chronic diseases.  
Despite technological improvements, we are in danger of 
fragmentation in healthcare provisioning if the current 
approach of developing vertically separated applications 
continues. In other words, solutions tend to operate in “vertical 
silos”. As a consequence, they are typically restricted to a 
single domain, for example, working on a single device or 
within a managed network. Instead, solutions are required that 
operate across domains, be they organisational, networking, or 
even device specific. Open systems solutions must adapt to a 
variety of applications and services, through communication 
and networking layers that operate across domains. Within our 
project, entitled PAL (Personal Assisted Living), we envisage a 
multi-domain system comprising patients at home and outside, 
primary care practices, hospitals, and outsourced services (such 
as X-rays and emergency response teams), where components 
are used and reused to meet the functional requirements across 
the range of care-related applications and services. 
To make such a vision manageable we have started from a 
number of use cases that highlight the requirements motivated 
by the above: (1) Prevention of disease onset or deterioration 
through lifestyle and health monitoring; (2) Integration of 
social and professional networks; (3) Mechanisms for 
information governance; (4) Dynamic coordination of system 
components to realise functional goals; (5) Operation across 
organisational and communication domains. Section II presents 
a lead scenario to exemplify these issues, outlining the main 
challenges for developing a holistic systems solution for 
healthcare provisioning.  
We address these challenges through providing an 
integration framework, so that a range of applications can be 
deployed above a middleware layer under which a variety of 
communications technologies can operate, while supporting 
diverse device technologies. From the perspective of 
information management, our framework supports data 
recording, analysis, retention, usage and audit across the 
boundaries at the application, network and device level. From 
the (patient) users’ perspective, their data is sensitive and 
private and we support the specification and enforcement of 
security policies. Moreover, we envisage the involvement of 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

social and professional networks of carers, particularly as users 
become less able to cope alone. Controlling data access 
becomes more subtle as more users (roles) become involved.  
All of these aspects are realised in the PAL architecture 
presented in Section IV. It is this architecture and the 
presentation of its on-going realisation that is the core 
contribution of this paper. We recognise that the envisioned 
system and its early prototyping in a lifestyle management 
setting is only a first step towards an integrating framework for 
the healthcare application industry. We believe, however, that 
our work can provide useful insights in the relevant areas of 
development. In addition to our integration approach, we also 
outline experiences with certain aspects of a working system 
that we built based on our approach. We outline important 
aspects regarding the system components that we implemented 
and present first results from user experiments. 
We begin with a scenario to highlight the challenges in 
provisioning healthcare systems, and follow with related work. 
Section IV details our architecture, and in Section V we 
describe the realisation of our framework and present results 
illustrating design considerations for user-centric systems.  
II. 
LEAD SCENARIO AND CHALLENGES 
Let us first present our lead scenario in the area of lifestyle 
management. We will use this scenario to highlight the various 
challenges that exist for realising a system-wide solution for 
healthcare provisioning. 
A. Lead scenario 
Oscar is a patient-user who has chronic heart disease and 
needs to pay attention to his wellbeing. His related blood 
pressure issues make him susceptible to fainting. Since he was 
diagnosed, Oscar started using the PAL system to collect 
information about his daily activities, and physiological data 
relevant to his condition. PAL provides Oscar with support 
within a preventative mode as well as a reactive mode. In the 
preventative mode, the system allows Oscar to track his 
wellbeing by interpreting and visualising collected data in 
personalised ways. It also allows Oscar to share certain 
information with his support network (e.g., family, friends or 
healthcare specialists).  In the reactive mode, the system can 
provide emergency support, e.g., during an fainting episode. 
B. Main system challenges 
Self-monitoring is all about information pertaining to an 
individual. We therefore divide the system challenges into the 
dimensions of gathering and providing information throughout 
the system, processing and using the information, as well as 
governing the information according to defined policies.   
When gathering and providing information throughout any 
self-monitoring system, it is important to recognise that 
assisted living data may be collected from a wide variety of 
sources. Multiple types of data may originate from various user 
devices, such as mobile phones, laptops, PCs, body sensors and 
environmental sensors. The information used may include 
location, movement, ECG, heart rate, environmental context 
(e.g., noise levels, temperature, weather, pollen levels, etc.), 
social context, messages, calendar events, and many more. In 
addition, available knowledgebase sources, such as NHS Direct 
[3], could be integrated into the processing step, i.e., gathered 
information is aggregated and interpreted through wider 
community knowledge. Each data source may play a role in 
meeting a number of functional goals, across a range of 
applications; for instance, an ECG sensor may provide 
information relevant to applications for a patient-user when 
exercising, their GP for analysis/diagnostic purposes, and for 
paramedics in dealing with an emergency. The relevance of 
information to applications will vary, depending on the 
circumstances. As described in our lead scenario, we consider 
two usage modes: preventative and reactive. Due to the 
different requirements, the preventative mode focuses more on 
storage, high-level processing, visualisation, and policies for 
sharing and remote access. Given the plethora of information 
being gathered in the preventative usage mode, understanding 
the information is particularly challenging for system users. 
Hence, any visualisation needs to go beyond traditional graph-
based approaches to achieve the awareness that our users need.   
 The reactive mode is mainly concerned with reconfiguring 
data streams at runtime, respecting the various control policies 
as well as the heterogeneity of the underlying infrastructure. 
For the latter aspect, it is particularly important to avoid 
restricting any solution to single domains but rather to work 
over a variety of available communication technologies as they 
happen to be available. This requires that the supporting 
communication infrastructure facilitates information exchange 
between a wide range of data sources and sinks in a dynamic, 
context-aware, and multi-domain manner. For that, knowledge 
of network capabilities, such as availability, link failures, etc., 
is crucial. While this information is not used directly by end 
users, it is important for the provisioning of seamless services, 
for example when users move from indoors to outside or when 
patients move between areas with variable connectivity. 
Clearly, heterogeneity places a heavy burden on any 
application that is directly exposed to these issues. Hence, 
abstracting the communication specifics through a common 
interface is important, aiding the re-use of functional 
components across use cases. The level of abstraction that a 
healthcare application shall be built upon is that of information 
flows that can be controlled in terms of gathering, processing 
and usage, all under a common policy framework that defines 
the security properties of the information flow. Such a policy 
governance framework is important, given the personal nature 
of the information considered in our scenarios. While 
encryption of information is important, governance extends to 
context-aware policies defining access to flows of information 
(even if encrypted), forming appropriate communication 
relations (e.g., between doctors and care personnel), and the 
ability to override standard policy (e.g., in cases of emergency).   
We now present a brief overview of related work before 
outlining our architecture, focusing on information gathering, 
provisioning, processing, presentation and governance.   
III. 
RELATED WORK 
Self-monitoring solutions of different kinds have been well 
studied in academia and corporate research during the past 
years, with areas such as health and telemetry [9][10] being 
well represented within the commercial space. Some examples 
are movement and fall detection systems, such as WristCare 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[11], SenseWear BMS [12], Philips LifeLine [13] and the 
Wellcore Emergency Response System [14], or heart 
monitoring solutions such as t+ blood pressure [15], 
HealthBuddy [16], and CardioNet [17]. For most of the 
existing solutions, data is stored on a remote/central server and 
analysed by professionals; in some cases patients might be able 
to add certain notes, symptoms, and so on, and receive 
feedback from medical staff. Mostly, the systems are integrated 
into a purpose-built device, while mobile phones are merely 
used as an interface device, to input data or to receive alerts.  
With the availability of sensors such as the Alive Heart and 
Activity Monitor [18] that can be connected via Bluetooth to 
recording devices, such as mobiles or laptops, mobile devices 
can also be used for providing self-monitoring solutions. For 
example, MobiHealth provides a suite of physiological data 
recording through mobile phones [19], where various sensors 
can connect to the phone and use it to transmit data to a server. 
As smartphones become increasingly popular, and already 
include sensors such as GPS and accelerometer, fitness and 
assistance applications are appearing (e.g., iFall for Android 
[20], Sports Tracker for Symbian [21], or Endomondo [22]). 
Common to all these related approaches is the purpose-built 
nature of their solutions. What is lacking is a system approach 
that addresses our identified challenges from Section II through 
a coherent and holistic design. The following Section IV 
outlines our contribution to providing such a system solution.  
IV. 
PAL SYSTEM 
A. System Architecture 
The PAL core architecture follows a traditional layered 
structure where the middleware masks details of the underlying 
communications by presenting a communication interface to 
components that run above it. Although such a middleware can 
support applications directly, we have developed an additional 
lifestyle assistant layer capable of providing a higher-level 
interface 
to 
support 
users 
during 
self-monitoring 
in 
preventative mode. Other applications can coexist with the 
lifestyle manager by working directly above the middleware 
layer, so the infrastructure is generally suitable for supporting 
pervasive healthcare environments. For example, during 
reactive mode, external components are coordinated to respond 
to an emergency situation, as later described. 
 
Figure 1. High-level component view of the system. 
 
Figure 1 presents a high-level view of our system. In 
addition to the traditional layered components—the application 
(the lifestyle assistant), middleware and communication 
layers—we highlight the integration of information, its 
structures and its governing policies across all levels, from the 
user level right down to the communication and routing levels. 
Based on this integration framework, we provide in Section V 
an example of a working system that we realised alongside our 
lead scenario of lifestyle management. In addition to the 
realisation of our framework, we also outline first experiences 
that end users had with this system.  
B. Information gathering and provisioning 
In our system, much data is provided by sensors—physical 
(e.g., body or environmental sensors), or virtual (e.g., activity 
information derived from calendars, social interactions, 
application usage)—within a heterogeneous environment (see 
[2][7][7] for more information on gathering capabilities).  
To assist in managing the diversity of sensor-produced 
data, PAL uses a gateway-based design, in which sensing 
gateways encapsulate the specifics of the particular data to be 
integrated, such as the implementation of a wireless sensing 
protocol, and/or access to a particular database or converting 
low-level sensor data into a format that can be understood by 
other components in the system. A gateway is therefore 
responsible for a first level of filtering and abstraction of 
information. In practice, the scope of each gateway will depend 
on the particular sensors involved: some gateways might 
operate to manage, aggregate and transmit the data of a number 
of different sensors and/or sensor networks, while others may 
be comparatively lightweight, e.g., tied to a particular sensor, 
such that it appears as though the sensor directly interacts with 
other components in the system. Once data has been gathered 
from various sources, information is provisioned for processing 
and presentation. Data must flow to a range of different 
applications and components in order to achieve particular 
functional goals. Since healthcare is a highly data-driven 
environment, we provision information as events that are 
relevant to other components. An event can encapsulate health-
related information, including observations such as sensor 
readings, doctors' notes or a perceived emergency; as well as 
actions, such as the press of a panic button. Clearly, events will 
be relevant to a range of different applications/components, as 
appropriate to the particular circumstances.  
Middleware provides a layer of indirection between 
applications/services and the underlying infrastructure. The 
role of the middleware is to facilitate interoperability, to 
provide a reliable mechanism for the exchange of information 
between system components and services. In PAL, we extend 
StreamBUS (SBUS) [4], which is a middleware for managing 
the exchange of messages (encapsulating events/data) between 
system components. SBUS was specifically designed for 
managing streams, enabling dynamic system reconfiguration 
(connections/disconnections and altering privileges), and 
providing 
content-based 
publish/subscribe 
semantics. 
However, it aims to be all-encompassing, by also supporting 
more 
traditional 
client-server 
(RPC)-based 
interaction 
paradigms (see Figure 2). This is important, as communications 
middleware supporting pervasive healthcare environments 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

must provide for a number of interaction types, to enable a 
wide range of application-level functionality. 
Each application/service in the system becomes an SBUS 
component, 
leaving 
the 
middleware 
to 
manage 
the 
communication concerns on its behalf. Data is encapsulated in 
typed messages (representing events), which are transmitted to 
other components in the system. The middleware ensures type-
safe communication, and enables content-based filters to be 
imposed on communication channels. From an architectural 
perspective, much of the provisioning is implemented in the 
middleware using a publish/subscribe semantic, meaning that 
communication encapsulates the events themselves. 
 
Figure 2. SBUS Interaction Paradigms. 
 
Middleware is a natural point for policy management and 
enforcement, as it is independent of specific application and 
network concerns. From the middleware perspective, policy 
concerns dynamic reconfiguration in response to particular 
changes in circumstance: specifically, initiating/terminating 
data flows and/or changing privileges. In environments, such as 
assisted living, that consist of many data sources, forcing each 
application to initiate and manage its interactions quickly 
becomes infeasible (hence the application-specific silos of 
today). It follows that management increasingly concerns 
coordination: 
where 
particular 
circumstances 
(events) 
determine the interactions between applications. Policy 
operates to dictate how/when particular system components 
should (or should not) interact to meet the functional goals of a 
range of applications. In our infrastructure, we have developed 
a policy engine to manage these concerns. We implement a 
policy engine within database infrastructure (PostgreSQL), 
where policy is encapsulated in a set of rules (triggers). A rule 
is (automatically) executed on a particular change in context, 
which can operate to: a) raise an alert; b) effect a middleware 
reconfiguration (e.g. alter a privilege or connection); and/or c) 
change the active rule set (e.g. to enable a different set of 
governance policies to apply in an emergency situation). 
As illustrated in Figure 1, immediately below the 
middleware layer is the PAL communication infrastructure. It 
is composed of two key functional sub-systems: session 
management and inter-networking. Session management 
ensures that an assisted living application session (e.g., an ECG 
stream) is kept running continuously when the application 
device switches from one wireless network to another (e.g., 
from an indoor WiFi to an outdoor 3G base station) due to user 
mobility and changes in network availability. The ultimate goal 
is to provide always-on connectivity to mobile clients, if/when 
required. For this, we consider an environment where different 
types of wireless networks co-exist. Typically, when the point 
of attachment changes, the device’s address will also change, 
and as a result the application session is dropped. To solve this 
problem, a medium-independent gateway (MIG) has been 
designed to switch between different types of networks while 
ensuring session continuity. The essence of the MIG is a 
tunneling technology which hides any network interface 
(Layers 1, 2) and IP (Layer 3) changes from the upper layers, 
thus providing a virtual always-on available gateway. Such a 
tunnel enables the mobile device to physically join networks 
that belong to different administration domains without 
interrupting any on-going connections/flows. This method 
effectively simulates the behaviour of Mobile IP (MIP) [5] 
where a Home Agent (HA) is used instead of a tunnel end-
point. An algorithm is implemented that carries out network 
selection based on an individual network’s status such as signal 
strength, bandwidth, energy consumption, cost, etc.  
While the MIG is more concerned about heterogeneous 
wireless 
access 
networks, 
the 
PAL 
communication 
infrastructure also addresses wired core networks. In particular, 
a clean-slate approach to internetworking called Information 
Centric Networking (ICN) [6] is adopted as an IP alternative. 
Its key task is to conduct route calculation and packet 
forwarding that directly operates on information items rather 
than endpoint addresses. The ICN software used is called 
Blackadder [23], which was developed in the context of the EU 
project PURSUIT [6]. Blackadder has been slightly tailored in 
terms of network interfaces and integration with the MIG to 
accommodate the PAL requirements. Specifically, we 
developed a link-aware topology manager (TM) that makes use 
of network link status information to assist route calculation. 
The calculated routing paths connect the sources of the 
information (publishers) with the destinations (subscribers) 
utilizing the underling publish-subscribe semantic of ICN. The 
key 
contribution 
here 
lies 
in 
enabling 
differentiated 
dissemination of information; a requirement that we see as 
important in future healthcare environments. For instance, in 
cases where certain information, such as heart rate, is deemed 
more critical than others, an information-centric approach to 
infrastructure 
allows 
for 
differentiating 
this 
specific 
information compared from other, less important, without 
resorting to cost-intensive solutions such as deep packet 
inspection (DPI). In addition, the focus on information 
dissemination in contrast to endpoint connectivity (as in the 
current IP-based Internet) allows for realising scenarios where 
applications are primarily concerned with receiving particular 
information rather than connecting to a specific source for this 
information. For instance, an application can simply request 
heart rate data rather than discovering the particular sources 
(and the specifics that are concerned with contacting these 
sources) that might potentially provide heart rate data. Hence, 
we believe that such an information-centric infrastructure 
approach greatly enhances the capabilities of application 
developers through providing an information-centric interface 
for information-rich use cases. 
C. Information processing and presentation 
In pervasive care environments, information will be 
relevant to a number of different applications and system 
components, that use data in a variety of ways, e.g. for 
processing, aggregation, storage, presentation, etc. Sometimes 
information can be provisioned in its original form (as 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

produced by the information source), but often it requires 
further processing in order to fit its intended purpose.  
In our preventative scenario, further processing of the 
information collected is vital so that Oscar can more easily 
understand what happens during each day based on data 
collected. A different kind of processing is required when 
certain information is shared with other parties within his 
support network. For the PAL lifestyle assistant application, we 
use context type-based information processing, which groups 
the various sensors into several main categories: emotional, 
social, availability, mental (interest), activity, physical/spatial 
and temporal. Within each context dimension, we use a rule-
based system that can convert recorded data into high-level 
information based on various expert or individual experience-
based knowledge bases. Additionally, the patient-users can 
provide their own interpretations either during the recording 
(i.e., through phone widgets) or later, at the time of 
visualisation. 
Collected data forms the basis for various visualisations 
created to help users understand causal relations between their 
actions and their wellbeing. Such visualisations present 
information at various levels: detailed (e.g., timeline graphs), 
summarised (e.g., word clouds for text-based data), and 
correlated abstractions. The last type is a novel type of 
visualisation we have developed inspired by human storytelling 
[7]. For that, we process information along a story line by 
bringing all available (and processed) information together in 
order to create a summarised (and more engaging) view of the 
important events during a day. Figure 3 shows an example of 
an event within a daily story.  
 
Figure 3. Example of an event within a story. 
 
By providing multiple levels of detail within visualisations, 
we created a system that can support various types of user 
interactions and purposes. For example, while a story can show 
the main events during a day, the user (either as patient or 
healthcare specialist) can use detailed visualisations to focus on 
specific aspects, such as heart rate variations over time, social 
interactions over time and in certain locations, and so on. 
 Within the reactive scenarios, the coordination of 
applications and services underpins information processing and 
presentation. In PAL, we use the dynamic capabilities of SBUS 
to connect system components as appropriate to achieve 
particular functional goals. For instance, should a carer wish to 
visualise a patient’s live heart rate data, their (presentation) 
application must be able to find and connect to the relevant 
ECG stream. Sensor streams might also need to be directed to 
an inference engine to detect a change in state and raise alerts; 
e.g. when Oscar has fainted and not moved.  Some connections 
might be triggered by policy, e.g., automatically connecting an 
emergency service to a patient’s data streams (e.g. location, 
vital-signs) in situations of a perceived emergency. 
D. Information governance 
Personal information is inherently sensitive. Therefore, we 
must protect data at all system levels. The patient must be able 
to describe the circumstances in which particular information is 
disclosed to particular parties. Such policy is context-sensitive, 
as restrictions will often vary according to circumstance.  
For the scenarios of both modes to work, subsets of Oscar’s 
records need to be available to a number of different groups. 
These may include families, friends and neighbours, local GP 
practices, hospitals, paramedics and ambulance crews. 
Members of each group should have access only to the 
appropriate parts of the records and only for the appropriate 
length of time. Health and welfare records may include many 
different items in many formats, e.g. emails, photos, sensor 
readings. To deal with this, PAL applies protection directly to 
the items of sensitive data. These protected items can then be 
safely stored and transported on any medium as the data 
remains safe wherever it is, such as on servers, wired or 
wireless connections or stored on a disk or USB devices. 
Access to the data is controlled according to policies defined 
by Oscar and enforced using policy based authorisation.  This 
allows them to share his records while maintaining control over 
who can see them and under what circumstances.  
 
Figure 4. Token-based security mechanism 
 
PAL users are identified within the system by using a token 
asserting the user’s identity and attributes (e.g., a role). Tokens 
are issued by the Security Token Server (see Figure 4) once the 
user has been authenticated.  When a user has a token they can 
obtain Oscar’s data by connecting to a (live) data stream or by 
searching a Secure Data Server for archived data.  The data is 
protected by encryption and the decryption key must be 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

retrieved from the Authorisation Server.  The Authorisation 
Server will check the credentials contained in the user’s token 
and the information about the data object against the set of 
security policies.  Access to the data will only be granted if the 
policy conditions are satisfied. A decryption key will then be 
returned to the user and they can decrypt the object and access 
the data. Since many parties are producing and consuming data 
within PAL, the system has been designed to operate within 
more than one administrative domain. Each domain can 
contain an instance of the components described above. 
In addition to encryption, policy operates at runtime to 
govern information exchange. Each component maintains 
access control policy dictating the components with which it 
may interact. The SBUS middleware enables these privileges 
to be dynamically changed, which allows, for example, the 
relaxation restrictions in an emergency. Further, dynamically 
enforced policy enables granular, context-based control. For 
instance, policy might dictate that a homecare nurse is 
automatically disconnected from a patient’s data streams when 
she physically leaves the patient’s home. Both of these features 
are implemented by a dedicated, patient-centric policy engine 
that operates to trigger SBUS reconfigurations in response to 
changes in circumstance. 
Patients undoubtedly have specific concerns, e.g., that their 
location should be hidden in normal circumstances, or that a 
GP cannot access their data unless explicitly authorised. 
However, it is unrealistic, if not dangerous, to expect a 
patient/user to define all situations in which disclosure is 
appropriate. This is because the typical patient will neither 
have the knowledge nor expertise to precisely determine the 
information relevant to each party. In practice, we expect that 
disclosure policy will be influenced by care providers, possibly 
through the use of policy templates that describe particular 
interactions. Any involved party is implicitly responsible for 
protecting health information, and thus must adhere to any 
specific patient preferences. 
V. 
BRINGING THE PIECES TOGETHER 
So far, within our project, we have focused on designing, 
developing and testing the main system components and 
functionality needed to realise the two main scenario modes 
(preventative and reactive) as well as the security and privacy 
framework described above. Our current work is to bring such 
pieces together within a combined prototype, following the 
integration framework. Here, we present details of our existing 
working system components and certain relevant results 
collected through our user-based experiments. 
A. The Lifestyle Management System 
Following the preventative part of our lead scenario, we 
developed a lifestyle management system that collects, 
processes and visualises various types of user information. For 
realising the system, we use various input sources for obtaining 
valuable information about a user’s lifestyle. The recording 
scenarios had to reflect real lives as much as possible; therefore 
we considered a mixture of mobile and stationary sources, such 
as mobile phone, desktop, laptop, wearable physiological 
sensors and content servers. Through such sources, we are able 
to collect a large variety of information, as shown in Figure 5. 
It is important to note that the types of information 
considered within a specific scenario highly depend on user 
preferences and constraints, the available sources within certain 
scenarios as well as on the relevance of information to such 
scenarios. A large amount of information is collected through 
the AIRS (Android Remote Sensing) platform [7], which 
benefited from our user-based experiments to extend towards 
incorporating more sensors as well as user-based annotations 
for mood and important events. 
 
Figure 5. Information and sources. 
 
The gathered data is secured and stored in a user-controlled 
database. Given that our solution is currently not embedded 
into a particular healthcare environment, the security token 
framework described in Section IV.D was not integrated. 
Our system processes the gathered information along the 
context dimensions mentioned in Section IV.C for determining, 
for instance, activity, location, or environment information. 
This processing directly supports the visualisations towards the 
end user, both at detailed and abstract level. For this, the story-
based approach presented in Section IV.C is realised (with 
Figure 3 showing an example story fragment). In addition, we 
allow end users to view detailed information at various levels, 
such as ambient noise level over time, crowdedness as 
determined by Bluetooth-enabled devices around and so on. 
The end users can have access to their data (either recorded or 
obtained on-demand) through a blog-based interface. This 
‘diary’ style of visualisation lends itself to a natural form of 
end user interaction, allowing for the selection of particular 
days, archiving by month or amending gathered information 
with personal entries. 
In addition to the preventative part of our lead use case, we 
also realised certain aspects of the reactive side, such as the 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

information routing at middleware and infrastructure level (see 
Section IV.B). Hence, we utilise the information routing 
approaches, either through the SBUS middleware over an IP 
infrastructure or through directly routing on information within 
an information-centric networking test bed. We furthermore 
use our communication component of Section IV.B to ensure 
continuous connectivity in cases where individual networks 
become unavailable. This is important in particular for mobile 
scenarios. We also integrated this solution with the endpoint-
oriented security component as shown in Section IV.D. With 
this, we can demonstrate the secure streaming of, say ECG 
data, from a patient to an emergency response center without 
connectivity disruption (if alternative connectivity is available, 
of course). 
B. Insights from User Experiments 
In order to better understand how to design and build 
systems such as proposed in this paper, we have performed 
various user-based experiments aimed at giving us more insight 
into: (1) what information is considered useful; (2) how 
information should be shown; (3) what interactions should be 
used. The experiments were both survey-based (online 
questionnaire) and hands-on. The online survey tested relations 
between people that reflect on causes for certain important 
aspects of their wellbeing, such as stress, and their attitude 
towards systems as described here. The participants were 
invited through various means (university staff and student 
mailing lists, Facebook and LinkedIn contacts, PAL project, 
etc.). As background, we consider participants’ experience with 
self-monitoring systems and their attitude towards self-
reflection more important than technological abilities or age.  
The results included here are based on 38 participants, 7 
with previous experience with self-monitoring, 29 without and 
2 that did not specify. The participants were introduced to the 
preventative part of our demonstrator system from the 
beginning, through a stress-related usage scenario and a high-
level system description.  They were asked if they would find 
such a system useful for self-reflection. Encouragingly, 63% of 
all participants answered positively. We were particularly 
interested in how people we considered more self-reflective 
(i.e., people that think back often and think why something 
happened) feel about the system and 76% said they would find 
such system useful. Out of the people that answered positively, 
74% had no previous experience with self-monitoring systems. 
Next, we asked if they would like a story-based representation 
created by the system based on their recorded data (we used a 
concept movie containing a day story built from events similar 
to Figure 3). 83.3% of the people that said they would find the 
system useful said they would like such interface. We also 
asked if they would like to customise their story. 95% of the 
ones that like both the system and the story answered 
positively, with most people wanting to customise characters, 
places, emotional states, and activities. 
  We further conducted a series of dedicated experiments 
with 6 unpaid volunteers (ages between 20 and 80) that aimed 
at finding out what people consider interesting in their daily 
activities For that, the users were asked to use digital 
annotation means we provided (a binary event button on the 
Alive heart monitor and, later, AIRS-provided phone widgets: 
small interface elements that allow interaction with an 
application without brining it to the foreground) in order to 
mark when something they considered interesting enough to be 
reflected within their lifestyle management system happened or 
was about to happen. 
Essential in understanding how systems like ours should be 
created is that every user stated that they expect their interest in 
certain types of information to change within the various 
situations experienced during the day as well as over time and 
with increased system usage. Hence, it is expected that the 
system would provide end users with means to customise their 
stories over time, both in terms of what they include and in 
terms of how they look. This would allow them to better 
understand what could be of interest for them in ways that they 
have not thought of before. Part of this aspect of configurability 
also includes that each user wants to be in control of what is 
recorded.  Also, being able to change their preferences over 
time allows a change of focus.  
As a result of our experiments we have already added 
several new features to our system, such as the phone-based 
widgets used for annotating an event with user’s own meaning 
and another widget that allows users to set their current mood. 
We consider such features essential for a system like ours, as 
the automatic inference processes would probably not be able 
to (always) capture the meaning of why an event was 
interesting (e.g., is it because the user is in a certain place, or in 
a certain situation, such as meeting). It is worth noting that 
users still highlighted the need for faster annotation through 
dedicated hardware in some scenarios.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Pervasive 
healthcare 
systems 
face 
many 
real-life 
deployment challenges that are rarely or poorly addressed. This 
often leads to disruptions in end user experiences or imposing 
system constraints, leading to single device or single network 
solutions. We believe that providing solutions only for bespoke 
use cases will prevent the wide adoption of healthcare solutions 
in the future. It is here where our main contribution lies, 
namely to outline system-wide challenges for healthcare 
provisioning systems that are addressed through an open, 
systemic and holistic approach. The resulting PAL system 
operates over a variety of communication infrastructure 
solutions. It abstracts the specifics of the infrastructure through 
a unifying middleware, and is able to support the functional 
requirements of a wide-range of applications.  
At the application-level, we have shown how the lifestyle 
assistant enables the users of the system to better understand 
the plethora of available data, by employing novel visualisation 
approaches that extend detailed graph-based information 
through story-telling approaches that are engaging and 
summarising. All of this is achieved within a framework for 
information governance that takes into account the private and 
sensitive nature of the information involved. Although our 
intention is not to build specific diagnostic tools, the lifestyle 
assistant supports patients in reflecting on their activity history 
and also assists more formal care processes; thus providing 
insights for healthcare systems in general.   
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In our future work, we will investigate the possibilities for 
conducting detailed studies relating to different aspects of the 
system, such as visualisation or the security framework. We 
will also continue to work with funding agencies to incorporate 
the lessons learned into future system requirements.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
PAL is funded by the TSB and EPSRC under grant 
numbers TP/AN072C, TS/H000062/1 and TS/H000186/1. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
UK Department of Health, “Improving Chronic Disease Management,” 
Report, 2004. 
[2] 
D. Trossen and D. Pavel, “NORS: An Open Source Platform to 
Facilitate Participatory Sensing with Mobile Phones,” International 
Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous Systems: Networking and 
Services (MOBIQUITOUS 2007), pp. 1-8, August 2007. 
[3] 
NHS Direct, http://www.nhsdirect.nhs.uk, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[4] 
D. Ingram, “Reconfigurable Middleware for High Availability Sensor 
Systems”,  Proc. ACM Distributed Event-Based Systems DEBS09,  
Nashville, TN, USA, pp. 20:1-20:11, July  2009. 
[5] 
C. E. Perkins, “IP Mobility Support for IPv4, Revised,” Internet 
Engineering Task Force (IETF), 2010. 
[6] 
EU FP7 Project PURSUIT,  http://www.fp7-pursuit.eu, [retrieved: Sept, 
2012]. 
[7] 
D. Pavel, V. Callaghan and A. K. Dey, “From self-monitoring to self-
understanding: Going beyond physiological sensing for supporting 
wellbeing”. International Workshop on Pervasive Computing Paradigms 
for Mental Health (MindCare 2011), Pervasive Health 2011, Dublin, pp. 
312 -315, May 2011. 
[8] 
AIRS: 
An 
Android-based 
Sensing 
Platform: 
https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.airs, [retrieved: Sept, 
2012]. 
[9] 
D. Trossen, D. Pavel, J. Singh, J. Bacon and K. M. Guild, “Information-
centric Pervasive Healthcare Platforms”, Proceedings of 4th International 
Conference on Pervasive Health, Munich, pp. 1-4, March 2010. 
[10] IBM, “MQ Telemetry Transport (MQTT)”,  http://mqtt.org/, [retrieved: 
Sept, 2012]. 
[11] WristCare: http://www.istsec.fi/eng/Emikakoti.htm, [retrieved: Sept, 
2012]. 
[12] SenseWear,  http://sensewear.bodymedia.com/, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[13] Philips Lifeline Solutions, http://www.lifelinesys.com/content/home, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[14] Wellcore 
Emergency 
Response 
System 
solutions, 
at 
http://www.wellcore.com/, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[15] OBS, at http://www.obsmedical.com/products, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[16] Bosch Healthbuddy, http://www.bosch-
telehealth.com/en/us/products/health_buddy/health_buddy.html, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012] 
[17] CardioNet 
Solutions, 
 
http://www.cardionet.com/patients_01.htm, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[18] Alive 
Technologies, 
“Alive 
Heart 
and 
Activity 
Monitor”, 
http://www.alivetec.com/products.htm, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[19] MobiHealth, http://www.mobihealth.com, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[20] iFall, http://www.imedicalapps.com/2010/04/ifall-android-medical-app/, 
[retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[21] Sportstracker, http://www.sports-tracker.com/, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[22] Endomondo, http://www.endomondo.com, [retrieved: Sept, 2012]. 
[23] D. Trossen and G. Parisis, “Designing and Realizing an Information-
Centric Internet,” IEEE Communications  Μagazine, Special Issue on 
Information-centric Networking, pp. 60-67, July 2012. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

