Smart Grip Prosthetic Hand
Vicken Tchangoulian1,Vicken Daghlian2, Ali Hage-Diab1, 3, Bassam Hussein2, 3,, Hassan M. Khachfe1, 3
1 Department of Biomedical Engineering
2 Department of Industrial Engineering
3 Lebanese Institute for Biomedical Research & Applications (LIBRA)
Lebanese International University
Beirut, Lebanon
e-mail: vickent9@gmail.com, e-mail: vicken.daghlian@gmail.com, e-mail: {ali.hagediab; bassam.hussein;
hassan.khachfe}@liu.edu.lb
Abstract- In a fast paced world, an accident can happen to
anyone of us, changing and impacting our lives negatively.
Some of these accidents have irreversible consequences, like
the amputation of a limb. Recent studies show that there are
about 16 amputations per 100,000 people in Lebanon. Through
the decades, engineers and scientists have come up with
different solutions to make the lives of amputees somewhat
easier, specifically transradial amputation. Unfortunately, fully
functional
prosthetic
hands
cost
anywhere
from
$5000-
$120000. The current
project proposes a solution at
a
reasonably affordable cost for a highly durable prosthesis that
can satisfy the needs of an amputee coming from any financial
background. To manufacture a durable prosthesis, we used
aluminum to machine the parts of the inner skeleton. To make
the cover, we used fiberglass molding and finished it off with a
glossy paint job. The aluminum parts are connected to each
other by steel bearings and stainless steel rivets, nuts, and
bolts. The fingers are actuated by steel cables, which are pulled
by servo motors. The fingers are reset to their initial positions
by spring loaded steel cables. The smart grip system, which is
the main innovative characteristic of the prostheses, senses the
presence and the slipping of an object between the fingers. The
whole system is controlled by an Arduino microcontroller. In
addition, the smart grip system can be used in many other
industrial applications related to the fields of robotics. With
this project, we managed to prove our concept of the smart
grip system, but there is still room for improvement.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In an imperfect world, an accident can happen to
anyone of us, changing our lives to worse. Some of these
accidents may be severe and have irreversible consequences
like the amputation of a limb. The ingenuity of humankind
has led us to different solutions to problems that were
thought to be unsolvable. Throughout history, people have
come up with different methods to make the lives of
amputees somewhat easier. For example, in the case of hand
amputation, people used a hook to perform simple tasks, or
a wooden hand for cosmetic reasons. Prosthetics have come
a long way since then.
Nowadays, there are much more advanced methods to
solve this problem, prosthetics can range from metal hooks
and purely cosmetic hands to fully functional thought
controlled prosthetics, and in between, there are still method
to be explored in order to find the soft spot of prosthetics,
that is, to find the method that can meet the requirements of
an amputee at a reasonable price. Presently, the cost of a
functional prosthetic hand can range from $4,000 to
$12,0000 [1]- [4].
According to most human rights doctrines, all people
should
have
an
equal
opportunity
to
a
normal
life.
Unfortunately, this is not always the case as the privileged
have the luxury to afford any solution to any problem since
they have the financial means of doing so. In this paper, the
researchers propose an optimal solution at the lowest cost for
a highly durable prosthesis that can satisfy the requirements
of an amputee, especially the ones with limited financial
resources. To achieve this objective, a durable and affordable
functional prosthetic hand will be presented. The durability
of the prostheses will come from its lightweight aluminum
skeleton with composite cover, and the functionality will be
derived from a simple smart grip system integrated with the
finger drive. Also, the smart grip system can be used in many
other industrial applications in most of the robotic fields.
II.
AMPUTATION AND PROSTHETICS
Knowledge of amputation and the history of prosthetics
will help to emphasize the importance of the availability of
prosthetics to amputees.
A.
Amputation
Amputees can be found all over the world. Some people
are born with a missing limb, but also limb loss can be the
result of different types of accidents such as wars, vehicle
accidents, diseases, or sports related accidents (mountain
climbing, soccer, etc.).
According
to
the
statistics
done
by
Eastern
Mediterranean Health journal [5], there are about 1.6
amputations per 10,000 persons in Lebanon. Amputations
are categorized as upper limb amputations and lower limbs
amputations, and each of these two types have different
subcategories. Each of the above mentioned amputation
types are usually handled by specific types of devices, which
are called prosthetic devices. Transradial amputations, for
example, were initially solved with wooden prosthetics,
metallic prosthetics, cosmetic prosthetics, hook prosthetics
and – today – myoelectric prosthetics. Nowadays, prostheses
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

fall in different categories and they differ by quality,
functionality, cost and other specifications.
In this paper, a smart prosthetic hand with good grip is
presented. Usually, the user needs to grab items that can have
different textures and geometrical shapes. The smart grip
system will provide the simplicity of grabbing any kind of
object without the fear of loss of control over the item
grabbed, be it a hot coffee mug, a plastic bottle, an egg, etc.
A hot coffee mug, for example, will exert heat on the
prosthesis, and hence the choice of materials that will be
used to manufacture the prosthesis should be such that it will
not be affected by temperatures that a normal human hand
can withstand. Being smart does not mean that prostheses
will be independent; the user interface will control different
modes of operation that will satisfy the amputee.
In brief, the aim of proposed model is mainly to provide
the average amputee with a prosthesis that is durable and
functional, at an affordable price.
III.
MATERIALS AND METHODS
The materials and methods chosen for this project have a
direct effect on its success, thus they are discussed in detail
in the subsections below.
A.
Manufactring:
From a manufacturing point of view, the proposed model
aims to achieve four main objectives: heat resistance,
durability, weight, and mechanism.
• Heat Resistance: heat resistance is important, because it
gives the user a wider range of activities that he/she can
perform with the prosthesis, rather than being limited by a
certain temperature range. By heat resistance we do not mean
that the prosthesis must be totally fireproof, but it must be
able to withstand the normal temperatures that a human
being encounters in his daily life, e.g., holding a mug
containing a hot beverage, an accidental spill of hot water, or
getting your hand close to naked flame for a short period of
time. The target temperature range will be up to 70˚C. 
• Durability: durability is also a key factor in functionality
and user satisfaction. Durability is important, because the
user can encounter high forces through accidents and this can
damage the prosthesis. By durability, it is meant that the
prosthesis must endure certain rages and types of forces. This
however, can limit the range of activities the user can
perform with the device, for example, when a finger gets
wedged in a doorway, or if a door is slam-closed on a finger.
• Weight: weight plays a big role in comfort and this is a
major factor in functionality and user satisfaction. Simply, if
the prosthesis is heavy, the user will not be comfortable
carrying it around on his/her arm.
• Mechanism: the importance of the mechanism is indirect
rather than direct in user satisfaction context. The smooth
operation of the hand is crucial for a semi-humanlike motion
of the fingers. The mechanism must be reliable to ensure
accuracy, consistency, and repeatability.
B.
Control
The device control can be divided into three parts: user
interface, processing, and smart grip system.
• User Interface: a system that will allow the user to control
the prosthesis through simple commands.
• Processing: a control module that must combine the smart
grip system (mentioned below), the drive system, and the
user interface.
• Smart Grip System: a unit that allows the person to
actuate the right amount of force to provide sufficient grip to
grab a given item depending on its weight, texture, and
geometrical shape. The aim of having a smart grip system is
to eliminate the margin of human error during the grabbing
action. This system will be able to grab an object regardless
of its shape, surface texture, or weight.
IV.
IMPLEMENTATION
The
manufacturing
methods
and
implementation
protocols are being filed for patenting and, thus, will not be
disclosed now. In this paper, only the various phases will be
mentioned and discussed briefly:
Phase 1
1.1
Machining (Figure 1)
The machining was done with a lathe and
milling machine. The measurements, along with the 90
degree angles, had to be accurate to a tenth of a millimeter to
ensure the smooth operation of the fingers.
1.2 Smart grip system design and testing
The smart grip system is a combination of three
Figure 2. Assembled Aluminum Skeleton
Figure 1. Palm and Forearm
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

elements; object sensing, slip sensing, and data
acquisition
system.
The
object
sensing
is
accomplished by micro switches in the fingertips.
The slip sensing is accomplished by a modified
optical mouse. The data acquisition is done by an
Arduino microcontroller.
Phase 2
2.1 Assembling the aluminum skeleton (Figure 2)
After
assembling the machined
finger section
together, the fingers were placed on the palm and forearm
plate. Then the cable system was assembled on the plate.
2.2 Integrating the smart grip system (Figure 3)
The micro switches were fitted on the finger tips
and the optical mouse was modified to fit into the
composite cover of the index finger.
Phase 3
3.1 Integration of the drive system with the skeleton
After fitting the servo motors onto the palm and
forearm plate and temporarily fixing the modified optical
mouse on the tip of the index finger, the drive cables
were connected to the arms of the servo motors and each
finger preload was calibrated.
3.2 Further smart grip system testing
After integrating the mechanism with the smart grip
system, tests were done on the system to find some
coding bugs and fix them.
Phase 4
Composite cover design and testing
The composite cover design phase was dedicated
mostly to find the right design that would be humanlike,
proportional in size, strong, light weight, and big enough to
contain all the elements of the system. This was done by
hand laying fiberglass on positive and negative molds made
of plaster of Paris and molding clay.
Phase 5
Integration of the optical mouse in the index finger
as shown in Figure 3
The most important aspect of this stage was to
calibrate the exact distance of the lens of the optical mouse,
from the surface of the hand. This distance has a direct effect
on the information transmitted by the sensor.
Phase 6
Cosmetic finishing of the composite cover.
The
cosmetic
finish
was
handed
over
to
a
professional painter in a body shop.
V.
CONLUSION
Although the current prototype, as shown in Figure 4,
is not ready for the market and is in need of more research
and testing to improve some aspects, it served as a “proof of
concept” that can later be subjected to further development
and amelioration.
From a manufacturing point of view, the researchers had
four main objectives: 1) Heat resistance, 2) Durability, 3)
Weight, and 4) Mechanism, all but one – weight – were
achieved. From an electronic systems point of view, two of
the three main objectives: 1) User interface (not achieved),
2) Processing, and 3) were achieved. The two objectives that
were not successfully completed were the expense of
durability and time limitation. These incomplete objectives
will be the target of future work.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The researchers would like to acknowledge and thank
Mr.
Fadi
Lama,
Mr.
Farris
Al
Hajj,
Dr.
Ardaches
Tchangoulian, Mr. Garo Mateosian, Mr. Joseph Al Haybe,
Mr. Edward Hassoun, Mr. David Slikhanian, and Mr. Harout
Enichteian for their priceless help and support. This project
was funded by a generous grant from YLEngineering.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. J. Jorge, et al. "Cyborg beast: a low-cost 3d-printed
prosthetic hand for children with upper-limb differences."
BMC research notes 8, no. 1 (2015): 10.
[2] M. M. Matus, "The BeBionic3 Prosthetic Hand Is Powerful
Enough to Hold 99 Pounds and Sensitive Enough to Use a
Pen," Inhabitat. Design Will save the World. Inhabitat LLC,
vol. 7, 2012.
[3] C. C. Connolly, "Prosthetic hands from touch bionics,"
Industrial Robot: An International Journal, vol. 35, p. 290,
2008.
Figure 3. Integrating the Slip Sensor
Figure 4. The Prosthetic Hand
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[4] L. R. Resnik , S. K.Klinger , and K. E. Etter, "The DEKA Arm:
Its features, functionality, and evolution during the Veterans
Affairs Study to optimize the DEKA Arm," Prosthetics and
orthotics international, vol. 38, p. 492, 2014.
[5] K. Y. Yaghi, et al. "Diabetes or war? Incidence of and
indications for limb amputation in Lebanon, 2007." (2012).
[6] Y, A, Badamasi, "The working principle of an Arduino." In
Electronics, Computer and Computation (ICECCO), 2014 11th
International Conference on, pp. 1-4. IEEE, 2014.
[7] A.D. Diab. A New Method to Construct a Conductive Stretch
Sensor from Non-Conductive Fabric Elastic Bands. Lebanese
Patent Office # 10770, October 2015.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-604-0
GLOBAL HEALTH 2017 : The Sixth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

