Extending the US Health Information National Trends Survey to China and 
Beyond:   Promoting Global Access to Consumer Health Information Needs and 
Practices 
Gary L. Kreps 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
gkreps@gmu,.edu 
 
Guoming Yu 
Public Opinion Research Institute 
Renmin University of China 
Beijing, China 
yuguoming@126.com 
 
Xiaoquan Zhao 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
xzhao3@gmu.edu 
 
Wen-Ying Chou 
Health Communication & Informatics Research Branch 
National Cancer Institute 
Bethesda, MD, USA 
chouws@mail.nih.gov 
 
Xu Zihao 
Public Opinion Research Institute 
Renmin University of China 
 
 
 
Beijing, China 
xuzihao10@126.com 
 
Meijie Song 
Public Opinion Research Institute 
Renmin University of China 
Beijing, China 
songmeijie2005@163.com 
 
Bradford W. Hesse 
Health Communication & Informatics Research Branch 
National Cancer Institute 
Bethesda, MD, USA 
hesseb@mail.nih.gov 
 
Richard Moser 
Health Communication & Informatics Research Branch 
National Cancer Institute 
Bethesda, MD, USA 
moserr@mail.nih.gov 
 
Paula Kim 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
Pkim12@gmu.edu 
 
 
Abstract—The US-based Health Information National Trends 
Survey (HINTS) conducted every other year since 2003 by the 
National Cancer Institute (NCI) has become a major source for 
relevant data about the public's access to and use of relevant 
health information for cancer prevention and control.  These 
data have been used to guide the development of evidence-
based health communication intervention programs to reduce 
health information gaps and promote informed health decision 
making in the US. An innovative collaboration has been 
established between the NCI, George Mason University's 
Center for Health and Risk Communication, and Renmin 
University of China's Public Opinion Research Institute to 
conduct a biennial representative national HINTS survey in 
China, under the auspices of the Chinese Ministry of Health.  
Pilot data are currently be collected in two major Chinese 
cities, with full national administration of the first biennial 
HINTS-China research program to be conducted in 2013.  
Data gathered from the HINTS-China surveys will be used to 
guide evidence-based health promotion interventions across 
China to promote public health.  This exciting international 
research program opens the door to expanding the HINTS 
research program to many other countries around the world to 
help promote global health. 
Keywords-health information; HINTS; National Cancer 
Institute; China; health communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Access to and effective use of relevant, accurate, and 
timely health information is critically important for guiding 
the important health-related decisions that consumers and 
providers must make across the continuum of care to 
promote health and well-being [1].  This includes decisions 
about the prevention of health risks, health promotion 
behaviors, the detection and diagnosis of health problems, 
the treatment of health problems, and strategies for living 
with health threats (survivorship) [2].  The National Cancer 
Institute (NCI) introduced the Health Information National 
Trends Survey (HINTS) research program in 2003 to track 
the American public’s access to and use of relevant health 
information, as well as their preferred ways to receive  
needed health information [3]. Data from the HINTS 
research program has helped health promotion leaders to 
identify serious public health information gaps and to guide 
targeted health education intervention programs to reduce 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

these gaps for enhancing informed health decision making, 
especially concerning cancer prevention and control [4].  The 
HINTS survey has been conducted roughly every other year 
since 2003 by the NCI and has become a major source for 
relevant data about past, current, and evolving public access 
to and use of relevant health information [4, 5, 6].   The 
HINTS research program provides health promotion experts 
with critical information about both the most glaring public 
health information deficits that need to be addressed and the 
best ways to communicate needed health information to key 
audiences. 
 
The lessons learned from the HINTS research program 
about access to health information in the US can be 
profitably extended to other nations and regions of the world 
to promote global health. Global health experts have learned 
that while there are often major differences in the ways 
health problems and solutions are expressed in different parts 
of the world, there are also many similarities in health threats 
and there is strong demand for cooperation in addressing 
these threats [7].  There have been calls to expand the 
HINTS research program to other parts of the globe [8].  In 
response to these calls, HINTS-China will be the first major 
expansion of the HINTS research program beyond the US 
(and its territories).  HINTS-China is an active and 
innovative international collaboration between the NCI (in 
the US), the Chinese Ministry of Health, George Mason 
University’s Center for Health and Risk Communication, 
and Renmin University of China’s Public Opinion Research 
Institute.  We are currently gathering pilot data in two major 
cities in China (Beijing and Hefei) during 2012 and early 
2013 to refine Chinese language HINTS questions and 
delivery strategies, in preparation to be begin national 
administration of the first biennial HINTS survey in China in 
late 2013.     
 
II. 
THE NEED FOR HINTS RESEARCH  IN CHINA 
This exciting new research program is especially relevant 
in China, where there are serious public health concerns 
about cancer prevention and control.  Cancers are now the 
leading cause of death in urban China and the second leading 
cause of death in rural China [9, 10].  Current evidence 
suggests there is a serious and growing cancer burden in 
China, with increasing levels of cancer incidence, morbidity, 
and mortality [10, 11].   To reduce the cancer burden in 
China there is a concerted need to encourage cancer 
screening and early detection to promote timely cancer 
treatments, as well as to facilitate increased focus on cancer 
prevention activities [9, 12, 13].  Achieving these cancer 
prevention and control goals in China, as in other parts of the 
world, depends to a large extent on disseminating relevant 
and strategic health information about cancer prevention and 
control to key audiences to inform and motivate health 
decision making by health care consumers, providers, and 
policy makers [14].   The HINTS-China research program 
has the potential to establish the evidence-base for guiding 
strategic health communication programs for promoting 
cancer prevention and control in China. 
The HINTS-China research program builds upon the 
NCI’s well-established US national HINTS research 
program [3, 4, 5, 6].  The HINTS-China research program is 
adapting the latest HINTS questionnaire items, using similar 
core questions, adapted to the unique health issues and 
communication characteristics of the Chinese public.  The 
focus of the HINTS-China survey will be on access to and 
use of cancer information.   
 
III. 
FOCUS OF THE HINTS-CHINA RESEARCH PROGRAM 
 
The 
HINTS-China 
survey 
will 
recruit 
a 
large 
representative national sample in China across both urban 
and rural areas representing all of the major regions of the 
country.  Special sections of the HINTS-China questionnaire 
will focus on relevant Chinese health issues, such as the link 
between smoking and lung cancer (the leading cause of death 
from cancer in China), immunization for hepatitis B, and 
screening for colorectal, breast, and cervical cancers [9].  We 
plan to adapt the NCI’s comprehensive HINTS data 
dissemination program for providing information from the 
HINTS-China research program to health care researchers, 
consumers, providers, and policy makers.   
 
Several of the unique features in the HINTS-China 
research program include the translation of the latest HINTS 
questionnaire into Chinese languages and adjusting the 
wording of the questions to adapt to unique Chinese 
respondent cultural issues.  HINTS-China data will be 
collected through standardized personal interviews to ensure 
a good response rate and full collection of data.  Sampling 
strategies will be employed to ensure a representative 
national sample of the Chinese public across all regions of 
the country, as well as both urban and rural areas of China.  
HINTS-China questions will examine the public’s health 
information seeking practices, current levels of health 
information 
(including 
information 
deficits 
and 
misinformation), utilization and preference for different 
channels of communication, uses of health information 
acquired, and the source preferences of different segments of 
the Chinese public.   
 
Current HINTS-China research activities include the 
translation and adaptation of the HINTS questionnaire for 
effective use with Chinese respondents.  We are asking 
Chinese health professionals and policy makers to help us 
evaluate and refine the HINTS-China questions to make sure 
they are appropriate, understandable, and relevant for the 
Chinese public.  We are pilot testing early versions of the 
HINTS-China questionnaire with diverse samples of 
respondents in Beijing and Hefei.  Based upon these 
formative research activities we plan to carefully evaluate the 
HINTS-China pilot data, refine the HINTS-China research 
instruments, refine our administrative plan for collecting 
national HINTS-China data, develop plans for HINTS-China 
data analysis, data reports, results dissemination, and 
applications of the data for promoting public health, as well 
as 
to 
plan 
future 
biennial 
HINTS-China 
survey 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

administrations.  We will also be comparing the pilot data we 
collect with other surveys and research findings from studies 
conducted in the US, China, and other parts of the world.  
We expect the HINTS-China research program to build upon 
an expanding body of communication research being 
conducted in China and elsewhere about public access and 
use of health information. 
IV. 
APPICATIONS OF THE HINTS-CHINA DATA 
The HINTS-China research program will help provide 
the first comprehensive description of the current state of 
cancer-related health knowledge among different segments 
of the public across China.  The research will identify 
important information needs and gap, as well as areas where 
the Chinese public is seriously misinformed about important 
health issues.  The research will provide a general 
assessment about levels of public health and biological 
literacy in China, which will be critically important for 
guiding the development of public health education 
programs and media [15].  Data from the HINTS-China 
research program will help identify what the Chinese public 
knows about relevant health issues and what they need to 
know to promote cancer prevention and control. 
 
Findings from the HINTS-China research program will 
help Chinese public health officials evaluate the influences 
and effectiveness of current health information and education 
programs in China, identifying what is working and where 
more work is needed for communicating relevant health 
information to key public audiences.  The data will let these 
public health officials know what topics need to be included 
in future health education programs, what channels of 
communication are likely to reach different segments of the 
Chinese population, what messages strategies are likely to 
resonate with different public audiences, and which 
information sources are most preferred by different 
audiences for providing them with relevant health 
information.  Data from the HINTS-China research program 
will be essential for guiding the development of targeted 
evidence-based health promotion intervention programs in 
China. 
 
The HINTS-China research program will also provide 
relevant data for comparison with the US HINTS research 
program to identify similarities and differences in the ways 
that Chinese and American publics’ access and use relevant 
health information.  There are likely to be important lessons 
learned about which health communication programs have 
worked well and which programs have not worked so well in 
these countries.  This information will be used to identify the 
best health promotion programs to be emulated and the least 
effective health communication practices that should be 
improved.  These data will provide a basis for international 
collaboration between the US and China for conjoint health 
promotion efforts, activities, and policies, as well as provide 
a basis for encouraging global collaborations between many 
different countries concerning public health promotion [7, 
13] 
 
The longitudinal, repeated administration design of the 
HINTS-China research program will provide an important 
source of new data about the changing information and 
health environments in China.  This is particularly important 
as the rate of change, technological innovation, and 
international exchanges expand in China.  The successive 
administrations of the HINTS-China questionnaire will help 
track changes in public access to information, use of 
communication channels, increases in public knowledge 
about health issues, as well as identify emergent new health 
trends and issues that need to be addressed.   The survey 
will also provide baseline data and biennial update 
comparisons to evaluate health promotion progress in China 
for promoting cancer prevention and control.  Finally, this 
exciting international research collaboration opens the door 
to expanding the HINTS research program to many other 
countries around the world to help promote global health. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Strong support for this exciting new international 
research program has been provided by the Chinese Ministry 
of Health, the National Cancer Institute in the US, George 
Mason 
University’s 
Center 
for 
Health 
and 
Risk 
Communication, and Renmin University of China’s Public 
Opinion Research Institute.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Johnson, and D. Case, Health information seeking.  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, in-press. 
[2] G. Kreps. The impact of communication on cancer risk, 
incidence, morbidity, mortality, and quality of life.  Health 
Communication, 15(2), 161-169, 2003. 
[3] D. Nelson, G. Kreps, B. Hesse, R. Croyle, G. Willis, N. 
Arora, B. Rimer, K. Viswanath, N. Weinstein, and S. Alden. 
The Health Information National Trends Survey (HINTS):  
Development, design, and dissemination.  Journal of Health 
Communication, 9(5), 1-18, 2004. 
[4] L. Finney Rutten, B.  Hesse, R. Moser, and G.L. Kreps.  
(Eds.). 
 
Building 
the 
Evidence 
Base 
in 
Cancer 
Communication.  Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, 2011. 
[5] B. Hesse, D. Nelson, G. Kreps, R. Croyle, N. Arora, B. 
Rimer, and K. Viswanath.  Trust and sources of health 
information.  The impact of the Internet and its implications 
for health care providers:  Findings from the first Health 
Information National Trends Survey.  Archives of Internal 
Medicine, 165(22), 2618-2624, 2005. 
[6] B. Hesse, R. Moser, L. Rutten, & G. Kreps.  The Health 
Information National Trends Survey:  Research from the 
baseline.  Journal of Health Communication, 11 (S 1), vii-xvi, 
2006. 
[7] D. Kim, A. Singhal, and G. Kreps.  (Eds.).  Handbook of 
global health communication strategies:  Theories and 
practices.  New York:  Peter Lang Publishers, in-press. 
[8] G. Kreps, and L. Finney Rutten.  Building the evidence base 
in cancer communication:  Next steps.  In L. Finney Rutten, 
B. Hesse, R. Moser, & G.L. Kreps, (Eds.), Building the 
evidence base in cancer communication (pp. 315-322).  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, 2011. 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[9] P. Zhao, M. Dai, W. Chen, and N. Li.  Cancer trends in China.  
Japanese Journal of Clinical Oncology, 40(4), 281-285, 2010. 
[10] Ministry of Health, the People's Republic of China. Report on 
the Third National Sampling Survey of Causes of Death. 
Beijing: The People's Health Press; 2008.  
[11] J. Ferlay, H-R. Shin, F. Bray, D. Forman, C. Mathers, and D. 
Maxwell Parkin.  Estimates of worldwide burden of cancer in 
2008:  GLOBOCAN 2008.  International Journal of Cancer, 
127(12), 2893-2917, 2010. 
[12] S. Dey, and A. Soliman.  Cancer in the global health era:  
Opportunities for the Middle East and Asia.  Asia-Pacific 
Journal of Public Health, 22(3), 75S-82S, 2010. 
[13] National Research Council.  Fulfilling the Potential for 
Cancer Prevention and Early Detection. Washington, DC: The 
National Academies Press, 2003.  
[14] G. Kreps.  Strategic use of communication to market cancer 
prevention and control to  vulnerable populations.  Health 
Marketing Quarterly, 25(1/2), 204-216, 2008. 
[15] J. Miller, and G. Kreps.  Biological literacy:  A key to cancer 
prevention and control in the 21st century.  In L. Finney 
Rutten, B. Hesse, R. Moser, & G.L. Kreps, (Eds.), Building 
the evidence base in cancer communication (pp. 225-247).  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, 2011. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

