The Development of Action Model that Integrate Tuberculosis Case Detection and
Completeness of Treatment through Women Empowerment at District Level in
Indonesia
Indang Trihandini, Popy Yuniar, R. Sutiawan
Dept. of Biostatistics and Population
Faculty of Public Health, University of Indonesia
dini05@ui.ac.id
Abstract—Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is the causative
agent of human tuberculosis (TB) with an estimated 8.8 million
new TB cases and 1.4 million deaths annually. According to
MDG (Millennium Development Goals), Indonesia should be
able to reduce half the number of patients with infectious
diseases including tuberculosis by 2015. Based on Health
Survey data in Indonesia, 2010, Lebak is a district in Banten
Province with the highest TB prevalence rate of 1,282 per
100,000 population. In 2013, Lebak District Health Office
stated that one of the main problems in treating tuberculosis
patient was the patient’s reluctance to go to a hospital or
health center. Therefore, encouragement for the patients is
very important to reduce this reluctance. On the other hand,
women in Lebak are socially active, including in their religious
group. This active social group in Lebak can be a good
medium to encourage patients with tuberculosis to go to the
hospital. Therefore, we develop an integrated system model for
finding out new cases and completeness of TB treatment
through women empowerment in the family and community.
Keywords- Action model; Tuberculosis; Case detection;
Completeness of treatment; Women empowerment
I.
INTRODUCTION
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) is the causative agent
of human tuberculosis (TB) [1] with an estimated 8.8
million new TB cases and 1.4 million deaths per annum [1].
According to MDG, by 2015, Indonesia will have to
decrease by half the number of the patients with contagious
diseases, including TB. Unfortunately, sustainable and
accurate information on TBC epidemic does not exist [2].
This situation leads to the deployment of costly surveys and
discontinuous information. TB case detection deserves to be
better treated. According to WHO reports in 2012 [1], the
increase of prevalence numbers obviously showed that TB
in Indonesia has become a global health problem. This was
measured from several indicators
such as morbidity,
prevalence, and incidence. Prevalence in Indonesia was 281
per 100,000 people, which was higher than China, India and
Thailand (104, 249 and 161). On the other hand, the number
of incidences in Indonesia was 187, which was also higher
than China, India and Thailand (75, 181 and 124) [1].
Indonesia has implemented the DOTS strategy since 1995,
but unfortunately the tuberculosis treatment problem cannot
be handled only by concentrating on the medical treatment
aspect, but also
through
discovering
new patients.
Therefore, estimated CDR (Case Detection Rate) of  TB
incidence is still low, and and the proportion of TB which
has not been handled is still fairly large [2][3].
Lebak is one of districts in Indonesia with a large
population of poor people with TB. The percentage of TB
patients in Lebak who took treatment for less than 6 months
was 19.3 % and TB patients who did not take any
medication was 4.5%. In 2013, The Lebak District Health
Office (DHO) stated that one of the main obstacles in
treating
patients with tuberculosis was the
patient’s
reluctance to go to a hospital or health center. Therefore,
encouragement for patients is important to reduce this
feeling of reluctance. On the other hand, the Lebak women
are socially active, and social groups can be a good medium
to encourage patients with tuberculosis to go to the hospital.
One active group in particular is the women’s religious
group Fatayat NU. Therefore, there is a necessity to develop
an integrated system model to identify new cases and
maintain the completeness of TB treatment through women
empowerment.
This study offers a program to
treat
communicable diseases, especially TB in Lebak district.
Through the implementation of this program,
every
component involved in the application of TB prevention
program will benefit directly and indirectly [4].
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we
present the research method. In Section III, the results are
presented. Section IV presents a solution for increasing the
community knowledge regarding the TB disease and
developed system. In Section V, we discuss our findings.
Section VI concludes the paper.
II.
RESEARCH METHOD
This study has been ongoing for 17 months (began March
2013) and will conclude on October 2014. A variety of
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

methods were employed to develop the model in this study
[5][6][7]:
1.
Literature study of baseline data on case detection
and number of drop-outs, and selected priority area
had been conducted.
2.
Knowledge and behavior of women in the
communities to detect and treat TB cases have been
assessed 
through 
quantitative 
and 
qualitative
approaches.
3.
Training on how to detect and treat TB cases in
religious meetings for two months have been
conducted.
4.
Communication media to increase their knowledge
of TB symptoms have been designed.
5.
A short message application based on System
Development Life Cycle (SDLC) and web design.
Those methods were deployed to develop the
information systems had been developed.
6.
The integrated patients’ database between the
Health Center and community have been developed
7.
A
standard 
operating 
procedure 
(SOP) 
and
knowledge suitable for other districts/counties to
enable replication had been developed.
Three Primary Health Centers (PHC) were involved in
this study, namely PHC Mandala, PHC Karanganyar and
PHC Cibadak.
III.
RESULTS
A.
Problem Identification on Communities
150 women from 3 villages (50 women from each
PHC) were interviewed, and results indicate that only 20%
knew about the symptoms of TB, 50% had heard of TB, and
only 1% knew about TB treatment. The result from problem
identification indicated that the community tends to have
poor knowledge and tends to be very passive toward TB
treatment. Therefore, we developed an implementation
strategy training to increase community awareness in
detecting TB cases with an understanding of symptoms of
TB diseases, such as:
1. Coughing for 2 weeks or longer
2. Sputum is mixed with blood
3. Cold sweats at night (while not conducting any
activities)
4. Chest pains and shortness of breath
5. Decreased appetite and body weight
6. Fever in the evening for a month or longer
Each training took 3 days per season within two months.
We held four trainings for the Lebak women. We also
suggested the women who have received training to teach
about TB symptoms to their social groups, such as their
Quran recitar (pengajian)
group and local women
empowerment (PKK) (Fig. 1).
Figure 1. Training of women to detect and understand the symptoms of TB
diseases
B.
Media Communications Development
A communication media by creating leaflet and pocket
book had been designed. This aims to provide information
of TB, its signs and symptoms, and preventive measures. In
this leaflet, there was also information of a Short Message
System (SMS) gateway number that can be reached by the
target group if TB symptoms are found in the family or
surrounding community. On the other hand, the pocket book
provides information on how to use the SMS application
information system for health officers in PHC and mothers.
Figure 2 illustrates the design process of leaflets, booklets
about TB symptoms should be known and understood by
mothers through several meetings.
Figure 2. Finished leaflet and process of designing leaflets
C.
Problem Identification on System
Several problems were also identified in the assessment
system conducted. Problems were divided into three
components: input, process and output. From the input
component, problems that occurred were [8][9]:
1. Recording
and 
reporting 
process 
were 
still
conducted manually and was potential to human
error;
2. The software that can improve community-based
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

reporting and monitoring of TB patients’ treatment
completeness was not ready yet. The problem which
occurred 
during 
the 
process 
is
that
the
transformation process from data to information was
still manually performed and, in turn, was not
effective for creating routine reports. Because the
manual process took some time, this in turn
impacted on performing the output, such as the need
for extra time for feedback to respond to cases and
the difficulties for community to understand the sign
and symptom of TB.
The constraint of the information systems development
was that the system was not developed in an integrated
manner. It should be developed by seeing the behavior of
the unit of observation, ability of
the operators,
infrastructure constraints, standard operating procedures and
decision makers’ needs. Good information systems should
be tiered, from the smallest unit to the decision-making
units. The integrated information model unit that can
perform well was the availability of trigger unit, which
could enforce the observation unit to be very effective [10].
The TB patients, as the smallest observation unit, and
women can be the trigger units which needs to be observed
periodically. Therefore, in this proposal, empowerment of
women in the family was chosen as the trigger unit in the
integrated information system development.
Considering the aims of this study, we made problem
solving breakthroughs, such as the use of SMS or text
messaging to register suspected TB Patients into certain
Primary Health Center [11]. Preliminary findings indicated
by SMS had many advantages, such as: lower unit cost (no
telephone calls or visits to PHC for reporting), no staff
needed to administer (we designed the system to connect
directly through SMS and PHC’s system), and cost effective
and efficient. In Lebak, most women have GSM mobile
phones. Unfortunately, there are still fees for sending SMS
or text messages.
IV.
SOLUTIONS
There are a number of alternate solutions to overcome
these problems [12][13]:
1. Share information on signs and symptoms of TB with
the community;
2. Conduct trainings
to increase
health officers’
capabilities so they can function as facilitators to
increase community awareness;
3. Develop an information system to effectively assist
communities to report cases to health officers.
4. Improve 
the 
integrated 
system 
process.
A
development that can reduce the delay in reporting
process is required. Besides, this can improve access
to the information, and information can be monitored
and evaluated.
The expected output from this solution is the real time
information which will improve case detection and reduce
drop-outs
[8][10].
Prior
to
these alternate solutions,
empowering community, especially women, to be able to
perform active surveillance was a key element in the
implementation of the information system. In order to
reduce the difficulties experienced by that target user in
using information system, in the early stages of
implementation, 
health 
officers
and 
community
organizations will provide continuous assistance (Fig. 3)
[14]. SMS or text messages are used to register suspect TB
patients which are sent by trained women. If problems
persist, health officers are to provide manual records to
grant data transmission. These two activities will be
conducted by considering the community’s ability to adapt
to the information system (technology acceptance).
Figure 3. Schematic of the SMS system report
A. The SMS for Life system
The system consists of two components [15][16]: an
SMS management tool and a web-based reporting tool. The
SMS management tool (Fig. 4) is an application stores with
single registered mobile telephone number for each health
care worker.
Figure 4. Scheme of the SMS system in the SMS for Life Pilot
B. Training and Socialization
Training 
and 
socialization
participants 
include
representatives of the Lebak District health office, data
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

management and information centers of Primary Health
Centers, and 25 Fatayat NU cadres. These activities were
held at the Fatayat NU Center over two days. The procedure
of sending messages and patients data with symptoms as
well as on leaflets and posters through sms is an important
stage, given that this information system is built based on
the patient data. Leaflets and posters were distributed over
two weeks ago during a meeting with study groups in the
organization Fatayat NU.
Participants were equipped with the knowledge to use
the SMS tools, as well as the procedures for sending SMS
module and assistance for patients to take medication. These
activities were performed in conjunction with training in
community health centers to receive cadre reports, as well
as to send an automatic reply delivery cases and information
on TB patients who had been positive TB diagnosed (Fig.
5). Health providers of Primary Health Centers has a
number of responsibilities for the systems developed, such
as monitoring TB patients to complete their treatments
along with a Fatayat NU cadre, and compiling entire reports
for Primary Health Center and Health District Office every
three months.
The simulation to find cases done in these training was
aimed to train participants to understand field situations and
discuss potential scenarios. The training included question
and answer session and an agreement to send SMS to
primary health center if there is anyone suspected of having
TB disease based on the symptoms explained in this
training.
Figure 5. Training and socialization for Fatayat NU cadres and Primary
Health Care providers
The trial specific procedures to recruit, enroll and
follow-up participants were integrated within existing health
care services pathways which were also discussed as well.
TABLE I. PATIENTS WITH SUSPECTED TB, POSITIVE TB
DIAGNOSIS AND FOLLOWING TREATMENT
Note: TW = quarter
Table I shows a tendency of TB suspect patients on the
increase. This indicates that Fatayat NU cadres have
actively approached and monitored the community in their
area. Moreover, TB positive patients also increased in line
with increased TB suspected patients. The numbers are quite
similar to those of the Lebak District health office’s
estimates on TB positive patients.
However, there are still patients who dropped out (DO)
of their TB treatments. The main reasons of this are that the
patients are unable to pay the cost of treatment and they felt
healthier and, in turn, ended their treatments.
V.
DISCUSSION
According to our findings, the women willing to enroll
in this study such as cadres, were worried of contagious
diseases and thought that the diseases will infect their
families and friends. Ideally, women should be able to
choose when and how frequently they would receive text
messages, since a majority of women use their own mobile
phones.
On the other hand, poor internet access via mobile
phones and computer was one of the biggest obstacles for
communicating with this community. However the strengths
of this study included the representative sample of the
general population. The unique personal identifiers made it
possible to extract information through multiple record
linkages on demographic and socioeconomic factors as well
as previous hospitalization for all of the selected individuals.
The major weakness was the uncertain generalizability
of our findings. However, there was still the benefit that can
be obtained from the data that were linked with the
registered based population, for instance the possibility to
access the socio-demographic data. Coordination with
partners (Department of Health and Fatayat NU) were
carried out in order to perform a more precise analysis of the
TB SMS trials system. In addition, this system showed that
the majority of users were
educated and younger
individuals. The model was designed through media design
communication 
and 
effective 
information 
system
applications. The implementation of a system involving
commitment between partners (Fatayat NU and Department
of Health) as well as volunteers who were able to play an
active role in carrying out these activities was necessary.
Applications were developed by considering the efficiency
and user friendliness which helped the system to be used
optimally.
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The benefit of an integrated information system is to
increase the ability of community to recognize the signs and
symptoms of TB disease. The increase of public awareness
towards TB also affected the number of reports health
workers received on presence of TB symptoms among
communities [17]. The health workers will then proceed the
reports by reminding the patients’ families of the medical
schedule that have been prescribed through Fatayat NU
cadres.
As for the science development, this integrated
information can be used as the reference for the further in-
depth research
on
community empowerment through
appropriate information technology. Moreover, this research
can also be used to increase case detection and decrease
drop-out rate from the TB medical treatment. Furthermore,
this research can also be useful as reference in developing
more user friendly information system for health workers
and communities.
There are weaknesses in this system, such as dependency
on
computers,
electricity,
internet
networks,
and
communication networks associated with mobile phone
signals, as well as fees for sending SMS.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This study shows that mobile phones are an acceptable
approach for detecting new cases of TB and TB treatment
completion and as a desirable and acceptable means of
communication. However, we still need an effective
communication media such as a leaflet that can be provided
information of TB, its signs and symptoms, and preventive
measures. Defining program success is not only determined
by statistical significance, but also determined by the
perception of users. In addition, monitoring and evaluation
phase of designing a system is crucial to its success and
needs to be enforced on a regular basis to maintain the true
potential and continue to adapt with the needs of the
patients.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank to the University of
Indonesia that gave us financial support to conduct the
research with number 2765/H2.R12/HKP.05.00/2013
REFERENCES
[1]
WHO, Global Tuberculosis Report, 2012.
[2]
Ministry of Health Republic of Indonesia, Regulation Health
Minister Of The Republic Of Indonesia Number 565 /
Menkes / PER / III / 2011 on National Tuberculosis Control
Strategy Year 2011-2014, 2011.
[3]
National Development Planning Agency (BAPPENAS),
Report of the Millenium Goals in Indonesia, 2011.
[4]
Ministry of Health Republic of Indonesia, Regulation Health
Minister Of The Republic Of Indonesia Number 192/
Menkes/
SK/   VI/ 2012 about Roadmap Plan for
strengthening of Health Information Systems, 2012.
[5]
D. Gundersten Storla, S.Yimer, and G. Aksel Bjune, "A
systematic review of delay in the diagnosis and treatment of
tuberculosis",
BMC 
Public 
Health,
vol
8, 
2008,
doi:10.1186/1471-2458-8-15.
[6]
Kushniruk, Andre. Human, Social and Organizational
Aspect of Health Information System. Medical Informatic
Series. Hershey New York, 2008.
[7]
M. Lynne Markus, C. Tanis, “The enterprise system
experience-From adoption to success”, In R.W. Zmud, Ed.,
Framing the Domains of IT Research: Glimpsing the future
through the past, Cincinati. 2007.
[8]
WHO, Electronic Health Record: Manual for Developing
Country. Western Pacific Region, 2006.
[9]
V. Venkatesh, M.G. Morris, G.B. Davis, and F.D. Davis,
“User acceptance of information technology: Toward a
unified view”, MIS Quarterly 27 no 3, 425-478, September
2003.
[10]
J.
Tan,
E-Health 
Care 
Information 
Systems:
An
Introduction for Students and Professionals‖. Jossey-Bass, a
Wiley Imprint, 2005.
[11]
Ministry of Health Republic of Indonesia, Regulation Health
Minister Of The Republic Of Indonesia Number 004/
Menkes/ SK/ I/ 2003
Decentralization
Policies
and
Strategies on Health, 2003.
[12]
M. Rahmat, Ibrahim, Samik, Penelitian Bidang Sistem
Informasi Manajemen di Indonesia (SIMDI),” Quo Vadis?
Sistem Informasi”, 2005, MTI-UI, Vol 1(2).
[13]
S. Gondodiputro, “Medical Records and Health Information
Systems in Primary Health Care (PHC)”. Section of Public
Health, FK-Universitas Padjadjaran, Bandung, 2007.
[14]
H. Eko, B.P. Agung, N.S. Fuad, “Hospital Information
System Applications in the Web-Based Framework Using
Sub-system Pharmacy Prado‖”, Universitas Diponegoro,
Semarang. 2008, Vol. 7 No. 1 Januari - Juni.
[15]
S. Albino, K.M. Tabb, D. Requena, M.Egoavil, M.F.
Pineros-Leano, 
F.R. 
Zunt 
and 
P.J. 
Garcia 
mail,
“Perceptions and Acceptability of Short Message Services
Technology to Improve Treatment Adherence among
Tuberculosis Patients in Peru: A Focus Group Study”,
PLOS ONE.
Volume 9, Issue 5,
May 2014, doi:
10.1371/journal.pone.0095770.
[16]
D.Lloyd Johnson, Re-architecting Internet Access and
Wireless Networks for Rural Developing Regions. A
Dissertation for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy.
University Of California. Santa Barbara, March 2013.
[17]
A. Beith, R. Eichler, D. Weil, Worldwide: Incentives for
Tuberculosis Diagnosis and Treatment, In Performance
Incentives for Global Health: Potential and Pitfalls, 2009.
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

