Towards Evidence-Based Self-Management for Spondyloarthritis Patients
Wolfgang Leister, Ingvar Tjøstheim,
Trenton Schulz, Aleksander Bai
Norsk Regnesentral
Oslo, Norway
email: {wolfgang.leister, ingvar.tjostheim,
trenton.schulz, aleksander.bai}@nr.no
Liming Chen
De Montfort University
Leicester, UK
email: liming.chen@dmu.ac.uk
K˚are Birger Hagen, Camilla Fongen,
Nina Øster˚as, Hanne Dagﬁnrud
NKRR, Diakonhjemmet Hospital
Oslo, Norway
email: k.b.hagen@medisin.uio.no
camilla.fongen@diakonsyk.no
Dag Magnar Soldal, Carl-Henrik Franke
Hospital of Southern Norway
Kristiansand, Norway
email: {dag.magnar.soldal,
carl-henrik.franke}@sshf.no
Lars Thomas Boye
Tellu AS
Asker, Norway
Vebjørn Berre
APERTUS AS
Asker, Norway
Jon Hagfors,
Jan Halvard Relbe-Moe
Norsk Revmatikerforbund
Norway
Abstract—We developed a concept including a set of tools
for self-management for patients suffering from axial spondy-
loarthritis (SpA). This concept involves patient-recorded outcome
measures, both subjective assessment and clinical measurements,
that are used to present recommendations. We report from
experiences made while implementing a proof of this concept.
Besides giving the patient a self-management tool, our work also
improved the methodology for clinical measurements.
Keywords—axial spondyloarthritis; self-mangement; healthcare;
self-assessment; evidence-based; mobile applications.
I . I N T RO D U C T I O N
For a variety of chronic diseases, patients managing the
condition themselves (self-management) can result in reduced
costs in the health care sector and an improved clinical
outcome [1]. Self-management encompasses methods where
the patient participates in managing their disease through
education and changes of behaviour and lifestyle [2] [3]. In
evidence-based self-management, elements such as clinical
assessment, collaborative priority and goal-setting, patient self-
efﬁcacy, and active follow-up are essential [4]. We look closer
at self-management settings [5] where patients assess the
status of their disease using sensors and questionnaires on
their smartphones and report the results (i.e., patient-reported
outcome measures) [6] [7]. Based on the results patients
receive non-pharmacological recommendations from the self-
management system to increase their coping skills, help with
pain management, adhere to their medication regime, improve
self-care behaviours, and enact lifestyle changes.
Spondyloarthritis (SpA) describes a group of several related,
but phenotypically distinct rheumatic diseases, such as ankylos-
ing spondylitis (AS). The condition axial SpA is characterised
by inﬂammatory back pain and mainly affects the axial skeleton,
which is distinct from peripheral SpA with other symptoms. In
axial SpA, the ﬁrst appearance is mainly in young adulthood
and can lead to structural and functional impairments and
a decrease in health related quality of life. Although axial
Fig. 1: Concept for controlling the disease with the three parts: self-
management, clinical assessment, and patient-health personnel communication.
SpA is a chronic condition, the symptoms and disease activity
vary over time [8]. The primary goals for managing axial
SpA are to maximise long term health-related quality of life by
controlling symptoms and inﬂammation, preventing progressive
structural damage in the spine, and normalising function and
social participation. Relevant medication and physical training
are recommended as the foundation of the management of
axial SpA [9].
Currently, there are few self-management tools for axial SpA
that are evidence-based. Some tools for subjective assessment
exist, but sensor-based tools for objective assessment are not
yet available to the wider public. Also, there are obstacles to
let patient-assessed data be of use in a clinical setting [10].
This paper presents a concept for evidence-based, self-
management of axial SpA, supported by an implementation
of a smartphone and sensor-based system that can give
recommendations to the patients. We report from experiences
from this implementation.
The remainder of this paper is organised as follows: After a
brief presentation of related work (Section II) and presenting
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

our concept of self-management for axial SpA patients (Sec-
tion III), we show details from the proof of concept implemen-
tation involving subjective and sensor-based clinical assessment
and recommendations to the patient (Section IV). Further, we
present the results from a usability test (Section V). We discuss
our ﬁndings (Section VI) and conclude in Section VII.
I I . R E L AT E D W O R K
Considerable work has been done on self-management
programs for chronic diseases with good results in terms of
quality of life, and reducing the need for care and cost efﬁciency
[11]. Programs such as The Chronic Disease Self-Management
Program have shown signiﬁcant improvement in health distress
and increased perceived self-efﬁcacy [12]. The motivation for
these programs is to provide people with chronic diseases the
tool to efﬁciently mange their own condition.
We can ﬁnd management support for some chronic conditions
using information and communication technology (ICT). These
include: a self-management application called SoberDiary for
alcoholism [13], a mobile application for diabetes that integrates
with personal smartwatches [14], a virtual coach for chronically
ill elderly [15], a smartphone app for rheumatic diseases
management [16]. There are also generic apps for integration
vital signs into personal health devices or electronic medical
record systems [17].
Within axial SpA there are ICT apps like SpA Helper
[18] that helps monitor the disease. But the results from the
monitoring are not part of a feedback cycle; i.e., they do not
use the treat-to-target principle (Section III-A).
I I I . S E L F-M A N AG E M E N T
We ﬁnd multiple deﬁnitions of self-management in the
literature. But we prefer the deﬁnition by Barlow et al. [19]
“. . . the individual’s ability to manage the symptoms, treatment,
physical and psychosocial consequences and life style changes
inherent in living with a chronic condition.” Barlow et al. stress
that monitoring one’s condition and the effect of responses to
daily life can lead to a dynamic and continuous process of
self-regulation.
A. Integrating Treat-To-Target
The treat-to-target method [20] has been developed for
treating axial SpA. This evidence-based method is used after
diagnosis and early treatment, when the disease has reached a
stable state (Fig. 1). At this stage, an individual treatment plan
has been created for the patient. This method uses a treatment
goal (target) for a treatment plan. Following the treatment plan
and regularly assessing the patient’s status provides evidence
about how the disease develops. When the patient’s status
moves away from the treatment target to a worse condition,
health personnel, in discussion with the patient, might adjust
the treatment plan or target.
As part of an evidence-based, self-management setting, the
treat-to-target method is extended so the patient can perform
self-assessment to gather evidence about the current disease
condition by performing assessments, answering questionnaires,
Fig. 2: Treat-to-target in a self-management setting, showing tasks to be
performed by patient and health personnel, respectively.
and following the progress from the patient diary. The patient
diary data can be used for patient-health personnel communi-
cation by making it available to the clinical personnel, either
regularly or when needed (e.g., a patient visit).
Fig. 2 shows how treat-to-target can be aligned with self-
management. The upper unshaded part of the drawing is
the health personnel domain. This is where health personnel
perform clinical assessments and decide the treatment target and
treatment plan. The lower shaded part is the patient’s domain.
This is where the patient can perform assessments, compare
with the target, and adjust some elements of the treatment, e.g.,
physiotherapy or exercise.
B. An Architecture for axial SpA Treatment
Our concept (Fig. 3) builds on a) a solution for self-
management, b) better quality and effectiveness of clinical
assessment, and c) enhanced patient-health personnel commu-
nication.
The solution for self-management lets the patients use tools
at home to control the disease. It includes patient-reported
outcome measures [7], the assessment of ample parameters,
the use of a patient diary [21], patient guidance with respect
to the treat-to-target principles, and alerts in case of changes
of the patient’s condition or physical function.
The concept also enhances the quality and effectiveness of
clinical assessment; assessment methods developed for self-
management are made available for clinical assessment.
The concept includes a foundation for patient-health person-
nel communication. Self-reported assessments can be used for
patient-health personnel communication to explain or visualise
the development of the disease and data transfer to the hospital.
IV. P RO O F O F C O N C E P T F O R A X I A L S PA
S E L F-M A N AG E M E N T
The parts of this architecture that include data exchange
between a health cloud or a patient’s devices and the electronic
health record (EHR) system are beyond the scope of our work.
These are parts that rely on policies deﬁned by public healthcare
providers. So, we focused on implementing tools for clinical
assessment and self-management.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fig. 3: Architecture of a self-management system including three parts: self-
management, clinical assessment, and data exchange.
Fig. 4: Drawing of the APERTUS sensor used for axial movements.
A. Medical Assessment Methods for axial SpA
Medical self-assessment is essential for evidence-based self-
management. So, these self-assessment methods should be
based on medical assessment methods since evidence for their
effectiveness is documented.
The AS Disease Activity Score (ASDAS) is used for
measuring and monitoring disease activity in axial SpA. It
is based on a composite score of domains relevant to patients
and clinicians, including both self-reported items and objective
measures [22].
The Bath indices [23] present outcome measures for use
with SpA patients, and consist of four indices: the Bath AS
Metrology Index (BASMI), the Bath AS Functional Index
(BASFI), the Bath AS Disease Activity Index (BASDAI), and
the Bath AS Patient Global Score (BAS-G). These indices are
designed to give a good clinical assessment using a minimum
number of measurements or questions to be answered. The
BASMI is ﬁve simple clinical measurements; the other indices
consist of a number of questions that are answered on a rating
scale from zero to ten.
Øster˚as et al. [24] described a set of assessment tests that
are candidates for axial SpA self-assessment. These exercises
include: lateral spinal ﬂexion, modiﬁed Schober’s, cervical
rotation, occiput to wall distance, tragus to wall distance,
intermalleolar rotation around the vertical axis, lumbal/thorcal
rotation, six-minutes walking test, stair climb test, sit-to-stand
test, ﬁngertip-to-ﬂoor test, and maximum grip strength test.
B. Sensor-based clinical measurements
APERTUS developed a sensor that can measure rotation
around the vertical axis such as cervical rotation, thoracic
rotation and hip abduction (measured in the supine position).
Furthermore, the result can be transmitted via a wireless
connection to a receiver, such as PC, tablet, or smartphone.
This inertial sensor is packaged in a small box (Fig. 4)
that can be attached to the body. The size of the device is
55mm × 35mm × 3mm. The sensor contains radio technology
that follows Bluetooth standards that might inﬂuence electronic
devices in 2.4 GHz ISM, but to a signiﬁcantly lower degree
than mobile phones.
Compared with other technology such as lasers or optical
sensors, this sensor’s advantages include its high precision and
being cheaper, smaller, and lighter than the other solutions.
Compared to the traditional way of measuring rotation with a
goniometer or myrinometer (e.g., compass) the sensor provides
more precise measurements. The sensor is a simple way to
achieve satisfactory measurements in acceptable use of time
and without health personnel assisting.
In a laboratory setting, the sensor has excellent criterion
validity and reliability for rotation around the vertical axis
in the range of motion from 10 to 120 degrees. The angle
can be measured with a precision of ±1.3◦. These ﬁndings
justify proceeding with further evaluations of the sensor for
this kind of measurements [25] [26]. A clinical trial of the
rotation measurements with 60 patients suffering from axial
SpA is currently under evaluation.
We developed a suitable user interface for the assessment
process with the sensor. The assessed data are stored locally
in the patient diary and forwarded to the health cloud for
permanent storage.
C. Self-Assessment of Subjective Conditions
For the assessment of the subjective conditions for BASDAI
and BASFI we implemented suitable user interfaces in our
prototype (Fig. 5). We also implemented a questionnaire for
ASDAS, a composite score including subjective evaluation
and the inﬂammatory markers C-reactive protein (CRP) and
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Patients answer The
questions on a scale from zero to ten by tapping on the
appropriate number. We did not choose sliders because we
assumed that tapping on the appropriate ﬁeld would be easier
for the target group with their possible movement restrictions.
After the form is ﬁnished, the data are stored locally. An
estimate of the current health condition is shown to give the
patient feedback along with the possibility to report these data
to the health cloud for permanent storage.
Questionnaires can be scheduled using the mobile device’s
calendar by creating calender entries with a speciﬁc syntax.
The calendar then reminds patients to perform assessments at
a given time.
D. Self-Management and Recommendation
A self-management system needs to support the patient
in the following ways: a) deciding the type and degree of
adjustments for non-pharmacological changes in a treatment
plan, such as diet, training, lifestyle, or other minor adjustments;
b) identifying signiﬁcant deviations from the expected progress
and present these deviations to the patient and health personnel;
c) advising changes of treatment plan to the health personnel;
and d) suggest changes of patient’s target to the health
personnel. Qi et al. [27] present an approach for how to make
decisions that are presented to the patient. We use a diary in
our solution.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

(a)
The
ASDAS/BASDAI
menu.
(b) The BASFI menu.
(c) The result page.
Fig. 5: Screenshots for the data collection module.
(a)
The
diary
login
screen.
(b)
The
diary
patient
view.
(c) The diary history view
for BASDAI.
Fig. 6: Screenshots from the patient diary app.
The diary shows the disease’s development visually, devia-
tions from the treatment plan, and gives recommendations using
trend labels. The patient view (Fig. 6b) shows the patient’s
birth year, the current left and right cervical rotation, and the
current scores for ASDAS, BASDAI, and BASFI, including
their targets. Each of these scores can have historical data; this
is shown in the patient history view (Fig. 6c) and summarized
in the trend labels (Fig. 7) to the right of the value. There
are ﬁve trend labels: (a) disease activity is increasing, but
below target; (b) disease activity is increasing; (c) no change
in disease activity; (d) disease activity is decreasing, either
below or heading towards target; and (e) disease activity is
decreasing, but still very high and needs more treatment.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
Fig. 7: Trend labels for the patient view.
E. Heuristic Decision Support Based on Medical Expertise
We created simple rules to guide patients and health
personnel. These rules are based on the values from ASDAS,
BASDAI, and BASFI.
The values derived in ASDAS and BASDAI indicate the
amount of disease activity. Machado et al. [28] deﬁne cutoff
values for disease activity measured using ASDAS: a) under
1.3 the disease is inactive; b) between 1.3 and 2.1 disease
activity is moderate; c) 2.1 to 3.5
disease activity is high;
and d) Over 3.5 disease activity is very high. A change on
the ASDAS scale of 1.1 or more is considered a clinically
important change while 2.0 or more is considered a major
change. Based on this work, we indicate the trend of the
scores (up, down, or steady), as well as the severity (colour).
The thresholds can be personalised for patients where health
personnel deﬁnes alternative values.
Braun et al. [29] propose a similar approach for BASDAI by
calculating a trend line that uses BASDAI targets for cutoffs.
Situations where the BASDAI is above 4.0 - indication of
high disease activity - or changes of the BASDAI over 50%
or a factor of two also generate a warning to contact health
personnel.
BASFI indicates the disability level. Wariaghli et al. [30] ran
a large survey with Moroccan patients and deﬁned the target
values depending on the patient’s age in three age ranges. We
use similar rules as above for determining the trend based on
the patient’s target or age information, depending on what is
available.
V. U S A B I L I T Y T E S T O F T H E P ROT OT Y P E S
Usability, how easy something is to use, is an important factor
for adoption and continuous use of a system or application.
Motivated by this, we performed a usability test of the two
developed prototypes. We wanted to see how appropriate the
apps are for their purpose, and to get feedback on the usability.
We employed the System Usability Scale (SUS) developed
by Brooke [31]. The SUS consists of ten questions that are
rated by the participants on a ﬁve point or a seven point Likert
scale [32]. The ratings are used to calculate a score on a scale
from 0 to 100 where 70 is the average score. Additionally,
we added six questions on related matters that are not part of
the SUS scale, e.g., the need for the apps, satisfaction, and
whether participants would recommend the apps to others.
For the usability test, we recruited eighteen individuals
with Android smartphones among members of the Norwegian
Rheumatology Association (Norsk Revmatikerforbund). We
asked the eighteen to download the two apps and sign up for
the usability test. Of the invited participants, fourteen followed
the procedure, downloaded the app, and registered at the health
cloud site. The individuals received the link to the surveys
after they had downloaded the apps and a text message with
instructions. Of the eighteen individuals, nine used the apps
and completed the test.
With only nine respondents, the usability test is more a
pilot study. If an application has major usability weaknesses,
these will likely be revealed with small sample sizes also. Our
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE I: SUS scores for the collection module app and patient diary app
with highest and lowest scores removed.
Average
Median
Collection module
73.73
80.20
Patient diary
74.05
74.35
test did not indicate major weaknesses. We did not perform
statistical analysis of the data beyond calculating SUS scores.
We performed separate tests for each app. The average and
median from the SUS are presented in Table I with the highest
and lowest scores eliminated. The SUS scores of the apps are
73 and 74, respectively.
VI. D I S C U S S I O N
The proposed concept for self-management is based on a
feedback loop with the patient is involved. Axial SpA does not
require immediate attention when the condition worsens, but
an appointment with a clinic needs to be scheduled. Also, not
adhering to the self-management regime does not have other
side-effects beyond not adhering to the treatment, and these
patients need to keep the conventional frequency of clinical
follow-ups. Note that other chronic diseases might require
immediate attention in some situations or not adhering to the
self-management regime might worsen the patient’s condition.
Thus, an evaluation is needed for other conditions than axial
SpA to see if our self-management architecture can be applied.
Data assessed in self-management are usually not complete
or might be of a different nature in terms of the clinical
indices. For example, the values extracted from blood samples
might not be available, only selected values from the BASMI
examinations might be available, or the patient assesses
alternative measurements that are not part of the established
indices. To support recommendations in these cases, it is
necessary to predict an individuals axial SpA disease condition
based on a combination of physiological, behavioural and
subjective (self-reported) features. To achieve this, Schiboni
et al. [33] have proposed a fuzzy rule-based evidential reasoning
(FURBER) approach for multiple assessment fusion. But this
approach requires enough real patient data as training data to
be considered for real treatment.
The medical indices for axial SpA and the data retrieved
from the FURBER method are only suited to give an indication
of the disease conditions at one moment. For predicting the
probable development of the patient’s health condition and
whether actions need to be taken requires temporal reasoning.
Modelling the disease development as a stochastic process to
optimise the treatment recommendations could be done by a
Markov Decision Process (MDP) [34]. Yet a large sample size
could make this approach less viable [35]. Alternatively, the
patient proﬁling method described by Lutz et al. [36], could
be feasible.
The new assessment methodology for rotation exercises
using sensor technology will also impact clinical use as
it will save time and provide better results. Today, health
personnel use goniometer or compass-based measurements
that are time consuming but have acceptable accuracy. The
trials in clinics have shown this new methodology simpliﬁes
clinical measurements, greatly improves accuracy, and saves
time for the health personnel and the patient. The time saved
and higher-quality data quickly make up for the cost of the
sensors. Speciﬁcally, the much higher accuracy and easier
handling of the sensor technology compared to the traditionally
used methods is attractive to health professionals. Furthermore,
the sensor will enable patients to perform the measurements
themselves without the involvement of health personnel.
VII. C O N C L U S I O N
We presented an architecture for self-management of axial
SpA patients that is based on self-assessment by these patients.
We have performed a proof of concept by implementing vital
parts of a self-management system including clinical mea-
surements, patient-reported outcome measurements, feedback
module, patient diary, and decision making software.
Further user evaluations will be necessary before a system
based on our architecture can be brought into clinical practise.
In addition, communication modules to the EHR system of the
clinics need to be implemented. Further, the development of
suitable measurements for exercises beyond rotation exercises
need to be developed in a way that allows patients to perform
these at home.
Finally, since patient-reported data might not be of the best
quality (e.g., they have not undergone quality assurance or
might be incomplete) estimation methods both for the current
disease status and for temporal prediction need to be developed.
While we could show the viability of the methods, further
implementation work needs to be done.
VIII. AC K N O W L E D G M E N T S
The work presented here has been carried out in the Mobile
musculO SKeletal User Self-management (MOSKUS) project
funded by the Research Council of Norway in the VERDIKT
programme, grant number 227251.
R E F E R E N C E S
[1] L. C. Li, A. F. Townsend, and E. M. Badley, “Self-management
interventions in the digital age: New approaches to support
people with rheumatologic conditions.” Best Pract Res Clin
Rheumatol, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 321–33, 2012.
[2] K. R. Lorig, P. D. Mazonson, and H. R. Holman, “Evidence
suggesting that health education for self-management in patients
with chronic arthritis has sustained health beneﬁts while reducing
health care costs,” Arthritis & Rheumatism, vol. 36, no. 4, pp.
439–446, 1993.
[3] T. J. Brady, J. Kruger, C. G. Helmick, L. F. Callahan, and
M. L. Boutaugh, “Intervention programs for arthritis and other
rheumatic diseases,” Health Education & Behaviour, vol. 30,
no. 1, pp. 44–63, February 2003.
[4] M. Battersby et al., “Twelve Evidence-Based Principles for
Implementing Self-Management Support in Primary Care,” Joint
Commission Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, pp. 561–570,
Dec. 2010.
[5] Y. Miedany, “e-rheumatology: are we ready?” Clinical Rheuma-
tology, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 831–837, 2015.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[6] D. Palmer and Y. E. Miedany, “Proms: a novel approach to
arthritis self-management,” British Journal of Nursing, vol. 21,
no. 10, pp. 601–607, 2012.
[7] Ø. Dale, T. Schulz, A. Christie, and H. Dagﬁnrud, “Collection
of patient reported outcome measures using short messaging
service,” in eTELEMED 2013, The Fifth International Confer-
ence on eHealth, Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, pp. 214–
219. International Academy, Research and Industry Association
(IARIA), 2013.
[8] J. Braun and J. Sieper, “Ankylosing spondulitis,” Lancet, vol.
369, pp. 1379–1390, 2007.
[9] J. Braun et al., “2010 update of the ASAS/EULAR recommen-
dations for the management of ankylosing spondylitis,” Annals
of the Rheumatic Diseases, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 896–904, 2011.
[10] P. West, R. Giordano, M. van Kleek, and N. Shadbolt, “The
Quantiﬁed Patient in the Doctor’s Ofﬁce,” in Proceedings of the
2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems
- CHI ’16, pp. 3066–3078.
New York, USA: ACM Press, 2016.
[11] U. E. Bauer, P. A. Briss, R. A. Goodman, and B. A. Bowman,
“Prevention of chronic disease in the 21st century: elimination of
the leading preventable causes of premature death and disability
in the usa,” The Lancet, vol. 384, no. 9937, pp. 45–52, 2014.
[12] K. R. Lorig et al., “Chronic disease self-management program: 2-
year health status and health care utilization outcomes,” Medical
care, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 1217–1223, 2001.
[13] C. You et al., “Soberdiary: A phone-based support system for
assisting recovery from alcohol dependence,” in Proceedings
of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems, CHI 2015, Seoul, Republic of Korea, April
18-23, 2015, B. Begole, J. Kim, K. Inkpen, and W. Woo, Eds.,
pp. 3839–3848.
ACM, 2015.
[14] E. ˚Arsand, M. Muzny, M. Bradway, J. Muzik, and G. Hartvigsen,
“Performance of the First Combined Smartwatch and Smartphone
Diabetes Diary Application Study,” Journal of Diabetes Science
and Technology, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 556–563, May 2015.
[15] A. van Wissen, C. Vinkers, and A. van Halteren, “Developing a
virtual coach for chronic patients: A user study on the impact
of similarity, familiarity and realism,” in Persuasive Technology,
pp. 263–275.
Springer, 2016.
[16] A. R. P. Azevedo, H. M. L. de Sousa, J. A. F. Monteiro, and
A. R. N. P. Lima, “Future perspectives of smartphone applica-
tions for rheumatic diseases self-management,” Rheumatology
international, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 419–431, 2015.
[17] H. S. Park, H. Cho, and H. S. Kim, “Development of a multi-
agent m-health application based on various protocols for chronic
disease self-management,” Journal of medical systems, vol. 40,
no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2016.
[18] M. Jagoda, “SpA Helper,” web pages. [Online]. Available: https:
//itunes.apple.com/cv/app/spa-helper/id722932133 [Accessed: 2.
May, 2016].
[19] J. Barlow, C. Wright, J. Sheasby, A. Turner, and J. Hainsworth,
“Self-management approaches for people with chronic conditions:
a review,” Patient Education and Counseling, vol. 48, no. 2, pp.
177–187, 2002.
[20] J. S. Smolen et al., “Treating spondyloarthritis, including ankylos-
ing spondylitis and psoriatic arthritis, to target: recommendations
of an international task force.” Ann Rheum Dis, vol. 73, no. 1,
pp. 6–16, 2014.
[21] S. A. Raymond and R. N. Ross, “Electronic subject diaries in
clinical trials,” Applied Clinical Trials, pp. 48–58, March 2000.
[22] J. Zochling, “Measures of symptoms and disease status in
ankylosing spondylitis: Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity
Score (ASDAS), Ankylosing Spondylitis Quality of Life Scale
(ASQoL), Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Disease Activity Index
(BASDAI), Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Functional Index
(BASFI), Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Global Score (BAS-
G), Bath Ankylosing Spondylitis Metrology Index (BASMI),
Dougados Functional Index (DFI), and Health Assessment
Questionnaire for the Spondylarthropathies (HAQ-S),” Arthritis
Care Res.(Hoboken.), vol. 63 Suppl 11, pp. S47–S58, Nov 2011.
[23] K. Irons and C. Joffries, “The Bath Indices – outcome measures
for use with ankylosing spondylitis patients,” The National
Ankylosing Spondylitis Society (NASS), Surrey, UK, 2009.
[24] N. Øster˚as, H. Dagﬁnrud, A. T. Tveter, D. M. Soldal, C. Fongen,
and C.-H. Franke, “About spondyloarthritis, disease speciﬁc
questionnaires and assessments, and generic ﬁeld tests for health-
related physical ﬁtness,” Diakonhjemmet Sykehus, NKRR-notat
2-2013, 2013.
[25] C. Fongen, A. T. Tveter, F. R. Andersen, N. Øster˚as, and
V. Berre, “Laboratory validity and reliability of a new sensor
developed for measuring rotation around the vertical axis
– a subproject in the Mobile mosculO SKeletal User Self-
management,” Diakonhjemmet Sykehus, NKRR-notat 1-2016,
2016.
[26] C. Fongen, N. Øster˚as, F. R. Andersen, V. Berre, A. T. Tveter,
and K. B. Hagen, “Innovation in health care – laboratory validity
and reliability of a new sensor developed to measure cervical
rotation,” Annals of the Rheumatic Diseases, vol. 75, no. suppl
2, p. 1288, 2016.
[27] J. Qi, L. Chen, W. Leister, and S. Yang, “Towards knowledge
driven decision support for personalized home-based self-
management of chronic disease,” in Proc. of the 2015 Smart
World Congress, pp. 1724–1729, 2015.
[28] P. Machado et al., “Ankylosing spondylitis disease activity score
(asdas): deﬁning cut-off values for disease activity states and
improvement scores,” Annals of the rheumatic diseases, vol. 70,
no. 1, pp. 47–53, 2011.
[29] J. Braun et al., “International ASAS consensus statement for
the use of anti-tumour necrosis factor agents in patients with
ankylosing spondylitis.” Annals of the rheumatic diseases,
vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 817–824, 2003.
[30] G. Wariaghli et al., “Normative values for the Bath Ankylosing
Spondylitis Functional Index in the general population com-
pared with ankylosing spondylitis patients in Morocco,” BMC
Musculoskelet Disord, vol. 13, no. 1, p. 40, 2012.
[31] J. Brooke, “SUS: A quick and dirty usability scale,” in Us-
ability evaluation in industry, P. W. Jordan, B. Weerdmeester,
A. Thomas, and I. L. McClelland, Eds.
London: Taylor and
Francis, 1996.
[32] K. Finstad, “Response interpolation and scale sensitivity: Evi-
dence against 5-point scales,” J. Usability Studies, vol. 5, no. 3,
pp. 104–110, May 2010.
[33] G. Schiboni, W. Leister, and L. Chen, “Using fuzzy evidential
reasoning for multiple assessment fusion in spondylarthropathic
patient self-management,” in Emerging Trends and Advanced
Technologies for Science and Information, ser. Studies in
Computational Intelligence.
Springer, 2016.
[34] C. C. Bennett and K. Hauser, “Artiﬁcial intelligence framework
for simulating clinical decision-making: A markov decision
process approach,” Artiﬁcial Intelligence in Medicine, vol. 57,
no. 1, pp. 9–19, 2013.
[35] A. J. Schaefer, M. D. Bailey, S. M. Shechter, and M. S. Roberts,
“Modeling medical treatment using markov decision processes,”
in Operations Research and Health Care: A Handbook of
Methods and Applications, M. L. Brandeau, F. Sainfort, and
W. P. Pierskalla, Eds., pp. 593–612.
Boston, MA: Springer US,
2004.
[36] W. Lutz, Z. Martinovich, and K. I. Howard, “Patient proﬁling: An
application of random coefﬁcient regression models to depicting
the response of a patient to outpatient psychotherapy.” Journal
of consulting and clinical psychology, vol. 67, no. 4, p. 571,
1999.
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

