Semantic Interoperability of Medical Information Systems and Scientific
Repositories
Dimitar Tcharaktchiev
Medical University
Department of Medical Informatics, USHATE
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: dimitardt@gmail.com
Emanuil Markov
Technical University
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: emospy@gmail.com
Evgeniy Krastev
Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridsky
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: eck@fmi.uni-sofia.bg
Ivan Ivanov
Technical University
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: ivan.evgeniev@gmail.com
Abstract—This study presents the implementation of European
health informatics standards in the Hospital Information
System (HIS) and the Scientific Repositories employed in the
University
Specialized
Hospital
for
Active
treatment
of
Endocrinology. It has the purpose to demonstrate the usage of
the archetype paradigm in achieving semantic interoperability
in clinical data exchange. This approach enables to transfer
several medico-administrative, clinical and laboratory data
from the Hospital Information System to the Register of rare
endocrine diseases.
The Orphanet
nomenclature of
rare
diseases
as
well
as
international
Logical
Observation
Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC) maintained by the
Regenstrief Institute, and Systematized Nomenclature Of
Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED-CT) codes are used for
this purpose. Initial computer experiments are demonstrated
and discussed.
Keywords-Semantic interoperability; archetype object model;
Health informatics standards; Medical Information Systems;
Hospital Information Systems; Clinical registries.
I.
INTRODUCTION
This study presents the implementation of European
health informatics standards in the Hospital Information
System (HIS) and the Scientific Repositories working in the
University Specialized Hospital for Active Treatment of
Endocrinology, (USHATE), and the transfer of clinical data
between them preserving their clinical context.
II.
METHODOLOGY
The patient is in the center of the integration of all
clinical
and
administrative
data.
Documentation
and
messages conforming to the United Nations rules for
Electronic Data Interchange for Administration, Commerce
and Transport (UN/EDIFACT) are created [1]. The standard
EN ISO 13606
for Electronic Health
Record
(EHR)
communication and archetype paradigm is applied (see
Figure 1). Roger’s definition for Minimum Basic Data Set
(MBDS) is adopted including core of information with the
most commonly available set of items and most extensive
range
of
usages
[1].
The
applied
standards
and
nomenclatures support the semantic interoperability between
the systems.
III.
RESULTS
Several medico-administrative, clinical and laboratory
data can be transferred from the Hospital Information
System to the Register of rare endocrine diseases, keeping
the context of their registration, structuring the measured
results, used nomenclatures and methods in archetype
concepts satisfying the Archetype Object Model of EN ISO
13606 [2][3]. In this register, the ICD 10 codes are mapped
to the Orphanet nomenclature of rare diseases and respective
ORPHA codes. For example, Figure 1 displays patient’s
names, sex, age and several anthropometric data - Height,
Weight, and Body Mass Index. Records concerning the
blood pressure include the Systolic and the Diastolic blood
pressure, the method and the place of measurement and the
technical details as type of device, position, level of the
patient effort, inclination of the patient, and other conditions.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This approach of standardization at all stages of data
transmission gives the possibility to transfer the data between
our national register and the international repositories, using
the European standard for an International Patient Summary
(IPS) (prEN 17269) [4].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the National Scientific
Program “е-Health in Bulgaria”. 
REFERENCES
[1]
D. Tcharaktchiev et al., MEDICA – 9 Years of Development
and Use of a Clinical Information System in the University
Hospital of Endocrinology and Gerontology – Sofia. in:
Medical Informatics Europe ’96, J. Brender et al. (Eds.), IOS
Press, 1996, pp. 458-462.
[2]
D, Tcharaktchiev, V. Gergiev, and I. Ivanov, “Archetypes and
Standards for Medical Information Interchange”. ACSIJ
Advances in Computer Science: an International Journal, Vol.
4, Issue 5, No.17 , 2015, pp. 133-137.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[3]
CEN/TC 215, "ISO 13606-2:2019. Health informatics --
Electronic health record communication -- Part 2: Archetype
interchange specification," ISO, 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://www.iso.org/standard/62305.html.[last
accessed:
22.10.2020].
[4]
CEN/TC 251, “EN 17269 Health informatics - The Patient
Summary for Unscheduled
Cross-border Care”. European
Committee for Standardization, Brussels, 2018.
Figure 1. Blood Pressure Archetype (HIS of the University Specialised Hospital for Active Treatment of Endocrinology – Sofia, Bulgaria).
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

