Technology Acceptance of an Online Speech and Language Assessment Application 
for Stroke Patients - the Medical Caregivers' Viewpoints 
 
Awais Ahmad 
Computer and Systems Science 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: awais.ahmad@miun.se 
 
 
Karin Ahlin 
Computer and Systems Science 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: Karin.ahlin@miun.se  
 
 
Peter Mozelius 
Computer and Systems Science 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: Peter.mozelius@miun.se 
 
 
Abstract— Stroke is a globally increasing disease and speech 
and language deficiencies are common in stroke survivors. To 
facilitate medical caregivers in their professional work and to 
improve patients’ quality of life, technology can play an 
important role.  However, the use and acceptance of 
technology are uncertain, and more research is needed in this 
direction. This study evaluates the technology acceptance and 
adoption of an online speech and language assessment 
application. The evaluation focused Design Science Research 
strategy was adopted for that purpose. Two physiotherapists, 
one occupational therapist and three speech therapists 
participated in the study. The Unified Theory of Acceptance 
and Use of Technology (UTAUT) was used as the theoretical 
base for interview questions formation and data analysis. The 
study findings show that the suggested application is useful and 
easy to use; however, it should be more synchronised with 
speech therapists’ daily work routines. The speech therapists 
stressed that functionalities of the application should be 
designed in close collaboration with them, and it should be 
compatible with the already existing systems and services in 
place.  Due to the impairments after stroke, the patients have 
some specific preferences for software and hardware such as a 
tablet with touch pen is the preferred hardware. Additionally, 
the interface should have bigger text fonts and pictures, and 
highly contrastive colours in the graphics should be used for 
patients’ convenience. The user’s privacy and security, 
patient’s current health, and their previous knowledge and 
experience about technology were also found important 
determinants for intention to use the given technology.  
Keywords-Technology 
acceptance; 
Speech 
and 
language 
relearning; Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of 
Technology (UTAUT); eHealth; Stroke.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION   
In the rapidly growing percentage of older adults, age-
related chronic diseases increase [1]. Stroke is one of those 
diseases where stroke survivors often suffer from both 
physical and mental impairments [2]. The impairments after 
stroke have a serious impact on patients' overall daily life 
quality and often a patient's friends and relatives are affected 
[3][4]. Stroke impairments and rehabilitation after stroke can 
be divided into motoric, cognitive and speech disabilities [5]. 
This study has a focus on speech impairments and the use of 
a technology-enhanced system to assess the speech and 
language impairment, and to find a relevant rehabilitation 
plan. 
After stroke patients' ability to read, write, speak and 
listen can be decreased to different degrees depending on 
how the stroke has affected the brain [6]. Stroke patients' 
social and professional life is often severely affected, which 
can lead to an isolated and depressed state of mind.  An 
important part of a successful rehabilitation process is to 
early assess the speech and language impairments, and to 
start the relearning as soon as possible. Speech therapists 
often work with pen-and-paper based assessment systems 
where calculating results, storing statistics, and measuring 
progress are time-consuming tasks. This study evaluates a 
prototype of the digitalisation of the pen-and-paper based 
language assessment system 'A-ning'. 
Aning is a Swedish word that could be translated to 
English as 'Clue', symbolising the important idea of getting a 
clue of which speech and language relearning activities the 
actual patient needs. The A-ning system has at least three 
user roles, stroke patients, speech therapists and health 
administrators. This first evaluation of the digital prototype 
only involves the speech therapist perspective, and that this 
must be followed up later by tests with the other user groups. 
Three speech therapists with a long professional career 
participated in the tests for this study, where interview 
questions and data analysis were based on the Unified 
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) [7]. 
A. Aim  
Despite the fact that several advanced and sophisticated 
technologies are available in the health sector, the use and 
acceptance of these technologies are doubtful and more 
research is needed to find the critical factors that might affect 
technology acceptance [8]–[11]. UTAUT model [12]  has 
been widely used in research to evaluate the effectiveness 
and adoption of technology-enhanced systems [11][13][14]. 
This study is aimed to access and evaluate the technology 
acceptances of an eHealth application by using the UTAUT 
as a theoretical model.  
 
 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The addressed research question was:  
What is the technology acceptance of a speech and 
language assessment application from medical caregivers’ 
viewpoint? 
 
The remaining paper is structured as follows. In Section 
II, the UTAUT theory is presented as the theoretical 
framework of this study. An overview of the Speech and 
Language Assessment Application (A-ning) is given in 
Section III. Section IV describes the adopted methodology 
for this study, while the study results and the discussion 
about those results are presented in Sections V and VI 
respectively. 
Finally, 
The 
study 
conclusion 
and 
recommendations for future work are presented in Section 
VII. 
II. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK: UNIFIED THEORY OF 
ACCEPTANCE AND USE OF TECHNOLOGY (UTAUT) 
The UTAUT model was designed to assess the user 
behaviour and intention to use technology [12]. It is a 
synthesis of eight different theories and models that were 
previously designed for technology acceptance including the 
Technology  Acceptance Model (TAM), a widely 
acknowledged model to identify the intention to use the 
technology [11][13][15].  
After comparing and synthesizing those eight models, 
Venkatesh et al. [12] suggested that the intention to use 
technology depends upon four basic factors: performance 
expectancy, effort expectancy, social influence and 
facilitating conditions. Performance expectancy is explained 
in TAM as “perceived usefulness”, and effort expectancy is 
stated as “ease of use” in TAM. In other words, the UTAUT 
model can be seen as an extension of TAM as it adds two 
extra factors, social influence and facilitating conditions. 
Several studies highlighted that social influence such as the 
role of important others, and facilitating conditions like 
education and training are important for technology 
acceptance [6][16]–[18]. Therefore, the UTAUT model was 
preferred as the theoretical framework for this study. The 
UTAUT model suggests the following four technology 
acceptance elements. 
A. Performance expectancy 
Venkatesh et al. [12] defined performance expectancy as 
“the degree to which an individual believes that using the 
system will help him or her to attain gains in job 
performance” 
[12]. 
It 
is 
considered 
an 
important 
determinant of intention to use technology in many different 
studies [7]. Venkatesh et al. [12] highlight, the user should 
have a firm belief that the system will improve his/her 
productivity and performance, speed up the work tasks and 
it will make the work easier. 
B. Effort expectancy 
Effort expectancy describes the user’s belief in the ease 
of use of the system. Venkatesh et al. [12] stress that 
learning to operate the new system should be easy and 
quick, the use of the system should be effortless, and the 
interaction with the system should be understandable and 
clear. The system should take less time and effort to perform 
mechanical operations such as data input [7].  
C. Social influence 
Venkatesh et al. [12] described social influence as “The 
degree to which an individual perceives that important 
others believe he or she should use the new system”.  The 
beliefs of the other influential and important people have a 
significant effect on the intention of use of the system. In an 
organization, the viewpoints of co-workers, supervisors and 
senior management play an important role in the acceptance 
of a technology-enhanced system.  
D. Facilitating conditions 
Venkatesh et al. [12] defined facilitating conditions as 
“The degree to which an individual believes that an 
organizational and technical infrastructure exists to support 
the use of the system”. The new system should be 
compatible and synchronized with the existing work 
routines and work style of the user. Guidance, clear 
instructions to use, and personalized support are the 
essential determinants for technology acceptance [7].  
III. 
SPEECH AND LANGUAGE ASSESSMENT APPLICATION 
(A-NING) OVERVIEW 
Speech and language relearning starts with an initial test 
of the patient’s communication loss after stroke; the test is 
called A-ning [19].  Despite the test is being developed a 
long time ago (in 1995), it is still the most used and 
comprehensive test for language impairments in Sweden 
[20]. The test is a standardised process conducted by speech 
therapists, and it consists of different assessment tasks. For 
example, the patient is asked to look at an image (see Figure 
1) of an outdoor restaurant and describe the different 
activities there.   
 
 
Figure 1.  An example of a Patient’s task  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

      During a session with the patient, the speech therapist 
gives some points from 0 to 5 on each task. Those points are 
then calculated according to different language categories 
and the average of all those categories is calculated to 
summarize the assessment, which is quite a time taking 
process. Figure 2 presents the manual evaluation after the 
test.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Manual and paper-pen based evaluation 
 
      The speech therapists (Participants 1-3, Table 1) 
emphasised the need of converting this old paper-pen 
system to an online application. The application was co-
created in close cooperation with speech therapists. As 
presented in Figure 3, after the session with the patient, the 
application presents auto-generated graphs.  
 
Figure 3. Digital Speech and language Evaluation System  
 
      Each graph presents a set of exercises that are related to 
a specific category. Different colours in the graphs present a 
patient's deficiency level; the green colour presents minor 
impairments, the yellow colour presents mild impairments 
and the red colour presents some major impairments. 
IV. 
METHOD 
To explore and evaluate the technology acceptance of an 
online aphasia assessment application, the Evaluation 
Focused Design Science Research strategy was followed 
[21]. The assessment application was developed in 
collaboration with speech therapists at regional municipality 
rehabilitation. Six therapists participated in the study. Their 
location and years of experience in speech and language 
rehabilitation are presented in the following Table 1. 
 
TABLE I.  
STUDY PARTICIPANTS 
Participants 
Professional role 
Region 
Years of 
experience 
Participant 1 
Speech therapist #1 
Stockholm 
25 
Participant 2 
Speech therapist #2 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
4 
Participant 3 
Speech therapist #3 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
5 
Participant 5 
Occupational 
Therapist 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
5 
Participant 6 
Physiotherapist #1 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
8 
Participant 7 
Physiotherapist #2 
Mid Sweden 
Region 
3 
 
Participants 4-6 work as the mobile stroke-rehabilitation 
team at the regional hospital. They offer rehabilitation 
services at the patient's home for those who are living within 
the 70 Km range from the hospital. The main reason to 
involve these participants was to explore the effect of social 
influence on technology acceptance.  
Following design science, the evaluation is conducted in 
two steps. First, the artefact was demonstrated for an initial 
evaluation and a detailed evaluation was conducted in the 
next step.   
A. Demonstrate artefact 
The purpose of this activity was to demonstrate and test 
the artefact in one case. In this activity, the application was 
tested and evaluated for technology acceptance with only 
one speech therapist (Participant 2). This type of initial 
demonstration gives us an idea about how well the artefact 
addresses 
the 
identified 
problem 
in 
one 
scenario.  
Johannesson and Perjons [21] argue, if an artefact performs 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

well in one case, there are some good possibilities that it 
might perform the same in many other cases.  
Figure 4 presents an overview of the artefact 
demonstration activity. The activity was carried out in two 
sub-activities. First, a test case was designed that contains 
five tasks followed by some interview questions (see 
APPENDIX I). The interview questions were developed 
using UTAUT as base knowledge [7][12].  
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Demonstrate artefacts Activity  
 
The activity was performed at the local municipality 
rehabilitation centre, one speech therapist (Participant 2) and 
all the three researchers participated in this activity. After the 
session, the researchers discussed and analysed the data, and 
found that the application was effective for aphasia 
assessment; however, some changes and additional functions 
were 
suggested. 
The 
application 
was 
updated 
by 
implementing the suggested alterations and it was ready for a 
detailed evaluation. 
B. Evaluate artefacts 
After demonstrating the artefact, the next step was to 
make a detailed evaluation of the artefact. As suggested by 
Johannesson and Perjons [21], this activity aimed to evaluate 
whether the developed artefact solves the defined research 
problem or not. As presented in Figure 5, the activity was 
conducted in three sub-activities; analyse the context, select 
goals, and finally conduct the evaluation. The old aphasia 
evaluation system was paper-pen based while the new 
system is technology-enhanced; therefore, technology 
acceptance was analysed as a context and exploring 
technology acceptance of the new system was highlighted as 
an important goal for conducting the evaluation. As 
described in the artefact demonstration activity, UTAUT was 
used as theoretical base knowledge for data collection and 
analysis. 
Four sessions were conducted with all three speech 
therapists. In both demonstration and evaluation activities, 
the same interview questions and evaluation tasks were used 
(See APPENDIX I). Because of the Covid-19, some 
participants were working from home, therefore, three 
sessions were conducted at the municipality rehabilitation 
centre, where two researchers participated online and only 
one researcher conducted the session at the rehabilitation 
centre. However, the last interview was entirely online where 
all the study participants and the researchers participated 
online. For data collection and recordings, the Zoom 
Meetings Platform was used [22].  
 
 
Figure 5.  Evaluate artefacts Activity  
 
 
Deductive thematic analysis was performed for data 
analysis [23]. First, the transcripts and audio recording were 
thoroughly examined and initial codes that were relevant to 
technology acceptance of the artefact were selected. The 
defined codes were then categorised according to the 
determinant factors of the UTAUT model as initial themes. 
Thereafter, the important findings that were relevant to 
answer the research question were identified and presented in 
the findings section. 
C. Ethical considerations  
The rules and regulations from the Swedish Research 
Council (Codex)  were followed for ethical considerations 
[24]. Before the interviews started, all the participants were 
informed that they could refuse to answer any question and 
cancel the interview at any time (before or during the 
interview). The privacy and anonymity of the study 
participants are also important to consider in research ethics  
where people are involved [25]. The interviews were 
recorded with the participants’ permission and their 
anonymity was ensured. The interviews recordings were 
stored in the secure database at the university that is only 
accessible by the relevant study researchers. 
 
V. 
RESULTS 
To evaluate the technology acceptance, the results were 
thematically analysed and categorized according to the 
UTAUT model’s determinants: performance expectancy, 
effort 
expectancy, 
social 
influence 
and 
facilitating 
conditions. However, these categories were not enough to 
cover the contents of the interviews. Therefore, privacy and 
security, and previous knowledge and experience about 
technology were added as extra categories.   
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

A. Performance expectancy 
This category explains the perceived usefulness of the 
online assessment application. All the study participants 
mentioned that the online application is beneficial for speech 
and 
language 
assessment 
(Participants 
1-3). 
The 
automatically generated points-based evaluation of language 
impairment was the most valued function in the application. 
The paper-pen based and manual assessment involves 
several calculations that take a lot of time after the 
assessment session with patients (Participants 1, 2).  Speech 
therapist 3 described, “The manual evaluation system was 
time taking and boring; it takes 40 minutes for me to 
conclude the evaluation and to transfer it to the hospital 
journal system”. Speech therapist 1 mentioned, “The 
assessment tasks and exercises with the patients are 
performed in a different order and the final evaluation is 
categorized in a totally different sequence of exercises. 
Therefore, it is quite hectic to rearrange everything after the 
session with the patient and to calculate every point in a 
different sequence.” Figure 2 gives an overview of the paper-
pen based evaluation.   
Based on the speech therapist’s input during a session 
with the patient, the new calculation system diagnoses 
speech and language deficiency automatically. Participant 3 
described that the new system will help her with point-based 
diagnosis, and to save data digitally. Figure 3 demonstrate 
the new digital assessment system. All the speech therapists 
acknowledged the usefulness of these coloured graphs as 
they make it easy to discuss with patients their health 
condition (Participant 1-3). The patients will get a better idea 
of their impairments in different language categories and it 
will be easy for speech therapists to highlight in which 
category the patients need to put some more effort 
(Participant 3). 
B. Effort expectancy 
This category explores the ease of use of the software 
application. A continuation of the performance expectancy 
is the new calculation system, where participants 1-3 
discussed the necessity of individualizing the traffic light 
metaphor as well as interpreting it. There is a need for 
individualizing the speech training, both relating to the 
patient's current health condition and goal with the speech 
training. Based on the latter, the system should allow 
follow-ups and comparisons between the various test 
occasions. The speech therapists 1- 2 declared that they 
hoped for the patient to improve, shown in the statistics, and 
that the system should help them to increase the degree of 
difficulty at each test occasion. The ultimate goal should be 
to get a detailed assessment system that could find more 
linguistic defects. The speech therapists 1 - 2 declared that 
such a system would take at least five years to develop, but 
as brought up by Participant 1, there are several words and 
expressions in A-ning that today are obsolete and difficult to 
understand for younger patients, and for patients with a 
foreign background. An alternative is to update the existing 
A-ning system, or as suggested by Participants 2 and 3, the 
digitalization could be carried out based on A-ning, but with 
the possibility to replace the A-ning tests with some other 
test system in the future.       
Aforementioned is that the statistics are the obvious gain 
of digitalising the assessment. To gain more efficiency 
should there be an overall workflow, with a starting point 
and the next assignment showing up, without interference. 
Participants 1-2 emphasize that they should be the ones 
choosing the assignments and that the order should be shown 
on an overview. Emphasized by all participants are that there 
should be possibilities to add individual notes, both for each 
assignment and on a general level, e.g., when an assessment 
is completed. Another important aspect of the system is that 
each category should be marked with one colour, improving 
the possibilities to interpret the test results. One suggestion 
from Participant 1 -2 is therefore to create folders with 
descriptive headlines, where assignments from each category 
could be stored 
C. Social influence 
This category explains the other co-workers’ views about 
the usefulness of the system. The viewpoints of speech 
therapists' colleagues (Participants 4-6) were used to assess 
the social influence. Moreover, speech therapist 2 discussed 
the usefulness of the applications with their fellow therapists; 
all the co-workers acknowledged the usefulness and a 
positive intention to use the assessment application 
(Participant 2). Stroke patients feel comfortable and 
motivated by getting treatment in their home environment 
and 
living 
independently 
(Participants 
4-6). 
The 
rehabilitation process is faster and more effective when the 
patients are at home with their significant others (Participants 
3, 4-6). Since the application provides the possibility of 
online sessions, the application will be useful for the patients 
as well as for the speech therapists (Participant 1). 
D.  Facilitating conditions 
This category discusses the availability of facilitating 
conditions such as technical infrastructure, education and 
training about the application functions, and personal support 
for the system. The requirements on technical infrastructure 
are several and focus on not solely converting the assessment 
from a paper-based assessment to a digital system. One 
example is the participants' emphasis on having different 
views for the patient and the speech therapist on every given 
occasion. Therefore, the patient's screen should show, e.g., 
one image, while the speech therapist should see several 
images and pick one for the patient. Another aspect is the 
possibility to change the size of the patient’s image to offer 
him/her the best possible resolution.     
One part of the assessment is for the patient to write, e.g., 
what is shown on the screen. Therefore, a touch pen is 
necessary, preferable on a tablet (Participant 1 - 3). The 
tablet’s size should allow both the patient and speech 
therapist to write on it. On occasion, the speech therapist 
needs to give written instructions, adding requirements on 
immediate digital interaction. Another patient assignment 
describes what is shown on the screen and creates a story, 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

preferably recorded. The recording also needs to be played 
for further evaluation by the speech therapist.  
Previously described is that stroke patients often suffer 
from brain fatigue, offering small time slots of total energy. 
Therefore, there is a need to save the solved assignments and 
continue at another session not related to a specific speech 
therapist. Related to partly finished or fully finished 
assessment is the integration to any journal system. 
Participant 3 emphasizes the importance of this requirement, 
describing that it takes 40 minutes of administration to cover 
this manually. 
E. Privacy and security 
Trust on privacy and security of the users’ data was also 
a matter of concern for the participants. One part of privacy 
and security is that other speech therapists should be able to 
see the results from one assessment to create efficiency in the 
flow of patients. Still, the patient’s privacy and security 
should be in focus for the system. Somewhat contradictory to 
the patient’s privacy and security is the involvement of 
relatives or other secondary users. The secondary users are 
essential, depending on the patient’s condition and the wish 
of distance use. They should be able to help the patient, still 
not affecting the results of the assessment. 
F. Previous knowledge and experience 
The user's previous knowledge and experience about 
related technologies was another important factor for 
technology acceptance. During the interviews, it was 
observed that the participants who have previously used 
relearning applications in their work, showed more interest 
in using the suggested application. The users’ participation in 
the design and development also enhance their knowledge 
and interest in the given technology. The speech therapist 
(Participant 2) who was involved throughout the process of 
the application’s co-creation showed the most enthusiasm 
and intention to use the application. However, the speech 
therapist (Participant 3) who was involved only in the 
evaluation phase, showed the least interest in using the 
application. 
VI. 
DISCUSSION  
The study aimed to explore the technology acceptance of 
the speech and language assessment application from 
medical 
caregivers’ 
viewpoints. 
Since 
the 
medical 
caregivers(speech therapists in the study context) play an 
important role in the patient’s recovery and relearning, their 
viewpoints and participation in the system development are 
important [26]. The same phenomena are observed in this 
study; the participants with the most participation showed the 
most intention to use the application. The technology 
acceptance also depends upon the expected benefits of using 
the system. The unawareness of the potential benefits of a 
given technology and a fear to use that technology negatively 
affect the medical caregivers’ performance expectancy [27]. 
Therefore, continuous technical support and training are of 
great importance.  
There are several options while creating a digital version 
of the A-ning assessment system. One is to convert the 
paper-based system to a digital version, adding the feature of 
creating better possibilities for the speech therapist’s to use 
statistics, both for individual patient’s or synthesising statics 
for specific categories of patients or on an assignment level. 
The prototype adds such features, improving parts of the 
work for the speech therapists. Another option is to, still 
based on the involvement of the speech therapists, create an 
online system, separating features for the speech therapists 
and the patient. Examples are immediate written interaction 
between the speech therapists and the patient’s screen or 
showing different images. The development could be done in 
steps, where one initial step could be integrations to various 
journal systems, offering immediate efficiency for the speech 
therapist. Creating an online system relies on various 
technical solutions, like recording or writing on one screen 
and reading on another. The interaction of being in the same 
room simultaneously needs to be replaced by other 
interactions and be based on the patient’s varying condition. 
A-ning is the most frequently used and comprehensive 
test for speech and language impairment in Sweden, and all 
participants find the system to be of high quality. However, 
natural languages like Swedish are entities that change over 
time and the test vocabulary involves some words that today 
must be classified as obsolete. Important for the younger 
generation of patients in a country where 20% of the 
population have a foreign origin. In the same way, as a 
thesaurus needs continuous updating, a language test system 
also needs updating. This looks like the most realistic 
alternative for the moment, since the development of a new 
test system would be both costly and time-consuming. 
Authors find the analogue A-ning system to be a thorough 
and high-quality test system, and a good foundation for 
further digitalisation. Some obvious contributions to the 
language relearning process in a further digitalised version of 
the system would be features for statistics and for measuring 
relearning progression.    
VII. CONCLUSION 
The study explored the acceptance of an online speech 
and language assessment application. The factors that might 
affect the adoption and use of technology were also 
discussed in the study. The online evaluation seems more 
effective and efficient than the traditional manual system for 
speech therapists and it enables independent living for the 
patients. To enhance the performance expectancy, the 
potential users (speech therapists) should be involved 
throughout the application development process and all the 
application functionalities should be comprehensively 
discussed with them. The intention to use the application 
depends upon patients’ medical condition, active users’ 
participation in the application development, trust about 
privacy and security of personal data, and providing users 
with proper education and training about the system.  
This evaluation was carried out with a speech therapist 
and caregiver perspective, which is an important part of the 
process. The next important step is to get the patient 
perspective, in an evaluation that preferably also should 
involve some patients' relatives and friends. Furthermore, the 
multi-stakeholder approach should include administrative 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

staff at health centres and hospitals to get their view on 
statistical features and security aspects. Finally, what seems 
like the most valuable contribution of a further digitalised 
system would be to implement more features for test result 
statistics, and for visualisation of relearning progression.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 We are grateful to stroke rehabilitation therapists and the 
communal 
rehabilitation 
centre 
for 
co-creating 
and 
evaluating the speech and language relearning application 
with us. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Freund et al., “Effectiveness of information and 
communications technology interventions for stroke survivors 
and their support people: a systematic review,” Disability and 
Rehabilitation, pp. 1–16, 2021. 
[2] S. Palmcrantz et al., “An interactive distance solution for 
stroke rehabilitation in the home setting–A feasibility study,” 
Informatics for Health and Social Care, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 
303–320, 2017. 
[3] Y. Guo et al., “The Unmet Needs of Community-Dwelling 
Stroke Survivors: A Systematic Review of Qualitative 
Studies,” International journal of environmental research 
and public health, vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 2140, 2021. 
[4] P. Mozelius, K. Ahlin, and A. Ahmad, “A game-based 
approach for motoric stroke rehabilitation: defining the 
requirements,” in ECGBL 2019, 2019, vol. 13 p.p. 519-526. 
[5] K. Ahlin, A. Ahmad, and P. Mozelius, “Determining Testbed 
Requirements 
for 
Technology 
Enhanced 
Speech 
Rehabilitation after Stroke-the Informed Co-workers View 
Point”. In: IARIA GLOBAL HEALTH International 
Conference on Global Health Challenges. 2019, pp.1-8. 
[6] M. Tousignant, J. Macoir, and V. Martel-Sauvageau,  
“Satisfaction with in-home speech telerehabilitation in post-
stroke aphasia: an exploratory analysis”,  J Int Soc Telemed 
EHealth, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 1-11, 2018. 
[7] V. Venkatesh, J. Y. Thong, and X. Xu, “Unified theory of 
acceptance and use of technology: A synthesis and the road 
ahead,” Journal of the association for Information Systems, 
vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 328–376, 2016. 
[8] A. Ahmad and P. Mozelius, “On the Importance of Tailor-
made Speech Relearning Software for Stroke Rehabilitation,” 
in ICT4AWE 2020, pp. 176-179, 2020, vol. 6. 
[9] S. H. Fischer, D. David, B. H. Crotty, M. Dierks, and C. 
Safran, “Acceptance and use of health information 
technology by community-dwelling elders,” International 
journal of medical informatics, vol. 83, no. 9, pp. 624–635, 
2014. 
[10] A. H. Zai, J. G. Ronquillo, R. Nieves, H. C. Chueh, J. C. 
Kvedar, and K. Jethwani, “Assessing hospital readmission 
risk factors in heart failure patients enrolled in a 
telemonitoring 
program,” 
International 
journal 
of 
telemedicine and applications, pp. 1-6, 2013. 
[11] A. Kohnke, M. L. Cole, and R. Bush, “Incorporating UTAUT 
predictors for understanding home care patients’ and 
clinician’s acceptance of healthcare telemedicine equipment,” 
Journal of technology management & innovation, vol. 9, no. 
2, pp. 29–41, 2014. 
[12] V. Venkatesh, M. G. Morris, G. B. Davis, and F. D. Davis, 
“User acceptance of information technology: Toward a 
unified view,” MIS quarterly, pp. 425–478, 2003. 
[13] D. Veer et al., “Determinants of the intention to use e-Health 
by community dwelling older people”, BMC health services 
research, vol.15, no. 1, pp.103, 2015. 
[14] V. L. Hanson, “Influencing technology adoption by older 
adults,” Interacting with Computers, vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 502–
509, 2010. 
[15] S. Wiklund Axelsson and A. Melander Wikman, “Ready for 
eHealth. Older Swedes’ perceptions of eHealth Services: 
Using the PIADS scale as a predictor for readiness,” 
Technologies, vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 29, 2016. 
[16] M. B. Garcia, “A Speech Therapy Game Application for 
Aphasia Patient Neurorehabilitation–A Pilot Study of an 
mHealth App”, International Journal of Simulation: Systems, 
Science & Technology, vol.20, no.2, pp. 1-9, 2019 
[17] K. Mallet, R. Shamloul, and M. Pugliese., “A patient 
perspective on the delivery of mobile Tablet-based stroke 
rehabilitation in the acute care setting”. Int J Stroke, vol. 14, 
no. 2019, pp. 174–179, 2019 
[18] J. Marshall, A. Caute, K. Chadd, M. Cruice, K. 
Monnelly, S. Wilson, and C. Woolf, “Technology-
enhanced writing therapy for people with aphasia: results of a 
quasi-randomized waitlist controlled study,” International 
journal of language & communication disorders, vol. 54, no. 
2, pp. 203–220, 2019. 
[19] E. Lindström and C. Werner, A-ning: neurolingvistisk 
afasiundersökning. Protokoll. Ersta högsk., 1995. 
[20] A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius, and K. Ahlin,  Speech and Language 
Relearning for Stroke Patients- Understanding  Users’   needs 
for Technology Enhancement. In Proceedings of Thirteenth 
International Conference on eHealth, Telemedicine, and 
Social Medicine (eTELEMED 2021), Nice, France, July 18, 
2021 (in press) 
[21] P. Johannesson and E. Perjons, An introduction to design 
science. Springer, 2014. 
[22] M. M. Archibald, R. C. Ambagtsheer, M. G. Casey, and M. 
Lawless, “Using zoom videoconferencing for qualitative data 
collection: perceptions and experiences of researchers and 
participants,” International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 
vol. 18, p. 1609406919874596, 2019. 
[23] V. Braun and V. Clarke, Thematic analysis. In H. 
Cooper, P. M. Camic, D. L. Long, A. T. Panter, D. 
Rindskopf, and K. J. Sher (Eds.), APA handbook of 
research methods in psychology, Vol. 2. Research 
designs: Quantitative, qualitative, neuropsychological, 
and biological, pp. 57–71, 2012. 
[24] S. Eriksson, 2015. CODEX Rules and Guidelines for 
Research. [Online]. Available from: https://codex.uu.se/ 
2011.01.19   
[25] S. Kvale, and S. Brinkmann, The qualitative research 
interview. Lund: Student litteratur, 2014. 
[26] T. Simic, C. Leonard, L. Laird, J. Cupit, F. Höbler, and E. 
Rochon, “A usability study of internet-based therapy for 
naming deficits in aphasia,” American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 642–653, 2016. 
[27] A. Vaezipour, D. Aldridge, S. Koenig, D. Theodoros, and T. 
Russell, “‘It’s really exciting to think where it could go’: a 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

mixed-method investigation of clinician acceptance, barriers 
and enablers of virtual reality technology in communication 
rehabilitation,” Disability and Rehabilitation, pp. 1–13, 2021. 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 1 
A. Evaluation Tasks of A-ning application 
1) Task 1 
Preplanning for a new patient 
• 
Create a new patient by giving information: 
• 
First name: Awais 
• 
Last Name: Ahmad 
• 
Personal no. : 8111150000 
• 
Speech therapist Name: Tove  
• 
Select the exercises 
2) Task 2 
Performing the exercises A2, A6, A7, A8 
• 
Complete the tasks for all the  
• 
Select an exercise 
• 
Write some comments in the comments box 
• 
Give some points 
3) Task 3 
Describing the evaluation 
• 
Select the graph sign from the main page 
• 
Describe the evaluation for different categories 
• 
Describe the overall aphasia evaluation 
4) Task 4 
Changing the selected exercises during an ongoing 
evaluation 
• 
Select some exercises, which are not selected  
• 
Deselect some exercises, which are selected 
• 
Update the Information 
5) Task 5 
• Resuming a previously started evaluation 
B. Technology acceptance Interview questions 
1) Question 1. 
How easy-to-use was the system as compared to the old 
system? 
2) Question 2 
Which feature was difficult to use and what was easy to 
use? 
3) Question 3 
What are your recommendations to improve the interface? 
4) Question 4 
How do you see the usefulness of this system for the 
patients and other speech therapists? 
5) Question 5 
What help do you need for the use of this system in terms 
of: 
• 
Infrastructure 
• 
Education/training 
 
 
 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

