The Role of School Administartion in Providing and Promoting Health Education in 
Schools in Nabatieh (Lebanon) Area 
Amani Berjawi 
School of Education  
Lebanese International University 
(LIU) 
Nabatieh, Lebanon 
Email: amani.berjawi@liu.edu.lb  
Ali Al Khatib 
School of Arts and Sciences 
International University of Beirut 
(BIU) 
Beirut, Lebanon 
Email: ali.alkhatib@b-iu.edu.lb  
Hassan M. Khachfe 
Business, Educational, & Medical 
Optimization Research Institute 
(BE-MORE) 
Lebanese International University 
(LIU) 
Nabatieh, Lebanon 
Email: hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
Abstract—In the framework of the current Lebanese 
environmental conditions, with the increase in the number of 
refugees, and the rapid spread of diseases among students in 
schools, it is important to raise awareness concerning health 
and healthy behaviors. Healthier students are better learners, 
more motivated, focused and less likely to be absent, thus their 
academic achievement would be higher. Schools are considered 
the perfect place to promote health. This present study was 
done to determine the role of schools' administrations in 
providing and promoting health education to students in 
schools in Nabatieh area in the five fields: 1-nutritional, 2-
physical, 3-personal health and hygiene, 4-mental, and 5-sexual 
health. Besides, the authors intended to determine the 
difference in health education implementation between private 
and public schools in Nabatieh area. The results revealed a 
significant role played by schools' administrations in health 
education implementation in the five fields with a slight 
difference in health education implementation between private 
and public schools.  
Keywords-school health education; health educators. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
School health is considered a vital topic. An official 
concern of school health in Lebanon has been increasing 
since the 1980s [1]. Between 1997 and 1999, health 
education has been integrated within the Lebanese 
curriculum, with a unit to monitor its implementation in the 
Ministry of Education and Higher Education (MoEHE). Two 
years later this unit faced many obstacles and its work 
limited to some duties. The first published assessment of the 
health education implementation in Lebanese schools was in 
2005 by Soweid & Jaoude.  They conducted a Global School 
Health Survey (GSHS) to assess health education 
implementation by studying health risk behaviors. Their 
results showed a high prevalence of health risk behaviors [2]. 
A similar study was done to assess the prevalence of health 
risk behaviors in Lebanon showed an increase in those risk 
behaviors [3]. 
The following study aimed at determining the role of 
school administrations in providing and promoting health 
education through assessing current state of health education 
in schools, exploring the role of latter in providing nutritional 
education, physical health education, personal health and 
hygiene, sexual education and mental health education, and 
determining 
the 
difference 
in 
health 
education 
implementation between private and public schools. 
To investigate the research questions, the authors 
developed 2 pairs of hypothesis: 
1.
H01 Schools in Nabatieh area provide and promote 
health education. 
2.
H02 There is a difference in health education 
implementation between public and private schools.   
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II reviews the literature, Section III describes the 
methodology used, and Section IV presents the results. 
Section V discusses the results obtained. The conclusion and 
the acknowledgment close the article.  
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), 
health is defined as "a state of complete physical, social, and 
mental wellbeing and not merely the absence of disease" [4]. 
Health has been introduced within education to increase 
awareness among students. The best way to introduce health 
within education is in school, using school health education 
programs. 
Whether people are healthy or not is determined by the 
conditions they are surrounded by. Many factors/conditions 
affect individual health, they are called determinants of 
health. World Health Organization (WHO) updated the 
determinants of health to social, economic environment, 
physical environment, personal determinants and behaviors. 
Behavior is defined as "an overt action, conscious or 
unconscious with a measurable frequency, intensity and 
duration." Tending to establish healthy behaviors during 
childhood is more effective than tending to change behavior 
during adulthood [5]. 
A. Health Education 
Health education consists of courses suitable for schools' 
grades from Kindergarten till 12 (K-12) that address 
different topics such as education concerning nutrition, 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

mental health, physical activity, tobacco and substance use, 
violence and injury, and sexual health [6]. School health 
education aims at increase student knowledge, allows the 
student to acquire skills needed to avoid diseases and 
reduces unhealthy behaviors [7]. The importance of health 
education is summarized as the following: it improves life, 
reduces behaviors associated with diseases, allows acquiring 
knowledge, skills and behaviors concerning health, and 
impacts 
academic 
performance 
through 
increasing 
attendance [8]. 
B. Topic/field of health education 
A Lebanese guide for health educators, co-authored by 
the University of Balamand and the MoEHE, lists health 
education topics as personal health and hygiene, accident 
prevention, sexual health, physical activity, nutritional 
health, social problems, and mental health [9]. 
Physical activity is defined as the body movement that 
produces energy and tends to reduce disease, and physical 
education is defined as "Academic subjects that provide an 
opportunity for students to learn knowledge and skills 
needed to establish and maintain physically active lifestyle" 
[10]. 
 Nutritional health in school includes supporting children 
with an effective environment that promotes healthy eating, 
spreading information related to food and beverage [11]. 
Promoting nutritional health in schools improves the quality 
of food, enhances healthy literacy, allows students to 
acquire skills related to nutrition and reevaluates personal 
habits and behaviors [12] [13]. 
 Personal hygiene and health in schools comprise body 
and clothes cleanliness [14], as it is defined as the practice 
of behaviors that keep one clean to sustain health [15] 
Personal hygiene reduces absenteeism, decreases infections, 
and enhances health and knowledge. 
 Mental health is defined as the ability to control 
emotions, behaviors, thoughts and feelings, and being 
confident about self and communication with others. Mental 
disorders 
affect 
students' 
learning 
and 
social 
communication, attendance and drop out of school [16]. 
 Sexual health education is the process of providing 
knowledge to practice healthy sexual behaviors [17]. It aims 
at helping students understand and acquire knowledge 
concerning body structure, role, similarities and differences 
between the two genders [18]. 
C. Health Education in Lebanon 
School health in Lebanon has been developed during the 
last 20 years. Health education has been integrated within 
the curriculum to be taught in schools within other subjects 
with a unit to monitor the implementation. Its components 
include: personal hygiene, physical activity, sexual and 
mental health, accident prevention, nutritional education, 
disease prevention, and social problems [19]. 
During 2002, the work of the unit has faced many 
obstacles. Due to the lack of assessment of implementation 
of health education, a study was conducted by the GSHS to 
assess the extent of the implementation of school health 
through assessing health behaviors among students aged 
between 13-15 years [2]. The results of the study showed a 
high prevalence of risk behavior among students. Another 
study showed an increase in the percentage of risk behavior 
during 2012 [3]. 
The implementation of the school health program is the 
responsibility of a group of school administrations that 
include school administrators, health educators, a physician, 
school educational body and students’ parents. The 
implementation of school health education needs the support 
of the school administrators in various fields. They promote 
health education through: health service (providing suitable 
tools, following medical cases, performing cyclic checkups, 
performing awareness seminars and workshops), school 
environment (promoting cleanliness tools and materials, 
monitoring cafeterias and available food, and providing 
safety 
stadium), 
performing 
educational 
activities 
(activating school visits and extracurricular activities, and 
performing annual competitions) [7]. 
The health educator is responsible for the implementation 
of health education. He/she plays an important role in 
applying, monitoring and implementing health education in 
schools. 
Health 
educators 
should 
have 
specific 
characteristics identified by the MoEHE. The roles the 
health educators include supervising the process of 
providing safe environment and healthy water, monitoring 
available food, and organizing workshops and seminars. 
Health educators have to implement the mentioned roles and 
their roles are monitored by both schools’ administrators 
and health inspectors [7]. 
D. Related studies 
Different studies have been conducted concerning the 
effect of sexual, mental, physical, nutritional health 
education, and personal hygiene on students. Results of 
these studies showed a significant impact on student's 
behaviors, attitude, and academic achievement [20]-[25]. 
The results of a similar study on the role of school 
administration in providing and promoting health education 
in schools in Ghaza showed significant role played by 
schools in providing health education [26]. There are no 
similar studies that measure the implementation of health 
education in schools in Nabatieh. 
This study attempted to provide Lebanese MoEHE and 
the Ministry of Public Health with information on the 
current state of health education in schools in Nabatieh area. 
Results can improve students', staffs' and teachers' health by 
improving school health programs and helping educational 
policymakers, curriculum developers and other stockholders 
to establish effective strategies to improve the health of 
Lebanese citizens.   
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

III.
METHODOLOGY
The researchers employed the descriptive mixed method. 
Creswell defined the mixed method as "a method that 
focuses on collecting, analyzing, and mixing both 
quantitative and qualitative data in a single study…the uses 
of quantitative and qualitative approaches in combination, 
provide a better understanding of the research problem than 
either approach alone."  [27]. The authors used a mixed 
method for the following reasons:  
1.
Clarifying contradiction between the findings of 
quantitative and that of qualitative, thus comparing 
the 
results 
obtained 
from 
a 
questionnaire 
distributed to health educators and those obtained 
from questioning schools' administrators. 
2.
The mixed method gives different insights and 
perspectives since the questionnaire and the 
interview questions focus on the view of health 
educators and schools administrators concerning 
school health education respectively. 
This study classified as a descriptive mixed method as it 
analyses data collected from a survey conducted on health 
educators 
and 
interviews 
conducted 
with 
schools' 
administrators in private and public schools in Nabatieh. 
A. Sampling and Population 
Quantitative data were collected from a sample of 53 
health educators from private and public schools in a 
random manner. Half of the participants were from private 
schools and the other half were from public schools with 
different years of experience and included both males and 
females without any discrimination. Knowing that health 
educators' age ranges were not’ measured in the study since 
the study focused on health education implementation 
without considering age differences. 
The qualitative data were collected using interview 
questions with schools' administrators (12) gathered from 
private and public schools in a random manner. 
B. Instrument 
The researchers were guided by a pre-validated 
questionnaire survey that measured school health education 
at the level of nutritional health education, personal hygiene 
and safety, physical health, sexual health, and mental health 
education. 
      The questionnaire in this research comprised three 
sections. The first section introduces the purpose of the 
survey with the assurance of anonymity and confidentiality 
of the information they provide. The second section consists 
of 5 items added by the researchers as a profile of the health 
educator (Gender, job status, years of experience and 
educational institution). The third section consists of 41 
items divided into 5 fields and one open-ended question, 
which were evaluated on a five-point Likert scale (1-
Strongly disagree, 2-disagree, 3-neither agree nor disagree, 
4-agree, 5-strongly agree).  
The interview questions used consist of three sections; it 
was aimed to support and confirm the results obtained from 
the questionnaire and to give detailed information 
concerning health education. The first section introduces the 
aim of this research, the second consists of two questions 
concerning schools, and the third consists of the 5 studied 
fields. Noting that the questions are yes/no questions and 
open ended questions. 
C. Data collection 
Approval from the Director of Institutional Review 
Broad (IRB) was obtained to conduct the research, followed 
by an official approval from the General Director of 
Education at the MoEHE to access schools. Each school 
was visited by the researcher accompanied with an assistant 
to help in collecting data. In addition to the direct contact, 
the researcher used the Google form questionnaire to reach a 
maximum number of the study sample. The interviews in 
this study used to collect information by questioning 
schools' administrators. The interviews were conducted in 
Arabic language with administrators from public and private 
schools in Nabatieh area. The answers to the interview 
questions were indicated within the interview in order to 
make it easy for the researcher to analyze results.  
D. Data analysis 
The researches in this study aimed to measure the extent 
of providing and promoting health education in public and 
private schools, confirm the results of questionnaire with the 
results of interviews, and check if there is a difference in the 
implementation of health education between private and 
public schools.  
The authors compared the implementation of health 
education between private and public schools in the five 
mentioned fields. The researchers measured the private and 
the public mean, the percentage mean of public and private, 
and the difference (private-public) of each item of the 
questionnaire to validate second hypothesis. For the 
quantitative data, statistical analyses were carried out using 
IBM-SPSS version 21. The qualitative data were analyzed 
based on thematic analysis and rubrics already mentioned in 
the interview questions, results were also summarized and 
triangulated with the questions of the questionnaire. 
IV.
RESULTS
Concerning the results of the questionnaire, all the 
participants were health educators (100%), of which 94.3% 
were females. 45.3% of the participants have an experience 
of 11 years or more. About half of the participants were from 
private schools and the other half from public schools. The 
authors 
in this research 
assessed 
health education 
implementation in the 5 different fields. 
Concerning nutritional health education, most schools 
implement 
nutritional 
health 
(90%), 
with 
monitoring/detecting quality of water provided to students 
scored the highest, whereas supplying school library with 
publications concerned with nutritional health had the lowest 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

score. Concerning personal hygiene, health and safety, the 
majority of schools implement personal hygiene and health 
(82.45%). Following up personal cleanliness (hair-nail) 
scored the highest, whereas putting an evacuation plans in 
case of 
emergency/accident 
had the 
lowest 
score. 
Concerning physical health education, the majority of 
schools implement physical health education (82.64%). 
Preparing a suitable location for school stadium scored the 
highest, whereas raising student's awareness by presenting 
drawings that show the importance of sport had the lowest 
score.  Concerning sexual and mental health education, two-
thirds of schools implement sexual and mental health 
education. Raising awareness concerning the importance of 
dealing with family and connections scored the highest and 
displaying documentary films that show the danger of 
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) had the lowest score 
with respect to sexual health. Performing leisure trips scored 
the highest and training teachers and counselors how to deal 
with students with chronic diseases had the lowest score for 
mental health education. These results showed that almost all 
schools implement nutritional, physical and personal 
hygiene. On average, there is a role played in health 
education implementation at the level of sexual and mental 
education but to a lesser extent than other components. This  
could be due to the absence of financial support, regulations 
and the prevailed culture that restrict the discussion of sexual 
topics to brief titles mentioned within books. 
On average, most schools in Nabatieh area take into 
consideration students' health (see Table 1).
TABLE I. DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS OF HEALTH EDUCATION 
IMPLEMENTATION IN PRIVATE AND PUBLIC SCHOOLS IN 
NABATIEH. 
Health Education 
N 
Mean 
% of mean 
53 
4.23 
0.70 
TABLE II. DIFFERENCE IN HEALTH EDUCATION BETWEEN 
PRIVATE AND PUBLIC SCHOOLS. 
Health 
Education 
public 
schools 
mean 
Private 
school 
mean 
Public 
school 
% 
Private 
school 
% 
Diff 
(Pr-
Pu) 
4.00 
4.28 
80.00 
85.67 
5.67 
In comparing health education implementation between 
private and public schools, the results showed that the 
average percentage of nutritional health education in public 
schools was 89.10% and that of the public was 89.67%, with 
0.57 Differences in Percentage Mean (Diff (pr-pu)). The 
average percentage of personal hygiene, health and safety in 
public schools was 80% and that of private 85.67% with 5.67 
differences in percentage mean. The average percentage of 
sexual health education in public schools was 60% and that 
of private schools 69.67%, with 9.67 differences in 
percentage mean. The average percentage of mental health 
education in public schools was 67.83% and that of private 
schools 86.33%, with 18.51 differences in percentage mean. 
In general, the average percentage in public schools was 
80% and that of private schools was 85.6%, with a difference 
in percentage mean reaching 6% (see Table 2). 
Concerning the results of interviews, most schools adopt 
health education programs. Most of them provide nutritional 
health education through organizing visits related to public 
health, giving awareness seminars, following special 
nutritional programs, providing healthy food in cafeterias 
with continuous monitoring of drinkable water and 
cleanliness. All administrators provide safety and a healthy 
environment through continuous monitoring of personal 
hygiene, water, furniture, and rooms, providing suitable 
ventilation and lightening, and performing first aid seminars. 
More than half of them perform seminars aimed at raising 
awareness about dealing with direct and indirect accidents. 
All administrators perform cyclic checkups and awareness 
seminars of healthy mouths and teeth. Most schools' 
administrators motivate their students to join extracurricular 
activities. While for the last two fields, sexual and mental 
health, both are taken into consideration but to a lesser extent 
than the other fields. 
V.
DISCUSSION
Many researches have provided evidence of the 
relationship between health and academic achievement 
where healthier students are better learners. The authors 
through these previous studies confirmed the role of health 
on students' academic achievement/performance without 
interfering or checking the effect of heath on performance of 
students in private and public schools, this would be a 
research question for another study. There are no similar 
studies done on the field of health education implementation 
in schools in Nabatieh area. 
Schools in Nabatieh area provide and promote health 
education with a need to enhance both sexual and mental 
health education through releasing regulation by the MoEHE 
concerning this issue. Physical, nutritional, and personal 
health and hygiene are mostly provided due to the 
regulations released which obliged the schools to follow 
nutritional program (monitoring cafeterias, performing cyclic 
checkups on offered food, spreading awareness, and 
providing safety and healthy environment), performing 
cyclic checkups on students health, following students who 
suffer from diseases, performing annual medical screening 
by specific teams, monitoring quality of water provided, 
organizing physical competitions in schools and between 
other schools,. Sexual and mental health education are 
provided with less care. This could be due to the nature of 
culture, absence of awareness concerning the importance of 
such topic, and lack of financial support.  
Improving upcoming generation health has an important 
role in improving students’ success rates in schools, so it is 
crucial to have cooperation between the Ministry of Public 
Health and the MoEHE to establish school health programs, 
raise awareness in public schools to the level of private 
schools, perform official training programs for educational 
body and health educators, assign counselors for each school 
to monitor students' health, segregate the job of teaching 
from health educator's job to allow them to perform their job 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

properly, host experts (nutritionists, psychologists) to spread 
awareness among students, conduct first aid seminars, and 
provide health room services in case of emergencies. 
The effect of health on students' performance should be 
highlighted. Lebanese students' are engaged in unhealthy risk 
behaviors as physical inactivity, violence, drug uses, 
unhealthy eating habits, so schools have to manage such 
problems by providing suitable programs, resources and 
educational body to monitor and follow up such cases. 
Educating students about their health would raise awareness 
and prepare them to make healthy decisions concerning their 
life thus motivate them to change their behaviors. 
Schools’ administrators also confirm the results obtained 
in the questionnaire that schools played an important role in 
health 
education 
implementation 
with 
a 
need 
for 
enhancement and support. 
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
In conclusion, this study shed light on a critical topic of 
the importance of assessing health education in schools in 
Nabatieh area in Lebanon. Health education is one example 
of a program that schools can establish to enhance student's 
health, and reduce diseases. Although schools have a major 
role in enhancing health, the government, policy makers, 
and curriculum developers can establish processes for 
resources to support health education programs at Lebanese 
schools. It would be only well provided when the 
government accepts and takes responsibilities to effectively 
put in action and improve health programs. 
The authors recommended performing further studies to 
assess the quantity and quality of health education being 
taught and offered to students in schools. Besides, conduct 
research to take into consideration parents and students’ 
opinions and perspectives about the provided health 
education. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all participants, health 
educators and schools administrators, who answered the 
survey and the interview questions.   
REFERENCES
[1] M. Kanj, "Health education through extracurricular activities in 
Lebanon," pp. 27-36, 2012.   
[2] R. Soweid, and S. Jaoude,“Global school-based student health 
survey,” 2005. 
[3] Saint-Joseph University, “National health statistics report in 
Lebanon,” 2012. 
[4] D. NutBeam, “Health Promotion Glossory,” Health Promotion 
International, vol 13, pp. 1-9, 1998. 
[5] L. Kann, et al.,“Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance,” Vol. 65, 
No. 6, June  2016. 
[6] S. Manoj, “Introduction to Health Education, Health 
Promotion, and Theory,” 3rd Edi, pp. 3-13, 2012. 
[7] N. Khalifa, and H. Aoun, “Educational Assistant File on School 
Health: Health Educator Guide,” 2007.  
[8] American Cancer Society, the American Diabetes Association, 
the 
American 
Diabetes 
Association, 
American 
Heart 
Association, “Health education in schools – the importance of 
establishing healthy behaviors in our nation’s youth,” 2008.  
[9] Ministry of Education and Higher Education, “School health 
strategy document in Lebanon,” 2007. 
[10] T. R. Frieden, H. W. Jaffe, J. W. Stephens, S. B. Thacker, and 
S. Zaza, “School health guidelines to promote healthy eating 
and physical activity,” Centers of Diseases Control and 
Prevention, 2011. 
[11] Center of Diseaes Control and Prevention, “At glance 2016 
healthy schools the right place for a healthy Start,” 2016, 
Available 
from:  
https://www.cdc.gov/chronicdisease/resources/publications/aag
/pdf/2016/aag-schoolhealth.pdf 
[12] Fernandes, et al.,“Evaluating the effect of nutrition education 
on the prevalence of overweight/obesity and on foods eaten at 
primary schools,” Jornal de Pediatria, pp. 315-321, 2009. 
[13] K.Williams, and A. Dill, “Wisconsin wellness: putting policy 
into practice,” Nutrition Education, 2nd edi, pp. 9-10, 2014. 
Available 
from: 
https://dpi.wi.gov/sites/default/files/imce/school-
nutrition/pdf/wisconsin-wellness-putting-policy-into-
practice.pdf 
[14] R. Charter, “Personal Hygiene. Hygiene and environmental 
health,” 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.open.edu/openlearncreate/mod/oucontent/view.ph
p?id=187&printable=1 
[15] G. Victoria, “School policy advisort guide,” personal hygiene, 
2017. 
[16] Center of Diseases Control and Prevention, “Children’s 
mental 
health,” 
2018. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.cdc.gov/childrensmentalhealth/symptoms.html 
[17] A. Ajuwon, “Benefits of sexuality education for young people 
in nigeria,” Africa Regional Sexuality Resource Centre, 2005. 
[18] Student health service department of health Hong Kong, “Sex 
education at home,” 2010.   
[19] UNDP, “School health symposium,” 2002. 
[20] J. Sallis, “The Effect of 2 years physical educational proram 
(SPARK) on physical activity and fitness in elementary 
schools students,” American Journal of Public Health, vol. 87, 
No. 8, August 1997. 
[21] O. S. Kapinga, and D. F. Hyera, “Pupils perception of sex and 
reproductive health education in primary schools in tanzania: a 
phenomenological study,” Journal of Education and Practice, 
vol. 6, no. 6, 2015, ISSN  2222-1735 (Paper) ISSN 2222-288X 
(Online) 
[22] R. A. Sleem, and E. Mekheal, “The Effect of lebanese sex 
education curriculum 2009 on developing students positive 
sexual attitude and good behaviors,” Educational Research 
Newspaper, 2016. 
[23] K. Jabbour, “An Exploratory study of the critical need for 
school health programs in Lebanon,” Journal of Education and 
Learning, vol 7, pp.231-238, 2013. 
[24] C. Habib-Mourad, et al., “Promoting healthy eating and 
physical activity among school children: findings from Health-
E-PALS, the first pilot intervention from Lebanon,” BMC 
Public Health. 2014. 
[25] A. Shrestha,  and M. Angolkar, “Impact of health education 
on the knowledge and practice regarding personal hygiene 
among primary school children in Urban Area of Karnataka, 
India,” Journal of Dental and Medical Sciences, pp. 86-89, 
2014, doi: 10.9790/0853-13478689. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[26] S. Fodda, “The Role of School Magaement in Activating 
School Health Education at the Primary Stage in Ghaza,” 2012. 
[27] J. Creswell, “Designing and conducting mixed methods 
resaerch,” 2011. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

