Internet of Medical Things for Independent Living and Re-Learning 
 
Ali Hassan Sodhro, Karin Ahlin, Awais Ahmad, Peter Mozelius 
Computer and Systems Science 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
Emails: {alihassan.sodhro, Karin.ahlin, Awais.ahmad, Peter.mozelius}@miun.se 
 
 
 
Abstract— This position paper gives better insight about the role 
and importance of Internet of Medical Things (IoMT) for 
independent living and re-learning for older adults. Sensing 
Technologies are the paradigm shift for transforming 
conventional healthcare practices into the smart, and self-
assisted activities, which are envisioned for today’s medical 
world. Internet of Things (IoT) and IoMT are the inter-related 
technologies for promoting independent living and re-learning 
practices. In this paper, re-learning is defined as the process for 
adults to recover useful instrumental activities of daily living 
skills that have been lost after an impairment.  
Keywords: Internet of Medical Things; Independent Living; Re-
Learning;  Smart Homes; Older Adults. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The aim of this positional paper is to show how the 
Internet of Medical things (IoMT) can be used for independent 
living and re-learning. In addition, the paper shows how 
healthcare is revolutionized with the help of the Internet of 
Things (IoT) and advanced sensing technology. This paper 
presents the role of IoMT in independent living of elderly 
people both in their own houses and in retirement homes, and 
the utility of embedding sensing technologies in everyday life 
objects. Thus, IoMT can reduce the expenses for healthcare 
due to the lower need for personal assistance, and provides a 
better Quality of Life (QoL) to the elderly users [1][2]. 
In the modern world, a better healthcare system is one of 
the main challenges of a growing world population. The IoMT 
is a collection of Wi-Fi-enabled medical devices intended to 
collect data on health parameters such as heart rate or blood 
pressure. Wireless sensor networks (WSNs) enable device-to-
device (D2D) communication, necessary for the synthesis of 
multiple types of medical data. In addition, IoMT is the vision 
of providing a better healthcare system. The main 
requirements for WSNs are increased data rates, high speed 
and more bandwidth. Ongoing development of consumer 
technologies not only have enhanced the speed of Internet 
driven platforms, but also encouraged and promoted the 
markets of IoT devices such as smartphones, Personal Digital 
Assistants (PDAs), and many types of sensor-enabled 
wearables [3]. In addition, the technology company Ericsson 
claims advanced technologies that manage the massive data 
amounts, bandwidth, delay, and data rate will entirely 
transform and reshape the healthcare world. There are various 
advantages of the IoMT based smart and pervasive healthcare; 
for instance, better Quality of Service (QoS), adaptive and 
scalable features to other heterogeneous networks, high and 
cost-effective capacity, high reliability, lower delay, longer 
connectivity with intelligent data traffic management, and 
high energy-efficiency [4]. 
The IoMT is a collection of various sensor nodes, which 
collect data and transmit to a gateway (i.e., the platform or a 
medical office) for proper connection and communication 
with the help of the cloud and the Internet. The main task of 
the IoMT is to incorporate lightweight portable sensor 
technologies to support healthcare systems with impressive 
and integral capabilities for ongoing data collection and 
synthesis to support accurate monitoring and diagnosis of 
older adults. The physician can efficiently access and review 
patients’ data and analyse which patient needs more attention. 
The IoMT is a promising technology for remote older patients  
monitoring where it improves medical care with the key focus 
on ‘healthcare for anyone everywhere’ [5]. 
     The remaining of the position paper is organized as 
follows. Section II presents Internet of Things, Section III 
discusses Internet of Medical Things. Independent living is 
described in Section IV and Section V reveals the re-learning. 
Discussion, conclusion and future research are given in  
Sections VI and VII, respectively. 
II. 
INTERNET OF THINGS 
Longer lives and better healthcare facilities are 
cornerstones for an increasing aging society, and in several 
parts of the world healthcare is becoming challenging with 
high cost and poor economic status, which affects many 
generations. The recent trends in emerging Information 
Communication Technologies (ICTs) have reshaped the entire 
healthcare world by providing easy and effective data-
collecting, diagnosis, and treatment facilities [1]. It is 
necessary to manage and preserve the patient’s experience for 
efficient monitoring of the healthcare applications for 
instance, home health monitoring, and Personal Health 
Records (PHRs). Several IoT-based wearable devices for 
instance, smartwatches, smart rings, smart necklace, and 
Fitbits can be used with the human body (i.e., 
on/inside/implant) to collect vital-sign signals for effective 
diagnosis and cure. The service providers can access the data 
for accurate diagnosis and treatment to give convenient, cost-
effective and timely treatment [2]. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

It is also essential for the healthcare system to assure the 
availability of accurate and error-free critical information to 
intended users (physicians and patients). The mobility of IoT 
devices and pervasive features of integrated technologies 
adopt different healthcare applications with wide coverage 
and sustainable connectivity. Thus, it is important to 
effectively monitor the lives of elderly people while 
exchanging the data through IoT-based portable devices [6]. 
III. 
INTERNET OF MEDICAL THINGS 
The rapid increase in the number of elderly people at  
present gives clear insight for future population record and 
healthcare status that about 15.7% population shall be in the 
age range of 65 or older by 2030 [7]. The flexible and scalable 
features of IoMT easily integrate the wearable medical 
devices with existing and advanced technologies for 
independent 
living, 
sustainable, 
reliable 
and 
better 
connectivity with improved efficiency, accuracy and economy 
[8]. The services offered by IoMT require less cost, are 
simple, accurate and have an effective mechanism with 
sustainable battery capacity at fast speed and with reliable 
connectivity. The IoMT system must be well-equipped with 
advanced network and continuous connectivity of devices. 
For scanning and connectivity with doctors, patients must 
have a valid identity. The rapid growth in smart cellular 
technologies have revolutionized the notion of healthcare with 
the support of IoMT [9]. 
The collected patient’s data must be preserved privately 
for better analysis and diagnosis. Because of its sensitive 
nature, it is necessary to properly monitor and draw the 
reports. There is a big impact of IoMT in our daily life and its 
role increases as life goes on. It also provides solutions to 
chronic diseases as well as those patients who suffer a lot from 
constant and long-term pain [10]. The medical data of patients 
like 
electrocardiography 
(ECG), 
heart 
rate, 
and 
electroencephalogram (EEG) signals can be monitored within 
e-health applications through recent wearable IoT devices. An 
important issue in these IoT devices with the transmission of 
signals is power consumption and the devices need battery 
resources; there are serious limitations for the continuous 
observation of signals. To extend the battery lifetime, lossy 
signal compression is used to reduce the size of collected bio-
signals data and, in return, increase the battery lifetime of 
wearable devices for continuous and long-term monitoring. 
One-dimensional bio-signals like EEG, ECG and respiratory 
data are usually available in commercial IoT devices. [11] 
gives the review of some existing medical data compression 
algorithms.  
IV. 
INDEPENDENT LIVING 
The emerging notion of independent living or ambient 
assisted living is realized due to the vast and revolutionary role 
of the Internet of Things (IoT). Due to the lightweight nature 
and cost-effective features of sensors, it is easy to provide 
quality of life to elderly patients even at remote locations. 
Thus, IoT can be considered as promising and vital for various 
fields such as smart healthcare, smart transportation, and 
smart cities [12]. The rapid progress and advancement in 
smart technologies have not only facilitated the lives of every 
age group, but also reduced the costs of healthcare to 
reasonable rates. Hence, longer and better life expectancy is 
the result of emerging and user-friendly IoT-based wearable 
devices [13].  
Over the past two decades, the population of older adults 
has been rapidly increasing all over the world [14]. Due to 
these changing demographics, healthcare providers are facing 
an increasingly massive workload; as time goes on, the need 
to alleviate their workload becomes more critical [15][17]. On 
the other hand, despite age-related physical and cognitive 
problems, older adults like to live independently in their home 
environment [18]. Several studies highlighted that patients not 
only recover more quickly in their home environment, but 
their quality of life is also improved [15][19]. The Internet of- 
Medical Things (IoMT), which includes technologies and 
devices such as sensors for windows, doors, temperature, 
humidity, luminosity, and smart audio and video cameras, 
might be used to achieve a better QoL and independent living 
[20].  
Several researchers emphasize IoMT as a foundation for 
independent living, called ambient assisted living; sometimes, 
the integration of IoMT throughout a house is referred to as a 
smart home [21]. Researchers focus on requirements for the 
technology and smart home applications and explain that 
devices and applications should be flexible, adaptive and 
changeable over time [21]. The authors of [22] focus on the 
middleware, which serves as a collection point on the one 
hand, and as a processing and distribution centre, on the other 
hand. The data is collected via tailor-made parameter 
monitoring devices and home sensor-technology and further 
distributed to care givers. The authors in [20] address 
problems with IoMT for independent living in terms of user 
interfaces, 
easy-to-use 
features, 
size, 
weight, 
and 
obtrusiveness. Besides these problems, [23] addresses lack of 
interoperability causing problems while connecting to 
caregivers or relatives.  
The IoMT implementations for older adults focus on 
preventing falls and supporting Activity of Daily Life (ADL) 
[22][24]. Starting with falls, [25] express fall prevention as 
important for older adults. They built a prototype using an 
accelerator and sensors. In this case, the accelerometer detects 
if a fall has occurred and if it does happen, the server will 
automatically notify the caregivers or relatives. There are 
several examples focusing on supporting ADL, where one is 
to add awareness of older adults’ decreased physiological 
resilience and weakened response to stressors [24]. The 
authors frame their study by collecting data from the 
participants’ activity when moving around the city. The data 
from older adults is linked with data collected from smart city 
implementations, such as geographical positions. Another 
example is predicting upcoming or ongoing disease attacks for 
noncommunicable diseases and cognitive assessment [20]. 
They base their system on correlations between physiological 
and cognitive data and frame it as predictive analysis.  
V. 
RE-LEARNING 
In the e-health area, re-learning has been described as the 
process for an adult to recover useful instrumental activities 
of daily living skills that have been lost after an impairment 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[26][27]. This is a process with the aim of improving the 
quality of life and well-being of patients, to increase their 
potential for an independent living. Often, re-learning consists 
of an unstructured process that has been referred to as the 
Trial-and-Error method, with skills acquisition by guessing 
correct responses and learning from errors. However, more 
structured methods have been tested and the study by [28] 
found an advantage for errorless re-learning when compared 
to errorful re-learning among memory-impaired patients. 
Errorless learning refers to the use of feed forward 
activities to prevent learners from making mistakes. 
Therapists present the different steps in a re-learning activity 
with detailed instructions and visual cues. Another structured 
re-learning method is the spaced retrieval approach, a 
technique that requires a patient to memorise and reproduce 
task sequences. These methods have been tested and found 
successful for patients with memory impairment [26][27][29]. 
In addition to older adults' need for cognitive re-learning, there 
are also needs for motoric re-learning and speech re-learning 
[15]. For all these three branches of re-learning, it is essential 
to adapt the more general instructional design for the older 
adult target group. A frequently applied approach is to extend 
pedagogy with the principles of adult learning [30][31]. 
Cognitive and motoric re-learning are today, to a high 
degree, technology enhanced, but speech re-learning could 
also possibly be technology enhanced. However, the condition 
is to tailor software and hardware solutions to the actual target 
group [32]. This should also be a condition for instructional 
design and pedagogy, where the important adult learning 
principle 'learning to learn’ [33] is not exclusively for older 
adults. For e-health in general and for IoT solutions in 
particular, there is also a need for upskilling the staff [34]. 
Finally, for re-learning in the growing number of older adults, 
it seems worth to consider an extension of the pedagogy–
andragogy–heutagogy continuum [35], in the direction 
towards geragogy, with the idea of facilitating their e-health 
media literacy [36].  
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
A. Smart healthcare 
Rapid progress in IoT-based wearable devices has 
revolutionized the entire traditional healthcare perspective 
into a smart and pervasive fashion. IoMT is the cornerstone to 
achieve the required and standard needs of the elderly patients. 
Intelligent features of the IoT-based IoMT devices not only 
provide ease and comfort to the patients, but also lead to cost-
effective and smart healthcare anywhere and for anyone. 
Thus, it can be claimed that sensors within IoT and IoMT 
based wearable technologies, are the vital entities for 
promoting smart and ubiquitous healthcare. 
B. IoMT and older adults independent living 
For older adults to live happily and independently, IoT 
seems to be a cornerstone and it is widespread in its 
functionality. This claim is built on transforming the 
traditional homes of the elderly into smart homes using 
sensing technologies for sending information to caregivers. 
IoMT allows the possibility to prevent common falls among 
older adults as well as predict various diseases. Besides, in 
smart homes, IoMT can be useful for geographical 
monitoring, combining smart city approaches with older 
adults’ data while conducting physical activities. Still, IoMT 
for independent living of older adults seems to be in its 
infancy, and the development potential is not fully utilized.  
C. IoMT and Re-learning 
Amongst many other things related to e-health and 
independent living, re-learning can benefit from IoMT 
enhancement in several aspects. One aspect is the possibility 
of measuring the progression in the various branches of re-
learning. For cognitive and motoric re-learning, there is also 
the opportunity of monitoring re-learning, both for assessment 
of exercises and for avoiding accidents. Furthermore, the 
general technology enhancement can realise the idea of re-
learning anytime and anywhere and support the andragogy-
heutagogy concept of self-directed learning.    
D. Usability and technology acceptance of IoMT for older 
adults 
Although the IoMT based devices have several potential 
benefits for older adults, the usability of and technology 
acceptance for these devices has been a matter of concern. 
Particularly, the older generation who have not used the 
technology frequently in their entire life might have problems 
with adapting and using these devices. Age-related 
impairments and chronic diseases also limit the use of 
technology in older adults. Therefore, it is of great importance 
to design and develop IoMT based devices and services 
according to the special needs of older adults. A User-Centred 
Design (UCD) approach should be adopted where the users 
are involved throughout the design and implementation 
process.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
Independent living and re-learning are main activities to 
be practiced effectively by the older adults on a daily basis to 
keep themselves happy and healthy. This can be possible 
through the emerging sensing technology, IoT and IoMT 
driven wearable devices. Besides, smart and pervasive 
healthcare is based on the fundamental characteristics of these 
unobtrusive portable and lightweight devices. Due to its 
highly intelligent sensing and processing capabilities, IoMT 
easily provides the ‘smart and cost-effective healthcare for 
older adults’. Finally, the implementation of IoMT to support 
re-learning and independent living share the same concerns as 
other e-health technologies: trust, security, personal integrity, 
user acceptance, and accessibility of ICT.  
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

REFERENCES 
[1] E. Borelli et al., "HABITAT: An IoT solution for independent 
elderly", Sensors. vol. 19, no.5, p. 1258, 2019.  
[2] L. Mainetti et al., “An IoT-aware AAL system for elderly 
people. 2016 IEEE International Multidisciplinary Conference 
on Computer and Energy Science (SpliTech), 2016, p. 1-6. 
[3] M. Hooshmand et al., “Boosting the battery life of wearables 
for health monitoring through the compression of biosignals”, 
IEEE Internet of Things Journal, vol. 4, no. 5, p. 1647-1662, 
2017. 
[4] A. H. Sodhro et al., “Towards wearable sensing enabled 
healthcare framework for elderly patients”, IEEE  International 
Conference on Communications (ICC), Dublin, Ireland, 2020, 
p. 1-5. 
[5] D. Rosewater et al.,  “Battery energy storage state-of-charge 
forecasting: models, optimization, and accuracy”,  IEEE 
Transactions on Smart Grid, vol. 10, no. 3, p. 2453-2462, 2018. 
[6] S. M. M. Fattah et al., ”Building IoT services for aging in place 
using standard-based IoT platforms and heterogeneous IoT 
products”, Sensors, vol. 17, no. 10, p. 2311, 2017. 
[7] H. Magsi et al.,  “A Novel Adaptive Battery-Aware Algorithm 
for Data Transmission in IoT-Based Healthcare Applications”, 
Electronics,  vol. 10, no. 4, p. 367, 2021. 
[8] T. Zhang et al.,  “A joint deep learning and Internet of Medical 
Things driven framework for elderly patients”, IEEE Access, 
vol. 8, no. 2020, p. 75822-75832, 2020. 
[9] A. Rashed et al., “Integrated IoT medical platform for remote 
healthcare and assisted living”, 2017 IEEE Japan-Africa 
Conference on Electronics, Communications and Computers 
(JAC-ECC),  2017, 1-7.  
[10] H. Arora et al.,  “Experimental validation of the recovery effect 
in batteries for wearable sensors and healthcare devices 
discovering the existence of hidden time constants”, The 
Journal of Engineering, vol. 2017, no. 10, p. 548-556, 2017. 
[11] H. Kaur, “An Energy Efficient Wireless Body Area Network 
Using Genetic Algorithm”, International Journal of Advanced 
Research in Computer Science, vol. 8, no. 8,  p. 98-106, 2017. 
[12] R. Maskeliūnas, R. Damaševičius, and S. Segal, "A review of 
internet of things technologies for ambient assisted living 
environments," Future Internet, vol. 11, no. 12, p. 259, 2019 
[13] A. H. Sodhro et al., " Power Management Strategies for 
Medical Information Transmission in Wireless Body Sensor 
Networks", IEEE Consumer Electronics Magazine, vol. 9, no. 
2, p. 47-51, 2020. 
[14] P. Mozelius, K. Ahlin, and A. Ahmad, “A game-based 
approach for motoric stroke rehabilitation: defining the 
requirements”, ECGBL 2019, 13th European Conference on 
Games Based Learning, Odense, Denmark, 2019, p. 1-7. 
[15] A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius, and K. Ahlin, "Testbed requirements 
for technology enhanced stroke rehabilitation to support 
independent living",  ICT4AWE 2019-5th International 
Conference on Information and Communication Technologies 
for Ageing Well and e-Health, Heraklion, Greece, 2019, p. 1-
8, INSTICC Press. 
[16] A. H. Sodhro et al., “Towards Convergence of AI and IoT for 
Energy Efficient Communication in Smart Homes”, IEEE 
Internet of Things  Journal, vol. 8, no. 12, p. 9664-9671, 2021. 
[17] Y. K. Choi and H. J. Thompson, “Use of an Internet-of-things 
smart home system for healthy aging in older adults in 
residential settings: Pilot feasibility study”,  JMIR aging, vol. 
3, no. 2, p. 21964, 2020. 
[18] S. Peek et al., “Older adults' reasons for using technology while 
aging in place”, Gerontology, vol. 62, no. 2, p. 226-237, 2016. 
[19] A. H. Sodhro et al., ”Power Control Algorithms for Media 
Transmission in Remote Healthcare Systems”, IEEE Access, 
vol. 6, no. 2018,   p. 42384-42394, 2018. 
[20] C. Vizitiu et al., “Exhaustive Description of the System 
Architecture and Prototype Implementation of an IoT-Based 
eHealth Biometric Monitoring System for Elders in 
Independent Living”, Sensors, vol. 21, no. 5, p. 1837, 2021. 
[21] S. Helal and C. N. Bull, “From smart homes to smart-ready 
homes and communities”, Dementia and geriatric cognitive 
disorders, vol. 47, no. 3, p. 157-163, 2019. 
[22] J. Plattner et al., ”Using IoT middleware solutions in 
interdisciplinary research projects in the context of AAL”,   
Proceedings of the 13th ACM International Conference on 
PErvasive Technologies Related to Assistive Environments; 
Corfu, Greece: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020,  
p. 51. 
[23] M. M. Baig et al., “A Systematic Review of Wearable Sensors 
and IoT-Based Monitoring Applications for Older Adults – a 
Focus on Ageing Population and Independent Living”,  Journal 
of Medical Systems, vol. 43, no. 8, p. 233, 2019. 
[24] P. Abril-Jiménez et al., "Ageing-friendly cities for assessing 
older adults’ decline: IoT-based system for continuous 
monitoring of frailty risks using smart city infrastructure", 
Aging clinical and experimental research, vol. 32, no. 4, p. 663-
671, 2020. 
[25] L. Sumi, I. Longchar, and S. Dey, "IoT-based Fall Prevention 
and Detection for Senior Citizens, Physically and Intellectually 
Disabled", 2019 IEEE International Conference on Information 
Technology (ICIT), Bhubaneswar, India, 2019, p.190-195.  
[26] J. Bourgeois et al., "Re-learning of activities of daily living: a 
comparison of the effectiveness of three learning methods in 
patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type", The journal of 
nutrition, health & aging, vol. 20, no. 1, p. 48-55, 2016. 
[27] O. R. Oyeleke,  "A situation-driven framework for Re-learning 
of activities of daily living in smart home environments", Lowa 
State University, 2020, p.114, Graduate Theses and 
Dissertations. 18197, https://lib.dr.iastate.edu/etd/18197. 
[28] M. Muzammal et al., "A Multi-sensor Data Fusion Enabled 
Ensemble Approach for Medical Data from Body Sensor 
Networks", Information Fusion, Elsevier, vol. 53, no. 2020, p. 
155-164, 2020. 
[29] H. Payne and S. Brooks, "Different strokes for different folks: 
the bodymind approach as a learning tool for patients with 
medically unexplained symptoms to self-manage", Frontiers in 
Psychology, vol.9, no. 2018, p.2222, 2019. 
[30] A. H. Sodhro, Y. Li, and M. A. Shah, ”Energy-efficient 
Adaptive Transmission Power Control in Wireless Body Area 
Networks”, IET Communications, vol.10, no.1, pp.81-90, 2016 
[31] N. M. Salbach et al., " The role of theory to develop and 
evaluate a toolkit to increase clinical measurement and 
interpretation of walking speed and distance in adults post-
stroke", Disability and Rehabilitation, p.1-17, 2020, DOI: 
10.1080/09638288.2020.1867653. 
[32] A. Ahmad and P. Mozelius, "On the Importance of Tailor-
made Speech Re-learning Software for Stroke Rehabilitation", 
ICT4AWE 2020:SciTePress, 2020, p.1-8. 
[33] N. Zahid et al., "An   Adaptive Energy   Optimization 
Mechanism for Decentralized Smart Healthcare Applications", 
93rd IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC) 2021-
Spring, 25-28 April, Helsinki, Finland, 2021, p. 1-5. 
[34] D. Hu et al., “Decomposing Atrial Activity Signal by 
Combining ICA and  WABS”, 35th IEEE Annual International 
Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
(EMBC), Osaka Japan, 2013, p.1-5. 
[35] L. M. Blaschke, "The pedagogy–andragogy–heutagogy 
continuum and technology-supported personal learning 
environments", In: Jung I. (eds) Open and Distance Education 
Theory Revisited. Springer Briefs in Education. Springer, 
Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-7740-2_9,  p. 
75-84, 2019. 
[36] P. Rasi, H. Vuojärvi, and H. Ruokamo, "Media literacy 
education for all ages", Journal of Media Literacy Education, 
vol. 11, no. 2, p. 1-19, 2019. 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

