Patient Feedback during an Awake Craniotomy Using Virtual Reality 
Alexander Moryäner 
Computational Health Informatics 
Leibniz University 
Hannover, Germany 
email: alexander.moryaener@gmail.com 
Tobias Holst 
Computational Health Informatics 
Leibniz University 
Hannover, Germany 
email: holst@chi.uni-hannover.de 
Igor Merkulow 
Computational Health Informatics 
Leibniz University 
Hannover, Germany 
email: merkulow@chi.uni-hannover.de 
Gabriele von Voigt 
Computational Health Informatics 
Leibniz University 
Hannover, Germany 
email: vonvoigt@chi.uni-hannover.de 
 
 
Abstract—The goal of this work in progress project is to 
provide an improvement to the currently used procedure of 
physician-patient interaction during the awake craniotomy 
using Virtual Reality (VR) technology. The proposed 
procedure will evaluate the patient's response to the visual and 
auditory stimuli, provided via a VR device. We will highlight 
the functionality of the setup, its advantages and shortcomings, 
and discuss possible risks of the used technology. Our 
approach provides a complete virtual environment, including 
situations and combinations of stimuli that can test complex 
reactions of the patient, and, on the other hand, is completely 
under control of the neuropsychologist. We conclude by 
showing that the benefits of the approach significantly 
outweigh the downsides, so that the presented technology is not 
only a new opportunity, but also the future. 
Keywords-Virtual Reality; Awake Craniotomy; Patient 
Feedback. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For some patients, awake surgery is the best way to avoid 
the risk of surgical neurological deficits [1]. “The main 
advantage of awake craniotomy is to allow for intraoperative 
electrocorticography and cortical mapping to identify 
eloquent brain areas” [2]. This advantage also outweighs the 
psychological disadvantages that can arise from this method. 
For this reason, awake surgery is used more and more 
frequently [1]. Current brain mapping, for example, uses 
images that the patient has to recognize and name or texts 
that the patient has to read aloud [3]. 
We propose an improvement to the currently used 
procedure of physician-patient interaction during the awake 
craniotomy using Virtual Reality (VR) technology. 
The state-of-the-art procedure currently involves testing 
of the visual and auditory senses during the stimulation of 
the corresponding brain area with a surgical instrument. The 
aim is to ensure that no sensory degradation will take place 
during the operation. The testing duration has to be as short 
as possible to reduce the risk of epileptic seizures. 
The visual stimulation usually involves placing pictures 
in front of the patient, optionally on a laptop or tablet screen, 
accompanied by a request to describe the situation. The 
current procedure tends to be cumbersome, error-prone, and 
has the additional limitation that the physician is not able to 
see the test at the same time as the patient, thus not being  
able to verify the correctness of the answer. Figure 1 shows 
the surgical area during an awake craniotomy with the 
numbered areas for stimulation. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Surgical area during an awake craniotomy. 
 
In the proposed setup, we use the VR technology as in 
[4], but generate much more expressive and complex stimuli 
in order to evaluate the possible degradation of brain 
functionality. 
In Section 2, we show the features of the developed 
application. Section 3 deals with the hardware and software 
requirements. In Section 4, details of the implementation are 
briefly presented. Section 5 contains the conclusion, 
currently still occurring problems, and possible further 
developments. 
II. 
APPLICATION FEATURES 
The major goal of the setup is to support the physician 
during the brain surgery and to give him the possibility to 
test affected brain regions. For this task, a preferably full 
spectrum of sensory stimulations and corresponding 
responses is desirable. The sight is the most important sense 
for human beings, so the majority of the tests address the 
visual stimulation with the last two including hearing as well. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In the first prototype, the following features have been 
selected for the implementation: 
- 
Image recognition 
- 
Interaction with a complex situation/environment 
- 
Memory function 
- 
Reflex and reaction 
- 
Hand-eye coordination 
- 
Auditory perception 
- 
Combination of visual and auditory perception. 
The usage of the novel technology will also force the 
personnel to change their routine, albeit not in a very 
significant way. The patient has to familiarize himself with 
the app and the displayed virtual world, and he has to 
perform the tests in advance in order to have a baseline or 
reference point of his performance. The patient should 
display no anxiety controlling the app. It should also be 
taken into account that the patient's awareness of being 
operated on his brain may induce high stress levels during 
the operation. 
This preoperative procedure is also necessary to test 
patient's sensitivity to the so-called Virtual Reality sickness. 
In this case, the approach is not applicable. 
A. Image Recognition 
 
 
Figure 2. Image recognition of 2D and 3D images. 
 
The basic configuration of the app already provides about 
80 different two- and three-dimensional images, an amount 
that can easily be extended to include for example patient-
specific images. 3D-objects even allow a complete 360-
degree view, which is impossible with the currently used 2D-
representations. Figure 2 shows a small selection of sample 
images from the application that the patient should 
recognize. 
B. Interaction with a Complex Situation/Environment 
 
 
Figure 3. Forest 3D-scenery. 
In our application, we implemented a forest (as shown in 
Figure 3), a desert, and a town scenery, all three with their 
typical 
vegetation, 
earth 
conditions 
and 
animals. 
Additionally, we provide two uncommon and more 
challenging environments - a space station, and a room made 
of colored cubes. The different environments can be selected 
according to the patient's preferences and can help to reduce 
stress during the operation [4]. The patient is able to move 
freely and interact with the environment, which extends the 
range of possible questions significantly from the basic 
recognition to the deeper understanding of the given 
situation. 
C. Memory Function 
 
 
Figure 4. Memory game with bird’s eye view (left) and first person’s field of 
view (right) [5]. 
 
The memory and especially the short-term memory, is of 
utmost importance to human beings, thus it should be tested 
during the awake craniotomy. 
We implemented the well-known memory game "pairs" 
and a labyrinth escape situation. In the latter, the patient is 
asked to memorize the path from entrance to the exit for a 
few minutes from the bird's eye perspective as shown in the 
left part of Figure 4. After that the app switches to the 
person's field of view as shown in the right part, requesting 
him to navigate to the exit of the maze. This test also aims to 
estimate the spatial ability and the sense of orientation, i.e. if 
the patient uses the same dead-end repeatedly. 
D. Reflex and reaction 
 
 
Figure 5. Arachnophobia scenery. 
 
In the previous test procedure, there is neither a 
standardized test nor a measurement of patient's reaction 
time, which can be an important indicator of his condition. In 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

our app, we addressed the problem by implementing two 
tests to estimate the patient’s reflexes and reactions: 
- The supervising physician lets a spider appear in the 
field of view of the patient whilst he walks in a forest. 
This is shown in Figure 5. If there is any reaction, the 
patient did not lose his reflex. 
- In a second test, the patient is on a grass pitch and a ball 
appears from a random direction with varying speed. 
The patient is asked to stop the ball in the middle of his 
field of view by pressing a button. 
E. Hand-Eye Coordination 
 
 
Figure 6. Test for hand-eye coordination and acrophobia [5]. 
 
This specific part of the app tests the accuracy of the 
coordination ability and of the user interaction and its 
possible degradation during the operation. The patient has to 
walk virtually on a narrowing wooden beam placed in midair 
as shown in Figure 6. 
F. Auditory Perception 
The app provides a typical hearing test. A sound is 
coming from the left, right or both sides and the patient has 
to choose the corresponding button with the controller. 
Correctness of the answer is visualized by the change in the 
button coloring or communicated by the physician. 
G. Combination of Visual and Auditory Perception 
 
 
Figure 7. Combined tests [5]. 
 
One final test combines seeing and hearing. The patient 
has to decide if the presented 3D-object matches the sound 
by selecting a corresponding screen area and the correctness 
of the choice will be indicated by the change in the button's 
color. An example can be seen in Figure 7. A short sound file 
is played at the same time. For example, if the patient hears a 
car horn, he has to select the red tick on the right; if it is a 
bird’s song, he must select the turquoise cross on the left. If 
the patient makes mistakes during the stimulation or gives no 
answer at all, this is an important sign for the operating team 
as they continue to perform the awake craniotomy. 
III. 
REALIZATION 
       In this section, we will show the technical realization 
including the necessary hardware and the software 
requirements. 
A. Technical Setup 
 
 
Figure 8. Used VR glasses (left) and controller (right) [5]. 
 
The project setup contains an Android-based smartphone 
as a central processing and visualizing gear, the VR app, a 
pair of Destek V4 VR glasses, and a gaming controller, used 
as a steering device for the app. This equipment, excluding 
the smartphone, can be seen in Figure 8. An additional 
control screen for the surgical team is also needed for the 
verification of test results. A pair of headphones or small 
speakers is necessary for the auditory tests. 
We chose a smartphone VR holder instead of full-fledged 
VR glasses due to the cost factor and higher flexibility. The 
Android Operating System, being the most common mobile 
OS, was selected for the development of the VR app. 
An additional focus needs to be put on the controller. 
Since the head tracking, as the regular way of navigation in 
the VR environment, is not possible due to the head fixation, 
the steering has to be done with an external device. A game 
controller emerged as the best-suited device so far. To meet 
the requirements on the wireless signal interference in the 
medical setting (s. below) it can be connected by wire 
instead of Bluetooth. 
B. Implementation Requirements 
In order to develop a user-friendly VR app, the scope of 
all possible users has to be determined - it includes different 
physicians - surgeons, anesthesiologists, neuropsychologists, 
nurses, and, on the other hand, the patients. An intuitive and 
easy to use user interface has to be developed for both of 
these user groups with a special focus on the latter, to avoid 
contributing to the heavy stress during the operation. In 
addition, of course, the approach has to improve the current 
patient-physician interaction to justify its development. 
The following functional requirements were considered: 
- 
The use of the app should not require any special 
knowledge or experience. 
- 
The patient should not endure any additional risks 
compared to an awake craniotomy without the app. 
- 
The app should never cause any hassle or stress for the 
patient. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

- 
The app should be reliable and robust with respect to 
system crash. 
- 
Software has to be extensible and modifiable to fit 
different use cases. 
- 
The app should be able to deal with wrong interactions. 
- 
All the information presented to the patient should be 
synchronized to the control screen. 
- 
Additional constraints arose due to the medical 
environment (and were met): 
- 
The number of signal transmissions should be reduced 
to a minimum. 
- 
The app must not interfere with any other device in the 
operating theater. 
- 
The app should be implemented with special regards to 
IT 
security 
due 
to 
the 
highly 
health-critical 
environment. 
- 
The data protection act has to be respected. 
- 
The code quality should meet industrial standards 
typical for medical software. 
- 
The entire setup and its components have to be 
accordingly certified (“work in progress”). 
One final note should address the general usability - the 
VR glasses and, optionally, headphones are head-mounted, 
so that they may interfere with surgeons' access to some 
regions or the sterility requirements. It should be obvious 
that in these cases, the setup is unusable and other methods 
should be employed. 
IV. 
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS 
The app and the 3D-scenery were implemented using 
Microsoft Visual Studio with Unity. Unity is a set of tools 
primarily used for the game development, allowing creating 
feature-rich environments with natural physical conditions, 
which are necessary to make the user feel comfortable using 
the app. The main user interface was also designed with 
Unity. To create the stereoscopic images, we used the 
Google VR SDK for Android. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
During a demonstration and following discussion with 
three participating surgeons they agreed that our approach 
shows promising potential, however further development of 
the technical setup is necessary to meet the specific 
requirements of awake craniotomy and other types of awake 
surgeries. 
One conclusion was that the highest benefit could be seen 
in the availability of more specific and flexible tests than 
with state-or-the-art procedures. Especially, further brain 
functions, for example short-term memory, situational 
perception and combination of senses, can be tested. 
Additionally, the ability to adapt the VR environment to 
patient's personal or professional interests and preferences is 
a great improvement. In addition, it could potentially reduce 
the stress and anxiety during the surgery at the same time as 
in [4], so patients might prefer our approach, but this needs 
further evidence in future work. 
Another insight resulting from the discussion was that 
our approach is one step ahead of the current state of the 
brain mapping, since it adds the possibility to test currently 
unmapped functionalities, for example, it is still not fully 
understood which brain regions affect spatial ability. 
Additional research is necessary in this area to tap the full 
potential of this approach. 
The consensus was that this is not only a new opportunity 
but also the future. 
In our future work, we will: 
- 
Address the setup’s shortcoming, that in contrast to the 
regular interpersonal communication, the usage of VR 
prevents the eye contact between the neuropsychologist 
and the patient. 
- 
Extending the supervisor interface with additional 
information and better test control. 
- 
Test the setup under clinical conditions. 
COMPLIANCE WITH ETHICAL STANDARDS 
Conflict of Interest: The authors declare that they have no 
conflict of interest. 
This article does not contain any studies with human 
participants or animals performed by any of the authors. 
This article does not contain patient data. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
With friendly support from Prof. Christian Rainer Wirtz, 
Prof. Ralph König, Dr. Gregor Dursun, Clinic for 
Neurosurgery at the University Medical Center Ulm/BKH 
Günzburg, Germany. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Milian, M. Tatagiba, and G. C. Feigl, “Patient response to 
awake 
craniotomy 
– 
a 
summary 
overview”, 
Acta 
Neurochirurgica, 
vol. 
156, 
pp. 
1063–1070, 
2014, 
doi:10.1007/s00701-014-2038-4. 
[2] G. M. Ibrahim, and M. Bernstein, “Awake craniotomy for 
supratentorial gliomas: why, when and how?”, CNS 
oncology, vol. 1, issue 1, pp. 71-83, Sep. 2012, 
doi:10.2217/cns.12.1. 
[3] O. Sacko, V. Lauwers-Cances, D. Brauge, M. Sesay, A. 
Brenner, F. E. Roux, “Awake Craniotomy vs Surgery Under 
General Anesthesia for Resection of Supratentorial Lesions”, 
Neurosurgery, vol. 68, issue 5, pp. 1192-1199, May 2011, 
doi:10.1227/NEU.0b013e31820c02a3. 
[4] W. O. C. Lopez, P. Navarro, M. Ibarra, C. Rocha, and J. D. 
Gomez, “Creation of an original system of virtual reality, 
augmented and neurogaming for the education and 
entertainment of the patient in the operating room and impact 
on his stress in craniotomy with awake patient”, 69. 
Jahrestagung der Deutschen Gesellschaft für Neurochirurgie 
(DGNC) Joint Meeting mit der Mexikanischen und 
Kolumbianischen Gesellschaft für Neurochirurgie, Münster, 
2018, 
https://www.egms.de/static/de/meetings/dgnc2018/18dgnc305
.shtml, retrieved: Sep. 2021. 
[5] A. Moryäner, “Development of a Remote-Controlled Virtual 
Reality App for Therapy Support”, Bachelor’s thesis, Leibniz 
University Hannover, 2018. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

