Options for Protecting Medical Data by IP Rights 
Iryna Lishchuk, Marc Stauch 
Institut für Rechtsinformatik 
Leibniz Universität Hannover 
Hannover, Germany 
e-mail: lishchuk@iri.uni-hannover.de, stauch@iri.uni-hannover.de 
 
 
Abstract—This paper investigates different approaches to 
recognising Intellectual Property (IP) in medical data so as to 
protect efforts invested in enhancing the usability of such data 
through data curation. Sui generis database rights, copyrights 
and related rights, the legal regime of know-how all offer 
plausible options for protection here. In this paper, we analyse 
these options including by reference to a specific EC FP7 e-
health research project (CHIC) and assess the prospects and 
potential benefits of applying them in order to protect 
investments made in data curation for medical research. 
Keywords-IP rights; data rights;  medical data; data 
curation.  
I. INTRODUCTION 
In recent years attention is increasingly focusing on the 
potential use of clinical health data for medical research. In 
principle, such data, recorded in patient or research databases 
can be of tremendous value when analyzed, in revealing 
linkages, e.g., between environmental and/or genetic factors 
and diseases. A major advantage too is that such connections 
can often be identified straight from the records, without the 
need for further invasive and potentially risky research. 
As the potential value of health data becomes better 
understood, efforts to monopolize clinical data by exclusive 
IP or proprietary rights are also expanding. For instance, 
there are cases when the commercial use of health related 
data has been asserted under the coverage of database rights 
[1]. Patentable inventions have been derived out of the data 
of patients and research subjects and successfully 
commercialized [2]. The property right in data, generated in 
medical research, may also be claimed under contractual 
schemes [3]. At some point copyrights may also come to 
consideration for monopolizing data in medical domain [4]. 
However, as a precondition for allowing a significant 
amount of clinical data to be usefully exploited, there is an 
important initial step required in the form of data curation. In 
this regard, as we analyze below, most types of IP protection 
are tailored to protect specific objects that have already 
passed a certain threshold of maturity (data repositories, 
confidential information with assignable commercial value, 
etc.); but, as we discuss, none as such guarantees adequate 
protection to protect the prior investment made in curating 
the data. 
In what follows, we begin by describing the data curation 
process in medical research in Section II. Then, in Section 
III, we consider the key relevant regimes of IP protection 
that may apply to protect such activity, namely: copyright 
and related rights, sui generis data base rights, and know-
how protection, as well as reliance on contractual 
mechanisms. By way of illustration, in Section IV, we 
consider how those regimes may apply to data curation in the 
context of a specific medical research project. In Section V 
the paper then concludes with some suggestions as to how 
curation activity may be better protected in the future. 
II.  DATA CURATION 
The clinical data provided for e-health research usually 
comprises a large mass of data of multiple data types, 
formats, 
words, 
figures, 
numerical 
parameters, 
abbreviations, etc. From a technical standpoint, data 
integration is still a significant challenge for such research. 
In this regard, a starting point in the context of curation 
might be to see raw data in terms of the ‘given’, which as 
yet lacks semantic meaning, with the latter only emerging 
through the addition of an interpretive context (which also 
marks the change in state from data into information). It is 
arguably the technological development and transformation 
of raw or incompletely processed data into information (or 
the uncovering of additional semantic meaning), brought 
about by the curative process, which presents the suitable 
object of IP protection. 
Data integration is key here, but the format, scope, 
parameter, structure, context, terminology, completeness, 
etc., of the individual and heterogeneous data are not 
standardized, which may affect their quality, and ultimately 
their interoperability and integration [5]. This could also 
potentially affect collaboration of the different researchers 
in this field if they use different semantics and techniques to 
describe, format, submit, and exchange data.  
The curation required here to ensure the data relates to 
and measures the same phenomena with sufficient accuracy 
to be usable is a large and painstaking task. It includes the 
problem of dealing with incomplete data fields and cross-
checking that various indices were measured and recorded 
in a similar way (e.g., images were taken using similar 
equipment, co-morbidities were classified using the same 
terminology, etc). It is evident too that considerable 
expertise and skill is required for it to be performed well: 
the curator needs to have a real feel and understanding for 
the subject matter in order to make sensible judgments in 
resolving various gaps and uncertainties. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

III. POTENTIAL IP PROTECTION 
A. Copyright and Related Rights 
Clinical data comes for the most part from clinical trials, 
laboratory results, medical examinations, etc. An example 
of the clinical data from the research project is shown in 
Figure 1[6]. Such data is usually expressed in some numeric 
parameters, figures, words, combinations of such items. The 
representation of clinical data in this format is suitable and 
useful for digital data processing. However, the isolated 
items, be they words, keywords, syntax, figures or 
mathematical concepts as such, will not attract copyright. 
According to the Court of Justice of European Union 
(CJEU), items, “considered in isolation, are not as such an 
intellectual creation of the author who employs them.” [7]. 
In order to be protected by copyright, the data must 
constitute the expression of the original author´s creativity, 
which is only present when “through the choice, sequence 
and combination of those words that the author may express 
his creativity in an original manner and achieve a result 
which is an intellectual creation” [7]. The protection of 
clinical data by copyright may be acceptable for the medical 
reports, written by the physician or the patient and only 
when the expression of original creativity is achieved.  
 
 
Figure 1. DWI and ADC mapping of nephroblastoma from different 
patients before and after pre-operative chemotherapy. Presented at the 
annual meeting of the British Chapter of the ISMRM, September 2012, 
provided by Prof. Kathy Pritchard-Jones from UCL. Copied from CHIC 
Deliverable D2-2 “Scenario based user needs and requirements” [6]. 
As may be seen from the image, some data is presented 
in visual form and is represented by images. However, 
medical images are normally produced by technical means 
(such as X-Ray, Ultrasound, etc.) and lack the creativity – 
an indispensable pre-requisite for copyright. A similar 
standard of copyright and requirement of original creativity 
applies to photographic works as well. According to Recital 
16 Directive 2006/116/EC [8], a photographic work is 
protected by copyright, if it is original. A work “is to be 
considered original if it is the author's own intellectual 
creation reflecting his personality”. Other criteria such as 
merit or purpose are not relevant for copyright. According 
to the CJEU decision in the case C 145/10 REC of Eva-
Maria Painer [9], copyright protects pictures taken by an 
individual, exercising free and creative choices, thus 
stamping a picture with his personal touch. It means, only 
pictures, which are taken by an individual expressing some 
level of creativity may be protected by copyright. On the 
other hand, images, generated automatically, will lack the 
creative input and may not be copyrighted. Since the 
images, produced in medical domain, are normally taken 
automatically and the process of recording is mostly 
completely managed by technical means, such images 
normally do not express creativity and do not attract the 
protection by copyright, respectively.  
Apart from the rights considered so far, in the field of 
copyright there are a number of other emerging rights 
granted as a response to relevant investment. These rights 
are normally provided to the person, who invests in 
producing the protectable information. Such rights are 
referred to as related rights. Protection by related rights does 
not necessarily link to the intellectual creation (as the case is 
with traditional copyright), but rather to the economic 
investment.  
The major rationale for protection by related rights tends 
to shift between intellectual creation and investment [10]. A 
mixture of artistic creation and investment attracts exclusive 
rights to performers in fixations of their performances. The 
economic investment constitutes a major factor, which 
renders exclusive rights to phonogram producers in their 
phonograms, to the film producers in respect of first 
fixations of their films, to broadcasting organizations in 
fixations of their broadcasts [11].  
However, the number of related rights as of now is 
rather limited (mostly to those, indicated above). Therefore, 
attaching added value to the data enriching, post-procession, 
modification, etc., does not constitute the kind of investment 
protectable by related rights.  
Against these considerations, the protection of clinical 
data, which is normally collected in the course of medical 
examinations and is represented in some numerical or 
technical visual format, by copyrights or related rights, may 
not be considered as a practicable solution, because the 
requirements for copyright protection in this data would not 
be met.  
B. Sui Generis Database Right 
As a rule, clinical institutions, participating in medical 
research, manage and maintain the clinical data in the 
clinical data repositories. Some clinical institutions manage 
their clinical information and store the results of clinical 
trials using Ontology-based Clinical Trial Management 
Application 
(ObTiMA) 
[12]. 
Others 
prefer 
data 
management systems specific to their medical activities.  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Against this practice, an option of protecting the clinical 
data under the umbrella of sui generis database rights comes 
into consideration first.  
The legal protection of databases is provided by the 
Directive 96/9/EC of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection 
of databases (the Database Directive) [13]. Such protection 
is granted in recognition of the fact that constructing a 
database requires “investment of considerable human, 
technical and financial resources" [13]. The directive aims 
to reward and protect such investment by providing the 
maker of a database with a sui generis data base right that 
places him in a position to prevent unauthorized access and 
copying of the database contents, which he compiled. In this 
regard, Article 7 Database Directive states: 
“Member States shall provide for a right for the maker 
of a database which shows that there has been qualitatively 
and/or quantitatively a substantial investment in either the 
obtaining, verification or presentation of the contents to 
prevent extraction and/or re-utilization of the whole or of a 
substantial 
part, 
evaluated 
qualitatively 
and/or 
quantitatively, of the contents of that database.” The object 
of protection in terms of the Database Directive is a 
‘database’ meaning “a collection of independent works, data 
or other materials arranged in a systematic or methodical 
way and individually accessible by electronic or other 
means” [13]. 
Protection of databases by the sui generis right can be 
considered as a plausible option for protecting the clinical 
data repositories, provided such repositories satisfy the 
criteria for protection. For this, the repository must show 
significant investment in “the obtaining, verification or 
presentation” of its contents.  
As regards the scope of the database right, it would 
protect the collected data from being copied as a whole or in 
substantial 
part, 
evaluated 
“qualitatively 
and/or 
quantitatively” and either copied in one action or step by 
step [13]. 
Provided the clinical data repository qualifies as a 
database in the meaning of Database Directive and the 
clinical institution holds the sui generis database rights, the 
institution may stipulate the terms of using the repository 
contents as a whole, grant the rights of use under contractual 
license, 
prevent 
and 
enforce 
the 
unauthorized 
extraction/reutilization of the repository contents as a whole 
or in substantial part. The holder of sui generis database 
rights may leverage how the contents of its repository may 
be used, whether the data items may be extracted 
(downloaded) and in what scope, whether the data may be 
transferred to external parties or whether the data procession 
may only be done on its premises.  
However, the sui generis protection applies to the 
contents of the repository as a whole or in substantial part 
and may apply separately and irrespective of protectability 
of data items by other rights, such as copyrights. Article 7 
(4) makes this explicit, saying that the database right: “shall 
apply irrespective of eligibility of the contents of that 
database for protection by copyright or by other rights. 
Protection of databases [….] shall be without prejudice to 
rights existing in respect of their contents”. 
Thus, the holder of the repository may manage the use of 
the repository contents as a whole. However, the use of 
separate data items in the repository may remain governed 
by the terms, stipulated by the data providers and/or holders 
of rights in such items. For instance, the access rights to the 
datasets, handled as confidential, may require signing of 
non-disclosure agreement (NDA) and the use of such data 
may be limited and be subject to technical protection 
measures, etc. 
The options of protection, which potentially may apply 
to separate datasets we consider next. 
C. Know-how 
Because of the high sensitivity of health related data 
(and the potential harm from disclosure to the patient’s 
interests in privacy, dignity and autonomy), clinical data in 
the medical treatment domain is managed under the rules of 
professional medical secrecy and subject to the fiduciary 
duties. For preserving the secrecy of clinical data, after such 
data leaves the medical domain (where it was handled under 
the rules of professional medical secrecy) and enters the 
domain of clinical research (where not necessarily all parties 
are bound by the rules of professional secrecy), protecting 
such data under the legal regime of know-how (or as 
undisclosed information) may be advised as a good option.   
Protection of undisclosed information is provided by 
Section 7, Article 39 et seq. TRIPS Agreement [14]. The 
legal regime of know-how enables natural and legal persons, 
who are in legitimate possession of such information, to 
prevent such information “from being disclosed to, acquired 
by, or used by others without their consent in a manner 
contrary to honest commercial practices.” Unfair practices 
for these purposes would include the acquisition of 
information via violation of contractual duties, breach of 
confidentiality obligations, inducement to breach, etc. [14].  
In order to be protectable, the relevant information 
should have the quality of protectable information within 
the meaning of Article 39 TRIPS Agreement. Article 39 
TRIPS Agreement protects information, which:  
“(a) is secret in the sense that it is not, as a body or in 
the precise configuration and assembly of its components, 
generally known among or readily accessible to persons 
within the circles that normally deal with the kind of 
information in question; 
(b) has commercial value because it is secret; and 
(c) has been subject to reasonable steps under the 
circumstances, by the person lawfully in control of the 
information, to keep it secret.” [14]. 
The first weak point of protecting clinical data as know-
how is that as of now the legal framework on know-how 
protection in the EU is not harmonized [15]. Although, there 
is a proposal for a draft directive on the protection of 
undisclosed information in the EU (the Draft Directive) 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[16], before it is adopted and implemented, protection of 
know how remains dispersed through the national states of 
the EU Member States, and subject to varying  requirements 
for and scope of protection  
The Draft Directive, which is intended to harmonize the 
national laws in relation to know-how protection, in many 
aspects repeats the provisions of the TRIPS Agreement (in 
particular, it relates to the protectable subject matter and 
requirements for protection (Article 2), acts of unfair 
acquisition of information (Article 3), rights and remedies 
conferred (Article 5 et seq), etc.). In this regard it may also 
be queried how far the Draft Directive, if adopted, would 
improve the protection for data, the preparation of which 
consumed much effort, but which for one or another reason 
may not reach the level of protectable know-how. Here the 
key obstacles in applying know-how protection to the 
clinical data, processed for research, relate to the need (in 
order to be protected) for such data to be secret, subject to 
the confidentiality measures and have economic value.  
First, to satisfy the criterion of secrecy, the information, 
sought to be protected, must be accessible to a limited 
number of persons only. The use of such information must 
be subject to confidentiality measures.  The application of 
confidentiality measures means that the data must be 
stamped as “Confidential” and the sharing of such data must 
be made upon non-disclosure obligation and observation of 
the confidentiality measures. Disclosure of such datasets 
without due confidentiality measures might compromise the 
regime of secrecy so that protection would be forfeited. As 
regards the requirement of economic value of know-how, 
this will be considered to be present if through publication, 
the research investment and competitive standing of the 
entity doing the work would be undermined [17]. 
In relation to the volumes of clinical data, made 
available for research, this requirement, besides being at 
odds with the underlying culture of academic research, 
would create further workload. The data, subject to the 
regime of confidentiality, must first be strictly identified. 
The confidentiality mark would need to be attached to 
individual data items and any use and disclosure of such 
data to any third party must be made upon signing the non-
disclosure 
agreement. 
This 
preservation 
of 
the 
confidentiality mark, conclusion of NDA and control over 
handling such data as confidential would present another 
challenge. 
Against these considerations, the protection of clinical 
data under the legal regime of know-how might, in 
principle, be possible in relation to some defined amount of 
data, but hardly offers a feasible solution, when protection 
of large amounts of data, processed in medical research is 
sought. It also may operate against the principle of 
openness, if optimal use is to be made of the data by the 
research community, exploiting the full potential of 
available datasets. 
D. Contractual Approaches 
Insofar as the IP regimes for protecting the data, 
produced in medical research projects fail, one further 
method for regulating rights in data may be by contractual 
relations. Thus, in third party funded projects, the relations 
of ownership over the research results are typically 
governed by contract. The sponsor is typically interested to 
exploit the project results and funding is typically granted 
upon condition that the sponsor acquires the ownership and 
exploitation rights over the research results [3]. This model 
does not cause problems in practice, because the acquisition 
of ownership and exploitation rights is typically foreseen by 
the contract. The participating institutions are bound by 
these contractual relations and required to procure the 
ownership over the research results from the persons, whom 
they engage into the project. 
IV. APPLICATION OF IP REGIMES TO DATA CURATION IN 
CHIC 
A. Background 
The research project “Computational Horizons In Cancer 
(CHIC): Developing Meta- and Hyper-Multiscale Models 
and Repositories for In Silico Oncology”, is an ICT research 
project in the clinical domain [18]. CHIC develops clinical 
trial driven tools and services within a secure infrastructure, 
which facilitate the creation of multiscale cancer hyper-
models (integrative models) by technical means. These 
composite multiscale constructs of models (hyper-models or 
integrative models) are intended to synthesize and imitate 
the biological processes, which occur in course of tumor 
progression, at several temporal and spatial levels 
(molecular, cellular, etc.) at once.  
In this context too, the study of how individual cancer 
components interact with each other has led to an explosion 
in the number of different types of data generated from the 
patients such as: molecular data, epigenetic data, clinical 
data, imaging data, pathology data and other laboratory data 
[19]. These different data types are assembled in order to 
systematically explore and formalize them in mathematical 
models.  
Subsequently, the models are developed and validated 
against clinical data either taken from the literature or 
provided by the clinical partners [20]. The data management 
systems, used by the clinical partners, differ. Whereas the 
integration of data from data management system ObTiMA 
[12] is harmonized, the data from individual clinical data 
repositories need to be adapted to the requirements of the 
project. The use of diverging data management systems by 
the clinical institutions leads to the situation that the data, 
collected from different sources, is not inter-operable with 
each other and mostly cannot be used for research as such. 
The clinical data also needs to be post-processed by the 
modelers so that it fits into the set of parameters, which the 
models recognize and can utilize as an input for running the 
simulations. Data curation is a very important step because 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the inputs, outputs and descriptions of processes, simulated 
by the models, need to be standardized into the set of 
parameters, acceptable and usable by all cancer models.  
B. Applicability of IP Regimes to Project Data Curation 
The clinical data, which after the necessary de-
identification enters the domain of CHIC, is placed and 
stored in the CHIC clinical data repository.  The CHIC data 
repository hosts data categorized per data type: imaging data 
(DICOM etc), descriptive/structural data (age, sex etc), 
other files (histological reports), links (to other data 
repositories) etc. The datasets for each type are accessible 
individually so that the data corresponding to the model 
parameters may be chosen. The fact that the repository is 
built “based on the experience already accumulated during 
the implementation of other data repositories” should be 
sufficient to prove the requisite investment in “either the 
obtaining, verification or presentation” of its contents [13]. 
Against this background, the database right in the CHIC 
clinical data repository is likely to be granted.  
Protection of the CHIC data repository by the sui generis 
database rights would go to the maker of the database. In the 
meaning of the Database Directive, the maker of a database 
is seen as “the person who takes the initiative and the risk of 
investing”, but excluding subcontractors [13]. Thus, the 
party, who constructed the CHIC repository, would be in a 
position to manage the use of the repository, such as by 
allocating the access rights to the project parties or external 
parties, to define the rights of use (access only, 
modification, download, etc.), to divide the repository into 
sections and define different regimes of uses depending on 
the data stored therein, etc. Grant of the sui generis 
protection would also entitle the right holder to enforce his 
rights, once unauthorized copying of the repository contents 
on the large scale has occurred.  
Apart from the protection of the repository contents as a 
whole by sui generis database rights, the items in the 
repository may also enjoy protection in their own right.  
Since the clinical data repository deals with highly sensitive 
information (meaning that already for that reason, access to 
the data is strictly limited), application of the legal regime of 
know-how to some data items at least may be an option. As 
we saw above, for this, the data items, selected for know-
how protection, must be identified, the access and use of 
such data shall be limited to a defined number of people 
only, the management of such data shall be subject to 
confidentiality measures. In the case of CHIC, the regime of 
secrecy may be provided to the data via marking it as 
“Confidential” and making the disclosure of such data 
subject to the non-disclosure obligation. Considering from 
the technical side, the confidentiality mark would then need 
to be placed and borne by the data throughout the whole 
research process so that the data marked as “confidential” 
by the input comes out marked “confidential” by the output. 
This would present an additional workload, but is 
implementable. Also, disclosure of such data items to the 
CHIC parties subject to the non-disclosure obligation would 
not present a significant obstacle, because the project parties 
are bound by the contractual relations within the project. 
The factual use of data within the project may also be 
managed by technical measures, such as granting or denying 
the access rights, rights of use and extraction, limiting the 
data procession to the framework of technical infrastructure 
of CHIC only. Whereas the application of such contractual 
and technical confidentiality measures to the clinical data in 
CHIC may be feasible, in how far such technical and 
confidentiality measures may be implemented in other 
medical research projects may be questionable.    
By contrast, copyrights and related rights offer less 
plausible options for protecting the clinical data in CHIC. 
As noted above, the clinical data in CHIC is represented by 
technical data from clinical trials, which is composed from 
different parameters. As observed in Section III, isolated 
items are not protectable by copyright. Copyright will fail 
against the lack of creativity expressed in such data. The 
investment, deployed in curating the data for CHIC, does 
not qualify as investment, protectable by related rights. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
As we have seen, there are various ways in which the 
activity of curating clinical datasets could benefit from IP 
protection. Thus, collecting, arranging the data into a 
repository and making it suitable for use may render the 
investment, deployed in collecting and presenting the data, 
protectable by sui generis database rights. Similarly, the 
generation of research data and adoption of additional 
confidentiality and security measures to keep this data secret 
to the broader community may render such data protectable 
as know-how. 
However, the present approach that seeks to maintain 
(commercial) data confidentiality by keeping data secret 
leads to a fragmented research environment, and reduces the 
chances for greater data interoperability to be achieved. 
Here the law - aided by technology should aim to encourage 
greater openness, while assuring appropriate curation 
rewards. This could, e.g., take the form of an officially 
endorsed mechanism or system for measuring and tagging 
changes produced in a given data set (or the merging of 
several data sets) resulting from curation efforts, as the 
reward-trigger. At the same time, as another crucial policy 
element, the law needs – especially in the case of the 
curation of sensitive health data – to ensure that privacy and 
other interests of patients and research subjects are and 
remain adequately protected.  
In particular, it will here be necessary to take account of 
(and compensate for) the knock-on effects of IP changes, 
where data-holders are no longer (also) motivated by 
commercial considerations to keep their data secure and 
confidential. This concern is all the greater here since the 
activities of data sharing and curation being encouraged, 
also by their nature present enhanced risks to personal 
privacy. The point of curation is precisely to uncover new 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

connections and patterns in data that help generate robust 
inferences (usable – for good or ill) about the relevant data 
subjects. Accordingly, it is submitted that any system for 
rewarding investment in data curation should also require 
(as a condition for such rewards) that the data curator takes 
every appropriate measure to counterbalance the associated 
enhanced risks to privacy.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to these results has received funding 
from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme 
FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement No 600841. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. M. Gitter, “Informed Consent and Privacy of De-Identified 
Information and Estimated Data, Lessons from Iceland and 
the United States in an Era of Computational Genomics,” 
(Published 
Conference 
Proceedings 
style), 
in 
Proc. 
ALLDATA 2016, The Second International Conference on 
Big Data, Small Data, Linked Data and Open Data (includes 
KESA 2016), Lissabon, 2016, pp. 7-12.  
[2] Moore v. Regents of University of California, Supreme Court 
of California, July 9, 1990, 51 Cal. 3d 120. 
[3] H.-D. Lippert, „Wem gehören Daten, die im Rahmen von 
Forschungsprojekten gewonnen werden?“/“To whom belongs 
the data generated in research projects?“ in: Geistiges 
Eigentum: Schutzrecht oder Ausbeutungstitel?/in: Intellectual 
Property: Protection right or title to exploit, Springer, Volume 
5, 2008, pp. 359-369.  
[4] Haimo Schack, “Zur Rechtfertigung des Urheberrechts als 
Ausschliesslichkeitsrecht“/“On justification of copyright as 
exclusive right,“ in: Geistiges Eigentum: Schutzrecht oder 
Ausbeutungstitel?/in: Intellectual Property: Protection right or 
title to exploit, Springer, Volume 5, 2008, pp. 124-140. 
[5] European Commission, “E-Health Task Force Report – 
Redesigning  health in Europe for 2020,” Luxembourg 2012, 
ISBN 978-92-79-23542-9 
[6] CHIC, Deliverable D2-2 “Scenario based user needs and 
requirements”, 
<http://chic-vph.eu/uploads/media/D2-
2_Scenario-based_user_needs_and_requirements.pdf> 
16.08.2016.  
[7] CJEU, Judgment of 16 July 2009, Case C 5/08, Infopaq 
International A/S v Danske Dagblades Forening, Ref. 45. 
[8] Directive 2006/116/EC on the term of protection of copyright 
and certain related rights (codified version), OJEU, L 372/12, 
27 December 2006. 
[9] CJEU, Judgment of 7 March 2013, Case C 145/10 REC, Eva-
Maria Painer v. Standard VerlagsGmbH, Axel Springer AG, 
Süddeutsche Zeitung GmbH, Spiegel-Verlag Rudolf Augstein 
GmbH & Co. KG, Verlag M. DuMont Schauberg Expedition 
der Kölnischen Zeitung GmbH & Co. KG.  
[10] H. Zech, “Information als Schutzgegenstand,“ Tübingen, 
2012, ISSN: 0940-9610 (Jus Privatum). 
[11] Directive 2001/29/EC of 22 May 2001 on the harmonisation 
of certain aspects of copyright and related rights in the 
information society, OJEU L 167/10 - L 167/19, 22.6.2001. 
[12] H. Stenzhorn, et al, “The ObTiMA system - ontology-based 
managing of clinical trials,” Stud Health Technol Inform. 
2010;160(Pt 2):1090-4. 
[13] Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the 
Council of 11 March 1996 on the legal protection of 
databases, OJEU, L 77/20 - L 77/28, 27.3.96. 
[14] Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property 
Rights, the TRIPS Agreement, Annex 1C of the Marrakesh 
Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization, 
Marrakesh, Morocco, 15 April 1994. 
[15] Hogan Lovells International LLP, “Report on Trade Secrets 
for the European Commission – Study on Trade Secrets and 
Parasitic Copying (Look-alikes), MARKT/2010/20/D”, 2011. 
[16] Proposal for a Directive on the protection of undisclosed 
know-how and business information (trade secrets) against 
their unlawful acquisition, use and disclosure, Brussels, 
28.11.2013, COM(2013) 813 final, 2013/0402 (COD). 
[17] K. Lodigkeit, Intellectual Property Rights in Computer 
Programs in the USA and Germany, Peter Lang GmbH, 2006, 
pp. 98-101. 
[18] Computational Horizons In Cancer (CHIC): Developing 
Meta- and Hyper-Multiscale Models and Repositories for In 
Silico Oncology <http://chic-vph.eu/project/> 16.08.2016. 
[19] C. Coveney, J. Gabe, and S. Williams, “The sociology of 
cognitive enhancement: medicalisation and beyond,” Health 
Sociol. Rev., 20 (2011), pp. 381–393. 
[20] J. Dejaegher, L. Solie, S. De Vleeschouwer, and S. W. Van 
Gool, 
“Dendritic 
Cell 
Vaccination 
for 
Glioblastoma 
Multiforme: Clinical Experience and Future Directions,” In 
G. Stamatakos and D. Dionysiou (Eds): Proc. 2014 6th Int. 
Adv. Res. Workshop on In Silico Oncology and Cancer 
Investigation – The CHIC Project Workshop (IARWISOCI), 
Athens, 
Greece, 
Nov.3-4, 
2014 
(www.6thiarwisoci.iccs.ntua.gr), 
pp.14-18. 
(open-access 
version), ISBN: 978-618-80348-1-5. 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

