Rehabilitation of Attention System 
for Treatment of Traumatic Brain Injury 
 
 
Maya A. EL Tawil, Amjad M. EL Hadla, Amin Haj-Ali, Hassan M. Khachfe, Mohamad Hajj-Hassan 
Departments of Biomedical and Computer Engineering 
Lebanese International University, LIU  
Beirut, Lebanon 
    {10930350; 30920005}@students.liu.edu.lb, {amin.hajali; hassan.khachfe; mohamad.hajjhassan}@liu.edu.lb  
 
 
Abstract— The main objective of the attention rehabilitation is 
to increase and enhance the attention level for patients who 
suffered from traumatic brain injury (TBI) due to certain 
accidents (e.g., car crash, fall, etc…). Several rehabilitation 
methods, which perform treatment procedures to patients, 
have been reported. However, each method has its unique 
approach to achieve the same goal and to improve the overall 
result of the patient rehabilitation process. In this paper, the 
development of an attention rehabilitation system (device and 
method) are reported. It is based on practicing a video game 
multiple times to activate the attention area in the patient’s 
brain and to stimulate the patient’s willingness to increase 
his/her effort to win the game. The device and the 
corresponding game techniques are non-invasive, safe, and to a 
lesser degree can be practiced autonomously. The patient can 
practice it at home alone or with minimal supervision. In 
addition, there are no associated side effects, since no pressure 
will be applied on the patient and no medication is required 
during the rehabilitation procedure.  
Keywords- Attention deficits, Rehabilitation,Videogame, Motion 
sensor, Wiimote, Traumatic brain injury, Wireless data collection 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION        
TBI is a form of brain injury caused by sudden damage to 
the brain. Recent studies show that traumatic brain injuries 
contribute to about 30% of all injury deaths, and the leading 
causes are falls, vehicles crashes, recreation accidents, and 
violence [1]. Patients suffering from TBI face difficulties in 
their daily tasks since a part of their brain has its function 
disrupted. They also suffer from a lack of cognition for 
attention, concentration, processing and understanding of 
information, decision-making, communication, problem 
solving, organization, 
reasoning, 
planning, judgment, 
memory, controlling impulse and desires [2]. The extent of 
the disruption in the brain depends on the severity of the 
injury, whether it is mild or severe.  
TBI affects different portions of patient’s brain. It mainly 
affects the attention part leading the patient to lose the ability 
of gaining particular attention and processing different tasks 
simultaneously. This results in problems such as carrying on 
long conversations or sitting still for long periods of time [1]. 
Several treatment methods are used to perform treatment 
procedures to such patients and some of them can be 
performed in hospital, specialized clinics and can happen on 
an outpatient basis [3]. Some examples of attention and 
concentration rehabilitation are cognitive rehabilitation 
therapy, attention process training, and Tomatis attention 
assist method [4]. These rehabilitation methods are based on 
training the patients on functional and educational activities 
by using tools such as classical music or simple exercises. 
On the other hand, many patients who suffer from TBI will 
have psychosocial symptoms along with their poor 
concentration, such as anxiety, anger outbursts, and 
personality changes [5]. Rehabilitation procedure is going to 
be hard to perform on such patients, due to the difficulty to 
deal with their reactions and personalities, especially when 
the therapy is outside their home and in an unpleasant place 
such as the clinic or the hospital. Moreover, such patients 
may refuse to follow directives on what they should do for 
treatment such as the instruction of the therapist or nurse. In 
this work, we report the development of a device for the 
rehabilitation of attention and concentration deficits. The 
patient can practice at home, and this new method is totally 
safe, effective and easy.  
In Section 2 of this paper, we describe an attention and 
rehabilitation procedure that is usually done on the TBI 
patients. In Section 3, a definition and explanation of the 
software used in this system is stated. In Section 4, the 
system methodology and components are clearly identified 
where the proposed workflow is divided into three main 
parts to simplify the procedure of this system; also, the steps 
of how the patient can use this device are stated. In Section 
5, the results of testing this system on a TBI patient and on a 
normal person are explained with a brief comparison 
between these two test cases and determination of the 
acceptance criteria. In Section 6 we present a summary and 
conclusion of this new rehabilitation method and state what 
differentiates it from the new technologies.  
II. 
REHABILITATION OF ATTENTION 
Bennett et. al. present the definition of attention as “the 
ability to focus on certain aspects of the environment that 
one considers important or interesting and to flexibly 
manipulate this information” [5]. In other terms, attention is 
the prerequisite of enhancing the memory and increasing the 
brain functional activity. It actually plays an important role 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in the behavior of certain person by making him/her more 
socially active in communicating with others. In addition, it 
increases the person’s ability to selectively concentrate on 
specific information from the surrounding while ignoring 
other things. Furthermore, it induces quick interpretation and 
understanding of a problem with finding solution faster than 
others.  
The rehabilitation of attention is the ability to restore 
concentration skills and activate focusing in the brain. 
Games, activities, and tasks can play an important role in 
activating the attention, enhancing the focus and the 
perceptual skills. There are several methods for rehabilitation 
of attention. However, a general procedure outlined in Figure 
1 can be considered typical. This procedure includes six 
steps that starts with an examination of the patient’s brain to 
determine the amount of the damage. This assessment is 
based on studying the function of the nervous system and 
evaluation of cognitive functions such as attention or 
memory. In other terms, it is called neuropsychological 
assessment [7] and it must be done prior to the treatment. 
Based on the results of this test, a series of cognitive and 
rehabilitation processes are administered to the patient. At 
the end of this procedure, an evaluation is performed to 
check the progress and consequences on the patient’s brain 
functions. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Typical rehabilitation general process [7]. 
 
Another important factor to be considered along with the 
neuropsychological assessment results is the age of the 
patient. The importance of this factor lies in its direct relation 
to the patient’s brain function. The damage of a young adult 
brain might be totally different than that of an older person. 
After collecting all these information from patients, 
rehabilitation sessions are administered based on their cases. 
A recording of the patients’ cognitive improvement is 
compiled to produce a comparison between the pre and post 
neuropsychological assessment. 
 
III. 
TOOLS AND METHODS 
This system described in this paper provides a way of 
introducing patients with lack of cognition resulting from 
serious brain injury, brain tumor or head trauma to the first 
steps of rehabilitation. The system includes a hardware 
control device based on the MindFlex™ headset to record 
the brain’s activities. In addition, a Wii-Mote™ is used as an 
free guiding device that the patient uses to control the game. 
The Wii-Mote™ can provide haptic feedback to the patient 
signaling certain events. The patient uses the headset control 
along with guiding device in order to move the grasping 
mechanism in the game (software part of the system) 
towards a ball with a specific color. By focusing 
concentration, the patient can initiate the grasping 
mechanism. The concentration threshold level is usually set 
by the rehabilitation technician. The aim of the game is to 
put a certain number of colored balls in their color associated 
basket. As the patient brain’s abilities improve throughout 
rehabilitation, the technician increases the difficulty level of 
the game by changing the concentration threshold. 
A. System Architecture  
As described above the brain activities are recorded by 
the EEG sensors built into the MindFlex™ headset. The 
headset is outfitted with a Wi-Fi module (ESP8266 based 
ESP-01). The module retrieves the data stream from the 
headset via its serial port and echoes the data wirelessly via 
UDP (User Datagram Protocol) datagrams to a computer. 
The Wii-Mote™, used to record the patient’s hand 
movement, connects wirelessly as well via Bluetooth. The 
wireless connections free the patient from any wiring 
harness and thus allow for more ergonomic set-up.  
The computer collecting the data runs the main software 
application. The application collects the data sent from the 
headset as well as the patient’s hand movement data 
recorded by the Wii-Mote™.   
In addition the application controls both the game’s 
engine and GUI (Graphical User Interface). System block 
diagram is shown in Figure 2. 
B. Software Application 
The software application is written in Processing™ 
language. Processing™ is an open source programming 
language built for the electronic arts, it is a flexible software 
sketchbook and a language for coding [8]. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

  
MindFlex™
Headset
ESP-01
Computer
Serial
Wi-Fi
Wii-Mote™
Bluetooth
 
 
Figure 2.  Proposed system architecture 
 
 
      This application can be used at home, hospital, clinics or 
any comfortable place for the patient. It is important for this 
application to be used in an area where there is dimmed light 
interface with the Wii sensor bar in order to have the optimal 
rehabilitation process and result of the application. The steps 
to follow are:  
1- The patient/therapist will turn on the computer that 
we have already installed on the game.  
2- The patient will wear the MindFLEX headset and 
turn it on by the button on the left side of this 
headset. 
3- The patient/therapist will open the MindFLEX 
game icon. 
4- The patient/therapist will click on the wireless 
connection network and click on MindFLEX to 
connect it with the game software.  
5- The Wii sensor bar is connected to the computer 
through USB port and the Wiimote is paired with 
the computer by running the Wiimouse program.  
6- The patient can sit or stand holding the Wiimote in 
forward direction toward the Wii sensor bar.  
7- The patient can start the game and control the 
movement of the mouse cursor by holding the 
button A on the Wiimote, which is equal to the left 
click on a regular mouse.  
8- The patient can press only the button A of the 
Wiimote in order to move the ball and he/she can 
move his/her hand left or right to determine the 
direction that he/she wants to move the ball in.  
9- The patient cannot catch the ball unless his/her 
concentration threshold exceeds the concentration 
threshold set (by a slider) in the game scheme.  
10- The therapist usually determine this concentration 
threshold based on the patient’s progress but any 
patient can start with setting the concentration 
threshold to 50,which is the minimum average. The 
patient can play this game as much as he/she wants 
per day with no force applied on the patient; in the 
therapeutic stages, it is better to keep following up 
the recording of the patient’s concentration progress 
daily.   
Depending on the threshold of concentration level taken 
from the patient, the ball in the game will be captured by the 
Wii Mote control gesture only if the concentration value 
above a certain threshold value in various stages of the game. 
As the patient goes through each stage the stage difficulty 
goes harder with more obstacles and high concentration level 
is set while a counter is recording the progress of the patient 
to provide the data needed for monitoring the effectiveness 
of the rehabilitation game program on patient activity (see 
Figure 3).     
 
  
 
                     
Figure 3.  Game graphical user interface 
IV. 
RESULTS 
This method was tested on patient who suffers from lack 
of attention; also it was tested on normal person. As for 
normal person, he passed the first two levels with less time 
than that of the patient with attention deficits and the 
concentration threshold was set to 60, but there were some 
difficulties to pass the third level. Patient with attention 
deficits could finish the first stage where no obstacles are set 
in the game scheme, level 1, and the concentration threshold 
was set to 50 as it is considered the minimum average that 
such patients must easily reach in order to catch the ball in 
the game. It took this patient more time to finish the next 
level where obstacles are present; however the concentration 
threshold is still set to 50; and at the end it was so hard for 
this patient to finish the third level where three obstacles are 
present in the game scheme. It is important to know that is 
not necessary to force the patient to finish his/her level, time 
is not set for the patients and at the end we are trying to 
encourage him/her to concentrate not to leave him/her 
disappointed. The purpose of this rehabilitation is to train the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

patient no matter how much time he/she took in this process 
in order to get the best result. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this work, a new rehabilitation method of attention 
deficits is devised for TBI patients. It consists of series of 
brain signals detection, processing and analyzing data. The 
result of processing showed to be a very effective way to 
stimulate brain functional activity and enhance the patient’s 
attention level. The use of simple tool to communicate with 
the game added a specification to this technique and increase 
its effectiveness compared to other rehabilitation methods. 
The use of this technique allows the patient to be self-active 
by coordinating the concentration activity with movement of 
hand to get through the levels and enhances the divided 
portion of attention type whereas the other methods lack that 
coordination and only focus on the focused portion of 
attention types. The main advantage of this rehabilitation 
method over other new technological devices like the smart 
phones with the free applications that may play role in 
activating the patient’s brain, is that they missed the 
concentration monitor; for example, the puzzle game 
application, may help the patient to regain his/her 
concentration skills but there is no recorder for how much 
he/she is concentrating and if he/she is making a progress or 
no. When it comes to medical field, a real and concrete 
values and results must be present in order to diagnose the 
patient and know how he/she can be treated.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Privit Blog, Traumatic Brain Injuries: cause and effects, 
[Online],Available from:http://privit.com/category/blog/2015, 
retrieved: May, 2016.  
[2] D. Neumann and A. Lequerica, “Cognitive Problems after 
Traumatic Brain Injury”, National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research, U.S Department of Education, grant 
no. HI33A060070.   
[3] Office of Communications and Public Liaison, “Neurological 
Diagnostic Tests and Procedures”, NINDS, NIH Publication 
No. 05-5380,  March, 2005. 
[4] W. Mittenberg, R. E. Zielinski, and S. Fichera, “Traumatic 
Brain Injury: A guide for patients”, Psychotherapy in Private 
Practice, pp. 1-13, 1993.  
[5] T. Bennett, k. Malia, B. Linton, M. Raymond, and K. Bewick, 
“Rehabilitation of Attention and Concentration Deficits 
Following Brain Injury”, The Journal of Cognitive 
Rehabilitation, pp. 1-5, March-April, 1998.  
[6] Quizlet, [Online], Available from: https://quizlet.com/2016, 
retrieved: May, 2016. 
[7] J. Solana et al. , “Intelligent Therapy Assistant (ITA) for 
cognitive rehabilitation in patients with acquired brain 
injury”, BMC Medical Informatics and Decision Making, 
DOI: 10.1186/1472-6947-14-58, July, 2014. 
[8] B. Fry and C. Reas, Processing, [Online], Available from: 
https://processing.org/2012, retrieved: May, 2016. 
 
TABLE I.  
HARDWARE COMPONENTS OF THE SYSTEM 
Components 
Functionality  
 
Mind-Flex Headset 
Embedded with an EEG sensor measures 
brain activity and a Neurosky chipset 
transmit brain signal.  
 
 
 
ESP8266 chipset 
Attached to the MindFlex headset. Sends the 
brain activity signal to the computer via 
wireless connection.  
 
 
 
Computer 
Connect to the ESP8266 chipset to receive 
brain signal activity. Contain processing 
software for processing incoming brain data 
to control designed game. 
 
 
 
Wiimote controller 
Connects to the computer through Bluetooth 
connection. Track the movement of the 
patient to direct the grapping pointer in the 
game. 
 
 
 Wii sensor bar 
An IR transmitter to be detected by IR 
camera within the Wiimote. Used to set the 
range of motion for the Wiimote controller. 
  
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

