Emerging Issues in Medical and Engineering Ethics:  
The Case of Reverse Paternalism in Lebanon 
 
Sarah Hammoud, Zahraa Shahrour, Ali Hage-Diab 
Department of Biomedical Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
{11031556; 11031548}@students.liu.edu.lb, 
ali.hagediab@liu.edu.lb 
Hassan Khachfe 
Center for Quality Assurance, Institutional Assessment & 
Scientific Research (QAIASR) 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
Bassam Hussein 
Department of Industrial Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
bassam.hussein@liu.edu.lb 
 
 
 
Abstract— There are different occupations and professions in 
almost every society, and despite all the ethical frameworks 
that govern professions by professional ethics, it is widely 
noticed that there are still challenges facing each profession. 
One of those ethical challenges is related to paternalism. 
Paternalism is the act of interfering with a person’s autonomy 
by making decisions for them claiming that it is “for their own 
good”. In a developing country like Lebanon, an ethical 
dilemma is commonly noticed in the field of medicine but not 
commonly discussed in the literature.  This dilemma will be 
termed and defined for the first time as reverse paternalism. 
Reverse paternalism refers to the act of sacrificing one’s 
autonomy and self-determination and giving another person or 
group the right for making decisions on their behalf. People 
are considered moral agents and some are giving up their 
autonomy and rights for making decisions to medical 
practitioners because “they know better”. The main focus of 
this paper is therefore on reverse paternalism that will be 
investigated as an ethical dilemma being faced in Lebanon. 
What exactly is reverse paternalism? Are there regulations 
that restrict such kind of paternalism? How do medical 
practitioners act in such situations? And to what extent is there 
auditing over what happens in hospitals, private clinics, 
medical centers and institutions? Our aim is to shed the light 
on this ethical dilemma and highlight how serious and wide 
spread it has become, by providing statistical data we have 
collected. We will also provide recommendations based on 
cases showing the adverse ramifications of reverse paternalism 
on society.  
Keywords—medical ethics; engineering ethics; medicine; 
paternalism; reverse paternalism.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
We live in a world that is divided into groups of distinct 
fields related to disciplines of different schools. People get 
education and major in different fields to become 
professionals and enter the world of employment. Doctors, 
scientists, professors, lawyers, teachers, engineers, etc., find 
themselves in situations where important decisions have to 
be made, and because they are the ones “who know better”, 
their decisions have to be right, especially when other 
people depend on them. Governmental morals are often 
incomplete without personal morals. Three types of 
moralities or ethics have arisen, namely, common morality, 
personal morality, and professional ethics [1]. Each country 
classifies various occupations as being a profession or not. 
Engineering for example is considered a profession in our 
society and therefore needs a set of standards to be adopted 
by professionals. Each profession should include a basic 
methodology for deciding what is morally right and what is 
morally wrong in one’s professional conduct to qualify 
whether an action is right or wrong. This normative ethics 
and principles leads to the codes of ethics that demonstrate 
the accountabilities and duties of each profession and when 
these codes are followed, the field flourishes and brings 
changes to the field and the world as well. But what happens 
if these codes are not taken into consideration and 
professionals act outside the ethical frameworks that govern 
their behavior? And who is affected by such unethical acts? 
Despite of all these normative ethics and standards, it is 
widely noticed that there are still challenges facing each 
profession. 
As 
Biomedical 
Engineers, 
one 
of 
the 
professional obligations that governs our personal practice is 
to regard responsibility toward the rights and the health of 
patients and since the doctor-patient relationship is an 
example of a relationship between individuals which is 
ruled by ethical behavior, we found that it is important to 
shed light on one of the ethical challenges that faces this 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

relationship which is the long-practiced paternalism. 
Paternalism is the act of interfering with a person’s 
autonomy by making decisions for them claiming that it is 
“for their own good” [2]. 
Paternalism is problematic because the definition of a 
patient’s best interests used by a paternalistic approach is 
too narrow, because such best interests should not be 
determined by the medical facts alone but the patient’s 
views and judgments should be taken into consideration 
also. It has become evident that doctors often act in a 
paternalistic way about their patients claiming to do so 
because they “know better”. In a developing country like 
Lebanon, various medical practices lack a successful shared 
decision-making because of the physicians’ attitudes and 
irresponsibility on one hand and the patients’ lack of 
education, fear, laziness and the inability to make a serious 
decision on the other hand. But what is really interesting 
that paternalism nowadays is encouraged by the patients 
themselves; in other words, paternalism is being reversed 
and moral agents, such as patients, customers etc. are giving 
up their autonomy either intentionally or unintentionally. 
This ethical dilemma is commonly noticed in the field of 
medicine, and will be termed and defined for the first time 
as reverse paternalism. This paper will provide a small 
background about ethics, and discuss paternalism and the 
possible causes of reverse paternalism. Patients were 
surveyed with a questionnaire designed to identify the 
extent of reverse paternalism tendencies. Hence, a definition 
and some possible solutions will be proposed. Medical 
reverse paternalism is one of the ethical cases that 
specifically apply to biomedical engineering, but all types of 
engineering in general as well. This is the first time that this 
ethical issue is being identified, quantified, discussed and 
assigned of being a real problem and factor in various fields 
such as medical diagnosis and treatment in Lebanon. Our 
aim is not only to gather data of the extent of reverse 
paternalism in Lebanon, but also try to understand how to 
raise the awareness of patients for their treatment choice 
rights.  This is implemented by distributing a questionnaire 
with very direct questions related to reverse paternalism. 
In Section II, we will define ethics and their 
contributions to religion and culture, to give an idea about 
the influence of religious and cultural ethical aspects on 
decision-making processes of people. In Section III, ethics 
will be explained and defined according to their types in the 
fields of bioethics, engineering ethics and medical ethics, as 
well as biomedical engineering ethics. Section IV will be 
about the scope of this paper, which is reverse paternalism. 
In this section, the link between paternalism and reverse 
paternalism will be explained. It will also be defined for the 
first time given a title and explanation of the importance of 
engineers contributing to this dilemma. It will also highlight 
the relation between biomedical engineers and ethical 
dilemmas that are found in medical practices, and the 
importance of taking responsibility for what happens with 
patients in medical practices. Section V is an explanation of 
the concept of informed consent that is obligatory in 
medical practices for patients to know what exactly will be 
done during certain treatments.  Section VI provides a clear 
explanation of how a decision-making process between 
patients and doctors should be done, in addition to a 
comparison to how it is done in Lebanon, in our 
observation. Section VII includes the survey that was done 
by distributing a questionnaire and collecting data, in 
addition to a presentation of the results of our investigation. 
Finally, Section VIII is a conclusion of what we have 
hypothesized and the outcome of whether reverse 
paternalism is an ethical challenge in Lebanon or not.  
 
II. 
WHERE IS ETHICS FOUND? 
Ethics is a group of principles, values, rules and 
regulations, beliefs, morals and rules of conduct [1]. This 
group organizes goals and actions for the achievement of the 
most important values one can have. This means that any 
flaw in behavior might mislead one from the path of being 
ethical. Ethics can be described as being a system of moral 
principles that differentiate between what is right and what 
is wrong.  In other words, ethics is a norm of conduct that 
recommends concepts of acceptable and unacceptable 
behavior.  
All cultures have systems of health beliefs to explain 
what might be the cause of a certain illness, the way it can 
be treated and who will be involved in it. Culture specific 
values have high influence on patient roles and expectations. 
It often specifies how much information is desired, how 
death/dying will be managed, sorrow patterns, gender 
family roles, and processes for decision-making [3]. 
Therefore, each culture brings its own views and values to 
the healthcare system which alters healthcare beliefs, health 
practices, and of course the nature of the doctor-patient 
relationship. Cultures differ mainly between developed and 
under-developed countries. Developed countries adopt a 
shared decision-making process between the patient and the 
doctor, where the patient receives all the information, 
support and education that is needed and asked for by the 
patient. Whereas developing countries rather lack that kind 
of relationship and consultations between patients and their 
doctors.  
 Ethics can be seen as the base of religions, though it is 
explained and may be even seen from different perspectives 
in various religions. Since religion has very high impact on 
how most of the people live, behave and how they do not 
behave, then ethics must be applied to tell whether this act is 
right or wrong. However, each religion has another opinion 
of how to clarify ethical principles. Lebanon is known to 
have the most religiously diverse society in the Middle East, 
hence it is important to address the issue of Reverse 
Paternalism from a religious point of view. By approaching 
this case, Christianity and Islam will be considered rather 
generally. We find that Western Christian Civilization, and 
specifically American medicine, is founded upon Biblical 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

ethics and the tradition of the Greco-Roman Heritage. These 
are based on several principles such as the presence of 
moral codes and moral justifications, the doctor-patient 
relationship, in addition to moral integrity etc. Life in all its 
forms has a very high status in Islam, and human life is one 
of the most sacred creatures of God. It must therefore be 
respected, appreciated and protected. Islamic law is called 
the Shari’a and is not the same as Islamic ethics, since in 
Islam everything has to be checked twice, first if it is against 
legal standards and second against moral standards [4]. 
There is an absolute harmony between Islamic law and 
morality, but they have still different objectives, meaning 
that they might differ in their prescriptions. 
III. 
THE MAIN TYPES OF ETHICS 
Our study mainly concerns ethics in biomedical 
engineering, which is the intersection between bioethics, 
medical ethics, and engineering ethics. In order to 
understand the relationship and contributions of these fields 
with one another a brief overview of each is provided.  
 
A. Bioethics, Medical Ethics, and Engineering Ethics 
Bioethics is an activity; it is a shared, reflective 
examination of ethical issues in health care, health science, 
and health policy [5]. It defines the basic ethical values for 
the conduct of biomedical and behavioral research involving 
human and non-human subjects.  
Medical ethics is a system of morals and principles 
being applied to situations that are specific to the medical 
world and the practice of medicine. Ethical principles are 
mainly: autonomy, beneficence, justice and non-maleficence 
[6]. 
Engineering ethics stands for the set of ethical standards 
and principles ruling the behavior of engineers in their title 
role as professionals. In other words, an engineer should be 
devoted to the protection of public health, safety, and well-
being [1]. 
 
B. Biomedical Engineering Ethics 
Biomedical engineering is the application of engineering 
principles and techniques to medicine and biology. Each 
profession is ought to include a basic methodology for 
deciding what is morally right and what is morally wrong in 
one’s professional conduct. Ethics is considered to be the 
central concept to biomedical engineers, since its principles 
guide them to recognize ethical problems and attempt to 
solve them. This is why there is a code of ethics that 
emphasize the major principles of a biomedical engineer 
being followed and respected. But what is a principle?  
A principle is used as a basis for ethical reasoning by 
guiding a specific action or behavior. Autonomy, 
Beneficence, Non-maleficence, and justice are the main 
principles biomedical engineering ethics is based on [6].  
 
IV. 
REVERSING THE TIDE OF MEDICAL PATERNALISM 
Every time the state of a person is interfered with 
another person’s autonomy, it is a case of paternalism, 
which of course is claimed to be of benefit for the person 
who “knows less” than the one acting paternalistic. This act 
is often justified and thereby wrapped in a more attractive 
appearance as providing protection and hence the best for 
the other person.  A significant kind of autonomy is the one 
that exists as a counterweight to the medical profession’s 
long-practiced paternalism. Today, the principle of patient 
autonomy and self-determination has emerged as the 
dominant ethos in health care, threatening in many instances 
to totally eclipse the principle of medical beneficence [7]. 
The typical doctor-patient relationship, where the physician 
acts paternalistically towards their patient and takes 
decisions for them and very often not even explains why 
and how the decision was taken. In their opinion, there is no 
need to explain, because the patient either would not 
understand it, or does not need to know about it. There are 
many reasons that may have led to this situation that we find 
in these days, especially in Lebanon.  
What makes it such a serious and dangerous case is that 
patients do not even notice how they are being used and are 
losing their autonomy because a doctor just decided that this 
pregnant woman cannot give birth naturally and needs to 
undergo a caesarean operation instead. This woman of 
course believes it because in the end she thinks that her 
doctor is just doing what is right and best for her and her 
baby and this is all she cares about. But what this woman 
does not know is that very often it is not her that benefits 
from this operation, but her doctor. It is a common 
knowledge in Lebanon that there are many doctors that can 
be considered more as businessmen rather than physicians 
that once took the Hippocratic oath. What matters is how 
much they benefit instead of acting according to the 
principles that seek for beneficence, non-maleficence, and 
justice for the patients.  
Because people behave according to their culture and 
religion, a doctor should at least be aware of what those tell 
the patient to do. Is mere knowledge enough to justify the 
limitations that patients are subjected to on their liberty or 
violations of their autonomy? And is it even morally 
defensible to act paternalistically in the sake of preventing 
harm and providing welfare and benefit? At first thought 
one might think of course it is, but the real problem that is 
addressed here is that such acts are done without taking the 
patient’s opinion into consideration, neither does the doctor 
explain what might be the side effects of certain decisions.  
People 
can 
be 
paternalistic. 
Institutes 
can 
be 
paternalistic. Motivations can be paternalistic. Acts can be 
paternalistic. Reasons can be reasons of paternalism. 
Paternalism is found everywhere. But does this completely 
incapacitate our ability to make our decisions and choices? 
Does giving up our right to choose become a habit? The real 
problem exists when people, in particular patients, 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

proactively give up their autonomy by themselves and leave 
all the decisions to the physician, again, because “they know 
better”. Many of those may be too old to take certain 
decisions, and others might just not understand what will 
happen thereby, diminishing their rights to choose. 
Whenever a patient asks his/her doctor to prescribe 
whatever medicine or medical intervention that the doctor 
sees fit, we have a case of Reverse Paternalism. Whenever a 
patient refuses to choose a treatment procedure among other 
procedures and trusts the doctor to choose for him, we have 
a case of Reverse Paternalism. Whenever a patient is 
advised to perform a medical image in a specific laboratory 
assigned by a doctor and does not question the doctor’s 
recommendation, we have a case of Reverse Paternalism. 
Therefore, these acts feed the tide of paternalism to give rise 
to an emerging ethical dilemma termed as Reverse 
Paternalism, which is the act of sacrificing one’s autonomy 
and self-determination and giving another person or group 
the right for making decisions for them. The patient allows 
the physician to do what is best for them, and this way 
taking life-based decisions for them. What this patient might 
not have thought about is that this doctor might misdiagnose 
a case and make mistakes. Who is to blame in such cases? 
How honest is this doctor and to what extent might he/she 
be saying the truth? 
There are numerous reasons that push patients into 
giving up their autonomy and let their physician choose for 
them. Though most of these reasons neither justify nor solve 
the dilemma of reverse paternalism. Yes, there are many 
cases one could think of where reverse paternalism is the 
right thing to do, but there will never be certainty to that the 
physician’s interest is only their patient and their health. So, 
to what extent can doctors be trusted? 
The least this patient can ask for is information. There is 
a whole protocol to be followed if a patient must undergo a 
surgery. The physician is ought to take enough time in order 
to explain why the surgery has to be done, who will be 
doing it, where is it going to happen, what the consequences 
and side-effects might be, if there are other choices, and 
what might happen if this surgery was not performed. 
Images and explanations with simple terminology should be 
used in order to make sure that the patient has understood 
everything and can now decide and choose. This patient 
must be a moral agent and the physician must try as much as 
possible not to act paternalistically and abide by the rules of 
professional 
medicine.  
Paternalism induces power 
imbalance between health professionals and patients.  The 
professional should be the expert in the area of diagnostic 
information, treatment options and possibilities. But the 
patient is also an equally valid expert, with specialist 
knowledge in her or his own personal concerns, history, 
family roots, philosophy and way of life. The expertise that 
the professional brings to the consultation is not merely 
technical [8]. This kind of paternalism is most commonly 
present in the field of medicine, and directly related to 
biomedical engineering in particular, and engineering in 
general.  
As Biomedical engineers, it is our obligation to conduct 
responsibility towards the rights and safety of patients that 
are part of this issue.  For this reason, we find it important to 
shed light on this challenge of reverse paternalism, and 
inform people about the importance of remaining their 
moral agency.  It is important to find out how frequent a 
successful shared decision-making process is in a 
developing country like Lebanon, in order to investigate the 
reasons behind this ethical dilemma. This dilemma 
interferes with decisions taken by engineers who work in the 
medical field. Biomedical engineers are engaged in a range 
of interactions, which includes interactions with patients as 
well as doctors. We noticed in our society that there is a 
clinical dependence of patients in their decision-making 
process on the opinions of their doctors.  Some patients tend 
to trust their doctors to an extent that made the doctor-
patient relationship crossing the boundary of professional 
ethics.  
Biomedical engineers are responsible agents in their 
respective profession, which means that they must act in the 
interest of the patients and use their knowledge and skills to 
benefit them and inform and alert them when it is needed. 
Because biomedical engineers are engaged to deal with 
medical devices and equipment in hospitals and health care 
facilities, then they have responsibilities towards the life and 
safety of patients. One example that reveals the issue is 
when a doctor prescribes MRI or CT scan at a specified 
medical laboratory for a patient for no clinical reason, only 
for the benefit of the doctor or to benefit the medical 
laboratory and the patient accepts and trusts their doctor and 
allows them to make decisions on his/her behalf. Here, the 
biomedical engineer can either accept that kind of behavior 
and even make use of the patient’s dependence and 
ignorance, or encourage legislations regarding this issue and 
educate the patients and alert them about the hazards of 
 
Figure 1. Diagram Illustration of the interaction of a Clinical/Biomedical 
engineer [9]. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

radiations and the technical implications of any medical 
procedure/treatment and strive to protect the patients and 
their rights and educate them about the importance of 
getting involved about decisions regarding their treatment.  
As engineers, we are expected to satisfy the standard of 
care by holding paramount the safety and health of the 
public. As biomedical engineers, we must act in patient-
centered manners and apply engineering principles in 
managing medical systems and devices in the patient 
setting. Thereby, we are obliged to regard responsibility 
towards the health and safety of patients. Figure 1 illustrates 
the interaction between a clinical/biomedical engineer and 
other parties. This not only verifies that a biomedical 
engineer is involved in all decision-making processes with 
all kinds of departments, in any healthcare facility, but it 
also highlights the fact that patients are prioritized. Our role 
as biomedical engineers is patient-centered and this is 
another reason for us to approach this ethical dilemma with 
high interest. The current patient-doctor relationship that is 
presented in our society has triggered our sense of 
responsibility; where we identified an emerging ethical 
dilemma concerning this relationship where we think that 
some patients themselves are encouraging the act of medical 
paternalism, which is long practiced by doctors in the 
medical field. 
 
V. 
INFORMED CONSENTS IN MEDICINE AND 
ENGINEERING  
Let us take a closer look at this principle and explain its 
importance.  As mentioned previously, moral agents have 
the autonomy to make decisions on their own, and 
differentiate between right and wrong. A patient has 
therefore the capacity to act intentionally with a full 
understanding, and without influence of a free and voluntary 
act. It is the basis for the practice of an “Informed Consent”. 
It is very important to shed light on what an informed 
consent is because it has become evident that many people 
do not even know of its existence.  An informed consent is a 
process for getting a patient’s permission before being 
subjected to a certain healthcare intervention. In other 
words, when a patient is diagnosed to undergo a surgery or 
receive therapy, the physician is obliged to get the patient’s 
permission. This is done by providing them with a 
document that contains all the information the patient has to 
know before taking the decision of permission or not. It 
comprises a clear appreciation and understanding of all the 
relevant facts, implications, and consequences of the 
specific therapy or surgery.  Certainly, no information 
should be kept from the patient so that they are able to form 
a rational decision and to avoid severe ethical issues arising 
from the lack of sufficient data. If a patient is not able to 
take any decision due to mental disability, sleep deprivation, 
Alzheimer’s disease, or being in a coma, or immaturity, then 
another individual is certified to give consent on their behalf 
such as parents, siblings, or legal guardians of a child.  
Sometimes the consent is divided into an information 
component, and a consent component. The information 
component refers to disclosure of information and 
comprehension of what is disclosed giving the patient the 
chance to consider its content in his/her decision-making. 
The consent component refers to both that his decision is a 
voluntary decision and that permission is given to proceed. 
Note that informed is collected according to guidelines from 
the fields of medical ethics and research ethics.  
In Lebanon, many patients that have undergone 
surgeries or treatments, sound surprised when hearing the 
word “informed consent”, which implies that they most 
probably have never seen one and thereby permission was 
taken only orally if not paternalistically. The informed 
consent is not only a must for patients, but also a protection 
for physicians. It is evidence that the patient agrees to what 
will happen to them, and what might happen if they did not 
undergo this surgery or therapy.  Not only has the patient 
the right for an informed consent, but also the physicians 
and doctors.  Many practitioners believe however that 
patients may thus be better served if efforts are directed 
instead to finding ways of minimizing hard paternalism 
without too great a compromise on patient’s freedom [7].  
This argument is yet to be validated from an ethical 
perspective. 
 
VI. 
DECISION-MAKING PROCESS 
Decision-making process is the process of selecting a 
belief or a course of action among various alternative 
choices. Taking the doctor-patient relationship as an 
example to illustrate this process, seven main steps will be 
explained in order to highlight the importance of the 
informed consent that is part of this process [10]: 
1) Identify decision to be made 
2) Gather relevant information 
3) Identify alternatives 
4) Weigh evidence 
5) Choose among alternatives  
6) Take action  
7) Review decision and consequences  
Doctors have the medical knowledge that makes them 
superior to patients in decision-making. They do know best 
in the sense that they have more scientific and medical 
information concerning injuries and diseases and their 
elimination and elevation more that the patients have. 
Therefore, patients are advised to surrender to this epistemic 
authority. This issue raises various ethical and social 
questions that should be taken into account. There are many 
patients that do want to know and gain knowledge about 
their diagnosis or treatment, but the main challenge is about 
the patients that show no interest to shared decision making. 
Patients are now quite aware of how the process of decision-
making is done. Table I illustrates a comparison between 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

how decision-making should occur, and how it is done here 
in Lebanon. When describing what happens in Lebanon, 
only a general idea of what is happening is given, showing 
why 
it 
is 
so 
important 
to 
find 
solutions 
and 
recommendations for encouraging patients to follow a 
process of shared-decision making. However, reasons are 
numerous, and most of them might be of cultural sources. 
There is a strong relationship of dominance and affection 
between decision-making and culture. Just like ethics in 
general has an impact on religion or cultures, these cultures 
have an impact on how patients might take their decisions. 
Patient roles and expectations are often influenced by 
culture values, sometimes it is influenced by how much 
information and about illness and treatment is desired, how 
death and dying will be managed, sorrow patterns, gender 
and family roles, and hence processes for decision making. 
Each culture brings its own views and values to the health 
care system, which alters health care beliefs, health 
practices and doctor-patient relationship.  A general 
guideline for such relationship should be based on an 
approach of mutual respect and appreciation of roles.  Just 
as professionals must not abuse their position by 
manipulating or coercing patients against their will, so 
patients must not coerce professionals to go against their 
fundamental ethical convictions and professional values 
[8].  
 
VII. 
SURVEY 
 The purpose of this survey is to examine the presence 
of the suggested phenomenon in Lebanon and to assess to 
what extent it is present in the field of medicine. If the 
results indicate that this phenomenon is spread in our 
society, then we must alert people about it and we must try 
to suggest some regulations to restrict such kind of 
paternalism. 
The following hypothesis is formulated to achieve the 
objectives of the present study: A new kind of paternalism is 
emerging in the field of medicine in Lebanon, termed as 
Reverse Paternalism. 
The study was conducted on a representative sample of 
85 patients in Beirut region. The patients who were selected 
in the sample were males and females with diversity in age 
and education. (Table II represents a sample of the 
questionnaire).  The questionnaire consists of 20 items and 
each item has five alternative responses: strongly disagree, 
disagree, neutral, agree, and strongly agree. These items are 
related to the following concepts: 
1. Patient’s autonomy 
2. Decision making process 
The questionnaire has a variety of questions that refer to 
a paradigm of reverse paternalism or the absence of reverse 
paternalism, as well as a neutral point of view.  Figures 2-a, 
b, c, and d give an illustration of the age, gender, marital 
status, employment status, and educational level. A total of 
85 patients have answered 20 questions. Each question was 
analyzed in order to categorize it. Questions 1, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 
12, and 15 are direct questions referring to reverse 
paternalism.  The questions can be separated as two types,  
10 positive questions and 10 inversed questions meaning the 
opposite of the positive ones. As Figure 3 shows, 85% ask 
their doctors about information about suggested treatments 
or procedures. 70% disagree with their doctors not involving  
 
 
 
 
Figures 2. a, b, c, and d show the personal information of surveyed patients 
who answered the questionnaire. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 3. Illustration of how many patients ask for information. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Patients’ disagreement on not being involved in decision-making 
processes. 
 
 
Figure 5. Patients say that they have a successful shared-decision making 
process with their doctors. 
 
Figure 6. Patients wanting their doctor to choose and decide on their behalf. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. The percentage of patients who find it ethically permissible for 
doctors to act paternalistically. 
 
 
Figure 8. Patients refuse to let their doctors choose on their behalf. 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

them in decisions about their treatments (Figure 4). Only 
53% do not allow their doctors to choose on their behalf, 
19% have a neutral opinion, which means that 28% allow 
their doctors to take decisions for them (Figure 5). Figure 6 
illustrates how 38% agree that it is ethically permissible for 
doctors to act paternalistically with their patients. When 
asked if they refuse to let their doctors to take decisions on 
their behalf, 44% disagreed (Figure 7). 
As most of the results indicate the existence of weak 
reverse paternalism, we took a closer look at the age and 
educational status of those who showed tendency towards 
reverse paternalism. Some of the patients that are in the age 
range of 40-60 years have a lower educational level, due to 
the complications of war Lebanon has faced, also showing 
tendency towards reversing paternalism. We chose a patient 
to ask about his last visit to a Doctor. This patient was a 
married, employed male of age between 40-60 years of age 
with an elementary educational level. He was asked about 
how much he trusts his Doctor and how much he believes in 
what he prescribes as treatments. He agreed on telling us 
what his problem was and what was prescribed, and when 
we asked him if he knows what each drug is for he said no 
and responded: “ He is a very good Doctor and I am sure he 
knows what is best for me and what to prescribe for me to 
get better.” Again, we took a closer look at the questionnaire 
this patient had filled, and noticed that they do not quite 
match the way he really acted.  
  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
Who is to blame? When patients give up their autonomy 
in the thought of having someone more educated and 
professional taking decisions for them?  Who is to blame if 
that person did not do what is most beneficial for the 
patient? Reverse paternalism appear to be a serious issue in 
developing countries.  However, it has not been defined yet 
because people have not acknowledged it till now, even 
though it has become a common knowledge in the medical 
practice. This is due to the absence of the regulations 
specific to reverse paternalism that can restrict the 
physicians’ unethical behavior towards patients. Physicians 
who are supposed to be committed to the Oath they made 
are making use of some patients’ dependence and lack of 
education for their own interests, with the absence of ethical 
concepts or regulations.  In Lebanon, medical practitioners 
lack the sense of responsibility due to the lack of auditing 
and supervision over what happens in hospitals/clinics. 
A good test for their responsibility is the question “Do 
physicians commit to ethical or legal standards when there 
is no supervision?” and it seems that most doctors fail this 
test!  
Our intentions were not only to get numbers and 
percentages of people who really are reversing paternalism 
or not, but as mentioned previously in the introduction, the 
questions were direct on purpose. Some of the questions 
were answered as how patients should act, but do not really 
act like in real life. This does not mean that the results are 
far from reality, because patients were very honest, but it 
rose awareness and may even prevent patients from not only 
reversing paternalism, but also reduce the long-term 
practiced paternalism.  Now, surveyed patients may think 
twice about how to undergo the process of shared-decision 
making. As engineers, it is our responsibility to alert people, 
inform them about problems and challenges they might face 
and advise in order to help them avoid harm. Since numbers 
are still not very high, reverse paternalism might be just at 
its beginning to increase, and our aim is to reduce and 
prevent this ethical issue from happening. 
 Recommendations must be provided to control this 
ethical dilemma. Ethical guidance that governs the behavior 
of doctors and patients in cases of Reverse Paternalism 
should be developed. Highlighting the importance of 
consent before any medical intervention is another 
recommendation. Moreover, we recommend organizing at 
least one meeting before any operation where the patient 
consults and gets all the information needed. In order to 
raise that issue and let people know that they do not have to 
give up their right of autonomy, medical practitioners 
should teach people to ask!  
 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Harris, C. E., Pritchard, M. and Rabins, M., Engineering 
Ethics Concepts & Cases, California: Wadsworth-Cengage 
Learning Belmont, 2009.  
[2]  Enderle, J. D. and Bronzino, J. D., (Eds), Introduction to 
Biomedical Engineering, Academic Press, 2012.  
[3]  Spector, R. E., Cultural Diversity in Health and Illness, New 
Jersey: Pearson Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, 2004.  
[4]  Shomali, M. A., ‘Islamic bioethics: a general scheme”, 
Medical Ethics and History of Medicine, 2008.  
[5]  Sugarman, J., 20 Common Problems: Ethics in Primary Care, 
New York: McGraw-Hill Professional Publishing, 2000.  
[6]  Beauchamp, T. L. and Childress J. F., Principles of 
Biomedical Ethics, Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 
2001.  
[7]  Chinn, J. J., “Doctor-Patient Relationship: From Medical 
Paternalism to Enhanced Autonomy”, Singapore Medical 
Journal, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 152-155, 2002.  
[8]  Wyatt, J., “Medical Paternalism and the Fetus”, Journal of 
Medical Ethics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. ii15-ii20, 2001.  
[9]  Dyro, J., Clinical Engineering Handbook, Academic Press, 
2004.  
[10]  Schwenk, C. R., “Cognitive Simplification Process in 
Strategic Decision-Making”, Strategic Management Journal, 
vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 111-128, 2006.  
  
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE I.  
THE DECISION MAKING PROCESS. 
Process steps 
Description of each step 
Application of each step in Lebanon 
Identify decision to 
be made  
Go through an internal process of trying to define clearly 
the nature of the decision you must make. 
Patients realize that there is a decision to be 
made but instead of going through an internal 
process, they immediately ask their physicians 
for advices and what to do. 
Gather relevant 
information 
Most decisions require collecting pertinent information. 
The real trick in this step is to know what information is 
needed the best sources of this information, and how to 
go about getting it. Some information must be sought 
from within you through a process of self-assessment; 
other information must be sought from outside yourself-
from books, people, and a variety of other sources. This 
step, therefore, involves both internal and external 
“work”. 
Many people do now know where to look for 
information or whom to ask. Others try to get 
information 
from 
people 
with 
similar 
experiences instead of researching properly. The 
process of self-assessment is sometimes not 
clear to certain patients.  
Identify 
alternatives 
Through the process of collecting information you will 
probably identify several possible paths of action, or 
alternatives. You may also use your imagination and 
information to construct new alternatives. In this step of 
the decision-making process, you will list all possible 
and desirable alternatives. 
Many 
patients 
ask 
their 
physicians 
for 
alternatives, but do not know where to look for 
information 
other 
than 
their 
healthcare 
practitioners, which is the same problem found 
in step 2.  
Weigh evidence 
You draw on your information and emotions to imagine 
what it would be like if you carried out each of the 
alternatives to the end. You must evaluate whether the 
need identified in Step 1 would be helped or solved 
through the use of each alternative. In going through this 
difficult internal process, you begin to favor certain 
alternatives, which appear to have higher potential for 
reaching your goal. Eventually you are able to place the 
alternatives in priority order, based upon your own value 
system. 
The challenge in this step is that many patients 
do not even reach this step. But helping them 
reach this point would make it easier for them to 
be able to imagine themselves in certain 
situations. 
Choose among 
alternatives 
Once you have weighed all the evidence, you are ready 
to select the alternative, which seems to be best suited to 
you. You may even choose a combination of 
alternatives. 
What is done here, is that most patients only take 
into account the alternatives their physicians 
have told them, so when left with a number of 
alternatives they are lost when confronting 
decisions on their own. (Only if physicians 
haven’t been paternalistic when implying what 
alternative to choose). 
Take action 
You now take some positive action, which begins to 
implement the alternative you chose in Step 5. 
This is where patients return to reverse 
paternalism and let their health care practitioners 
choose 
what 
alternative 
to 
choose 
and 
implement. 
Review decisions 
and consequences 
In the last step you experience the results of your 
decision and evaluate whether or not it has “solved” the 
need you identified in Step 1. If it has, you may stay 
with this decision for some period of time. If the 
decision has not resolved the identified need, you may 
repeat certain steps of the process in order to make a 
new decision. You may, for example, gather more 
detailed or somewhat different information or discover 
additional alternatives on which to base your decision 
This depends on what type of decision was 
made. If the decision has not resolved the 
identified need, if a surgery has not been 
successful, patients often blame their physicians. 
These physicians however, have been told to 
decide for them, which is why shared-decision 
making is of highest importance.  
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II.  
PATIENT QUESTIONNAIRE 
Answer questions as they relate to you. 
Check the box(es) that are most applicable to you. 
8) About You 
a) 
1. Your Age  
 
-20 
-40 
-60 
 
b) 
2. Your Gender  
 
 
c) 
3. Your Marital Status 
Single  
 
 
d) 
4. Your Employment status 
 
 
 
 
e) 
5. Your Educational level 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

9) Doctor-patient Relationship 
Please complete the following questionnaire by circling the appropriate answer. 
 
Strongly 
Disagree 
 
Disagree 
 
Neutral 
 
Agree 
Strongly 
   Agree 
I never ask my doctor for information about a suggested 
treatment/procedure 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I seek multiple opinions before selecting a surgery/treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I’m confident that my doctor provides me the best treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I don’t want my doctor to involve me in decisions about my 
treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I have a successful shared-decision making relationship with 
my doctor 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I want my doctor to choose on my behalf 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Doctors know best for patient and they have to decide for 
them 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
It is ethically permissible for patients to allow doctors to act 
paternalistically  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
In critical cases I prefer my doctor to choose on my behalf 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I trust my doctor in everything he says because he is well-
known to be the best in his/her field 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I always ask my doctor for information about a suggested 
treatment/procedure 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
It is not necessary to seek multiple opinions before selecting a 
surgery/treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I don’t trust my doctor’s ability to provide the best treatment 
for me 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I want my doctor to involve me in decisions about my 
treatment 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
My doctor-patient relationship lack a successful shared-
decision making process 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I refuse to let my doctor choose on my behalf 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Even though doctors know better, they don’t have the right 
to choose for patients 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
It is not ethically permissible for patients to allow doctors to 
act paternalistically  
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I prefer to take all my medical decisions by myself 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
I don’t trust my doctor completely just because he is known 
to be the best in his/her field 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

