Studies on the Use of Electrolyzed Water as a Disinfectant at Home Care  
 
 Koichi Umimoto, Aki, Kamada, Masahiro Miyata,  
Syunji Nagata 
Department of Biomedical Engineering 
Osaka Electro-Communication University 
Osaka, Japan 
umimoto@isc.osakac.ac.jp, kmd.aki080707@gmail.com 
ce_miyata@yahoo.co.jp, narasinagataschunji@yahoo.co.jp 
Junichiro, Yanagida 
Department of Medical Technology 
Kobe Tokiwa University 
Kobe, Japan 
jyanagida@kobe-tokiwa.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—The prevention of opportunistic infection for the 
elderly is important in home care and the hygiene management 
for infection is required. When water containing sodium 
chloride is electrolyzed, electrolyzed water with strong 
bactericidal ability due to the available chlorine (AC) is 
generated on the anode side. Slightly acidic to neutral 
electrolyzed water (SANEW, pH 5.0 to 7.5) is physiological pH 
and is suitable for biological applications. For producing 
SANEW simply and at a low cost, the container has electrolysis 
cell in a cylindrical shape having a sidewall without membrane 
partition and the sidewall serves as a cathode in the 
electrolyzer device. The graphite rod was used as the anode. As 
a result, the pH and AC concentration were 5.6 and 13.7 ppm, 
respectively. 
SANEW 
was 
obtained 
directly 
by 
this 
experimental device and this water showed a strong 
bactericidal activity. This device is useful for producing 
SANEW as a disinfectant to employ at home care, when 
considering economic and environmental factors, since it 
returns to ordinary water after use.  
Keywords- Home care; Electrolyzed water; Bactericidal 
activity.  
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The prevention of opportunistic infection due to a 
reduction in resistance or physical strength of the elderly is 
important in home care and the hygiene management for 
infection is required. Electrolysis is known as a method of 
separating an ionic substance by way of a chemical reaction. 
A device for achieving electrolysis requires certain 
components, such as an electrolyte containing an ionic 
substance, a pair of electrodes (an anode and a cathode), a 
diaphragm and a direct electric current supply. In the 
electrolysis process, water containing sodium chloride 
(NaCl) is electrolyzed, resulting in the production of strongly 
acidic electrolyzed water (SAcEW, pH 2.2 to 2.7) on the 
anode and strongly alkaline electrolyzed water (SAlEW) on 
the cathode side (Fig.1). SAcEW contains an available 
chlorine (AC) such as hypochlorous acid (HClO), which is 
known to have a strong bactericidal action and shows an 
instantaneous bactericidal activity [1] [2]. SAcEW reverts to 
ordinary water again after use. Therefore, recently this water  
has attracted considerable interest in a medical field. 
However, the activity does not persist. In addition, 
SAcEW stimulates the oral mucous etc. because of its strong 
acidity, and is therefore unsuitable for biological applications 
[3][4]. On the other hand, in slightly acidic to neutral 
electrolyzed water (SANEW, pH 5.0 to 7.5), since the 
activity persists and its pH is physiological levels, it can be 
applied to various uses. However, the production of SANEW 
requires electrolysis of hydrochloric acid itself or use of 
hydrochloric acid as a pH adjuster. Thus, the production is 
too complicated to perform in domestic homes. 
In this study, we developed a simple device to produce 
SANEW directly for home care without use of hydrochloric 
acid and evaluated the bactericidal activity of this solution. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Anode side 
H2O → 1/2O2 + 2H+ +2e- 
2Cl-  →  Cl2 + 2e- 
Cl2 (aq) + H2O ⇆ HCl + HClO 
 
Cathode side 
H2O + 2e- → 1/2H2 + OH- 
Na+ + OH- ⇆ NaOH 
 
Figure 1.  Principle of producing electrolyzed water with two electrolytic 
cell 
 
This paper is structure as follows. Section II describes 
the device used as well as the approach to measure 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

bactericidal activity. In Section III, we present the results. In 
Section IV, we discuss the relevance of the results. Section V 
concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Device 
The most expensive in the electrolyzer device is an 
electrode which is coated by platinum for the protection 
against corrosion. In order to reduce the cost, the container 
was electrolysis cell in a cylindrical shape having a sidewall 
without membrane partition. The sidewall was made of 
stainless steel and was operatively connected to a DC power 
supply so that the sidewall serves as a cathode in the 
electrolyzer device. The graphite rod was used as the anode. 
As the graphite rod was arranged as the anode in the vicinity 
of a center of the container, the anode was surrounded by 
the cathode at a constant distance, and thereby the strongly 
alkaline electrolyzed water will be obtained at the vicinity of 
the sidewall of the container (Fig. 2). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Principle of producing electrolyzed water with a cylindrical shape 
 
 
B. Measurement 
Using an experimental device, 1L of 0.1% NaCl 
solution was put into a container and electrolysis is 
performed by applying a DC 20 voltage for 30 minutes. The 
values of the pH and AC concentration of the electrolyzed 
water were measured with diethyl-p-phenylenediamine by a 
spectrophotometer. 
 
C. Bactericidal activity 
Two strains of bacteria (S.aureus and B.cereus) were 
prepared to investigate the bactericidal activity of 
electrolyzed water. The bactericidal activity was examined 
as follows. These bacteria were cultivated at 37°C for 24 
hours under aerobic-culture in petri dishes. After cultivation, 
each one colony was incubated with 10% povidon iodin, 
70% isopropyl alcohol, SAcEW and SANEW, also this 
solutions were added onto the fresh petri dishes and were 
cultivated for 48 hours. The colony of bacteria in the petri 
dish was counted and the bactericidal activity was judged. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
The obtained measurement results, the levels of pH and 
AC concentration of the extracted electrolyzed water at 30 
minutes after the start of the electrolysis are listed in Table 1. 
The levels of pH of those water were from 5.5 – 5.9 and 
those of AC concentrations were from 11.1 – 13.7 ppm. 
SANEW was obtained directly by this experimental device. 
     The results of bactericidal activity of chemical 
disinfectants and electrolyzed water are shown in Table 2. 
There were many colonies of S. aureus and B.cereus in each 
petri dish as controls, while there was no colony of bacteria 
after added SANEW as same as other solutions. 
 
 
TABLE Ⅰ. THE LEVELS OF PH AND AC CONCENTRATION OF 
ELECTROLYZED WATER 
 
pH 
AC concentration (ppm) 
 
Electrolyzed water 
5.9 
11.2 
5.6 
13.7 
5.6 
13.0 
5.5 
11.1 
 
 
TABLE Ⅱ.   BACTERIAL ACTIVITY OF ELECTROLYZED WATER 
Bacteria 
Solutions 
S.aureus 
B.cereus 
Control (Sterilized water) 
CFU/ml 
16.6×106 
67×105 
10% povidon iodin 
0 
0 
70% isopropyl alcohol 
0 
0 
SAcEW 
0 
0 
SANEW  
0 
0 
 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Generally, in an electrolyzed water generator having a 
membrane, equal amounts of acidic water and alkaline water 
are generated in the respective electrolytic chambers with 
the same capacities on both sides of the membrane. 
Consequently, SANEW cannot be directly produced. 
Alternatively, a system for producing SANEW by a method 
using hydrochloric acid as a pH adjuster with a membrane-
less system suffers from the problem of handling 
hydrochloric acid. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

SANEW has strong bactericidal activity against E.coli 
and B.cereus similar to chemical disinfectants and also, it 
has an advantage that its bactericidal activity stably persists 
for a long time, making it useful for sterilization, 
disinfection and cleaning as same as SAcEW with pH 2.2 
[5]. Accordingly, it is applicable to electrolyzed water 
generators producing bactericidal water that can contribute 
to killing bacteria on equipment and utensils in food 
factories, sterilization of instruments in medical-related 
departments, care homes for the elderly, cleaning toilets and 
the interiors of buildings, and cleaning bathrooms. 
Furthermore, since bactericidal water can be simply 
generated and returns to ordinary water when discarded, the 
present study is easy to use for improving public hygiene. 
The present study is characterized in that electrolysis 
cell in a cylindrical shape having a sidewall serves as a 
cathode, and does not need to maintain for membrane 
replacement. The structure is a simple one that does not 
need any special tool. This apparatus can be made at a low 
cost about 1/10 times as compared with conventional 
apparatus using hydrochloric acid [6]. Therefore, this device 
is useful for producing SANEW as a disinfectant to employ 
at home care. However, as a disadvantage, the graphite rod 
elutes very slightly during electrolysis by DC 20 V and 
needs to be replaced with long term use. And also, the 
quantity of SANEW production is 1L/30 min because of a 
batch type specification, which is rather low compared to 
the conventional apparatus of flowing water type (5L/min). 
Further research is necessary to make an improvement in 
this apparatus.  
 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We made a simple electrolytic device in cylindrical 
shape having a sidewall and succeeded to produce SANEW 
with strong bactericidal ability as a disinfectant. SANEW 
can be produced from a saline solution and at a low cost in 
this system. This device is useful in home care. 
 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported in part by a Grants-in-Aid 
for Scientific Research from Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Hotta, K. Kawaguchi, K. Saito, K. Ochi, and T. 
Nakayama, “ Antimicrobial activity of electrolyzed 
NaCl solution: effect on the growth of Streptomyces 
SPP, ” Actinomyatologica vol. 8, pp. 51 -56, 1994 
[2] K. Kumon, “ What is functional water? , ” Artif. Organs, 
vol. 21, pp. 2-4, 1997 
[3] K. Umimoto, Y. Emori, H. Fujita, and K. Jokei, 
“ Evaluation of strong acidic electrolyzed water for the 
disinfection, ” IEEE-EMBS, APMBE, Proceedings CD-
ROM, 2003 
[4] K. Umimoto, Y. Kanno, T. Kawabata, and K. Jokei, 
“ Characteristics of strong acidic electrolyzed water,” 
IFMBE Proceedings vol. 8, APCMBE, PA-2-01, 2005 
[5] K. Umimoto, H. Kawanishi, Y. Tachibana, N. Kawai, S. 
Nagata and J. Yanagida, “ Development of automatic 
controller for providing multi electrolyzed water, ” 
IFMBE Proceedings vol. 25, pp. 306-009, 2009 
[6] Purester Morinaga Milk Industry. Co. LTD.   
URL: http://www.morinagamilk.co.jp/products/ 
purester/product/2014.06.30 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

