Development of an e-Healthcare System for
University Students
Yoshiro Imai
Graduate School of Engineering
Kagawa University
2217-20 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
e-mail: imai@eng.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Eiichi Miyazaki
Faculty of Education
Kagawa University
1-1 Saiwai-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
miya@ed.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Hiroshi Kamano, Tomomi Mori
Health Center
Kagawa University
2-1 Saiwai-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
{kamano@cc, mori@ao}.kagawa-u.ac.jp
Hironari Kohno, Kayo Ikeshita, Mitsunori Sugihara
Plan and Design Section of Medical IT LAboratory incorp.
2217-15 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
e-mail: {kohno,ikeshita.kayo,sugihara }@mitla.co.jp
Yuhko Ogata
President of Medical IT LAboratory incorp.
2217-15 Hayashi-cho, Takamatsu, Japan
yhuko@mitla.co.jp
Abstract—An e-Healthcare system with IC card authentication,
automatic health screening subsystem and Web-based health
information monitoring, has been designed and implemented
for university health education. It is a prototype of private
Cloud service of e-Healthcare for university students which can
obtain their health records from physical measuring devices with
their IC card-based authentication, manage their health data
in suitable database, investigate such data from viewpoint of
doctors/nurses and provide such information for self-healthcare
controlling through Web-Database service. This paper presents
an organization of the above e-Healthcare system, demonstrates
its real usages in university health education and describes its
brief evaluation and expanding plan through practical applica-
tions.
Keywords- e-Healthcare; IC card authentication; health screening;
health information monitoring; university health education.
I. INTRODUCTION
People of the world have own natural rights to live their
healthy lives. They have been interesting in their situations of
health and nowadays almost all of them are longing for their
healthy environment more strongly than ever before. Doctors
always point out that people need to keep their healthy lives
if they do not want to be ill and sick. It is very important for
everyone to maintain his/her living environment at the healthy
level. In other words, everyone wants to have some facilities
to monitor his/her healthy level and needs some visualizing
tools to recognize whether his/her healthy level becomes good
or not.
In every higher education and/or university, even in Japan,
of course, its staffs and administration must provide health
education and equip health managing environment for its
students. Because it is important for current students to study
in good condition during their university lives and for external
society including their family to welcome the relevant students
as its up-and-coming persons. Strictly speaking, however,
universities have faced to some problems to be resolved in
order to provide efﬁcient health education and they are/have
been suffering from the lack of staffs and facilities to manage
health keeping environment for their students.
An approach of e-Healthcare seems to be one of the most
effective and efﬁcient solutions to improve such environment
of health education with the above lack of staffs and facilities
in universities as well as in general societies. This approach
may be able to provide a powerful strategy to equip so-called
“Ubiquitous Healthcare Service” where users can always con-
nect to the information server, monitor their health information
in it and obtain suitable advises and instructions for their health
management(s).
This paper describes our e-Healthcare system for univer-
sity students with IC(integrated circuit) card authentication,
automatic health screening subsystem and Web-based health
information monitoring. First of all, the next (second) section
introduces some related works for the sake of comparison and
coordination of our study with the state-of-the-art in the same
domain. The third section shows conﬁguration of a newly-
developed e-Healthcare system and illustrates some details of
the system and its facilities. The fourth section demonstrates
its real application in our university, explains some brief eval-
uation of our e-Healthcare system and reports our challenge
to expand our system to overground in the future market.
Finally, the last (ﬁfth) section concludes our summaries for
the perspective study and shows acknowledgements and some
useful references.
II. RELATED WORKS
This section introduces some typical related works (papers)
in order to compare and coordinate our study with the below
the currently and/or previously published papers in the same
domain.
A. e-Healthcare related works
B.W. Trevor Rohm of Brigham Young University and his
son in [1] described “ Abstract A vision of the e-healthcare
era is developed using scenarios from today and for the
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

future. The future of e-healthcare is based on empowering
individual patients with current information about diagnosis
and treatment for personal decision-making about their health
without ever visiting a healthcare facility. Empowering the
patients is made possible with a futuristic personal medical
device (PMD).” And they added “The PMD is a ‘black box’,
which works in conjunction with the internet and locally stores
expert system programs. The PMD has various accessories
available to help with diagnosis besides voice and image
capabilities.”
Patrick C. K. Hung from University of Ontario Institute of
Technology (UOIT) described in [2] “ Information privacy is
usually concerned with the conﬁdentiality of personal identiﬁ-
able information (PII) and protected health information (PHI)
such as electronic medical records. Thus, the information
access control mechanism for e-Healthcare services must be
embedded with privacy-enhancing technologies.”
A. Mukherjee and J. McGinnis from Montclair State Univer-
sity categorized and explained ‘e-Healthcare’ in paper article
[3]. And they presented the state-of-the-art to identify key
themes in research on e-healthcare. They pointed out “ E-
healthcare is contributing to the explosive growth within
this industry by utilizing the internet and all its capabilities
to support its stakeholders with information searches and
communication processes. A review of the literature in the
marketing and management of e-healthcare was conducted to
determine the major themes pertinent to e-healthcare research
as well as the commonalities and differences within these
themes. Based on the literature review, the ﬁve major themes
of e-healthcare research identiﬁed are: cost savings; virtual
networking; electronic medical records; source credibility
and privacy concerns; and physician-patient relationships.
E-healthcare systems enable ﬁrms to improve efﬁciency, to
reduce costs, and to facilitate the coordination of care across
multiple facilities.”
B. Ubiquitous Services of e-Healthcare in other related works
Nowadays, e-Healthcare has been tightly connected with
ubiquitous computing services. Especially, mobile computing
is a key technology to realize e-Healthcare system effectively
and efﬁciently. The below papers are discussing about relations
and connections between mobile computing and know-how of
construction of e-Healthcare system.
Zhuoqun Li and his supervisors of University of Plymouth
described at the relevant conference on Computational In-
telligence in Medicine and Healthcare [4] “ The growing
availability of networked mobile devices has created a vast
collective potential of unexploited resources. Grid computing
with its model of coordinated resource sharing may provide
a way to utilize such resources that are normally distributed
throughout a mobile ad-hoc network.” They also discussed
the general challenges in implementing Grid functionalities
(e.g. service discovery, job scheduling and Quality of Service
(QoS) provisioning) in the mobile environment and the speciﬁc
issues had arisen from realistic application scenarios, i.e. the
e-healthcare emergency.
Min Chen and his co-researchers of Seoul National Univer-
sity described in [5] “ Radio frequency identiﬁcation technol-
ogy has received an increasing amount of attention in the past
few years as an important emerging technology. To address
this challenging issue, we propose an evolution to second-
generation RFID (Radio Frequency Identiﬁcation) systems
characterized by the introduction of encoded rules that are
dynamically stored in RFID tags. This novel approach facili-
tates the systems’ operation to perform actions on demand for
different objects in different situations, and enables improved
scalability. Based on 2G-RFID-Sys, we propose a novel e-
healthcare management system, and explain how it can be
employed to leverage the effectiveness of existing ones. It is
foreseeable that the ﬂexibility and scalability of 2G-RFID-Sys
will support more automatic and intelligent applications in the
future.”
C. Design Concept based on Previous Related Works
We have designed our new e-Healthcare system based on
not only facing problems to be resolved in our university but
also the above previously announced in the public journals
and conference papers described in the above subsections. Our
design concepts are summarized as follows, the former are our
original design concepts introduced from existing problems at
the routine physical examination for students in our university.
Namely,
• Reduction of time-consuming tasks and frequently oc-
curred human-errors.
• Avoidance of paper-oriented information exchanging and
sharing.
• Applicability of newly designed system to Health Educa-
tion in our university.
• Usage of IC card-based Student Identiﬁcation for user
authentication.
And the latter ones are added through investigation of previous
related works in the public papers. Namely,
• Utilization of Mobile Computing technologies including
Wireless Local Area Network, 3G/GSM (Global System
for Mobile communication) telephone communication
and others for position-independent services.
• Employment of suitable “Electronic Medical Records”
and/or “Personal Health(care) Records” for seamless
healthcare services.
• Capability of newly designed system as so-called Ubiq-
uitous Services or Cloud Services in order to provide
effective healthcare environment.
III. CONFIGURATION OF E-HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
This section shows conﬁguration of our e-Healthcare system
which is already annunciated in the paper [6] and illustrates
some details of the system’s characteristics and its typical
facilities.
A. Conﬁguration of e-Healthcare System
Figure 1 shows a conceptual conﬁguration of our e-
Healthcare System in order to resolve existing problems at the
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fig. 1.
Conceptual Conﬁguration of an e-Healthcare System (previously annunciated in [6]).
routine physical examination for students in our university. Its
characteristics are summarized as follows;
• User(Examinee) authentication with IC card-based stu-
dent ID for simpliﬁcation of Examinee checking.
• Automatic data obtaining of physical measuring de-
vices into personal computers in order to reduce time-
consuming tasks of paper-based data recording.
• Temporary data storage with IC card for the routine
physical examination in not-networked environment.
• Equipment of database for individual healthcare record
and health monitoring through campus network.
• Professional health education by university doctors and/or
nurses through analysis of medical records from the
routine physical examination.
• Information retrieval of medical records from Web-based
monitoring with user authentication.
Kart et al. [7] from University of California, Santa Bar-
bara described “Large-scale distributed systems, such as e-
healthcare systems, are difﬁcult to develop due to their com-
plex and decentralized nature. With open standards, such
as XML [8], SOAP [9], WSDL [10] and UDDI [11], the
service oriented architecture supports interoperability between
services operating on different platforms and between ap-
plications implemented in different programming languages.
The service oriented architecture facilitates the development
of such systems by supporting modular design, application
integration and interoperation, and software reuse.” They men-
tioned in other article [12] of IT Professional (March-April
2008) “Medical monitoring devices worn by the patient, and
frequent electronic communication between the patient and
a nurse, can ensure that the prescribed treatment is being
followed and that the patient is making good progress. The e-
healthcare system can be readily extended to other healthcare
professionals, including medical technicians who perform and
report tests and analyses requested by physicians.”
Their studies and results have provided some good ideas and
comprehensive strategy for us to develop and improve our e-
Healthcare system and simultaneously taught us how to select
several kinds of technologies for implementation of effective
e-Healthcare system for our demand of university. We do not
employ such open standards described in the above papers,
but we recognize that it is very important to design our system
with modular system architecture / programming and utilize
standards of protocols and data formats. So our system can
have expandability not only to connect with other systems but
also to adapt for several kinds of users with interoperability.
B. Sub-systems and facilities of our e-Healthcare System
For example, at ﬁrst, we introduce a dedicated sub-system
including physical measuring devices, IC card reader/ writer
and personal computer (PC) for controlling. Figure 2 shows a
typical dedicated sub-system with a blood pressure monitoring
device and vision analyzer as physical measuring device.
Controlling PC in Figure 2 has connectivity with the above
devices and IC card reader/writer so that user authentication
and data acquisition can be realized in the following steps;
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fig. 2.
Dedicated Sub-system of Physical Measuring Device, IC card
Reader/Writer and Personal Computer.
1) Placing IC card of Examinee on the IC card reader
connected to PC.
2) Authenticating ID of Examinee from IC card and ob-
taining his/her relevant information.
3) Acquiring data from physical measuring device con-
nected to PC.
4) Combining measured data and regarding information of
Examinee into the formatted record with time-stamping.
5) Storing the above time-stamped record in IC card if
the PC for physical examination is not connected with
network environment.
6) Database server can collect such records of PC or IC
card into its storage through network environment.
We have already developed a mechanism to build dedicated
sub-systems in order to interface several measuring devices
such as a blood pressure monitoring device, vision analyzer
and other devices to take height and weight [13]. So we
will be able to expand the above samples into other types
of dedicated sub-system relatively easily for other kinds of
physical measuring devices.
Secondly, we explain another facility of our e-Healthcare
system to realize health monitoring for database server through
campus network in university. Figure 3 shows a scheme of
health monitoring or health information retrieval for database
by university doctor through campus network.
The dedicated sub-system of our e-Healthcare system de-
scribed above can accumulate the formatted record combined
with measured data and regarding information of Examinee
with time-stamping. So every student (i.e. Examinee) has
his/her health records in database with when-where infor-
mation about the routine physical examination or periodical
health checking. Not only the relevant students themselves
but also university doctors/nurses can investigate or trace the
history/changes of health information in time series.
The relevant facility of our system can generate some
kinds of graph based on time-series analysis in order to
illustrate the history/changes of health information. Of course,
university doctors/nurses can relatively easily perform their
professional medical suggestions and/or judgments for some
speciﬁed students by means of the above facility. Moreover,
students will be able to retrieve their health information from
database and understand the according history/changes of such
information even by themselves.
One of the merits of employing a graphical interface for
retrieval of health information is to ﬁnd out an speciﬁc change
of health information with irregularity efﬁciently even at
glance. Students can recognize such a case very easily through
our e-Healthcare system by themselves and then consult their
university doctors and/or nurses with their evidences from our
system. Doctors and/or nurses in university also can perform
periodical monitoring for graphical retrieving results. They
will send some e-mail and other communication to the relevant
student about his/her health situation.
With our e-Healthcare system, the above Health Education
of university will be introduced and managed effectively
and efﬁciently. The next section will demonstrate its real
application in our university, explains some brief evaluation of
Fig. 3.
Health monitoring for Database through campus network.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

our e-Healthcare system and reports our challenge to expand
our system to overground in the future market.
IV. APPLICATION OF E-HEALTHCARE SYSTEM, ITS BRIEF
EVALUATION AND ITS EXPANDING PLAN
This section demonstrates real application of our e-
Healthcare system at the routine physical examination in our
university at ﬁrst. And then it explains brief evaluation of the
system and mentions our new challenge to expand our system
for potential market near future.
A. Real Application of e-Healthcare system in the routine
physical examination
We have already applied dedicated sub-system of our e-
Healthcare system described in the previous section to the real
routine physical examination since 2011. In the case of Figure
4 , we could not prepare any networked environment for the
Fig. 4.
Photos of the Routine Physical Examination in 2011 with a prototype
of our e-Healthcare system.
routine physical examination so that all the dedicated sub-
systems of our e-Healthcare system had never connected to
the campus local area network and the Database information
server. Under such condition, our dedicated sub-systems must
choose the following procedures; namely combining informa-
tion about IC card of examinee and measured data acquired
from the according physical measuring devices and storing
such information into the relevant IC card for each examinee
during the routine physical examination.
We call dedicated sub-system of our e-Healthcare system
“Automatic Health Screening System” for student Health
Education in Kagawa University [13]. Figure 5 shows a photo
of dedicated sub-system of our e-Healthcare system used in
the real routine physical examination in 2011. It is conﬁgured
with Note PC, Physical measuring device (this case shows
“blood pressure monitoring device”) and IC card reader/writer.
They were connected one another, and measured data had
been saved temporally in Note PC as well as each examinee’s
IC card. Finally, we had transferred all the data into the
information server.
Fig. 5.
Photo of a Blood Pressure Monitoring Device as physical measuring
device, IC card Reader/Writer and Personal Computer in the routine physical
examination.
B. Brief Evaluation and Expanding Plan of e-Healthcare
System
From the viewpoint of applying our e-Healthcare system to
the real task, the system can provide time-saving operations
and precise computation of measuring students’ health infor-
mation. With our system, our university has enjoyed the above
results because the system can reduce total time to perform the
routine physical examination and avoid frequently-occurred
human errors during physical examination. Our university
can also obtain some effects of introducing our e-Healthcare
system into practical situation within university tasks which
include the routine physical examination and useful Health
Education.
Now, we are going to apply for some external budgets
in order to bring our e-Healthcare system to the mainstream
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

of university-outside. An alliance between university project
team and brighter venture company has begun to challenge for
national funds for the sake of making our system overground.
We must brush up our system into more applicable and more
tightly secure one. The former is very important because the
system has expandability, while the latter must be unavoidable
in the health and medical domains where there are the most
values in privacy, security and personal customization. We
hope that our e-Healthcare system can be smoothly changed
and improved for the above requests from the rising market
near future, because it has modularity and expandability in-
troduced in the paper.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper describes our e-Healthcare system for Student
Health Education in Kagawa University. With our system,
not only students can receive efﬁcient Health Education but
also doctors/nurses can provide fruitful medical suggestion
and/or judgment through health monitoring. The routine phys-
ical examination can be improved into reduction of time-
consuming tasks as well as avoidance of frequently-occurred
human errors.
Characteristics of our e-Healthcare system are summarized
as follows;
• Employment of modular system architecture for easy
maintenance, effective interoperability and system ex-
pandability:
Our e-Healthcare system includes a dedicated sub-system
with some kinds of physical measuring devices, IC card
reader/writer and controlling PC(s), a Database infor-
mation server and some facilities for user-side health
monitoring and retrieving. Each dedicated sub-system can
be relatively easily tailored for other kinds of physical
measuring devices. An additional facility can be built into
the system for the sake of system expansion.
• Utilization of student IC card for user identiﬁcation:
It is a good idea to employ student IC card for user(i.e. ex-
aminee) identiﬁcation during physical examination. With
such IC card-based identiﬁcation, our e-healthcare system
can reduce and shorten total mount of time to register and
authenticate examinees for physical screening test.
• Realization of mechanism to interface between measuring
devices and computers:
In order to build some kinds of interfaces between
physical measuring devices and controlling PC in ded-
icated sub-system, it must be done to connect device into
computer’s Input-Output ports such as USB(Universal
Serial Bus interface), write speciﬁc software for interrupts
just like drivers and manipulate such devices by the
controlling PC. With automatic control of measuring
devices by such PC, our e-Healthcare system can avoid
probabilistically happened human errors as well as writ-
ing mistake of measured data.
• Visualization of history/changes of health information in
time series:
The speciﬁc facility of our system can generate graphic
information based on time-series analysis in order to
illustrate the history/changes of health information. Doc-
tors/nurses of university can relatively easily perform
their professional medical suggestions and/or judgments
by means of such a facility. Students can also recognize
graphical history/changes of their health information.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Seigo Nagao, the
President of Kagawa University, for his great leadership and
very important suggestions from his doctor’s viewpoint. They
are willing to express sincere thank to Dr. Kazuhiro Hara,
Professor Emeritus of Kagawa University and the Funding
Leader of K-MIX (Kagawa Medical Internet eXchange), for
his powerful and continuous supervisions to this study. They
are also grateful to Dr. Yukio Hori, Assistant professor of
Kagawa University and Mr. Daisuke Yamakata, previous As-
sistant professor of Kagawa University for their valuable
contributions to our research achievements. This research is
partly supported by Kagawa University Specially Promoted
Research Fund 2012.
REFERENCES
[1] B.W.T. Rohm and C.E.T. Rohm Jr., A vision of the e-healthcare era,
International Journal of Healthcare Technology and Management, Vol. 4,
No. 1-2, pp. 87–92, February 2002.
[2] P.C.K. Hung, Towards a Privacy Access Control Model for e-Healthcare
Services,
Third Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust
(PST2005), 4 pages, October 2005.
[3] A. Mukherjee and J. McGinnis, E-healthcare: an analysis of key themes
in research,
International Journal of Pharmaceutical and Healthcare
Marketing, Vol. 1, No. 4, pp. 349–363, 2007.
[4] Z. Li, L. Sun, E.C. Ifeachor, Challenges of Mobile ad-hoc Grids and
their Applications in e-Healthcare,
Second International Conference on
Computational Intelligence in Medicine and Healthcare (CIMED2005), 8
pages, July 2005.
[5] Min Chen, S. Gonzalez, V. Leung, Qian Zhang, Ming Li, A 2G-RFID-
based e-healthcare system,
IEEE Wireless Communications, Vol. 17,
No. 1, pp. 37–43, February 2010.
[6] Y. Imai, Y. Hori, H. Kamano, T. Mori, E. Miyazaki, and T. Takai,
A Trial Design of e-Healthcare Management Scheme with IC-Based
Student ID Card, Automatic Health Examination System and Campus
Information Network, H. Cheriﬁ, J. M.Zain, and E. El-Qawasmeh(Eds.):
Proceedings of the International Conference on Digital Information and
Communication Technology and its Applications (DICTAP 2011), Part I,
CCIS 166, pp. 728-740, June 2011.
[7] F. Kart, Gengxin Miao, L.E. Moser, P.M. Melliar-Smith, A Distributed
e-Healthcare System Based on the Service Oriented Architecture,
IEEE
International Conference on Services Computing (SCC 2007), pp. 652–
659, July 2007.
[8] eXtensible Markup Language (XML).
see “http://www.w3.org/TR/xml11/”
[9] SOAP: In previous versions of this speciﬁcation the SOAP name was an
acronym of “Simple Object Access Protocol”. This is no longer the case.
see “http://www.w3.org/TR/soap12-part1/”
[10] Web Services Description Language(WSDL).
see “http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl/”
[11] Universal Description, Discovery and Integration(UDDI).
see “http://uddi.xml.org/uddi-org/”
[12] F. Kart, L.E. Moser, P.M. Melliar-Smith, Building a Distributed E-
Healthcare System Using SOA,
IT Professional, Vol. 10, No. 2, pp.
24–30, March-April 2008.
[13] E. Miyazaki, H. Kamano, D. Yamakata, Y. Imai, Y. Hori, Development
of an Automatic Health Screening System for Student Health Education
of University,
W.V. Siricharoen, M. Toahchoodee, and H. Cheriﬁ(Eds.):
Proceedings of DICTAP 2012, pp. 421-427, May 2012.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

