Management System of Medical Equipment in Hospitals 
M. Rammal, A. Jaffal, Mohamad Hajj-Hassan  
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
{31110078; 30830792}@students.liu.edu.lb, 
mohamad.hajjhassan@liu.edu.lb 
Hassan M. Khachfe  
Center for Quality Assurance, Institutional 
Assessment, & Scientific Research 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
hassan.khachfe@liu.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract— In the hospital, the management of medical 
equipment is a series of activities from budget planning to 
equipment disposing. The overall activities focus on issues such 
as quality, safety, performance, cost, and profit. An efficient 
and effective management system is necessary for supervising 
these goals. The main problem faced in most of the Lebanese 
hospitals is the over load that is applied from both paper work 
and maintenance issues at the same time, resulting in 
department breakdown and/or limitations. In this paper, we 
show an equipment service life-cycle model applied in these 
activities for in-house clinical engineering department, beside 
an in-house cycle management, in addition to a tool of 
communication with the other departments in the hospital. 
Some information systems were built by the management 
system and the information of management operations in 
clinical engineering department can be systematically collected 
and revealed at different life-cycle stages by these systems. 
Through the management system, we can easily integrate the 
management activities and improve medical care quality and 
patient’s safety. 
Keywords-Management 
system;communication;in-house 
cycle management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, the healthcare sector is indispensible to us in 
order to maintaine a healthy life away from desease, but it is 
very expensive. Hospitals, private or public, tend to ensure 
the health service in every region on the Lebanese ground. 
Various departments are present in each hospital that work 
together to guarantee the safety of the patient beside the 
appropriate medication and therapy. Depending on the 
patient’s case, he/she will be transferred to one of the 
departments and will remain there as long as necessaryto 
complete treatment. Departments within the hospital are 
divided into therapeutic, diagnostic, and service departments 
[1]. Every part in the hospital is related to another, thus 
linked together to form a strong chain to make sure that the 
patient is better in his stay and nothing is missed in his 
therapeutic period. Our concern is in the service sector, and 
especially in the Biomedical Department which is 
responsible for all the pieces of equipment in the hospital, 
their history, specifications, failure, and cost. This is very 
important in order to insure quality health survice to the 
incoming patients. 
Working as a biomedical engineer in a hospital requires 
being able to handle multiple tasks in parallel, such as 
technical issues and following up with different companies, 
as well as managing paperwork. Problems are found in the 
management part which is the result of hundreds or 
thousands of papers on the engineer’s desk each month. 
Papers consist of maintenance requests, transfer forms, 
preventive maintenance requests, discard forms, etc.  
The work mentioned increases the load on the 
biomedical engineer who is probably the only one in the 
department doing everything as a one man show. Paper 
work take a lot of time and disperses the process of 
parallelism mentioned previously [2]. On the other hand, 
each three years, the biomedical engineering department 
should be prepared with all these necessary data following 
the Accreditation standards to be submitted to the Ministry 
of Health. For that, all the requirements mentioned before 
should be available and well organized at any time. 
And here is the importance of having a management 
system that can control the cycle of this work between the 
departments and the biomedical department, and a tool that 
can be used to apply this management system [3]. 
The main goal of the proposed project is to develop a 
management system that can organize the work pathway 
between the main department which is the Biomedical, and 
the secondary parts which are the hospital departments 
(Emergency, Operating Room, Intensive Care, etc.).  What 
we mean by a management system is actually a process that 
is controlled by the biomedical engineer to stay in contact 
and updated with the secondary departments, which 
provides an improved quality of healthcare delivered to the 
patients. The system is ridden by a tool which is a software 
divided into a server user and active users. The main 
server/program is the biomedical engineer in the hospital. 
Active users represent the departments found in the hospital. 
Users can send maintenance requests, write transfer forms, 
and apply a request for preventive maintenance or exams for 
the staff. Each department, when using the program, is 
restricted to the machines found in this department [4]. On 
the other hand, the server can manage everything in all the 
departments due to a database that consist of the history of 
biomedical 
equipment. 
The 
server 
can 
also 
send 
recommendations and actions to the requests sent. In 
addition, the engineer can enter all the data that belongs to 
each machine which result in a history record of each 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

equipment from the moment bought reaching the discard 
phase. Policies, procedures, and instructions of use are also 
available in the software. Several processes (depreciation 
value, repeated failure, etc.) will be implemented in the 
program to help the engineer in some decisions he might 
take. 
Using this tool, the management system can be applied 
easily upon controlling and gathering all the required data 
beside tracking equipment, counting repeated failures and 
taking critical decisions concerning hospital improvement 
which is directly related to the patient’s safety and the 
quality of the delivered healthcare services. 
The following section (section II) will shed lights on 
structure of the Lebanese hospitals with the biomedical 
engineering’s tasks. Section III will cover the system design 
and implementation. Results and discussion are stated in 
section IV. Finally, the conclusion is set in section V. 
 
II. 
HOSPITALS IN LEBANON 
Hospitals in Lebanon are mainly divided into public and 
private. Each hospital has its own divisions. Departments 
within the hospital follow one of the three classes: 
Therapeutic, diagnostic, or service. The Biomedical 
department is one of the service departments that are not 
only connected to all the other hospital departments, but 
also to external parties such as companies and agencies. 
The biomedical engineering departments should deliver 
continuous learning about the proper use of medical 
equipment to the doctors and nurses; communicate with the 
vendors, hospital administration, third party payers, and 
leasing agencies to take the right decision about the cost, 
technical requirements, reliability, and future planning. On 
the other hand, biomedical engineering department should 
communicate with the hospital environment section to take 
care of waste management, power, cabling, maintenance, 
and safety.  
Also, the department should insure the safety and 
accepted medical practices to overcome the regulation 
agencies. All of these connections are part of the daily tasks 
of the biomedical department to ensure the quality of 
healthcare delivered to the patient.  
The connections shown in figure 1 are essential to 
provide the best hospital environment with good equipment 
management, 
active 
department’s 
communication, 
following 
defined 
procedures 
of 
purchasing 
and 
maintenance, etc., which all result in maximizing healthcare 
quality and ensuring patient’s satisfaction. 
All the mentioned tasks beside the paper work form a 
huge responsibility on the biomedical engineer in the 
hospital.  
Since all these tasks, beside the paper work, are related, it 
becomes essential to have a computer based management 
system to facilitate the inter-communication between the 
biomedical engineering department and all the other 
departments to save the time consumed on paper work and 
helps in decision making. 
 
III. 
SYSTEM DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
A Hospital Management System is a way for making the 
management inside the hospital paperless. This includes the 
clinical, back office, and generic management of all 
activities. It integrates the entire resources of a hospital into 
one integrated software application. The most important 
benefits that the biomedical engineering department gains 
from this management system are: minimizing manpower 
requirements, instant information retrieval, and timely 
treatment decisions. 
It’s a well know fact that there is no common hospital 
management system applied worldwide [6]. Each country 
has a certain system applied in some of its hospitals based 
on the country’s conditions and standards from one side, 
and the hospital’s profession, level, and type from the other 
side.  
An existing management system in Michigan is based on 
dividing the biomedical department and the hospital 
equipment into several subdivisions [7]. Also, the 
management system applied in New Delhi defines the 
maintenance categories, as well as defining the function and 
the troubleshooting process of various medical equipment 
[8]. In Kenyan hospitals, a software is developed and 
installed in each department to identify the equipment fault 
and reports the possible personnel to handle it [9]. 
Our management system for the Lebanese hospitals 
should consist of: 
 
A. Number of Staff: 
The number of staff varies according to the number of 
beds in the hospital as shown in table I. 
According to the number of beds within the hospital, the 
number of staff can be easily calculated such that every 100 
beds need one biomedical engineer and one biomedical 
technician [7] [8]. 
 
 
Figure 1.Connections of the biomedical department with inner and outer 
hospital environment [5]. 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE I. Number of biomedical engineering staff with the corresponding 
number of beds. 
 
 
 
B. Roles and Responsibilities: 
 
Biomedical 
Technician: 
Different 
tasks 
are 
assigned to the biomedical technician in the 
biomedical engineering department. He is the 
biomedical engineer’s assistant, responsible for daily 
checkup mainly for the life support equipment such 
as defibrillators, anesthesia machines, etc., to make 
sure that everything is normal and ready for 
functioning. Checking the medical gases, such as 
oxygen, nitrogen, and compressed air to ensure the 
volume and pressure of each is also one of the 
biomedical technician’s tasks. On the other hand, the 
technician should follow up the temperature in some 
of the departments like Cath Lab, CT scan, MRI, 
etc… and the level of Reverse Osmosis (RO) water 
and the corresponding Total Dissolved Substances 
(TDS) and make sure the normal functioning of the 
autoclaves as well. 
 
Biomedical Engineer: The Biomedical engineer 
should set the maintenance schedule that is 
composed 
of 
two 
parts: 
Planed 
Preventive 
Maintenance (PPM), and Corrective Maintenance 
(CM), to guarantee the efficiency and accuracy 
beside the normal function of medical equipment in 
the hospital. Moreover, the engineer is responsible 
for the stocks that contains the spare parts and stand 
by items and check for the missing/needed ones to 
order them. Designing new department, equipment 
installation, meeting with companies, and new 
equipment planning are also tasks assigned for the 
biomedical engineer in the hospital.  
 
Software: The software is the tool for applying the 
hospital management system. It is developed using 
vb.net language. The software is based on 
Administrator-Client 
Inter-phase 
[9]. 
The 
administrator 
is 
the 
biomedical 
engineering 
department, whereas the client may be any other 
department within the hospital. In figure 2, the front 
page of the administrator’s software is shown. 
 
 
The biomedical department represents the head of 
the management system software. The other 
departments are the clients in this software. The 
software consists of:  
 
- 
List of Equipment: It lists the medical equipment 
found in each department with the corresponding 
details about the location room, serial number, 
hospital code, model, brand, purchasing date, price, 
and the availability of the operating manual. Also, a 
list of the discarded equipment/accessory in each 
department is available. Figure 3 illustrates the list of 
equipment found in the ground floor of the hospital 
with all the corresponding details that can be seen by 
both the engineering and the relative department. 
 
 
 
 
- 
Requests: Requests are divided into maintenance 
requests and transfer requests. The administrator 
(Biomedical Department) receives requests sent from 
any other department. The maintenance request 
contains all the information about the equipment in 
addition to the failure date, time, type, description, 
expected maintenance duration, current status, finish 
date, and accessories needed.  
The transfer request consists of all the information 
about the equipment in addition to time, date, and 
duration of transfer, and the targeted location beside 
the reason of transfer. 
- 
PM Schedule: Figure 4 shows the PM schedule set 
by the biomedical engineering department. PM 
schedule is divided into internal (In-house), and 
external (company) preventive maintenance. The 
 
 
Figure 2.The front page of the administrator’s (Biomedical Department) 
software. 
 
 
Figure 3.The ground floor's list of equipment software layout. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

schedule also shows the equipment and their 
corresponding dates of PM in addition to the 
maintenance party.  
 
- 
Stock: Includes the spare parts/items found in the 
department and their quantity as shown in figure 5. 
 
- 
Repeated Failure: This part allows the biomedical 
engineer to search by serial number or date interval 
to list the number of failures of equipment beside all 
the needed information. The repeated failure is a 
clear indicator that gives the biomedical engineer 
strong evidence and clear statistics about the 
equipment history, thus helping in taking the 
appropriate action and highlighting the equipment 
that should be replaced to guarantee the safety of the 
patients, as well as increasing the number of patients 
benefiting from the delivered healthcare. 
 
- 
Formulas: The biomedical engineer can implement 
any formula that helps him in taking decisions in a 
more reliable and fast way. Figure 6 shows one of 
the useful formulas which is the depreciation value 
[10]. 
 
- 
Instructions of use: The page allows the staff in the 
department to view the instructions of use of all the 
equipment found in their department. Instructions of 
use contain details about getting started with the 
equipment, safely use, cleaning procedure, etc., 
these details should be clear to all the staff in the 
department to ensure the best use of the equipment 
with 
best 
results 
regarding 
the 
patient’s 
diagnosis/treatment. 
 
- 
Security: For the administrator software version, a 
username and password are used to guarantee the 
data security and private access. On the other hand, 
the client software version is more flexible to let all 
the staff access the information needed and send the 
requests directly; but any modification requires a 
username and password. 
The biomedical engineer can enter, edit, and delete 
data about medical equipment in the hospital. He 
has a full access to the software. However, the 
clients can only view the instructions of use, send 
maintenance/transfer requests, and receive feedback 
from the biomedical department concerning the 
request sent. The biomedical department receives a 
notification upon any new request. In return, the 
client also receives a notification upon any feedback 
received. 
The network security of the software is a part of the 
overall hospital network security. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The management system and the software were 
implemented to test the functionality and activity of the 
overall system. The administrator version was installed on 
the main computer of the biomedical department. The client 
version was installed on the computers of all the medical 
departments. The software’s communication is done by 
using the internal network of the hospital with the help of 
the information-technology department. 
Upon failures in any medical equipment, the department 
sent a maintenance request. When receiving the notification 
of a new request, the biomedical engineer checks the 
software to verify the location of the failed equipment 
beside a brief description of the failure found, thus, takes the 
needed action. The engineer in return sends a feedback 
about the duration of maintenance and fills the missing 
information in the software to fulfill the data entry step. 
The biomedical engineer in his department, and using the 
software, was able to send/receive data and communicate 
with the other departments within the hospital. He also 
checks the PM schedule, as well as following the 
biomedical stock of spare parts. On the other hand, the 
department was able to view, add, remove, and edit any 
 
 
Figure 4.PM schedule layout in the administrator's software page. 
 
 
Figure 5. Stock's page with the corresponding details. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

equipment with its details using the list of equipment part in 
the software. 
Things were better using the software. Time was saved in 
a great way with less paper work and reduction of over tasks 
that were due the responsibilities of the biomedical 
department. 
The most important thing was that everything was ready 
for the accreditation that is done by the Lebanese Ministry 
of Health approximately each three years. 
As a result, the management system and the software 
achieved the mentioned tasks and diminish the problem 
stated at the beginning of this paper in a computerized way 
based on databases and inter-communication between the 
biomedical and other hospital departments. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The implementation of this management system in the 
Lebanese hospitals can ensure the proper functioning of the 
biomedical department in the hospital since it saves time, 
archive data, helps in decision making, and make reviewing 
the medical equipment history easy. Besides, the system 
activates the inter-communication between the biomedical 
department and the other departments, sets the work 
pathway, and organizes all the data that the biomedical 
engineer needs. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P. Debra Ferenc, Understanding Hospital Billing and Coding, 
Third Edition, 2014J. Clerk Maxwell and A Treatise on 
Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, 
1892, pp.68–73. 
[2] Holleman, L. Warren, Cofta-Woerpel, M. Ludmila, Gritz, and 
R. Ellen, “Stress and Morale of Academic Biomedical 
Scientists”. 
[3] World Congress on Medical Physics and Biomedical 
Engineering, Beijing, China, IFMBE Proceedings 2013, 
Volume 39, May 26-31, 2012, pp 799-802. 
[4] Kevin McGowan, Analytical Sciences, Inc, “Using Visual 
Basic® to Customize a Set of SAS® reports”, Paper 164-27 
[5] Hari Balasubramanian On delays in access to care in 
American hospitals, Monday, March 17, 2014 M. Young, The 
Technical Writer’s Handbook. Mill Valley, CA: University 
Science, 1989. 
[6] Abdo Jurjus, Focal Point for Health Research MOPH, “Health 
Research in Lebanon: a country report”, Cairo, June 2000 
[7] Jennifer Nolan, Chair, Equipment Management Committee, 
“The university of Michigan hospital and health centers 
equipment management plan”, 2010 
[8] Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, “Medical Equipment 
Maintenance Manual”, New Delhi, October 2010. 
[9] David Mutia, John Kihium, and 
Stephen Maranga, 
“Developing an In-house Computerized Maintenance”, 
Kenya, 2012, No 3, Vol 2. 
[10] Birittani Sponaugle, JUNE 3, 2014, “Depreciation Expense: 
Caluculate and Understand Fixed Asset Value”. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.Depreciation value is one of the implemented formulas in the 
software. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

