Unobtrusive Physiological and Gesture Wearable
Acquisition System: A Preliminary Study on
Behavioral and Emotional Correlations
Nicola Carbonaro, Alberto Greco, Gaetano Anania, Gabriele Dalle Mura,
Alessandro Tognetti, Pasquale Scilingo, Danilo De Rossi and Antonio Lanat`a
Interdepartmental Research Centre ”E. Piaggio”, Faculty of Engineering, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy
Email: nicola.carbonaro@centropiaggio.unipi.it, alberto.greco@centropiaggio.unipi.it, g.anania@ing.unipi.it,
gabrieledallemura@gmail.com, a.tognetti@centropiaggio.unipi.it, e.scilingo@centropiaggio.unipi.it, d.deross@centropiaggio.unipi.it,
a.lanata@centropiaggio.unipi.it
Abstract—This study proposes an integrated wireless wearable
system, that provides relevant information on gesture and elec-
trodermal responses for affective communication investigations.
The system is designed to be comfortable and unobtrusive to
be used in immersive virtual realities as well as in actual
scenarios in order to acquire implicit and explicit affective
information. The system is comprised of a glove where textile
electrodes, deformation sensors, and an inertial motion unit
are integrated. The glove simultaneously acquires electrodermal
activity and gesture, providing pre-elaborated signals that will be
used for feature extraction purpose in emotion recognition ﬁled.
Preliminary results are reliable and promising for the complete
integration of affective motion and physiological signal contents.
This prototype is useful to investigate how humans perceive and
produce affective interactions. Moreover, this prototype could be
used for designing novel emotional models based on high-level
and largely-comprehensive affective information.
Index Terms—Gesture; electrodermal activity; affective recog-
nition; textile-based systems; signal processing; features extrac-
tion; statistics;
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, research on emotions [1], [2] increased,
dramatically. In particular, the aspects related to how emotions
can be elicited, measured and recognized are still open issues
to be solved. One of the most interesting concepts under
study is how a person can communicate an emotion non-
verbally either alone or in a social scenario, where two or more
people are interacting. Indeed, the evaluation and interpretation
of physiological signals, facial expressions, body movements
and postures present a strong challenge because of the many
ambiguities related to affect deﬁnition, communication, and
interpretation. Classical methods for evaluating affects tend to
focus on questionnaires, in which the subjects are interviewed
for reporting what they felt during the experiment, sometimes
showing them a video of their performance, or asking them
to recall what they felt at each moment during the earlier
tasks [3]. Despite the promising results, in the majority of
cases physiological signals and body movements are studied,
separately. As matter of fact, previous studies showed that
human movement is a visual stimulus and that we have
experience of both perceiving and producing [4]. Concerning
physiological signal evaluation for emotions recognition, many
works have attempted to study physiological signals in order to
extract parameters able to identify patterns which are related to
speciﬁc emotions. Moreover, physiological reactions are one
of the most reliable signs of an implicit affective response
since they are controlled by the Autonomous Nervous System
(ANS). In the literature, many works have provided evidence
of the strong relationship between physiological reactions and
emotional/affective states of humans [2], [5], [6]. In particular,
the physiological signals used in the affect computing research
are Heart Rate Variability (HRV), Respiration (Resp) and Elec-
troDermal Activity (EDA). Previous works in physiological
signal-based emotion recognition are summarized in [7]. In
our study, we propose the ﬁrst integrated prototype for the
simultaneous acquisition of gesture and physiological signals
in the form of a textile glove that can acquire EDA, ﬁnger
movements and that can also determine forearm orientation.
Since EDA is the measurement of the sweat gland activity
and is directly controlled by Sympathetic Nerve Activity
(SNA), [8]–[10], it is considered an ideal way to monitor
the ANS. EDA can be acquired at the palmar and ﬁngers
surface, because they are suitable anatomical sites of sweat
eccrine glands. In the presented prototype, EDA is acquired
by using textile electrodes placed on the index and medium
ﬁngers. Finger movements are collected by using textile defor-
mation sensors placed on the glove metacarpophalangeal area
and forearm orientation is acquired by employing an Inertial
Measurement Unit (IMU) embedded in the glove electronics.
This works is split into two big sessions, as follows: the
ﬁrst one is named ”Materials and Methods” and the second
one is the ”Conclusion”. Material and Methods is structured as
follows: at the beginning, a description of the textile platform
is reported in detail, afterwards, the study exposes through
several sub sessions the principles and the methodologies of
analysis for both the hand gesture detection (e.i., the ﬁrst and
second sub sessions) and the EDA (e.i. the third and fourth
sub sessions). Afterwards, there are two sub sessions that
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

are dedicated of reporting the experimental results on textile
deformation sensors and wearable EDA tests. Finally, in the
Conclusion session, the study results and improvements are
underlined and a discussion is open on where and how these
data could be integrated and used to improve the knowledge on
the emotional communication system from a more high-level
approach.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
In this study, the ﬁrst prototype of a multi-parameter sensing
glove for the simultaneous acquisition of hand gestures and
EDA is presented. EDA is acquired through dedicated textile
electrodes integrated in the index and medium ﬁngertip areas
(see Fig. 1a). Finger movement is tracked by using ﬁve textile
deformation sensors integrated in the glove metacarpopha-
langeal area (see Fig. 1b). Both EDA and deformation signals
are acquired and elaborated on-line by using a dedicated wear-
able and wireless (i.e., ZigBee [11]) electronic unit. Moreover,
forearm orientation is measured by an Inertial Measurement
Unit (HMC6343 [12] by Honeywell) embedded in the glove
electronics and ﬁxed in the dorsal part of the forearm close to
the wrist.
(a) EDA electrodes
(b) Textile deformation sensors
Fig. 1: Multi-sensing glove prototype
A. Textile deformation sensors for hand gesture recognition
Textile deformation sensors and,more speciﬁcally conduc-
tive elastomer (CE) smeared sensors have been widely used
for movement and gesture detection in neurorehabilitation
[13]. Previous studies demonstrated the possibility of using
a CE-based sensing glove to measure hand joint angles by
using algorithms based on multivariate interpolation or neural
networks. The drawbacks of these techniques was the high
calibration effort, which limitated the use of such devices
in practical situations [13]. Despite promising performances,
CE-based prototypes showed several limitations such as non
negligible relaxation time, non linearities and hysteresis [14].
Here, the gestural interface consists of ﬁve textile deformation
sensors made of a particular conductive and elastic yarn. The
same sensors were previously used for respiration monitoring
in [15]. With respect to CE materials, this new sensor conﬁg-
uration was chosen for the better long term stability, the lower
hysteresis and the faster relaxation time. The sensors have
piezoresistive properties. Local fabric deformations due to user
hand movements modify the sensor electrical resistance, and
each sensor resistance is closely correlated with the single
ﬁnger degree of ﬂexion.
1) Processing methods: The sensor signal is characterized
by a slow baseline drift due to the intrinsic characteristics
of textile substrate (i.e., hysteresis and relaxation time are
improved but they still exist). For this reason, an ad hoc
algorithm for hand gesture recognition was conceived. The
algorithm follows in real time signal local maximum and
minimum levels through a peak detection routine that works
without empiric thresholds. This continuous update of signal
maximum/minimum allows for recognizing the condition of
single ﬁnger opening or closing independently from the base-
line variation (see Fig. 2). The combination of the described
procedure on the ﬁve ﬁngers enables a rapid recognition of the
current hand gesture. With respect to previous methodology,
no initial calibration is needed. This last point makes the
algorithm ﬂexible towards different hand physical conﬁgura-
tions and glove sizes. In Fig. 2, the results of the developed
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
a)
 
 
Thumb
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
b)
 
 
Index
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
c)
 
 
Middle
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
d)
 
 
Ring
0 
5 
10
15
20
25
30
35
1500
2000
2500
e)
Time[s]
 
 
Pinkie
I
II
III
IV
V
VI
Fig. 2: Raw signals (solid lines) and algorithm results (dotted
lines)
algorithm are shown. In each ﬁgure is represented the ﬁnger
sensor signal (solid line) and the algorithm result (dotted line).
In the case of high dotted line, the respective ﬁnger is ﬂexed
and vice versa. In this example, the user was asked to close
the hand (Phase I) and then to ﬂex one ﬁnger while the others
are extended (Phase II to VI).
B. Textile electrodes for EDA monitoring
EDA is acquired by integrated textile electrodes placed at
the ﬁngertips. The use of textile electrodes as opposed to
standard Ag/AgCl electrodes has already proven to be equiv-
alent, as we reported in our study [16], where we performed
the electrode characterization calculating the voltage-current
characteristics and the electric impedance and found that their
behaviors are comparable with standard electrodes. Moreover,
the use of a wearable textile system exhibits several advantages
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in terms of portability and usability for long-term monitoring,
and gives minimal constraints. In this prototype, the EDA is
obtained as the ratio between an imposed continuous voltage
of 0.5V between the two ﬁngers and the passing current.
Hereinafter, we refer to this EDA measurement as Skin Con-
ductance (SC).
1) SC processing and features extraction: The SC signal
is characterized by a tonic (i.e., Skin Conductance Level,
SCL) and a phasic component (Skin Conductance Response,
SCR). SCL is the slowly varying baseline level of skin
conductance, while SCR arises within a predeﬁned response
window (1 − 5s after stimulus onset), and is directly related
to a given stimulus [17]. The signal division into its phasic
and tonic components can be complicated by an overlapping
of consecutive SCRs, in case of an inter-stimulus interval
shorter than the SCR recovery time. In order to overcome this
issue, we analyzed the SC by means of a modeling technique
based on the deconvolution process [18]. The SC signal is
the result of a convolution between the SNA and an Impulse
Response Function (IRF). The IRF is a biexponential function
the so-called Bateman function [19], which is the result of
a diffusional model of the dynamics of sweat concentration
in the corneum, assuming that it is governed by the laws of
diffusion [20]. The decomposition of the SC in its components
was performed by means of Ledalab 3.2.2. software package
for MATLAB [21]. The row SC signal is pre-ﬁltered by a
lowpass ﬁlter with a cut-off frequency of 2Hz. After this
phase, a deconvolution between the ﬁltered SC data and the
IRF is performed. The deconvoluted signal was analyzed by a
peak detection algorithm. A signiﬁcant peak was detected if a
local maximum had a difference greater than 0.2µS from its
preceding or following local minimum [18]. The points under
the threshold was considered part of the tonic driver signal.
The tonic driver was estimated over the experiment duration
time by an interpolation algorithm, and, consequentially, the
tonic SC activity was achieved by a convolution between
the tonic driver and the IRF. The phasic driver component
was obtained by subtracting the tonic driver signal from the
deconvoluted SC. In Fig. 3, an example of the original SC
signal and the two deconvoluted tonic and phasic driver signals
are shown. The extracted features from both phasic and tonic
driver signals were the Number of Peak (NP), the MEAN
value of the AMPlitude (MeanAmp), the MAXimum value
of the AMPlitude (MaxAmp) and the MEAN value of the
ﬁrst derivative AMPlitude (DMeanAmp). The features were
calculated within a window response of 5s.
C. Textile deformation sensors tests
A set of experiments were carried out in order to test the
performance of the sensor response and new algorithms of the
sensing glovSeven participants were asked to perform different
combinations of hand postures by performing ﬁnger ﬂexion-
extension movements while wearing the glove. Once a posture
position was recognized (e.g., close thumb and open other
ﬁngers), the system generated the results of the ﬁnger combi-
nation. This operation was replicated three times for each user.
Fig. 3: Example of decomposition analysis. In the upper ﬁgure
the row SC signal is shown. The lower ﬁgures report the
deconvoluted tonic and phasic driver signals during resting
and elicitation phase.
TABLE I: HAND POSTURE RECGNITION
Task
N Test
Recognized
No Recognized
Success
zero ﬁngers
21
21
0
100
one ﬁnger
105
102
3
97.14
two ﬁngers
210
199
11
94.76
three ﬁngers
210
195
15
92.8
four ﬁngers
105
97
8
92.38
ﬁve ﬁngers
21
21
0
100
The results of this test are shown in the Table I. In this table,
columnTask represents the different conﬁgurations performed
by the user, considering how many ﬁngers are closed in that
particular posture. Taking into account the ﬁrst row of the
table, zero ﬁngers means that the user was performing the ﬂat
hand posture. Positive and negative recognition is reported in
the third and fourth columns respectively. In the last column,
the percentages are presented that represent the algorithms’
capability of recognizing a particular posture.
D. Wearable EDA test
A preliminary test was carried out to evaluate the perfor-
mances of the glove for affective evaluation. Seven patients
were recruited and an affective stimulating protocol was ad-
ministered. Affective elicitation was performed by projecting a
set of images selected from the International Affective Picture
System (IAPS) database [22], which consists of hundreds of
pictures with an associated speciﬁc emotional rating in terms
of valence and arousal. The valence and arousal ratings are
based on several studies where subjects were requested to
rank these images using the Self Assessment Manikin [23].
The protocol was divided into two sessions: basal, lasting 20
seconds and arousal, lasting 50 seconds. The ﬁrst was a resting
state phase in order to record the baseline of the subjects; the
second session was characterized by a slideshow of images
with an arousal level between [5 − 6]. The features extracted
from the two sessions were compared by using statistical
analysis. The statistical inference analysis was performed by
means of a nonparametric test due to the non-gaussianity of the
sample set. In particular, the data of subjects derived from the
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II: P-VALUE RESULTING OF A MANN WHITNEY
TEST BETWEEN THE NEUTRAL AND AROUSAL SES-
SION
NP
MeanAmp
MaxAmp
DMeanAmp
phasic
< 0.05
< 0.05
< 0.05
< 0.05
tonic
< 0.05
0.34
0.42
0.2
basal and the arousal session were compared by using Mann
Whitney test [24]. The results of the analysis are shown in the
Table II.
III. CONCLUSION
In this study, a preliminary test on the performance of
a ﬁrst integrated prototype for the simultaneous acquisition
of gesture and physiological signals is reported. The novelty
of the prototype lies on the use of a wearable textile glove
integrated with different technologies enrolled in monitoring
EDA and hand posture. Unlike previous textile-based sensing
gloves for posture recognition, this glove employs new strate-
gies using sensor integration into textile substrates. Moreover,
the new implemented algorithm was able to distinguish the
xconﬁguration of each ﬁnger without any calibration stage
or empiric threshold. Referring to EDA results, the textile
electrodes integrated in the glove showed optimal capacity
in detecting reliable signals (see Fig. 3). The results of the
statistical analysis applied to the features extracted from the
phasic SC component showed that calculated affective infor-
mation was statistically signiﬁcant for differentiating basal and
arousal session. On the contrary, most of the features of the
tonic signal did not show a statistical difference, which is most
likely due to the short duration of the experiment, not allowing
enough time for signiﬁcant changes to be made in the slowly
varying skin conductance level. These revelations create and
interesting basis and open up promising novel research ap-
plications. The integration of gestural and physiological data
could enable the use of EDA signal in real environments,
allowing for the possibility of implementing innovative algo-
rithms for the automatic ﬁltering of movement artifacts that
usually corrupt the electrodermal signals. Currently, it is well-
known that EDA signals can only be used in strongly con-
trolled conditions. Furthermore, the analysis of affective body
language jointly to physiological signal interpretation can offer
the possibility of both understanding how humans process
emotional stimuli, [25], and allowing the implementation of
innovative emotional models. It is worthwhile noting that, the
integration of information coming from non verbal emotional
expressions and physiological signals is widely advocated but
rarely implemented [2]. It is a matter of fact that physiological
and body language convey information about emotional states.
However, current literature lacks the exact informational val-
ues given from these channels as emotional indicators. Even
if oldest emotional expression research was focused on body
language and posture, state-of-the-art affect detection systems
have disregarded this information preferring facial expressions
and acoustic-proposed features. However, it is a common
experience that human body language is commonly used as
a emotional communicative channel, therefore, gesture and
posture together with direct sympathetic information, such as
EDR, can offer a kind of integrated information that is often
unavailable from the conventional nonverbal measures such
as the face and paralinguistic features of speech. Although
physiological signal interpretation is thoroughly studied in
this ﬁeld it is well know, that their emotional content is not
sufﬁcient enough in order to understand emotional commu-
nicative system. In this view, the recent advances in gestural
interfaces, as that presented in this study, present an oppor-
tunity to study how advocate emotions, e.g., expressions and
embodiments, activate physiological and behavioral responses
during an emotional episode. According to our results we
believe that new methodologies could hypothesize how these
information cold be represented in speciﬁc models arising
from the collaboration of affective and human-etology sciences
giving weighted importance to all variables that can be simul-
taneously monitored by the wearable platform.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research has been partially funded by the European
Commission through CEEDs (FP7 FET 258749) project.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Gallois and V. Callan, “Decoding emotional messages: Inﬂuence of
ethnicity, sex, message type, and channel.” Journal of personality and
social psychology, vol. 51, no. 4, p. 755, 1986.
[2] R. Calvo and S. D’Mello, “Affect detection: An interdisciplinary review
of models, methods, and their applications,” Affective Computing, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 18–37, 2010.
[3] H. Wallbott and K. Scherer, “Assessing emotion by questionnaire,” The
measurement of emotions.Emotion: Theory, research, and experience,
vol. 4, pp. 55–82, 1989.
[4] M. Shiffrar and J. Pinto, “The visual analysis of bodily motion,” Com-
mon mechanisms in perception and action: Attention and Performance,
vol. 19, pp. 381–399, 2002.
[5] C. Collet, E. Vernet-Maury, G. Delhomme, and A. Dittmar, “Autonomic
nervous system response patterns speciﬁcity to basic emotions,” Journal
of the autonomic nervous system, vol. 62, no. 1-2, pp. 45–57, 1997.
[6] G. Valenza, A. Lanata, and E. Scilingo, “Oscillations of heart rate and
respiration synchronize during affective visual stimulation,” Information
Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 16, no. 4, pp.
683–690, 2012.
[7] J. Wagner, J. Kim, and E. Andr´e, “From physiological signals to
emotions: Implementing and comparing selected methods for feature
extraction and classiﬁcation,” in Multimedia and Expo, 2005. ICME
2005. IEEE International Conference on.
Ieee, 2005, pp. 940–943.
[8] D. Fowles, M. Christie, R. Edelberg, W. Grings, D. Lykken, and P. Ven-
ables, “Publication recommendations for electrodermal measurements,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 232–239, 1981.
[9] D. Fowles, “Mechanisms of electrodermal activity,” Methods in physio-
logical psychology, vol. 1, no. Part C, pp. 231–271, 1974.
[10] W. Boucsein, Electrodermal activity.
Springer Verlag, 2011.
[11] Z. Alliance, “Zigbee speciﬁcation,” ZigBee Document 053474r13, pp.
344–346, May 2012.
[12] Honey,
“http://www51.honeywell.com/.../hmc6343.pdf,”
www.magneticsensors.com, June 2012.
[13] A. Tognetti, F. Lorussi, R. Bartalesi, S. Quaglini, M. Tesconi, G. Zupone,
and D. De Rossi, “Wearable kinesthetic system for capturing and
classifying upper limb gesture in post-stroke rehabilitation,” Journal of
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 2, no. 8, 2005.
[14] F. Lorussi, A. Tognetti, N. Carbonaro, G. Anania, and D. De Rossi, “En-
hancing the performance of upper limb gesture reconstruction sensory
fusion,” in Proceedings of the Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2011.
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[15] R. Paradiso and L. Caldani, “Electronic textile platforms for monitoring
in a natural environment,” Research Journal of Textile and Apparel,
vol. 4, 2010.
[16] A. Lanat`a, G. Valenza, and E. Scilingo, “A novel eda glove based
on textile-integrated electrodes for affective computing,” Medical and
Biological Engineering and Computing, pp. 1–10, 2012.
[17] D. Levinson and R. Edelberg, “Scoring criteria for response latency
and habituation in electrodermal research: a critique,” Psychophysiology,
vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 417–426, 1985.
[18] M. Benedek and C. Kaernbach, “A continuous measure of phasic
electrodermal activity,” Journal of neuroscience methods, vol. 190, no. 1,
pp. 80–91, 2010.
[19] ——, “Decomposition of skin conductance data by means of nonneg-
ative deconvolution,” Psychophysiology, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 647–658,
2010.
[20] R. Schneider, “A mathematical model of human skin conductance,”
Psychophysiology, vol. 24, no. 5, p. 610, 1987.
[21] C. Karenbach, “Ledalab-a software package for the analysis of phasic
electrodermal activity,” Technical report, Allgemeine Psychologie, Insti-
tut f¨ur Psychologie, Tech. Rep., 2005.
[22] P. Lang, M. Bradley, and B. Cuthbert, “International affective picture
system (iaps): Technical manual and affective ratings,” 1999.
[23] P. Lang, “Behavioral treatment and bio-behavioral assessment: Computer
applications,” 1980.
[24] H. Mann and D. Whitney, “On a test of whether one of two random vari-
ables is stochastically larger than the other,” The annals of mathematical
statistics, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 50–60, 1947.
[25] M. Giese, T. Poggio et al., “Neural mechanisms for the recognition of
biological movements,” Nature Reviews Neuroscience, vol. 4, no. 3, pp.
179–192, 2003.
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

