Privacy-Preserving Online Monitoring Framework for e-Health Applications
Youna Jung
Department of Computing and Information Sciences
Virginia Military Institute
Lexington, Virginia, United States
e-mail: jungy@vmi.edu
Abstract— Many e-health applications track how they are used 
by patients to enable and validate their effectiveness. While 
online monitoring can improve the accuracy and quality of e-
health applications, there is the potential of serious privacy 
violations. As e-health applications use online monitoring 
services, sensitive health data could be exposed to not only the 
healthcare providers but also the monitoring service providers 
against wishes of a user. To prevent privacy loss during online 
monitoring, in this paper, we propose a privacy-preserving 
online monitoring framework, in short PPoM, that helps 
providers and users of e-health applications specify their own 
policies and enforce user privacy policies in systematic 
manner. To support medical staff and users who do not have 
enough knowledge and skills on Information Technologies 
(IT), the PPoM framework provides intuitive and automatic 
tools that enable non-IT administrators and users to generate 
privacy policies, enable administrators to automatically insert 
monitoring code into their e-health applications, and control 
outgoing messages sent from users’ browsers.
Keywords-e-health application; online monitoring; privacy 
protection; framework.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Online monitoring and analytics are essential techniques 
to evaluate and enhance the performance of online 
applications. They help the online service providers improve 
the usability of their applications by collecting user/usage 
data and analyzing the performance of applications [1][2]. In 
general, there are three different approaches to online user 
monitoring: 1) log file analysis on the server side, 2) proxy-
based monitoring, and 3) use of monitoring scripts provided 
by online monitoring/ analytics services on the client side 
[3]. In this paper, we focus on the third approach because it 
is widely used and requires less time and effort to collect, 
analyze, and visualize user/usage data.
Online monitoring and analytics services, such as Google 
Analytics [4] and Adobe Analytics [5] have been widely 
used in a variety of online application areas, such as e-health 
[6], e-commerce [7], information retrieval [8], and so on. 
These monitoring/analytics services enable the tracking and 
recording of user actions and characteristics, such as mouse 
clicks, frequency of use of an application, time spent in a 
particular page, media viewed, page navigation sequences, 
content entered into a textbox, location information, whether 
a mobile device is being used, and so on.
Among various online application areas, we focus on the 
healthcare 
and 
wellness 
domains 
because 
e-health 
applications are becoming ingrained into the everyday life of 
many people. According to Eysenbach [9], e-health is an 
emerging field at the intersection of medical informatics, 
public health and business, referring to health services and
information delivered or enhanced through the Internet and 
related technologies. It is an umbrella term that includes a 
variety of online healthcare applications and systems that use 
information technologies, such as e-Learning for healthcare, 
e-Diagnosis, e-Prescribing and online health interventions. 
By using advanced information technologies, including 
electronic data management and rich interaction skills, e-
health applications are capable of 1) providing personalized 
services, 2) reducing healthcare cost, 3) ensuring easy access 
regardless of time and place, 4) ensuring consistent quality of 
services 
over 
time, 
5) 
enabling 
automated 
data 
collection/analysis, and 6) demonstrating the potential for 
having more honest self-reporting by patients [11]. Many e-
health applications have been used for online healthcare 
education [10], healthcare research [11] and recruitment of 
its participants [12], collecting healthcare data for research or 
national healthcare purposes, and conducting healthcare 
interventions to facilitate disease prevention, disease self-
management, and health promotion [13].
Most
e-health applications provide
several of the 
following functionalities: 1) self-assessment or self-profiling 
to recognize individuals’ health-related status and in turn 
provide personalized messages and/or healthcare services, 2) 
continuous 
communication 
with 
patients/users 
using 
interactive tools such as online trackers, and 3) wide 
dissemination of information related to health and safety, 
presented in text and/or multimedia format. To accomplish 
the purposes of e-health applications, on one hand, detailed 
monitoring is critical to confirm that e-health applications are 
used correctly and to validate their efficacy. In order to do so, 
e-health applications must collect detailed, and often 
identifiable, user data including health information. On the 
other hand, the protection of user privacy is however critical 
since e-health applications often deal with very sensitive 
private data, including health status, medical records, and 
family health histories. Control over the sharing of this 
information is of the utmost importance and urgency because 
indiscriminate monitoring, if inconsiderate of user privacy, 
may result in private health data being used for unwanted 
purposes and/or shared with unknown people [1][14][15]. In 
case of e-health applications, even generic usage data can be 
damaging if disclosed. For example, disclosure of the login 
frequency into an online treatment application for substance 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

abuse can unintentionally reveal a user’s medical status. 
Consequently, it is urgent and critical for research to 
examine how we can simultaneously achieve these two 
important yet opposing goals -- monitoring identifiable user 
data while protecting user privacy.
To enable e-health applications to conduct trustworthy 
user monitoring without concern for loss of privacy, in this 
paper, we propose a new Privacy-Preserving online 
Monitoring (PPoM) framework. In the PPoM framework, 
online monitoring services collect user/usage data based on 
users’ policies and users can verify user/usage data being 
monitored and strictly enforce user policies on the client 
side. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In 
Section II, the requirements for secure online monitoring in 
e-health applications are identified. In Section III, PPoM 
framework is proposed and the overall architecture is 
described. For better understand of practical use, in Section 
IV, operation flows and example use cases are described in 
detail. In Section V, evaluation plans are presented. Section 
VI reports on the related work. The conclusions and future 
work are presented in Section VII.
II.
LIMITATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS
A.
Limitations
Existing online monitoring approaches on e-health 
applications have two major problems, as follows:
1)
Lack of systemactic methods to verify and enforce 
privacy policies mutually agreed by users and providers:    
To protect user privacy during online monitoring, a user 
needs to specify his/her preference in data disclosure while 
the administrators of an e-health application specify their 
privacy policy describing what kinds of user data might be 
monitored, what those data are used for, who those data will 
be shared with, and how user data are maintained. Users and 
administrators can specify their policies using policy 
languages such as P3P [19] and WS-XACML [20]. Once a 
user agrees to an application’s policies, the enforcement of 
agreed policies has been primarily relied on the honor 
system [16] within the application without any external 
verification process. To ensure user privacy, the federal 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) [17] stipulates that a healthcare component must 
not disclose protected health information to another 
component (HIPAA 164.105.(a)(ii)) with only a few 
exceptions (HIPAA 164.512). However, it is difficult to 
expose violations of HIPAA regulations within e-health 
applications in existing approach. If a provider embeds 
monitoring code and/or third-party data-collecting ads in its 
webpages, private data can easily be released regardless of 
users’ wishes. Although this is an obvious violation of 
HIPAA rules, there are no solutions to systematically detect 
the application’s fraud and prevent user data from 
undesirable use and disclosure.
To protect user privacy from undesirable use, some 
online applications anonymize/de-identify user data by 
deleting identifiers in original data but such anonymized data 
can often be re-identified/de-anonymized [18]. It is hence not 
enough to hide user identifiers and we need a new method 
not to share critical information based on user preferences. In 
addition, anonymization might not be applicable to some e-
health applications that require identifiable user data for 
personalized services. Without a strong enforcement method,
many users are unlikely to consent to online monitoring.
2)
Need for professional IT knowledge and skills: At 
present, professional IT knowledge is needed for developing 
e-health applications with appropriate privacy-preserving 
monitoring. For example, to specify privacy policies of an e-
health application, an application administrator must 
understand privacy policy languages, such as P3P [19] or 
WS-XACML [20] and be able to precisely specify the 
application’s policy in that language. In addition, to use an 
online 
monitoring 
service, 
the 
administrator 
must 
understand the client-side monitoring code (e.g.,
in 
JavaScript), and be able to manually insert privacy-
preserving code into the original source code (possibly 
using different languages) for each web object or webpage 
being monitored. Hence, administrators of e-health 
applications need to understand at least one language to 
integrate privacy-preserving monitoring into applications. 
This is however an impractical expectation for many non-IT 
administrators, such as doctors, nurses, health educators and 
communicators. Not only for non-IT clinical staff who 
manage e-health applications but also for average users who 
use e-health applications, it is difficult to exactly specify 
privacy policies and enable their applications/browsers to 
protect user privacy. The lack of IT knowledge of 
administrators 
and 
users 
of 
e-health 
applications 
significantly increases the need for easy-to-use tools for a 
privacy-preserving framework.
B.
Requirements
Towards trustworthy and highly usable online monitoring 
in e-health applications, the following requirements should 
be satisfied:
1)
For strict enforcement of user privacy policies
·
Online monitoring services that are aware of user 
privacy policies rather than application policies.
·
Verification methods to ensure that an application 
complies with policies mutually agreed by providers 
and users on user side.
·
Enforcement methods to protect user privacy on user 
side in case of privacy violation during online 
monitoring.
2)
For practical use by non-IT users and staff
·
User-friendly interfaces to intuitively specify privacy 
policies and monitoring objects.
·
Automatic generation of privacy policies for e-health 
applications.
·
Automatic 
conversion 
of 
existing 
e-health 
applications to privacy-preserving applications in 
which privacy-aware monitoring code is embedded.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 1. Overall architecture of PPoM framework.
III.
OVERALL ARCHITECTURE
To fulfill the requirements described above, in this paper, 
we propose a new PPoM framework that rigorously protects 
user privacy by referring user policies and enforcing them on 
user side. For convenient and easy adoption by e-health 
application providers, PPoM includes easy-to-use tools for 
users and providers. The overall architecture of PPoM 
framework is shown in Figure 1. The detailed descriptions 
for each component are following:
A.
PPoM Service
The problems of existing online monitoring services are 
twofold. First, users are forced to choose between two 
options: opt-in or opt-out, and not allowed to choose data to 
be monitored in fine-grained level. Second, user data are 
collected based on the decision of providers. Once a user 
gives consent to monitoring (opt-in), all user activities on the 
web objects in which monitoring code is embedded are 
captured regardless of users’ privacy preferences. None of 
existing services considers users’ privacy preferences during 
monitoring.
To address the issue of ignorance of user preferences 
during monitoring, we propose a PPoM service that gathers 
only authorized user/usage data that users allow to monitor. 
By specifying privacy policies, users determine which data 
can be monitored. User policies will be then enforced by a 
trustworthy third-party monitoring service, the PPoM 
service. Using the PPoM service, e-health applications can 
guarantee effective protection of user privacy by providing a 
way to enforce user policies in a systematic manner rather 
than simply providing a written agreement. The concrete 
enforcement framework assists both monitoring services and 
e-health applications in building better reputations and 
accelerates active participation in e-health applications 
without concerns about privacy leakage. In addition, it can 
be used to compel and enable e-health applications to obey 
HIPAA regulations.
B.
Privacy-Preserving User Browser
If an e-health application is trustworthy and both users 
and administrators can correctly specify their own policies, 
then existing approach may be able to guarantee secure 
online monitoring. However, this protection presumes the 
application’s honesty and the user’s ability to specify privacy 
policies precisely. Let us assume that an e-health application 
publishes untrusted policies that differ from its actual 
monitoring behavior. Once user’s policies and the 
application’s policies are matched, a user will start 
interaction with the dishonest application and his browser 
will send unconsented data to the application.
However, user privacy must be protected even if a user is 
exposed to untrustworthy parties, such as indiscriminate 
monitoring/analytics services that conduct online monitoring 
in violation of user privacy, naïve applications that do not 
have their own privacy policies or dishonest applications that 
write and/or enforce their policies dishonestly. To address 
the above security requirement, we propose a PPoM-enabled 
web browser (in short, PPoM browser) as a user-side 
protection. For easy adoption, we plan to implement a 
browser extension that enables existing browsers (e.g., 
Explorer and Chrome) to perform following tasks:
1)
It presents all user data being monitored by online 
monitoring service(s) in web pages: A PPoM browser 
displays all monitoring data and recipients of data on the 
screen by analysing source code of web pages.
2)
It allows a user to decide which usage and his/her 
data can be disclosed: A PPoM browser inspects data types, 
data values, and destinations of all outgoing message 
according to user policies. If it detects malicious monitoring 
that violates user policies, it alerts a user to unauthorized 
monitoring. For example, if the user decides to disclose 
his/her medical history to a first-party (e.g., an e-health 
application website), then a PPoM browser only allows 
outgoing messages to the e-health application and blocks 
other messages to other entities (such as ad companies or 
social networking sites) even if the application does not 
have its own privacy policy or inserts monitoring code to 
collect his/her medical history data.
3)
It refines the user’s privacy policies based on 
updated user preferences: If a user’ privacy policies are 
naïve or incorrect, the proposed approach based on user 
policies cannot protect user privacy successfully. However, 
It is very difficult for average users to specify precise 
privacy policies because it is hard to understand the 
correlation between description of user data in privacy 
Application 
Converter
4b
2b
3
6
5
Privacy-Preserving Online Monitoring Tool 
(PPoMT)
Application-specific 
Monitoring
Code
Privacy Policy 
Generator
2a
4a
Policy 
Miner
In-page
Selector
AP
PPoM
Browser
Privacy-aware 
Monitoring
APIs
UP
7a
page
Privacy-Preserving Online 
Monitoring Service
e-Health
Application
Application
Administrator
1
User
Monitoring
Code Generator
PPoM
Browser
7b
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

policies and web objects in web pages. To enhance the 
proposed PPoM framework, a PPoM browser allows users 
to refine their preferred policies by intuitively selecting 
what user/usage data can be monitored in web pages.
C.
Privacy-Preserving Online Monitoring Tool
As pointed out in Section II. A, it is difficult for non-IT 
administrators to have professional IT knowledge and skills 
that necessary for trustworthy online monitoring. In this 
paper, we propose the PPoM Tools (PPoMT) to help health 
professionals. PPoMT enables non-IT clinical staff to specify 
privacy policies for their healthcare applications, and/or to 
easily convert their applications into privacy-preserving 
applications that analyze user/usage data without violating 
user privacy. While motivated by the needs of non-IT 
administrators, this tool could also improve the efficiency of 
developers who are required to insert monitoring code into 
their applications. The PPoMT consists of four individual 
tools: the In-page Selector, the Monitoring Code Generator, 
the Privacy Policy Generator, and the Application Converter. 
The detailed explanations for each tool are following:
1)
In-page Selector: It is a server-side software module 
that is capable of generating modified webpages that have 
user-friendly interfaces for selection of web objects to be 
monitored and corresponding policies and delivering user 
selections to the Privacy Policy Generator and the 
Monitoring Code Generator. It sends modified webpages to 
the PPoM browser of an administrator. By clicking on web 
objects that are displayed in the PPoM browser (e.g., a 
button, link, text, image, or video), the administrator can 
select which objects to monitor without any IT knowledge 
and skills. Additionally, he can declare corresponding 
privacy policies.
2)
Monitoring Code Generator: It generates privacy-
aware monitoring code by receiving an administrator’s 
selection on monitoring objects and associated privacy 
policies from the In-page Selector. The generated code will 
be varied depending on monitoring services.
3)
Privacy 
Policy 
Generator: 
It 
helps 
non-IT 
administrators who may be unfamiliar with online privacy 
policy languages publish privacy policies for their own 
applications. Using the Policy Miner, it derives the privacy 
policies for a given application by analyzing all monitoring 
objects and corresponding privacy policies that are selected 
by the administrator.
4)
Application Converter: It helps non-IT administrators 
to update source code of an existing application by assisting 
them in inserting the privacy-aware monitoring code 
generated by the Monitoring Code Generator. Once the code 
modifications are made, an administrator needs to deploy 
the modified source code in their server.
IV.
PRIVACY-PRESERVING MONITORING USING PPOM
In this section, we explain how PPoM protects user 
privacy during online monitoring and supports non-IT 
administrators and users by describing operation flows and 
example use cases from the point of view of administrators 
and users.
A.
For online healthcare providers
Let us assume that Alice, a medical doctor, administrates 
an e-health application that assesses the impact to people 
following exposure to traumatic events. To trace patients’ 
activities and collect health-related data, Alice wants to 
conduct online monitoring on her applications, but it is 
impossible for her to use existing online monitoring services 
due to lack of IT-related knowledge.
E-health Application
(Administrator)
Monitoring Service
In-page Selector
adds check boxes 
and drop-down lists 
to web objects in 
pages
Establish a service 
agreement 
Establish a service 
agreement 
Request a monitoring service
Mutual agreements
PPoM-enabled application
PPoMT
{OR}
Monitoring Code 
Generator creates 
privacy-aware 
monitoring code
Application Converter 
transforms an existing 
application to an PPoM-
enabled application 
Updated source code 
Insert the privacy-
aware monitoring 
code into an 
application
Privacy Policy 
Generator creates 
the policies of an 
application (AP)
AP
AP
S
S´
Application  policies (AP)
An administrator 
selects objects to 
be monitored and 
corresponding 
policies through 
his PPoM browser
Application-specific privacy-aware monitoring code
Original source code 
S´
(1)
(2a)
(2b)
(4)
(3)
(5)
Figure 2. Operation flow of administrators of e-health applications in PPoM.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

If she uses the PPoMT, she can easily transform her 
application into a monitoring-enabled application without 
any IT knowledge. For better understanding, let us look at its 
operational flow in detail. First, she needs to upload the 
source code of her application or enter the URL(s) of the 
application’s webpage(s). Second, she selects objects to be 
monitored through the user-friendly interfaces generated by 
the In-page Selector, and specifies corresponding privacy 
policies (Figure 1.(1) and Figure 2.(2)). Third, her selections 
are delivered to the Policy Generator (Figure 1.(2a) and 
2.(2a)) and the Monitoring Code Generator (Figure 1.(2b) 
and Figure 2.(2b)). Forth, the Privacy Policy Generator then 
creates the applications’ policies by analyzing selected 
monitoring data and policies, while the Application 
Converter (which enables the application to perform privacy-
preserving monitoring by inserting monitoring code 
generated by the Monitoring Code Generator into the 
original source code (Figure 1.(3) and Figure 2.(4)) produces 
the updated source code. Fifth, Alice deploys the created 
application policies (Figure 1.(4a) and Figure 2.(3)) and the 
updated source code in the application server (Figure 1.(4b) 
and Figure 2.(5)).
B.
For Users
Let us assume that Bob is one of Alice’s patients. Alice 
recommends Bob to use her e-health application every week 
to assess his mental and physical health but he hesitates to 
use the application due to privacy concern. If Bob uses the 
PPoM browser, he may want to use an e-health application 
without privacy loss. Towards this, Bob is first required to
specify his own privacy policies and store his policies in his 
browser before using an e-health application (Figure 3.(1)). 
His PPoM browser then compares his privacy policies and 
application policies when he enters a url of Alice’s 
application (Figure 3.(2)). If they match, the application 
server sends PPoM-enabled pages which privacy-aware 
monitoring code is embed in (Figure 1.(5)(6) and Figure 
3.(3)). As he interacts with the application, the PPoM 
browser displays all user/usage data being monitored to 
enable users to verify privacy protection during online 
monitoring (Figure 3.(4)). If there is no privacy violation, the 
privacy-aware monitoring code collects only authorized user 
data according to policies of him specified by him for the 
sake of himself (Figure 1.(7a)(7b) and Figure 3.(5)). To 
ensure enforcement of user policies, his PPoM browser 
blocks outgoing messages that violate his privacy policies on 
the user side (Figure 3.(6)).
User
PPoM Browser
E-health Application
(Administrator)
Privacy-Preserving
Monitoring Service
User 
privacy-
preserving 
online 
monitoring
Check if an application's 
policies match with user 
policies 
Render a page with user data 
being monitored in privacy-
preserving mode
Generate 
user policies 
IF not match, 
stop the interaction 
UP
UP
Check if 
match with 
the intended 
preference 
Refine user policies with 
fine-grained user selection 
UP´
Negotiate with the application 
using the refined user policies
Check outgoing user data 
IF match, request a page
IF match, 
start interaction 
IF not match
IF violate user policies, 
block outgoing msg
IF not violate user policies, send user data
User policies (UP)
Request an application's policy
Enter a URL
User data
AP
IF succeed
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Figure 3. Operation flow of users in PPoM.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

V.
EVALUATION PLAN
To evaluate the performance of the proposed privacy-
preserving monitoring service, we will calculate the ratio of 
the number of all monitoring data (a+c in Table I) to the 
number of unauthorized but collected data (c in Table I). In 
addition, we will also test the successful blockade ratio of the 
number of messages containing unauthorized data (g+h in 
Table II) to the number of blocked messages among them (g
in Table II). We will plan to test the developed tool, PPoMT, 
by comparing a user’s selections of monitorable data and 
corresponding privacy preferences with monitoring scripts or 
source code that generated by PPoMT. To evaluate the 
correctness of the generated privacy policies, we will create a 
variety of anticipated privacy policies, use PPoMT to 
generate privacy policies, and compare the resulting policies 
with the anticipated policies.
TABLE I. 
USER DATA MONITORED BY THE PROPOSED PRIVACY-
PRESERVING MONITORING SERVICE
Monitored
Not monitored
Allowed
a
b
Not allowed
c
d
TABLE II. 
OUTGOING MESSAGES FROM A PROPOSED USER AGENT
Sent
Blocked
Allowed
e
f
Not allowed
g
h
VI.
RELATED WORK
A.
Provider-side privacy protection for online monitoring
To guarantee secure user monitoring, a few methods have 
been proposed by providers of online applications and 
monitoring services. Some third-party advertising companies 
have voluntarily begun to insert an ‘Adchoices’ icon into 
their ads to increase user awareness of online tracking. 
However, it has been found that the icon was not very 
effective at making users aware of tracking occurrences [21]. 
As a middleware approach, Privad [22][23] is proposed to 
conceal a user’s activities from an advertising network by 
interposing an anonymizing proxy between the browser and 
the ad network. However, the adoption of a proxy-based 
middleware may not be a feasible solution to small-size e-
health 
applications 
because 
of 
its 
huge 
overhead 
requirements. In addition, it is useless if an e-health 
application requires identifiable user data to analyze 
performance of applications at the individual level.
B.
User-side privacy protection for online monitoring
1)
Browser-based approaches: To protect user privacy 
in user side, browser-based approaches have been proposed. 
Adnostic [24], a browser extension, is capable of behavioral 
profiling and targeting in users’ browsers to select effective 
ads while not sending user data to third-party ad companies. 
RePriv [25] enables browsers to conduct user interest 
mining and only share the resulting encapsulated interests 
with third-parties. Both Adnostic and RePriv have only 
focused on targeted advertising and/or personalization but 
have not considered online monitoring services. As a simple 
solution to indiscriminate online monitoring, using opt-out 
cookies and/or a blocked-application list have been 
recommended. Opt-out cookies are, however, fragile 
because they can be easily disabled or deleted by a third 
party [26][27]. Setting a block list in a browser can 
effectively block malicious applications but currently this 
approach blocks any listed application in its entirety and 
does not support fine-grained blocking at the data level.
2)
Policy-based 
approaches:
As 
a 
policy-based 
protection approach, Privacy Bird [28] has been proposed. It 
is a P3P user agent that reads P3P policies of online 
applications and lets users know whether the application 
policies and user preferences are matched. If policies are not 
matched, a bird icon turns red. A user can get information 
by clicking on a red bird icon. However, Privacy Bird is 
only able to check the acceptability of application’s P3P 
policies, so users cannot check all user data monitored at the 
application’s data level.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The lack of reliable and effective methods of privacy 
protection has been the biggest obstacle to the growth of e-
Health applications. Without a suitable solution, people keep 
hesitating to use e-Health applications, even though those 
applications help users access healthcare services in easy and 
convenient way at the reduced cost. To address the privacy 
protection issue above, in this paper, we proposed the PPoM
framework that protects user privacy in both the application 
side and the user side so that secure online monitoring can be 
guaranteed in the entire process of online monitoring. We 
believe that PPoM accelerates practical use of e-health 
applications. Towards this goal, a few challenges need to be 
pursued in the future:
·
Development of the privacy policies to specify 
preferences on healthcare data in fine-grained level. 
·
Development of a privacy-preserving monitoring 
service that protects user privacy based on user 
policies.
·
Development of the PPoM browser and tools. 
·
Performance 
tests 
on 
the 
other 
individual 
components and an integrated component and a field 
test associated with actual clinical trials.  
·
Development of a threat model for PPoM and 
security test using a threat model. 
REFERENCES
[1]
J. R. Mayer and J. C. Mitchell, “Third-Party Web Tracking: Policy 
and Technology,” Proc. IEEE Symp. on Security and Privacy (SP 
'12), IEEE Press, 2012, pp. 413-427, 2012, doi=10.1109/SP.
[2]
B. A. Schroeder, “On-line monitoring: A tutorial,” IEEE Computer, 
vol. 28, no. 6, pp. 72-78, 1995.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[3]
N. Schmucker, “Web Tracking,” SNET2 Seminar Paper (Online),
2011. http://www.snet.tu-berlin.de/fileadmin/fg220/courses/SS11/snet 
-project/web-tracking_schmuecker.pdf [retrieved: June, 2015].
[4]
Google 
Analytics. 
http://www.google.com/analytics/index.html
[retrieved: June, 2015].
[5]
Adobe 
Analytics. 
http://www.adobe.com/sea/solutions/digital-
analytics.html [retrieved: June, 2015].
[6]
M. N. K. Boulos et al., “CAALYX: a new generation of location-
based services in healthcare,” Int. J. Health. Geogr., vol. 6, no. 1,
March 2007, pp. 1-6, doi:10.1186/1476-072X-6-9.
[7]
C. Hoelscher and H. Dietrich, “E-Commerce Personalization and 
Real-Time Site Monitoring,” in Designing personalized user 
experiences in eCommerce, Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2004, pp. 
95-117.
[8]
C. L. Borgman, S. G. Hirsh, and J. Hiller, “Rethinking online 
monitoring methods for information retrieval systems: from search 
product to search process,” J. Assoc. Inf. Sci. Technol., vol. 47, no. 7, 
pp. 568-583, July 1996. 
[9]
G. Eysenbach, “What is e-health?,” J. Med. Internet. Res., vol.3, no.
2, 2001.
[10] J. M. Bernhardt and J. Hubley, “Health education and the Internet: the 
beginning of a revolution,” Health. Educ. Res., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 
643-645, 2001.
[11] E. M. Daley, R. J. McDermott, K. R. B. McCormack, and M. J. 
Kittleson, “Conducting web-based survey research: a lesson in 
internet designs,” Am. J. Health. Behav., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 116-24, 
Mar-Apr 2003.
[12] D. F. Duncan, J. B. White, and T. Nicholson, “Using Internet-based 
Surveys to Reach Hidden Populations: Case of Nonabusive Illicit 
Drug Users,” Am. J. Health. Behav., vol. 27, issue 3, pp. 208-218, 
May-Jun 2003.
[13] K. E. Evers, “eHealth promotion: the use of the Internet for health 
promotion,” Am. J. Health. Behav., vol. 20, issue 4, pp. 1-7, Mar-Apr 
2006.
[14] M. Bilenko and M. Richardson, “Predictive client-side profiles for 
personalized advertising,” Proc. ACM SIGKDD conf. on Knowledge 
discovery and data mining (KDD '11), ACM New York, 2011, pp. 
413-421.
[15] A. McDonald and L. F. Cranor, “Beliefs and Behaviors: Internet 
Users' Understanding of Behavioral Advertising,” TPRC 2010 Social 
Science Research Network (SSRN), August 16, 2010, pp. 1-31,   
http://ssrn.com/abstract=1989092.
[16] Wikipedia, “The Honor System,” http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Honor 
_system [retrieved: June, 2015].
[17] U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Office for Civil 
Rights, “HIPAA Administrative Simplification Regulation Text, 45 
CFR Parts 160, 162, and 164 amended through March 26,” 2013, pp. 
1-115, 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/administrative/privacy
rule/adminsimpregtext.pdf.
[18] P. Ohm, “Broken Promises of Privacy: Responding to the Surprising 
Failure of Anonymization,” UCLA Law Review, vol. 57, pp. 1701-
2010, August 2009. 
[19] P3P 1.1. http://www.w3.org/TR/P3P11/ [retrieved: June, 2015].
[20] WS-XACML 1.0. http://xml.coverpages.org/Anderson-WS-XACML 
v10.pdf [retrieved: June, 2015].
[21] M. Hastak and M. J. Culnan, “Online Behavioral Advertising “Icon” 
Study,” 
Future 
of 
Privacy 
Forum 
(online), 
2010,  
http://www.futureofprivacy.org/2010/02/15/online-behavioral-
advertising-icon-study [retrieved: June, 2015].
[22] S. Guha, B. Cheng, and P. Francis, “Privad: practical privacy in 
online advertising,” Proc. USENIX conf. on Networked systems 
design and implementation (NSDI'11), USA, 2011, pp. 169-182.
[23] A. Reznichenko, S. Guha, and P. Francis, “Auctions in do-not-track 
compliant internet advertising,” Proc. ACM conf. on Computer and 
communications security (CCS '11), New York, 2011, pp. 667-676, 
doi=10.1145/2046707.2046782.
[24] V. Toubiana, H. Nissenbaum, A. Narayanan, S. Barocas, and D. 
Boneh, “Adnostic: Privacy Preserving Targeted Advertising,” Proc. 
Symp. on Network and Distributed System Security, March 2010, pp. 
1-21.
[25] M. Fredrikson and B. Livshits, “REPRIV: Re-Envisioning In-
Browser Privacy,” Proc. IEEE Symp. on Security and Privacy, May 
2011, pp. 1-15.
[26] P. Leon et al., “Why Johnny can't opt out: a usability evaluation of 
tools to limit online behavioral advertising,” Proc. ACM Conf. on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI '12), USA, 2012, pp. 
589-598, doi=10.1145/2207676.2207759.
[27] M. Ayenson, D. J. Wambach, A. Soltani, N. Good, and C. J. 
Hoofnagle, “Flash cookies and privacy II: Now with HTML5 and 
etag respawning,” Social Science Research Network, July 
2011, 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.1898390.
[28] Privacy Bird, http://www.privacybird.org [retrieved: June, 2015].    
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

