A Transition towards Digital Home Visits in Social Care and Home Health Care 
during the Corona Pandemic 
 
 
Karin Ahlin 
Computer and System Sciences 
Mid Sweden University 
Östersund, Sweden 
e-mail: karin.ahlin@miun.se 
 
 
 
Magnus Zingmark 
Health and Social Care Administration 
Östersunds City, Sweden 
e-mail: 
magnus.zingmark@ostersund.se 
 
 
 
Thomas Persson Slumpi 
Computer and System Sciences 
Mid Sweden University Östersund, 
Sweden 
e-mail: thomas.persson@miun.se 
 
Abstract— During the pandemic, physical meetings were 
supposed to decrease as much as possible to avoid the virus to 
spread. Before the pandemic, the physical meeting favoured 
social care and home health care in Sweden. One solution was 
to digitize as many of these meetings as possible. Therefore, we 
investigated this transition in a web survey, including questions 
with predetermined and open-ended answers. The web-survey 
was sent to co-workers in home health care and social care in a 
middle-seized municipality in Sweden. The results showed that 
not all meetings could be transformed, like meetings with 
citizens with hearing or cognitive impairments. Challenges 
related to the transformation were instability in technical 
equipment, the professionals’ and citizens’ knowledge of 
handling technical equipment, and access to technical 
equipment support. Despite this did the co-workers digitize 
meetings whenever possible, adding operational and problem-
solving attitude to the transformation. Due to this study’s 
limitation, like respondents from one municipality and the 
pandemic’s length, we intend to investigate further and 
understand the development of the transformation and how 
knowledge in the area increases. 
Keywords- digitization; social care; home health care; pandemic; 
physical meeting; digital meetings. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In Sweden, the municipalities have the responsibility to 
provide social care and, to some extent, home health 
care.  As a consequence of social distancing during the 
corona pandemic, ordinary home visits in social care and 
home health care needed to be reduced in Swedish 
municipalities. To compensate for this reduction in meetings 
In Real Life (IRL), digital technology for communication 
and meetings could be considered an alternative as a way of 
upholding continuity in an extraordinary situation [1][2]. 
However, before the corona pandemic, digital technology 
was only used to a limited extent by professionals in 
municipality-based social care and home health care in 
Sweden [3]. Some of the implementations and deployments 
of digital technology have also been criticized for being 
more of an end in itself than means for improved care [4]. It 
has also been found that turning a physical event into a 
digital one requires adaptation [5][6], to overcome 
challenges.  
Some of the general challenges to use of digital 
technology that have been reported are problems with 
technical equipment, knowledge on how to handle technical 
equipment, access to support for technical equipment, and 
support from management [7]. Specific challenges in the 
domain of social care and home health care are privacy 
while communicating and caretakers’ access to individually 
adjusted technical equipment [3]. Added to these challenges 
is the process of transition from physical meeting to digital 
meeting where not all meetings can be transformed and 
maintain high quality.  
Thus, in the transition from traditional IRL home visits to 
ICT-based (Information and Communications Technology) 
home visits, there is a need to better understand challenges 
experienced by professionals in social care and home health, 
how they deal with these challenges and how they 
experience the possibility to digitize meetings. Therefore, 
the purpose of this study was to explore the transition 
toward increased use of digital home visits in social care 
and home health care in a Swedish municipality. 
The paper is organized as follows: Section II presents a 
literature review on digital transformation and its 
challenges, Section III contains the method, and Section IV 
the results from the survey. Section V is a discussion, 
referring to the results and the literature review followed by 
the conclusion in Section VI.  
 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Digital technologies have been found possessing a great 
transformative power, affecting the ways we communicate, 
consume, and create [8]. It has even been established those 
digital technologies no longer just can be viewed as 
mirroring the physical reality, but in some cases are what 
shapes the physical reality [9]. The digital transformation is 
therefore an established concept that [10] propose the 
following definition for: 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Digital transformation is a holistic effort to revise core 
processes and services of government beyond the traditional 
digitization efforts. It evolves along a continuum of transition 
from analog to digital to a full stack review of policies, 
current processes, and user needs and results in a complete 
revision of the existing and the creation of new digital 
services. The outcome of digital transformation efforts 
focuses among others on the satisfaction of user needs, new 
forms of service delivery, and the expansion of the user base. 
[10, p.12] 
Even though digital technologies have a transformative 
power, the actual transformation will not start on its own. 
There are several different challenges that need to be 
addressed for the transformation to take place.    
One challenge is for the users to adjust to the new digital 
setting [6]. The authors of [11] discuss the importance of 
assigning time for negotiation of boundaries and form 
adaptation strategies, such as how many participants can 
take part in a digital activity. Another important part is to 
practice and become familiar and comfortable with the 
approach, like putting on and using the camera. The users 
can partly get familiar with the technology through 
preparation- and familiarization activities [11] or practice 
sessions [12]. The users can also become familiar by 
adjusting, redesigning, or creating whole new versions of 
the activity to align with the digital technology used [1] 
[12]. The users need to become what [13][14] label 
technology ready. However, the authors of [7] argue that 
technology readiness is no longer a fundamental challenge. 
The argument for this is, according to [7] that those digital 
technologies have become a natural part in both the 
workplace and the private sphere. People have simply 
become more experienced in using this type of technology. 
However, there are also studies that indicates that 
technology readiness still is a big challenge [11][12][15] 
[16][17].    
A second challenge is to make everyone socially present 
[18]. In a physical meeting, the social presence comes 
naturally as you occupy a physical space with your body. In 
digital meetings presence does not come as easily. There is a 
great chance that participants become blind and invisible to 
one another [19]. The lack of presence can emerge from 
having problems in participating in discussions [5] or 
feeling removed from the discussions all together [2]. But 
also, according to [15], due to lack of cues, difficulties in 
determining who was speaking, and difficulties in capturing 
others´ attention. Everyone needs to be involved [2][15].  
 Several research works, such as [7][20] emphasize the 
instability in the technology itself as the most evident 
challenge. Instability in technology creates disturbances and 
one way of avoiding unnecessary disturbances is to follow 
the advice of [21] and keep technology simple, but also 
clarify the technological requirements [13]. Even though 
technology is kept simple, disturbances might still occur like 
problems with the audio [2][12][13][15] different forms of 
lag [5], computer freezes [2], slow Internet connection [13], 
slow up-date [2], fragmentation or delays in screen sharing 
[15], loss of access to online spaces [11], etc. Disturbances 
might be due to the technology as such, but might also be 
due to a lack of knowledge of how to manage the technology 
[6][16]. Thus, it is necessary to plan for support [2][20][21]. 
Because even if the case is that all involved might be skilled 
users of technology, issues might arise that the users cannot 
solve on their own. The support might also concern, besides 
traditional troubleshooting of the technology used [11], 
setting up the new environment and its content [12][15].  
A fourth challenge is directly related to the last part of the 
section above because management has an important role 
not only in the shaping of fundamental premises for distance 
collaboration [7][19], but making all users visible. In fact, 
[19] argue that good management is one of the most critical 
factors in distance collaboration. 
 
III. 
METHOD 
To address the purpose of the study, a web-based survey 
was conducted during April 2020. The study was conducted 
in a mid-sized Swedish municipality with approximately 
64000 citizens. The municipality is sparsely populated, 
beside one city, two smaller communities and a vast rural 
area. In addition to the responsibility for social care 
including home care and special housing, the municipality´s 
health and social care administration also had the 
responsibility for home health care for citizens with a high 
level of care needs, e.g., for citizens with extensive home 
care or special housing. The professionals involved in the 
provision of social care and home health care were district 
nurses/nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists and 
social workers working and care staff. 
A. Procedure and Data Collection 
The respondents included in this study were district 
nurses/nurses, physiotherapists, occupational therapists and 
social workers working within the health and social care 
administration. A web-based survey was distributed by 
email through managers in the organization to all 
physiotherapists, 
district 
nurses/nurses, 
occupational 
therapists and social workers (i.e., the professional 
conducting needs assessment before social care is granted). 
The survey included questions related to access to and 
knowledge about ICT and views on possibilities and 
challenges toward using ICT. The survey included questions 
with fixed answers, as well as open-ended questions. The 
survey questions are included in Appendix 1.  
In all, 82 professionals responded to the survey: district 
nurse/nurse (n=21), physiotherapist (n=16), occupational 
therapist (n=26), social worker (n=19). The majority worked 
within home care (n=46), in special housing (n=14), with 
clients with developmental disabilities (n=19), with daily 
living support for clients with neuropsychiatric diagnosis 
(n=2). 
B. Analysis 
The questions with predetermined alternatives for 
answers were analyzed and presented with descriptive 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

statistics [22]. These questions were focused on which 
modes of communication the respondent had access to, e.g., 
telephone by landline, smartphone, laptop, stationary 
computer, and how he/she had used the different modes of 
communication. The three open-ended questions discuss 
possible meetings to digitize, meetings viewed as not 
possible to digitize, and challenges while digitizing 
meetings. The three open-ended questions were initially 
approached on an overall level to get familiar to the answers 
[23]. After our initial analysis, we further explored the 
material and categorized answers. The categorization was 
based on the answers, reflecting an inductive analysis [24]. 
This detailed analysis gave us a deeper understanding of the 
material and, e.g., for the question about meeting possible to 
digitize, gave us thirty-four categories, ranging from the 
interprofessional meetings without citizens to recruitment 
interviews.  
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The descriptive statistics include the answers to questions 
about access to equipment, experience in using different 
modes of communication, and potential in using ICT. The 
answers to the open-ended questions include views on 
possible and meetings not possible to transform, as well as 
hindrances in transforming meetings. 
A. Access to ICT and potential to use ICT 
Overall, access to different types of equipment for 
communication was good; all respondents reported access to 
at least one piece of technical equipment that allowed digital 
communication. Eighty-one (99%) respondents had access 
to a smartphone, 63 respondents (64%) had access to a 
laptop, 34 respondents (41%) had access to a stationary 
computer, 33 respondents (40%) had access to a telephone 
by landline.  
All professionals had access to some type of 
communication software; we found the type varied across 
participants. One was Microsoft Outlook for daily use of 
communication via email and calendar bookings and 
another was Skype for business. The latter had been 
available for more than 4 years and Microsoft Teams had 
begun being used during 2019. The professionals used the 
software Procapita for internal communication regarding 
care planning. A larger proportion of the respondents had 
experience in using Microsoft Teams than Skype: for verbal 
calls 23 vs. 2 (altogether 30%), for video calls 38 vs. 4 
(altogether 51%), and for written communication 50 vs. 2 
(altogether 61 %).  
In relation to the question about sufficient knowledge, 
28 respondents (34%) consider that they lacked sufficient 
knowledge about ICT, 22 (27%) that they had sufficient 
knowledge whereas 31 (38%) had good or very good 
knowledge. Twenty-nine respondents (35%) considered that 
they had no access to the equipment required whereas 53 
(65) considered that they had sufficient, good or very good 
access to the equipment required. Thirty-two respondents 
(39%) considered that they had no access to sufficient 
support, 25 (30%) that the support was sufficient and 25 
(30%) that access to support was good or very good. 
 
B. Views on possibilities and challenges 
The qualitative analysis illustrates a clear difference 
between possible meetings and non-possible meetings. The 
proposals for possible meetings from each respondent 
clearly exceed the meetings viewed as not possible to 
digitize. The suggestions for possible meetings are mainly 
internal meetings, where the suggestions include follow-ups, 
planning, and consultations. The limitations described are 
about the citizen not having access to the right technology, 
if the citizen is suffering from cognitive impairment or that 
the home visit includes some form of physical activity such 
as taking care of wounds. 
 
1) Meetings viewed as possible to digitize 
The answers to the questions which meetings could be 
digitized cover all of the described meeting categories, such 
as internal or external personal meetings, staff meetings 
concerning citizens, or meetings with citizens. Many of the 
respondents expressed answers related to three or four 
categories in their answers, implying that the respondents 
have a solution-oriented attitude towards digital meetings. 
Some of them even describe how they are conducting such 
meetings, where one example is assessments:  
“…It doesn't go as fast or with the 
same fingertip feeling, but everyone 
gets help. Assessments are done via 
photo; I write what angles I need and 
body parts that need to be included in 
the picture. Since "my" staff at all the 
accommodations understands and 
appreciate that I do this, it has been 
very good.”  
Among the number of meetings that are listed as 
digitizable, most are meetings where citizens are not 
participants in the meetings, such as interprofessional 
meetings without citizens or professional meetings (only a 
profession). After that, many of the respondents’ state that 
meetings where citizens are discussed, so-called care 
planning, case meetings or follow-up, can be digitized. Even 
meetings that could be considered to need physical 
interaction, home visits, are listed as possible digitizable 
meetings. The conditions specified in the opportunity to 
digitize home visits and other visits with citizens are that 
everyone has access to and knowledge of digital aids and 
that the citizen does not have a hearing impairment or 
suffers from cognitive impairment. Some respondents also 
stressed that meetings with citizens with dementia also can 
be digitized, with help from relatives or home care staff.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

“Citizens who do not have a long-time 
dementia / cognitive impairment and 
can handle a phone. In some cases, 
this can be solved with the help of 
home care staff.” 
Several respondents state that there must not be too 
many participants included in internal meetings, regardless 
of whether they are focused on issues related to citizens or 
purely staff meetings, if these meetings should be possible 
to digitize. 
 
2) Meetings viewed as impossible to digitize 
When it comes to meetings that are viewed as impossible 
to digitize, these mainly relate to meetings with citizens 
where the physical meeting must take place. The 
respondents emphasize several such meetings, like palliative 
care, taking care of wounds, injections, sampling, or testing 
of technical aids at home. In all these meetings, the physical 
meeting was considered a prerequisite for the task to be 
performed and completed satisfactorily for the citizen. 
The meetings that were considered to be somewhat 
possible to digitize were those that were about trying out or 
changing something in relation to technical aids needed in 
the home. The reasoning around these issues indicate that it 
was both a question about assessing practical situations 
related to the home care staff´ tasks, as well as the 
opportunity to try out the technical aid itself. Despite the 
challenges described, one respondent has resolved the need 
for physical meetings during the pandemic as follows:  
“I have solved individual settings for 
technical aids "semi" - I meet the staff 
at the entrance with current aids, set 
up the wheelchair based on the staff's 
description and supervise how the leg 
rests are to be adjusted. I follow up 
from home, if something needs to be 
fixed, we decide the time at the 
entrance when staff comes with the aid 
in question […] The staff is so much 
better now and observant of good/bad 
sitting, for example than ten years 
ago." 
Another respondent describes that there is a need for 
other routines during, for example, delivery of technical aids 
in order to be able to digitize home visits: 
“Testing of aids can be more difficult. 
This includes the delivery of aids that 
today cannot be made to the citizen's 
home but are delivered to the 
prescriber. Sees a potential that some 
testing can take place in the home 
environment depending on; what type 
of aid it is, the support around the 
person and change in delivery options 
for aids.” 
Other meetings that are viewed as difficult to digitize are 
those where the citizen suffers from cognitive or hearing 
impairments. Several respondents are frank on the 
difficulties to digitize such meetings. Another perspective is 
that some respondents view internal staff meetings as not 
suitable to digitize and relate it to the importance of the 
physical contact during and after a meeting. Several 
respondents emphasize education as hard to digitize, both 
for newcomers and education for experienced colleagues. 
One respondent expresses it like this:  
“Training where practical method 
teaching needs to take place, e.g. 
training for substitutes regarding 
transfer and nursing in general, as 
well as training at lifting, product 
display from companies where 
practical screwing, adjustments and 
settings are to be tested.” 
3) Challenges while digitizing meetings 
The respondents emphasize several challenges with 
digitizing meetings, where some of them are technical 
challenges, lack of knowledge, both own knowledge and in 
the citizen, work assignments that cannot be digitized, and 
security.  
  
Technology problems arise when access to the “right” 
technology is missing. Examples include the cases when the 
technology the user is equipped with is too old and heavy, 
or there is a limited access to critical documentation systems 
from outside the workplace, or the network fails on a regular 
basis. Sometimes, these problems force users to find 
workarounds:  
“I come across small things every day 
at work from home that get frustrating 
about technology or anything else that 
limits. For example, I can't get video 
calls on teams via my laptop but I had 
to download teams on the mobile for 
that bit. " 
Another challenge is related to the lack of knowledge of 
how to use technology. Quite a few communicate 
uncertainty when it comes to their own knowledge of 
technology, and that this is a challenge for digitalization. 
Another aspect of lack of knowledge is related to a shifting 
knowledge level within work groups. This causes an 
imbalance between individuals, which hampers efficient use 
of digital technology. A third aspect is citizens’ lack of 
knowledge in combination with a lack of resources, 
especially when it comes to older citizens. They often lack 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

resources, such as Internet connection or the hardware such 
as a computer or tablet. 
Some respondents especially point to older citizens who 
have dementia or other cognitive impairment. These 
impairments cause problems with managing technology or 
even understanding that it is an ongoing meeting when no 
one else is physically present. The quality of the meeting is 
viewed as decreasing and the care workers are afraid of 
losing or misunderstanding important information from the 
citizens.     
“In a profession where a lot is about 
dialogue and getting the citizen's 
perspectives and involving them, it is a 
challenge to get good communication 
and good meetings through distance 
independent technology. This is 
primarily due to the fact that the target 
group of older people generally does 
not feel comfortable with technology, 
and because of some functional 
impairments make it difficult to 
communicate as it is.” 
More often the respondents described the physical 
meetings as the basis for their work and that these cannot be 
changed to digital meetings. The challenges presented are 
mainly two aspects of the physical meeting that it is difficult 
to transfer to the digital meeting. The first is that it is 
challenging to create confidence in digital meetings; for 
example, the body language does not proceed in the same 
way. One respondent frames it like this:  
“Being able to establish a good and 
trusting relationship is a fundamental 
factor in my work, and it can be 
challenging to instil confidence and 
incorporate nuances and people's 
small and physical reactions through 
video and conversation when you have 
not met them.”  
Some of the respondents refer to security as a challenge. 
They refer both to the content of the meeting, such as 
personal information, and to the security requirements 
regarding privacy that software must fulfil. Often, they 
referred to colleagues’ statements, preferable safety officers, 
while discussing security. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Before the corona pandemic, ICT was used, but only to a 
limited extent by professionals in social care and home 
health care in the actual municipality. The rapid shift 
towards a wide-spread use of ICT can thus be considered a 
new initiative in the municipality and as such, the 
community readiness model [25] provides a framework that 
can help us understand to what extent the organization was 
prepared to initiate such change. The results indicate that in 
relation to ICT use, the municipality´s readiness was 
situated towards the earlier phases described in the 
framework. In order to move forward towards enhancing the 
readiness to implement health promoting initiatives, some 
strategies could be helpful. These strategies include 
different modes of informing the community to increase 
knowledge and raise awareness of the issue, e.g., by 
newsletters, media and meetings, conduct local surveys and 
focus groups to discuss issues and identify strategies [26].  
 
Overall, the results indicate that a large proportion of the 
professionals in the context of Swedish social care and 
home health care find ICT a feasible way to conduct 
meetings in face of the corona pandemic. However, based 
on the answers related to the potential in ICT, a lack of 
knowledge, and/or support, reported in 1/3 of the sample, 
seem to be a factor limiting the use of ICT. As indicated by 
a 99% access to smartphones in the sample, it can be argued 
that knowledge and support in how to make optimal use of 
digital technology requires training not just providing 
equipment to the co-workers. This study, like other studies, 
shows that technology readiness is a challenge [2][15] and 
that training and support need to be planned and prioritized. 
The results indicate that practical routines, e.g., how 
technical aids are delivered could be supported by the use of 
ICT. While technical aid could be delivered directly to the 
citizens, the process of practical testing, assessment and 
follow-up could in some instances be made digitally. 
However, issues related to a safe handling of technical aids 
is a complex issue that need to be further explored to ensure 
a high quality of services. 
Instability in technology has been researched and covered 
as one of the most evident challenges for more than one 
decade 
(see, 
e.g. 
[2][20]). Focusing 
on 
the 
rapid 
development of ICT, it is surprising that this is still a major 
challenge in the empirical material, both from the statistics 
and the open-ended questions. Providing respondents with 
stable Internet connection and required equipment shouldn’t 
be a problem these days since it was emphasized earlier by 
[13].   
The empirical material shows that instability in 
technology is handled by work-arounds, even when it is 
necessary to use private equipment. Handling and solving 
the problem is of the highest priority.   
For the 2/3 of the sample who can and are using ICT-
based solutions, social presence is highlighted as an 
important feature of meetings. Therefore, meetings with no 
involvement of the citizens are argued as the easiest to 
digitize, as well as meetings with few participants. In 
contrast, some results indicate that also meetings with 
citizens actually can be digitized. Building on a solution-
oriented attitude towards digital meetings expressed by 
some respondents, it seems as if the question of digitizing 
meetings with citizens is somewhat of a greyzone. If the 
professional is confident in finding ICT-based solutions and 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the citizen has sufficient knowledge or can access support 
from staff or relatives, a wider range of meetings can be 
digitized. One argument for meetings without citizens could 
be that the citizens they meet often suffer from some kind of 
impairment, such as dementia or problems hearing. For 
citizens with functional limitations, their social presence in a 
conversation is often said to require a physical meeting. For 
citizens with functional limitations, the digital meeting 
requires at least colleagues or a relative. Today, social 
presence solely refers to citizens without impairments, 
excluding parts of the population. One argument for not 
digitizing meetings with a lot of participants is that 
everyone’s involvement is at risk [2][15].  
Management support is often referred to as a prerequisite 
for transforming from physical to digital meetings [2] 
[20].  Of interest is therefore that very few of the 
respondents mention management’s support as a challenge. 
One reason for that could be that the initial phase of the 
pandemic required operational action to solve the situation, 
resulting in totally new ways to handle meetings via 
distance collaboration. The drastic change that the pandemic 
entailed forced the individuals to solve their daily 
assignments and there was little time for asking for 
strategies or discussing with managers.  
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
During the pandemic, the transition towards using digital 
meetings, like home visits, in social care and home health 
care in Sweden increased. Therefore, we investigated this 
transition by a web survey including both ended and open-
ended questions. Based on the results from the survey, some 
challenges to use ICT were reported including problems 
with instability in technical equipment, the professionals’ 
and citizens’ knowledge on how to handle technical 
equipment, and access to support for technical equipment. 
Added to this is the process of transition from physical 
meeting to the digital meeting where not all meetings can be 
transformed to keep high quality, such as meeting with 
citizens with hearing or cognitive impairment. Despite these 
challenges, the overall impression was that the respondents 
used digital meetings whenever possible and saw a lot of 
potential in the transition from physical to digital meetings. 
Their handling and perspectives were operational, solving  
problems when they occurred and not waiting for strategies 
or management instructions.   
 
1) Limitations and further research 
This study is limited to one mid-sized municipality in 
Sweden and focuses on some work roles while digitizing 
meetings, such as home visits. The results indicate 
interesting results to dig deeper into to digitization of 
meetings, with or without citizens, as well as what the 
activities that can be conducted during those meetings. As 
such, should this study be viewed as an initial step to dig 
deeper into the digitization and its challenges, as well as 
how they are embraced. Another limitation is that the 
conclusions are based on the co-workers’ impressions after 
a short time period of digitization. Our impression is that 
this knowledge is increased over time and thereby how to 
digitize, as well as what can be digitized. Therefore, is it of 
further interest to detail investigations on various 
perspectives on meetings that can be digitized and the 
challenges related to digitizing them. One way of doing that 
is to focus on one group of work roles, as well as deepen the 
empirical material by interviews. Another interesting focus 
is that of the shown operational bottom-up perspective on 
handling 
the 
digitization 
and 
further 
investigating 
operational, as well as management views on the 
digitization of social care and home care. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Q. Wang, C. Huang, and C. L. Quek, “Students’ Perspectives 
on the Design and Implementation of a Blended Synchronous 
Learning Environment”, Australasian Journal of Educational 
Technology. 2018, 34(1), pp.1-13. 
[2] C. P. White, R. Ramirez, J. G. Smith, and L. Plonowski, 
“Simultaneous Delivery of a Face-To-Face Course to On-Campus 
and Remote Off-Campus Students”, TechTrends. 2010, 54(4), pp. 
34-40. 
[3] The National Board of Health and Welfare. E-health and 
Welfare 
Technology 
in 
the 
Municipalities 
by 
2020, 
https://www.socialstyrelsen.se/globalassets/sharepoint-
dokument/artikelkatalog/ovrigt/2020-5-6779.pdf, 2020.  
[4]  S. Frennert, “Lost in Digitalization? Municipality Employment 
of Welfare Technologies”, Disability and Rehabilitation: Assistive 
Technology. 2019, 4(6), pp. 635-642. 
[5]  P. Rogers, C. R. Graham, R. Rasmussen, J. Olin Campbell, 
and D. M. Ure, “Case 2: Blending Face-To-Face and Distance 
Learners in a Synchronous Class: Instructor and Learner 
Experiences” Quarterly Review of Distance Education. 2003, 4(3), 
pp. 245-51. 
[6] O. Popov, “Teachers’ and Students’ Experiences of 
Simultaneous Teaching in an International Distance and On-
campus Master’s Programme in Engineering “ The International 
Review of Research in Open and Distributed Learning. 2009, 
10(3), pp. 1- 17. 
[7]  P. Bjørn, M. Esbensen, R. E. Jensen, and S. Matthiesen, “Does 
distance still matter? Revisiting the CSCW fundamentals on 
distributed collaboration” ACM Transactions on Computer-Human 
Interaction (TOCHI). 2014, 21(5), pp. 1- 26. 
[8]  S. Aral, C. Dellarocas, and D. Godes, “Introduction to the 
Special Issue—Social Media and Business Transformation: a 
Framework for Research “, Information Systems Research. 2013, 
24(1), pp. 3-13. 
[9]  R. L. Baskerville, M. D. Myers, and Y. Yoo, “Digital First: 
The Ontological Reversal and New Challenges for IS Research”, 
2019. MIS Quarterly. 2020, 44(2), pp. 509-523. 
[10] I. Mergel, N. Edelmann, N. Haug, “Defining Digital 
Transformation: Results from Expert Interviews” Government 
Information Quarterly. 2019, 36(4), pp. 1- 16. 
[11] M. Bower, B. Dalgarno, G. E. Kennedy, M. J. W. Lee, and J. 
Kennedy,  “Design and Implementation Factors in Blended 
Synchronous Learning Environments: Outcomes from a Cross-
Case Analysis” Computers & Education. 2015, 86, pp. 1 – 17. 
[12]  K. Kear, F. Chetwynd, J. Williams, and H. Domelan, “Web 
Conferencing for Synchronous Online Tutorials: Perspectives of 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Tutors Using a New Medium” Computers & Education. 2012, 
58(3), pp. 953-963. 
[13]  Y. J. Park and C. J. Bonk,  “Synchronous Learning 
Experiences: Distance and Residential Learners’ Perspectives in a 
Blended Graduate Course “, Journal of Interactive Online 
Learning, 2007, 6(3), pp. 245-264. 
[14] G. M. Olson and J. S. Olson, “Distance Matters” Human–
computer interaction. 2000, 15(2-3), pp. 139 – 178. 
[15] M. Bower, M. J. Lee, and B. Dalgarno, “Collaborative 
Learning Across Physical and Virtual Worlds: Factors Supporting 
and Constraining Learners in a Blended Reality Environment 
“British Journal of Educational Technology,  2017, 48(2), pp. 407 
– 430. 
[16]  M. Chakraborty and S. Victor, “Do's and Don'ts of 
Simultaneous Instruction to On-Campus and Distance Students via 
Videoconferencing “, Journal of library administration. 2004, 41(1-
2), pp. 97-112. 
[17]  Q. Wang, C. L. Quek, and X. Hu, “Designing and Improving 
a Blended Synchronous Learning Environment: An Educational 
Design Research “, The International Review of Research in Open 
and Distributed Learning,  2017, 18(3), pp. 99 – 118. 
[18] E. Szeto and A. Y. Cheng, “Towards a Framework of 
Interactions in a Blended Synchronous Learning Environment: 
What 
Effects 
Are 
There 
on 
Students' 
Social 
Presence 
Experience?”, Interactive Learning Environments, 2016, 24(3), pp. 
487-503. 
[19] G. M. Olson and J. S. Olson, Working Together Apart: 
Collaboration over the Internet, San Rafael, CA, Morgan & 
Claypool Publishers, 2014.  
[20] G. M. Olson and J. S. Olson, “Bridging Distance - Empirical 
Studies of Distributed Teams “In: D.F. Galletta and P. Zhang, 
editors. Human-computer interaction and management information 
systems, Applications, ME Sharpe, 2006, 6, pp. 117 – 143. 
[21] J. M. Zydney, P. McKimmy, R. Lindberg, and M. Schmidt, 
“Here or There instruction: Lessons Learned in Implementing 
Innovative Approaches to Blended Synchronous Learning”,  
TechTrends, 2019, 63(2), pp. 123-132. 
[22] J. Creswell, Research Design Qualitative, Quantitative and 
Mixed Methods Approaches Fourth Edition. Fourth ed. Los 
Angeles, Sage, 2014 . 
[23] G. R. Gibbs, Analyzing Qualitative Data. Vol 6, SAGE, 2018  
[24] Q. M. Patton, Qualitative Research & Evaluation Methods. 
3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, Sage Publications, 2002.  
[25] E. R. Oetting, J. F. Donnermeyer, B. A. Plested, R.W. 
Edwards, K. Kelly, and F. Beauvais, “Assessing Community 
Readiness for Prevention” International Journal of the Addictions, 
1995, 30(6), pp. 659-683. 
[26] R. W. Edward, P. Jumper‐Thurman, B. A. Plested, E. R. 
Oetting, and L. Swanson, “Community Readiness: Research to 
Practice”,  Journal of community psychology, 2000, 28(3), pp. 
291-307. 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
Survey questions: 
 
1. What is your profession? 
2. Which are your main activities while working? 
3. What technology for distance-independent meetings do you 
have access to in your work? 
4. What types of distance-independent solutions have you used to 
conduct VOICE CALLS? 
5. What types of distance-independent solutions have you used to 
conduct VIDEO CALLS? 
6. What types of distance-independent solutions have you used to 
conduct WRITTEN CONVERSATIONS / CHATS? 
7. What type of meetings/contacts do you see can be handled 
through distance-independent technology? 
8. What type of meetings/contacts do you see can NOT be handled 
through distance-independent technology? 
9. 
To 
what 
extent 
do 
you 
have 
access 
to 
the 
knowledge/equipment/support you need? 
10. Shortly, is there anything that you think of that can support the 
use of distance-independent technology? 
11. Finally, we ask you to describe what challenges you see in 
using distance-independent technology? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-892-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2021 : The Tenth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

