Heath Kiosks as an Equal Opportunity Resource for Better Health:  A 
Systematic Review 
 
 
Ashish Joshi  
Center for Global Health and Development  
College of Public Health, UNMC 
Omaha, NE 68198- USA 
Email: ashish.joshi@unmc.edu 
 
Kate Trout  
Center for Global Health and Development  
College of Public Health, UNMC 
Omaha, NE 68198- USA 
Email: kate.trout@unmc.edu
 
 
Abstract— Computerized health kiosk systems could be the key 
to improving public health among diverse populations around 
the world. The objective of our study is to examine the current 
utilization of health kiosks in various diverse settings. Further, 
the study aims to describe the various characteristics of the 
individuals using these health kiosks. A search was performed 
using a scientific database, Pubmed, to identify articles 
published during the period of January 2005 to January 2012 
using the following keywords: “public health kiosk”, “public 
health kiosk rural”, and “public health kiosk urban”. A 
secondary search was also performed to include the articles 
that met the inclusion criteria. Results of our review show 
variations in the geographic patterns of users’ accessibility of 
kiosk locations. Health kiosk acceptance was high among Black 
Hispanics, people born outside of the United States, and users 
with no formal education past high school. High satisfaction 
was observed among low literacy users, individuals with no 
formal education, and low-income families. Older populations 
accessed kiosks at churches and health fairs.  Users with no 
insurance most commonly accessed the kiosk at public 
libraries, followed by neighborhood health centers and 
Laundromats. The health kiosks have shown to be a useful 
medium of reducing health disparities by bridging the gap 
among users with varied characteristics. However, there is a 
need for further research to determine long-term impacts of 
health kiosks on the health outcomes of the populations in 
various settings. 
Keywords- Health kiosks; users; technology; acceptance. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Computerized kiosk systems could be the key to 
improving public health around the world among diverse 
populations.  Public health kiosks have proved to be 
successful 
in 
disseminating 
health 
education 
and 
interventions.  Kiosks are free standing units containing a 
computer that delivers services, as well as informational and 
instrumental support.  Many of the kiosk computers have 
touch-screen interfaces and vary in the level of interactivity.  
Public kiosks have been used in the distribution of a variety 
of services, such as gift registries, bank Automatic Teller 
Machines (ATMs), movie theater tickets, movie rentals, and 
grocery store checkout lanes.  The current utilization of 
kiosk systems has made the use of health kiosks accepted 
and familiar in public settings.  Conventional ways of 
delivering health interventions to participants would be time 
and labor extensive to provide tailor health information for 
each participant of the health intervention.  The health kiosk 
improves the quality of information appropriate to the user 
across a larger, more diverse audience.  Therefore, health 
kiosks are time efficient, accessible, and have the capability 
of adapting to diversity [1]-[3]. 
Culture, socioeconomic status, and language are three 
components that affect the gap of health disparities.  Health 
care delivery should be culturally competent for at least six 
reasons: (1) respond to demographic changes, (2) improve 
quality of services and health outcomes, (3) meet legislative, 
regulatory 
and 
accreditation 
mandates, 
(4) 
gain 
a 
competitive edge in the market place, (5) decrease liability 
and malpractice claims, and (6) eliminate health disparities 
of diverse cultural, ethnic, and racial backgrounds [3].  
Programs have been designed through conducting surveys 
within communities enabling them to present consistent 
culturally relevant information that has been approved by 
individuals in the community [5].  Furthermore, providing 
relevant information itself can help reduce disparities within 
populations, and help close the gap of low health literacy.  
Cultural tailoring and theoretical framework needs to be 
incorporated in the delivery of health information, and can 
be easily managed into the design of kiosk programs.  
Kiosks have the ability to provide multiple language options 
in the delivery health information, and maintain consistent 
culturally relevant information.   
Public health promotion efforts would be more 
successful if they were targeted at specific geographic areas.  
The national public health objective calls for an increased 
use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS) to make 
interventions more cost effective [6].  The use of GIS can 
improve health promotion and disease prevention efforts in 
at least seven ways: (1) helping visualize patterns of disease 
and disparity, (2) help identify risk factors, (3) fostering 
local collaboration and data-sharing, (4) interpreting 
geographically 
specific 
intervention 
outcomes, 
(5) 
identifying the medically underserved populations, (6) 
planning of interventions for maximum reach and 
effectiveness, and (7) selecting the most appropriate setting 
for prevention efforts [7]-[11].  
Public health kiosks can potentially be utilized to enhance 
self-management of chronic diseases, reduce health 
disparities, better outreach of healthcare services, and can be 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

a cost effective way to improve delivery of healthcare 
services. However, several variables such as digital divide, 
health 
literacy, 
lack 
of 
culturally 
adaptive 
health 
information, and limited availability of tailored health 
material are some of the existing barriers to greater adoption 
of health technologies and their impact in the improvement 
of health outcomes. To our best knowledge, there has not 
been a systematic review to analyze relationships among 
location, user characteristics, study outcomes, and user 
perceptions to the technology.  Heath kiosks disseminate 
education and help build skills for better health that reach 
the medically underserved communities, and approach 
challenges faced in the field of public health.   
The objective of our study is to examine the current 
utilization of health kiosks in various diverse settings. 
Further, 
the 
study 
aims 
to 
describe 
the 
various 
characteristics of the individuals using these health kiosks.  
This paper contains five sections.  You have just read the 
Introduction in Section I.  Section II describes the methods, 
and comprised of keyword search, inclusion criteria, 
exclusion criteria, variable extraction, and statistical 
analysis.  The results of the study are described in section III 
with the kiosk locations and user characteristics, technology 
outcomes, components/functions/features of the kiosks, and 
correlations of user characteristics with technology 
outcomes.  Section IV concludes our paper, and followed by 
section V explaining future research. 
II. 
METHODS 
A.    Keyword Search 
A search was conducted on Medline via Pubmed 
electronic database [12] to identify the up to date literature 
about the use of the kiosk in public health settings. The 
search period was during January 14-January 20 2012 with 
keywords searched included “public health kiosk”, “public 
health kiosk rural”, and “public health kiosk urban” and 
included articles published during the period of January 
2005 to January 2012. A manual review of the literature 
provided by the electronic database search was conducted to 
identify relevant articles to include in our analysis. A 
secondary search was also performed to include the articles 
that met the inclusion criteria. 
B.    Inclusion criteria 
Those studies that had studied health kiosks in both 
clinical and non-clinical settings, were in English, and were 
conducted both within and outside United States were 
included in our final analysis.  
C.    Exclusion Criteria 
Electronic search entries were excluded if they were not 
full text peer-reviewed papers, such as abstract submissions 
or news report articles. Other studies that were excluded 
included those that focused on the use of kiosks educating 
individuals on topics not related to health, home based 
health kiosks, and kiosks that vend/distribute products. 
Computerized kiosks that were used solely to answer a 
survey or to collect data for patient check in at a private 
practice were also excluded. 
 
D.    Variable Extraction 
The following variable information was extracted from the 
final analyzable articles: 
• 
Targeted audience: It was aimed to gather 
information about the different age groups 
race/ethnicity and gender for which previous 
studies have been conducted. This will help us in 
developing better understanding about the usage 
and acceptance of health kiosks for various socio-
demographics. 
• 
Study location: The aim here was to develop a 
better understanding about the research that 
currently exists about the implementation and 
adoption of health kiosks in various developing and 
developed countries.  
• 
Study setting: This information will help us 
identify the disparities in the implementation of 
health kiosks in rural and urban settings. 
Additionally, “setting location” defines location 
specificity 
of 
kiosks 
within 
communities, 
businesses, and events. 
E.    Statistical Analysis 
Descriptive analysis was performed to report means and 
standard deviations for the continuous variables and 
frequency analysis for the categorical variables. All analysis 
was performed using SPSS version 20 [13]. 
III. 
RESULTS 
A. Kiosk Location and User Characteristics 
The majority of the studies were performed only on 
adults (56%; n=18), followed by children and adults (38%; 
n=12), adolescents (3%; n=1), and only children (3%; n=1). 
The majority of the studies were focused both on males and 
females (84%; n=27) while only limited number of studies 
included only females (16%; n=5). Additional variables that 
might be important to determine use of the health kiosk 
among various users may include educational status, 
income, and prior familiarity with use of computers. 
However, there were few studies that reported this 
information in the studies included in our final analysis.  
Among health care settings, half of the studies placed 
kiosks in medical clinics (50%; n=16), followed by 28% 
(n=9) at emergency departments, and 19% (n=6) at 
community health centers.  The other locations utilized by 
studies were social service agencies (16%; n=5), public 
libraries (13%; n=4), churches (13%; n=4), health fairs (9%; 
n=3), beauty salons (9%; n=3), Laundromats (9%; n=3), 
pharmacies (6%; n=2), and restaurants (6%; n=2). Only one 
out of 32 studies placed kiosks at a senor apartment (3%; 
n=1), community center (3%; n=1), grocery store (3%; 
n=1), Department Motor Vehicles office (3%; n=1), and 
school (3%; n=1). Of all the 32 studies analyzed, only 5  
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF STUDIES DETERMINING THE LOCATION HAVING THE HIGHEST REACH TO PEOPLE ON MEDICARE, MEDIAID, AND NOT INSURED 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
studies reported the most preferred locations where the 
health kiosks can be placed. Majority of the studies (60%; 
n=3/5) reported neighborhood health centers as the most 
preferred location for the health kiosk.  This was followed 
by public library and social service agencies.   
An additional analysis was conducted to determine the 
preferred kiosk location to reach patients receiving 
Medicaid, Medicare, and people with no insurance.  Of all 
the 32 studies analyzed, only 4 studies reported the reach of 
Medicaid users at each location where the health kiosks can 
be 
placed. 
The 
majority 
of 
the 
studies 
reported 
neighborhood health centers (75%; n=3/4) as the most 
accessed by users on Medicaid.  Other highly accessed 
locations were social service agencies, medical centers, and 
Laundromats. Only three studies (9%) reported the reach of 
Medicare users that accessed the kiosk at each location. All 
three of the studies reported churches (100%; n=3/3) as the 
most preferred by users on Medicare, followed by public 
libraries, Laundromats, and beauty salons.  One limitation to 
the preferred Medicare locations is that beauty salons were 
third, sixth, and seventh order in the three different studies.  
More analysis is needed to determine the preference of 
beauty salons among Medicare patients.  Only three studies 
(9%) reported the reach of users with no insurance that 
accessed the kiosk at each location. The location with the 
most access among users with no insurance was public 
libraries (66%; n=2/3).  Other highly access locations were 
neighborhood health centers and Laundromats (Table 1). 
Three studies (9%; n=3/32) reported the mean age across 
different kiosk locations, and consistently show that older 
populations access health kiosks at churches and health fairs 
with a mean range of 47.8 to 42.9 years of age. Younger 
populations access kiosks at beauty salon, social service 
agencies, library, Laundromats, and neighborhood health 
centers with a mean range of 33.1 to 36 years of age.  
Although, the mean age can be shifted from the kiosk health  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
topic presented, the results were consistent across the three 
studies using the same kiosk at each location. 
B. Technology Outcomes 
The ease of use of the technology (34%; n=11) 
evaluated the ability of users to operate the kiosk without 
issues. The kiosk usage (28%; n=9) was evaluated in respect 
to the users’ utilization of the kiosk and its features accessed 
during use. The usability (19%; n=6) was studied to define 
the users’ ability to navigate and operate the technology, 
and the presentation of materials by the technology with 
clear, concise actions provided to the user. Two studies 
assessed logistical issues (6%; n=2), such as kiosk generated 
data, and concerns of kiosk. The acceptance (9%; n=3) was 
evaluated with consumers’ approval of the new technology. 
One study (3%) evaluated the use of the kiosk placed across 
different locations to differentiate the reach of the kiosk per 
location (Table 2).  
C. Components/Functions/Features of the 
Kiosk                                            
The 
majority 
of 
studies 
used 
a 
touch 
screen 
computerized kiosk (78%; n=25), and about half of the 
kiosks provided printed information (53%; n=17). Four 
(13%) kiosk systems were able to store personalized health 
records. Tailored information personalized to the user 
characteristics was delivered by 75% (n=24) of the studies. 
Only two studies provided information about the local 
resources available. Only 5 (16%) studies had kiosks that 
were Internet enabled, one had (3%) fax capabilities, and six 
(19%) had a designated personal attendant to guide users. 
There were limited studies that had reported the use of 
telephone handsets (9%; n=3), video camera (3%; n=1), 
microphone (3%; n=1), headphones (3%; n=1) with the 
health kiosks. 
Order of Kiosk 
Location 
Preference 
Type of Medical Coverage 
Medicaid 
Medicare 
Those with No 
Insurance 
1 
Neighborhood Health 
Center 
Church 
Public Library 
2 
Social Service Agency 
Public Library 
Neighborhood Health 
Center 
3 
Medical Center 
Laundromat and Beauty 
Salon 
Laundromats 
4 
Laundromats 
Neighborhood Health 
Center 
Social Service 
Agencies 
5 
Public Library and 
Emergency Department 
Social Service Agency 
Beauty Salon 
6 
Beauty Salon 
Health Fair 
Church 
7 
Church 
 
Health Fair 
8 
Health Fair 
 
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

TABLE II.  
NUMBER OF STUDIES THAT DETERMINE EASE OF USE, 
TECHNOLOGY ACCEPTANCE,  AND SATISFACTION OF HEALTH KIOSKS  
 
D. Correlations of User Characteristics with Technology 
Outcomes  
Outcomes were analyzed to determine groups with 
specific characteristics that are significantly correlated with 
the outcome.  The acceptance of the kiosk was analyzed in 
three studies (9%) and satisfaction in six studies (19%), 
among studies both were found to be significantly higher 
among black Hispanics, people born outside of the United 
States, and individuals with no formal education past high 
school. Among studies that analyzed usage (28%; n=9), two 
studies (6%) identified significant results of low literacy 
users, no formal education past high school, and low-
income families of 5000 US dollars or less having the 
highest usage of the kiosk. The ease of use of the 
technology (34%; n=11/32), and usability (19%; n=6/32) 
were readily reported among studies.  High literacy, no 
formal education past high school, and users of the age 36 
years or less was positively correlated with ease of use 
regarding the technology.  Usability of the kiosk was 
correlated with high literacy users, and spending more time 
at kiosk (Table 3).  Additionally, two studies (6%) identified 
health kiosks were easy to use and accepted among children; 
with more time spend at the kiosk among younger children. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Computerized kiosk systems could be the key to 
improving public health around the world among diverse 
populations.  Through our review, we identified high usage 
among low literacy users, no formal education past high 
school, and low-income families of 5000 US dollars or less.  
There was high acceptance and satisfaction among black 
Hispanics, people born outside of the United States, and 
users with no formal education past high school.  Although 
theoretical framework was not often provided to determine 
the correlations of specific framework, we can in fact 
conclude that the technology has the capability of reaching 
health disparity groups and potentially narrow disparity 
gaps through the analysis of the perception of the users.  
Furthermore, our findings suggest that there are 
geographic patterns of user accessibility of kiosk locations.  
Older populations access kiosks at churches and health fairs.  
The location with the most access among users with no  
TABLE III.  
NUMBER OF STUDIES CORREATING USER CHARACTERISTIC 
AND TECHOLOGY OUTCOME 
 
insurance was public libraries, followed by neighborhood 
health centers and Laundromats.  Unanimously, churches 
were identified the most accessed by users on Medicare.  
The majority of the studies reported neighborhood health 
centers and social service agencies as the most accessed by 
users on Medicaid.  Better understanding the patterns would 
help target appropriate interventions, and in return be more 
cost effective.  
This review indicates a sustainable and accessible health 
kiosk would have a positive impact on the prevention and 
management of a variety of health topics, as well as chronic 
diseases in communities.  The evidence of positive study 
outcomes across a wide spread of processes suggests a 
positive impact on communities’ health, although there is a 
need for further research to determine long-term impacts on 
populations. There can be a sense of community 
empowerment 
by 
providing 
a 
resource 
enabling 
communities to take their health into their own hands.  
Studies have shown high rates of kiosk usage among people 
who are uninsured or underinsured interested in preventative 
health.  Men who are over weight and self-reported being 
depressed were most interested in kiosk information on 
weight control.  Women who smoke and self-reported being 
depressed was most interested in kiosk information about 
smoking cessation [1].  This suggests that individuals are 
seeking out help, and access education modules provided by 
the kiosk that are most relevant to improving their own 
health.  Engaging a community in their public’s health and 
providing them with the resources to make a difference, 
could empower the community to have healthier habits as a 
social group.  An economic analysis, indeed suggests that 
the role of health kiosks will impact persons who may not 
otherwise be reached, along with low-income populations 
and a resource that will becomes extremely cost effective 
over time [14].  
There are several limitations of our study. First, the 
search included only those studies that were indexed in Pub 
med.  Therefore, we may have excluded studies that might 
not have been part of it. Second, the search was limited to 
Variable 
Assessed 
N 
Outcome results 
Positive 
Impact 
Negative 
Impact 
Usability 
6 
5 
1 
Ease of use 
11 
10 
1 
Technology 
satisfaction 
6 
6 
 
Technology 
acceptance 
3 
2 
1 
Kiosk usage 
9 
6 
 
 
User 
Characteristics 
Variables Assessed 
Acceptance 
Ease 
of 
Use 
Usage 
Satisfaction 
Usability 
Low literacy 
 
 
2 
 
 
High literacy 
 
1 
 
 
1 
Black Hispanics 
1 
 
 
1 
 
Born outside of 
the US 
1 
 
 
1 
 
No formal 
education past 
high school 
1 
1 
1 
1 
 
Age of 36 years 
or less 
 
1 
 
 
 
Low income 
 
 
1 
 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

certain combination of key words that might have resulted 
in missing of the other reference articles that might have 
been applicable to our study. However, every effort was 
made to include additional articles after reviewing and 
including the references of the primary articles in the final 
analysis after they met the inclusion criteria.  
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
There is a need to compare and contrast the use of the 
health kiosks among different countries, as several factors 
might impact the overall health kiosk usage in these 
countries. These factors might include social, political, 
cultural, organizational and logistical variations, and 
challenges among populations and other stakeholders. 
Further research is needed to examine health kiosk usage 
patterns stratified by age, gender, occupation, income, 
educational status, and prior computer skills of the 
individuals.  
An understanding of usage patterns can help us better 
assess the impact of health kiosks in improving overall 
health outcomes among diverse user groups. Additionally, 
there is the need for more comparative studies among kiosk 
locations within communities to identify optimal settings for 
kiosk placement, and among a wider variety of settings.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Pendleton B.F., Labuda Schrop S., Ritter C., Kinion E.S., McCord G., 
Cray J.J., Costa A.J. Underserved patients' choice of kiosk-based 
preventive health information.  Fam. Med. 2010 Jul-Aug;42(7):488-
95. 
[2] 
Green M. J., Peterson S.K., Baker M.W. et al. Effect of a computer 
based decision aid on knowledge, perceptions and intentions about 
genetic testing for breast cancer susceptibility: a randomized 
controlled trial. JAMA. 2004;292:442-452. 
[3] 
Leung S.F., French P., Chui C., Arthur D. Computerized mental 
health assessment in integrative health clinics: a cross-sectional study 
using structured interview. Int. J. Ment. Health Nurs. 2007 
Dec;16(6):441-6. 
[4] 
National 
Center 
For 
Cultural 
Competency. 
Conceptual 
frameworks/models, guiding values and principles. Whitehaven St. 
NW: Georgetown University Center for Child and Human 
Development. 
Available: 
http://www11.georgetown.edu/research/gucchd/nccc/foundations/fra
meworks.html [accessed 27 May 2012].  
[5] 
Andersen 
S., 
Andersen 
P., 
Youngblood 
N.E. 
Multimedia 
computerized 
smoking 
awareness 
education 
for 
low-literacy 
Hispanics. Comput. Inform. Nurs. 2011 Feb; 29(2):107-14. 
[6] 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Understanding and 
improving health. In: Healthy People 2010. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: 
US Government Printing Office, 2000. 
[7] 
Alcaraz K.I., Kreuter M.W., Bryan R.P. Use of GIS to identify 
optimal settings for cancer prevention and control in African 
American communities. Prev. Med. 2009 Aug;49(1):54-7. 
[8] 
Caley L.M. 2004. Using geographic information systems to design 
population based interventions. Public Health Nurs. 2004 Nov-Dec; 
21(6):547-554. 
[9] 
McLafferty S.L. GIS and health care. Annu Rev Public Health 2003 
May; 24:25-42. 
[10] Renger R., Cimetta A., Pettygrove S., Rogan S. Geographic 
information systems as an evaluation tool. Am. J. Eval. 2002 Dec; 
23(4):469-479. 
[11] Richards T.B., Croner C.M., Rushton G., Brown C.K., Fowler L. 
Geographic information systems and public health: Mapping the 
future. Public Health Rep. 1999; 114(4):359-373. 
[12] U.S. National Library of Medicine.  MEDLINE®/PubMed®. 
Accessed at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed. 
[13] IBM Corp. Released 2011. IBM SPSS Statistics for Windows, 
Version 20.0. Armonk, NY: IBM Corp. 
[14] Gould S.M., Anderson J. Economic analysis of bilingual interactive 
multimedia nutrician education. J. Nutr. Educ. Behav. 2002 Sep-Oct; 
34:273-278. 
 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

