Effect of SinR Transcriptional Factor on the Expression of Bacilysin Biosynthetic 
Operon in Bacillus subtilis 
Ayten Yazgan-Karataş; Öykü İrigül-Sönmez 
Molecular Biology-Biotechnology and Genetics Research 
Center (MOBGAM) and Molecular Biology and Genetics 
Department, Istanbul Technical University 
Istanbul,Turkey 
e-mails: karatasay@itu.edu.tr; oirigul@iontek.com.tr 
Hasan Demirci 
Molecular Biology and Genetics Department, Yıldız 
Technical University 
Istanbul, Turkey 
e-mail: hasan@yildiz.edu.tr
 
 
Abstract— In Bacillus subtilis, bacilysin is a nonribosomally 
synthesized dipeptide antibiotic composed of L-alanine and L-
anticapsin. It is active against a wide range of bacteria and 
even Candida albicans. The biosynthesis of bacilysin depends 
on the bacABCDEywfG operon (bac operon) and the adjacent 
monocistronic gene ywfH. In our previous study, lutR mutation 
significantly decreased the maximum transcription level of the 
bacABCDEywfG operon at the onset of stationary phase to 
about 57% of wild-type level.  In this study, we aimed to test 
the possible effect of global regulator SinR on the expression of 
the bac operon. For this sinR gene was disrupted in the 
transcriptional bacA-lacZ fusion bearing strain (OGU1) to 
generate 
“sinR::cm 
bacA::lacZ::erm” 
bearing 
strain 
(OGU1SR). Additionally, we also test whether sinR and lutR 
gene products affect the bac operon expression mutually due to 
the close regulatory interactions between LutR and SinR 
transcriptional factors . For this, ΔsinR-ΔlutR double mutant 
(sinR::cm 
lutR::Tn10::spc 
bacA::lacZ::erm) 
strain 
(OGU1SRLR) was constructed. Finally,  all of that resulting 
strains and OGU1 were grown in Perry and Abraham (PA) 
medium at 37oC and β–galactosidase activities were measured 
throughout the different stages of growth. β–galactosidase 
assay results indicated that in the absence of sinR gene product 
bac operon expression was severely effected. Since, disruption 
of sinR gene resulted with complete loss of transition state 
dependent induction of bac operon expression while almost the 
same bacA-expression profile as the single sinR mutant was 
detected in the sinR-lutR double mutant.  
Keywords- Bacillus subtilis; bacilysin; bacABCDEywfG; bac 
Operon  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Antibiotics have a crucial role in keeping the public healthy. 
Understanding the genetic and molecular basis of the 
regulation of antibiotic biosynthesis is of great interest for 
providing new strategies for targeted genetic engineering of 
antibiotic producing strains. 
Bacilysin is a simple dipeptide antibiotic which is 
composed of an L-alanine residue at the N-terminus and an 
unusual amino acid, L-anticapsin, at the C-terminus [1] 
Antimicrobial activity of bacilysin depends on the 
anticapsin moiety [2]. It is active against wide range of 
bacteria and even Candida albicans. 
Bacilysin biosynthesis is regulated either positively or 
negatively. Global regulatory proteins CodY and AbrB 
negatively regulate the bac operon, on the other hand 
global regulatory proteins Spo0A and ComA positively 
regulate the bac operon expression [3]. In addition to 
master regulatory genes, bacilysin biosynthesis in Bacillus 
subtilis was also demonstrated to be under the control of 
GntR type transcriptional regulator LutR which was 
identified by transposon mutagenesis technique [4].  
       SinR is a global transcriptional regulator that is required 
for 
sporulation, 
competence, 
motility, 
exoprotease 
production and biofilm formation in B. subtilis. In our 
previous study, it was shown that LutR is a transcriptional 
factor that has a function in the regulation of many 
pathways and there is a close overlap among the targets of 
LutR and SinR regulatory proteins [5]. In this study, we 
aimed to test the possible effect of global regulator SinR on 
the expression of the bac operon as well as to test whether 
sinR and lutR gene products affect the bac operon 
expression mutually by using lacZ fusion analysis.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II we described the materials and methods used in this study. 
In Section III we described and evaluated the main results 
obtained in this study.  
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
A. Bacterial strains, media and culture conditions   
The strains of B. subtilis used in this study are listed in 
Table 1. All these strains were the derivatives of B. subtilis 168. 
 
TABLE 1.  BACTERIAL STRAINS AND THEIR GENOTYPE 
Strain 
Genotype 
Source 
B.subtilis PY79 
Wild 
type, 
BSP 
cured 
prototrophic 
derivative 
of 
B.subtilis 168 
P.Youngman 
OGU1 
bacA::LacZ::erm 
İ.Öğülür 
SinR mutant B. 
subtilis  
ΔsinR::cm 
AkosT. 
Kovacs 
OGU1LR 
lutR::Tn10::spc bacA::lacZ::erm 
T. E. Köroğlu 
OGU1SR 
ΔsinR::cm  bacA::LacZ::erm 
In this study 
OGU1SRLR 
lutR::Tn10::spcΔsinR::cm 
bacA::lacZ::erm 
In this study 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

B. subtilis strains were normally grown in Luria Bertani 
(LB) medium at 37°C. The Perry and Abraham (PA) medium was 
used for bacilysin production. Antibiotic concentrations 
employed in this study for direct selection were as follows: 
erythromycin (1 µg/ml), lincomycin (25µg/ml), spectinomycin 
(100 µg/ml), chloramphenicol (5 µg/ml) and ampicillin (100 
µg/ml).  
B. Insertional inactivation of regulatory genes  
      For 
construction 
of 
OGU1SR 
(sinR::cm 
bacA:.lacZ::erm) strain , genomic DNA of sinR disrupted B. 
subtilis strain that harbors ΔsinR::cm mutation was isolated 
and transformed into the competent cells of bacA-lacZ fusion 
bearing strain OGU1. ΔsinR-ΔlutR double mutant strain 
OGU1SRLR was constructed by transforming competent 
cells of OGU1LR (lutR::Tn10::spc bacA::lacZ::erm) strain 
with 
chromosomal 
DNA 
from 
OGU1SR 
(sinR::cm 
bacA:.lacZ::erm) strain.  
C. β–Galactosidase Assay  
β-Galactosidase assay was carried out as described by 
Miller (1972). The specific activitiy is expressed as [A420-
1.75 X A550 per Minute per OD595]X1000.  
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
To analyse the effect of sinR and lutR insertional 
inactivations on the bac operon expression, transcriptional 
lacZ fusion analysis is performed. For that purpose, we first 
constructed the congenic derivatives of the transcriptional 
bacA-lacZ fusion bearing OGU1 with the mutation of the 
interested genes sinR and lutR. The resulting strains 
OGU1SR, OGU1SRLR, OGU1LR and OGU1 as a control, 
were cultured in PA medium at 37oC and sampled in every 1 
h for the β-galactosidase assay. As shown in Figure 1, 
expression of the bac operon was persistent during the 
exponential growth phase. However, it induced in the course 
of transition between exponential and stationary phases and 
reached to its top level upon entry into stationary phase. As 
shown previously, lutR mutation significantly reduced the 
maximum transcription level of the bac operon (Figure 1). 
On the other hand, the deletion of the sinR gene severely 
affected the bacA-lacZ expression and resulted with the 
complete loss of transition state dependent  induction of the 
bac operon expression. However, almost the same bacA-
expression profile as the single sinR mutant was detected in 
the sinR-lutR double mutant.  
 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Results of this study indicate that both SinR and LutR 
regulatory proteins are required for the maximum bac operon 
expression but SinR activity is essential for the transition 
state induction of the bac operon expression.  
 
 
Figure 1. Growth curves and β-galactosidase activity of bacA::lacZ fusion 
OGU1 (white squares and black squares) and its derivatives lutR 
mutant (white triangles and black triangles), sinR mutant (white 
circles and black circles) and lutR-sinR mutant (white diomands 
and black diomands) in PA medium. Error bars represent the 
standard deviation of three independent experiments . 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Istanbul Technical 
University Scientific Research Foundation.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. E Walker and E. P Abraham., "the Structure of Bacilysin and 
Other Products of Bacillus subtillis". Biochem. J. vol.118, pp.563-
570,1970. 
[2] M. Kenig, E. T. Vandamme and E. P.Abraham, "the Mode of 
Action of Bacilysin and Anticapsin and Biochemical Properties of 
Bacilysin-Resistant Mutants." Microbiol.  vol. 94, pp. 46-54, 1976. 
[3] T. E. Köroğlu, Ö. İsmail, S. Mutlu, A. Yazgan-Karataş and G. 
Özcengiz, "Global regulatory systems operating in bacilysin 
biosynthesis in Bacillus subtilis." J. Mol. Microbiol. vol. 20, pp. 
144-155,2011. 
[4] T.E. Köroğlu, G. Kurt-Gür, E. C. Ünlü and A. Yazgan-Karataş, 
"the Novel Gene yvfI in Bacillus subtilis is Essential for Bacilysin 
Biosynthesis." Antonie van  Leeuwenhoek, vol. 94, pp. 471-479, 
2008. 
[5] Ö. İrigül-Sönmez, T.E. Köroğlu. B. Öztürk, A. T. Kovacs, O. 
P. Kuipers and A. Yazgan-Karataş, "in Bacillus subtilis LutR is 
Part of the Global Complex Regulatory Network Governing the 
Adaptation to the Transition from Exponential Growth to 
Stationary phase." Microbiol. vol.160, pp. 243-260, 2014. 
[6] j. H. Miller J.H. “Experiments in Molecular Genetics. Cold 
Spring Harbor, Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory,1972. 
 
 
 
  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

