Determining Testbed Requirements for Technology Enhanced Speech 
Rehabilitation after Stroke - the Informed Co-workers’ View Point 
 
Karin Ahlin 
Computer and Systems Science 
Östersund, Sweden 
Karin.ahlin@miun.se 
 
Awais Ahmad 
Computer and Systems Science 
Östersund, Sweden 
awais.ahmad@miun.se 
Peter Mozelius 
Computer and Systems Science 
Östersund, Sweden 
          Peter.mozelius@miun.se 
 
 
 
Abstract—This paper analyses and discusses the identified 
requirements for technology enhanced systems for speech 
rehabilitation after a stroke. To stroke patients, a speech 
injury can be devastating, impacting their abilities to speak, 
listen, read, and write. Therefore, speech therapy is 
recommended as early as possible. To address the challenge 
with a growing percentage of older adults, therapy 
should include a variety of Technology Enhanced Systems 
(TES) to support the idea of independent living. These systems 
must be adapted to the patients’ needs and speech therapy 
requirements. 
Based 
on 
a 
design 
science 
approach, 
requirements were determined from an analysis of ten semi-
structured 
interviews 
with 
knowledgeable 
informants. 
Findings indicate several important requirements, such as: 
TES should be motivating, joyful, individualised and built on 
patients’ needs and on speech therapists’ professional 
knowledge. Furthermore, TES services must be user-friendly 
and provide training in each patient’s mother tongue. Added 
to these requirements are ease of including close relatives as 
supporting persons, as well as accessibility through portable 
devices. 
Keywords-e-health; HCI; stroke rehabilitation; independent 
living; speech therapy; requirements 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Stroke is one of the most common and serious diseases 
across the globe; it can cause death or a variety of 
disabilities [1]. Stroke is caused by an interruption of blood 
flow to the brain that affects neuronal cells, which leads to 
severe impairments in brain function [2]. Generally, a stroke 
patient’s disability can be classified into motor, speech and 
cognitive injuries [3]. This paper focuses on speech injuries 
which impact both speech and language function, which can 
reduce drastically a person’s abilities to speak, listen, read 
and write [2]. Because of that, quality of life is severely 
compromised and patients’ overall social interactions 
decrease. These changes have long-lasting impacts on 
patients’ personal and professional lives. Therefore, various 
types of speech therapy are recommended as early as 
possible after stroke [3]. A large number of traditional 
treatments are available for speech recovery, but providing 
access to treatments to all stroke patients is challenging 
because of the high cost for human resources and day-to-day 
operational requirements needed for these intervention 
types. For speech and language retrieval, high-intensity and 
long-term 
therapy 
is 
needed 
and 
current 
medical 
interventions cannot provide those services due to limited 
resources [15].   
In the last two decades, Technology Enhanced Systems 
(TES) have been recognized as highly useful for several 
treatment types that involve multiple rehabilitation therapies 
[3]. Indeed, several therapy systems have been successfully 
developed using modern technologies [4]-[6]. Recent 
studies highlight that different types of TES can be useful 
for speech and language rehabilitation, combining various 
categories of technologies, such as: tele rehabilitation based 
on audio and videoconferencing [2][15], internet-based 
therapy [19], serious game-based therapy [21] and Virtual 
Reality based therapy [6].  
After a stroke, however, due to brain function 
impairments, a patient’s ability to understand and learn new 
things is decreased drastically, which creates challenges for 
patients in adopting and using TES [3]. Therefore, users’ 
requirements need to be considered during speech and 
language rehabilitation and a user-centered design approach 
may be most effective, so that the more difficult learning 
process can be easier after a stroke [7]-[10]. Some studies 
highlighted the importance of user-friendliness and usability 
issues for TES [9][19].  However, a Requirement-Focused 
Design Science approach, where relevant stockholders such 
as 
medical 
caregivers 
and 
people 
with 
technical 
backgrounds are involved, seems to be rarely used. The 
requirements to develop TES for speech and language 
rehabilitation should additionally be considered from a 
clinician's perspective [19]. 
 This study focused on the viewpoint of co-workers 
working with stroke patients. The co-workers were all 
experienced in rehabilitation procedures and patients’ 
therapy. This study concentrated on these informed co-
workers’ viewpoints to determine which requirements are 
essential for the user-friendliness and usability of TES, 
distinguishing between functional and non-functional 
requirements. Therefore, the main research question was:  
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

What are the testbed requirements of technology-enhanced 
systems for speech rehabilitation after stroke, based on 
informed co-workers’ viewpoints? 
 Presented in Section 2 is an extended background, 
declaring previous research on, e.g., speech rehabilitation. 
Section 3 describes the study’s research method, which is 
Design Science. Declared in Section 4 are the findings from 
the study. Section 5 includes the discussion and presented in 
Section 6 is the conclusion.  
  
II. 
EXTENDED BACKGROUND 
Presented in the extended background is previous 
research on speech rehabilitation for stroke patients and 
requirements for TES in speech rehabilitation.  
A.   Speech rehabilitation for stroke patients 
Stroke rehabilitation is a challenging task for both 
patients and healthcare providers, as it requires high 
motivation and hard work from the patients, and extensive 
resources from the stroke rehabilitation staff [5]. Difficulties 
related to speech and language are classified as a condition 
called aphasia.  Aphasia is one of the common stroke 
impairments where a patient’s cognitive performance may 
not be decreased, but the ability to speak, read and/or write 
is affected to some degree [2]. Almost one third of patients 
suffer from aphasia after stroke [2][11]. After a stroke, most 
speech and language impairments recover during the first 
few weeks but the rest of the recovery may take several 
years; t speech and language therapy has been seen to be an 
effective intervention to enhance the recovery process [12]. 
Several studies confirmed that the quality of life of 
people with chronic aphasia is severely affected because of 
their emotional suffering, social limitations, communication 
disorders, and their overall health condition [13]-[15]. Most 
aphasia patients also suffer from anomia. During anomia, a 
person’s capacity to find appropriate words is reduced, 
which creates major problems in a patient’s daily life [2]. 
Because of their speech and language disability, stroke 
patients can no longer express their emotions, opinions, 
thoughts, personality and knowledge, and that lack of 
expression leads to deep frustration [16]. Another impact of 
speech inability is increased uncertainty and fear. The 
patients become uncertain about what is said and what is 
understood, leading to doubts about what was planned in the 
past and a continuous fear of future unpleasant situations. 
Consequently, this devastating disability impacts the people 
living around the patient such as relatives and friends [15]. 
An improvement in speech and language abilities is an 
overall goal for aphasia rehabilitation and Speech and 
Language Therapy (SLT) plays an important and effective 
role in reaching this goal [15]. Several studies highlight the 
benefits of SLT such as improvement in expression, reading 
and writing [17]. Moreover, some evidence has shown that 
highly intensive, highly dosed, and long-term therapy have 
better results as compared to low intensity, low dosed and 
short-term therapy [15]. To increase accessibility and 
decrease the cost of such therapy, the requirements for TES 
to be an affective supplement in speech therapy is of special 
interest. 
B. Requirements for TES in speech rehabilitation 
Here, the functionality for TES in speech rehabilitation 
is divided into functional requirements and non-functional. 
The functional requirements include specific elements of 
TES that support speech therapy, such as word training. 
Non-functional requirements refer to general elements of 
TES, such as a specific color scheme.      
Consideration of non-functional requirements for 
rehabilitation includes that it should be joyful to conduct 
and experience, especially since stroke patients mainly 
suffer from fatigue and therefore need extra encouragement 
to train [18]. The encouragement can be based on game-like 
aspects, with follow-up situations where extra training 
results in various gratifications. As such, functionality of 
follow-ups is of interest, both from a patient’s and a speech 
therapist’s perspective [18][19]. Rybarczyk et al. [18] state 
that other general requirements are that the TES should be 
based on therapeutic material and be designed according to 
different levels of language complexity.  
The functional requirements for speech rehabilitation 
must be personalised based on the patient’s condition and 
intention [19][20]. Simic et al. [19] describe the need for a 
user-centered design based on the patient’s individual set of 
conditions, emphasising that most TES for speech training 
assumes some base level of communication. Unfortunately, 
this base level varies from patient to patient and may 
frequently be lower than TES designers assume, which 
results in patients who are unable to access the training at 
all. Patient’s intention refers to their internal desires for 
successful rehabilitation, where stroke patients’ motivation 
for recovery varies. Simic et al. [19] point out that a 
patient’s intention might interfere with that of the speech 
therapist and could affect the training based on TES.  
In personalising the TES to a patient’s condition and 
intention, several aspects of speech therapy must be 
included as functional elements. For example, object 
identification, which includes simple followed by complex 
order comprehension, is described as one part of the 
functionality [18]. Simple order comprehension is based on 
the construction of a sentence including name-verb-direct 
complement. One such example is: “Put the knife close to 
the plate.” A complex sentence adds a coordinate or a 
subordinate sentence, e.g., “Put the knife close to the plate 
and the fork to the left of the knife.” Within the training for 
order comprehension, Rybarczyk et al. [21] adds functional 
elements, emphasising that the TES should include an 
ability to train writing exercises and text, word selections, 
and specific questions. The order of the writing exercises, or 
any exercise, should be easy for the speech therapist to 
personalise for their patients, offering various ways for 
developing the training based on a patient’s condition and 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

intent. Besides requirements mentioned earlier, the training 
must be based on the patient's mother tongue which means 
TES should be available in many languages; currently 
several training programs only are available in one 
language, e.g., English [20][21].  
Identified non-functional requirements include adaptable 
user control interfaces, potential of using a tablet, user-
friendly graphical layout, and tangible interfaces. The user 
control interface must be adaptable to multiple levels of 
patients’ motor disabilities and there should be the 
possibility to use a tablet for training [22]. The ability to use 
a tablet allows more than one person to easily see and use 
the interface, because relatives and other members of a 
support network can help the stroke patient learn to use the 
tablet. Another helpful aspect of using a tablet is that during 
training this smaller device offers significant support. For 
example, it can support discussions between a person and a 
patient where pointing at a picture on a tablet is easy.  
Rybarczyk et al. [18] and Rybarczyk et al. [21] stress 
several non-functional requirements, including the graphical 
layout. In [18], ease of use of a graphical layout, including 
oral and written instructions, for an ordinary speech training 
software is considered to be essential, to support patients 
with multiple levels of disability who may struggle to learn 
to use the software and/or who need the assistance of a 
relative or other person. They focus on potential tangible 
interfaces, e.g., allowing a user to touch and move objects 
while training ordering of words. Still, the starting point for 
any user interface should be a healthy person’s ability to use 
a software program, e.g., hierarchical menus and an 
ordinary login based on, e.g., a mail address and a password 
decided by the user. Rybarczyk et al. [21] describes the 
context of VR as a training environment, which could 
support individualising the interface by allowing the stroke 
patient to adjust the control sensitivity with, e.g., a 
joystick.     
  
III. 
METHOD 
This study was carried out with a Design Science 
approach inspired by a process [23]. The five steps in this 
process are 1) to explicate the problem, 2) to define 
requirements for an artefact, 3) to design and develop an 
artefact, 4) to demonstrate the artefact and finally 5) to 
evaluate an artefact. Many design science studies, however, 
carry out only a subset of all five steps. For example, with 
the aim of defining requirements for technology enhanced 
speech rehabilitation, Their study was designed with the 
focus of a Requirement-Focused Design Science project. In 
Requirement-Focused Design Science Research, artefact 
design (step 3) is outlined, but does not involve 
implementation, demonstration or evaluation of the artefact 
(steps 4 and 5) [23]. The current study, based on an existing 
problem, tried to similarly define requirements based on a 
combination of literature review and interaction with 
selected experts. 
As highlighted by [24], expert opinions can be useful to 
eliminate bad design ideas early in the design science 
process. Experts’ negative opinions can often be more 
useful than experts’ positive opinions to improve the design 
of an artefact.  
A.  Data collection  
Data have been collected from the ten informants that 
are listed in TABLE I.   
 
TABLE I.        SELECTED INFORMANTS 
 
Informant 
Professional role 
Years of 
experience 
Informant 1 
Speech therapist #1 
25 
Informant 2 
The region’s medically responsible 
doctor 
25 
Informant 3 
Therapist #1 
5 
Informant 4 
Physiotherapist #1 
8 
Informant 5 
Physiotherapist #2 
3 
Informant 6 
Chairman of the local stroke patient 
organisation 
3 
Informant 7 
Speech therapist #2 
4 
Informant 8 
CEO for a small company working with 
game-based stroke rehabilitation 
25 
Informant 9 
Hardware and software specialist at a 
big multinational company 
9 
Informant 
10 
Head of Stroke Team 
15 
 
Informants #3 to #5 and #10 work in the mobile stroke 
rehabilitation team located at the region’s main hospital. 
The entire mobile team includes one manager and five co-
workers. The team is responsible for rehabilitation after 
initial clinical care when patients have been relocated to 
their homes. The mobile stroke team also has regular 
contact with Informants #2 and #6. Informants #8 and #9 are 
independent of any clinical stroke organisation.  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

All informants have different important roles in 
contemporary stroke rehabilitation. Each was selected in a 
combination of purposive sampling and snowball sampling. 
Purposive sampling is a technique where the involved 
researchers rely on their own judgment when choosing 
informants. Snowball sampling means that researchers find 
new 
informants 
that 
are 
recommended 
by 
earlier 
informants.  All informants have expert expertise in the 
investigated area and were carefully selected to satisfy the 
design science idea of using expert opinions [24]. 
To define requirements in this study, data have been 
gathered mainly by semi-structured interviews and partly by 
a literature review. All interviews were carried out with a 
common instrument with a set of basic questions that 
allowed adaptation to the various interviews, see appendix 
1. The common question schedule included themes such as 
general 
stroke 
rehabilitation, 
speech 
rehabilitation, 
informants’ understanding of the use of TES, and their 
views on the potential for TES’ use in speech rehabilitation 
of stroke patients. The interviews were all conducted in 
person with informants; at least one researcher attended. 
The interviews lasted between 45 to 90 minutes.  
The context for stroke patients was mainly the Jämtland/ 
Härjedalen region, a part of Sweden that covers spread-out 
rural areas and few inhabitants. Many stroke patients live in 
rural areas, meaning travel requirements affect the mobile 
stroke team. The team must limit their area for home 
rehabilitation visits to 70 kilometres from the hospital 
located in the region’s city. Therefore, the patients living 
further away must stay at a nursing home, located close to 
the region’s hospital, for shorter time periods (approx. two 
weeks) during their rehabilitation. IN addition, this spread 
of rural areas affects the use of TES, because rural areas 
may have limited bandwidth and spots without Internet 
access (Informants #3 - 5).  
B.   Data analysis 
An inductive thematic analysis was conducted to find 
patterns and themes useful for answering the research 
question using interpretations rather than measurements. 
The analysis was based on audio recorded interviews and 
the transcribed recordings. Each researcher conducted an 
individual analysis followed by group discussions to 
compare analyses, resolve questions and inconsistencies, 
and determine which findings, and their relationships, to 
include. The individual analyses followed the following 
steps, 
described 
below: 
identifying 
meaning 
units, 
condensing meaning units to fit the study, coding units to 
identify requirements, categorising identified requirements, 
and arranging categories within themes [25]-[27]. Meaning 
units are expressions from the informants in favour of 
speech rehabilitation. After identifying interesting meaning 
units, each researcher wrote them down for further work. 
After identifying meaning units, each researcher synthesised 
them by creating excerpts of the core ideas that could 
potentially address the research question of the study. The 
coding identified individual requirements for speech 
rehabilitation, such as using patients’ native languages as a 
foundation. The individual requirements were then 
aggregated into categories, based on the various speech 
disabilities resulting from stroke. The categories were 
arranged within the previously presented functional and 
non-functional themes. The arrangements of categories were 
based on various speech disabilities related to stroke and the 
perspective of functional or non-functional requirements. 
After each researcher completed the individual analysis, the 
group met to compare meaning units, excerpts, coding, 
categories, and themes. Final decisions about categories and 
themes were discussed and agreed upon by all researchers. 
Relevant findings from the analyses are presented in the 
next section. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
After a stroke, due to speech and cognitive impairments, 
a person’s ability to understand, express and communicate is 
decreased; therefore, the TES should be adjusted according 
to the patient’s medical condition (informant 1, 2, 7). 
Informant 1 explained that described that there are many 
mobile phone and tablet-based applications that are 
recommended for speech rehabilitation; however, the 
success of these interventions heavily depends on the 
patient’s medical condition, such as how much of the brain 
function is impaired after stroke. Informant 1, 2 emphasised 
that the TES should be easy to use and patients should feel a 
sense of joyfulness when using the TES. All but three 
informants, including the two speech therapists, highlighted 
the importance of user-centred design for the TES 
(Informant 1-5, 7, 9). Generally, non-medical professionals 
develop most of the TES for speech rehabilitation; therefore, 
they do not understand the needs and limitations of stroke 
patients. Informant 7 argued that TES should be designed in 
cooperation with speech therapists and they should be 
involved throughout the process.  
Informants 1 and 7 express the following variations on 
speech problems for the stroke patient: dysphagia (problems 
with swallowing), aphasia (see earlier description), and 
dysarthria (reduced mobility in the muscles used in speech). 
Initial speech problems are mainly related to dysphagia 
since the patient is unable to consciously initiate a swallow. 
Informant 7 shows a TES that supports training to swallow, 
with English narration. When using the TES, Informant 7 
must off the sound and talk to the patient in Swedish.  
Patients with severe aphasia may suffer from complete 
loss of speech function; therefore, pictures and video-based 
applications can be helpful (Informant 1, 7). For less 
damaged patients, using a TES to record and replay speech 
is recommended as a process that can improve speech 
function and pronunciation.  
An interesting finding is that several informants 
emphasise the importance of considering the patient’s vision 
(Informant 1). Many TES have been developed for persons 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

with a full field of view. For many stroke patients, the full 
field of view is blurred, creating problems while using many 
TES. Unknown and complex graphical user interfaces can 
also be troublesome to learn and accept. As mentioned by 
Informant 6, stroke patients have to relearn many everyday 
tasks which is a cognitive overload that can make it difficult 
to also learn how to navigate new user interfaces (Informant 
3, 6). 
The speech therapists emphasised the need for 
communication tools based on speech problems after a 
stroke (Informant 1, 7). Communication difficulties can be 
reduced in various ways; for example, by using images or 
other alternative communication strategies. The lack of TES 
for easy communication is evident since the demonstrated 
ones are adapted from technologies initially developed for 
children in elementary school. Informant 7 explained that 
most of the currently available TES are initially developed 
for school-going children and then speech therapists use 
them after making adjustments. The content is not adjusted 
for situations in adult lives; for example, content does not 
include training for describing daily routines, such as having 
a cup of coffee or going to the grocery store, with adjustable 
degrees of difficulty. Patients’ communication needs are 
therefore 
unsupported. 
Hence, 
TES 
that 
supports 
communication training should be specifically designed for 
stroke patients.  
To use TES, significant education and training is needed 
(Informant 1-5, 7), not only for the patients but the clinical 
staff as well (Informant 7). To set up proper training, a wide 
range of multimedia functions and content should be 
available to adjust to the needs of each patient. Thusly, the 
speech therapists need to understand the TES and its 
functions to adjust it for each patient. Informant 7 explains 
the need for understanding by describing necessary 
technical tasks; for example, bringing together appropriate 
interactive pictures and video-clips to demonstrate TES 
information and training material. One example of lack of 
education and training was that the staff at a stroke 
rehabilitation centre was not very comfortable with the use 
of technology for distance interaction, such as Skype or 
Zoom (Informant 2, 7, 10). Speech therapists needed, for 
example, to show a video clip while, at the same time, they 
instructed the patient or relative. Hence speech therapists 
need interactive guidance to support the stroke patients’ use 
of Skype. Patients’ personal integrity is also of importance 
during training and education via Skype (Informant 2-5). 
People do not often feel comfortable being monitored or 
recorded via video cameras and therefore this type of 
monitoring technology should not be used frequently 
(Informant 2). Importance of proper education and training 
is even more vital for stroke patients, who often are older 
adults. Older adults with limited previous e-technology 
knowledge or experience tend to have more difficulties in 
learning to use TES than younger adults with knowledge or 
experience (Informant 1-5, 7). The problem with adjustment 
to TES arises for stroke patients doing their rehabilitation at 
the nursing home, since the staff working there are seldom 
interested in information technology and thus do not support 
patients in learning to use the TES (Informant 7). 
Another load on speech therapists who work with stroke 
patients is the lack of speech therapists working at the centre 
for accessibility aid. When prescribing a tablet and software 
to a stroke patient, the tools are rarely correctly adjusted for 
the patient. Therefore, the prescribing speech therapist needs 
to configure both tablet and software by themselves. Related 
to this struggle is the concept of Bring Your Own Device 
(BYOD). Three informants (informant 1, 3, 6) bring up the 
concept in their interview answers. BYOD means that users 
are not limited to use pre-configured devices, but that they 
also can use their own devices. BYOD must not be 
restricted to mobile phones and smartphones and should 
also include tablets, laptops and desktop computers. 
However, the two devices that were brought up were mobile 
phones and tablets. Informant 1 uses applications that can be 
run on simple mobile phones, while Informant 4 uses 
applications that need a smartphone with support for email 
and web login. Their main argument is that a 
familiar navigation system is extra valuable in a situation 
where the patients' cognitive ability to learn and relearn is 
reduced. If BYOD acronym is extended to Bring Your Own 
Technology (BYOT), a term coined by Intel [28], 
technology-enhanced stroke rehabilitation must include 
patients' Internet access, which could be limited in the 
region’s rural areas. 
The findings in this study can be summarised as: 
• 
TES services should be easy to use and bring 
patients a sense of joyfulness 
• 
The development of TES services should involve 
both users and medical professionals, and strive for 
an individualised design 
• 
Speech rehabilitation services should be accessible 
in patients' mother tongues and not only in English 
• 
A variety of TES services should be provided, 
including solutions tailor-made for older adults, 
considering both content and graphical design 
• 
Stroke patients must constantly relearn, and their 
ability to learn new interfaces is limited 
• 
The concept of Bring Your Own Technology 
seems promising, with the idea of patients using 
devices that already are familiar   
   
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Several functional requirements, including adaptability 
to each individual stroke patient as an overall requirement, 
for TES supporting speech rehabilitation is described in the 
literature [18]-[21]. This overall requirement is emphasised 
in the empirical material, which describes speech therapists 
doing their best to adjust to individual stroke patients by 
using TES that is not initially designed for the rehabilitation 
situation. Content of the TES, especially when perceived as 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

irrelevant to patients’ lives, could diminish the motivation 
of the patients, who thereby lose interest in continually 
developing their communication skills. One possible reason 
for the lack of adaptability could be that speech therapists 
rarely are involved in the development of TES for speech 
rehabilitation 
and 
the 
designers 
therefore 
lack   understanding of stroke patients’ various conditions 
and needs. Some conditions are understood in clinical terms, 
such as the categorisation of various conditions within 
anomia [2] or dysarthria. Despite the existence of clinical 
identifications and categorisations of conditions, commonly 
known by speech therapists, TES developers seemingly do 
not include them in TES design. In addition, TES that 
include narratives in the patients’ mother tongue (e.g., 
Swedish) are scarce, resulting in frustration both for the 
speech therapist and the patient. For the speech therapist, 
this lack of language support results in increased 
workload; for the stroke patient it serves as a reminder of 
the new limitations in their life [13]-[15]. 
Follow-up with patients by the speech therapist is a 
somewhat delicate assignment nowadays. Data on follow-
ups should be available to the therapist in a way that allows 
efficiency to see which assignments are conducted, but also 
guarantees privacy for the stroke patient. The patients have 
the right to declare their data as private, limiting access by 
the speech therapist. These rights are important, but 
therapists, on the other hand, lose control of a patients’ 
speech development process, needing to believe in the 
patients’ descriptions of their progress. Here, the relatives 
can play an important role, by being a bridge between the 
patient and the speech therapist. By adding possibilities for 
relatives, or close friends, to be part of the rehabilitation 
using TES, the follow-up and the patient’s motivation to 
continue the training could be improved. These issues 
highlight the importance of trust between the therapist and 
the patient, in addition to the patient’s motivation to develop 
his/her speech skills.    
Non-functional requirements, focusing on the graphical 
layout, are found in the literature [18][21]. They declare that 
the design of the TES should be interactive, entertaining, 
and easy to use. To set up proper communication or 
training, there should be a wide range of multimedia 
functions and content to adjust to the needs of each patient 
and the different goals of the rehabilitation.  Examples of 
multimedia functions include interactive pictures and video-
clips that a speech therapist can use to demonstrate the 
information and training instructions or material. The 
requirement should focus on providing variation in types of 
multimedia, allowing possibilities for adjustment.   
Rarely mentioned in the literature, but emphasised in the 
empirical material, are specific requirements for training the 
use of the TES. The speech therapists and stroke patients 
need general training for both TES and hardware, such as 
tablets, offering more accessible paths for communication 
[22]. Just as few TES are designed for stroke rehabilitation, 
there are few possibilities for education in TES for stroke 
rehabilitation. Training themselves and patients to use the 
TES becomes the responsibility of the speech therapist, and 
is impacted by the stroke patient’s motivation for learning. 
One factor which could affect this motivation positively is 
the size of the region and the long distances: If patients learn 
to use TES quickly, its use could improve efficiency in the 
rehabilitation and decrease the time spent in nursing homes. 
Motivating the speech therapist to gain more knowledge 
about both software and hardware should be a result of 
strategic decisions made by the employer. When education 
is discussed in the literature, it is described as being 
conducted in both written and oral forms, lacking any 
training the form of video [18]. In addition, the lack of 
communication tools focusing on the stroke patient’s daily 
life can cause additional difficulties for the speech therapist, 
which is rarely mentioned in the literature.   
The BYOD concept is spreading to new contexts 
including hospitals. As in many other fields, the BYOD 
practice can be time-efficient and cost-effective for 
hospitals, but include challenges with standardisation and 
security. For distributed stroke rehabilitation in patients 
these 
issues 
seem 
less 
problematic. 
The 
authors' 
recommendation is to focus on usability and user-
friendliness, which highlights the importance of BYOD, 
because stroke patients have reduced capacity to use and 
learn complex interfaces, requiring familiar and user-
friendly navigation systems.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Few available softwares for stroke patients are designed 
using the knowledge of the speech therapists. Shown here is 
that the design of the TES (Technology Enhanced Systems) 
should be interactive, joyful, and easy to use. To set -up 
proper communication or training, there should be a wide 
range of functions and content to adjust to the needs for 
each patient and the different goals of the rehabilitation. 
This requirement is based on the different goals with the 
rehabilitation, as well as the specific needs for the individual 
stroke patient.  Example of a function is that of multimedia 
in which a speech therapist can use to demonstrate the 
information and training instructions or material. The 
multimedia function could include interactive pictures and 
video-clips. Another important requirement is that the 
software should be accessible for relatives or close friends 
to help whenever needed.  
A.    Future work 
The applications used for speech therapy are developed 
with other user groups in mind. For example, applications 
are designed for students in elementary school, and 
therefore include material for children, such as pictures of 
kids’ games and activities. Applications must be designed 
with material that is relevant for stroke patients. Another 
impediment is that the language in the software is often 
English, rather than the mother tongue of the stroke patients. 
Therefore, we propose further prototyping, development, 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

and testing of TES to enrich the foundation for speech 
therapy after a stroke. Finally, it is also important to involve 
stroke patients in the future work, to get their early and 
continuous feedback during the development of a software 
prototype. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1]   P. Langhorne, J. Bernhardt and G. Kwakkel, “Stroke 
rehabilitation”, The Lancet, 377(9778), pp. 1693-1702, 
2011. 
[2]   M. Tousignant et al., “Satisfaction With In-Home Speech 
Telerehabilitation in Post-Stroke Aphasia: an Exploratory 
Analysis”, Journal of the International Society for 
Telemedicine and eHealth, 6, pp. e11 (11-18), 2018.  
[3]   A. Ahmad, P. Mozelius and K. Ahlin, “Testbed requirements 
for technology enhanced stroke rehabilitation to support 
independent living”, in Editor (Ed.)^(Eds.): ‘Book Testbed 
requirements for technology enhanced stroke rehabilitation 
to support independent living’ (INSTICC Press, 2019, edn.), 
2019. 
[4]   H. Zhang , Z. Shen, J. Lin, Y. Chen, and Y. Miao,  
“Familiarity design in exercise games for elderly”, Int J Inf 
Technol, , 22, pp. 1 – 19, 2016. 
[5]   T.P. Yamato, J.E. Pompeu, S.M.  Pompeu and L. Hassett,  
“Virtual reality for stroke rehabilitation’, Physical therapy”, 
96(10), pp. 1508 – 1513, 2016. 
[6]   J. Broeren, A. et al., “Virtual rehabilitation after stroke’, 
Studies in health technology and informatics”, 136, pp. 77 
2008 
[7]   C. Pagliari, “Design and evaluation in eHealth: challenges 
and implications for an interdisciplinary field”, Journal of 
medical Internet research, 9, (2), pp. e15, 2007. 
[8]   R.E. Glasgow, “eHealth evaluation and dissemination 
research”, American journal of preventive medicine, 32, (5), 
pp. S119-S126, 2007. 
[9]   A.D.V.  Dabbs et al., “User-centered design and interactive 
health technologies for patients”, Computers, informatics, 
nursing: CIN, 27, (3), pp. 175, 2009. 
[10]   L. Neuhauser, G.L. Kreps, K. Morrison, M. Athanasoulis, 
N.Kirienko and D. Van Brunt, “Using design science and 
artificial intelligence to improve health communication: 
ChronologyMD case example”, Patient education and 
counseling, 92, (2), pp. 211-217, 2013. 
[11]   J. Greener, P.  Enderby and R. Whurr, “Speech and language 
therapy for aphasia following stroke”, Cochrane Database of 
Systematic Reviews, (4), 1999. 
[12]   A. Gerstenecker and R.M. Lazar, “Language recovery 
following stroke”, The Clinical Neuropsychologist, pp. 1-20, 
2019. 
[13]   K. Hilari, R. Wiggins, P. Roy, S. Byng and S.  Smith, 
“Predictors of health-related quality of life (HRQL) in 
people with chronic aphasia”, Aphasiology, 17, (4), pp. 365-
381, 2003. 
[14]   K. Ross, and R. Wertz, “Quality of life with and without 
aphasia”, Aphasiology, 17, (4), pp. 355-364, 2003. 
[15]   H.P Øra, M. Kirmess, M.C.  Brady, I.E Winsnes, S.M. 
Hansen and F. Becker, “Telerehabilitation for aphasia–
protocol of a pragmatic, exploratory, pilot randomized 
controlled trial”, Trials,  19, (1), pp. 208, 2018. 
[16]   M.B 
Johansson, 
M. 
Carlsson 
and 
K. 
Sonnander, 
“Communication difficulties and the use of communication 
strategies: from the perspective of individuals with aphasia”, 
International journal of language & communication 
disorders, 47, (2), pp. 144-155, 2012. 
[17]   M.C. Brady, H. Kelly, J. Godwin, P. Enderby and P. 
Campbell, “Speech and language therapy for aphasia 
following stroke”, Cochrane database of systematic reviews, 
(6), 2016. 
[18]   Y.  Rybarczyk and J. Fonseca, “Tangible interface for a 
rehabilitation of comprehension in aphasic patients”, 2011. 
[19]    T. Simic, C. Leonard, L. Laird, J. Cupit, F. Höbler  and E. 
Rochon, “A usability study of internet-based therapy for 
naming deficits in aphasia”, American Journal of Speech-
Language Pathology, 25, (4), pp. 642-653, 2016. 
[20]   P. Kesav, S. Vrinda, S. Sukumaran, P. Sarma and P.Sylaja, 
“Effectiveness of speech language therapy either alone or 
with add-on computer-based language therapy software 
(Malayalam version) for early post stroke aphasia: A 
feasibility study”, Journal of the neurological sciences, 380, 
pp. 137-141, 2017. 
[21]   Y. Rybarczyk, J. Fonseca  and R. Martins, “Lisling 3D: a 
serious game for the treatment of portuguese aphasic 
patients”, in Editor (Ed.)^(Eds.): ‘Book Lisling 3D: a serious 
game for the treatment of portuguese aphasic patients’ 
(edn.), 2013.  
[22]   K. Mallet et al., “RecoverNow: A patient perspective on the 
delivery of mobile tablet-based stroke rehabilitation in the 
acute care setting”, International Journal of Stroke, 14, (2), 
pp. 174-179, 2019. 
[23]   P. Johannesson and E. Perjons, “An introduction to design 
science”  (Springer, 2014), 2014. 
[24]   R.J. Wieringa, “Design science methodology for information 
systems and software engineering’ (Springer, 2014), 2014. 
[25]   S. Elo and H. Kyngäs, “The qualitative content analysis 
process”, Journal of advanced nursing, 62, (1), pp. 107-115, 
2008. 
[26]   M. Bengtsson, “How to plan and perform a qualitative study 
using content analysis”, NursingPlus Open, 2, pp. 8-14, 
2016. 
[27]   C. Erlingsson and P. Brysiewicz, “A hands-on guide to doing 
content analysis”, African Journal of Emergency Medicine, 
2017, 7, (3), pp. 93-99, 2017. 
[28]   A.  Freeman, S.A. Becker and C. Hall, “2015 NMC 
Technology Outlook: Brazilian Universities”, in Editor 
(Ed.)^(Eds.): ‘Book 2015 NMC Technology Outlook: 
Brazilian Universities’ (The New Media Consortium, edn.), 
2015. 
 
APPENDIX 1 
A. First interviews 
1. How do you currently work with Stroke Rehabilitation?  
2. What different technology-supported solutions have you 
been in contact with when it comes to Stroke 
rehabilitation and to what extent have you used these? 
Pros and Cons? 
3. What requirements do you think should be met for e-
solutions at rehab clinics as well as in the patients' home 
environment? 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

4. How do you think that your patients have received 
technology-supported solutions? Any differences in age, 
gender or education?  
5. Have you encountered any problems or conflicts 
regarding technology-supported solutions for Stroke 
rehabilitation, such as current ownership, use, support? 
6. Do you want you to use more / have more knowledge 
about 
technology-supported 
readings 
for 
stroke 
rehabilitation?  
7. To what extent do you have your workplace 
opportunity/budget to try new e-solutions?  
8. What 
are 
your 
background/education 
and 
your 
relationship with this area?  
9. Is there anything that you think I forgot to ask about? 
B.  Second interview with speech therapists 
1. What is language reduction? 
2. Can 
you 
explain 
the 
diagnosis 
of 
aphasia, 
dysarthria, verbal apraxia and dysphagia? 
3. Can you explain the rehabilitation for aphasia, 
dysarthria, verbal apraxia and dysphagia? 
4. Can you describe your functional requirements for an 
application for aphasia, dysarthria, verbal apraxia and 
dysphagia? 
5. Can you describe your non-functional requirements for 
an application for aphasia, dysarthria, verbal apraxia and 
dysphagia? 
6. Do you see any special requirements (general and for an 
application) in terms of speech rehabilitation for stroke 
patients in Region J / H? 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

