Personalize Systems for Psychological Evaluation 
Performance and Vigilance Monitoring 
Marek Penhaker, Radka Jeziorska 
Department of Cybernetics and Biomedical Engineering,  
VSB-Technical University of Ostrava, FEECS 
Czech Republic 
e-mail: marek.penhaker@vsb.cz, radka.jeziorska@vsb.cz   
Vilem Novak, Katerina Panackova 
Children Neurology Clinic 
University Hospital Ostrava, Czech Republic 
Czech Republic 
e-mail:vilem.novak@fno.cz , katerina.panackova@vsb.cz 
  
 
Abstract - This work deals with the monitoring of sleep 
deprivation, sleep disorders and investigative methods for their 
diagnosis. The aim of this work was to develop an algorithm for 
measuring and evaluating mental performance and vigilance 
tested. Computer based program consists of six tasks that tested 
memory, reaction time, coordination of movement and level of 
sleepiness 
using 
the 
Epworth 
Sleepiness 
Scale. 
Sixty 
measurements were performed using the above mentioned 
program. 
These 
data 
were 
statistically 
processed 
and 
characteristic values were determined for a select group of healthy 
people. For the creation of the program, the Visual C# 
development environment was used, and the measured data are 
stored in a MS Access database on cloud. Statistical data 
processing was done in software Statgraphics Plus. 
Keywords - sleep disorders diagnosis; Epworth scale; 
mental performance; vigilance; statistical evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Sleep is a basic biological need. It is characterized by 
reduced movement activity and reduced reactivity to external 
influences. The body while it rests, function system slows down 
and starts running the regenerative processes. The changes in 
physiological changes, reduced body temperature, slowing of 
the heart and respiratory rate, reduced blood pressure, changing 
hormone levels in the brain. Good quality sleep is important for 
maintaining good physical and mental health. It is essential for 
the proper functioning of the central nervous system (CNS), 
assists in tissue regeneration and healing, promotes healthy 
growth, and restores the immune system and thereby increasing 
the body's resistance to disease. 
Total sleep time per day for different animals differs greatly, 
approximately from 2 hours to 20 hours. The sleep duration for 
humans is individual. It is reported that the average sleep of 
humans lasts 7-8 hours, but some individuals have different 
sleep needs can vary from 4 to 12 hours of sleep per day. [1],[ 2] 
A. Sleep Disorders  
Studies show that 40% of adults have sleep problems and 
their number increases with increasing age. About 25% of adults 
indicates occasional sleep disorders, 10% are difficulties 
permanent and 5% of respondents suffer from excessive daytime 
sleepiness, and it influence work is social impact on their quality 
of lives. Under the current international qualification with sleep 
disorders divided into six basic categories: insomnia, respiratory 
disorders linked to sleep, hypersomnia, circadian rhythm 
disorders, parasomnias and abnormal movements linked to 
sleep. 
B. Circadian Rhythm Disorders 
Circadian rhythm disorders arise different timing of our own 
biological rhythm or the rhythm desynchronisation required 
external environment. Among these syndrome disorders include 
changes time zones (jet lag syndrome), which arises time shift 
during transcontinental flights. Other disorders related to 
circadian rhythm shift work. Daytime sleep for workers who 
perform night shift, fully substitute its length or quality night's 
sleep. In delayed sleep phase one goes to bed around 2 to 4 hours 
of the morning and getting up late in the morning until noon. 
Conversely, at advanced stages people go to bed early tonight 
(18 to 20 hours) and wakes up very early in the morning (1 to 3 
hours).[3, 4] 
C. Symptoms of Sleep Deprivation 
Symptoms include emotional problems, anxiety, stress and 
depression, people are irritation. During prolonged insomnia 
may occur disorientation and problems with speech. These 
symptoms usually disappears after sufficient sleep and have no 
other consequences. Chronic insomnia can have long-term 
consequences, such as high blood pressure, heart failure, and 
psychiatric problems in the worst case, death. 
D. Exploatation 
Sleep deprivation is used in scientific studies to investigate 
the function sleep and its biological mechanisms. Most often 
used in laboratory rats, for which examines how total sleep 
deprivation and deprivation of REM or NREM only phase. Lack 
of sleep is also used as a torture and interrogation techniques. 
This fact is used tired that people are more likely to speak the 
truth. Investigation is the first kept awake for several days and 
then when he is finally allowed to fall asleep, suddenly 
awakened and interrogated. According to recent studies it is 
possible to use sleep deprivation, also for the treatment of 
depression. This stages have to be measured and analyzed 
especially for industry and medical application and safety 
maintenance. [5],[6],[7] 
E. Examination Methods 
The basic step for the diagnosis of sleep disorders is a 
detailed medical history specifying sleep and diet excluding 
exogenous factors (drugs, alcohol, drugs).This history some 
patients sufficient for a diagnosis. Character disorder specify 
sleep questionnaires, eg. sleep diary, Epworth sleepiness scale 
or Stafford sleepiness scale (ESS). Basic testing method is 
polysomnography. The differential diagnosis individual failures 
is used multiple sleep latency (MSLT) and maintain wakefulness 
test (MWT) which is determined using the measure of daytime 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

sleepiness. The independent self-monitoring system for sleep 
deprivation and vigilance is not common or the systems are 
under psychologists and neurologist’s control in ambulance. 
[8],[9],[10],[11] 
II. 
MEASUREMENT OF MENTAL PERFORMANCE AND 
VIGILANCE 
The aim of this work was to design and develop a 
methodology for testing and evaluation of mental performance 
and vigilance tested. Program was created consisting of six tasks 
which test memory, reaction time, coordination of movement 
and level of sleepiness using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. The 
obtained data are stored in a database and will be further 
processed and analyzed statistically. 
A. Database Conception 
The database structure was designed so that the information 
it contained as much information on mental performance and 
alertness of the patient like time of the test each task, errors in 
tasks, number of success answer act. To connect to the database 
through a data adapter Microsoft.ACE.OLEDB.12.0, because 
the database was created in .accdb format (Microsoft Access). 
The database is located in the data directory of the program and 
mirroring to google Drive cloud. [12],[13],[14] 
B. Task 1 - Presentation of Words and Their Immediate 
Equipment 
The first task is focused on memory investigated. This task 
is not determined only number of correctly remembered words, 
but also the number of poorly remembered and words that said 
the test more than once. The monitor will gradually appear 30 
words (Figure 1). The challenge is to remember what they most. 
When all the words have tested must equip as many words 
presented, Regardless of how the order. The memorized words 
then enter in the text box (Figure 1), which appears after 
presentation of all 30 words. The role is not limited. Presentation 
of words is repeated three times. For each repeating the same 
words appear in the same order as in the first experiment. It is 
necessary to always insert all remembered the words, including 
those that were already entered in previous experiments. That 
we will not only memorized the number of words in each 
experiment, we also observe whether repeatedly tested 
remember more words. 
 
Figure 1.Inserting memorized words 
C. Task 2 - Sorting Numerical Series 
The objective of this task is to sort the numbers 1 to 15 in the 
fastest time. For this purpose form in which the 15 keys with 
individual numbers (Figure 2), these buttons are arranged in 
three rows and five columns. Button sequence is random. When 
you click on this button right. The button will disappear. This 
task is not recorded only time during which the test line up 
correctly series of numbers, but also the number of false clicks. 
 
Figure 2. Sorting numerical series 
D. Task 3 - Test of the ReactionTtime 
This role is based on a psychomotor vigilance test, the test 
responds pressing the button to light the bulb. In my role appear 
on the monitor green rectangle, which will be at different time 
intervals to change color to red (Figure 3). The goalies to click 
on the rectangle as soon as possible after the color change from 
green to red. The color varies randomly in the interval 2-10 
seconds. Total time jobs are 2 minutes. Do database imposing 
reaction time individual experiments from which the end of the 
job calculated average reaction time. An important figure is the 
number of false clicks, ie. clicks, when the rectangle green. 
 
Figure 3.Change the color of the rectangle 
E. Task 4 and 5  - Pulling Shapes 
These tasks are focused on the coordination of movement. 
The monitor shows the image Star shaped (Figure 4). The 
challenge is to shape Stroke clockwise, move the mouse but is 
reversed - up is down and down is up, left and right direction 
remains unchanged. Properly trace shape changes color. If you 
get out of shape, color cursor turns red and must be returned to 
the place buckling. The task starts ramming of blue point and 
ends when the entire pattern correctly trace or after 90 seconds. 
Results in displacement, which trace the test, expressed in 
percentage. This task is carried out first and then the dominant 
non-dominant hand 
F. Task 6  - Epthword Sleepiness Scale 
This questionnaire (Figure 5) measures the general level of 
sleepiness during the day. Identifies option snap or sleep on a 4-
point scale (0 - I'd never take a nap/a, 1 - a small chance nap, 2 - 
medium chance nap, 3 - high chance nap) in 8 different 
situations or activities that are part of everyday life. The total 
score is the sum of ESS points in different situations and can 
take values from 0 to 24. The database is not saved only the total 
score, but also the results for each scenario. The results of this 
task will be taken as a reference in statistical data processing 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 4. Pulling shapes 
III. 
PROGRAM CONTROL 
Program Control for measuring mental performance and 
alertness is done by tablet or mouse. It was necessary to find a 
tool that would enable the program to operate even if one not 
used to working with a mouse. These people could be 
misrepresented the results of each task.  [15],[16] 
Tablet was chosen as a compromise between control mouse 
and implementation of special control. It consists of a solid 
substrate with an active area of a rectangle and moving the 
sensing device in the form of a wireless pen. The computer input 
peripherals allows operate a computer in a similar way as a 
computer mouse (cursor control). 
 
Figure 5.Epworth Sleepiness Scale  
 
To realize the test was elected tablet G-Pen F610 (Figure 6). 
It is a widescreen tablet with a working area of 150 x 250 mm (6 
x 10 „). The computer is connected via an interface USB, from 
which is also supplied. For their work with the tablet used 
pressure-sensitive pen, which is capable of recognize the 1024-
level pressure for accurate shooting. The pen is cordless and are 
available there dedicated buttons for left and right mouse button.  
 
Figure 6. Tablet templates for test 
When testing must be used in tablet mode, absolute 
positioning, the position of the pen on the tablet corresponds to 
the position of the cursor on the screen. This is adapted to the 
program, which individual form elements adapt to the screen 
resolution, and therefore can be used monitors of different sizes 
and different resolutions. For the role of „Sorting numerical 
sequence“ and „Test reaction time“ were then created templates 
(Figure 6), which help better control tasks using a tablet. These 
templates are inserted top sheet tablet. [17] 
IV. 
STATISTICAL EVALUATION OF MEASUREMENT DATA 
Data were obtained using an assay for measuring mental 
performance and vigilance. Was tested a total of 60 people aged 
21 to 28 years. Tested had normal sleep patterns and not been 
treated with any kind of sleep disorder. The statistical evaluation 
was used program Statgraphics Plus version 5.0. 
A. Analyzed data 
Output data in a program objectively measured data showing 
mental performance and alertness measured entity. These data 
are classified using variables which serve as input for statistical 
evaluation. 
The same number of men (n=30) and women (n=30) took 
part in the measurement.  Number of tested with dominant right 
hand is n=51 what creates 85% of all respondents. Number of 
tasted with dominant left hand is n=9 what creates 15% of all 
respondents. 
The examined group of persons that was selected for this 
study is the group of young people of age between 20 to 30 years 
who, in time of the testing, did not suffer from any 
hypnophrenosis and who had normal sleep habits. 60 
respondents of the age from 21 to 28 years complied with this 
criterion from which there were 30 men and 30 women. Before 
the intrinsic test completing the tested were asked not to use any 
drinks with caffeine content, e.g. tea or coffee, and also not to 
smoke. 
Time demand on the test gave rise to the creation of two 
versions because its length ranges approximately from 20 up to 
30 minutes. Therefore, a part of data was collected by means of 
the first version when the tablet was used for controlling. The 
rest of data was obtained from the respondents to whom the 
program was sent by e-mail. The advantage of this version was 
addressing of a huge number of persons. The response rate was 
about 50% in this case. [17] 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

V. 
RESULTS 
A. The Dependence Between the Total Score and the ESS Sex 
The first step of the test according to the total score of the 
ESS and sex create a Table (Tab. 1), which contains the observed 
frequency and the relative frequency and the expected 
frequency. For proper results it is necessary to observe the test 
assumption that none of the expected frequency of not less than 
2 and at least 80% of the expected frequency must be greater 
than 5. To meet these prerequisites are met, the overall score 
ESS divided into three categories: 0-6 points, 7-8 points, and 9-
24 points. 
TABLE I.  
A FREQUENCY TABLE FOR THE CORRELATION BETWEEN 
THE TOTAL SCORE AND ESS 
 
1-6 standart 
value 
7-8 border 
value 
9-24 increased 
value 
man 
14 23,33% 14  
7 11,67% 7  
9 15,00% 9  
woman 
14 23,33% 14  
7 11,67% 7  
9 15,00% 9  
Sum 
28 46,67%  
14 23,33%  
18 30,00%  
 
On Table (Tab. 1) is seen that all of the expected frequency 
of greater than 5, it is possible to use the chi-square test. Before 
the test still possible the null and alternative hypotheses: 
 
The null hypothesis is: ESS depend on gender. 
 
The alternative hypothesis is: ESS depends on sex. 
Since the p-value was set to 1, i.e., p-value is greater than 
0.05, do not reject the null hypothesis and we can say that the 
overall ESS scores depend on the sex (of at level 0.05). 
B. Correlation Between the Number of Memorized Words and 
a Total Score of ESS 
In this test, we find that the correlation between the number 
of memorized words on the third attempt and a total score of 
ESS. ESS scores are divided into three groups of 0-6 points 7-8 
points 9-24 points. To determine this dependence, we use 
ANOVA method by which we can compare the mean number of 
selections. Must be met assuming a normal distribution and 
homoscedasticity (ie. The same variance). If you have the same 
scattering data, but does not come from a normal distribution, 
we used the nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test, the mean values 
do not test, but compliance medians. 
 First, we formulate null and alternative hypotheses:  
 
Null hypothesis: Number of memorized words 
depend on the  ESS score.  
 
Alternative hypothesis: Number of memorized 
words depends on the ESS score. 
Before the test is needed to verify the normality of the data, 
where the null hypothesis is: The data comes from a normal 
distribution. For testing normality is used chi-square test of 
goodness of fit. P-value of 0.031 is the first choice, ie. p-value 
<0.05, so we reject the null hypothesis and we can say that the 
data come from a normal distribution. P-value for the second 
selection is 0.208, ie. p-value> 0.05, so do not reject the null 
hypothesis and we can say that the data comes from a normal 
distribution. P-value 0.343 is the third selection, ie. p-value> 
0.05, therefore, we accept the null hypothesis and we can say 
that the data comes from a normal distribution.  
Next, we verify homoscedasticity, where the null hypothesis 
is: Scattering of memorized words all selections are the same. 
Because the data from the first choice does not come from a 
normal distribution, use Levene test. P-value is 0.10, ie. p-
value> 0.05, do not reject the null hypothesis and we can say that 
the spread of memorized words all selections are the same. 
Because the data from the first choice does not come from a 
normal distribution, we cannot use ANOVA. To test the 
dependence use Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance to 
test conformity medians. P-value of 0.018. This value is smaller 
than the significance level of 0.05, so we reject. Analysis of sleep 
deprivation null hypothesis and accept the alternative 
hypothesis. We can say that the number of memorized words 
depends on the total score (ESS at a significance level of 0.05).  
For a more accurate conclusion in rejecting the null 
hypothesis needs to be done post hoc analysis. The maximum 
number of memorized words are tested with a lower Scores for 
ESS. The biggest difference in the number of memorized words 
is tested with ESS between 0-6 and 7 to 8 more homogeneous 
than the time required to sort the numerical range for the test 
with ESS 7-8 and ESS 9 to 24 The higher the ESS, the longer 
the time required to sort the numerical series. The biggest 
difference time required to sort the numerical series is among 
tested with ESS 0-6 and 9 to 24 
C. Dependence Between the Average Response Time and 
Overall Score ESS 
In this assay, verify whether the relationship between the 
reaction time and the average total score of the ESS. ESS scores 
are divided into three groups of 0-6 points 7-8 points 9-24 points. 
To determine this dependence, we use ANOVA method by 
which we can compare the mean number of selections. Must be 
met assuming a normal distribution and homoscedasticity (ie. 
The same variance). If you have the same scattering data, but 
does not come from a normal distribution, we used the 
nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test, the mean values do not test, 
but compliance medians. 
First, we formulate null and alternative hypotheses: 
 
Null hypothesis: The average response time does not 
depend on the total score of ESS. 
 
Alternative hypothesis: The average response time 
depends 
on 
the 
total 
score 
of 
ESS. 
 
Before the test is needed to verify the normality of the data, 
where the null hypothesis is: The data comes from a normal 
distribution. For testing normality is used chi-square test of 
goodness of fit. P-value of 0.67 is the first choice, ie. p-value> 
0.05, so do not reject the null hypothesis and we can say that the 
data comes from a normal distribution. P-value is 0.15 second 
selection, ie. p-value> 0.05, so do not reject the null hypothesis 
and we can say that the data comes from a normal distribution. 
P-value of the third selection is 0.45, ie. p-value> 0.05, so do not 
reject the null hypothesis and we can say that the data comes 
from a normal distribution. 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Next, we verify homoscedasticity, where the null hypothesis 
is: Scattering average times of all selections is the same. Because 
all selections are normally distributed data, use Bartlett's test. P-
value is 0.056, ie. p-value> 0.05, do not reject the null hypothesis 
and we can say that the variance of the average reaction time of 
selection is the same. 
Because all the preconditions are met, we can proceed to the 
actual ANOVA. P-value is 0.0002. This value is smaller than the 
significance level of 0.05, so we reject the null hypothesis and 
we can say that the average response time is dependent on the 
overall score ESS (at a significance level of 0.05). 
D. Dependence Between the Track Trace Non-Dominant 
Hand and aTotal Score of ESS 
In this test, we find that the relationship between the track 
non-dominant hand and an overall score of ESS. ESS scores are 
divided into three groups of 0-6 points 7-8 points 9-24 points. 
To determine this dependence, we use ANOVA method by 
which we can compare the mean number of selections. Must be 
met assuming a normal distribution and homoscedasticity (ie. 
The same variance). If you have the same scattering data, but 
does not come from a normal distribution, we used the 
nonparametric Kruskal-Wallis test, the mean values do not test, 
but compliance medians. 
First, we formulate null and alternative hypotheses: 
 
Null hypothesis: The track does not depend on the total 
score of ESS. 
 
Alternative hypothesis: The path depends on the total 
score of ESS. 
Before the test is needed to verify the normality of the data, 
where the null hypothesis is: The data comes from a normal 
distribution. For testing normality is used chi-square test of 
goodness of fit. P-value of 0.0001 is the first choice, ie. p-value 
<0.05, therefore rejected the null hypothesis and I can say that 
the data come from a normal distribution. P-value of 0.071 is the 
second choice, ie. p-value> 0.05, so do not reject the null 
hypothesis and we can say that the data comes from a normal 
distribution. P-value 0.343 is the third selection, ie. p-value> 
0.05, so do not reject the null hypothesis and we can say that the 
data comes from a normal distribution. 
Next, we verify homoscedasticity, where the null hypothesis 
is: Scattering tracks all selections are the same. Since the date of 
first choice does not come from a normal distribution, use 
Levene test. P-value is 0.59, ie. p-value> 0.05, do not reject the 
null hypothesis and we can say that the scattering paths all 
selections are the same. 
Because the data from the first choice does not come from a 
normal distribution, we cannot use ANOVA. To test the 
dependence use Kruskal-Wallis one-way analysis of variance to 
test conformity medians. P-value is 0.16. This value is greater 
than the significance level of 0.05, so do not reject the null 
hypothesis. We can say that the track trace non-dominant hand 
is independent of the total score (ESS at a significance level of 
0.05). 
VI. 
DISCUSSIONS 
The aim of this work was to study methods for the diagnosis 
of sleep disorders and the creation of a program to measure 
mental performance and alertness on the basis of which it is 
possible to determine whether the test suffers from lack of sleep. 
Was designed and created program stack the six tasks with 
which testing memory, reaction time, coordinate the movement 
and level of sleepiness. 
There were an average of individual tasks for testing in the 
range 21 to 28 years who have normal sleep patterns and do not 
suffer from a sleep disorder. The first task was tested by 
memory. The average number of words memorized in the first 
experiment was 10.1 ± 3.1 words, in the second experiment, it 
was 16.2 ± 3.8 words, in the third 21.0 ± 3.5 words. In the second 
task was average time required to sort the numerical series 13.8 
± 2.4 seconds. The average reaction time in the third test role 
was 0.438 ± 0.067 seconds. Percentage tracks trace dominant 
hand was 70.7% ± 22.5%, when using non-dominant hand, the 
percentage 
of 
paths 
69.3% 
± 
26.0%. 
The value of total Epworth Sleepiness Scale score was 7.1 ± 3.2. 
As a point of reference was chosen Epworth sleepiness scale, 
the results of which were compared results of the study Dr. 
Murray Johns, who created this method. Because the results of 
ESS in this study were comparable to studies, it was possible to 
use the results for further testing. 
In testing, it was found that there is a correlation between the 
number of memorized words, the time required for alignment of 
numerical series and the average reaction time and the total score 
of the ESS. At the same tim the followed track traced of both 
dominant and non-dominant hand depends on the overall ESS 
score is strongly.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
Computer aided testing of psychometric variables seems to 
be very useful in the medical practice and research. Many testing 
procedures are well-grounded by a simple algorithm and they 
are suitable for the implementation in a form of the computer 
software. The software enables a quick and cheap measurement 
of the psychometric variables.  
The effect of the personal UI interaction within device is 
conclusive for accuracy and reliability of the psychometric 
evaluation. The classical PC’s UI are not very appropriate 
because of variable computer skills in population. The button 
device as used in the Cognitive Drug Research Ltd.  System is 
more useful due to its simplicity. Use of pressure-sensed pen and 
tablet is another interesting way because of almost general 
writing skills in population. 
This method of measuring mental performance and alertness 
was created in collaboration with the University Hospital in 
Ostrava. The proposed scheme can be further used for testing 
and collection of additional data and to determine the average 
value, characterizing the other groups tested. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work and the contributions were supported by the project 
SP2015/179 'Biomedical engineering Systems XI', and this 
paper has been elaborated in the framework of the project 
„Support research and development in the Moravian-Silesian 
Region 2014 DT 1 - Research Teams“(RRC/07/2014). Financed 
from the budget of the Moravian-Silesian Region. 
 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

REFERENCES 
[1] 
C. Borzová, „ Insomnia and other sleep disorders “, 1. 
vyd. ed. Praha: Grada, 2009. 
[2] 
S. Nevsimalova „Disorders of sleep and wakefulness” 
Habilitation work. Praha,, 1996. 
[3] 
S. Nevsimalova, „The Diagnosis and Treatment of Pediatric 
Narcolepsy,“ Current Neurology and Neuroscience Reports, 
vol. 14, Aug 2014. 
[4] 
J. Pisko, L. Pastorek, J. Buskova, K. Sonka, and S. 
Nevsimalova, „Nightmares in narcolepsy: underinvestigated 
symptom?,“ Sleep Medicine, vol. 15, pp. 967-972, Aug 
2014. 
[5] 
M. Behan and O. Krejcar, „Mobile Widget Technology as a 
Solution for Smart User Interaction,“ in Ambient M
 
edia and Systems. vol. 118, C. T. Angelis, D. 
Fotiadis, and A. T. Tzallas, Eds., ed, 2013, pp. 113-122. 
[6] 
M. Behan and O. Krejcar, „Modern smart device-based 
concept of sensoric networks,“ Eurasip Journal on Wireless 
Communications and Networking, pp. 458-466, 2013 2013. 
[7] 
I. Idris, A. Selamat, N. Ngoc Thanh, S. Omatu, O. Krejcar, 
K. Kuca, et al., „A combined negative selection algorithm-
particle swarm optimization for an email spam detection 
system,“ Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, 
vol. 39, pp. 33-44, Mar 2015. 
[8] 
M. W. Johns, „A new perspective on sleepiness,“ Sleep and 
Biological Rhythms, vol. 8, pp. 170-179, Jul 2010. 
[9] 
S. S. Sullivan and C. A. Kushida, „Multiple Sleep Latency 
Test and Maintenance of Wakefulness Test,“ Chest, vol. 
134, pp. 854-861, Oct 2008. 
[10] 
M. Cerny, M. Penhaker „The HomeCare and circadian 
rhythm, pp. 786-794, 2008. 
[11] 
D. Vybiral, M. Augustynek, and M. Penhaker, „Devices for 
position detection,“ Journal of Vibroengineering, vol. 13, 
pp. 531-535, SEP 2011 2011. 
[12] 
J. Majernik and P. Jarcuska, „Education of Clinical 
Disciplines in Pre and Post-Graduate Study Oriented on 
Increasing of Newest Infectious Diseases Knowledge,“ in 
3rd International Conference on New Horizons in Education 
- Inte 2012. vol. 55, A. Isman, Ed., ed, 2012, pp. 604-611. 
[13] 
J. Majernik, P. Jarcuska, and Ieee, „Web-based delivery of 
medical education contents used to facilitate learning of 
infectology subjects,“ 2014 10th International Conference 
on Digital Technologies (Dt), pp. 225-229, 2014 2014. 
[14] 
M. W. Chughtai, A. Selamat, I. Ghani, and J. J. Jung, „E-
Learning Recommender Systems Based on Goal-Based 
Hybrid Filtering,“ International Journal of Distributed 
Sensor Networks, 2014 2014. 
[15] 
P. Brida, J. Duha, and M. Krasnovsky, „On the accuracy of 
weighted proximity based localization in wireless sensor 
networks,“ in Personal Wireless Communications. vol. 245, 
R. Bestak, B. Simak, and E. Kozlowska, Eds., ed, 2007, pp. 
423-432. 
[16] 
P. Brida, F. Gaborik, J. Duha, and J. Machaj, „Indoor 
Positioning System Designed for User Adaptive Systems,“ 
in New Challenges for Intelligent Information and Database 
Systems. vol. 351, N. T. Nguyen, B. Trawinski, and J. J. 
Jung, Eds., ed, 2011, pp. 237-245. 
[17] 
V. Novak, R. Jeziorska, and M. Penhaker, „Computer Based 
Psychometric Testing and Well Being Software for Sleep 
Deprivation 
Analysis,“ 
in 
Advanced 
Methods 
for 
Computational Collective Intelligence. vol. 457, N. T. 
Nguyen, B. Trawinski, R. Katarzyniak, and G. S. Jo, Eds., 
ed, 2013, pp. 207-216. 
[18] 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale. Neuropsychological tests 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://wiki.galenhealthcare. 
com/index.php/File:ECalcs_Epworth_Sleepiness_Scale.jpg
 
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

