A Health VC for Chronic Disease Management in a Global Context 
 
 
 
Christo El Morr,PhD 
School of Health Policy 
and Management, York 
University Toronto, 
ON Canada 
elmorr@yorku.ca 
  
 
 
Shadi Saleh, PhD 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy, American 
University of Beirut 
Beirut, Lebanon 
ss117@aub.edu.lb 
 
 
Walid Ammar, MD 
Ministry of Public 
Health 
Beirut, Lebanon 
mphealth@cyberia.net.l
b 
 
 
 
Nabil Natafgi 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy, American 
University of Beirut, 
Beirut, Lebanon 
nmn13@aub.edu.lb 
  
 
Karen Kazandjian 
Department of Health 
Management and 
Policy, American 
University of Beirut, 
Beirut, Lebanon 
kk03@aub.edu.lb
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents an implementation of hybrid 
Health Virtual Community (Health VC) using a predefined 
model to design Health VC in a developing country. It provides 
an analysis of the components needed in an environment where 
high technology is not as available as in a developing country. 
We argue that virtual community researches should take into 
consideration a more flexible approach to model VCs and we 
suggest changes to the model. 
Keywords-Health 
Virtual 
Communities; 
Virtual 
Communities; 
Online 
Communities; 
Chronic 
Disease 
Management; Chronic Disease; Modeling; Global Health; 
Developing Countries; LMIC. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Worldwide, 
chronic 
diseases 
(e.g., 
diabetes, 
hypertension, 
cardiovascular 
diseases, 
and 
chronic 
respiratory diseases) are hitting an increased number of the 
population. Globally, Chronic diseases related caused 35 
million death out of 58 million in 2005; moreover, the 
fatalities caused by cardiovascular diseases is almost twice 
the number of fatalities caused all infectious diseases 
combined (e.g., tuberculosis, malaria, AIDS) [1]. Besides the 
lower life expectancies, populations in developing countries 
suffer from chronic diseases [2]; in fact, the number of 
deaths from Cardio-Vascular Diseases (CVD) in developing 
countries is twice the same number in developed countries, 
and more than three-quarters of deaths related to diabetes are 
occurring in developing countries [1]. 
An intervention that uses eHealth System has the ability 
to allow chronic disease management. Health Virtual 
Communities has been identified as one eHealth tool that 
allow such intervention. Virtual Communities (VCs) were 
subject to investigation from many sides to explore their 
advantages and challenges. Researchers in healthcare 
investigated ways to use VCs for healthcare delivery and 
support [3][4]. In an attempt to understand and sketch the 
VC, models were proposed for static and mobile virtual 
communities [5][6]. 
In this paper, we will describe the development a health 
VC in a developing country for chronic disease management. 
The health VC was designed based on previously suggested 
model [7]. We will explain the Health VC components and 
discuss the ability of this model to satisfy the requirements of 
virtual community definition, taking into account the 
technological challenges of developing countries in a global 
health context. 
We will start with a description of the health VC for 
chronic disease management Virtual Community in section 
II. We will, then, explain the design of our Health VC in 
section III. We provide a discussion of our Health VC in 
section IV and conclude the paper in section V. 
II. 
BACKGROUND: HEALTH VIRTUAL COMMUNITIES 
A Health Virtual Community cover a wide range of 
clinical specialties, technologies and stakeholders [8]. 
Members of a Health VC can be health care providers, 
educators, patients, health professionals. We can classify 
Health VCs into two categories: professional-centered or 
patient-centered. A professional centered VC is focused on 
exchange of knowledge among professionals and forms a 
community of practice. Members in such communities are 
health professionals that interact and work in virtual teams in 
order to exchange knowledge and create new knowledge if 
possible. 
Members of patient-centered VCs include health 
professional, patients and possibly their family members. 
Patient centered VCs permit professionals-to-patient and 
patient-to-patient communication. Health care professionals 
can tele-monitor and support patients and their families in 
their day-to-day management of their health condition. 
Moreover, individuals diagnosed with the same condition 
(e.g., chronic disease) can exchange and share health 
information and personal experiences. Hence, patient 
centered VC ensures continuity of care. 
The communication between patients and their doctors 
improves patient care [9]. Hence, the creation of patient-
centered Health VCs constitute a mean to strengthen patient-
doctor interaction and flow of information, providing 
improved care while overcoming geographical boundaries. 
Managed care is considered to take place when the right 
care is provided by qualified health team members to a 
person “at the right frequency and duration that will best 
support that person” [10]. Tools to remotely monitor and/or 
educate patients and people at risk, play an important role in 
managed care. This allows the patients and people at risk to 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

be involved in the management of their own conditions. That 
is the idea behind self-managed care [11].  
In a Low-Middle Income Country (LMIC), in a global 
health context, a project involving the implementation of 
health VC is underway. The internet penetration in LMICs 
allows implementation of health VCs with potential benefits 
to healthcare health care providers and their patients. We will 
explain in the following the design of a patient-centered 
health VC for chronic disease management in a LMIC. 
III. 
A VIRTUAL COMMUNITY FOR CHRONIC DISEASE 
MANAGEMENT 
Healthcare VCs emerged in the online environment as an 
attempt to benefit from the advantages VCs offer for patients 
[4] such as those with chronic diseases [3] or diabetes and 
hypertension 
[5]. 
Mobile 
VCs 
present 
also 
many 
possibilities, and many models have been proposed to use 
them, wither in a general context [6] or in the health sector 
[12] (e.g., for cancer patients [13][14]). Our project consists 
of building a collaborative health virtual community in 
Lebanon to enhance equity in access to primary care in rural 
areas and Palestinian refugee camps. The research team 
includes researchers from the American University of Beirut, 
Lebanese Ministry of Public Health (MoPH), the United 
Nations Relief and Works Agency (UNRWA), York 
University, and University of Toronto.  
In Lebanon, a LMIC, 84% of all deaths are due to 
chronic diseases [15]. Age-standardized death rates from 
CVDs diabetes reach 404.4 and 262.7 per 100,000 
individual, respectively [16]. This problem is intensified in 
disadvantaged populations in the rural areas and the 
Palestinian refugee camps. Non-Governmental Organization 
(NGO) that run primary health care centers available in the 
underserved rural areas often suffer from limited resources 
[17]. 
This project takes a proactive integrated approach that 
couples community-based and health care initiatives. A 
health VC is being developed in order to support both 
patients and healthcare providers in 10 primary health care 
(PHC) centers located in rural areas and enrolled in the 
Lebanese Ministry of Public Health (MoPH) PHC National 
Network (Network) and 6 UNRWA PHC centers will 
comprise the study population. Agency (UNRWA) centers 
will comprise the study population. These centers are 
randomly assigned into the intervention and control groups. 
The intervention has two components:  
- A Provider Oriented Component: it targets the 
physicians (supply)  
- A patient Oriented Component: it targets patients 
having appointments at the primary care centers and 
suffering from diabetes and hypertension (demand). Another 
aspect of the patient oriented component includes screening 
potential patients in the community.  
We designed a health virtual community to provide the 
necessary tools. The hardware and software infrastructure 
was already provided by the network connection between the 
healthcare community centers and the MoPH. The tools 
needed for doctors and patients can be summarized in 3 sub-
systems: patient-oriented, provider-oriented and a service-
oriented one. 
 
A. 
Provider-oriented Sub-System 
The healthcare providers need to have access to 
information related to the clinical guidelines, the physician-
patient communication strategies, and online forums and 
Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ). An online portal was 
designed to enable healthcare providers from the PHC 
centers to meet and discuss online. Moreover, a FAQ section 
was designed to contain health information relevant to 
diabetes and hypertension. A coordinator of the Forum was 
designated to receive questions from the healthcare providers 
in the PHC centers, formulate answers, and ultimately create 
new FAQs. The clinical system and the online portal would 
be independent, and any information to be posted on the 
portal was to be de-identified to protect patients’ and health 
providers’ privacy. 
B. 
Patient-oriented Sub-System 
The patient oriented component was composed of 
targeted consumer Short Message Service (SMS) containing 
either health information related to disease self-management 
or reminders to appointments at the community PHC centers. 
We have used the Application Programming Interface (API) 
of a commercially available SMS service available in the 
local market to integrate our SMS-based patient oriented 
component into the existing system at the community 
centers. 
Regarding the patient e-education material; even though 
Lebanon has a high penetration of internet (52%) and cell 
phone 
use 
(3,350,000 
mobile-cellular 
telephone 
subscriptions, equivalent to 78.65 subscriptions per 100 
inhabitants) [18], smart phones were not judged to be a good 
tool in the rural communities. The eHealth research team 
decided to deliver the educational material targeting screened 
patients, using a more accessible medium, namely a. 
C. 
Service-oriented Sub-System 
The provider-patient relationship had to be managed 
through two components: a health indicators collection 
component 
and 
an 
appointment-scheduling 
system 
component. 
 The health indicators component was needed to enter 
clinical data related to the collection of the baseline and the 
evaluation of the intervention. The MoPH provides the 
clinical system in the community centers; however, we 
needed to update it in order to collect the additional clinical 
indicators (e.g., rate of controlled glycated hemoglobin or 
HbA1c, controlled hypertension, and annual eye exam). The 
related additional modules were designed using a minimalist 
approach; the design was straightforward and did not add 
complexity to the already existing system. 
The appointment-scheduling system component was 
designed through an existing commercial service. We have 
decided to use the commercial Application Programing 
Interface (API) to embed the SMS messaging strategy into 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the clinical application that is present in the community 
centers. 
The design of the Health VC is presented in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1. The Health VC Design 
IV. 
A HYBRID VC MODEL 
Based on our analysis and design of the Health VC, we 
find that the models proposed in the literature [5, 6, 19-24] 
are more focused on developed countries and exclude the 
situation in developing countries. We suggest a more 
inclusive design of a hybrid virtual community model that 
takes into consideration that the VCs can be developed using 
a myriad of technologies. Some of these technologies can be 
traditional (e.g., DVDs), others can be desktop based, while 
others can be off-line and then synchronized once they are 
connected to the whole system.  
We suggest a three dimensional hybrid model for virtual 
communities that takes into account the diversity of 
technologies that can be available to implement a virtual 
community. The model, shown in Figure 3, is composed of  
- 
Hybrid Communication Mechanisms that allows for 
Synchronous (e.g., online) and/or asynchronous 
(e.g., 
offline/synchronization) 
communication 
between members 
- 
A Hybrid Infrastructure that can be web-based, 
desktop-based, and/or offline (e.g., DVD) 
- 
Hybrid Delivery Channels that allow multichannel 
communication with the community members, 
including mobile, non-mobile (Desktop), and offline 
(e.g., DVD) 
This model is inclusive of experiences in developing 
countries that have different levels of access to ICT. 
 
 
Figure 2. A Hybrid Virtual Community Model 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The actual analysis and design of the Health VC faced many 
challenges. Our model may look surprising as it contains 
off-line material and information that need to be 
synchronized at a certain point in time. Nevertheless, our 
model complies with the definition of a virtual community.  
Preece [25] suggests a working definition for online 
community that is broad enough to cover a wide range of 
communities but precise enough to fit into social science 
definitions. According to Preece (2000), an online 
community consists of:  
- 
Socially interacting people performing special roles 
or satisfying their needs 
- 
A purpose, which is the reason behind the 
community 
- 
Policies to govern people’s interaction 
- 
Computer systems that support social interaction 
Weissman [26] identifies two types of systems that form 
when humans get together: the organization type designed 
for a specific aim and the association type formed out of the 
individuals’ dedication for shared objectives or beliefs. Had 
systems been of the former or latter type, they all share all or 
some of the characteristics that are outlined by Weissman. 
These are causal reciprocity, purpose, design, roles, 
circumstances, officers, passion, needs, loyalty, and access. 
Our system complies with both Preece’s definition of 
online communities or VCs, as well as Weissman’s ten 
characteristics of communities. 
Our Health VC: 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

- 
Is 
composed 
of 
socially 
interacting 
people 
constituting the users of the Health VC. There are 
four types of users of the Health VC: patients, health 
providers, fieldworkers, and the forum coordinator. 
Users perform special roles; the fieldworkers aim to 
screen the population and schedule appointments, 
the healthcare providers provide the diagnosis and 
patient follow-up, they interact with the portal 
(forum) coordinator for FAQs and access the online 
modules. Finally, the portal coordinator manages the 
online forum and answers questions related to new 
situations sent by healthcare providers remotely. The 
patients get access to educational materials (DVDs) 
and to SMS health messages and appointments 
reminders. Patients have mainly the role of 
information consumers while both fieldworkers and 
healthcare providers are information producers and 
consumers (e.g., access to information on the online 
portal). The coordinator is mainly a producer of 
information. 
- 
Has a purpose to provide equity in access to 
healthcare for populations with chronic diseases in 
rural areas and /or deprived areas, using eHealth 
tools. 
- 
Is endowed with strict policies to govern the way 
users (e.g., healthcare providers, fieldworkers, 
coordinator, and patients) interact with the system. 
Patients receive SMS messages, they cannot 
generate information; the fieldworkers feed the 
system with appointments. Healthcare providers 
enter clinical information into the community 
centers information system; and send questions and 
receive answers on the portal. The coordinator 
receives questions, organizes them and feeds 
answers into the forum. 
- 
Comprises a computer system that supports the 
users’ roles described. It is true that the computer 
system is not integrated in some aspects, for 
instance, the portal, community centers clinical 
system, and the field appointment scheduling; 
however, this does not diminish the fact that a 
computer system is in place and facilitates the users’ 
tasks in order to achieve the community purpose. 
If we look at Weissman’s ten characteristics of a 
community, we find that our model satisfies them: 
- 
Causal reciprocity: this aspect is about the usual 
“give and take” that drives people to stick together 
and it applies to our Health VC model where patient 
users are interested in consuming the information 
and clinicians and fieldworkers are interested in 
providing care.  
- 
Passion, needs, loyalty, and circumstances: are all 
embedded in our system. Our Health VC facilitates 
users’ task to live their passion to achieve an aim 
(equitable healthy living), and fulfill their needs (be 
healthy, provide care). The loyalty to the Health VC 
is driven by the benefit each user gets out of it. The 
circumstances that created the community are related 
to enhancing public healthcare delivery in rural 
areas. 
- 
Purpose and roles: are both described in our above 
discussion to Preece’s characteristics. 
- 
Design: the design of our Health VC facilitates the 
fulfillment of the purpose by coordinating the roles 
of the members. 
- 
Access: is given to all users to fulfill their roles, e.g., 
internet connection, laptops and information system. 
- 
Officer: is the system administrator that oversees the 
Health VC to make sure that all components are 
working well and that all users are abiding by the 
policies in place. 
We conclude that having parts of a model offline, or not 
in sync, or not web-based does not affect the fact that the 
model describes well a Virtual Community. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents a Hybrid Health Virtual Community 
model and analyzes its components based on a research 
project in a developing country. Some of the model 
components present asynchronous and off-line aspects; 
however, the model aligns with the definition of a virtual 
community and the characteristics of communities in 
general. VC models suggest usually a continuous online 
presence and access to advanced ICT devices; we provided a 
more 
comprehensive 
and 
an 
inclusive 
model 
that 
encompasses the circumstances of the developed countries 
while taking into account the ICT situation in developing 
ones. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
World Health Organization, "Preventing Chronic Disease: A Vital 
Investment," 
World 
Health 
Organization 
(WHO), 
Geneva, 
Switzerland2005. 
[2] 
World Health Organization, "The World Health Report 2003—
Shaping the Future," World Health Organization (WHO), Geneva, 
Switzerland2003. 
[3] 
C. El Morr, "Mobile Virtual Communities in Healthcare The Chronic 
Disease Management Case," in Ubiquitous Health and Medical 
Informatics: The Ubiquity 2.0 Trend and Beyond, ed: IGI Global, 
2010, pp. 258-274. 
[4] 
C. El Morr, "Health Care Virtual Communities: Challenges and 
Opportunities," in Handbook of Research on Developments in E-
Health and Telemedicine: Technological and Social Perspectives, ed: 
IGI Global, 2010, pp. 278-298. 
[5] 
C. El Morr, "A Model for Global Health Virtual Communities," in 
The Second International Conference on Global Health Challenges, 
GLOBAL HEALTH 2013, Lisbon, Portugal, 2013. 
[6] 
C. El Morr and J. Kawash, "Mobile Virtual Communities Research: A 
Synthesis of Current Trends and a Look at Future Perspectives," 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

International Journal for Web Based Communities, vol. 3, pp. 386-
403, 2007. 
[7] 
C. El Morr, S. Saleh, W. Ammar, N. Natafgi, and K. Kazandjian, "A 
Health Virtual Community Model: A Bottom Up Approach," in 
eTELEMED 2014, The Sixth International Conference on eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine, 2014, pp. 99-104. 
[8] 
G. Demiris, "Virtual Communities in Health Care," in Intelligent 
Paradigms for Healthcare Enterprises. vol. 184, B. Silverman, A. Jain, 
I. A., and L. Jain, Eds., ed: Springer, 2005, pp. 121-137. 
[9] 
M. R. Cornelia, W. Thomas, S. Marguerite, F. Gilbert, and M. K. 
Samir, "Effects of a computerized system to support shared decision 
making in symptom management of cancer patients: Preliminary 
results," Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 
vol. 10, p. 573, 2003. 
[10] HealthCanada, Handbook 3A-Service Delivery Plan for the Home 
and Community Care Program, 2000. 
[11] B. H. Stamm, "Creating Virtual Community: Telemedicine and Self 
Care," in Secondary Traumatic Stress: Self-Care Issues for Clinicians, 
Researchers and Educators, B. H. Stamm, Ed., ed: Sidran Press, 1999, 
pp. 179-207. 
[12] C. El Morr, "Mobile Virtual Communities in Healthcare: Managed 
Self Care on the move," in International Association of Science and 
Technology for Development (IASTED) - Telehealth (2007), 
Montreal, Canada, 2007. 
[13] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Mobile Communication 
and Computing in Healthcare: Designing and Implementing Mobile 
Virtual Communities for Cancer Patients," presented at the Tokyo 
Mobile Business Roundtable, Tokyo, 2002. 
[14] J. M. Leimeister, M. Daum, and H. Krcmar, "Towards m-
communities: the case of COSMOS healthcare," in The 36th Annual 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences(2003), 2003. 
[15] W. H. Organization, "Facing the Facts: The Impact of Chronic 
Diseases in Lebanon," WHO2012. 
[16] W. H. Organization, "NCD Country Profiles," WHO2011. 
[17] C. B. and C. M., "Informal politics and inequity of access to health 
care in Lebanon," International Journal for Equity in Health, vol. 11, 
2012. 
[18] I. T. Union. (2012, Oct. 19). ICT Data and Statistics.  
[19] Y. Arnold, J. M. Leimeister, and H. Krcmar, "CoPEP: A 
Development Process Model for Community Platforms for Cancer 
Patients," presented at the The XIth European Conference on 
Information Systems (ECIS), 2003. 
[20] M. B. Chhetri, R. Price, S. Krishnaswamy, and W. L. Seng, 
"Ontology-Based Agent Mobility Modelling," in 39th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS '06), 2006, p. 
45a. 
[21] S. Glissmann, S. Smolnik, R. Schierholz, L. Kolbe, and W. Brenner, 
"Proposition of an m-business procedure model for the development 
of mobile user interfaces," 2005, pp. 308-314. 
[22] J. Kawash, C. El Morr, and M. Itani, "A Novel Collaboration Model 
for Mobile Virtual Communities," International Journal for Web 
Based Communities, vol. 3, 2007. 
[23] J. Page, A. Zaslavsky, and M. Indrawan, "A buddy model of security 
for mobile agent communities operating in pervasive scenarios," in 
second workshop on Australasian information security, Data Mining 
and Web Intelligence, and Software Internationalisation - Vol. 32, 
Dunedin, New Zealand, 2004, pp. 17-25. 
[24] P. Schubert and J. F. Hampe, "Business Models for Mobile 
Communities," in 38th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences(HICSS '05), 2005, pp. 172-183. 
[25] J. Preece, Online Communities: Designing Usability supporting 
Sociability. USA: John Wiley & Sons Ltd., 2000. 
[26] D. Weissman, A social ontology: Yale University Press, 2000. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

