Mimo: A Non-pharmacological Comforting
Solution for Preterm Neonates
Frank Versteegh, Daniel Tetteroo, Thelxi Mamagkaki,
Mariana Serras Pereira, Wei Chen
Department of Industrial Design
Eindhoven University of Technology
Den Dolech 2, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, Netherlands
Email: {f.versteegh,d.tetteroo,t.mamagkaki,mveira,w.chen}@tue.nl
Sidarto Bambang Oetomo
Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
M´axima Medical Center
De Run 4600, 5500 MB Veldhoven, Netherlands
Email: s.bambangoetomo@mmc.nl
Abstract—Preterm neonates often suffer from pain, distress
and discomfort during the ﬁrst weeks of their lives. While
residing in special Neonatal Intensive Care Units (NICUs) that
are designed for optimal care, they are subject to numerous
interventions ranging from a simple diaper change to surgery.
Although pharmacological pain treatment often is available, it
cannot always be applied to relieve a neonate from pain or
discomfort. Therefore, new non-pharmacological solutions are
required to reduce the discomfort experienced by these babies
during the ﬁrst weeks of their lives. This paper describes a novel
solution, called Mimo, that provides comfort through mediation
of a parent’s physiological features to the distressed neonate. We
discuss the design and the implementation and pilot-evaluation
of a ﬁrst prototype. Results show that the concept is promising
enough to pursue a full-scale clinical trial.
Index Terms—preterm neonates; comforting solution; bonding;
heartbeat; pillow; user-centered design;
I. INTRODUCTION
Premature infants, born after a gestational age of less than
32 weeks are admitted to a Neonatal Intensive Care Unit
(NICU), where they are nursed in an incubator and receive
medical treatments. The last decades many new therapies have
been introduced, resulting in a substantial improvement of
survival. However, the stay of a preterm infant in the incubator
is negatively inﬂuenced by stress (excessive light and noise)
and painful procedures [1]. Gradually, the insight is growing
that these factors are partly responsible for developmental
impairments [2]. The Eindhoven University of Technology
(TU/e) in the Netherlands has started collaboration on research
with the Maxima Medical Centre in Veldhoven, the Nether-
lands. The goal of this project is to improve well being for the
pregnant woman and her child before, during and after delivery
[3]. Research results that have been reported from this project
area, for example, a smart jacket for neonates integrated with
textile sensors [4], a power supply based on contactless energy
transfer [5], blood oxygen saturation monitoring for neonates
using a reﬂectance pulse oximeter [6], neonatal temperature
monitoring [7], data transmission [8], and a device to support
cardiopulmonary resuscitation of neonates [9], [10]. Within
this project, this paper presents the pilot-study of a novel, non-
pharmacological comforting solution for preterm neonates.
A. Pain and discomfort
Premature neonates residing at Neonatal Intensive Care
Units (NICUs) experience much pain and discomfort due to
necessary medical interventions. These interventions include,
but are not limited to: heel punctures, venepunctures and in-
or detubations [11]. The attachment and removal of sensors
required for measuring physiological body signals can also be
unpleasant, stressful and painful [12]. Although pain treatment
is given in some of these cases, a large proportion (50%) [11],
[13] of the interventions are performed without any form of
pain treatment.
Simple procedures and environmental factors are also pos-
sible sources of pain and discomfort to preterm neonates.
Nociception is the term used to refer to the neural processes of
encoding and processing painful stimuli. In preterm neonates
this nociceptional system is not yet fully developed. A possible
consequence of this not-fully developed nociceptional system
is that stimuli such as sound and light, which are normally
not considered painful to a human being, may be perceived
as painful by the preterm neonate [14]. Injuries, but also
clinical procedures, will result in more widespread sensitivity
to pain [15]. The consequences of untreated procedural pain
in neonates can be both severe and long term. It is believed
that exposing preterm neonates to pain negatively affects their
ability to cope with pain and stress in later childhood [15],
[16].
B. Signs of discomfort
Neonates show many different responses to pain and stress.
These responses can be of both physiological and behavioural
nature, and can be used to detect discomfort of a neonate.
Physiological responses include an increased heart and res-
piratory rate, increased or decreased blood pressure, de-
creased oxygen saturation, vagal tone and skin temperature.
Behavioural responses are even more varied. Examples include
vocalizations like crying and whimpering, facial expressions
like grimacing with eyes squeezed shut or a stretched open
mouth, and body movements like ﬁnger and toe splaying and
trunk arching [15], [17]. It is worth noting that a change in
any of these responses does not always imply that the neonate
is experiencing stress or discomfort. Several pain-scoring
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

systems (such as PIPP [18] and Comfort-NEO [19]) have
been developed to aggregate the behavioural signs, providing
a reliable and structured tool for pain measurement.
C. Comforting techniques
The past two decades have seen an increase in interest in
neonatal pain treatment [16]. Pharmacological solutions re-
main popular and are the most used method for pain treatment.
Non-pharmacological methods of providing comfort and pain
relief do exist and some have proven to be effective. The most
popular techniques include: non-nutritive sucking, offering a
sweet solution, facilitated tucking and skin-to-skin care.
Non-nutritive
sucking
was
one
of
the
ﬁrst
non-
pharmacological
comforting
techniques
to
be
studied
and refers to offering a paciﬁer for the neonate to suck on
[20]. A sucrose solution can be provided as an extra means
of comfort during more painful procedures. A syringe is used
to gently squeeze some sucrose on the inside of the neonate’s
cheek. A paciﬁer is offered after the delivery of the sucrose,
distracting the infant with something sweet to suck on [21].
During facilitated tucking, the caregiver holds one hand on
the baby’s head and another one on the feet or body, depending
on what is feasible at that moment [22]. Similar techniques
are containment and swaddling [23]. The aim of all these
techniques is to restrict the movement space for the neonate
and to maintain it in a position similar to in-utero.
One of the most successful comforting techniques is skin-
to-skin care (SSC), otherwise known as kangaroo care [24].
During SSC the mother and infant are wrapped in cloth
together, with the infant held to the bare chest of the mother.
One downside of this comforting technique is that the neonate
needs to be taken out of the incubator, which can be stressful
to the child. Some neonates are unable to receive this particular
kind of care, because their medical condition does not allow
them to be taken out of the incubator.
Other comforting techniques include presenting the neonate
with an audible heartbeat [25] or music [26] and aromatherapy
[27]. If possible, breastfeeding can also be used as a non-
pharmacological comforting technique, although its effect was
demonstrated on term neonates [28].
The majority of these comforting techniques have in com-
mon that a parent or nurse needs to be present to provide the
desired care. Although the sole presence of its parents might
be comforting to a neonate, most parents are unable to be with
their child continuously. The same holds for nurses, as they
often have multiple neonates to care for. A comforting solution
that does not require the continued presence of a parent or
nurse is thus a design path worth exploring.
This paper presents a new concept for comforting preterm
neonates. This concept aims at comforting preterm neonates by
mimicking selected features of the baby’s mother or father and
making them available to the baby when the parents cannot be
present themselves. The following sections will describe the
concept in more detail, and discuss the implementation and
evaluation of a prototype based on this concept. Finally, the
implications of the proposed concept are discussed and future
directions are outlined.
II. CONCEPT
The concept for the proposed comforting solution was not
based on ﬁndings from literature alone. To understand the ﬁeld
better user studies were performed, the NICU environment
was observed and current comforting techiques were further
investigated. The results of these observations are described
below, followed by an explanation of the concept proposed.
A. User studies
An essential ﬁrst step in the development of a new, non-
pharmacological pain treatment is the recognition and evalu-
ation of the status-quo. In User Centered Design (UCD) the
end-user is constantly involved in the design process. This
becomes problematic when designing solutions for neonates,
simply because it is impossible to communicate with these
‘users’. In this case, medical staff and parents can be valuable
sources of information, in effect becoming the voice of the
neonates. Interviews with medical staff and observations at
a NICU facility have been performed in order to gain better
insight on the conditions and treatments given at a NICU.
The following paragraphs discuss these ﬁndings and their
implications for the concept that is explained in detail in the
last paragraph of this section.
B. NICU environment
NICU wards commonly house several incubators which are
often shielded from light entering. These incubators provide a
controlled environment, where amongst others temperature and
moisture levels are kept at an appropriate level. The neonates
constantly have their physiological signs monitored and are
therefore attached to many sensors. Small bean-bag pillows
are used to provide both comfort and support to neonates, and
can be used by nurses to stabilize the neonates in a position
that allows treatment. Small plush toys are also often present
in the incubator, allowing parents to share something more
personal with their child. The fact that some objects (such
as the bean-bag and plush toys) are already present within
an incubator gives rise to the opportunity to design a new
comforting solution that can be integrated with these objects.
C. Comforting neonates
Neonates can be comforted in two ways: by providing
an active comforting treatment, or by taking away sources
of discomfort. Some hospitals (e.g., the Maternity District
Hospital “Helena Venizelou” (GR)) have a very strict policy
that focuses on the latter. The fragile neonates are taken
out of the incubator only for medical treatments. The care
policy focuses on limiting external stimuli to the neonates
as much as possible. Noise and light levels are reduced to
absolute minimum and parents can visit their babies during
ﬁxed visiting hours.
Other hospitals (e.g., MMC in Veldhoven (NL) and the
Maastricht University Medical Centre (NL)) are less strict and
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

emphasize on the value of parent-child bonding as a source
of active comfort, therefore they allow parents to visit their
baby in the NICU at any given time. These hospitals also
encourage the parents to take part in their child’s care, by
changing diapers or bottle feeding. This kind of involvement
also helps the parents who often feel that they cannot help
their fragile baby during the stay at the NICU. These hospitals
encourage kangaroo care as a means of comfort and bonding.
Nurses and parents from these hospitals stated that infants are
the most relaxed during kangaroo care.
Although it is clear that parents can play an important role
in the comfort of their child, they cannot be present at all
times to provide this comfort. In all hospitals, some more
than others, there are situations in which alternative means of
comforting are required. Therefore, it seems appropriate that a
new comforting solution would focus on providing a neonate
with the same feeling of comfort that parents would provide,
even when the parents cannot be physically present.
D. Concept
Based on the literature review, the aforementioned user
studies and a brainstorm with the design team, several concepts
for a novel solution for comforting preterm neonates were
proposed. After a few elimination rounds, one concept was
selected. This concept, called Mimo, is a comforting solution
that provides neonates with an experience similar to being held
by their parents.
As already noted, neonates show less stress signs when
they are in contact with their parents and held to their chest.
This seems to be one of the most pleasant experiences for a
preterm neonate. However, neonates cannot receive this kind
of comforting at all times; parents cannot always be present at
the NICU and in many occasions neonates are in a condition
that does not allow them to be taken out of the incubator.
Mimo, aims at providing a comforting solution with quali-
ties similar to those of being held to a parent’s chest, available
especially when the parent cannot provide the comfort him-
or herself. This concept might not only increase the general
comfort level, but it can also contribute to the bonding
between parent and infant. Mimo gives parents the chance
to record their personal features such as heartbeat, smell and
temperature, which can be mediated to the child when it is in
need of comfort. When the concept is fully realized, the child
might experience a feeling as the parents were close to them,
even when the parents are not there in a physical sense.
One of Mimo’s basic characteristics is its ease of use, which
enables parents to record their physiological features without
guidance or in a special environment.
III. PROTOTYPE
The original concept for Mimo includes mediation of several
physiological features, such as smell, heartbeat and respiration.
However, building a prototype that would mediate all these
features would make it more difﬁcult to identify the most
beneﬁcial attributes of the concept. Therefore, the initial
prototype of Mimo was designed to only mediate the parent’s
heartbeat by means of vibrations, much like a pulse.
One of the basic characteristics of the concept is that Mimo
should be easy to set up and use, so that parents could record
their physiological data on their own, without the guidance of
a nurse for example. Then, the nurse needs only to switch on
and activate Mimo when comforting is needed. Moreover, the
Mimo prototype features a pillow-like device to convey the
heartbeat, which can replace the regular pillows that are used
in incubators, thus sustaining the neonate’s environment and
avoiding extra special equipment that would load the incubator.
This prototype was designed to be comfortable and ergonomic
for a premature neonate, but also washable and clinically safe
to meet hospital standards.
Fig. 1.
Prototype with the Mimo Recorder on the left and the Mimo Pillow
on the right.
The Mimo prototype (see Figure 1) consists of two distinct
parts:
1) A recording unit (Mimo Recorder), for registration of
the parent’s heartbeat
2) A pillow-like object (Mimo Pillow), for transmitting the
parent’s heartbeat to the neonate
A. Mimo Recorder
The Mimo Recorder is a white, cubical box that allows
parents of preterm neonates to make a recording of their
heartbeat. A heartbeat sensor (photoplethysmograph), as well
as a connection cable are attached to the side of the box. The
front of the box features a number of LEDs displaying the
status of the recording process and a button to initiate the
recording process.
1) Sensor: The heartbeat sensor that is used in the proto-
type is a photoplethysmograph, which is an optical sensor that
measures a person’s pulse. An infra-red LED on one side of the
sensor shines through the ﬁnger onto a photosensitive sensor
at the other side of the ﬁnger. The amount of blood that ﬂows
through the ﬁnger inﬂuences the amount of light that reaches
the sensor, hence providing information about the person’s
pulse. Although there are other ways to record a heartbeat
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

(such as electrocardiogram sensors), the photoplethysmograph
provides a quick and easy way to record a heartbeat. The ease
of use of this method outweighs the slightly lower accuracy
compared to other methods.
Fig. 2.
Circuit diagram of the electronics in the Mimo Recorder.
2) Electronics: An overview of the circuitry inside the
Mimo Recorder can be found in Figure 2. The heart of
the Mimo Recorder is an Arduino Uno [29] microcomputer,
powered by a 9V battery. The Arduino handles almost the
complete recording process, ranging from sensing and storage
to transmission of the heartbeat to the Mimo Pillow. A ﬁlter
module ensures the quality of the heartbeat signal that the Ar-
duino records. It was deliberately chosen to use a battery rather
than a ﬁxed power supply, to provide maximum ﬂexibility to
parents in their choice of a recording location.
3) User Interface: The user interface of the Mimo Recorder
was designed to be as simple as possible, such that parents
could perform the complete recording process themselves.
Four LEDs provide feedback to the parents about the status of
the heartbeat recording. One light shows whether the device
is switched on, another light indicates whether the sensor
is properly attached and the two remaining lights indicate
whether the recording has not started yet (lights off), is
currently in progress (lights blinking) or has ﬁnished (lights
on). In order to record their heartbeat, parents ﬁrst need to
attach the sensor to their ﬁnger or earlobe. Once the sensor
indicator conﬁrms that the sensor has been properly attached,
the parent can press the recording button and wait for the status
lights to light steady. Then, the Mimo Pillow can be connected
to the recording unit and the heartbeat will be transferred to
the pillow.
B. Mimo Pillow
The Mimo Pillow is the part of the prototype that stays with
the neonate. It is a boomerang-shaped pillow that is ﬁlled with
polymer beads and contains a pouch that accommodates the
electronics. The polymer beads that are used for the ﬁlling
ensure both softness for the neonate, and stability that allows
the pillow to be shaped around the neonate’s body and act as
support.
Fig. 3.
Circuit diagram of the electronics in the Mimo Pillow.
1) Electronics: Much like the Mimo Recorder, the Mimo
Pillow is controlled by an Arduino Mini microcomputer. This
Arduino version is much smaller and ﬂatter than the one used
in the Mimo Recorder, such that it is hardly felt on the outside
of the pillow. Other efforts to ensure that electronics are not
felt by the neonate have been made by using a specialized ﬂat
model racing battery as power supply, a tiny vibration motor
to mediate the heartbeat vibrations, and by using a tiny control
to switch on or off the electronics. A detailed overview of the
electronic circuit is provided in Figure 3.
2) User Interface:
The heartbeat data that has been
recorded with the Mimo Recorder can be transferred to the
Mimo Pillow by connecting the connection cables of both
devices. Once the heartbeat data has been transferred to the
pillow, it is immediately ready for use. The recorded heartbeat
data is stored in the microcomputer in the Mimo Pillow and
is played back continuously, as long as the device is switched
on.
IV. PILOT STUDY
To test the viability of the concept, a pilot study was
performed with the Mimo prototype. While a pilot-study is
not directly suitable for generating results on the effectiveness
of the prototype, it is a good starting point to test the initial
response of the neonates, nursing staff and parents to the
device proposed. The study was conducted with four preterm
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

neonates; three of them residing at the Medium Care Unit
and the other one at the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit of the
M´axima Medical Center in Veldhoven (NL).
A. Method
First, the heartbeats of the neonates’ mothers were recorded
with the Mimo Recorder. Then the pillow was presented to
the neonates directly after uncomfortable procedures such
as diaper changing or bathing. The pillow was presented
both in a switched-on state, as well as a switched-off state.
The neonates were observed before, during and after the
uncomfortable procedures. Since this was a pilot study it was
impossible to change the routines of the nurses present during
the evaluation. This in turn caused that sometimes additional
care was provided to the neonates next to the Mimo Pillow.
For example, the preterm neonate who was tested in the NICU
was also offered a sucrose solution in combination with the
Mimo Pillow.
B. Results
1) Neonates: None of the neonates showed signs of in-
creased stress due to the pillow’s presence. In addition, some
neonates showed positive responses to the pillow’s presence.
For example, one neonate was in severe distress after he had
been bathed and was crying continuously. The crying baby
was put back in the bed and the switched-on pillow was
put next to him. Immediately after putting the pillow next
to him, he stopped crying and showed no further signs of
distress. However, when the pillow was taken away from him
after a short while, he immediately started crying again. Other
neonates fell asleep while lying against a pulsating Mimo
pillow, further indicating that it may have a comforting effect.
2) Parents & hospital staff: Although it had not been the
primary intention of the concept, it turned out that the proto-
type had a positive effect on the neonates’ parents. During the
pilot study parents made many spontaneous, positive remarks
on Mimo and enjoyed the interaction with it. Hospital staff
were also interested in Mimo and positive about its potential
comforting effects on preterm neonates. Some of them also
suggested that a full-scale study on the effectiveness of Mimo
should be performed, based on the results of the pilot study.
V. DISCUSSION
This paper presented the design, implementation and eval-
uation of a new, non-pharmacological comforting solution
for preterm neonates. The concept (named Mimo) aims at
comforting a neonate by providing it with a feeling similar
to that of being close to a parent. Most neonates seem to
experience a strong sense of comfort when being held by their
mother or father.
The Mimo concept consists of two parts: a recording unit
and a technologically enhanced pillow. The recording unit is
used to record physiological data (such as heartbeat, breathing
rhythm, parental smell and body temperature) from a parent.
This data can then be transferred to the pillow, which includes
technology that enables it to ‘replay’ the recorded data to
the neonate. A prototype for Mimo has been designed and
evaluated in a pilot study. The prototype is a limited imple-
mentation of the original concept, as it focuses only on the
recording and playback of a parent’s heartbeat. The pilot study
performed with this prototype has shown that Mimo has no
negative inﬂuence on the comfort of neonates. Furthermore,
there are strong indications that Mimo might have a positive
effect on the comfort of neonates.
As already mentioned before, because of the limitations that
apply to a pilot study, it is difﬁcult to make deﬁnite conclusions
based on the data gathered. More neonates would be required
for testing, all of whom would have to go through more trials.
Also, the trials would have to be even more structured and
controlled than in the current study. Due to the limitations of
performing a pilot study, these issues could currently not be
addressed.
Performing studies on preterm neonates is a difﬁcult process
in which it is hard to collect useful data and attribute that
data to the experience the neonate is having. Much thought
had gone into the evaluation plan during the design phase of
this study. Due to the imposed limitations, this evaluation was
stripped from many of its features. A full clinical study should
include a blind evaluation of close-up video recordings of
the neonates during procedures. Nurses who have experience
with the ComfortNeo scale could then view video excerpts
and provide scores on the comfort level of the neonate. In
a future study, the physiological data of the neonates could
also be logged for the purpose of statistical analysis. Such
data collection was not possible during this pilot study and
conclusions based on this data would also lack any statistical
signiﬁcance. Acquiring more accurate behavioral and physio-
logical data for analysis of more neonates in better controlled
conditions would be key to a future study.
In the current pilot study, most of the participating neonates
resided in the medium care ward. Babies in the medium care
ward are already much more stable than neonates staying in
the NICU. This also means that these babies are exposed to
less painful medical procedures, which also means they are
less exposed to comforting techniques than neonates in the
NICU.
Most of the trials in the current study occurred during
diaper changes. The neonates that participated in this study
were usually fed directly after a diaper change. It is not
unreasonable to assume that neonates that remained fussy after
a diaper change were actually expecting to be fed. In such a
situation, the Mimo would most likely not render the desired
effect.
In the current study, neonates received an artiﬁcial heartbeat
reconstructed from a physiological recording of their mothers
heartbeat. It can be argued that the neonate is not able to detect
the difference in heart beats of different persons. Although
untested, this argument is moot from the design point of view.
Not only should the Mimo provide care to the neonate, it
also contributes in empowering the parents during a stressful
time. A random heartbeat would take this empowerment away
from parents, and would not contribute to parent-child bonding
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

either.
VI. CONCLUSION
We designed a new non-pharmacological comforting so-
lution for premature newborn infants based on the transfer
of maternal heart beat into a pillow that is equipped with a
“pulsator”. In a small pilot study we found that the response of
the infant was positive. Finally, parents and hospital staff who
interacted with Mimo during the pilot study, regarded Mimo
as a very promising concept that would possibly not only
comfort premature neonates, but also help parents bond with
their infant. A full-scale clinical follow-up study is currently
being conducted to conﬁrm these indications.
VII. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We are thankful for the help received from Misha Croes,
Sibrecht Bouwstra and Astrid Osagiator, as well as the parents
and neonates that participated in this study.
REFERENCES
[1] A. T. Bhutta and K. J. S. Anand, “Vulnerability of the developing
brain. neuronal mechanisms.” Clinics In Perinatology, vol. 29, no. 3,
pp. 357–372, 2002. [Online]. Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pubmed/12380463
[2] R. Grunau, M. Whitﬁeld, J. Petrie-Thomas, A. Synnes, I. Cepeda,
A. Keidar, M. Rogers, M. MacKay, P. Hubber-Richard, and D. Johan-
nesen, “Neonatal pain, parenting stress and interaction, in relation to
cognitive and motor development at 8 and 18 months in preterm infants,”
Pain, vol. 143, no. 1, pp. 138–146, 2009.
[3] W. Chen, S. Bambang Oetomo, and L. Feijs, “Neonatal monitoring:
Current practice and future trends,” in Handbook of Research on
Developments in e-Health and Telemedicine: Technological and Social
Perspectives.
IGI Global, 2010.
[4] S. Bouwstra, L. Feijs, W. Chen, and S. B. Oetomo, “Smart jacket design
for neonatal monitoring with wearable sensors,” in Sixth International
Workshop on Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks, 2009.
BSN 2009.
IEEE, Jun. 2009, pp. 162–167.
[5] W. Chen, C. Sonntag, F. Boesten, S. B. Oetomo, and L. Feijs, “A design
of power supply for neonatal monitoring with wearable sensors,” Journal
of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 185–
196, Jan. 2009.
[6] W. Chen, I. Ayoola, S. B. Oetomo, and L. Feijs, “Non-invasive blood
oxygen saturation monitoring for neonates using reﬂectance pulse
oximeter,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Design, Automation
and Test in Europe, ser. DATE ’10.
3001 Leuven, Belgium, Belgium:
European Design and Automation Association, 2010, p. 15301535.
[7] W. Chen, S. Dols, S. Bambang Oetomo, and L. M. G. Feijs, “Monitoring
body temperature of newborn infants at neonatal intensive care units
using wearable sensors,” in the Fifth International Conference on Body
Area Networks (BodyNets 2010), Corfu Island, Greece, 2010.
[8] W. Chen, S. T. Nguyen, R. Coops, S. B. Oetomo, and L. Feijs,
“Wireless transmission design for health monitoring at neonatal intensive
care units,” in 2nd International Symposium on Applied Sciences in
Biomedical and Communication Technologies, 2009. ISABEL 2009.
IEEE, Nov. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[9] S. Bambang Oetomo, L. M. G. Feijs, W. Chen, and P. Andriessen,
“Efﬁcacy of audio-promoted rate guidance for insufﬂation and chest
compressions and feed-back signalling for the pressure of chest compres-
sions during cardio-respiratory resuscitation (CPR) of newborn infants,”
in the annual meeting of the Society for Pediatric Research (SPR 2009),
Baltimore, US, 2009.
[10] W. Chen, S. B. Oetomo, L. Feijs, P. Andriessen, F. Kimman, M. Geraets,
and M. Thielen, “Rhythm of life aid (ROLA): an integrated sensor
system for supporting medical staff during cardiopulmonary resusci-
tation (CPR) of newborn infants,” IEEE Transactions on Information
Technology in Biomedicine, vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 1468–1474, Nov. 2010.
[11] R. Carbajal, “Nonpharmacological treatment of neonatal pain,” in
Neonatal Pain, G. Buonocore and C. V. Bellieni, Eds. Milano: Springer
Milan, 2008, pp. 83–97.
[12] D. P. Barker and N. Rutter, “Exposure to invasive procedures in neonatal
intensive care unit admissions.” Arch. Dis. Child-Fetal, vol. 72, no. 1,
pp. F47–F48, Jan. 1995.
[13] C. C. Johnston, F. Filion, M. Campbell-Yeo, C. Goulet, L. Bell, K. Mc-
Naughton, J. Byron, M. Aita, G. A. Finley, and C. Walker, “Kangaroo
mother care diminishes pain from heel lance in very preterm neonates:
A crossover trial,” BMC Pediatrics, vol. 8, pp. 13–13, 2008, PMID:
18435837 PMCID: 2383886.
[14] K. J. S. Anand and International Evidence-Based Group for Neonatal
Pain, “Consensus statement for the prevention and management of pain
in the newborn,” Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med, vol. 155, no. 2, pp. 173–
180, Feb. 2001.
[15] M. I. Levene, “Minimizing the discomfort of neonatal intensive care,”
Current Paediatrics, vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 196–200, Jun. 2003.
[16] C. C. Johnston, A. M. Fernandes, and M. Campbell-Yeo, “Pain in
neonates is different,” Pain, vol. 152, no. 3 Suppl, pp. S65–73, Mar.
2011.
[17] D. Ballweg, “Neonatal and pediatric pain management: standards and
application,” Paediatrics and Child Health, vol. 18, pp. S61–S66, Sep.
2008.
[18] B. Stevens, C. Johnston, P. Petryshen, and A. Taddio, “Premature infant
pain proﬁle: development and initial validation,” Clin. J. Pain, vol. 12,
no. 1, pp. 13–22, Mar. 1996.
[19] M. van Dijk, D. W. E. Roofthooft, K. J. S. Anand, F. Guldemond,
J. de Graaf, S. Simons, Y. de Jager, J. B. van Goudoever, and D. Tibboel,
“Taking up the challenge of measuring prolonged pain in (premature)
neonates: the COMFORTneo scale seems promising,” Clin. J. Pain,
vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 607–616, Sep. 2009.
[20] S. Y Shiao, Y. J Chang, H. Lannon, and H. Yarandi, “Meta-analysis
of the effects of nonnutritive sucking on heart rate and peripheral
oxygenation: research from the past 30 years.” Issues in Comprehensive
Pediatric Nursing, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 11–24, 1997.
[21] B. Stevens, J. Yamada, and A. Ohlsson, “Sucrose for analgesia in
newborn infants undergoing painful procedures.” Cochrane database of
systematic reviews Online, no. 1, p. CD001069, 2010.
[22] A. Axelin, S. Salanter¨a, and L. Lehtonen, “’Facilitated tucking by
parents’ in pain management of preterm infants-a randomized crossover
trial.” Early Human Development, vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 241–247, 2006.
[23] C.-M. Huang, W.-S. Tung, L.-L. Kuo, and C. Ying-Ju, “Comparison of
pain responses of premature infants to the heelstick between containment
and swaddling.” Department of Nursing, Chemei Medical Center., Tech.
Rep. 1, 2004.
[24] T. C. Castral, F. Warnock, A. M. Leite, V. J. Haas, and C. G. Scochi,
“The effects of skin-to-skin contact during acute pain in preterm
newborns,” Eur. J. Pain, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 464–471, May 2008.
[25] H. Kurihara, H. Chiba, Y. Shimizu, T. Yanaihara, M. Takeda,
K. Kawakami, and K. Takai-Kawakami, “Behavioral and adrenocortical
responses to stress in neonates and the stabilizing effects of maternal
heartbeat on them,” Early Human Development, vol. 46, no. 1-2, pp.
117–127, Sep. 1996.
[26] M. L. Butt and B. S. Kisilevsky, “Music modulates behaviour of pre-
mature infants following heel lance.” The Canadian journal of nursing
research Revue canadienne de recherche en sciences inﬁrmieres, vol. 31,
no. 4, pp. 17–39, 2000.
[27] R. M. Sullivan and P. Toubas, “Clinical usefulness of maternal odor in
newborns: soothing and feeding preparatory responses.” Biology of the
Neonate, vol. 74, no. 6, pp. 402–408, 1998.
[28] R. Carbajal, S. Veerapen, S. Couderc, M. Jugie, and Y. Ville, “Analgesic
effect of breast feeding in term neonates: randomised controlled trial,”
BMJ British Medical Journal, vol. 326, no. 7379, p. 13, 2003.
[29] Arduino. (2012, 06). [Online]. Available: www.arduino.cc
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

