Improving of Medical Imaging by the Use of Noninvasive Optical Technologies 
Anna Cysewska-Sobusiak and Grzegorz Wiczyński 
Division of Metrology and Optoelectronics, Institute of Electrical Engineering and Electronics  
Poznan University of Technology 
Poznan, Poland 
e-mail: anna.cysewska@put.poznan.pl; grzegorz.wiczynski@put.poznan.pl 
 
 
Abstract— Among the applied methods of tissue parameters 
measurement, a tendency to develop imaging methods based 
on detection and analysis of natural and forced biooptical 
phenomena is significant. Transmission variant of light-tissue 
interaction is considered in the paper. The work on the 
performed 
optoelectronic 
systems 
for 
human 
tissue 
transillumination is in progress. The transillumination image 
enables to disclose information on the functional condition, 
unavailable in the traditional X-ray technique. Preliminary 
results which were obtained by the authors during the finger 
and hand transillumination tests are promising. Some of them 
are presented in the paper. They show that effective imaging is 
possible even in a simple system and indicate that the further 
development of the designed noninvasive systems seems to be 
advisable.  
Keywords-medical imaging; light-tissue interaction; optical 
technologies; noninvasive transillumination 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In 1895, Wilhelm Conrad Roentgen [20] made the first 
radiogram of a hand, starting the development of image 
diagnostics methods. Other imaging methods appeared after 
a few dozen of years only. Modern imaging technology 
includes among others X-ray imaging, videoendoscopy, 
ultrasonography 
(USG), 
computer 
tomography 
(CT), 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission 
tomography (PET) and thermography [1][2]. All these 
methods allow the detection of different properties of tissues 
through a variety of utilized phenomena. Particular 
techniques differ from the point of view of the advantages 
and disadvantages, a range of applications, degree of 
invasive or noninvasive interaction, patient ballast, and 
complication of procedures. For example, MRI has always 
been especially suited for vascular imaging.  
The associated application of various methods is 
presently developed, allowing obtaining a more complete set 
of information on the object, compared to the tests made in 
one diagnostic technique only. Thanks to the selective 
optical properties of tissue cells, optoelectronic noninvasive 
imaging methods can be used for determination of essential 
features of tissue sets, particularly useful in developing 
combined diagnostics [3].  
As far back as 1876, Karl van Vierordt [19] already 
observed changes in the solar spectrum transmitted by the 
finger tissues of his own hand. He discovered that after 
pressure causing inadequate blood supply, a change occurred 
in the spectrum composition obtained, which he related to 
the changing participation of oxygenated and reduced 
hemoglobins in the tissues. Information on the first attempts 
of transillumination with optical radiation appeared in 1929 
[4]. In 1977, a hundred years after van Vierodt’s 
observations, Minolta built the first oximeter based on the 
transillumination of the ear lobe. Fast development of such 
techniques, however, occurred in 1980’s [5].  
Due to strong scattering of the light, the practical 
implementation of optical transillumination for medical 
imaging is a difficult task [6−12]. This technology allows for 
supporting detection of pathological formations in some 
tissue sets, particularly those located on body perimeter. The 
subject of the presented work-in-progress is based on our 
own previous experience in an expanded use of the 
transmission photoplethysmography and pulse oximetry 
principles.  
In Section 2, optical properties of human tissues are 
briefly mentioned. In Section 3, specific attributes of optical 
imaging and the proposed transmitting-receiving systems are 
described. Preliminary results related to transillumination 
images which were collected by us for human fingers and 
whole hands seem to be very promising. In Section 4, we 
present some selected results of imaging. 
II. 
OPTICAL PROPERTIES OF HUMAN TISSUES  
There is a window in which optical radiation can 
penetrate into human tissue set and propagate through it. 
This window includes red light and the NIR (Near Infrared) 
wavelengths [13][14]. A particular tissue composition 
depends very much on blood and water content what results 
in differences between values of optical parameters if to 
determine them at several compositions of various kinds and 
size. The effects of radiation influence on the object may 
concern its area and volume and the type of interaction 
largely depends on the properties of the beam of radiation. 
One of the most useful properties of using red and NIR 
wavelengths 
is 
that 
oxygenated 
hemoglobin 
and 
deoxygenated hemoglobin both absorb light differently in 
this region.  
A given set of living tissues consists of many 
components which create the complex spatial configuration. 
When a biological object is exposed to selective 
illumination, we can receive the selective optical response to 
particular wavelengths. Depending on the locality and 
diameter of the light beam passing through the object the 
effects of light-tissue interaction can differ very much. The 
interactions occurring between the light and the tissues result 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in scattering, absorption and fluorescence, providing 
information on the structure, physiology, biochemistry and 
molecular functions. Optical imaging may be used for 
description of surface and volume structures.   
III. 
ATTRIBUTES OF  OPTICAL IMAGING  
A. Powers and Limitations of Tissue Transillumination 
Combined application of various methods simultaneously 
is presently developed, allowing for obtaining a more 
complete set of information on the object, compared to the 
tests made with one diagnostic technique only. In such an 
approach, tendency to develop noninvasive methods based 
on detection and analysis of biooptical signals phenomena is 
perceptible. 
Transillumination is understood as the phenomenon of 
transmitting optical radiation with defined parameters by a 
given object, which becomes the carrier of information about 
the characteristics of this object. In case of biological objects, 
the optical properties of body fluids and other tissues are 
utilized. Photons in turbid media, such as most human 
tissues, are absorbed as well as scattered many times before 
being transmitted. Scattering and absorption can complicate 
the transillumination image. Due to the easiness of setting 
the location in relation to the measuring system and due to 
the variability of the optical properties, convenient objects in 
the transillumination tests are those located on body 
perimeter.  
Under 
the 
noninvasive 
“transillumination” 
and 
“illumination from underneath”, it is possible to diagnose 
and monitor the parameters of tissues and organs examined. 
It is related to achievements in optoelectronic devices and 
new capabilities of numerical processing. 
Optical radiation that is to play the role of an effective 
information carrier should be sufficiently coherent and, due 
to the high optical density of the object, should also have 
possibly high intensity. However, for higher power density 
quantities, some destructive photothermal effects may occur. 
Wavelength and power of radiation selected improperly may 
not only act ineffectively, but may cause damage or 
destruction of the object.  
B. Transmitting-Receiving Systems 
This paper includes a brief discussion of selected issues 
related to the biophysical and optical phenomena used and 
preliminary examples obtained by the authors with 
transillumination scanning applied to human hand and 
fingers. Our previous experience with measurements based 
on transmission pulse oximetry [15][16] has been utilized in 
an extended modified way.  The basic application difficulty 
in an effective transillumination of thick tissue layers is the 
low power of radiation to be detected. Therefore, it is 
necessary to force the optical power of the source and to 
apply sensitive photodetectors. Various variants of systems 
were considered, however, always the high-efficient light 
emitting diodes LEDs were used as light sources. Two 
variants of these systems which we currently use are shown 
in Fig. 1a and Fig. 1b. 
The experimental transillumination of hand and foot 
fingers is possible in a quite simple as well as efficient 
transmitting-receiving system presented in Fig. 1a. The 
mechanical structure of this system was constructed in the 
form of letter C [16][17]. The assembly is flexible and 
contains the motorization, brakes, motion transmission 
mechanisms, cable bundle, and pneumatic and electrical 
circuits. The optical part of the transmitting-receiving system 
consists of an illuminating LED diode placed opposite the 
sensitive receiving PIN photodiode (without the additional 
systems focusing the optical beam) which are fit at the 
structure ends in optical channels of 3 mm diameter and 
about 20 mm length. The object’s scanning is made in a 
rectangular x-y coordinates system. A hand examined is laid 
on a transparent plate stabilizing its position. The hand 
should remain immobilized in relation to the scanning 
system. The immobilization may not disturb the object’s 
function maintaining simultaneously the examined person’s 
comfort. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 1.  Two variants of the performed measuring systems: (a) view of the scanning system where the input is the transverse motion of the system in 
relation to the hand fingers; (b) scheme of a system designed to study the transillumination  effects with a monochromatic camera. 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Scheme of another system variant is shown in Fig. 1b. 
The object transillumination is realized with a system 
consisting of hardware and program parts. The system makes 
it possible to study the transillumination effects in the optical 
range, including the visible and near infrared radiation (up to 
1000 nm). The single and multi-element illuminating 
electroluminescent sources of light were tested. A 
monochromatic camera CMOS has been used as a light 
detector. 
IV. 
EXAMPLES OF RESULTS 
The selected results obtained with the system shown in 
Fig. 1a are presented in Fig. 2. The transverse motion of the 
scanning system in relation to the fingers was input. Several 
wavelengths were used for the tests. The results presented 
herein have been obtained for an ELJ-880-228B emitting 
light at the wavelength λ = 880 nm [18]. This LED was 
driven with current impulses. The PIN BPW24R photodiode 
was used as the sensitive photodetector.  
Fig. 2a presents the standardized values of the converted 
output signal from the photodiode for several x values. 
Particular levels of output signals show differences in light 
attenuation for a given position. The results obtained as 
transillumination images are shown in Fig. 2b. The grayness 
intensity is represented by the output signal values of the 
fingers examined (F1, F2, F3, F4). The specific isolines 
illustrate transmission properties of fingers at the used 
wavelength. Despite the system simplicity, the imaging 
obtained was as anticipated before. For example, differences 
between the amplitude variability for fingers without and 
with joint degeneration were observed. 
Some examples of images observed with the system 
shown in Fig. 1b are presented in Fig. 3. It is possible to 
distinguish the structures of the object that occur sufficiently 
near the camera input surface. Thus, the observation of the 
internal structures is possible of such objects as hands, feet, 
etc.  
Results of measurements shown in Fig. 2 do not still 
allow to distinguish the difference between the diseased and 
healthy joint because imaging of higher resolution has to be 
performed. However, results obtained with the system 
presented in Fig. 1b indicate that there is a possibility of 
optical detecting the pathological changes of joints.
LEFT HAND
F1
F2
F3
F4
F5
X
Y
x = 12mm
F2
F3
F4
x = 22mm
F2
F3
F4
x = 32mm
F2
F3
F4
x = 42mm
F2
F3
F4
F1
x =52mm
F2
F3
F4
F1
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 2.  Examples of imaging results obtained by the use the system shown in Fig. 1a: (a) Specification of the output signals dependency on the y location 
for selected cross-sections with x coordinate; (b) Examples of transillumination images obtainef for hand fingers. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Comparison of results obtained by the use of the system shown in Fig. 1b for the left hand transilluminated from the palm side at three 
wavelenghts, respectively: 645 nm, 880 nm, and 940 nm. 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Results presented in Fig. 3 show that transillumination of 
peripheral body sites is possible with red and near-infrared 
incident wavelengths. We may acquire not only the outlines 
of the object structure but also observe the blood vessels near 
the surface. Furthermore, there are visible bright components 
related to the finger joints. During studies, symptoms of 
rheumatic degeneration were observed. Strong light 
scattering by human tissues makes it hard to evaluate the 
structures occurring more deeply. The obtained images 
especially allowed the observation of the near-surface blood 
vessels and bone structures. The possibility of efficient 
transillumination greatly depends on the transmission 
properties of the object as well as the spectral characteristics 
of the LEDs and camera. The best effects were obtained for 
three wavelengths: 645 nm, 880 nm and 940 nm. All these 
wavelengths are included in the transillumination window 
where the hemoglobin species are the main light absorbers in 
arterial and venous blood [5]. Independently from the LED 
spectrum, the monochromatic camera allows obtaining of 
imaging in the gray scale. 
From the diagnostic point of view, the improving 
advantages of the proposed method, compared qualitatively 
with, e.g., traditional X-ray imaging include: 
• 
The lack of harmful influence of optical radiation of 
properly 
selected 
parameters 
on 
the 
human 
organism. 
• 
The 
possibility 
of 
noninvasive 
continuous 
monitoring of the chosen parts of the body.   
• 
The possibility of detecting the local concentration 
of the blood, e.g., hematoma. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The particular methods of medical imaging are not the 
alternative methods, but they can complement each other, 
according to the present tendencies to applying so-called 
combined imaging. The proposed optical imaging of such 
objects as the hand or foot has no the direct equivalent 
described in the accessible literature neither in the trade 
offer. It seems to be reasonable to test transillumination 
techniques not yet described in other reference data. The 
presented preliminary results of tests show that effective 
transillumination scanning is possible even in a simple 
system and indicate that the further development of the 
developed measuring system is appropriate and justified. The 
applied technique can be the useful tool in the process of 
diagnosing of, e.g., surface blood vessels and the rheumatoid 
inflammation of joints. From the combined imaging point of 
view, the optical imaging may provide information on the 
functional condition unavailable in other techniques. 
Transillumination imaging has the lower resolution in the 
comparison with, e.g., the RTG techniques, but they allow to 
detect changes invisible on the X-ray pictures. We have 
concentrated our current works on developing efficient 
transillumination of thick layers of tissues and building 
algorithms representing the anatomic and functional 
properties.   
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Enderle, S. Blanchard, and J. Bronzino, Introduction to 
Biomedical Engineering, San Diego: Academic Press, 2000.  
[2] T. Togawa, T. Tamura, and P. Å. Öberg, Biomedical Sensors 
and Instruments, 2nd ed., Boca Raton: CRC Press, 2011. 
[3] A. Cysewska-Sobusiak, G. Wiczyński, Z. Krawiecki, and A. 
Sowier, "Role of optical techniques in combined use of selected 
methods of medical imaging," Opto-Electronics Review, vol. 
16, pp. 136−146, 2008, doi:10.2478/s11772-008-0010-7. 
[4] M. Cutler, "Transillumination of the breast," Surg. Gynecol. 
Obstet., vol. 48, pp. 721−727, 1929.  
[5] J. G. Webster, Design of Pulse Oximeters, London: IPP 
Publishing Ltd, 1997. 
[6] B. W.  Pogue, T. O. McBride, U. L. Osterberg, and K. D.  
Paulsen, "Comparison of imaging geometries for diffuse 
optical tomography of tissue," Optics Express, vol. 4, pp. 
270–286, 1999. 
[7] A. K. Scheel et.al., "Assessment of proximal finger joint 
inflammation in patients with rheumatoid arthritis, using a 
novel 
laser-based 
imaging 
technique, 
"Arthrism 
& 
Rheumatism, " vol. 46,  pp. 1177–1184, 2002. 
[8] J. Beuthan et. al, "Light scattering study of rheumatoid 
arthritis," Quantum Electronics, vol. 32, pp. 945−952, 2002. 
[9] R. S. Jones et. al, "Near-infrared transillumination at 1310nm 
for the imaging of early dental decay,"Optics Express, vol. 11, 
2003. 
[10] U. Hampel, E. Schleicher, and R. Freyer, "Volume image 
reconstruction for diffuse optical tomography," Applied 
Optics, vol. 41, pp. 3816−3826, July 2002. 
[11] http://www.eatonhand.com/img/img00087.htm 
[retrieved: 
September, 2012]. 
[12] X. Wu and G. Faris, "Improved imaging through human 
tissue 
using 
compensated 
transillumination," 
Proc. 
Conference on Lasers and Electro-Optics (CLEO’98), doi: 
10.1109/CLEO.1998.676096.  
[13] F. A. Duck, Physical Properties of Tissue: a Comprehensive 
Reference Book, San Diego: Academia Press, 1990, pp. 
43−71. 
[14] V. V. Tuchin, "Light interaction with biological tissues 
(overview)," Proc. SPIE, vol. 1884, pp. 234−272, 1993. 
[15] A. Cysewska-Sobusiak, "One-dimensional representation of 
light-tissue interaction for application in noninvasive 
oximetry," Optical Engineering, vol. 36, pp. 1225−1233, 
April 1997. 
[16] A. Cysewska-Sobusiak, A. Hulewicz, Z. Krawiecki, and G. 
Wiczyński, Examples of the Application of Light-Tissue 
Interaction to Biomedical Engineering, in: WIT Transactions 
on the Built Environment, vol. 121, UK: WIT Press. 2011, pp. 
223−234. 
[17] ARM RX60B FAMILY CHARACTERISTICS, Staubli, 
2001. 
[18] Data sheet, ELJ-880-228B, Roithener Lasertechnik. 
[19] J. W. Severinghaus and P. A. Astrup, History of Blood Gas 
Analysis, Boston: Little, Brown and Company (Inc.), 1987. 
[20] J. F. Keithley, The Story of Electrical and Magnetic 
Measurements. From 500 BC to the 1940s, New York: IEEE 
Press, 1999. 
 
 
 
 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

