Computational Fluid Dynamics Model for a Closed Infant Incubator 
 
Aziza Hannouch,Vahe Mitilian, 
Mohamad Hajj-Hassan, Hassan M. Khachfe 
Department of Biomedical Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
{61010036; 6083099}@students.liu.edu.lb, 
{mohamad.hajjhassan; hassan.khachfe}@liu.edu.lb 
 
Charbel Habchi 
Department of Mechanical Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Current Address:  
Notre Dame University – Louaize 
Zouk Mosbeh, Lebanon 
charbel.habchi@ndu.edu.lb
 
Abstract— Incubators are essential tools to provide thermal 
comfort for neonates. The main heat transfer processes in these 
systems are convection and thermal radiation. The objective of 
the present work is to analyze the flow structure and heat 
transfer processes using computational fluid dynamics (CFD). 
The computational domain consists of a simplified incubator 
and neonate where two cases are considered. In the first case, 
the mattress was assumed adiabatic whereas in the second one 
the mattress is assumed to have a constant heat flux. Case one 
showed an excess of heat loss from the neonate by both 
convection and radiation, thus the neonate may suffer from 
hyperthermia and cold stress. This was solved by using a heat 
mattress with appropriate fixed heat flux in order to provide 
the desired thermal comfort. 
Keywords: CFD; biomedical engineering; Incubators; 
thermal comfort. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Healthy neonates can regulate their body temperature 
while premature and ill infants face difficulties keeping a 
controlled body temperature without external assistance. 
Consequently, they can suffer from cold stress and 
hypothermia that leads to an increase in the rate of morbidity 
and mortality [1]. This is why there is a need to maintain an 
optimal thermal environment for the neonate. This can be 
achieved by using incubators.  
Incubators are enclosed chambers with climate-controlled 
equipment used to keep an infant worm and safe from germs 
exposure. This is achieved by circulating warm air over the 
infant skin. The design of efficient incubators is crucial for 
the neonate survival. Many methods can be used to design 
and optimize incubators. Numerical simulations, namely 
CFD (computational fluid dynamics), is one of the most used 
tools since it does not necessitate expensive experimental 
work and it can assess locally the incubator environment 
such as the temperature and velocity [2]. Moreover, 
experimental studies exhibit risks on the human life 
especially on neonatal infants. 
CFD has been significantly enhanced over the last decade 
due to advanced engineering technologies [2, 3]. In recent 
studies, computational fluid dynamics has been greatly used 
to analyze the heat transfer between the environment and the 
human body, such as in incubators, panda warmers, or 
intensive care units [1]. CFD simulation can be very useful 
in many situations, as they easily allow parametric study and 
can be of great assistance in the design of more efficient, 
safe, and reliable medical equipment. 
Continuous research is being conducted for designing 
neonate incubators. The main objective is to provide a 
controlled temperature in order to increase the neonate 
survival and growth. In fact, the temperature inside the 
incubators is correlated with the flow structure which is in its 
turn affected by the ventilation system. Thus, understanding 
the relation between these parameters could be a solution to 
solve many problems inside incubators.  
The flow inside the incubator is complex and it is usually 
considered turbulent. This necessitates the use of a 
turbulence model to compute the governing equations. The 
most used turbulence models for incubators are the SST 
 and RNG 
 models [1]. Ginalski et al. [2] used 
the SST 
 to study the heat transfer in an infant 
incubator with and without an overhead screen. In their 
study, the human body and incubator geometry were 
generated using CAD application CATIA. Then the CFD 
software ANSYS Fluent was used to analyze the heat 
transfer and flow structure.  
Many others used the standard or RNG 
 turbulence 
model to study the heat transfer and fluid flow in closed 
incubators or radiant warmers [4-6]. A fair agreement was 
observed between the results obtained numerically and those 
from experimental analysis. For example, Sedin et al. [7] 
preformed both experimental studies and numerical 
simulations and compared the body core temperature and 
mean skin temperature obtained from both techniques. The 
maximum deviation between experimental and numerical 
results did not exceed 0.8oC for the worst case, i.e. a relative 
error of about 2.2%. 
The objective of the present work is to design a new 
ventilation strategy in incubators using CFD simulations. 
Two cases are considered here. In the first case, all the 
incubator walls and mattress are considered adiabatic to 
mimic double walled incubators. The second case higher 
inlet air temperature is considered and the mattress was 
heated with constant heat flux. 
The current paper is organized as follows: Section II is 
devoted to the computational domain and boundary 
conditions. Section III presents the numerical model and 
algorithms. The results are then discussed in Section IV. 
Finally, the conclusion is presented in Section V. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

II. 
COMPUTATIONAL DOMAIN AND BOUNDARY 
CONDITIONS 
The computational domain consists of an incubator 
chamber of 
700 500 400


 mm3 with a simplified neonatal 
model as shown in Fig. 1. There are two inlets (in cyan and 
green) and two outlets (red and orange) similarly to the 
Drager Caleo incubator [2, 8]. The total surface area of the 
infant skin is around 0.1344 m2 which is similar to the 
models used by Kim et al. [5] and Fic et al. [6]. The inlets 
and outlets have same cross-sectional area of 0.01 m2. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 1. (a) 3D view of the computational domain and (b) top 
view with main dimensions 
TABLE 1. BOUNDARY CONDITIONS FOR THE TWO CASES 
 
Case 1 
Case 2 
Newborn 
T = 36oC 
T = 36oC 
Inlet air 
T = 34oC 
u = 0.1 m/s 
T = 34oC 
u = 0.1 m/s 
Mattress 
Adiabatic 
q” = 5 W/m2 
Walls 
Adiabatic 
Adiabatic 
 
The airflow velocity at the inlets is assumed 0.1 m/s as 
proposed by Amezzane et al. [9] basing on ISO7730 [10]. 
The pressure at the outlets is considered constant equal to 
atmospheric pressure. No slip-boundary condition is 
assumed at all solid boundaries. The incubator walls are 
assumed adiabatic. Two cases are considered in the present 
study, as presented in Table 1. For both cases, the baby skin 
temperature is set to normal temperature of 36oC [11]. The 
two cases are summarized in TABLE 1. In the first case, the 
mattress is adiabatic, while in second case, the mattress is 
heated with a uniform heat flux. A hexahedral mesh is used 
in the present study consisting of 522,290 cells. The mesh 
was refined near the wall boundaries to insure 

y  values 
less than 4 in order to better compute the near wall regions. 
In the present studies a maximum 

y  of 2.8 was obtained. 
III. 
NUMERICAL METHOD 
ANSYS Fluent [12] is used to compute the Navier-
Stokes and energy equations using a second order accuracy. 
This code is based on cell-centered finite volume 
discretization. The flow equations are solved sequentially 
with double precision and a second-order upwind scheme for 
spatial discretization of the convective terms. The diffusion 
terms are central differenced and second-order accurate. 
Pressure-velocity coupling is achieved by the COUPLED 
algorithm. The 
k 
 SST turbulence model is used with a 
correction for flows characterized by a low Reynolds 
number. The Boussinesq approximation was adopted to 
include the buoyancy effects. The radiation process was 
computed using the Discrete Ordinates (DO) model with 10 
iterations. The emissivity of all solid boundaries is assumed 
equal to 0.9 while the newborn emissivity is set to 0.95 [2]. 
The residual value 10-6 is set as the convergence criterion for 
the solutions of the flow and energy equations. Beyond this 
value no significant changes were observed in the velocity 
and temperature fields and turbulence quantities. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The energy rate balance on the neonate body can be 
written as follows [2]: 
R
C
E
M
q
q
q
q
q



 
 
(1) 
where 
qM
 is the metabolic heat generated by the infant, 
E
q  
is the heat lost by evaporation, 
C
q  the convective heat loss 
and 
R
q  the radiative heat loss. 
The heat transfer from the newborn to the surrounding 
environment, especially the radiation and convection rates, is 
directly related to the temperature and air velocity within the 
incubator. The convective and radiative heat fluxes are 
determined from CFD simulations. The first two terms are 
calculated using the Caleo Drager web application [13]. The 
baby in the present study has a surface area of 0.134 m2. The 
corresponding weight is 1374 g [14]. Thus with this weight 
and assuming a neonate age of 1 day, this gives 
 .2 24 W

E
M
q
q
. 
For thermal balance the energy difference must be close 
to zero. In fact, if q
  is negative this means that the baby 
needs additional heating, and vice versa. 
TABLE 2 recapitulates the results for the radiative and 
convective rates of heat transfer obtained from CFD 
simulations for case 1 and 2. It is shown than for the case 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

with adiabatic mattress, the heat balance is negative which 
means that the neonate is losing heat to the environment. 
This necessitates the addition of an additional heat source to 
decrease the heat loss. 
TABLE 2. ENERGY BALANCE RESULTS FOR CASE 1 AND 
CASE 2 
Heat rate (W) 
qM
 
E
q  
C
q  
R
q  
q
  
Case 1 
3.26 
1.02 
2.15 
5.23 
-5.14 
Case 2 
3.26 
1.02 
1.10 
1.27 
-0.13 
 
Fig. 2 to 4 (a) show calculation results for case 1 without 
heated mattress, while Fig. 2 to 4 (b) show calculation results 
for case 2 with heated mattress. It can be observed from the 
streamlines shown in Fig. 2 (a) and (b), that the flow 
structure for both cases is similar since forced convection is 
dominant. The flow leaving the inlets is directed upward then 
the interaction with the upper surface of the incubator 
redirects the flow downward towards the neonate. Thus a 
convective heat exchange occurs between the neonate skin 
and the flowing warm air. Moreover, the temperature of the 
airflow in case 2 is slightly greater than that in case 1. This 
explains the reduction in the convective heat loss from the 
neonate from 2.15 W to 1.1 W. In fact, the average air 
temperature inside the incubator in case 1 is around 34.8oC 
while it reaches around 35.3oC in case 2 due to the addition 
of the heated mattress. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 2. Streamlines colored by temperature for (a) case 1 and (b) 
case 2. 
The convective heat loss from the neonate for case 1 is 
shown in Fig. 3 (a) where the values range from -0.31 W/m2 
to 8.12 W/m2. Positive value means the heat is lost from the 
neonate while negative value means heat is gained by the 
neonate skin. Comparing with Fig. 3 (b) for case 2, it is 
shown that the neonate loses less heat by convection but 
more heat is added since the air flow temperature is slightly 
higher in case 2. The convective heat loss is greater at the 
neonate chest and face due to the impinging flow caused by 
the two vortices. 
 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 3. Convective heat flux on the neonate skin for (a) case 1 
and (b) case 2. 
The radiative heat flux distribution is presented in Fig. 4, 
where in case 1 the heat loss by thermal radiation from the 
neonate is greater than that in case 2. The lowest radiative 
heat loss is from the inside legs while the maximum is from 
the baby’s face and chest. After the addition of the heated 
mattress, the radiative heat loss is decreased by almost a 
factor of 3. Another important issue is that the heated 
mattress temperature should be almost equal to the neonate 
skin temperature to avoid conductive heat transfer. This is 
well obtained here since the heat flux between baby’s sides 
near the mattress tends to zero, avoiding thus overheating 
issues. 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Figure 4. Radiative heat flux on the neonate skin for (a) case 1 and 
(b) case 2. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Computational fluid dynamics study was performed to 
analyze the flow structure and heat transfer in a neonate 
incubator. Two cases where considered: one with an 
adiabatic mattress and one with a heated mattress. The first 
case shows that the heat loss from the neonate is high 
especially for the radiation heat transfer which reaches 
around 5.23 W. This problem was solved by providing 
additional heat to the mattress. This could be done for 
instance by putting an electric resistor underneath the 
mattress. The heat loss from the neonate with heated mattress 
where decreased from around 5 W to around 0.1 W. 
Moreover, the temperature of the mattress did not exceed 
36.6oC to avoid burn in the neonate skin. 
In future work, the CFD study will account for the 
humidity comfort and new solutions will be proposed based 
on the corresponding results. 
VI. 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. C. Wrobel, M. K. Ginalski, A. J. Nowak, D. B. Ingham, 
and A. M. Fic, "An overview of recent applications of 
computational modelling in neonatology," Philosophical 
Transaction of the Royal Society of London A, vol. 368, pp. 
2817-2834, 2010. 
[2] M. K. Ginalski, A. J. Nowak, and l. C. Wrobel, "A combined 
study of heat and mass transfer in an infant incubator with an 
overhead screen," Medical Engineering and Physics, vol. 29, 
pp. 531-541, 2007. 
[3] Y. H. Kim, C. H. Kwon, and S. C. Yoo, "Experimental and 
numerical studies on convective heat transfer in a neonatal 
incubator," 
Medical 
and 
Biological 
Engineering 
and 
Computing, vol. 39, pp. 114-121, 2001. 
[4] M. Rojczyk and I. Szczygiel, "Numerical analysis of radiant 
warmer," Computer Assisted Methods in Engineering and 
Science, vol. 20, pp. 237-265, 2013. 
[5] Y. H. Kim, C. H. Kwon, and S. C. Yoo, "Experimental and 
numerical studies on convective heat transfer in a neonatal 
incubator," 
Medical 
and 
Biological 
Engineering 
and 
Computing, vol. 39, pp. 114-121, 2001. 
[6] M. Fic, D. B. Ingham, M. K. Ginalski, A. J. Nowak, and l. 
Wrobel, "Heat and mass transfer under an infant radiant 
warmer-development of a numerical model," Medical 
Engineering and Physics, vol. 32, pp. 497-504, 2010. 
[7] G. Sedin, K. Hammarlund, B. Stromberg, "Transepidermal 
water loss in full-term and pre-term infants," Acta Paediatrica, 
vol. 31, pp. 305-327, 1983   
[8] www.draeger.com (Last accessed on May 2015).  
[9] Amezzane, A. Awada, M. Sawan, and F. Bellemare, 
"Modelling and simulation of an infant’s whole body 
plethysmograph," Medical and Biological Engineering and 
Computing, vol. 44, pp. 823-828, 2006. 
[10] ISO7730, In moderate thermal environments-determination of 
the PMV and PPD indices and specification of the conditions 
for thermal comfort, 1993. 
[11] S. T. Blackburn, Maternal, fetal and neonatal physiology: a 
clinical perspective, 4th ed., Elsevier Health Sciences, 2014. 
[12] Ansys, "Fluent academic research," 14.5 ed. 
[13] Http://legacy.draeger.com/us/heat-balance/index.jsp#help 
(Last accessed on May 2015).  
[14] M. D. Luc brion, M. D. Alan, R. Fleischman, M. D. George, 
and J. Schwartz, "Evaluation of four length-weight formulas 
for estimating body surface area in newborn infants," The 
Journal of Pediatrics, vol. 107, pp. 801-803, 1985. 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-511-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2016 : The Fifth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

