Chronic Disease Management System Based on 
eHealth Concept in China 
 
Xufeng Zhang, Bin Li, Zhihong Yao, Lei Liu 
Biomedical Informatics Group 
Shanghai Center for Bio-information Technology 
Shanghai, P.R.C. 
xfzhang@scbit.org, libin@scbit.org, 
yaozhihong@sibs.ac.cn, liulei@scbit.org 
Hao Chen 
School of Public Health 
Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
Shanghai, P.R.C. 
121chenhao@sjtu.edu.cn 
 
Abstract—Chronic diseases have posed great threats for the 
health of the residents in China. The treatments for chronic 
diseases usually endure a long time. Therefore, a lot of medical 
resources are occupied. In this article, we introduce the chronic 
diseases management system (CDMS) based on eHealth concept. 
Patients can detect the index relevant to the chronic diseases by 
themselves and get some instructive guides about health-care 
from this system. The application of this management system will 
enhance the patients' awareness of diseases and thereby lower the 
expenses of the treatments for chronic diseases. 
Keywords-chronic disease; PHR; eHealth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The incidences of chronic diseases are increasing with the 
improving of living standard and the changing of eating habit. 
Chronic diseases occur in young age gradually. In China, 
chronic diseases have been the main causes of death. As the 
statistics of the year 2000 showed that 80.9% of mortality was 
attributed to chronic diseases [1]. Furthermore, chronic 
diseases will greatly affect the life quality of the aged. Take 
Shanghai, for example, 73.76% residents developed chronic 
diseases among the aged in 2008. 
Chronic disease, usually, has a long course and is hard to be 
cured. The interventions and treatments for the patients are 
important. The Internet of Things (IoT) is a concept that 
describes how the Internet is being used to link consumer 
devices and physical assets so that these new endpoints can 
create and receive a data stream. The method based on IoT will 
realize the purpose of remote monitoring for the susceptible 
population and patients. 
  In this paper, we introduce a chronic disease management 
system (CDMS) based on eHealth. This system can not only 
monitor the vital signs of the patients through long distance for 
the benefit of telemedicine, but also help to arouse the 
awareness of the health statues for the patients. Compared to 
the traditional telemedicine systems, the CDMS is more 
focused on attracting the patients to participate in self-health 
management. Due to the use of a service component 
architecture technology, components of the system can run 
independently to provide web services. The components do not 
interference each other which makes it convenient for function 
expansion. 
In Section II, we give a brief architecture overview of the 
CDMS. More details of the CDMS’s components are described 
in Section III to Section VII. Two main features, Front-end 
Data Cleaning and User-friendly System, are introduced in 
Section VIII. An example of using the CDMS is given in 
Section IX. Finally, we drew a conclusion in Section X. 
II. 
CDMS’S ARCHITECTURE 
There are always new chronic diseases will be found, and 
chronic diseases prevention and control methods may change 
over time. We cannot design a common mode to manage all of 
the chronic diseases. In order to overcome the uncertainty, the 
chronic diseases management system (CDMS) should be 
flexible enough to change the chronic diseases prevention and 
control methods and scalable enough to manage the new 
chronic diseases. 
The CDMS took SOA (Service-Oriented Architecture) as 
the main architecture to ensure the system's flexibility and 
scalability. A Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) [2] is a set 
of principles and methodologies for designing and developing 
software in the form of interoperable services, and the services 
are unassociated, loosely coupled units of functionality. By 
SOA, the CDMS can easily add new services to manage new 
chronic diseases and replace old services to change chronic 
diseases prevention and control methods. 
The system architecture is shown in Figure 1. All 
components in the system communicate with each other by 
web service (WS), so each component can evolve respectively 
according to the different needs and will not affect each other. 
The components on the upper part of the picture are system-
specific components and need to be developed. The others on 
the lower half are common components, which have the 
corresponding software implementations. 
The 
system-specific 
components 
include 
the 
five 
components of Personal Health Records (PHR), Drug Database, 
Evidence-based Medicine, Chronic Disease Management 
Service, Vital Signs Integration Service; we will introduce 
them in later sections, respectively. Chronic Disease 
Management Portal is the portal of the CDMS and users can 
access all components through it. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Chronic Disease 
Management 
Service
Hypertension
...
SCA
Drug 
Datase
PHR
W
S
W
S
ESB
CDMS Portal
W
S
W
S
Vital Signs 
Integration 
Service
ESP
BPM
Diabetes screening 
process
PHR entry Process
...
EDM
Diagnosis of diabetes 
Rules
...
Diagnosis of hypertension 
Rules
W
S
W
S
W
S
Audit 
Service
Legacy System
EDB Servie Adaptor
W
S
Evidence-
based 
Medicine
W
S
W
S
Security 
Service
Diabetes
Glucose
...
Blood Pressure
 
Figure 1.  CDMS’s architecture 
The common components include Enterprise Service Bus 
(ESB), Event Stream Processing (ESP), Service Component 
Architecture (SCA), Business Process Management (BPM), 
Enterprise Decision Management (EDM), and each of the five 
components has corresponding open source implementations. 
The CDMS just selects and integrates the implementations by 
SOA. 
ESB, ESP and SCA are the basis of the CDMS. ESB can be 
used to integrate legacy services or applications (such as HIS, 
PACS, etc.). By using ESB, the CDMS does not need to repeat 
patient data entry, which had existed in the legacy systems. 
ESP enables the CDMS to monitor multiple streams of event 
data, and analyze them. Normally, ESB is used to audit the 
accounts in the CDMS. Services are core to SOA. Using SCA, 
you can build units of functionality, or components, supporting 
a variety of languages, and then expose them as services over 
protocols. Moreover, these components can be wired together 
internally to form higher-level services, or composites. And the 
services can run in a distributed fashion and be managed as a 
virtual cloud. By SCA, the CDMS can add more services to 
manage new chronic diseases easily. 
BPM and EDM are used to design visually chronic disease 
management processes and medical decision-making that can 
be used to the CDMS immediately. Because visual designers 
are provided by BPM and EDM, doctors can also design the 
processes and decision-makings easily. In this way, the CDMS 
can attract the doctors to participate the design of the system. 
III. 
PERSONAL HEALTH RECORDS (PHR) 
Chronic diseases are diseases of long duration and 
generally slow progression. The prevention and treatment of 
chronic diseases relies mainly on the patients' own efforts, 
including developing good living and eating habits, taking 
medicine on time, etc. In order to store all of the patient-
centered data, the CDMS use PHR as the underlying data 
model.  
A personal health record is a collection of health-related 
information that is documented and maintained by the 
individual it pertains to. By using PHR, the CDMS allows 
patients to participate in their own healthcare management by 
viewing, editing, or discussing their own medical data.  
Internationally, several institutions and organizations are 
concerned with standardization of EHR (Electronic Health 
Records) [3][4], and some of the standards such as openEHR 
[5], HL7 CDA [6], CEN 13606 can be used to build the PHR. 
Compared with other standards, the openEHR is more generic, 
particularly due to being archetype-driven, and can satisfies 
many requirements outside the original concept of the “clinical 
EHR”. After our research, we believe that openEHR is best 
suited to build the PHR model in the CDMS. 
But, openEHR only given the definition of the basic 
structure of PHR, and you need to define the PHR items on 
your own. In 2009, Ministry of Health of the People’s Republic 
of China published the basic framework and data standard of 
the health records (China HR) [7]. The standard has defined the 
minimum collection of health record data items. Therefore， 
by combining the standard with openEHR, we can define the 
PHR which is applicable to China. 
The openEHR EHR is structured according to a relatively 
simple model. A central HER object identified by an EHR id 
specifies references to a number of types of structured, 
versioned information [5]. According to the definition of the 
EHR object, compositions are the containers of all clinical and 
administrative content of the record. In one HER there are two 
general categories of compositions: event compositions, and 
longitudinal, or persistent compositions. To add China HR data 
items into the compositions, we should divide the items into 
instantaneous information (corresponding to the EVENT 
composition) and long-term information (corresponding to the 
PERSITION composition). The items about basic personal 
information are different from others and are separated as a 
special component.  
 
Figure 2.  PHR basic structure 
The basic structure of the PHR in the CDMS is shown in 
Figure 2.  The PHR object is the root object, which contains all 
health information of a patient. The BasicPersonalInfo object 
records the patient’s basic information, for example, name, age, 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

gender etc. The TransientInfo object is used to record 
instantaneous 
information 
like 
clinical 
testing. 
The 
LongTermInfo is used to record long-term information like 
medication records. 
IV. 
DRUG DATABASE 
Drug database plays an important role in chronic disease 
management. All the precise information of a drug is included 
in this database. The application of this database is to give 
patients some advices on rational drug use according to their 
drug use history.  
The Drug database component is more general than the 
other components of the CDMS. In addition to information of 
drugs for chronic, the component also includes other drugs’ 
information. In the future, the component will be extracted as 
an independent service application. 
  We selected more than 2000 drugs and structuralized their 
information. As the displaying mode is based on web service, 
we can add more information (such as drug target, drug 
interaction) into the database later on. We aim to serve for the 
personalized medicine. 
V. 
VITAL SIGNS INTEGRATION SERVICE (VSIS) 
In the CDMS, timely access to the signs information of 
high-risk groups or patients is of great help for chronic disease 
prevention and control. 
With the development of the Internet of Things technology, 
through wireless transmission technology, to achieve real-time 
remote vital signs collection, has become possible and 
inexpensive. 
 The schematic diagram of the vital signs integration in the 
CDMS shows in Figure 3. 
RFID
RFID
blood	  pressure	  monitor
glucose	  meter
Mobile	  phone	  
Application
VSIS
XML
 
Figure 3.  Vital signs integration schematic 
All sensors (such as blood pressure monitors, glucose 
meters) in the figure contain RFID reader devices and wireless 
transmission module. RFID reader devices are used to identify 
users. The wireless transmission module is used for data 
transmission, including two ways of transmission: one way 
transmits data via Bluetooth to mobile phone, then transmits 
data to a back-end server; the other way transmits data directly 
to the servers via GPRS. 
The mobile phone application is the core of the entire 
integration module for signs sensor, it can pre-process the data 
transmitted by the sensor, also allow users to view the data. At 
the same time, when the server side have done further analysis 
of the data, the application can be used to receive the analysis 
results.  
The VSIS provides RESTful WS (the Web Service by 
Representational State Transfer) to collect data from mobile 
phones. The transmission between it and the cell phone uses 
XML as a data interchange format. It does not compel to limit 
the sensor must be output in XML data format because of the 
diversity of sensors. If the data generated by the sensors is not 
XML format, it will be converted through the Enterprise 
Service Bus configured on a particular service adapter, and 
then transmitted to the VSIS. 
VI. 
EVIDENCE-BASED MEDICINE 
Evidence-based medicine (EBM) aims to apply the best 
available evidence gained from the scientific method to clinical 
decision making. It seeks to assess the strength of the evidence 
of risks and benefits of treatments (including lack of treatment) 
and diagnostic tests. This helps clinicians understand whether 
or not a treatment will do more good than harm. 
  Some useful and helpful evidence-based medicine 
databases (such as Cochrane, MD Consult) have been widely 
used through the world. We utilize this idea in our database 
designing.  
Take Hypertension, for instance. We collected some strong 
evidences from massive publications and integrated them into 
our system. When a patient refers to the suggestion about 
“eating habit”, the system will come up with the latest 
evidences on “how to eat healthily as a hypertension patient”. 
We help the patients to manage their health condition and 
educate themselves about the knowledge of disease. 
VII. CHRONIC DISEASE MANAGEMENT SERVICE 
Chronic disease management service component is used to 
manage all chronic diseases. Because every chronic disease 
haves different day-to-day management process, it is need to 
develop different sub component. Although different chronic 
disease needs to develop different sub component, other 
components of the CDMS that all chronic disease management 
service’s sub components need to call are the same. The 
disease-related vital signs are provided by the VSIS component, 
the data used for clinics analysis is provided by the PHR 
component, the recommended or warning information about 
patients taking medicines is from the drug database component 
and some of the latest chronic disease educational information 
is provided by the evidence-based medicine component. 
     In order to ensure the flexibility of the system, the 
management processes in chronic disease management service 
are provided by the BPM component. Its advantage is that, if 
you need to make changes to certain chronic disease 
management process, you can just change the related 
management processes in the BPM component. And the 
chronic disease management service component uses rules of 
the EDM component to diagnose and treat chronic diseases. 
The EDM component allows doctors to design the rules by 
themselves. 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

VIII. SYSTEM FEATURES 
The CDMS is designed to help the patients with chronic 
diseases to participate in self-health management, and improve 
their health status while reducing hospitalization.   
To achieve this goal, the CDMS should encourage patients 
to detect vital signs themselves. However, this will lead to 
more erroneous data are submitted into the CDMS. To 
overcome the problem, a data-cleaning framework named 
Front-end Data Cleaning is introduced.  
Meanwhile, in order to attract patients to use the system, 
The CDMS should be user-friendly, which means that the 
system should be easy to access, the contents provided by the 
system should be easy to understand.  
The two main features will be introduced in this chapter. 
A. Front-end Data Cleaning 
The VSIS module is normally used to collect patients’ own 
detected vital signs. The biggest problem in the module is to 
ensure the accuracy of the data submitted by patients.  To solve 
the problem, a simple framework for data cleaning is designed. 
The framework includes two parts. The first part is a filter to 
check abnormal data outside the confidence interval and alert 
the user. If the user confirms the accuracy of the data, the data 
can be stored in the system and be used to amend the 
confidence interval. The second part is a calculation module 
that calculates the confidence interval by the patient's historical 
data (including the data submitted by the filter).  The filter 
locates in the mobile phone or the sensor, and the calculation 
module is embedded in the VSIS.  
Using the framework, the CDMS can filter a lot of 
erroneous data in front-end devices. Of course, different vital 
signs require different algorithms to calculate confidence 
intervals.  
B. User-friendly System 
The CDMS Portal lets users to access the CDMS through 
web browsers. Meanwhile users can also access the CDMS by 
mobile phone. The VSIS module uses a mobile phone 
application to collect patients’ vital signs. In fact, the 
application also allows users to access the CDMS. The 
application can synchronize data with the CDMS while it is 
online and analysis data offline. In this way users can access 
the CDMS anywhere anytime. 
To let users more easily understood expertise of chronic 
diseases, the CDMS should promptly adjust the contents in the 
CDMS by users’ feedback. This means the CDMS should be 
easier to be modified and extended than other traditional 
medical information systems. Thanks to the SOA technology, 
the CDSM can meet this demand easily. 
IX. 
EXAMPLE-- MANAGEMENT OF HYPERTENSION 
So far, a hypertension management module has been 
implemented in the CDMS. In this chapter, we will look at how 
users use the CDMS to manage their hypertension. 
When a patient gets a blood pressure monitor and registers 
for an account, he can use the CDMS. First of all, he should 
enter his basic information, such as age, gender, blood pressure 
value, medication information, etc.  
Now, he can get the system’s help to manage his 
hypertension. Usually the system will remind him to measure 
blood pressure and take medicines regularly. When the system 
detects the abnormal blood pressure values, it will alert him. If 
this situation continues for several days, the system will notify 
the doctor to contact him.  
X. 
CONCLUSION 
This article describes the design of SOA-based architecture 
chronic disease management system, the infrastructure of the 
system using existing SOA technology, and on this basis, 
develops a service component in the management of chronic 
disease. Various components interact through web service, 
evolve independently and will not affect each other. The VSIS 
component makes full use of existing Internet of Things 
technology, having the function of remote collection of the 
user's vital signs, allowing users to keep abreast of their own 
health, also providing support for the remote diagnosis and 
treatment from doctors. In order to allow users to get the latest 
medical research, we developed the component of evidence-
based medicine to provide intelligible results of the latest 
evidence-based 
medicine. 
And 
other 
components 
are 
developed on the purpose of providing effective services to the 
patients having chronic disease.  
However, the current chronic disease management system 
still has many aspects to be perfected. In PHR component, data 
structure has not yet fully established, the next work will 
further improve in this area. In EDM component, we are still 
unable to provide a language that doctors can directly use to 
design diagnosis and treatment rules. In the future, we will 
combine the expertise of medical personnel to create a 
language in related field, facilitating the use of medical 
workers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by National High-tech R&D 
Program (863 Program), project No: 2012AA02A602, 
2012AA02A604.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Chinese Centre for Disease Control and Prevention, “chronic diseases 
report in China”, 2006-5. Retrieved: September, 2012, from 
http://wenku.baidu.com/view/9113c5aedd3383c4bb4cd274.html  
[2] 
R Perrey and M Lycett. “Service-oriented architecture,” 2003 
Symposium on Applications and the Internet Workshops, Orlando, 
Florida, USA, pp. 116-119, 2003. 
[3] 
Oliver Johannes Bott. “The Electronic Health Record: Standardization 
and Implementation,”  2nd OpenECG Workshop 2004, Berlin, Germany, 
pp. 57-60, 2004. 
[4] 
Kristiina Häyrinen, Kaija Saranto and Prikko Nykänen. “Definition, 
Structure, content, use and impacts of electronic health records: A 
review of the research literature,” International Journal of Medical 
Informatics. 77(5): 291-304, 2009. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[5] 
T Beale and S Heard. “openEHR Architecture, Architecture Overview, 
Revision 
l.0.2 
”, 
2008. 
Retrieved: 
September, 
2012, 
from 
http://www.openehr.org/releases/1.0.2/ architecture/overview.pdf   
[6] 
Robert H. Dolin, Liora Alschuler, Sandy Boyer, Calvin Beebe, Fred M. 
Behlen, et al. “HL7 Clinical Document Architecture, Release 2,” Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 13, pp. 30-38, 
2006. 
[7] 
Ministry of Health, P.R.C., “the basic framework and data standard of 
the health records”, 2009-05-19. Retrieved: September, 2012, from 
http://www.gov.cn/gzdt/2009-05/19/content_1319085.htm 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

