Common Data Model for Interoperability of Observational Health Data:  
Bulgarian Diabetes Register Pharmacology Case Study 
 
Evgeniy Krastev  
Faculty of Math. and Informatics 
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: eck@fmi.uni-sofia.bg 
Petko Kovachev 
Faculty of Math. and Informatics 
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: az@petko.info 
Dimitar Tcharaktchiev 
Department of Medical Informatics 
Medical University 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail: dimitardt@gmail.com 
Simeon Abanos 
Faculty of Math. and Informatics 
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridski  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
e-mail:simeonabanos@gmail.com 
 
Abstract—This paper demonstrates the potential of a standard 
common data model to facilitate access to observational data 
and extract knowledge. The common data model enables 
platform interoperability for computational health technologies 
allowing assessment of the burden caused by the pharmacology 
costs on the healthcare system. It helps understanding the trends 
and effects in using different classes of drugs for diabetes 
treatment by exploring clinical data from the Bulgarian diabetes 
register. Unlike most regularly published reports on diabetes 
prevalence, the research results are obtained from a population- 
based study rather than applying aggregated statistical 
estimates. The Bulgarian Diabetes Register is a public common 
data model implementation allowing to overcome platform 
interoperability problems. It contains the latest and complete 
dataset of outpatient records of 501,065 distinct patients with 
diabetes in Bulgaria in 2018. The pharmacology case study 
reports new results for better assessment of the cost burden 
created by prescribing drugs for diabetes. Two major groups of 
drugs are considered- drugs for treatment of diabetes and 
related comorbidities. Novel drug diabetes therapies are just 
evolving in 2018, while the Metformin prescriptions prevail 
significantly. The costs are evaluated both at patient-centric 
level and at high level in terms of cost distributions among the 
drug classes in each group. The results are graphically 
visualized, discussed and compared in relation to existing public 
sources. 
Keywords-observational 
data; 
platform 
interoperability; 
Common Data Model; diabetes register; pharmacology cost 
analysis. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Modern healthcare more than ever depends on computer 
information technologies for data processing and exchange of 
medical information. Huge amounts of data are generated by 
people and digital devices that participate in the execution of 
almost all business processes in the healthcare system. For 
example, national diabetes registers maintain data describing 
the health status of diabetics. Such clinical data are collected 
routinely during health care procedures under real-world 
conditions. This kind of clinical data is collectively referred to 
as observational health data. Electronic Health Records 
(EHR) are used to accumulate systematically observational 
data, as well as other medical information like prescribed 
medications, 
allergies, 
laboratory 
test 
results 
and 
demographics data about the patient in digital format [1]. 
Unlike the EHR, an Electronic Medical Record (EMR), such 
as the Outpatient Record (OpR) provide a narrower view of 
the patient’s medical history than the EHR because it is 
maintained by a single Healthcare Provider (HP) [2]. 
Similarly to EHR, the OpR captures rich observational data 
about the health status of a patient and allows the HP to follow 
it while prescribing treatment activities and procedures across 
time. In the general case, an EHR comprises the patient’s 
EMRs from potentially different HPs. Thus, the EHR enable 
sharing of knowledge, skills and experience through 
communication between the actors in the healthcare system, 
provide a basis for research and education, satisfy 
organizational and legal requirements [3]. Nowadays, all of 
these opportunities for utilizing EHRs cannot be fully 
exploited. The reason is the lack of platform and data 
interoperability among the heterogeneous and proprietary 
nature of the software applications used by multiple HPs. 
Such interoperability problems stem from the primary 
distinction between EHRs and EMRs. EHRs are introduced 
for the purpose of sharing health data among organizations 
while EMRs serve the needs of a single HP. Therefore, the 
EMRs and in particular, the OpRs of a patient cannot be 
seamlessly integrated in the EHR of that patient. 
Considerable research efforts have been made in the last 
twenty years to resolve the interoperability issues in the 
exchange of clinical data [4]. Data exchange schemas and 
standards for reference models have been introduced for 
sharing EHR data across clinicians, patients and communities 
[5] [6] [7] . This approach allows disparate health information 
systems to effectively communicate, exchange data and 
process the exchanged data within and across the 
organizational boundaries. Services for accessing and sharing 
EHRs may accommodate their requirements with respect to 
three distinct levels of interoperability- foundational, 
structural and semantic interoperability [8]. Foundational 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

interoperability is limited to the availability of information 
technology, allowing EHR data exchange. Structural 
interoperability upgrades foundational interoperability with 
requirements for representing the exchanged data in 
predefined syntax and thus, allowing interpretation of data at 
individual data field level. Most often interoperability at that 
level is used for exchange of observational data represented in 
terms of a Common Data Model(CDM) where the physical 
implementation could be a relational database or an XML 
Schema [9] [10]. The semantic interoperability level employs 
standard terminologies, classifications and vocabularies to 
encode EHR clinical data so that the receiving information 
systems can correctly interpret the clinical meaning such data 
without human intervention [11] [12]. It is noteworthy that the 
clinical meaning is inferred not from the individual data 
values themselves rather from the way in which such data are 
linked together as compound clinical concepts, hierarchically 
structured terms, problems or associated with preceding 
healthcare events. This interoperability level preserves the 
semantic context of the exchanged clinical data by 
representing clinical concepts in terms of standard reference 
models, such as ISO/EN 13606 and HL7 FHIR. Therefore, the 
exchange of EHR extracts usually implements such semantic 
interoperability standards. 
In this paper, we consider a pharmacology case study that 
illustrates the potential of CDM to facilitate access to 
observational data and enhance population- based statistical 
research. It is motivated by the need for accumulating 
evidence on cost effectiveness and budget impact through 
Health Technology Assessment (HTA) [13]. The objective is 
to assess the burden of pharmacology costs spent for treatment 
of diabetes in a nationally- representative dataset. The data 
source for this study is the Bulgarian Database Register(BDR) 
that is an Observational Medical Outcomes Partnership 
(OMOP) CDM standardized database publicly available at the 
EHDEN 
Portal 
[14] 
[15]. 
This 
database 
contains 
observational 
data 
(observation 
period  
01.01.2018-31.12.2018) of all the outpatient records 
(6,887,876) issued in Bulgaria to patients with diabetics 
(501,065). The outpatient records are compiled by the General 
Practitioners (GPs) and the specialists from ambulatory care 
for every patient encounter. In this case study, the CDM 
appears to be the optimal solution for imposing structural 
interoperability in dealing with disparate data sources such as 
the variety of software applications employed to produce the 
outpatient records. Thus, the dataset of the BDR can be 
accessed remotely in order to receive aggregated results after 
executing analytical code locally in the secure environment of 
the data custodian. 
This paper is divided into sections as follows. In the 
following section, we make a brief overview of the existing 
CDM that enhance big medical data analytics [16] [17] [18] 
and elaborate on the OMOP CDM of the BDR. In Section III, 
we present aggregated results obtained by executing the 
analytical code. In Section IV we discuss the obtained results 
and compare them with existing research work [19]. Section 
V makes a conclusion and provides remarks on future work.  
II. 
METHODS AND MATERIALS 
This paper considers a case study where the original data 
sources are outpatient records created by a large number of 
GPs 
and 
specialists 
from 
ambulatory 
care 
using 
heterogeneous databases and client applications with 
disparate programming interface for data access, management 
and analysis. It entails problems caused by poor data 
interoperability, such as patient-matching with observational 
data, pseudonymization of records, satisfying requirements 
for integrity and consistency of clinical data. The development 
of software tools for analysis and assessment of data in 
distributed dataset environment is rather complicated and 
inefficient as well. The need for imposing some kind of 
unification of these disparate data sources focused our 
attention on using CDM in this research. 
The literature review provides convincing evidence that 
CDM are the preferred solution in cases of poor data 
interoperability when simultaneous analysis of disparate data 
sources is required [10] [20]. There are three most widely used 
CDMs for observational data research, namely, the OMOP 
CDM, the Sentinel and the Patient Centered Outcomes 
Research Institute (PCORNet). Each one of these CDMs has 
its strengths and weaknesses.  
The PCORNet CDM [16] introduces its own standard 
organization and representation of EHR data for a distributed 
network of nine population- based Clinical Research 
Networks of data contributors (14 billion diagnoses, 2.6 
billion medication orders and 9.8 billion laboratory results) 
[21]. A major weakness of this CDM is the missing support 
for clinical outcome measures, as well as data linkage, for 
example, queries cannot “de-duplicate” patients appearing in 
multiple networks.  
The Sentinel CDM was introduced in 2007 by the Federal 
Drug Agency (FDA) to monitor drug safety and includes EHR 
and register data in the following core subject areas utilization, 
enrollment, pharmacy, demographics, lab, death and vital 
signs (more than 365 million unique patient identifiers,  
16 billion pharmacy dispensings, 15 billion unique medical 
encounters, 45 million laboratory test results) [17] [22]. This 
CDM is extensible to any data source because data is 
represented as detailed as possible. Thus, the Sentinel CDM is 
flexible about demands for running data queries in any type of 
analysis. Queries are processed in a distributed pattern as 
follows. Query requests are distributed to the data partners 
where the queries run locally. Next, query results with direct 
identifiers removed are returned to the central server for 
aggregation and final processing. It entails keeping copies of 
large 
amounts 
of 
data 
and 
time-consuming 
data 
synchronization even for simple queries. Other weaknesses 
include limited data mapping, extensions of the CDM affect 
data usability, data granularity entails loss of information and 
local knowledge and finally, ongoing model refinements are 
driven entirely by the FDA. 
The OMOP CDM was introduced about the same time as 
the Sentinel CDM for the purpose of studying the effects of 
medicinal products. Currently, it is extensively used in the US 
and Europe where it is underpinned by the Observational 
Health Data Sciences and Informatics (OHDSI) network and 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

the EHDEN project of the EU (118 EHDEN data partners, 
more than 1,12 billion unique patient identifiers) [23]. 
Similarly to Sentinel and PCORNet, the OMOP CDM maps 
disparate data sources to a “patient-centric” relational 
database with predefined tables linked directly or indirectly to 
patients. The tables correspond to the CDM core subject areas, 
such as person, visit occurrence, drug exposure, measurement, 
observation, death. There are also tables describing device 
exposure cost, as well as standardized vocabularies for 
normalizing the meaning of data within the CDM. Thus, the 
OMOP CDM has the potential to meet the requirements of 
HTA.  
The OHDSI OMOP CDM is well supported by software 
tools assisting the Extract-Transform-Load (ETL) process and 
ensuring data quality during the mapping steps. This has 
allowed us to map to OMOP CDM health data from 6,887,876 
outpatient records issued in Bulgaria to patients 501,065 with 
diabetes during their encounters to GPs or HPs in 2018 [15]. 
Meta data of the thus obtained OMOP CDM of the Bulgarian 
Diabetes Register are published in the EHDEN Portal  
(Figure 1). 
Figure 1.  Link to the OMOP CDM of BDR inside the EHDEN Portal. 
The distribution of diabetics (Type 1 and Type 2) relative 
to the population of the corresponding administrative region 
is displayed in Figure 2. This figure shows that most of the 
people living in the northern part of the country and 
especially, in the north-west part, suffer from diabetes. These 
are the least populated regions of the country. It motivates us 
to explore the burden of costs spent for reimbursement of 
drugs for treatment of diabetes and its related comorbidities 
(cardiovascular drugs, drugs for disorders of the eyes or the 
nervous and urological system), for the purpose of comparing 
it with related research work. 
Figure 2.  Distribution of patients with diabetes in Bulgaria in 2018. 
The original pseudonymized outpatient records have been 
provided in XML format that needed data processing for 
making them valid against a single XML schema. For 
convenience, the adapted XML instances of outpatient records 
were loaded in a relational database that served as a source for 
the ETL process (Figure 3).  
These records contain administrative data and encoded 
clinical data describing health status or procedures, such as: 
✓ Date and time of the visit occurrence 
✓ Administrative data 
✓ Personal data, age, gender 
✓ Patient visit-related information 
✓ Diagnoses in ICD-10 
✓ ATC drug codes for medications that are reimbursed 
✓ Encodings for examinations and procedures 
✓ Codes describing specialized health care 
✓ Codes describing hospitalization need 
✓ Codes for planned consultations,  
✓ Laboratory tests and medical imaging 
Figure 3.  Mapping of outpatient records to OMOP CDM. 
 
 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Figure 4.  Mapping to table drug_exposure of the OMOP CDM. 
Observational data like patient state, height, weight, Body-
Mass-Index, blood pressure were provided in the outpatient 
records as unstructured data in natural language (Bulgarian 
text).  
Special interest in this study represent the fields in the 
OMOP CDM table drug_exposure shown in Figure 4 where 
field drug_concept_id encodes the drugs prescribed to 
diabetics. It is noteworthy that the Bulgarian national drug 
codes are linked to the ATC hierarchical classification system. 
Therefore, the standard vocabularies of the BDR are linked to 
ATC drug codes through drug_concept_id. 
TABLE 1. DRUG CLASSES FOR TREATMENT OF DIABETES. 
The existing literature distinguishes several distinct 
classes among the drugs for diabetes treatment [19] [24]. 
These classes are presented in Table 1 where the custom Code 
introduced for shortness and for the purpose of referencing the 
obtained results in the following section. 
It is noteworthy, that currently, the drug class denoted as 
T8 in Table 1 is considered to be the most modern and 
promising [19]. This is another reason to find out what is the 
share of sales of these drugs. Similar interest represents the 
distribution of sales of drugs prescribed for treatment of 
diabetes comorbidities. For convenience in referencing these 
drugs we introduce the drug encodings displayed in Table 2 
for the most frequently encountered comorbidities among 
patients with diabetes. By means of these codes, it will be 
easier to quote these classes of drugs in the obtained results.  
TABLE 2. DRUG CLASSES FOR DIABETES COMORBIDITY TREATMENT. 
In addition to table drug_exposure the analytical code in 
this study makes use of tables person, condition_occurence, 
observation_period, visit_occurence of the CDM. The results 
of executing this code are presented in the following section. 
III. 
RESULTS 
The BDR contains huge amounts of data that can provide 
rich information for treatment of diabetes. First of all, we get 
an accurate estimate for the diabetes prevalence (9.77%) in 
Bulgaria in 2018 (4.43% male and 5.35% female). Unlike 
other public data, the diabetes prevalence is computed 
accurately taking into consideration the total number of 
individual patients with encounters registered by GPs or HPs 
and not by statistical estimates based on the total population 
of the country.  
Once we know the diabetes prevalence, it is important to 
learn what is the cost for diabetes treatment. The available 
data in the BDR allows to get detailed information on this 
issue from different viewpoints. For shortness, here we 
present summary results that demonstrate the potential of 
HTA by limiting the scope of our research to drugs that are 
reimbursed by the National Health Insurance Fund as they are 
described in Table 1 and Table 2. The Total Cost (TC) of 
drugs prescribed to diabetics in Bulgaria in 2018 is 
160,766,702 euros where 96,171,943 euros is the amount for 
prescribed drugs from Table 1. It makes about 321 euros per 
diabetic patient, where 129 euros and 192 euros are spent on 
the average for drugs for treatment of diabetes comorbidities 
 
Code
Drug class for comorbidity 
treatment
ATC code 
prefix
A
  Cardiovascular drugs
C01, C03, 
C07, C08, 
C09, C10
A1
  Antithrombotic agents
B01 
N
  Nervous system disorders  
N01-N07
G
  Urological disorders
G04
S
  Ophthalmolotical disorders
S01
L
  Endocrine disorders
L02
M
  Ttreatment of bone diseases
M05
R
  Asthma drug categories
R03
 
Code
Drug class
International Nonproprietary Name 
(INN) 
T1
  Insulin
Insulin unique analogues and combination 
regimens
T2
  Sulfonylureas
Glyburide, Glipizide, Glimepiride, 
Gliclazide, Tolbutamide,Chlorpropamide, 
Tolazamide
T3
  Biguanides
Metformin
T4
  Alpha-Glucosidase Inhibitors
Acarbose, Miglitol, Voglibose
T5
  Thiazolidinediones
Troglitazone,  Rosiglitazone, Pioglitazone
T6
  Incretin-Dependent Therapies
Incretin , Exenatide, Liraglutide, Dulaglutide, 
Albiglutide",Lixisenatide, Semaglutide,   
Sitagliptin, Saxagliptin, Linagliptin,Alogliptin
T7
  Meglitinides
Nateglinide, Repaglinide
T8
  Sodium-Glucose Cotransporter 
  Type 2 Inhibitors
Canagliflozin,Apagliflozin,Empagliflozin,
Ertugliflozin
T9
 Statin-Dependent therapies
Simvastatin, Lovastatin, Ravastatin , 
Fluvastatin, Atorvastatin, Cerivastatin, 
Rosuvastatin, Ppitavastatin
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

(Table 2) and the diabetes itself (Table 1). Accordingly, 
59.82% of the TC are for drugs prescribed for diabetes 
treatment (Table 1), where 61.51% is the share of the insulin 
class of drugs.  
In the beginning, we have explored what is the share of 
modern drugs for diabetes treatment among all the prescribed 
drugs for diabetes treatment. Such are, for example, the drugs 
encoded as T8 in Table 1. Figure 5 shows that these drugs are 
rarely prescribed for diabetes treatment in Bulgaria during 
2018 (0.69% of all the prescribed drugs from Table 1). 
Metformin drugs are the most frequently prescribed (T3 in 
Table 1). These kind of drugs are usually prescribed for initial 
treatment of Type 2 diabetes and besides, the number patients 
with this diabetes type prevail significantly over the patients 
with Type 1 diabetes. This explains the peak value in the 
prescriptions for Metformin drugs. 
Figure 5.  Shares of prescriptions for diabetes treatment. 
Figure 6.  Total costs of drugs for diabetes treatment. 
In terms of costs the shares of the drugs in Table 1 change 
as it is displayed in Figure 6. We notice that the largest 
expenses are attributed to the insulin class of drugs (T1 in 
Table 1) although it is the third most prescribed class of drugs 
in Figure 5. Note that the average price in Bulgaria for the 
insulin drug class has been about 60 euros against 16 euros for 
the Metformin drug class in 2018. 
The above results provide evidence that the treatment of 
comorbidities accompanying the diabetes illness is almost as 
expensive as the treatment of the diabetes itself. Therefore, it 
is important to understand what are the costs for treatment of 
the most frequently encountered comorbidities.  
In the existing literature there is enough evidence that the 
cardiovascular diseases, the disorders of the nervous system 
and the ophthalmological disorders are some of the most 
frequent comorbidities of diabetes. At the same time, little is 
known about the relative shares of these disorders with respect 
to the overall expenses for treatment diabetes comorbidities. 
Figure 7.  Total costs of drugs for treatment of diabetes comorbidities. 
Figure 7 confirms that drugs for cardiovascular disorders 
and drugs with antithrombotic agents (code A and A1 in Table 
2) have the greatest weight (70.10%) in the TC for treatment 
of comorbidities. The drugs for treatment of asthma of (code 
R in Table 2) are at the second place (12.28%) in the TC with 
average price of about 51 euros in 2018, where most of the 
prescriptions are for medical products costing above the 
average value. For comparison, the drugs for treatment of 
disorders of the nervous system (code N in Table 2) are at the 
third place with 8.2% share in the TC with average price of 
about 130 euros. Unlike the drugs prescribed for asthma 
treatment, most of these prescriptions are for medical products 
with prices significantly below the average for all the products 
with code N in Table 2. Such an increase in the costs for drugs 
prescribed to diabetics for treatment of accompanying asthma 
disorders is observed for the first time and it should be taken 
in consideration in regulatory decision making. 
In conclusion, note that Table 1 and Table 2 entries do not 
exhaust all the drugs classes prescribed to diabetics. For 
example, drugs that are given to diabetics but not mentioned 
in these two tables are drugs for treatment of rare diseases or 
disorders caused by immune deficiency. Most of these drugs 
 
 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

are rather expensive and represent a huge burden in the overall 
amount reimbursed to patients for treatment of diabetes 
(135% of the TC of drugs from Table 1 and Table 2). In case 
we add these extra costs to the TC then we get average 675 
euros per diabetic patient expenses for prescribed drugs. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This paper reports results that are obtained by processing 
nationally-representative data mapped to an OMOP CDM. 
The BDR is a physical implementation of that CDM with meta 
data published on the EHDEN Portal. It allows transparency 
in accessing data and verifying the integrity and consistency 
of these results. The BDR contains huge amount of 
pseudonymized observational data that allows to investigate 
diabetes treatment from different views through health 
assessment technologies. 
The pharmacology case study considered here is just one 
example of the potential for exploring the health data. Without 
a restriction, data exploration could be extended to provide 
details with different level of granularity about the 
prescription of selected drugs or to group drug prescription by 
age and gender. In this regard, we must outline the following 
limitations that have to be taken in consideration. 
First, it is rather difficult to find public literature with 
numeric data from population-based studies evaluating the 
burden of costs in diabetes treatment. In one such rare 
publication [24] we found evidence that matches close with 
our findings. Although this publication refers to data from 
2014 and involves 312,223 patients from Italy, we established 
close correlation at several issues. For example, the share of 
costs on insulin drugs (T1 in Table 1) reported in this 
publication is 58.90% against the above quoted percentage 
61.51%. Another match is established in the reported share of 
cardiovascular drug costs with respect to all drug costs 33.5% 
against 34.2 % found in our study. There is, however, a great 
difference in the average cost per diabetic patient, 1066 euros 
against 675 euros established from data in the BDR. This 
difference could be attributed to the known differences in the 
standard of life (and price levels) between both countries at 
that time. 
Another issue that must be taken in consideration is that 
the NHIF does not reimburse always the full costs for 
prescribed drugs, while the amounts above quoted refer to the 
full drug costs. Since the finance reports of NHIF are public 
[25], we managed to calculate the amounts really reimbursed 
by the NHIF for diabetic drugs (Table 1) to be 67,208,241 
euros in 2018. As expected, this amount is about 30% less than 
the amount reported in the above section (96,171,943 euros). 
Here we must take in consideration that only a fraction of all 
the prescribed drugs in 2018 are dispensed to patients in the 
same year. Besides, the quantities of the prescribed drugs are 
usually greater than the quantitates of the reimbursed drugs. 
Thus, we can conclude that the results reported in this paper 
are consistent with the real-life practice. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper demonstrates the potential of the OMOP CDM 
to facilitate access to observational data accumulated from 
heterogenous datasets and extract knowledge using standard 
statistical tools. The assessment of the burden caused by the 
pharmacology costs on the healthcare system is important for 
regulatory decision making, as well as for drug suppliers in 
planning their market strategies. The obtained results help to 
understand the trends and effects in using different classes of 
drugs for diabetes treatment and especially, the trends in 
applying novel drug therapies for diabetes treatment. Public 
diabetes surveillance reports with such results are rather rare 
to find in the existing literature primarily because most often 
the datasets are heterogenous in terms of structure and lack of 
interoperability of the data sources. Unlike most regularly 
published reports in the public space, this paper reports results 
obtained from a population- based study rather than applying 
aggregated statistical estimates. 
The BDR implements an open- source OMOP CDM that 
allows 
to 
overcome 
poor 
interoperability 
among 
heterogeneous and often, incompatible data providers. It 
contains the latest and complete dataset of outpatient records 
issued to 501,065 distinct patients with diabetes in Bulgaria at 
every encounter to GP or HP in 2018. Among the other CDM 
briefly reviewed in this paper, the OMOP CDM proves the 
best potential for applying health assessment technology in 
obtaining reliable, transparent and verifiable results though 
analysis of observational data. 
The pharmacology case study makes public lot of new 
results that help understand better the burden of costs 
generated in the process of prescribing drugs for diabetes 
treatment. Two major groups of drugs are considered- drugs 
for treatment the diabetes and drugs for treatment of diabetes 
comorbidities. Numerical evidence shows that novel drug 
therapies of diabetes in this country are just beginning to 
evolve in 2018, while the prescriptions of Metformin drugs 
prevail significantly among all the rest. Contrary to the 
expectations, the costs of prescribed drugs for treatment of 
comorbidities in diabetes caused by asthma surmount the 
costs of prescribed drugs for therapy of the nervous system or 
urological disorders. The costs are evaluated both at patient- 
centric level, as well as at high level in terms of cost 
distributions among the drug classes in each one of the two 
groups. The results are graphically visualized, discussed and 
compared in relation to existing public sources.  
In our future work we focus on exploring the trends in 
using novel drug therapies for diabetes in Bulgaria. 
Preliminary results based on new public data sources during 
2018-2021 show a significant and rapid increase in 
prescriptions of novel drug class therapies (T8 in Table 1), 
decrease in other prescriptions (T7 in Table 1) and stable 
interest in other (T3 in Table 1). Moreover, we work on 
updating the BDR with fresh data once it becomes available.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by grant 80-10-8/11.04.2023 of 
the Scientific Research Fund of Sofia university St. Kliment 
Ohridski. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Dipak, "Electronic Health Record Standards," Yearbook of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 45, no. 01, pp. 136-144, 2006.  
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[2] L. Spooner and K. Pesaturo, "The Medical Record," in 
Fundamental Skills for Patient Care in Pharmacy Practice, 
Jones & Bartlett Learning, 2014.  
[3] B. Blobel, "Interoperable EHR Systems–Challenges, Standards 
and Solutions," European Journal for Biomedical Informatics, 
vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 10-19, 2018.  
[4] HIMSS, Dictionary of Healthcare Information Technology 
Terms, Acronyms and Organizations, 5th ed., CRC Press, 
2019, p. 75. 
[5] HL7, "HL7 FHIR Release 5," HL7, 26 March 2023. [Online]. 
Available: http://hl7.org/fhir/. [Accessed 11 June 2023]. 
[6] ISO/TC 215, "ISO 13606-1:2019 Health Informatics-
Electronic Health Record Communication-Part 1: Reference 
Model," 
ISO, 
2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.iso.org/standard/67868.html. [Accessed 6 June 
2023]. 
[7] openEHR, "The EHR Information Model," The openEHR 
Foundation, 17 November 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://specifications.openehr.org/releases/RM/latest/ehr.html
#_the_ehr_information_model. [Accessed 14 June 2023]. 
[8] HIMSS, 
"Interoperability 
in 
Healthcare," 
Healthcare 
Information and Management Systems Society, 2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.himss.org/resources/interoperability-healthcare.  
[9] J. Weeks and R. Pardee, "Learning to Share Health Care Data: 
A Brief Timeline of Influential Common Data Models and 
Distributed Health Data Networks in U.S. Health Care 
Research," eGEMs (Generating Evidence & Methods to 
Improve Patient Outcomes), vol. 7(1), no. 4, pp. 1-7, 2019.  
[10] S. Kent et al., "Common Problems, Common Data Model 
Solutions: Evidence Generation for Health Technology 
Assessment," Pharmacoeconomics, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 275-285, 
2021.  
[11] SNOMED International, "SNOMED CT," 2023. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.snomed.org/. [Accessed 14 June 
2023]. 
[12] WHO, "Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical Classification 
System," WHO Collaborating Centre for Drug Statistics 
Methodology, 
May 
2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.whocc.no/. [Accessed 11 June 2023]. 
[13] R. Claire, J. Elvidge and D. Dawoud, "EHDEN - D2.7 - 
Workshop 
for 
HTA 
Community 
Report," 
Zenodo 
(https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7550919), 2023. 
[14] EHDEN, "Bulgarian Database Register(BDR)," EHDEN 
Portal, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://portal.ehden.eu/. 
[Accessed 5 June 2023]. 
[15] E. Krastev and E. Markov, "Bulgarian Diabetes Register - 
Mapping onto OMOP CDM (CC#10)," January 2023. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
EHDEN 
Community 
Calls, 
https://www.ehden.eu/bulgarian-diabetes-register-mapping-
onto-omop-cdm-cc10/. [Accessed 15 June 2023]. 
[16] PCORnet, "PCORnet Common Data Model," The National 
Patient-Centered Clinical Research Network, 22 October 2020. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://pcornet.org/news/pcornet-
common-data-model/. [Accessed 10 June 2023]. 
[17] Sentinel, "Sentinel Common Data Model," Sentinel Operations 
Center, 
3 
June 
2022. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.sentinelinitiative.org/methods-data-
tools/sentinel-common-data-model/sentinel-common-data-
model. [Accessed 11 June 2023]. 
[18] Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics, "OMOP 
Common Data Model," ohdsi.org, 2022. [Online]. Available: 
https://ohdsi.github.io/CommonDataModel/. [Accessed 10 
June 2023]. 
[19] A. D. Dahlén et al., "Trends in Antidiabetic Drug Discovery: 
FDA Approved Drugs, New Drugs in Clinical Trials and 
Global Sales.," Frontiers in Pharmacology vol. 12:80754, pp. 
1-16, 2022.  
[20] H. Liyanage, S. Liaw, J. Jonnagaddala, W. Hinton and S. de 
Lusignan, "Common Data Models (CDMs) to Enhance 
International Big Data Analytics: A Diabetes Use Case to 
Compare Three CDMs," in Volume 255: Decision Support 
Systems and Education, vol. 255, Studies in Health 
Technology and Informatics, IOS Press, 2018, pp. 60 - 64. 
[21] C. B. Forrest et al, "PCORnet® 2020: Current State, 
Accomplishments, and Future Directions," Journal of Clinical 
Epidemiology, vol. 129, p. 60–67, 2021.  
[22] European Medicines Agency, "Common Data Model for 
Europe?-Why? Which? How?," 11-12 December 2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/report/common-
data-model-europe-why-which-how-workshop-report_en.pdf. 
[Accessed 10 June 2023]. 
[23] Observational Health Data Sciences and Informatics, The Book 
of OHDSI, https://ohdsi.github.io/TheBookOfOhdsi/, 2021.  
[24] L. Scalone et al., "Burden of Diabetes Mellitus Estimated with 
a Longitudinal Population-Based Study Using Administrative 
Databases," PLoS ONE, vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1-11, 2014.  
[25] NHIF, "Report on Quarterly Expenses for 2018. National 
Health Insurance Fund (in Bulgarian)," 4 November 2019. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.nhif.bg/bg/medicine_food/quarter-
payments/2022. [Accessed 12 June 2023]
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

