IT-Aided Business Process Enabling
Real-time Analysis of Candidates for Clinical Trials
Matthieu-P. Schapranow, Cindy Perscheid, Hasso Plattner
Hasso Plattner Institute
Enterprise Platform and Integration Concepts
August–Bebel–Str. 88
14482 Potsdam, Germany
{schapranow|cindy.perscheid|plattner}@hpi.de
Abstract—Recruitment of participants for clinical
trials is a complex task involving screening of hun-
dreds of thousands of candidates, e.g., testing for
trial-speciﬁc inclusion and exclusion criteria. Today, a
signiﬁcant amount of time is spent on manual screen-
ing as improper selected candidates have impact on
the overall study results.
We introduce a candidate eligibility metric, which
allows systematic ranking and classiﬁcation of can-
didates based on trial-speciﬁc ﬁlter criteria in an
automatic way. It is implemented as part of our
web application, which enables real-time analysis of
patient data and assessment of candidates. Thus, the
time for identiﬁcation of eligible candidates is tremen-
dously reduced whilst additional degrees of freedom
for assessing the relevance of individual candidates
are available.
Keywords-Clinical Trials; In-Memory Technology;
Data Analysis; Eligibility Metric; Clustering.
I. Introduction
The pharmaceutical industry heavily invests in clinical
trials to improve existing drugs and introduce new ones
every year [1]. The Guidelines for Good Clinical Practice
(GCP) deﬁne details for conducting clinical trials on
human subjects, which are widely adopted in certain
countries, e.g., the United States of America (USA) and
those of the European Union (EU) [2]. Amongst others,
they deﬁne document artifacts, e.g., Informed Consent
Form (ICF) or Case Report Form (CRF), as well as
interaction between involved actors, e.g., investigators,
sponsors, and trial participants. Before participation in
a clinical trial, candidates need to be tested for certain
trial inclusion and exclusion criteria.
In
the
given
work,
we
introduce
an
integrated
software-aided business process supporting the determi-
nation of eligible candidates for clinical trials building an
additional source of conﬁdence. Our software addresses
principal investigators during the design of clinical trials
and investigators during the identiﬁcation of candidates.
Our approach incorporates latest In-Memory Database
(IMDB) technology to support real-time analysis of
patient data during this phase. As a result, our approach
Figure 1: Result view of our web application showing four clusters
of candidates each containing an automatically assessed list of
candidates for review.
contributes by reducing the overall time for determina-
tion of candidates, which consumes a signiﬁcant amount
of the overall clinical trial time today [3]. Figure 1 depicts
the result view of our web application with four result
clusters while a ranked candidate list for the cluster
"desired Karnofsky score" is selected.
The rest of the work is structured as follows: In
Section II, our work is set in the context of related
work whilst we share a real-world use case in Section III.
We explain our incorporated methodology in Section IV,
demonstrate how it can improve the clinical trial process
in Section V, and introduce our IMDB approach in
Section VI. In Section VII, we discuss our ﬁndings and
our work concludes with an outlook in Section VIII.
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

II. Related Work
The given contribution addresses a) a software so-
lution improving ﬁltering and assessment of patient
data and b) a business process integrated the software.
Selected related work addressing software solutions for
candidate identiﬁcation are discussed in the following.
The Veterans Health Information Systems and Tech-
nology Architecture (VistA) of the U.S. Department of
Veterans Aﬀairs is a Hospital Information System (HIS)
combining data from distributed VA clinics and sites in
a single data source [4], [5]. Although it contains data
for candidate identiﬁcation, it is not used this purpose
as it does not provide required tools.
The Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bed-
side (i2b2) system provides IT tools for clinical re-
searchers for research purposes [6]. It provides a conﬁg-
urable and interactive query editor supporting a range of
ﬁlters, including diseases, medications, laboratory tests,
and doctor’s visit details [7]. Our contribution provides
additional enhancements, e.g., an eligibility metric to
rank and cluster results, as deﬁned in Section VI.
Dumas et al. identiﬁed Acute Myeloid Leukemia
(AML) candidates for clinical trials using clinical data
from of patients taken from the HIS of a German hospital
and compared them to inclusion and exclusion criteria
of ongoing clinical trials [8]. We also believe that the
secondary use of existing clinical data is beneﬁcial for
candidate identiﬁcation. Thus, our contribution deﬁnes
an IT-aided business process for candidate identiﬁcation
for a wide range of diseases.
All aforementioned approaches lack support for assess-
ment of results. In contrast, our approach systematically
calculates a score for each candidate enabling ranking
and clustering of the result set for the ﬁrst time.
III. Use Case
We deﬁned the following persona as a concrete exam-
ple for our enhanced business process in the remainder of
this work. Forrest G., male, 62 years old was an active
smoker for a long period in his life. During one of his
regular checkups, he was recently diagnosed with Non-
Small Cell Lung Cancer (NSCLC). Now, Forrest worries
about receiving the best available treatment for NSCLC.
Thus, he learned about targeted therapies and is very
interested in participating in clinical trials optimized
for his personal disease. As a result, selected details
of his Personal Health Record (PHR) are shared in a
de-identiﬁed way to assess the individual eligibility for
clinical trials. We refer to a ﬁctive clinical trial targeting
NSCLC requiring at least 150 g available tumor tissue
for preliminary testing.
IV. Methods
In the following, we share details about our incorpo-
rated methodology: in Section IV-A we introduce our
eligibility metric deﬁning a unique key ﬁgure per candi-
date representative for its calculated trial applicability
whilst the incorporated IMDB technology to leverage
interactive data analysis of big patient data in our
software artifact is introduced in Section IV-B.
A. Candidate Eligibility Metric
We deﬁne a vector of n candidate criteria ⃗v
“
pc1, . . . , ck, . . . , cnq with ci P r0, 1s, i P t1, . . . , nu while
each of the vector components is calculated by an indi-
vidual function, as described in Section VI-E. Thus, each
candidate is represented as a point in a n-dimensional
vector space where the most suitable candidate is deﬁned
by the vector p1.0, . . . , 1.0, . . . , 1.0q.
We deﬁne the eligibility score sk of a candidate k
as the normalized Euclidian distance dp ⃗
v1.0, ⃗vkq between
the vector of the most suitable candidate
⃗
v1.0 and the
vector of the individual patient ⃗vk, as deﬁned in Equa-
tion 1.
sk
“
1.0 ´ d p ⃗
v1.0, ⃗vkq
d p ⃗
v1.0, ⃗
v0.0q
(1)
“
1.0 ´
g
f
f
e
n
ÿ
i“1
˜
v1.0ci ´ vkci
v1.0ci ´ v0.0ci
¸2
(2)
B. In-memory Database Technology
We refer to IMDB technology as a toolbox of Informa-
tion Technology (IT) artifacts, which enables processing
of enterprise data in the main memory of server systems
in real time [9]. Through the combination of IMDB
database technology and analysis of available candi-
date data, we aim to achieve a speedup for the time-
consuming identiﬁcation of candidates, as described in
Section I. In the following, selected building blocks of
the IMDB technology are introduced.
1) Column-Oriented Data Layout: Most modern rela-
tional database systems fall into the category of transac-
tional databases and store their data in a row-oriented
format, i.e., all attributes of a record are stored in
adjacent blocks. This is advantageous if the complete
data of a single row has to be processed. On the other
hand, analytical database systems store and process
their data column-wise, i.e., all entries of a column are
stored in adjacent blocks, which is beneﬁcial if only
selected attributes of a data set need to be accessed.
When ﬁltering patients based on a study’s criteria, only
certain parts of their data need to be read. The types
of queries to be expected in our prototype can therefore
beneﬁt from this data layout.
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

2) Lightweight Compression:
Lightweight compres-
sion refers to a data storage representation that con-
sumes less space than its original pendant [9]. Stor-
ing data column-wise facilitates lightweight compression
techniques, such as run-length encoding, dictionary en-
coding, and diﬀerence encoding [10]. The diverse nature
of patient data results in heterogeneous data, i.e., many
NULL values, facilitating the potential to save space
through encoding.
3) Partitioning:
Our incorporated IMDB provides
vertical and horizontal partitioning [11]. The former
addresses large database tables and splits up a database
table in multiple column-wise subsets that can be dis-
tributed on individual servers while the latter divides
a long database table in smaller subsets of data [12].
Splitting data into equally long horizontal partitions
supports parallel search operations and improves scal-
ability [9]. For our use case, partitioning enables the use
of multiple sources of candidates to increase the reach of
the system [13].
4) Multi-Core and Parallelization: Modern system
architectures are designed to provide multiple CPUs
with each of them having separate cores. This capacity
needs to be fully exploited by parallelizing application
execution to achieve maximum processing speed. Inter-
nal tools of IMDBs are implemented to beneﬁt from
parallelization. By using the capabilities of our database,
we can speed up the process of clustering candidates.
5) Bulk Data Load: For candidate identiﬁcation, large
amounts of clinical data have to be collected and
stored. The bulk load capabilities of IMDBs support
this through the use of the CSV format and parallel
processing of the data to insert.
C. Realistic Patient Data
We consider the use of realistic patient data for devel-
opment and testing as the foundation to optimize soft-
ware for real-world use cases. As a result, we incorporate
patient data from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
program in the course of our development [14].
D. Design Thinking
Together with subject matter experts from research
and industry, we derived design decisions for our web
application and the enhanced process. For that, we incor-
porated the design thinking methodology, which helped
to stratifying the cooperation in an interdisciplinary
team [15]. Consequently, we performed regular user
interviews sharing our research artifacts to constantly
improve our approach.
V. The Clinical Trials Process
We deﬁne the following phases in the context of
clinical trials as depicted in Figure 2:
Figure 2: Phases of a clinical trial.
‚ Design: Inclusion and exclusion criteria need to be
deﬁned during this phase. Reviewing a list of po-
tential candidates supports investigators in selected
criteria to include a representative population.
‚ Pre-Screening: Candidate’s data is scanned and
they are contacted if they fulﬁll the criteria listed
in the clinical trial synopsis.
‚ Screening: After a comprehensible explanation of
the trial’s purpose, candidates need to consent their
participation by signing the ICF. A doctor, e.g., by
conducting medical tests, checks them. Iﬀ a candi-
date ﬁts all required criteria of the trial deﬁnition,
she/ he gets enrolled.
‚ Execution: The actual trial execution starts, e.g.,
intake of pharmaceuticals or placebos. After the
participant completes the trial the individual case
report is created. The Clinical Study Report (CSR)
is created after the overall trial is ﬁnished and the
trial database was locked.
‚ Follow-up: Study participants are followed up with
satisfaction surveys and further assessments, e.g.,
regular health checks.
A. Design of Study Protocols
Inclusion and exclusion criteria are deﬁned during de-
sign of a study protocol to identify adequate candidates
representing the population [16]. Improper design deci-
sions may result in complex or inadequate selection of
candidates aﬀecting the quality of the study results [17],
[18]. Our contribution supports trial investigators, e.g.,
they can examine all candidates and evaluate deﬁned in-
clusion and exclusion criteria by simulating their impact
on candidate identiﬁcation using real data.
B. Identiﬁcation of Eligible Candidates
The analysis of patient-speciﬁc data and their match-
ing with study-speciﬁc inclusion and exclusion criteria is
performed during the pre-screening phase, as deﬁned in
Section V. Nowadays, this involves time-consuming and
manual analysis of individual trial criteria for hundreds
of thousands of candidate proﬁles.
Our enhanced process improves the manual process by
deﬁning an eligibility score for each candidate, as deﬁned
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

in Section IV-A, representing the applicability in context
of the study. The process consists of the following phases:
‚ Conﬁguration of ﬁlter criteria,
‚ Automatic analysis of candidate data, and
‚ Review of results.
During conﬁguration of ﬁlter criteria, investigators
deﬁne criteria accordingly to the inclusion and exclusion
of the clinical trial on the ﬁlter screen of our app. The
speciﬁed ﬁlter criteria are translated into a database
query matching the selected ﬁlter criteria.
During data analysis, individual candidate records are
screened to meet deﬁned ﬁlter criteria. This process is
performed completely within the incorporated IMDB,
which eliminates the need for any application-level ﬁlter
and optimizes run time.
During the review phase, the investigator accesses the
result screen, which consists of a list of clusters, each of
them containing a ranked list of trial candidates with
a speciﬁc matching score for the current trial. Candi-
dates with a similar score but with diﬀerent criteria
are assigned to individual clusters, which outlines how
candidates’ criteria diﬀer.
For each candidate, all accessible data can be directly
expanded in the result view in order to assess follow-up
questions directly during the manual review phase. The
result view also provides interactive graphical analysis
features using individual criteria, e.g., graphs and ﬁg-
ures about age, gender, or tumor weight distribution.
If a potential candidate is found, she or he is added
to a persisted list of candidates to follow-up, e.g., by
downloading the candidate list to inform them about
their eligibility for the clinical trial.
VI. Contribution
In this section, we share implementation details of our
software application for identiﬁcation of trial candidates
matching trial-speciﬁc ﬁlter criteria.
A. Database Schema
We deﬁned an extendable star database schema for
patient data optimized for data analysis [19]. It consists
of the fact table CLINICAL_PATIENT containing unique
master data about the patients, which is referred to by
multiple dimension tables as depicted in Figure 3. For
example, the fact table contains birth date, gender, and
ECOG or Karnofsky score to quantify the health status
of a person [20], [21]. Dimension tables store additional
optional patient data using n : m relations, e.g., the
dimension table DRUG contains details about medication
intake, such as duration and dosage.
For our research prototype, we incorporated TCGA
data for indications of lung and ovarian cancer and
consolidated it. The LUAD table contains details about
Figure 3: Entity-relationship diagram of our star database schema.
It consists of the fact table CLINICAL_PATIENT holding general
patient data and dimension tables holding additional data, e.g.,
drug intake or tumor sample. Cardinality of all relations is 1 : ˚
unless marked.
Figure 4: Filter criteria creation in our web application: Three
ﬁlters have already been created, and the user is creating a forth
one using the auto-completion.
lung cancer, e.g., tumor location or active smoking time,
whilst the OV table contains ovarian-speciﬁc details.
We deﬁned an Extract, Transform, Load (ETL) pro-
cess for import of TCGA data into the database [22].
TCGA is downloaded and divided into multiple raw data
ﬁles, which are transformed by a Python script into CSV
ﬁles. The latter is loaded into our database using its bulk
load capabilities, as described in Section IV-B5.
B. Backend and Frontend
Our web application backend consists of a lean Ruby
server with Sinatra serving the static content of web
pages only [23]. All analysis operations, e.g., clustering
and ranking, are performed directly within the IMDB,
which eliminates the need to transfer data through the
application stack. We designed a web application ex-
changing user data between backend and frontend using
Asynchronous JavaScript and XML (Ajax) [24].
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

C. User Interface
Our User Interface (UI) incorporates a responsive de-
sign, i.e., display optimized for individual device classes,
e.g., desktop PCs and mobile devices.
Figure 4 depicts the ﬁlter deﬁnition view of our web
app for the use case deﬁned in Section III. On the
left-hand side, inclusion and exclusion ﬁlter criteria are
speciﬁed. Our app provides a list of relevant ﬁlter criteria
using auto-completion while typing. Filter criteria are
added either as Boolean operators AND or AND NOT. On
the right-hand side, ﬁlter-speciﬁc values are deﬁned.
Figure 6 shows a matrix of user-deﬁned ﬁlter criteria
for graphical exploration. The color of the dots indicates
the cluster, where the value belongs to, e.g., the red
cluster indicates candidates that are close to the desired
ECOG score while having only a few other diseases.
Candidates with a high result from the most suitable
candidate function are most eligible from a data’s point
of view.
Candidates are grouped in similar clusters, where each
cluster consists of a ranked list of candidates with spe-
ciﬁc information. Investigators can inspect all available
candidate information with a click on the "View full
patient record" link and store them in a follow-up list
using the "Save patient" button.
D. Filter Types
Together with subject matter experts, we deﬁned ﬁlter
types supporting the identiﬁcation of trial candidates. In
the following, selected ﬁlter types of our web application
are described in detail:
‚ Single option ﬁlters can have either of two pos-
sible values, e.g., gender: ♀ or ♂,
‚ One of many options ﬁlters describe one of
multiple statuses, e.g., cancer stages I to IV,
‚ Range ﬁlters deﬁne a continuum of values, e.g.,
age between 18 and 45,
‚ Threshold ﬁlters must be above or below a certain
value, e.g., a minimum tumor weight, and
‚ Free-text ﬁlters provide a text ﬁeld with auto-
completion for selection of various values, e.g., dis-
eases or previous medications.
We distinguish hard and soft ﬁlters, where the former
do not allow outliers and the latter consider incomplete
or imprecise data points. Soft ﬁlters assign lower scores
to outliers instead of removing them completely. If data
relevant for a ﬁlter is missing, e.g., the tumor weight of
a candidate is unknown, s/he will receive a lower score,
but will not be removed from the result.
E. Ranking
For candidate ranking, we incorporate our vector-
based eligibility metric, as described in Section IV-A.
Table I: EXCERPT OF PATIENT DATA.
Candidate
Gender
Age
Diagnosis
Tumor Weight
1
♂
45
NSCLC
242 g
2
♂
51
NSCLC
n/a
The most suitable candidate has the value one in all com-
ponents of the vector. For each candidate in the result
set, we calculate the distance between the candidate-
speciﬁc and the most suitable patient’s vector. The
ranking process is based on the vector space model [25].
For each vector component, an individual function
implements the comparison of candidate-speciﬁc data
with the data deﬁned for the most suitable candidate
and returns a decimal value within the interval r0, 1s.
Ranking functions for individual ﬁlters are imple-
mented diﬀerently depending on their type: there are
functions for hard and soft ﬁlters as well as a special
implementation for threshold ﬁlters. Apart from ﬁlter-
speciﬁc functions, the completeness and most suitable
candidate functions are always executed per candidate.
1) Completeness: Patient data may be incomplete,
i.e., some data is missing or unavailable in the can-
didate’s proﬁle. The completeness function assigns a
higher score to candidates having all matching attributes
available.
Let us consider the excerpt of patient data in Ta-
ble I for the use case described in Section III. The
completeness score is deﬁned as mean of all available
attributes, i.e., the number of available and matching
facts divided by the number of requested facts. The
completeness score is 1.0 for the ﬁrst and
2
3 for the
second candidate. Thus, the completeness function ranks
the ﬁrst candidate higher than the second, who could
still match all trial criteria although the tumor weight is
unavailable.
2) Most Suitable Candidate: The most suitable can-
didate function deﬁnes a certain penalty for candidates
with additional indications than the requested ones to
take eventual issues into account. We deﬁned an indi-
vidual penalty score for each disease according to the
degree of disease, e.g., having lung cancer is worse than
having asthma. The score is calculated by subtracting
the maximum of all disease penalties from 1.0.
Let us consider the use case described in Section III.
NSCLC without any additional indications results in a
score of 1.0, a candidate suﬀering from asthma receives a
score of 0.8, and a candidate, who just recently suﬀered
a heart attack, receives a score of 0.5.
F. Calculation of Eligibility Score
Let us consider the use case, as deﬁned in Section III,
using the completeness, general health, and threshold
functions to deﬁne the eligibility score s, as deﬁned in
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The lower this
distance, the 
better the patient.
Completeness
General Health
Threshold
(0.5, 0.5, 1.0)
(1.0, 1.0, 1.0)
0.4
0.4
0.8
0.8
Figure 5: Example of calculating the ranking score for a candidate.
The current candidate has the values (0.5, 0.5, 1.0). The most
suitable candidate is located at the point (1.0, 1.0, 1.0). The
normalized Euclidian distance between the current candidate and
the most suitable candidate determines the total ranking score.
Section IV-A. Figure 5 depicts candidate k as ⃗vk “
p0.5, 0.5, 1q and the most suitable candidate deﬁned by
⃗
v1.0 “ p1.0, 1.0, 1.0q as well as the distance from each
other in the three-dimensional space. For candidate k
not all required data is available, the health status diﬀers
from the requested one, and the requested threshold
value is exceeded. Thus, the eligibility score sk is sk “
0.5918, i.e., candidate k is eligible for the clinical trial
with 59.18% with regard to the selected criteria.
G. Clustering
Ranking candidates enables investigates to evaluate
the eligibility of candidates with regard to trial criteria.
However, two candidates may vary in diﬀerent aspects
while having the same eligibility score.
Thus, we perform a clustering of results, which assigns
similar candidates to the same cluster. We selected the k-
means clustering algorithm as it is the most appropriate
algorithm for our purpose [26]. Clustering is directly
executed within our IMDB, which eliminates the need
for exporting the data, processing the data by third-
party tools, and importing of results. As a result, we were
able to leverage interactive data analysis and exploration
of results for our application’s end users.
While the target number of clusters must be conﬁg-
ured, the algorithm can be applied to any number of
dimensions, as the distance to the cluster centroids can
be calculated in any multi-dimensional space. For our
prototype, we conﬁgured the algorithm to return four
clusters. This number is conﬁgurable and was chosen
after consideration of our sample dataset. Because users
of our application are allowed to vary the number of
ﬁlters, the number of dimensions is not ﬁxed.
In the frontend, the resulting list of candidates is
grouped in clusters, which are given appropriate names
Figure 6: Visualization of multi-dimensional clustering results.
Each block shows all candidates, projected onto two dimensions.
For example, the bottom right square shows the position of all
candidates with regard to Karnofsky score and the most suitable
candidate function, as deﬁned in Section VI-E2. Clusters are
indicated by a point’s color.
based on frequent properties. Additionally, the clusters
are visualized in a projection to each pair of two dimen-
sions as depicted in Figure 6.
VII. Evaluation and Discussion
We conﬁgured our candidate eligibility metric for a
concrete clinical trial addressing lung cancer patients, as
described in Section IV-A. Our database was populated
with real patient data taken from TCGA including
various indications, such as lung cancer and ovarian
cancer. Together with our experts from industry, we
deﬁned speciﬁc ﬁlter criteria to retrieve relevant subsets
of candidates eligible for the speciﬁc clinical trial.
During our conducted user interviews, we received
promising feedback that our enhanced business process
will reduce the overall time to identify candidates for
clinical trials.
Our enhanced process combines the automatic analy-
sis of patient data with a manual review phase performed
by a human expert. Thus, routined work is optimized
through our software-aided web application while the ac-
curacy of the outcome is guaranteed by the incorporated
human reviewer.
VIII. Conclusion and Outlook
In the given work, we shared research results of our
interdisciplinary cooperation of pharma experts, clinical
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

trial teams, and software engineers. Applying the con-
crete use case of a clinical trial for lung cancer patients,
we deﬁned an enhanced business process incorporating
IT artifacts, which enable the integrated analysis of
patient data. Today, the identiﬁcation of candidates
requires manual interpretation and matching of patient
and trial data, which results in a time-consuming and
error-prone process, e.g., in course of phase III and IV
clinical trials with more than thousand participants.
We deﬁned a generic candidate eligibility metric in
Section IV-A that is conﬁgurable per trial to reﬂect
speciﬁc inclusion and exclusion criteria of the study syn-
opsis. Furthermore, we introduced an enhanced IT-aided
business process for identiﬁcation of eligible candidates
for clinical trials in Section V. Consequently, we shared
in Section VI design decisions and implementation de-
tails of our web application supporting the analysis of
large pools of patient data in real time.
Our future work focuses on the adaption of our candi-
date eligibility metric to further indications and the use
of additional criteria. Furthermore, we are working to-
gether with our partners to establish our enhanced pro-
cess as standard operating procedures for cost-eﬀective
identiﬁcation of candidates for clinical trials.
References
[1] Y.
Feyman,
“Shocking
Secrets
of
FDA
Clinical
Trials
Revealed,”
http://www.
forbes.com/sites/theapothecary/2014/01/24/
shocking-secrets-of-fda-clinical-trials-revealed/
(last
accessed: Jun 1, 2015), 2014.
[2] World Health Organization, “Handbook for Good Clin-
ical Research Practice (GCP),” http://apps.who.int/
prequal/info_general/documents/GCP/gcp1.pdf
(last
accessed: Jun 1, 2015).
[3] S. J. Projan, “Why is Big Pharma Getting Out of
Antibacterial Drug Discovery?” Current Opinion in Mi-
crobiology, vol. 6, no. 5, 2003, pp. 427 – 430.
[4] D. Hynes, G. Joseph, and C. Pheil, “Veterans Health
Information Systems and Technology Architecture as a
Research Tool,” VIReC Ins, vol. 3, no. 1, 2002, pp. 1–8.
[5] United
States
Department
of
Veterans
Aﬀairs,
“VistA Health System,” http://www.vistahealth.com/
vista-health-system/myhealthhomepatientportal.aspx
(last accessed: Jun 1, 2015), 2014.
[6] S. N. Murphy et al., “Serving the Enterprise and Beyond
with Informatics for Integrating Biology and the Bedside
(i2b2),” American Medical Informatics Assoc., vol. 17,
no. 2, 2010, pp. 124–130.
[7] Partners Healthcare, “i2b2 Software,” https://www.
i2b2.org/software/index.html
(last
accessed:
Jun
1,
2015), 2015.
[8] M. Dugas, M. Lange, W. Berdel, and C. Müller-Tidow,
“Workﬂow to Improve Patient Recruitment for Clinical
Trials within Hospital Information Systems: A Case-
Study,” Trials, vol. 9, no. 2, 2008.
[9] H. Plattner, A Course in In-Memory Data Management:
The Inner Mechanics of In-Memory Databases, 1st ed.
Springer, 2013.
[10] P. Svensson, “The Evolution of Vertical Database Ar-
chitectures: A Historical Review,” in Proceedings of the
20th Int’l Conf on Scientiﬁc and Stat Database Mgmt.
Springer-Verlag, 2008, pp. 3–5.
[11] S. S. Lightstone, T. J. Teorey, and T. Nadeau, Physical
Database Design: The Database Professional’s Guide to
Exploiting Indexes, Views, Storage, and more.
Morgan
Kaufmann, 2007.
[12] J. M. Hellerstein, M. Stonebraker, and J. Hamilton,
Architecture of a Database System, Foundation and
Trends in Databases.
now Publishers, 2007, vol. 1.
[13] H.
Plattner
and
M.-P.
Schapranow,
Eds.,
High-
Performance In-Memory Genome Data Analysis: How
In-Memory Database Technology Accelerates Personal-
ized Medicine.
Springer-Verlag, 2014.
[14] National Cancer Institute, “The Cancer Genome Atlas
Data Portal Overview,” https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/
tcga/ (last accessed: Jun 1, 2015), 2015.
[15] H. Plattner, C. Meinel, and L. Leifer, Design Thinking
Research, ser. Understanding Innovation.
Springer,
2012.
[16] V. Cottin et al., “Small-Cell Lung Cancer: Patients
Included in Clinical Trials are not Representative of the
Patient Population as a Whole,” Annals of Oncology,
vol. 10, no. 7, 1999, pp. 809–815.
[17] L. Lovato, K. Hill, S. Hertert, D. Hunninghake, and
J. Probstﬁeld, “Recruitment for Controlled Clinical Tri-
als: Literature Summary and Annotated Bibliography,”
Controlled Clinical Trials, vol. 18, no. 4, 1997, pp. 328–
352.
[18] L. Marks and E. Power, “Using Technology to Address
Recruitment Issues in the Clinical Trial Process,” Trends
in biotechnology, vol. 20, no. 3, 2002, pp. 105–109.
[19] W. A. Giovinazzo, Object-Oriented Data Warehouse
Design: Building a Star Schema.
Prentice Hall Upper
Saddle River, NJ, 2000.
[20] M. M. Oken et al., “Toxicity and Response Criteria of
the Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group,” American
Journal of Clinical Oncology, vol. 5, no. 6, Dec. 1982,
pp. 649–656.
[21] D.
A.
Karnofsky,
“The
Clinical
Evaluation
of
Chemotherapeutic
Agents
in
Cancer,”
Evaluation
of Chemotherapeutic Agents, 1949.
[22] J. Singh, Understanding ETL and Data Warehousing:
Issues, Challenges and Importance.
Lambert Acad.
Publishing, 2011.
[23] A. Harris and K. Haase, Sinatra: Up and Running.
O’Reilly Media, 2011.
[24] A. Mesbah and A. van Deursen, “Migrating Multi-Page
Web Applications to Single-Page Ajax Interfaces,” in
Proceedings of the 11th European Conf on Software
Maintenance and Reengineering.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 181–
190.
[25] G. Salton, A. Wong, and C.-S. Yang, “A Vector
Space Model for Automatic Indexing,” Commun. ACM,
vol. 18, no. 11, 1975, pp. 613–620.
[26] T. Kanungo, D. Mount, N. S. Netanyahu, C. D. Pi-
atko, R. Silverman, and A. Wu, “An Eﬃcient K-Means
Clustering Algorithm: Analysis and Implementation,”
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 24, no. 7, 2002, pp. 881–892.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

