Estimation of Lumbar Load from Webcam Images Using  
Convolutional Neural Network for Standing Forward Bending Stationary Posture 
 
Riku Nishimoto 
Kochi University of Technology 
Miyanokuchi 185, Tosayamada, Kami, Kochi, Japan 
Kochi, Japan 
email: nishimoto.riku19990917@gmail.com 
Kyoko Shibata 
Kochi University of Technology 
Miyanokuchi 185, Tosayamada, Kami, Kochi, Japan 
Kochi, Japan 
email: shibata.kyoko@kochi-tech.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—To prevent lumbago, it is effective to understand 
one’s current posture situation and how to improve one’s 
posture. Therefore, this study proposes a method to constantly 
observe posture and evaluate the load on the body. The 
realization of this method visualizes the body loads in daily life 
and can be used as one of the means to maintain health. Hence, 
this study proposes to use a web camera for sensing and deep 
learning as a tool for estimating body load from web image. The 
body load is derived using a musculoskeletal model simulation 
based on the skeletal information extracted from the images, 
and a deep learning model is prepared in advance using this as 
the true value. In this paper, the first subject is a stationary 
standing forward bending posture. The accuracy of the created 
deep learning model is evaluated and the results indicate that 
the proposed estimation method can be useful in the case of a 
standing forward bending posture. 
Keywords-Deep learning; Lumbar load; Musculoskeletal 
model simulation.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many people of all ages and genders experience lumbago, 
and lumbago has become a social problem because of its 
potential impact on daily life. Lumbago is occurred by the 
load associated with postural distortions. To prevent lumbago, 
it is useful to have a system that can improve his/her own 
posture. Therefore, first, this study proposes a method to 
constantly observe posture and evaluate the load on the body. 
Based on these methods, we will be developed into a posture 
improvement system in the future. 
In our previous reports [1] [2], postures were observed 
using inertial sensors or optical motion capture, and 
noninvasive lumbar load estimation was performed using 
biomechanics and statistics, these estimation results 
confirmed a similar trend to the measured lumbar load ratio in 
the static posture of Nachemson et al. [3]. However, because 
specialized equipment and analysis are required, they are not 
suitable for routine observation and estimation. Hence, in this 
study, body load is estimated using based on data obtained 
from non-contact sensing method. Until now, previous 
researches have used skeletal detection software and deep 
learning from videos and images to detect the posture and 
motor status of children [4] [5] and falls of the elderly [6] as a 
method for observing daily life. In addition, several systems 
that use AI to evaluate posture based on skeletal position has  
been commercialized (Posen: Posen Co., Ltd, Sportip: 
Sportip, Inc.). Therefore, in this study, a web camera is used 
for sensing, as everyone has one and images can be gotten on 
a daily basis without any burden. Also, this study proposes to 
use deep learning as a means of estimating body load from 
images taking web camera. The purpose of this study is to use 
this estimation method to obtain body loads that can be used 
as a new indicator for systems that encourage voluntary 
postural improvement. 
Figure 1 shows an overview of the proposed body load 
estimation system in this study. During system operation, user 
inputs an image of his/her posture, along with his/her height 
and 
weight, 
into 
the 
system, 
which 
outputs 
the 
estimated/evaluated results of the body load. To achieve this, 
a deep learning model is created in advance during 
development. In this study, the skeletal position coordinates 
are detected from images using AI skeletal detection software 
(VisionPose: NEXT-SYSTEM Co., Ltd.). After that, body 
load is derived using a musculoskeletal model simulation 
(AnyBody: AnyBody Technology) based on the skeletal 
position coordinates. This is used as the true value to create a 
deep learning model. The advantage of using AnyBody is that 
the various loads on the body can be obtained from a single 
image data set. Therefore, if dealing with a variety of body 
loads, create a deep learning model for each load. 
The body load used in this paper is described. Previous 
research [7] has shown that the intervertebral disc 
compression force between the 4th and 5th lumbar vertebrae  
 
 
Figure 1.  Overview of the proposed body load estimation system. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

derived by AnyBody is useful. In response to this result, in 
this report, the intervertebral disc compression force between 
L4L5 derived by AnyBody is used as the lumbar load, which 
is one of the body loads. However, the input data for AnyBody 
is the skeletal coordinate positions of the human body. 
Therefore, VisionPose is used to detect skeletal position 
coordinates from web images. A total of 30 skeletal positions 
are detected by VisionPose, including hip and shoulder joints. 
In our previous report [8], as a preliminary step in creating a 
deep learning model, we confirmed whether the intervertebral 
disc compression force between L4L5 derived by AnyBody 
using the skeletal position coordinates detected by VisionPose 
from web images of standing forward bending posture could 
be used as training data for deep learning. The results 
confirmed its usefulness by showing an increasing trend in 
disc compression force with forward bending of the upper 
body. Hence, in this paper, we decided to use the 
intervertebral disc compression force between L4L5 derived 
by AnyBody along with the web images as the true value of 
the training data. In this paper, as the first step in creating the 
proposed system, a deep learning model is created for a 
stationary standing forward bending posture, and the accuracy 
of the lumbar load estimation by the deep learning model is 
evaluated. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes the methods and conditions for creating 
the lumbar load estimation system proposed in this paper. 
Section III describes additional evaluation of the lumbar load 
estimation 
system 
created 
in 
Section 
II. 
The 
acknowledgement and conclusions close the article. 
II. 
LUMBAR LOAD ESTIMATION SYSTEM  
In this paper, we use Convolutional Neural Network 
(CNN) for deep learning to estimate lumbar load.  This section 
describes the experimental methods used to collect training 
and validation data, the preprocessing applied to the measured 
data, and the training conditions for the CNN. Furthermore, 
the created deep learning model is used to estimate the lumbar 
load and confirm its accuracy. 
A. Experiment 
One webcam (StreamCam: logicool) is used to get video. 
Three male subjects (age 21±1, height 1.70±0.02 [m], weight 
67.0±1.70[kg]) who gave their consent to the experiment after 
obtaining approval from the Ethics Committee of the 
University and after explaining the experiment to the subjects 
in advance is the subjects of this study. Subjects are unified as 
male in this paper because of skeletal structure differences 
based on gender.   The camera is placed at a distance of 3 [m] 
from the subject's body center and at a height of 0.85 [m] from 
the floor. Movies are shot at 1080p/30fps. To obtain image 
data of random anteversion angles in the standing forward 
bending posture, subjects are asked to perform the following 
actions. The body gradually bends from an upright standing 
posture to about 30 degrees, then the body gradually raises to 
an upright standing posture. This is taken as one trial and 5 
trials are obtained. A total of three videos are obtained for each 
subject and used as training data. In addition, one trial of video 
is obtained from one of the same subjects on a different day 
and used as data for verification. 
TABLE I.  
CNN LEARNING CONDITIONS 
 
Set value 
Batch size 
32 
Classes 
120 
Epoch 
200 
Dropout 
0.2 
Convolution layer 
Filter size 1 
32 
Filter size 2 
64 
Stride 
1 
Pooling layer 
size 
(2, 2) 
Fully connected layer 
64 
B. Estimation Methods 
This study uses frame-by-frame images for learning and 
estimation, rather than processing on video with a time 
component, to estimate the posture load at a specific point in 
time. Therefore, the video obtained by the experiment for a 
total of 15 trials for 3 subjects is converted into images for 
each frame rate using the Python module OpenCV (image 
processing library). The training data totaled 3217 images, 
and the validation data for one trial subject totaled 657 images. 
Estimation uses CNN used for image classification. 
Numerical estimation is based on images, we consider that the 
same mechanism can be used for estimation as in the 
classification problem. The CNN structure in the deep 
learning model consists of an input layer, followed by two 
convolutional layers, one pooling layer, two convolutional 
layers with dropout to prevent overlearning, one pooling 
layer, smoothing to prevent dropout to prevent overlearning, 
and output to an output layer after passing through all coupled 
layers one layer. The Relu function is used as the activation 
function in the convolution layer and the Softmax function in 
the all-coupling layer. Keras Documentation [9] was used to 
create 
the 
above 
structure 
in 
Python. 
Keras.Callbacks.EarlyStopping is used as the termination 
condition, with the training error used as the monitor and auto 
as the mode. The values of each parameter are shown in Table 
I.  
To accommodate the estimation of new subjects that will 
not be used for training in the future, a deep learning model is 
created by dividing the derived disc compression force by 
height and weight, normalizing it, and labeling it as the true 
value for each frame of training data. After that, using the deep 
learning model created, lumbar load estimation is performed 
on the validation data, and the normalized values are 
converted to disc compression force [N (Newton)] by 
multiplying by height and weight. 
C. Estimation Results 
To evaluate the accuracy of the lumbar load estimated by 
the deep learning model from each of the 657 images in the 
validation data, the lumbar load derived from the same 
validation data using AnyBody is compared with the 
estimated value as the true value. Figure 2 plots the estimated 
values from the deep learning model and the true values 
derived by AnyBody. Poisson's correlation coefficient r2 is 
0.997, showing a high correlation and accurately capturing the 
changes caused by the forward bending of the upper body. 
Also, the Mean Absolute Error (MAE) between the deep 
learning estimate and the true value derived by AnyBody was 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

14.7 [N]. This is 2.25 [%] of body weight, which means that 
the margin of error is small. Furthermore, in the next section, 
the results of this study will be re-evaluated through additional 
experiments. 
III. 
EVALUATION METHODS 
The anterior tilt angle calculated from the skeletal position 
coordinates detected by VisonPose is the calculated value, and 
the anterior tilt angle measured by a digital angle meter is the 
measured value. Evaluate the MAE of the deep learning 
lumbar load estimation shown in Section II using the error 
between the calculated and measured values as an indicator. 
A.  Additional experiment 
Image acquisition experiment is performed to obtain the 
error in the upper body anterior tilt angle detects by 
VisionPose, and the change in disc compression force per unit 
anterior tilt angle derives by AnyBody. The experimental 
procedure is the same camera position and the same three 
subjects as in the experiment in Section II to obtain images in 
a static posture. Three pictures are taken at each of the 
following conditions: upright posture (0 degrees), 10 degrees, 
20 degrees, and 30 degrees of upper body forward tilt angle. 
The forward bend angle is determined by pressing the board 
against the lower back and measuring with a digital angle 
meter. 
Based on the obtained images, one is, the skeletal position 
coordinates indicating the body center shoulder and hip 
positions detected by VisionPose are used to calculate the 
anterior tilt angle using a trigonometric function. After that, 
the error is calculated from the results of the measured and 
calculated values. The other is, based on the images, the 
skeletal position coordinates are detected from each image 
using VisionPose, and the skeletal position coordinates are 
input to AnyBody to derive the intervertebral disc 
compression force between L4L5. 
B. Estimation Results 
Table II shows the error between the calculated and 
measured values of each upper body forward tilt angle, and 
the intervertebral disc compression force between L4L5 
derived by AnyBody.  
From the derivation results, it can be read that the L4/L5 
Intervertebral disc load increases almost linearly in 10-degree 
increments. From the results, the average change in 
compressive force per unit angle was found to be 21.1 [N]. As 
described in Section II-C, the MAE for lumbar load estimation 
by deep learning was 14.7 [N]. This is converted into the 
amount of change in the upper body forward tilt angle by 
dividing by 21.1 [N], the amount of change in compression 
force per unit angle. As a result, the MAE of the lumbar load 
estimation by deep learning corresponds to the increase in 
lumbar load when the upper body forward tilt angle changes 
by 0.70 degrees. The average change in the upper body 
forward tilt angle of 0.70 degrees is smaller than the angular 
error detected by VisionPose shown in Table II, so the MAE 
of the waist load estimation by deep learning shown in Section 
II is small. For this reason, the deep learning model created in 
this paper for the standing forward bending posture is useful.  
 
Figure 2.  Comparison with disc compression force estimated by the deep 
learning model and the derived values by AnyBody as the true value. 
Presented data shows the accuracy of the deep learning model. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The purpose of this study is to create a body load 
estimation system based on a deep learning model that uses 
web images and body load derived by AnyBody as training 
data. As a preliminary step, we examined the estimation of 
lumbar load from web images using a deep learning model 
that was created using the L4L5 intervertebral disc 
compression force derived by AnyBody as the training data 
for the standing forward bending posture and lumbar load, one 
of the body loads. 
 From a single image, the intervertebral disc compression 
forces were estimated in two different methods, one using 
deep learning and the other using AnyBody. In this way, the 
two types of forces were estimated for all validation data 
images, and compared with each other. The results showed 
high correlation and small error. Therefore, the deep learning 
model created in this paper for the standing forward bending 
posture may be useful as an estimation method for posture 
improvement systems.  
The deep learning model developed in this paper only 
estimates lumbar load in the upper body forward bending 
posture. Therefore, the postures and their body load to be 
targeted by the deep learning model will be increased in the 
future. AnyBody can derive various body loads applied to the 
body from a single measured data. Hence, various body loads 
are obtained from a single image data, and a new deep learning 
model is created using this as training data. That is, it is 
possible to estimate selected body loads in each posture by 
acquiring various loads applied to each body part from images 
of postures that are considered to have a large load on the 
lumbar, such as hunching back and warped back, including 
the upper body forward bending posture targeted in this paper, 
and learning them together with the images. In addition, the 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

accuracy of the deep learning model is improved by 
optimizing the program through filtering and attention 
mechanisms. If these can be used to estimate body loads in all 
postures with a high accuracy, we assume that adding body 
loads as a new indicator to the currently commercialized 
posture improvement system will lead to a further increase in 
awareness and lead to health maintenance. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number 
JP18K11106.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Shibata, Y. Inoue, Y. Iwata, J. Katagawa, and R. Fujii, 
“Study on Noninvasive Estimate Method for Intervertebral 
Disk Load at Lumbar Vertebrae,” Transactions of the JSME, 
vol. 78, no. 791, 2012, pp.130-141 (in Japanese). 
[2] H. Himeda, K. Shibata, H. Nishida, and R. Nakata,  “Study on 
Noninvasive Estimate Method for Intervertebral Disk Load at 
Lumbar Vertebrae, ”The Japan Society of Mechanical 
Engineers Chugoku-Shikoku Branch, Student Organization, 
The 50th Graduation Research Presentation by Students, 
Lecture No. 07a2, 2020, (in Japanese). 
[3] B. J. G. Andersson，R. Örtengren，A. Nachemson，and G. 
Elfström, “Lumbar Disc Presure and Myolectric Back Muscle 
Activity during Sitting,” I．Studies on an Experimental Chair, 
Scand J Rehab Med 6, 1974, pp. 104-114. 
[4] S. Suzuki, Y. Amemiya, and M. Sato, “Deep Learning 
Assessment of Child Gross-Motor,” 13th International 
Conference on Human System Interaction (HSI), 2020, pp. 
189-194. 
[5] R. Fu, T. Wu, Z. Luo, F. Duan, X. Qiao, and P. Guo, “Learning 
Behavior Analysis in Classroom Based on Deep Learning,” 
Tenth International Conference on Intelligent Control and 
Information Processing (ICICIP), 2019, pp. 206-212. 
[6] M. D. Solbach, and J. K. Tsotsos, “Vision-Based Fallen Person 
Detection for the Elderly,” CoRR, abs/1707.07608. 
[7] T. Bassani, E. Stucoviz, Z. Qian, M. Briguglio, and F. 
Glbusera, 
“Validation 
of 
the 
AnyBody 
full 
body 
musculoskeletal model in computing lumbar spine loads at 
L4L5 level,” Journal of Biomechanics vol. 58, 2017, pp. 89-96. 
[8] R. Nishimoto and K. Shibata, “Estimation of Lumbar Load 
from Webcam Images Using Musculoskeletal Model 
Simulation,” The Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers 
Chugoku-Shikoku Branch, Student Organization, The 50th 
Graduation Research Presentation by Students, Lecture No. 
05b2, 2022, (in Japanese). 
[9] Keras Documentation, https://keras.io/ja/, retrieved: August, 
2022.
TABLE II.  
MEAN ABSOLUTE ERROR BETWEEN CALCULATED AND MEASURED VALUES AND INTERVERTEBRAL DISC COMPRESSION FORCE BETWEEN 
L4L5 AT EACH UPPER BODY FORWARD TILT ANGLE. 
Upper body forward tilt angle [degrees] 
0 
10 
20 
30 
MAE of angle [degrees] 
2.17 
2.58 
4.58 
3.46 
L4/L5 Intervertebral disc load [N] 
365 
584 
798 
998 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-995-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2022 : The Eleventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

