Management of Clinical Concepts in Bulgarian Healthcare Using openEHR 
Specifications 
 
Simeon Abanos 
Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics 
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridsky  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
email: simeonabanos@gmail.com  
Evgeniy Krastev  
Faculty of Mathematics and Informatics 
Sofia University St. Kliment Ohridsky  
Sofia, Bulgaria 
email: eck@fmi.uni-sofia.bg 
Dimitar Tcharaktchiev 
Department of Medical Informatics 
Medical University 
Sofia, Bulgaria 
email: dimitardt@gmail.com
Abstract—Clinical concepts in national healthcare are usually 
represented employing heterogeneous information models. The 
existence of incompatible information models significantly 
complicate interoperability and management of clinical 
documents across a country as well as cross-border exchange 
of such documents. The objective of this paper is to outline a 
methodology for management of typical clinical concepts in the 
scope of Bulgarian healthcare by means of openEHR 
archetypes. A case study of management involving widely used 
clinical concepts is here considered. The clinical concepts are 
designed with openEHR concepts and therefore they are ready 
for semantic interoperability. The obtained results prove the 
hypothesis that existing health documents like clinical path 
reports can be transformed into archetype object model by 
preserving the semantic context. New results from computer 
experiments are presented and discussed in the context of 
providing patient- centric eHealth services. 
Keywords-openEHR 
information 
model; 
openEHR 
archetype; openEHR server; clinical path report; semantic 
interoperability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Heterogeneous information models are widely used in 
national healthcare. Health information systems employing 
such models are incompatible. This complicates significantly 
management and declines the quality of eHealth patient 
services.  
The objective of this paper is to outline a methodology 
for management of typical clinical concepts in the scope of 
Bulgarian healthcare by means of openEHR archetypes [1]. 
The methodology covers essential stages in the development 
a fully functional web application allowing semantic 
interoperability in management of clinical path reports by the 
National Health Insurance Fund (NHIF). 
The following Section II shortly presents the proposed 
methodology for building an openEHR archetype model 
comprising typical clinical concepts in national healthcare. 
New results in the implementation of the archetype model 
are provided and discussed in Section III. Section IV makes 
an evaluation of the contributions in this research work in 
relation to results in the existing literature. 
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
This paper employs openEHR [2] information model 
concepts to build an archetype object model of a clinical path 
report according to the XML schema model provided by the 
NHIF. It has been successfully implemented in a related 
research project for cross- border exchange of International 
patient Summary standard [3].  
The applicability of the algorithm is validated by 
processing a real-life collection of clinical reports on a 
openEHR server. 
III. 
RESULTS 
An openEHR template of a clinical path report is 
designed. This report in national healthcare contains details 
of the medical services and procedure provided in the 
process of patient treatment. An algorithm is developed for 
transforming existing heterogeneous information models of 
clinical data in such reports into instances of a template 
composed of openEHR archetypes. The transformation 
procedure persists data structures and semantic context. 
A multitier web application is developed for the purpose 
of testing the execution of typical management tasks with 
clinical concepts (Figure 1). It persists and manages 
archetype instances(contributions in openEHR server terms) 
of clinical path documents on  openEHR servers[4]. These 
severs provide a common software platform and can be 
deployed locally in a healthcare organization or in a cloud 
infrastructure. 
Clients are enabled to manage clinical path reports by 
invoking web service operations of the openEHR servers.  In 
our computer experiments we demonstrate  user friendly web 
interface that enhances the business process for openEHR 
management of such reports (Figure 2)[5]. This approach to 
modeling 
and 
management 
clinical 
data 
is 
being 
demonstrated for the first time in Bulgarian healthcare. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The obtained results prove the hypothesis that existing 
health documents like clinical path reports can be 
transformed into archetype object model. The proposed  
information model enables a standards-based approach to 
management of clinical documents and facilitates semantic 
interoperability between information systems in healthcare.  
Results from computer experiments demonstrate clinical 
path report data interactions among openEHR platforms. 
This novelty approach in national healthcare allows 
finding cost efficient solutions. Its implementation extends 
our previous research work carried out in developing 
solutions for patient-centric eHealth services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by the National Scientific 
Program “е-Health in Bulgaria”. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

REFERENCES 
[1] openEHR, Archetype Model (AM) Component - latest. 2020. 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://specifications.openehr.org/releases/AM/latest 
[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[2] openEHR, Reference Model (RM) Component - latest. 2020. 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://specifications.openehr.org/releases/RM/latest 
[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
[3] E. Krastev, D. Tcharaktchiev, P. Kovatchev, and S. Abanos, 
“International Patient Summary Standard Based on Archetype 
Concepts” International Journal on Advances in Life 
Sciences, 
ISSN 
1942-2660, 
vol. 
12,  
No. 
1 
& 
2, 
year 
2020, 
pp. 
34-46, 
http://www.iariajournals.org/life_sciences/ . 
[4] P. P. Gutiérrez, "Towards the Implementation of an 
openEHR-based Open Source EHR Platform (a vision 
paper)", Studies in Health Informatics, vol. 216, pp.45-9, 
2015. 
[5] P. Kovatchev, "Convert and insert hospital NHIF records into 
openEHR EHRServer instance," 2019. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=a6bWEog98U4&ab_chan
nel=PetkoKovachev[retrieved: October, 2020]. 
Figure 1.  Architecture of the multitier web application for magement of clinical concepts. 
 
Figure 2.  Web interface for management of clinical concepts.. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

