Challenges of Comparing Medication eHealth Services in the Nordic Countries 
 
 
Heidi Gilstad and Arild Faxvaag 
Health Informatics Research Group, Dept. of Neuroscience 
Norwegian University of Science and Technology, NTNU  
Trondheim, Norway 
heidi.gilstad@ntnu.no and arild.faxvaag@ntnu.no 
Christian Nøhr and Sidsel Villumsen 
Dept. of Development and Planning 
Aalborg University  
Aalborg, Denmark  
cn@plan.aau.dk and sidvil@plan.aau.dk 
Jarmo Reponen 
FinnTelemedicum, Dept. of Medical Technology 
University of Oulu. and 
Raahe Hospital  
Oulu, Finland 
jarmo.reponen@oulu.fi 
Hege Andreassen 
Norwegian Centre for Integrated Care & Telemedicine    
Tromsø, Norway  
hege.andreassen@telemed.no 
Lars Jervall and Thomas Pehrsson 
Center for eHealth in Sweden (CeHis) 
Stockholm, Sweden 
lars.jerlvall@telia.com and thopehr@gmail.com 
Maarit Kangas 
FinnTelemedicum, Dept. of Medical Technology 
University of Oulu 
Oulu, Finland 
maarit.kangas@oulu.fi 
 Guðrún Audur Harðardóttir 
Dept. of Health Information Management 
 Directorate of Health 
Reykjavik, Iceland  
audur@landlaeknir.is 
Sabine Koch 
Health Informatics Centre 
Karolinska Institutet 
Stockholm, Sweden 
sabine.koch@ki.se 
Hannele Hypponen 
Dept. of Information  
National Institute for Health and Welfare  
Helsinki, Finland 
hannele.hypponen@thl.fi
 
Abstract— A prescription and medication service that is 
optimised to protect against unnecessary harm is an essential 
component of a safer healthcare system. To this means, the 
Nordic countries have put considerable efforts in digitizing 
their prescription and dispensing processes and making 
medication 
eHealth 
services 
available 
for 
clinicians, 
pharmacists and patients. As these e-services are being 
established and applied, there is a need to monitor and learn 
from their use. This paper reports from a sub-study of a larger 
activity on developing indicators for monitoring eHealth 
services in the Nordic countries. We describe different 
medication eHealth services and compare their availabiliy to 
professionals and patients in the Nordic countries. We found 
that an ePrescription service is available for clinicians and 
patients in all Nordic countries, but services that enable 
renewal or viewing of prescriptions by patients are not 
commonly available yet. A major challenge when comparing 
medication eHealth services is the fact that definitions of 
indicators vary between countries. 
 
Keywords- Medication data, ePrescription, medication list, 
indicator 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Access to information about medication is crucial for 
high quality healthcare and patient safety [1]. Viewing an 
up-to-date list of current medications is a prerequisite when 
prescribing a new drug, administering medications or 
assessing potential side effects, decreasing errors when 
dispensing medications, for preventing medication errors 
and adverse drug events in the healthcare system [2], as well 
as for control of financial aspects for prescription products. 
From the patient’s perspective, having an updated list of 
their medications is an effective means of ensuring that the 
health professionals they encounter on their path through the 
health system are kept aware of some of the most important 
aspects of their health. 
Most nations now devote large resources in digitizing 
their healthcare systems and in building eHealth services for 
care professionals and patients. As such services have been 
built and taken into use, there is a need for monitoring and 
assessing the use of such services for mutual learning and 
improvement [3]. What characterizes eHealth services that 
are available at a national level in the Nordic countries and 
how are these being used? These are some of the questions 
that a Nordic eHealth Research Network (NeRN) has posed 
in an inter-Nordic collaboration on developing indicators for 
monitoring eHealth. NeRN is a research group [4] reporting 
to the eHealth group of the Nordic Council of Ministers, and 
is working with development, testing and assessment of a 
common set of indicators for monitoring eHealth in the 
Nordic countries (Finland, Sweden, Norway, Iceland and 
Denmark), plus Greenland, the Faroe Islands and Åland.  
Medication eHealth services include different e-services 
related to medication management for patients, pharmacists 
and care professionals. A central element of medication 
eHealth services is the electronic recording of prescriptions. 
The representations of prescriptions can be described as 
involving three different characteristics: Prescription as 
assigning a right, Prescription as a withdrawal action 
(Dispensing) and Prescription as an administered action, 
i.e., the patient has taken the medicine. As such, the decision 
to medicate, prescribing, dispensing and administering 
medicine, are different aspects of a Medication eHealth 
service in form of an ePrescription service, see Figure 1. 
The decision to medicate is the first step, where the health 
professional decides when and how the patient should be 
medicated. ePrescribing is the electronic prescribing of 
medicine by a health professional to a patient and making it 
available to a pharmacy, where the medicine can be 
dispensed and picked up by the patient. The prescription is a 
signed artifact (document) that describes the medication and 
how it shall be taken. It gives the patient the right to pick up 
the medication at the pharmacy and use it according to the 
description. In hospital settings, the health pofessional does 
not need to perform the actual prescription and can go 
directly from deciding to medicate to dispensing of the 
medicine, as shown in Figure 1. Dispensing is the retrieval 
of a prescription and the dispensing of the medicine to the 
patient. 
The 
patient 
consequently 
administers 
the 
medication, when consuming it. The medication list is the 
overview of the medications that are prescribed and 
dispensed to the patient. An eMedication list service allows 
for both patients and professionals to access it.  
Figure 1 illustrates worktasks related to medication, and 
the storage of data related to each task. The decision of 
medication is noted in a Medication Management System 
(MMS) by the health professional. Outside hospitals a  
prescription can be issued on a sheet of paper, telephoned to 
a pharmacy or sent as an electronic order to a prescription 
server, where it can be accessed by pharmacies. When a 
drug is dispensed at a hospital is will be documented in the 
MMS, if it is dispensed at a pharmacy,it will be documented 
in a pharmacy system – in some countries at a national 
level. Health professionals store information about the 
administration of drugs in a MMS.   
 
 
Figure 1. Overview of the process of a prescription from 
decision to medicate to administration of the medicine and where the data 
is stored in a medication eHealth service. 
This paper addresses the issue of availability of eHealth 
services related to medication and offers a comparison of 
the availability for patients and healthcare professionals in 
the Nordic countries. The following research question 
guides the work presented in this paper: 
What is the availability of ePrescription and eMedication 
list services in the Nordic countries? 
The research question encompasses information from 
indicators identified by NeRN and is divided into following 
sub-questions for cross country comparison:  
• 
Is an ePrescription service available?  
• 
Does a national electronic medication list comprise 
prescribed and dispensed medication available?  
• 
Is it possible for patients to renew their 
prescriptions electronically?  
• 
Is 
it 
possible 
for 
patients 
to 
view 
their 
ePrescriptions? 
Section II describes the methods used in the project. 
Section III offers a presentation of the results, and Section 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

IV includes the discussion. Section V comprises concluding 
remarks. 
II. 
METHODS 
The indicators used in this study were derived from a 
rating survey performed in 2013, constructed on the basis of 
national survey questionnaires in the Nordic countries, an 
OECD model survey developed in 2012, eHealth policy 
analysis performed in 2013 and variables presented in the 
eHealth evaluation literature [5].   
Data about the indicators for ePrescription and 
eMedication list services arise from discussions in a series 
of workshops with participants from all the Nordic countries 
arranged by the NeRN and a summary of the national 
survey questionnaires in the Nordic countries performed 
from 2010-2014 [6]. The results are presented as proportion 
of public healthcare organisations having the functionality 
within each of the Nordic countries. 
III. 
RESULTS 
When presenting the results, the sub-questions are 
addressed separately.   
A. Availability of a national ePrescription service 
The indicator is identical to an OECD indicator, but 
measured at a national level. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Availability of an ePrescription service. 
 
Figure 2 shows that by the end of May, 2014, all the 
Nordic countries have a national ePrescription service in 
place. In Finland, Denmark, Iceland and Sweden, 
ePrescription is available at a national level, i.e., at all 
public hospitals within the country, for all GP´s, and at 
every pharmacy in the country. In Finland, the roll-out of 
ePresciption to the private sector is currently on its way. In 
Norway, all pharmacies, general practitioners, private 
specialists and emergency doctors, all (non-hospital) doctors 
allowed to prescribe drugs have access to ePrescription, and 
soon also dentists. 
B. Availability of a national electronic medication list of 
prescribed and dispensed medication 
The indicator, which is identical to the OECD indicator, 
measures the availability of information about medication 
that has been previously prescribed, or dispensed at another 
institution. However, the contents of this indicator vary in 
the Nordic countries. A national list of prescribed and 
dispensed medication is not necessarily the same as the 
patient´s current medication list, since for example the 
medication dispensed while admitted to a hospital or 
purchased without a prescription may not be included.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Availability of national electronic medication list. 
 
Figure 3 shows the availability of national electronic 
medication lists in the Nordic countries. In Denmark, the 
medication list has been 100% available since 2010, 
including all types of prescriptions made outside hospitals 
as well as all medications dispensed both in and outside the 
hospital.  
In Finland, the national prescription database shows 
prescribed and dispensed medication, but not those 
administered during hospital stay. Patients can preclude 
health professionals from accessing the data. The national 
list of prescriptions does not include prescriptions on paper 
or prescriptions that have been made by phone, nor 
prescriptions related to social care. From 2015, the national 
KANTA-system will generate a comprehensive list of 
current medication for the patient from the prescription 
database and data from individual electronic patient record 
(EPR) systems, including medication administered during 
hospital stay.  
In Iceland, the availability of the national list of 
prescribed and dispensed medicine is 100%, since 2014, and 
includes all ePrescriptions, both prescribed and dispensed, 
as well as some paper and telephone prescriptions. All paper 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

and telephone prescriptions will be available in 2015. As in 
Finland, the medication list does not include the medication 
administered during hospital stay.  
In Norway, a national medication list is to be found in 
the “Kjernejournal” (Summary care record), and it may also 
be accessed via the national portal “helsenorge.no”. 
“Kjernejournal” 
is 
running 
as 
(in 
2014) 
a 
pilot 
implementation in two regions. “Kjernejournal” will contain 
a list of the medicines the patient has been prescribed (both 
ePrescriptions and paper prescriptions) in Norwegian 
pharmacies. Medicines the patient purchased without a 
prescription, received at an emergency department, hospital 
/ nursing home or purchased abroad will not appear. 
Prescriptions that have been dispensed are stored in the 
“Kjernejournal” for three years.  
In Sweden, the list of medications that have been 
dispensed to the patient has been available since 2012. The 
patient decides if the doctor is allowed to see the 
information in the database. A consent is needed from the 
patient. Very few patients i.e., 3-4.000 patients out of 9 
million actually choose to hide their information, 
C. Availability of electronic medication renewal 
This indicator shows the availability of services that 
enable electronic medication renewal at the national level. 
The indicator is identical to the OECD indicator. 
 
 
   Figure 4.  Availability of electronic medication renewal.  
Figure 4 shows the availability of electronic 
medication renewal services in the Nordic countries. In 
Denmark, there is 100% availability of electronic 
medication renewal in primary care at a national level.  
In Finland, this is currently an organizational activity.  
The patient needs to contact the pharmacy or primary health 
care centre to ask for a renewal, although many 
organizations provide an electronic web portal to mediate 
the request.   
In Iceland, only a few health care institutions offered 
this service in 2014. However, this is currently being 
implemented and is expected to be at a national level before 
end of 2015. 
In Norway, this service has not been established at the 
national level. General practitioners can offer service 
functionalities for patients depending on what portal 
provider they have chosen.   
In Sweden, electronic medication renewal has been 
available since 2012 in the national service "My healthcare 
contacts (MVK)". MVK is a citizen web portal that enables 
secure communication between patient/ consumer/ customer 
and healthcare and longterm care. The patient can book and 
rebook appointments, renew prescriptions, order a copy of 
his patient record and in some county councils also access it. 
D. Availability of electronic viewing of patient’s own 
prescriptions 
This indicator concerns electronic services that enable 
patients to view their own medication data. We present data 
for services at a national level. The indicator is identical to 
the OECD indicator. 
 
  
Figure 5.  Availability of patients’ viewing electronically of own 
medication data 
Figure 5 shows the availability of patients` viewing 
electronically of own medication data. In Denmark, patients 
have had the opportunity to view their own medication data 
covering the past two years since 2009. In the beginning, it 
only enabled viewing of prescriptions made outside 
hospitals. Since 2013, viewings of prescriptions made by 
hospital physicians have been included.  
In Finland, all patients now have access to all 
prescriptions. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

This service did not exist in Iceland until November 
2014.  Currently, it only includes ePrescribed medications. 
However, plans are already underway to enhance these 
services to include also paper- and telephone prescribed 
medication. 
Norway established this service in 2012-2013 via “My 
prescriptions” in helsenorge.no, but the service currently 
only enables viewing of the most recent prescriptions made 
by GPs.  
In Sweden this service has been available since 2012 as 
a national service through “My healthcare contacts” (MVK). 
Availability for patients viewing of medication data that 
(public/private sector) professionals have prescribed is a 
feature of national health information systems in the Nordic 
countries.  
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The Nordic countries seem relatively homogeneous and 
comparable in terms of political system, infrastructure, 
culture, and educational, social- and healthcare systems; 
however providing comparable indicators from surveys 
across the Nordic countries involves a number of 
challenges. The samples of the survey varied: in Denmark, a 
representative sample of clinical end users participated 
whereas in the other countries leaders in health care 
institutions were approached. The survey questions were 
formulated in the language of the respective countries, and 
the time and frequency of the surveys varied. Detailed 
discussions of these differences settled most of the variance 
they introduced, and the results obtained on the medication 
issues were quite comparable.  
Comparable e-services are the ePrescription services and 
the list of prescribed medicines, i.e., the proportion of public 
and/or private organizations where prescribed medicine 
outside the own organization, are available in all the Nordic 
countries. Although ePrescription is available it is still 
possible to issue prescriptions on paper or by telephoning 
the pharmacy. This proportion has not been measured but it 
is assumed that it is neglectable given the high number of 
prescriptions made electronically. 
The ePrescription services are well established and 
mature in some countries, while in other countries they are 
still in a pilot phase. The availability of a National list of 
prescribed and dispensed medication has also by 2014 
reached a level of saturation. In Denmark, this service has 
been available for some years. Although the service is 
available in all countries the architecture of the systems 
behind the services differ significantly, but a detailed 
analysis of these differences has not been targeted in this 
study. A special feature for patients to hide specific 
medications is available in all countries for similar ethical 
reasons. 
The availability of an e-service to renew medication is 
not available in all countries. In Denmark, and Sweden, the 
service has been available for some years, however it is 
implemented in different ways. In Denmark, this service 
was implemented for all patients to use as part of the 
agreement between the general practitioners and the regions 
who pay them fee for service. In Sweden, the service is 
available to all citizens through a national portal. In other 
countries this service is available only through dedicated 
organizations. 
The service that enables patients to view their own 
prescriptions has been implemented in all countries.  
However, when going into detail about the content of the 
indicators, the NeRN group realized that characteristics of 
the indicators varied between the respective countries. 
The availability of a national ePrescription service was 
saturated, but the content measured was different between 
the Nordic countries. In the definitions of the indicators, the 
fact whether the medication was prescribed, dispensed or 
administered was not clearly specified, or the data was not 
available because the question was not asked specifically in 
the surveys. It became apparent that the content of 
ePrescriptions and the measurements of them varied 
between the countries making detailed explanation in the 
presentation of the results necessary for each indicator and 
each country. 
Another point which makes comparison difficult is the 
fact that ePrescription does not cover paper-based 
prescriptions per se, which are regulated in another way 
than electronic prescriptions. It has different consequences 
in the respective countries. In Denmark, for instance the 
paper-based prescriptions will be synchronized with the 
overview of the patient’s own prescriptions once the 
medicine has been dispensed in a pharmacy. A related issue 
is that while ePrescriptions are 1-1 prescribed and dispensed 
medication, where the paper based prescription can hold 
more drugs on the same piece of paper.  
The e-services in this paper more specifically referred to 
as the medication eHealth service, may have different 
scopes, i.e., intended coverage area. While some e-services 
are accessible at a national level, others are either limited 
geographically to a regional level, administratively to the 
hospitals or the organizations, or to specific roles, for 
example to healthcare professionals and not to patients. The 
focus in this study is the availability of medication eHealth 
services at a national level and availability at a more 
granular level was therefore not presented. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The study showed that the availability of patients’ 
prescription information and ePrescriptions made available 
to any pharmacy is realized via the national ePrescription 
systems in each Nordic country. Moreover, the availability 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

of medication renewal requests as well as the availability of 
electronic viewing of patients’ own prescriptions is 
comprehensive on national level in some countries (Sweden, 
Denmark and Iceland). Patients’ access to view their 
prescription data electronically is also broad. However, the 
NeRN findings demonstrated that the services are realized 
differently in the respective countries and also definitions of 
indicators vary between countries hampering comparison.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Our gratitude goes to the eHealth Group of the Nordic 
Ministry of Health who supports the work of the Nordic 
eHealth Research Network in our efforts to define common 
indicators for monitoring eHealth in the Nordic countries. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. M. Benjamin, “Reducing Medication Errors and Increasing 
Patient Safety: Case Studies in Clinical Pharmacology”. The 
Journal of Clinical Pharmacology. Blackwell Publishing Ltd, 
2013. 
[2] G.E. Karagiannis, L. Tzachani, B. R. M. Manning, V. G. 
Stamatopoulos, M. Roughton, A. A. Lazakidou, M. Petridou, 
D. Iliopoulou, M. L Rigby “Patient-Generated EHR Input 
System Trials: An Analysis of Perceived Benefits Across a 
Range of Disease Groups” in eds D.D. Koutsouris and A.A. 
Lazakidou R, “Concepts and Trends in Healthcare Information 
Systems”. Springer Link, 2014. 
[3] The European Federation of Medical Informatics: “Working 
Group Proposal, adopted by the EFMI board”, 
http://iig.umit.at/efmi/, 2002. 
[4] H. Hyppönen, A. Faxvaag, H. Gilstad, G.A. Hardardottir, L. 
Jerlvall, M. Kangas, S. Koch, C. Nøhr, T. Pehrsson, J. 
Reponen, A. Walldius, V. Vimarlund. “Nordic eHealth 
Indicators: Organization of Research, First Results and Plan for 
the Future”. Stud Health Technol Inform 192:273-7, 2013. 
[5] J. Adler-Milstein, E. Ronchi,
 
G. R. Cohen,
 
Laura A. Pannella 
Winn,
 
A. K. Jha 2014: “Benchmarking health IT among 
OECD countries: better data for better policy”. J Am Med 
Inform Assoc 2014;21:111–116. doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2013-
001710 
[6] H. Hyppönen, M. Kangas, J. Reponen, C. Nøhr, S. Villumsen, 
S. Koch, G.A. Hardardottir, H. Gilstad, L. Jerlvall, T. 
Pehrsson, A. Faxvaag, H. Andreassen, B. Brattheim V. 
Vimarlund and J. Kaipio. “Nordic eHealth Benchmarking: 
Status 2014”. TemaNord 2015:539, Nordic Council of 
Ministers, 
Copenhagen, 
Denmark. 
(www.norden.org/en/publications) Accessed July 2015. 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-424-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2015 : The Fourth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

