Eco-Sensors4Health Toolkit: Scaffolding Children Participation in Schools’ 
Environmental Health  
Maria João Silva 
School of Education  
Polytechnic Institute of Lisbon, Portugal 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: mjsilva@eselx.ipl.pt  
Eduarda Ferreira 
CICS.NOVA 
New University of Lisbon 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: e.ferreira@fcsh.unl.pt 
Alexandra Souza, Ana Rita Alves 
Ciência Viva School 
Pavilion of Knowledge 
Lisbon, Portugal 
e-mail: {asouza, aalves}@cienciaviva.pt 
 
Abstract— The research presented in this paper aims at 
improving health education in primary schools, supporting the 
use of environmental sensors in environmental health problem 
solving. A research based design approach was adopted to 
develop a toolkit, aiming at supporting teachers in scaffolding 
children’s 
participation 
to 
improve 
their 
schools’ 
environmental health. The toolkit will facilitate children’s 
activities that make use of eco-sensors to identify and explore 
environmental health problems, as well as to suggest local 
solutions. Sound pollution, air pollution, and lack of thermal 
comfort are three central problems in Portuguese primary 
schools’ environmental health.  The data acquired by children 
through the use of sensors will inform and validate children’s 
decisions to improve schools’ environmental health and will be 
made available to other schools in a collaborative platform. 
The design of the toolkit was situated in Portuguese primary 
schools. It is an iterative design process, based on teaching and 
learning interventions with primary school children, in-service 
teachers, and students of a teacher education graduation, all in 
their natural and complex settings. Those interventions 
confirmed the practicality and effectiveness of the planned 
activities, and, together with the results of previous projects, 
informed the content and form of the designed toolkit that will 
be used in diverse schools to improve schools’ environmental 
health. 
Keywords – environmental health; eco-sensors; children; 
participation. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
A. Thematic, research goals, and context 
Primary schools’ environmental health is a current and 
relevant subject in Portugal, since there are several identified 
problems that affect school communities’ well-being, and 
that consequently can affect the learning processes [1] – [3]. 
Sound pollution, air pollution, and lack of thermal comfort 
are three central problems in Portuguese primary schools’ 
environmental health [1] – [3]. These problems are three 
important dimensions of indoor environmental quality [2] 
that, together or separately, create concentration difficulties 
[1], and consequently affect students’ and teachers’ 
performance [2]. 
Eco-Sensors4Health is a research project whose main 
goal is to improve environmental health in Portuguese 
primary schools, through the use of eco-sensors by children. 
Eco-sensors 
are 
devices 
that 
detect 
and 
measure 
environmental factors and elements, such as temperature, 
sound, and carbon dioxide. Eco-sensors communicate those 
measurements to other electronic devices, which transform 
the sensors’ signals into multiple representations, such as 
digits, tables, and graphs. 
In 
the 
Eco-Sensors4Health 
project, 
children’s 
participation to improve schools’ environmental health 
includes: i) the use of eco-sensors to identify and explore 
problems; ii) the suggestion of local solutions that will also 
be validated with the use of eco-sensors. This way, 
children’s participation in the Eco-Sensors4Health project 
will be developed in the context of primary school curricular 
activities, using techniques of the scientific inquiry strategy. 
The data acquired by children with the eco-sensors will 
be made available on the Eco-Sensors4Health collaborative 
platform, allowing multiple queries and comparisons of 
environmental health conditions in different schools and 
circumstances. 
The research presented in this paper is part of the Eco-
Sensors4Health project. It aims at improving health 
education in primary schools, through the creation of a 
toolkit, using a research based design approach, to support 
primary 
school 
teachers 
in 
scaffolding 
children’s 
participation in schools’ environmental health. 
B. Goals of the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit  
The Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit will support monitoring 
and intervention in environmental health, enabling children 
to eco-innovate to create healthier environments in schools. 
Since it is widely recognized that mediation, namely in what 
concerns scaffolding, is fundamental in problem solving and 
scientific inquiry activities [4] [5], this toolkit is targeted to 
primary school teachers, to facilitate the implementation of 
children's activities. It will offer support to teachers in 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

scaffolding children in the use of eco-sensors to identify and 
understand school environmental health problems, allowing 
the suggestion of solutions to such problems. 
The specific goals of the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit are: 
- To make eco-sensors and tablets available to teachers and 
children in order to support the acquisition of schools’ 
environmental health data; 
- To offer suggestions and support documents for problem 
solving and scientific inquiry activities. These suggestions 
and documents should also make it easier for teachers and 
children to enter data in the Eco-Sensors4Health platform; 
- To make pre and posttests available to teachers 
(questionnaires to support learning assessment). 
Following this introduction (Section 1), the theoretical 
background, and the related work are presented in Section 2. 
Then, in Section 3, the methodology, and toolkit design 
process are described. The subsequent sections are the 
systematization of the lessons learned and of the conclusions 
(Section 4). 
II. 
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
The design and development of the Eco-Sensors4Health 
toolkit represent a development study, in the context of an 
educational design research, since it aims at developing 
research-based 
solutions 
for 
complex 
problems 
in 
educational practice [6]. This section reports the main 
dimensions of the first phase of this development study:  the 
review of literature. 
The relevance of monitoring and intervention in schools’ 
environmental health is highlighted by diverse authors, 
emphasizing that: 
- The school’s environment can affect the health of the 
school community [7], with children being particularly 
vulnerable to environmental health risks, such as air 
pollution [8]; 
- Environmental health in elementary schools is often 
inadequate, especially when financial resources are scarce, 
and 
the 
ventilation 
is 
insufficient 
with 
classroom 
temperatures reaching values out of the recommended range, 
and carbon dioxide levels exceeding the safety level [9] [10]. 
The design and development of the Eco-Sensors4Health 
toolkit are grounded in the recognition of the importance of 
the participation of children in schools’ environmental 
health, since the participation of students in health promotion 
has demonstrated positive personal effects on students, as 
well as positive effects on the school [11]. 
The participation of children in schools’ environmental 
health, using problem solving and scientific inquiry 
strategies, needs scaffolding, since children need support 
(guiding and resources [12]) to succeed in such activities [5]. 
In this context, scaffolding should integrate concreteness 
fading over time, and transfer of responsibility to students 
[13]. In concreteness fading, the concreteness of the 
representations successively decreases to allow students to 
understand abstract representations that are connected to the 
concrete situation that is represented [14]. Following this 
scaffolding guiding principles, in the Eco-Sensors4Health 
toolkit, activities are sequenced from sensory exploratory 
activities to data acquisition in inquiry and problem solving 
activities. Since observation tables and experiment plans can 
make scientific strategies visible and transfer responsibility 
to students, the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit will include such 
tables and plans, together with sensors, as manipulable 
mediators [5] [12] – [15]. 
Electronic sensors, together with data-loggers, can be 
cognitive tools in scaffolding, facilitating the complex task 
of monitoring environmental variables, and improving the 
level of children’s scientific reasoning [4]. Diverse related 
projects evidenced the practicality of the use of sensors by 
elementary school children in environmental and health 
sense making activities [16].  In the SchoolSenses@Internet 
project, children used mobile phones built-in sensors, to 
create multiple sensory views of environmental quality, 
portraying and assessing the schoolyard environment [17]. In 
the USense2Learn project, children used mobile phones 
built-in sensors together with external weather sensors to the 
mobile creation of georeferenced multisensory information, 
intertwining quantitative and qualitative visions of the 
schoolyard, and sharing such information with other 
classrooms, using Google Earth [18]. Also, with a context 
aware approach, the SENSE project engaged elementary 
school students in the use of environmental sensors to 
collect, analyse, reflect, and share authentic air pollution data 
[19].  
In order to support elementary school teachers and 
children, the TEEMSS2 [20] and the POLLEN [21] projects 
created documentation that describes activities in which 
children use sensors to explore the environment and its 
multiple representations. 
The scaffolding of the use of sensors by children, in the 
context of scientific inquiry and problem solving activities, 
should address the following requisites: i) an appropriate 
balance of automated technology and user control [22]; ii) 
contextualization of data acquisition [19]. Consequently, the 
Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit adopts: i) a manual approach to 
data acquisition (children will register sensors’ data 
manually in registration forms and in the platform), 
following the affordances and challenges identified in 
previous studies and projects [18] [21]; ii) the manual 
registration of time and local data in the registration forms; 
iii) and the production of photos/audios/videos and captions 
to contextualize the acquired data [19]. 
III. 
THE TOOLKIT DESIGN PROCESS 
The design process of the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit is 
iterative, based on teaching and learning interventions, 
situated and implemented in real world contexts (Portuguese 
primary schools). The research team includes primary school 
teachers, 
together 
with 
experts 
in 
education, 
in 
environmental health, and in information and communication 
technologies. 
The first version of the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit is 
based on the conceptual framework, drafted in the previous 
section. To acquire empirical evidences of the practicality 
and effectiveness of this version, three case studies were 
developed with different participants: primary school 
children, pre-service teachers, and in-service teachers. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

A. Structure of the first version of the toolkit  
Following the three central problems of the Portuguese 
schools’ environmental health [1], the specific goals 
presented in the introduction, and the conceptual framework 
drafted in the previous section, the main components of the 
Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit are: 
- A set of tablets, iOS or Android, with an app to allow the 
sensors data logging; 
- A set of sensors: Sound sensor (tablets have in-built sound 
sensors); Carbon dioxide sensor (PASPORT Carbon 
Dioxide Gas Sensor - PS-2110); Temperature and humidity 
sensor (PASPORT Weather Anemometer Sensor - PS-
2174); 
- Guidelines 
for 
children's 
activities 
on 
schools’ 
environmental health, with the following structure: i) 
introduction to main concepts; ii) exploring with the senses 
(research questions; tasks; questions for reflection); iii) 
measuring and interpreting (research questions; tasks; 
questions for reflection); iv) suggesting solutions; 
- The registration forms and collaborative documents 
(experiment plans) to support children's activities on 
schools’ environmental health; 
- The children’s pre and posttests (with questions in the 
following categories: Knowledge, Environmental and 
Health Awareness, Attitudes, Personal Investment and 
Responsibility, Perception of the Physical Environment). 
B. Teaching and learning interventions with primary 
school children 
The empirical testing was developed with primary school 
classes in the Ciência Viva School (CVS), a science museum 
school in Lisbon. Each class stays in CVS for a week to 
develop a technology enhanced experiential science learning 
program. This program is mediated by the CVS 
teachers/researchers, whereas the school teachers of the 
classes follow all the process.  CVS was the context chosen 
by the Eco-Sensors4Health project to develop empirical 
testing, since it made it possible to develop teaching 
interventions with two visiting classes in each week (60 
classes each year). 
Two research questions were formulated: i) Do children 
perform epistemic practices in a scientific inquiry that makes 
use of the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit? ii) Can the Eco-
Sensors4Health toolkit be used in a scientific inquiry to 
support children in identifying school’s environmental health 
problems and suggest solutions? 
Using the toolkit, two different teaching and learning 
interventions were successfully implemented during the 
school year of 2017-2018: the “Sound Pollution”, and the 
“Air Pollution” interventions. The implementation of the 
“Sound Pollution” intervention in two classes was observed 
and audio-recorded, while the “Air Pollution” intervention 
was observed and audio-recorded with another class. 
Epistemic practices (EP) are practices that “construct 
scientific knowledge, having as reference the scientific 
practices in the context of scientific production” [23]. The 
audio-recordings allowed the identification of diverse types 
of EP, by project researchers with experience in such 
identification. Some examples of the EP, performed by 
children during the measurement and interpretation tasks, are 
presented in Table I. These EP were facilitated by teacher 
mediation (performed by teachers/researchers) [23], and 
guided by research questions, such as: “How does carbon 
dioxide concentration change when we change our location 
in the school environment?”, “How does carbon dioxide 
concentration change when we open the door/window of the 
classroom?”, “How does sound level change when we 
change classroom activities?”, or “How does sound level 
change when we change our location in the school 
environment?”  Likewise, it was possible to identify these 
same types of EP during the sensory exploration of sound 
and air tasks, which were also guided by teacher mediation, 
and research questions (e.g., “Can we observe the sound 
waves?” or “Can we catch the air?”). 
TABLE I.  
EXAMPLES OF EPISTEMIC PRACTICES 
Epistemic 
practices 
Examples 
Describe 
After opening the door of the classroom, children read 
the values of carbon dioxide concentrations displayed by 
the sensor and reported the decreasing in time (1650 
ppm, 1480 ppm, 1223 ppm, 913 ppm, 580 ppm…) 
Forecast 
When asked if the values that the sound sensor will 
register will be higher while singing the Happy Birthday 
or while clapping, children gave different answers, 
justifying their estimations. 
Use sensors 
Children used the carbon dioxide sensor near the road, 
and measured at first a concentration of 450 ppm, and 
afterwards a concentration of 5000 ppm, after a car 
passed by. 
Interpret 
In the sequence of the carbon dioxide data acquisition 
near the road, a child verbalized that when a car passes 
by, the values increase. 
Organize 
information 
Children registered the data acquired with the sensor in 
the registration form. 
Relate 
When asked why were the measured values of carbon 
dioxide concentrations lower in the garden, a child 
answered that it was because there are more plants in the 
garden. 
 
In both “Sound Pollution” and “Air Pollution” 
interventions, all children were able to fill the registration 
forms with the data acquired with sensors. Figure 1 shows 
the “Air Pollution” registration form, filled by a child. It is 
possible to observe the carbon dioxide concentrations in two 
days (columns), in the empty classroom, during the class, 
after opening the classroom door, and in the exhaled air 
(lines). It is also possible to observe the concentrations 
outdoors, at the Pavilion door, in the garden and near the 
road. In this context, after gathering the sensors’ data in 
different conditions, the great majority of children were able 
to make sense of the data, suggesting ways of renewing the 
air in the classroom: opening the door or the window (last 
sentence completed on the form). In what concerns “Sound 
Pollution” intervention, children were also able to gather and 
register sensors’ data in different conditions, during different 
activities. In one class of the “Sound Pollution” intervention, 
children suggested ways to improve hearing protection, but 
in the other class, children only repeated the sentence 
suggested by the teacher/researcher. This result will inform 
teachers/researchers to avoid this kind of influence. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 1.  Close view of an “Air Pollution” registration form filled out by a child (on the left, the original filled registration form; on the right, the 
translation into English) 
In spite of the efforts of the teachers/researchers to avoid 
the influence of the school teachers of the classes in 
children’s answers, these classes’ teachers helped some of 
the children in answering some of the questions, especially in 
the pretest. This influence was noticed but could not be 
quantified. 
It is noteworthy that in both interventions, and in both pre 
and posttests, children’s answers to ‘Environmental and 
Health Awareness’ questions were very positive. Children’s 
answers to ‘Knowledge’ questions related to the topic of 
each intervention improved after the respective intervention 
(see Table II). For instance, in the “Sound pollution” 
intervention, children’s answers to the question “A strong 
sound level is harmful to health?” had a significant 
difference (improvement) between the pre and posttest 
(Wilcoxon= - 2.639, p<.05). However, in the “Air pollution” 
intervention, children’s answers to the same question did not 
have a significant difference (Wilcoxon= -0.312, p>.05). 
Furthermore, in the “Air pollution” intervention, children’s 
answers to the question “To ventilate the classroom is 
important for health?” had a significant difference 
(improvement) between the pre and posttest (Wilcoxon= -
2.627, p<.05).  However, in the “Sound pollution” 
intervention, children’s answers to the same question did not 
have a significant difference (Wilcoxon= -0.550, p>. 05).  
TABLE II.  
STATISTIC DATA OF ‘KNOWLEDGE’ QUESTIONS RELATED 
TO THE TOPIC OF EACH INTERVENTION 
“Sound pollution” intervention 
Question 
Average 
Wilcoxon 
Pre 
Post 
“A strong sound level is harmful to 
health?” 
3.34 
4.29 
-2.639 
p<.05 
“Air pollution” intervention 
Question 
Average 
Wilcoxon 
Pre 
Post 
“To ventilate the classroom is 
important for health?” 
4.15 
4.67 
-2.627 
p<.05 
Unexpectedly, the children of the classes that participated 
in the “Sound Pollution” intervention did not improve the 
answers to the question “When we are silent, we do not hear 
sounds in the classroom?”, from pre to posttests. It will be 
relevant to verify if those results are due to the negative 
formulation of the sentence, since children answered 
correctly to equivalent questions in debates during the 
intervention. 
Several teachers of the participating classes continued to 
support children in monitoring and solving noise problems in 
their own school. Some teachers asked for support in 
implementing that intervention to the whole school. 
C. Teaching and learning interventions with students of a 
teacher education graduation 
To assess the perceived utility of sensors to study 
schools’ environmental health problems, teaching and 
learning interventions were performed in a Statistics course 
and in a Biology course of a teacher education graduation 
school. The selection of these courses was based on two 
criteria: i) adequate course syllabus; ii) large number of 
participating students. 
The intervention in the Statistics course aimed at 
understanding the perceived pertinence of the use of the 
sensors of mobile phones to acquire sound level data in 
diverse locations of the school, and of the use of Excel to 
organize and process the data. The 92 (100%) participants 
showed no technical difficulties in using the app of the 
mobile phones to acquire sound level data, nor in making 
sense of the acquired data. 82% of the participants found the 
activity pertinent, mainly (36%) because of the topic (sound), 
and also because of the opportunity to consolidate statistics 
knowledge (20%). 
The intervention in the Biology course was developed 
with the same participants working in groups and aimed at 
understanding the perceived pertinence of the use of the 
carbon dioxide sensor to study the exchanges of that gas 
between the atmosphere and living beings. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The content analysis of the groups’ reports allowed the 
formative assessment of the perceived pertinence of the 
intervention. 84% of the groups reported that the intervention 
contributed to their knowledge of scientific concepts and 
phenomena, while 34% mentioned that the intervention was 
pertinent because it contributed to the development of 
didactic competences (use of the sensors with their future 
students). 84% of the groups wrote about the pertinence of 
the use of sensors with children, emphasizing the 
enhancement of the learning process, namely in what 
concerns knowledge acquisition (69%), and the increase of 
motivation (28%). Nonetheless, the analysis of the reports 
showed 
students’ 
difficulties 
in 
learning 
complex 
phenomena, such as carbon dioxide exchanges, respiration 
and photosynthesis. 
D. Teaching and learning interventions with in-service 
teachers 
A b-learning workshop with in-service teachers was 
developed by the research team to assess the utility and 
practicality of the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit. The following 
research questions were formulated: Can teachers use the 
Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit to develop teaching and learning 
interventions, in which children: i) identify school’s 
environmental health problems? ii) Suggest solutions to the 
identified problems? 
Nine teachers participated in the workshop. Five teachers 
implemented the interventions individually and four worked 
in two groups. However, only six interventions were 
presented by eight teachers: four interventions were centered 
on temperature, while two were centered on noise. 
Teachers showed evidences that in all the implemented 
interventions, children (from 2nd to 5th grade): i) started by 
the sensory exploration of temperature/sound; ii) used 
sensors to measure temperature/sound in the schools’ 
environment; iii) identified noise and thermal discomfort 
problems in specific locations and activities; iv) suggest 
solutions to the identified problems. 
Using the sensors and temperature/sound scales provided 
in the toolkit, the children recognized harmful sound levels 
(e.g., 83 dB in the canteen at lunch time) and non-comfort 
temperatures (e.g., 26.4ºC in the classroom). They were able 
to suggest solutions, such as “keep the classroom open and 
ventilated”, “use light shutters”, “use the sound sensor to be 
aware of the sound level”, and “play ‘silence games’ in the 
canteen”. 
All the teachers expressed the will to continue the 
interventions in their classes. 
IV. 
LESSONS LEARNED AND CONCLUSIONS 
The Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit aims at supporting 
teachers 
in 
scaffolding 
elementary 
school 
children 
participation in schools’ environmental health. It was 
developed using a research based design approach and, 
specifically, a development study [6]. The first version of the 
toolkit was based on the review of the literature, and 
included: tablets, sensors, guidelines for environmental 
health scientific inquiry activities, registration forms and 
experiment plans, pre and posttests. The empirical testing [6] 
was carried out in three case studies that were focused on the 
formative assessment of teaching and learning interventions, 
guided by the toolkit first version.  
Both children and teacher participants of all the three 
cases showed no technical difficulties in using the sensors 
and tablets to perform the toolkit activities, making sense of 
the acquired data, while performing the tasks. In all the three 
cases, all the participants implemented the toolkit activities 
in an engaged way, and showed motivation to future similar 
activities, namely in what concerns monitoring and solving 
environmental problems in their schools.  
In the case study developed with primary school children, 
the practicality and effectiveness of the toolkit were 
illustrated by children’s epistemic practices, by suggestions 
to solve the identified problems, and by the answers to the 
tests. Some results were highlighted, in line with previous 
research: i) the importance of the research questions included 
in the toolkit guidelines in eliciting epistemic practices [13]; 
ii) the effectiveness of the registration forms in scaffolding 
the sense making in the use of sensors [15]; iii) the role of 
the reflection questions of the toolkit guidelines in 
scaffolding children’s solutions to the identified problems; 
iv) the need to improve some questions of the pre and 
posttests, and to prevent the influence of classes’ teachers in 
children’s answers to such tests. 
In the second case study, the students of the teacher 
education school acknowledged the pertinence of the 
activities (suggested in the toolkit), not only to their own 
content learning, but also as strategies to use with their future 
students. 
In the third case study, the in-service teachers used the 
guidelines and tools of the toolkit to successfully scaffold 
primary school children in identifying, exploring, and 
suggesting solutions to some schools’ environmental health 
problems. 
Following the validation of the guidelines and tools of 
the toolkit first version, future work will include a refinement 
of the Eco-Sensors4Health toolkit, based on the lessons 
learned in the empirical testing, and its use, together with the 
collaborative platform, to improve health education in 
diverse elementary schools. The final version of the Eco-
Sensors4Health toolkit will be made available on the 
project’s website and will be used to support teacher 
mediation in environmental health scientific inquiry 
processes, which will allow children to identify, explore and 
solve problems in their schools. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The present paper is part of the Eco-Sensors4Health 
project 
(LISBOA-01-0145-FEDER-023235) 
that 
is 
supported by FEDER (PORTUGAL2020) and Portugal State 
Budget. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. von Amann (Coord.), School health program 2015. 
[Programa de saúde escolar 2015]. Lisboa: DGS, 2015. 
[2] L. D. Pereira, D. Raimondo, S. P. Corgnati, and M. Gameiro 
da Silva, “Assessment of indoor air quality and thermal 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

comfort in Portuguese secondary classrooms: methodology 
and results,” Building and Environment, pp. 69-80, 2014. 
[3] J. Madureira, et al.,  “Children’s health and indoor air quality 
in primary schools and homes in Portugal: Study design,” 
Journal of Toxicology and Environmental Health, Part A, vol. 
78, pp. 915–930, 2015. 
[4] B. J. Reiser, “Scaffolding complex learning: the mechanisms 
of structuring and problematizing student work,” Journal of 
the Learning Sciences, vol. 13, n. 3, pp. 273-304, 2004. 
[5] C. Quintana, et al., “A scaffolding design framework for 
software to support science inquiry,” The Journal of the 
Learning Sciences, vol. 13, n. 3, pp. 337-386, 2004. 
[6] T. Plomp, “Educational design research: an introduction,” in. 
Educational design research - part a: an introduction, Plomp, 
T. and Nieveen, N. , Eds. Enschede, the Netherlands: 
Netherlands Institute for Curriculum Development (SLO), pp. 
10 – 51, 2013. 
[7] J. Wargo, The physical school environment: an essential 
component 
of 
a 
health-promoting 
school, 
Geneva, 
Switzerland: World Health Organization,  pp. 1–51, 2004. 
[8] World Health Organization (WHO) Children's environmental 
health, 
2018. 
Available 
at 
http://www.who.int/ceh/en/ 
[retrieved July, 2018]. 
[9] P. Wargocki and N. A. Da Silva, “Use of visual CO2 
feedback as a retrofit solution for improving classroom air 
quality,” Indoor Air, vol. 25, n. 1, 105-14, 2015. 
[10] A. M. C. Ferreira, Schools’ indoor air quality and children's 
health. [Qualidade do ar interior em escolas e saúde das 
crianças]. PhD Dissertation. Coimbra: Universidade de 
Coimbra, 2014. 
[11] U. Griebler, D. Rojatz, V. Simovska, and R. Forster, “Effects 
of student participation in school health promotion: a 
systematic review,” Health Promotion International, vol. 32, 
pp.195–206, 2017. 
[12] B. R. Belland, C. M. Kim, and M. J. Hannafin, “A framework 
for designing scaffolds that improve motivation and 
cognition,” Educational Psychologist, vol. 48, n. 4, pp.243–
270, 2013. 
[13] J. Van de Pol, M. Volman, and J. Beishuizen, “Scaffolding in 
teacher–student 
interaction: 
a 
decade 
of 
research,” 
Educational Psychology Review, vol. 22, n. 3, pp. 271–296, 
2010. 
[14] R. Goldstone and J. Son, “The transfer of scientific principles 
using concrete and idealized simulations,” Journal of the 
Learning Sciences, vol. 14, n. 1, pp. 69-110, 2005. 
[15] M. J. Silva, J.B. Lopes, and A. A. Silva, “Using senses and 
sensors in the environment to develop abstract thinking – a 
theoretical and instrumental framework,” Problems of 
Education in the 21st century, vol. 53, pp. 99-119, 2013. 
[16] Y. Rogers, K. Connelly, W. Hazlewood, and L. Tedesco, 
“Enhancing learning: a study of how mobile devices can 
facilitate sense making,” Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 
vol. 14, n.2, pp.111-124, 2010. 
[17] M. J. Silva, et al., “Adding space and senses to mobile world 
exploration,” in Mobile Technology for Children, A. Druin 
(ed.), pp. 147-170. Boston: Morgan Kaufmann, 2009. 
[18] M. J. Silva, J. C. Lopes, P. M. Silva, and M. J. Marcelino, 
“Sensing the schoolyard: using senses and sensors to assess 
georeferenced 
environmental 
dimensions,” 
ACM 
1st 
International Conference and Exhibition on Computing for 
Geospatial Research & Application, ACM, 2010. 
[19] D. S. Fraser, et al.. “The SENSE project: a context-inclusive 
approach to studying environmental science within and across 
schools,” Proceeding of CSCL’05, edited by International 
Society of the Learning Sciences, pp.155–9. Taiwan: Taipei, 
2005. 
[20] A. Zucker, R. Tinker, C. Staudt, A. Mansfield and S. Metcalf, 
“Increasing science learning in grades 3-8 using computers 
and probes: findings from the TEEMSS II project,” 
Proceedings of the NARST 2007 Annual Meeting, 2007. 
[21] E. van den Berg, F. Schweickert, and R. van den Berg, 
“Science, 
sensors 
and 
graphs 
in 
primary 
schools”, 
Proceedings of the GIREP Conference 2010, pp. 1-9, 2010. 
[22] S. Ananthanarayan, K. Siek, and M. Eisenberg “A craft 
approach to health awareness in children,” Proceedings of the 
2016 ACM Conference on Designing Interactive Systems, pp. 
724-735, 2016. 
[23] J. B. Lopes, J. P. Cravino, M. Branco, E. Saraiva, and A. A. 
Silva, “Mediation of student learning: dimensions and 
evidences in science teaching,” PEC 2008—Problems of 
Education in the 21st Century, vol. 9, n. 9, pp.42–52, 2008. 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-682-8
GLOBAL HEALTH 2018 : The Seventh International Conference on Global Health Challenges

