Fundamental Study to New Evaluation Method Based
on Physical and Psychological Load in Care
Hiroaki Inoue
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
jgh12701@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Noboru Takahashi
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
srl@ed.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Takeshi Tsuruga
Hokkaido Institute of Technology
Sapporo-city, Japan
tsuruga@hit.ac.jp
Nobuhide Hirai
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
nobu@nobu.com
Eiju Watanabe
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
eiju-ind@umin.ac.jp
Shunji Shimizu
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa
Chino-city, Japan
shun@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp
Hiroyuki Nara
Hokkaido University
Sapporo-city, Japan
nara@ssc.ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
Fumikazu Miwakeichi
The Institute of Statical Mathematics
Tachikawa-city, Japan
miwake1@ism.ac.jp
Senichiro Kikuchi
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
skikuchi@jichi.ac.jp
Satoshi Kato
Jichi Medical University
Shimotsukeshi-city, Japan
psykato@jichi.ac.jp
Abstract—Recently, the aging population has increased in Japan
and world-wide countries. As a consequence, a wide variety of
welfare devices and systems have been developed. However, the
evaluation of welfare systems and devices is limited only to stability,
intensity and partial operability. The evaluation of usefulness is
insufficient. Therefore, we will attempt to establish a standard to
evaluate usefulness objectively and quantitatively on the basis of
including non-verbal cognition. In this paper, we measure the load
of
sitting
and
standing
movements
by
using
EMG
(Electoromyogram) and 3D Motion Capture and set a goal to
establish
an
objective
evaluation
method.
We
think
that
establishing an objective evaluation method is necessity to develop
useful welfare devices. We examine the possibility of assessing load
and fatigue from measuring brain activity by using NIRS (Near
Infra-Red
Spectroscopy).
The
idea
of
universal
design
is
widespread in welfare devices and systems. Measuring requires the
verification of all generations. However, our study measured
younger subjects as a first step because they had enough physical
function.
Considering
younger
subjects
as
a
benchmark
is
appropriate for creating an evaluation method.
Keywords- Evaluation; Movement; Exercise; 3D Motion Capture;
NIRS; EMG; Care; Welfare Technology; Usefulwelfare device
evaluation; Evaluation method.
I.
INTRODUCTION
As aging population is increasing in Japan and world-wide
countries, welfare systems and devices are rapidly developing,
and various devices are manufactured because of this increased
popularity. Also, the market of welfare devices and systems is
expanding. However, the evaluation method is limited to
stability, strength and a part of operability for individual systems
or devices. This means that an evaluation methodology for the
usefulness of these devices and systems was not established.
Therefore, we will attempt to establish a standard to evaluate
usefulness objectively and quantitatively on the basis of
cognition such as physical load, reduction of fatigue and postural
stability. In particular, in considering universality, it is necessary
to measure human movement in daily life. Movement was not
measured using a particular device, but by routinely-performed
movement in daily life.
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

We examined the possibility of evaluation by measuring
physical load due to activities of daily living using 3D Motion
Analysis System and EMG. Also, we looked into the possibility
of quantitative evaluation of tiredness and load on the basis of
brain activity using NIRS. We considered that physical and
psychological load are linked to cognition, including non-verbal
cognition. In this paper, the purpose of the experiments are to
evaluate motion focusing on sitting and standing movements,
which are usually done in our life, by using 3D Motion Analysis
System, EMG, NIRS. We consider that humans feel physical
and psychological load during life motion. We tried to measure
the physical load by using 3D Motion Analysis System, EMG.
Additionally, we tried to measure non-verbal cognition about
psychological load by using NIRS.
Subjects were healthy males in their twenties, because
elderly people with various types of disease are inept in
quantitative evaluation.
II.
EXPERIMENTAL METHODS
A.
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
We simultaneously measured the 3D position and muscle
potential of subjects during tasks by using 3D Motion Analysis
System
(nac
IMAGE
TECHNOLOGY
Inc.
products-
MAC3DSYSTEM [1]) and EMG (KISSEI COMTEC Inc.
products-MQ16 [2]).
Regarding measuring the 3D position, 8 Infrared cameras
were placed around each subject, and 27 makers of the body
surface were set on the basis of Helen-Hayes Hospital Marker set
(Figure 1). In measuring muscle potential, measurement regions
were tibialis anterior muscle, gastrocnemius muscle, quadriceps
femoris muscle, hamstring, flexor carpi ulnaris muscle, extensoe
carpiulnaris muscle, triceps branchii, latissimus dorsi muscle of
the right side of the body
because these muscle were deeply
associated with standing and sitting movement. Also, wireless
measurements were used so that the subject was constrained as
little as possible. As sampling frequency, 3D Motion Analysis
System was 100Hz, and EMG was 1kHz.
The subjects were three males in their twenties. They were
asked to read and sign an informed consent regarding the
experiment.
In this experiment, each subject repeated one series of
movements, which was to transfer from the chair to seat face of
the welfare device
(IDEA LIFE CARE Co. Ltd products-
NORISUKEsan [3]) and opposite one with alternating between
standing and sitting, five times per one measurement. Seating
face of welfare device, which was designed to assist transfer
movement, was manipulated by a simple method and appeared
on the top of chair.
Figure 1. Experimental View of 3D motion Analysis and EMG
Subjects heard a buzzer every second and kept a constant speed
of motion to satisfy certain measuring conditions. Also, they
transferred from seat face to chair or conversely every 8 seconds
with consideration for movement of elderly persons. The
operation of the welfare device was performed by an operator
other than the subject.
B.
Evaluation by using NIRS
We measured brain activity during motion with the purpose
of establishing an evaluation method based on generality (Figure
2).
The subjects were six males in their twenties. They were
asked to read and sign an informed consent regarding the
experiment.
The
measurement
apparatus
was
NIRS
(SHIMADZU
CO.
Ltd
products-FOIRE3000
[4]).
The
measurement region was at right and left prefrontal cortex.
1)
Measuring brain activity during transfer with standing
position (task1)
For this measurement, the subjects used a welfare device to
perform transferring to a standing position. For this measurement,
each subject sat on seating face of the welfare device appeared on
the top of chair after raising the hip until kneeling position. Also,
each subject performed the inverse motion of transferring from
seating face to the chair. The time design was rest (5 seconds),
task (10 seconds), and rest (5 seconds). This time design was
repeated 30 times. The rest time was used to stabilize the brain
activity.
2)
Measuring brain activity during transfer with half-
crouching position (task2)
For this measurement, the subjects used a welfare device to
perform
transferring
to
a
half-crouch
position.
For
this
measurement, the subjects sat on seating face of welfare device
appeared on the top of chair after raising hip until kneeling
position. Also, the subject performed inverse transfer from
seating face to chair.Time design was rest (5 seconds), task (10
seconds) and rest (5 seconds). This time design was repeated 30
times.
In the experiments of task1 and task2, the operation of the
welfare device was performed by an operator other than the
subject. Before these measurements, the subjects adjusted to
transferring using the welfare device.
3)
Measuring brain activity during keeping a half-crouch
position (task3).
The subjects performed two tasks in this measurement.
During task3-1, each subject sat on the seating face of the welfare
device with eyes open. During task3-2, they kept a half-crouch
position.
Figure 2. Experimental View of NIRS
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The subjects alternated task3-1 and task3-2. Also, the subjects
took resting time between the two types of motion with their eyes
closed. The time design was: rest (5 seconds), task3-1 (10
seconds), rest (5 seconds), task3-2 (10 seconds) and rest (5
seconds). This time design was repeated 15 times.
III.
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A.
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
Figure 3 shows the result of transferring which was measured
by 3D motion analysis and EMG. In Figure 3, the middle
trochanter is the height of the midpoint between right and left
trochanter from the floor. The trunk angle is the forward slope of
the trunk. Also, following terms are rectifying voltage wave for
each
eight
muscles,
which
are
Tibialis
anterior
muscle,
Astrocnemius muscle, Quadriceps femoris muscle, Hamstring,
Triceps brachii muscle, Etensor carpi ulnaris muscle, Flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle and Latissimus dorsi muscle.
Next, analysis was performed by extracting the muscle
potential during standing and sitting movements from the
measured result with reference to middle trochanter and trunk
angle and calculating the value of integral during movement.
Table 1 shows the ratio of the value integral with the welfare
device to the one without the device. Also, we compared the
moving distance of median point between using the welfare
device and not. Table 2 shows the comparison results in a manner
similar to Table 1.
B.
Evaluation by using NIRS
As a common result for all subjects, oxy-Hb tended to
increase during the task and to decrease in resting state.
Therefore, it was thought that a change of hemoglobin density
due to task was measured. Figure 6 shows the trend of the
channel in which a significant difference was shown. Analysis
was performed via one-sample t-test [5,6,7,8,9] by a method
similar to previous researches [5,6,7,8,9]. In this analysis, it was
necessary to remove other than change of blood flow due to
fatigue. So, our method was mainly focused on resting state to
compare with the 1st trial and other trials of brain activity. In
task1 1 and 2, each of sample data for analysis was 4 seconds
after the task (Figure 4). In task 3, the sample data was 4 seconds
during task (Figure 5).
Figure 3. Result of 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
Figure 4. T-test of sample data of task1 and 2
Figure 5. T-test of sample data of task3
TABLE I.
COMPARISON OF INTEGRAL EMG
muscle
region
Subject1
Subject2
Subject3
Standing
Tibialis anterior
muscle
0.37
0.49
0.64
Astrocnemius
muscle
0.83
0.78
0.97
Quadriceps
femoris muscle
0.66
0.36
0.81
Hamstring
1.90
0.50
1.07
Triceps brachii
muscle
1.07
3.34
1.01
Etensor carpi
ulnaris muscle
1.08
1.31
0.96
Flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle
1.07
0.89
0.85
Lattissimus
dorsi muscle
0.98
0.87
1.20
Sitting
Tibialis anterior
muscle
0.50
0.59
0.80
Astrocnemius
muscle
1.01
0.92
0.94
Quadriceps
femoris muscle
0.49
0.57
0.85
Hamstring
2.16
1.60
0.96
Triceps brachii
muscle
0.89
0.96
1.07
Etensor carpi
ulnaris muscle
0.79
0.89
0.86
Flexor carpi
ulnaris muscle
0.79
0.86
0.95
Lattissimus
dorsi muscle
1.16
1.18
0.93
TABLE II.
COMPARISON OF CHANGE IN MEDIAL POINT
Subject1
Subject2
Subject3
Sitting
0.89
1.03
0.90
Standing
1.00
0.84
1.08
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

In the t-test of the same task, we performed t-test with first
time trial and other trial which was from second times to thirty
times, and examined relationship of the number of trials and
significant differences.
In task 1, a significant difference could be found from the
about 10th trials. Figure 9 shows the region confirmed significant
difference. In task 2, significant difference could be found from
the about 10th trials too. Figure 10 shows the region confirmed
significant difference.
Next, we performed t-test with the case of standing position
(task 1) and half-crouch position (task 2). In this analysis, a
significant difference could be found at prefrontal area (14ch,
17ch, 28ch and 32ch). Figure 11 shows a region confirmed
significantly different.
Also, two types of motions which were sitting and keeping a
half-crouching position were repeated alternatively in task 3. At
first, we performed t-test using 4 seconds during the first trial and
4 seconds during other trials, which were from second to fifteenth
in same position. Regarding the result analysis using sample data
during sitting position and half-crouching position, there were
significant differences at prefrontal area. Figure 12 confirms the
significant difference.
Figure 6. Measuring Result of Task1
Figure 7. Measuring Result of Task2
Figure 8. Measuring Result of Task3
Figure 9. Significant Difference of task1
Figure 10. Significant difference of task2
Figure 11. Significant Difference of task 1 and 2
Figure 12. Significant Difference in sitting position
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

IV.
DISCUSSION
1)
Evaluation by using 3D Motion Analysis and EMG
From the analysis of the result, it was shown that the value of
the integral decreased by using assistive apparatus for transfer.
Especially, there was a remarkable decrease in the value of the
integral at tibialis anterior muscle, quadriceps femoris muscle. On
the other hand, we have shown a minor decrease in one at upper
limb and muscles of the back. Also, the moving distance of
barycentric position was decreased by the use of the welfare
device.
This result was thought to be due to the difference in height
between chair and seating face of welfare device. Therefore, it
was thought that the use of assistive apparatus is useful to lighten
the burden on lower limbs. Thus, it's contemplated that muscle
load during standing and sitting movements was decreased and
reduced centroid fluctuation to lower the possibility of turnover.
Even if the subjects performed daily movements of standing
and sitting with the use of the assistive equipment, we have
shown that the integral of muscle potential and distance of
centroid change was decreased. Therefore, we proved that there
is the possibility of evaluation of daily performance except for
movement with the welfare device.
2)
Evaluation by using NIRS
In this experiment, we tried to measure quantitatively the
physical and psychological strain on the basis of brain activity.
Also, we think that brain activity discloses human cognitive
including non-verbal. As a result, it was shown that there were
differences in brain activity due to the number of trials and
postural. At this time, analysis was performed via one-sample t-
test using sample of brain activity in resting state, during task, or
after task. Hence, the analysis method was to remove disturbance
such as body motion and angular variation of neck to the best
extent possible although there was the possibility to measure skin
blood flow. Therefore, the strain due to tasks was quantitatively
measured by recognizing the significant differences.
Also, in previous research, a decrease in the brain activity
was reported around #10, 11 [10], as the result of measuring
brain activity during Advanced Trial Making Test using PET [11].
Therefore, this result came out in support of previous research.
Of course, it is necessary to increasethe number of subjects at
the present stage. In addition, there are problems associated with
the experiment, the number of subjects, the method and the
measured region. However, in terms of being recognized
significant differences at brain activity due to movement, it was
thought to show useful result in evaluating quantitatively daily
movements.
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this experiment, our purpose was to quantitatively evaluate
the physical load with focus on standing and sitting movements
which are part of usual daily movements, using 3D motion
analysis system and EMG.
As the result, it was shown that the integral of lower-limb
muscle, such as tibialis anterior muscle and gastrocremius
muscle, significantly decreased with the use of the welfare
device.
Also, it was reported that there is a positive correlation
between anteversion angle of body trunk and movement duration
in previous research [12]. But, our experiment method was to
estimate the possibility of falling in rising from a sitting position
by calculating moving distance of median point. It was confirmed
that the possibility of falling was decreased by using the device.
Next, we tried to measure physical and psychological load
quantitatively on the basis of brain activity. There were
significant differences due to the number of trials, holding
position. In this experiment, the analysis method was to remove
disturbance such as body motion and angular variation of neck to
the extent possible by using the measurement result in resting
state as sample. This has been useful in evaluating quantitatively
the load due to movement task by being recognized difference in
brain activity caused by number of trials, substance of task and
holding position.
The main purpose in this study was to evaluate physical load
and fatigue quantitatively. We tried to evaluate the change of
muscle load due to the difference of motion by simultaneously
measuring
with
3D
motion
analysis
System
and
EMG
quantitatively.
However, the evaluation of psychological load was necessary,
too. In terms of using the welfare device, prolonged use must be
taken into account. In this case, it is important to consider not
only physical load but also psychological load due to prolonged
use from the standpoint of developing the welfare device and
keeping up surviving bodily function.
Also, in previous research, separation between physical and
psychological loads has been performed. But, our view is that
there is a correlation between physical and psychological loads.
For this reason, we tried to measure psychological load including
physical one based on brain activity to quantitatively evaluate
both loads.
For the future, our aim is to establish a method of discussing
the usefulness of welfare devices by evaluating the load involved
in other daily movements with increasing number of subjects.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported as follows.There dimensional
motion analysis and commodious room were provided by nac
Image Techonogy Inc. EMG and analysis software were
provided from KISSEI COMTEC. NIRS was provided by
SHIMADZU COPPORATION. Developing welfare device was
provided by IDEA SYSTEM CO., LTD. We are deeply grateful
to them.
This study contributes to become the basis for one of theme
of s-innovation program in Japan Science and Technology
Agency which was named “Development Fatigue-reduction
Technology for Social Contribution of Aged
Person and
Establishment System for Evaluation.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y. Shinoda, “Considertion of feature extraction based on center of
gravity for Nihon Buyo dancer using motion capture system,”
SICE Annual Confference 2011, Tokyo Japan, pp. 1874-1878.
[2]
Y. Yamaguchi, A. Ishikawa, and Y.Ito, “Development of Biosignal
Integration Analysis System for Human Brain Function and
Behavior,” Organization for Human Brain Mapping 2012, China.
[3]
H.Inoue, S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H.Nara, and T. Tsuruga
“Fundamental Study for Evaluation of the Effect due to Exercise
Load” , Assistive Technology, Bio Medical Engineering and Life
Support 2011, Japan.
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

[4]
E. Watanabe, Y. Yamashita, Y. Ito, and H. Koizumi, ”Non-
invasive functional mapping with multi-channel near infra-red
spectroscopic topography in humans,” Heurosci Lett 1996, Feb 16,
205(1), 41-4.
[5]
N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N.
Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Fundamental Study
for a New Assistive System during Car Driving,” Proc. of
International Conferrence on Robotics and Biomimetics, DVD-
ROM, 2010, Tenjin, China.
[6]
N. Takahashi, S. Shimizu, Y. Hirata, H. Nara, H. Inoue, N. Hirai, S.
Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Basic study of Analysis of
Human
Brain
Activities
during
Car
Driving,”
the
14th
International Conferrence on Human-Computer Interaction, 2011,
USA.
[7]
S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, H. Inoue, and Y. Hirata,
“Fundamental Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the
Spatial Cognitive Task,” the 2011 Internatinal Conference on
Brain Informatics-BI 2011, China.
[8]
S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Nara, H. Inoue, and Y. Hirata,
“Basic Study for Human Brain Activity Based on the Spatial
Cognitive Task,” The Third International Conference on Advanced
Cognitive Techonologies and Applications, 2011, Italy.
[9]
S. Shimizu, N. Takahashi, H. Inoue, H. Nara, F. Miwakeichi, N.
Hirai, S. Kikuchi, E. Watanabe, and S. Kato, “Basic Study for a
New Assitive System Based on Brain Activity associated with
Spatial Perception Task during Car driving,” Proc. International
Conferrence on Robotics and Biomimetics, 2011, Thailand.
[10] Y. Watanabe,“Molecular/neural mechanisms of fatigue, and the
way to overcome fatigue,” Folia Pharmacological Japonica, vol.
129, pp. 94-98, 2007.
[11] H. Kuratsune, K. Yamaguti, G. Lindh, B. Evengard, G. Hagberg,
K.Matsumura, M. Iwase, H. Onoe, M. Takahashi, T. Machii,
Y.Kanakura, T. Kitani, B. Langstrom, and Y. Watanage,“Brain
Regions Involved in Fatigue Sensation: Reduced Acetylcarnitine
Uptake in to the Brain,” Neuroimage, vol. 17, pp. 1256-1265,
November 2001.
[12] K. Maruta,“The influence of Seat Angle on Forward Trunk
Inclination During Sit-to-Stand,” Jounal of Japanese Physical
Therapy Association, vol. 31, No.1, pp. 21-28, 2004.
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

