Advancing Healthcare Tourism in Malaysia through
the Implementation of the Flagship Medical
Tourism Hospital Programme
Farizal Jaafar∗, Lily Jasmin Abd Halim †, Ch’ng Zi Man †, Devaraj Subramaniam ‡, and Marale Atechian §
∗Acting Chief Executive Officer, Malaysia Healthcare Travel Council, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Email: farizal.j@mhtc.org.my
†Corporate Strategy, Malaysia Healthcare Travel Council, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Email: lily.jasmin@mhtc.org.my; chng.zm@mhtc.org.my
‡APAC Consulting Team, IQVIA Solutions Malaysia, Malaysia
Email: devaraj.subramaniam@iqvia.com
§Principal Consultant, Joint Commission International, Riyadh, Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
Email: MAtechian@jcrinc.com
Abstract—Access to quality healthcare and advanced treat-
ments has led to a growing demand for medical tourism. In
2019, an estimated 15 to 20 million individuals globally travelled
abroad for medical purposes and the growth of this market
is expected to double in the coming years. Patients are drawn
to seeking healthcare and medical treatment abroad, primarily
due to several factors, including the potential for cost savings,
shorter waiting times for treatments, and a wider range of
quality healthcare options. Recognising this trend, numerous
countries are intensifying their efforts to develop and promote
their respective medical tourism industries, with the goal of be-
coming the preferred destination for patients seeking treatments
abroad. Notably, in certain countries, government agencies are
spearheading initiatives to accelerate industry growth, which
holds significant potential to contribute to the countries’ economic
development. Asia emerges as the principal beneficiary of the
industry, garnering substantial demand from both domestic and
international patients. In Malaysia, the Malaysia Healthcare
Travel Council and the Ministry of Health Malaysia have devel-
oped the 5-year Malaysia Healthcare Travel Industry Blueprint
with the aim to provide “the best healthcare travel experience”.
As part of the strategic initiatives outlined in the blueprint, a
first-of-its-kind Flagship Medical Tourism Hospital Programme
was designed as an effort to reinforce Malaysia’s position as
a leader in the medical tourism market, improve healthcare
quality, and contribute to economic growth. This paper aims to
discuss the Flagship Medical Tourism Hospital Programme and
the assessment methodology employed for Malaysian hospitals
participating in this programme. Additionally, strategies for
capacity building and revenue growth within the programme,
and benefits towards the nation and beyond are reviewed. The
programme’s success in developing flagship medical tourism
hospitals within Malaysia positions it as an exemplary model
for other nations seeking to establish their own thriving medical
tourism industry.
Index Terms—medical tourism; medical travel; healthcare
destination; Malaysia healthcare.
I. INTRODUCTION
The search for quality healthcare has propelled individuals
to travel across international borders for medical treatment,
also known as medical tourism. Driven by the needs of an
increasingly elderly population for medical procedures with
high quality service and challenges such as high treatment
costs and long waiting times, the tourism and medical sectors
of many countries have developed strategies to seize oppor-
tunities within this market [8]. In 2019, it was estimated that
approximately 15 to 20 million individuals globally travelled
abroad for medical purposes, contributing to a total market
size of around US$ 33 billion [7]. The growth of this market
is expected to double in the coming years, driven by the in-
creasing demand from patients. While the market experienced
a 10% annual growth rate from 2013 to 2018, it is projected
to accelerate to approximately 20% annually from 2021 to
2027 [1]. The global medical tourism market stands poised
to present remarkable opportunities for both the healthcare
industry and nations at large, thereby holding the potential
to revolutionise the way healthcare services are delivered and
positively impact economic growth on a global scale.
Asia emerges as the principal beneficiary of the flourishing
medical tourism industry, garnering substantial demand from
both domestic and international patients. By 2025, the Asia-
Pacific (APAC) region is forecasted to become the largest
medical tourism market globally, accounting for approximately
34% of the global medical tourism revenue [2], with the pri-
mary customer groups originating from Asia Pacific (APAC),
Europe, and the Middle East [1]. The region’s favourable at-
tributes, including advanced healthcare infrastructure, cutting-
edge medical technologies, and a convergence of skilled
healthcare professionals, position it as a highly sought-after
destination for medical tourism. This trend not only signifies
Asia’s ascendancy in the global healthcare landscape but
also highlights its pivotal role in driving economic growth
and development through the influx of medical tourists from
around the world.
In Malaysia, the government plays a significant role in
growing the medical tourism market. The Malaysia Healthcare
Travel Council (MHTC) [3], an agency established under the
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

purview of the Ministry of Health Malaysia [6], tasked to
facilitate, and promote the healthcare travel industry, under the
“Malaysia Healthcare” brand. In November 2021, MHTC [3]
launched the Malaysia Healthcare Travel Industry Blueprint
2021 to 2025, officiated by the Minister of Health Malaysia
[3], [4], [6]. The blueprint aims to enhance the healthcare
travel ecosystem, strengthen the Malaysia Healthcare brand,
and expand Malaysia’s healthcare offerings to more targeted
markets [4]. The aspiration is to provide the “Best Malaysia
Healthcare Travel Experience by 2025” to healthcare travellers
and achieve revised industry revenue of MYR 2.4 billion (US$
513.4 million) from medical bills and spillover effect of more
than MYR 9.6 billion (US$ 2 billion) to other industries
(including ancillaries and tourism spending) by 2025 [1],
[4]. Aligning to the Industry Blueprint, ’Malaysia Healthcare’
remains committed in strengthening Malaysia’s position as the
leading global healthcare destination with synergistic public-
private partnership, from government stakeholders to private
industry players [4].
As an integral part of the five-year Malaysia Healthcare
Travel Industry Blueprint, the FMTH Programme plays an
instrumental role in transforming the healthcare travel ecosys-
tem. With the debut of the FMTH Programme in the country,
MHTC [3] aims to reinforce Malaysia’s position as a safe
and trusted destination for high-quality healthcare services
and seamless end-to-end patient experience [4]. Malaysia’s
healthcare travel industry is unique in a sense that all private
healthcare providers are stringently monitored by the Ministry
of Health. The FMTH Programme will serve as the future
torchbearer for Malaysia Healthcare, not only locally but
also internationally, significantly contributing to the country’s
export service, with expectations for Malaysian healthcare
to be significantly on par or above renowned international
hospitals, namely in Thailand, Singapore, Korea, Taiwan, and
more. This paper aims to introduce the FMTH Programme,
discuss the assessment methodology employed for Malaysian
private hospitals participating in this programme, strategies for
capacity building and revenue growth within the programme,
and benefits towards the nation and beyond that would advance
Malaysia’s position within the global medical tourism market.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section
2 discusses the mechanisms of the FMTH Programme,
its assessment methodology, the key enablers for capacity
building and revenue growth, as well as the broader impact on
Malaysia’s healthcare travel industry and the nation. Section
3 concludes the paper and lists future work directions.
II. DISCUSSION
A. Flagship Medical Tourism Hospital Programme Mecha-
nism
The FMTH Programme acts as a catalyst to drive and
elevate Malaysia’s private healthcare services, in order to
accelerate the medical tourism growth [4]. MHTC [3] aims
to identify flagship medical tourism hospitals in the country
and accelerate their capability building and revenue growth
[4]. The goal of the programme is to establish and garner
international recognition for the Flagship Medical Tourism
Hospitals [4]. The national programme spans across five years,
from 2021 to 2025, to achieve key targets of direct healthcare
investment and increase healthcare travellers’ revenue, which
directly drives a four-fold multiplier effect to ancillaries and
the tourism industry [9].
The FMTH Programme involves the invitation of 22 leading
private hospitals from Klang Valley, Malacca, Penang, and
Johor Bahru, which are part of MHTC’s Elite Members, for
participation [4]. The Members who agreed to participate are
required to go through stringent assessments before identifying
the four FMTH finalists in 2022. The assessments undertook
data-driven methodology covering 51 metrics across the three
key programme pillars of Medical Excellence, Service Excel-
lence, and International Branding (see Figure 1). As a result,
four hospitals were selected as FMTH finalists, namely Institut
Jantung Negara or National Heart Institute in Kuala Lumpur,
Island Hospital in Penang, Mahkota Medical Centre in Melaka,
and Subang Jaya Medical Centre in Selangor [4].
The FMTH finalists are then required to undergo the three-
year Acceleration phase for capability building and revenue
growth acceleration from 2023 to 2025 [4]. The implementa-
tion focus during the Acceleration phase includes programme
management, training and development by the industry ex-
perts, activation of programme enablers and global brand
profiling of the programme and Flagship finalists [4]. The
growth and development of the Flagship finalists will be con-
tinuously assessed against the international best practices and
benchmarks based on the three strategic programme pillars.
The four Flagship finalists will be required to undergo a final
round of assessment and selection in the third quarter of 2025
[4]. The Flagship hospital(s) will be eventually identified in
the fourth quarter of 2025 [4]. The highest recognition of the
Flagship hospital(s) will then be announced by the Honourable
Prime Minister of Malaysia in 2025 [4].
B. Assessment Methodology
The
overall
assessment
and
selection
of
the
FMTH
Programme is carried out by an independent and specialised
Programme
Management
Advisor
(IQVIA
Solutions
Malaysia)
and
Programme
Assessment
Advisor
(Joint
Commission International (JCI)) [4]. The assessments are
conducted based on data submission and rigorous onsite
assessments (including leadership interviews, patient journey
interviews, facility and environment of care visits, healthcare
travellers’ interviews and validation of data and documents),
focusing on the three strategic pillars – Medical Excellence,
Service Excellence and International Branding.
1) Medical Excellence: The overall selection process for
the pillar of medical excellence involved a comprehensive
review of specific parameters to ensure the highest standards of
patient safety and quality of care. These included patient safety
requirements such as clinical documentation adequacy, falls
for outpatient care, medication error rate, return visits to the
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Fig. 1. Strategic pillars of the FMTH Programme.
emergency room, postponement of surgeries, unplanned return
to the operating room, cardiopulmonary arrests outside critical
care, healthcare-acquired infection rate, unplanned transfers
to acute care for one-day surgeries, procedural sedation rate,
complications in invasive procedures and 30-day postoperative
mortality rate [4].
In addition, the process considered the availability of in-
novative medical technologies, international lab accredita-
tion, centre of excellence international recognition, ongoing
staff performance evaluation, job-related training hours per
healthcare personnel and the percentage of medical staff who
graduated from top global programmes [4].
Thereafter,
an
onsite
assessment
of
the
hospital’s
performance was conducted, covering the following five
key dimensions [4]:
• Strategy and Culture of Safety is a key dimension
demonstrating the commitment and support of the
governing entity and the executive leadership to the
strategic initiatives of the organization. Within the
context of the FMTH, medical tourism is considered as
a strategic goal, and it should be part of the governing
entity priorities and a standing discussion item on the
meetings’ agenda. This dimension should also reflect the
amount of investment and resources allocated to medical
tourism.
In addition, medical travellers need to receive care with
the utmost safety. A culture of safety is key in providing
a high-quality care and to create an environment where
errors become learning points that drive improvement.
This culture aims towards high reliability and pursuit of
zero harm.
• Healthcare
traveller’s
medical
journey
follows
the experiences of medical travellers to evaluate the
hospital’s performance against international standards.
It is a key approach to sequentially follow the course
of
care,
treatment,
and
services
received
by
the
medical
travellers
from
preadmission
through
post
discharge and recovery. It evaluates the preadmission
screening, assessments, the course of care, treatment
and services provided to the medical travellers by
and within the hospital by reviewing the medical
travellers’ medical record, conducting various interviews
for medical travellers and the healthcare providers.
The journey assesses the interrelationships between
and among disciplines including the review of the
pre-admission education, instruction, and the follow-up
care post discharge, and addresses the communication
methods including language preference and cultural
considerations. Travellers’ privacy and confidentiality is
paramount and an expectation that the hospital should
guarantee within this journey.
• Environment of care and facility review is a key
dimension to ensure that the physical environment of
the hospital is safe, secure, and does not pose a physical
risk to patients, families, staff, and visitors. The hospital
should have measures implemented to limit access to
sensitive areas of the hospital.
Hospital fires remain one of the top hazards for any
healthcare organisation. Therefore, the expectation is
to ensure the implementation of a robust fire safety
programme including the early detection, containment
and suppression of fire, proper maintenance of fire
safety equipment and clear, unobstructed fire exits.
This dimension also focuses on the safe maintenance
and operation of the medical equipment and utilities.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

The organisation should have redundancies in place in
relation to the utility system to support essential services
and ensure it is operated effectively and efficiently to
meet the needs of the patient. The treatment preparation
areas are functionally separated and respect the industry
standards for safe medication preparation.
• Internationally
recognised
Centres
of
Excellence
(CoE) involves recognition of effective and high-quality
service and management tools using evidence-based,
sponsored clinical practice guidelines. This dimension
focuses on the commitment of the organisation to
excellence whereby the collaboration of programmes
throughout the organisation acts as a testimony towards
the centre of excellence, and contains the structure,
resources, and support it needs to be successful and to
provide the desired clinical outcome.
All
patients
with
the
same
medical
condition
or
disease receive the same high-quality care, treatment,
and services as reflected in the programme’s scope of
services and mission. Medical research and development,
including participation in clinical trials and scientific
publications, play an important role in advancing medical
knowledge and improving patients’ medical outcomes.
These series of initiatives in building the international
CoE strive to stay at the forefront of medical innovation
and contribute to the overall progress of healthcare at
the global level.
• Information
management
and
technology
in
healthcare can significantly improve patient safety
by automating and streamlining healthcare services for
the seamless transition of patient health information and
offering safety mechanisms that have the potential to
reduce the risk of error. For example, medication errors
can be greatly reduced through the implementation
of a computerised prescribing mechanism and the use
of barcodes for medication administration to ensure
adequate patient identification.
Integration of new technology with the existing systems
is
an
important
criterion
and
aids
the
hospital’s
assessment of opportunities for the optimisation of
existing processes, including those that could be enabled
by new technology. When mobile devices are used for
texting, emailing, or other communications of patient
data and information, the hospital should implement
processes to ensure quality of patient care and maintain
security and confidentiality of patient information. It
is an expectation that the hospital develops, maintains,
and tests any programmes to account for planned and
unplanned downtimes and to ensure adequate continuum
of care for medical travellers.
2) Service Excellence:
The hospital’s performance in
service excellence is measured based on five key dimensions
[4]:
• Patient centricity performance - Patient centricity is
the compass that guides hospitals towards personalised
care, empowering patients with dignity and involvement,
fostering trust, and ultimately improving health outcomes.
By placing patients at the heart of their services, hospitals
cultivate an environment of empathy, collaboration, and
quality, elevating the overall healthcare experience. This
dimension evaluates hospital’s initiatives to constantly
enhance
patient
satisfaction
and
retention.
Metrics
assessed
include
patient
satisfaction
score,
patient
retention rate, and patient complaints.
• Operational performance - Operational performance
is the backbone of hospital service, ensuring efficient
processes, timely care delivery, and optimal resource
management.
By
prioritising
operational
excellence,
hospitals
can
enhance
patient
safety,
streamline
workflows, and maximise their ability to meet the
ever-evolving healthcare needs of their communities.
The dimension covers process efficiency in various
departments in the hospitals including patient service
department, outpatient clinics, pharmacy department
and radiology department/ diagnostic clinic. Metrics
assessed include waiting time for phone/ email enquiries,
Specialist Outpatient Clinics (SOC) waiting time, and
diagnostic turn-around time.
• Innovation
and
technology
enablers - Innovation
and technology enablers are vital in hospital services,
revolutionising healthcare delivery, enhancing diagnostic
accuracy, and enabling remote care. By embracing
advancements, hospitals can improve efficiency, patient
outcomes, and access to care, paving the way for a
brighter and more interconnected future of healthcare.
This
dimension
evaluates
the
level
of
technology
adoption
in
enhancing
patient
satisfaction.
Metrics
assessed
include
process
automation/digitalisation,
accessibility of patient communication/request platform,
and internet connectivity.
• Service offering enablers - Service offering enablers
play a crucial role in hospital services by meeting
diverse patient needs. By continually evolving and
enhancing their service offerings, hospitals can provide
comprehensive, tailored care that addresses the unique
requirements of every individual, fostering improved
patient
satisfaction
and
outcomes.
The
dimension
covers the initiatives that hospitals have implemented
to further enhance patient journey in and outside of
hospitals. Metrics assessed include spectrum of language
interpretation, travel arrangements, and on-arrival service.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

• Infrastructure enablers - Infrastructure is the corner-
stone of effective hospital services, providing the physical
foundation for quality care. Robust infrastructure ensures
seamless operations and creates a conducive environ-
ment for healthcare professionals to deliver timely and
comprehensive treatments, ultimately enhancing patient
experiences. This dimension evaluates the quality of the
infrastructure as a place of living. Metrics assessed in-
clude facility hygiene, availability of international patient
centres, prayer rooms, quality of staff and facilities,
availability and variety of restaurants, and availability
of leisure facilities (e.g., convenience stores, recreational
spaces).
3) International Branding:
The hospital’s performance
in international branding is measured based on four key
dimensions [4]:
• Global presence/ branding performance - A global
presence in medical tourism allows hospitals to attract
patients
from
around
the
world.
By
establishing
themselves
as
trusted
destinations
for
international
healthcare,
these
hospitals
attract
affluent
patients
seeking
high-quality
medical
services
abroad.
This
dimension evaluates the hospital’s branding effort in
the target medical tourist countries. Metrics assessed
include international recognition and awards, number of
countries with brand presence, and the conversion rate
from international enquiries to facility visits.
• Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) and health
diplomacy performance - CSR and health diplomacy
initiatives are essential as they demonstrate commitment
to
ethical
practices,
community
engagement,
and
sustainable healthcare. By actively addressing social
and environmental concerns as well as engaging in
health diplomacy, these hospitals not only enhance their
reputation but also contribute positively to the local
communities they operate in. They promote inclusive
healthcare access, foster long-term partnerships, and
contribute to diplomatic efforts in addressing health
challenges at both the national and international levels.
The dimension covers the hospital’s investment in
building reputation through CSR and health diplomacy.
Metrics assessed include CSR initiative numbers, spend,
impact, geographical coverage of target countries, and
the effectiveness of health diplomacy activities.
• Marketing
&
promotion
enablers
-
Marketing
and promotion enablers help raise awareness, attract
international patients, and showcase the hospital’s unique
offerings. Effective marketing strategies and promotion
efforts position the hospital as a preferred destination
for medical tourism, increasing visibility, credibility,
and ultimately driving patient volume, revenue, and
sustainable
growth.
This
dimension
evaluates
the
effectiveness of the hospital’s overall medical tourism
marketing strategy. Metrics assessed include international
marketing budget, number of online and offline channels
utilised, and quality of marketing messaging among
others.
• Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and Environ-
mental Sustainable Governance (ESG) performance
- The incorporation of SDGs and ESG principles into
hospitals can have significant impacts in promoting
global sustainability, enhancing hospital’s brand repu-
tation, strengthening community engagement and con-
tributing to the long term wellbeing of patients, staff
as well as the environment. The evaluation dimensions
include the alignment of hospital’s strategies, policies,
and actions to both the SDGs and ESG goals as well as
the integration into hospital’s practices. Metrics assessed
include the effectiveness of implementation and impact
measurements.
C. Accelerating Capacity Building and Revenue Growth
Throughout the Acceleration phase from 2023 to 2025,
programme management plays a key role in strengthening and
elevating the bar of excellence in delivering exceptional end-
to-end services to patients of the finalists, further reinforcing
Malaysia’s position as a safe and trusted destination for health-
care. The components of programme management include
the charting and activation of the 2023 to 2025 Flagship
Acceleration Plan including Key Performance Index (KPI)
from each finalist as well as the programme mentoring and
monitoring by the appointed advisors [4].
Furthermore, the Acceleration phase will be guided by the
global industry experts via a series of training and develop-
ment programmes [4]. This includes the C-suites coaching
on healthcare innovation and transformation as well as the
customised training modules for the hospital personnel. This
initiative directly supports the achievement of KPI targets set
in the finalists’ Acceleration plan.
FMTH also plays a catalytic role in expediting international
recognition of the Flagship finalists. The active commitment
and participation of the finalists in delivering medical and
service excellence will eventually lead towards cultivating
international branding. Extensive initiatives on global brand
profiling for FMTH have commenced through evidence-based
capabilities and patient outreach, some of which have strong
presence within the government ministries [4].
In support of the finalists’ Acceleration plan, the finalists are
granted with several enablers, as listed below. The successful
activation of all the enablers is the result of the collaborative
effort from the various government ministries and agencies
[4].
• Investment Tax Allowance (ITA) - Hospital investment
is supported through the provision of additional ITA
on qualifying capital expenditure including healthcare
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

technology.
• Fast Track Facilitation - Finalists’ applications are
subject to expedited approvals to support development
milestones as per the acceleration journey, with a
designated committee that oversees the approval process
related to renewals, facility improvement, onboarding
niche specialists, among many others.
• Healthcare Technology Sandbox - Hospitals are granted
flexibility of testing concepts that support medical and
service excellence or improve patient experience in a
sandbox. The tested concepts may be related to use of
digital health & healthcare innovation.
• Programme mentors and advisors - Finalists gain
access to programme advisors and industry experts that
guide them on growth and development, programme
monitoring and mentoring, KPI tracking, and more.
• National endorsement and recognition - The four Flag-
ship finalists were announced by the Minister of Health,
Malaysia in March 2023. The Flagship Hospital(s) will
eventually be recognised and awarded by the Honourable
Prime Minister of Malaysia in 2025.
D. Advancing Healthcare Industry and the Nation
In addition to the participating hospitals, the FMTH Pro-
gramme brings long-term benefits to the development of
Malaysia’s healthcare industry and the nation. The national
programme provides the country’s hospitals and medical pro-
fessionals with global exposure and opportunities to establish
standing and reputation as the top global medical tourism des-
tination. The programme also enables the nation’s healthcare
industry to challenge the position of popular medical tourism
destinations (i.e., Thailand and Singapore) in the APAC region
and to future-proof Malaysia and the region.
The economic impact of the FMTH Programme is immense.
In terms of direct economic impact on the health tourism
industry, the programme is expected to contribute 30% - 35%
of the total healthcare traveller’s revenue of MYR 2.4 billion
(US$ 513.3 million) in 2025 [1]. This is almost double the
growth in comparison to the achievement in 2022 [1]. In terms
of indirect economic impact, approximately MYR 9.6 billion
(US$ 2 billion) in revenue from economic spill over (ancillary
and tourism spend) is forecasted in 2025, representing a
MYR 4.4 billion (US$ 941.2 million) increase from 2022
[1]. In addition, domestic and foreign direct investments to
boost medical tourism in Malaysia by 2025 are estimated
to be MYR 1.0 billion (US$ 213.9 million) and MYR 500-
700 million (US$ 106.9 - 149.7 million), respectively [5].
Hospital construction, operational expansion and healthcare
digitalisation also contribute to the creation of more jobs,
employment opportunities for locals, tax generation and fiscal
impacts.
III. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The FMTH Programme is an innovative and game-changing
initiative implemented by MHTC [3] to raise Malaysia’s
healthcare profile as home to globally recognised healthcare
icons. Through strategic public-private partnerships, strong
leadership culture and unwavering commitment, this ground-
breaking programme successfully elevates the finalists into
world-class healthcare facilities.
The programme impact extends beyond the individual fi-
nalists, stimulating various sectors of the economy and con-
tributing to overall industry development. By attracting health
tourists and their companions, Malaysia experiences increased
revenue in tourism, hospitality, transportation, ancillary ser-
vices and more within the healthcare travel ecosystem. This
eventually creates employment opportunities and fosters the
growth of local businesses, establishing a virtuous cycle of
economic prosperity.
In summary, the FMTH Programme is revolutionising the
Malaysia Healthcare landscape, showcasing Malaysia as a
world-renowned and credible global healthcare brand. The
programme’s success in developing flagship medical tourism
hospitals within the country positions it as an exemplary model
for other nations seeking to establish their own thriving medi-
cal tourism industry. The programme’s accomplishments serve
as a source of inspiration and guidance for these countries,
providing them with valuable insights and best practices to
emulate.
REFERENCES
[1] Malaysia Healthcare Travel Council Informatics, 2023. MHTC Healthcare
Travel Informatics Analysis.
[2] IQVIA Solutions Malaysia, 2023. IQVIA Market Prognosis and Propri-
etary Forecast.
[3] Malaysia
Healthcare
Travel
Council,
2023.
Malaysia
Healthcare
Travel Council. Malaysia Healthcare Travel Council (MHTC). URL
https://www.mhtc.org.my/discover-mhtc/ (accessed 9.11.23).
[4] Malaysia Healthcare Travel Council, 2021a. Malaysia Healthcare Travel
Industry Blueprint 2021-2025.
[5] Malaysia Healthcare Travel Council, 2021b. MHTC Flagship Programme
Development Feasibility Outcome.
[6] Ministry
of
Health
Malaysia,
2020.
Official
Por-
tal
of
Ministry
of
Health
Malaysia.
URL
https://www.moh.gov.my/index.php/pages/view/137?mid=14
(accessed
9.11.23).
[7] Z. H. Perry, L. Apel-Sarid, L. Salzer, A. Toker, Medical Tourism in a So-
cialized Health Care System—The Need for Strict Systemic Supervision.
RHS 4, 68, 2019, https://doi.org/10.22158/rhs.v4n2p68
[8] Polaris
Market
Research,
2020.
Medical
Tourism
Market
Size,
Share
-
Industry
Trends
Report
2020-2026.
Polaris.
URL
https://www.polarismarketresearch.com/index.php/industry-
analysis/medical-tourism-market (accessed 9.11.23).
[9] World Travel & Tourism Council, 2019. Travel & Tourism Economic Im-
pact 2019. World Travel & Tourism Council, London, United Kingdom.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-112-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2023 : The Twelfth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

