Introducing the Global Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA):                  
Training Health Advocates around the World to Champion the Needs of Health 
Care Consumers 
Gary L. Kreps 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
gkreps@gmu,.edu 
 
Paula Kim 
Center for Health and Risk Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
pkim12@gmu,.edu 
 
Lisa Sparks 
Health and Strategic Communication Program 
Chapman University 
Orange, CA, USA 
sparks@chapman.edu 
 
Linda Neuhauser 
Health Research for Action Center 
University of California, Berkeley 
Berkeley, CA, USA 
linden@berkeley.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
Carol G. Daugherty 
Department of Global and Community Health 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
cdaughe2@gmu.edu 
 
Mollie Rose Canzona 
Department of Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
mcanzona@gmu.edu 
 
Wonsun Kim 
Department of Communication 
George Mason University 
Fairfax, VA, USA 
wkim10@gmu.edu 
 
Jungmi Jun 
Department of Communication Studies 
University of Northern Iowa 
Cedar Falls, Iowa, USA 
jungmi.jun@uni.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Patient advocacy can make significant contributions 
to health research by ensuring that efforts are patient-focused 
and help promote cooperation between all relevant sectors of 
the health care community. Yet, the development of effective 
patient advocacy organizations demands strong leadership, 
establishment of active collaborations with key stakeholders, 
and careful management of fiscal and personnel resources to 
enhance health outcomes. This presentation describes the 
development and implementation of an innovative training 
academy 
to 
prepare 
cancer 
advocacy 
leaders, 
both 
domestically and internationally, by helping them carefully 
consider strategic health advocacy processes, roles, and 
responsibilities.  The Global Advocacy Leadership Academy 
(GALA) will provide participants with a comprehensive 
overview of the modern health care system, identifying critical 
constituents 
and 
stakeholders, 
and 
examining 
interrelationships between key individuals and organizations. 
Strategies 
for 
fostering 
meaningful 
communication, 
cooperation, and coordination between patient advocacy 
organizations and other stakeholders related to health, 
including consumers, other advocacy groups, clinicians, 
government officials, researchers, and private industry 
representatives, will also be explored. For example, patient 
advocacy organization leaders will learn about communication 
strategies for working effectively with researchers and 
clinicians to support prevention, detection, treatment, and 
survivorship efforts that will benefit patients. Patient advocacy 
organization leaders will also explore strategies for raising 
funds and increasing funding for health research. They will 
learn about clinical research, health regulatory systems, 
community organizing, as well as drug and technology 
development and approval processes from basic research to 
clinical practice. Exemplar models of successful patient 
advocacy organization leadership will be described and 
evaluated as GALA case studies that illustrate effective health 
advocacy. 
Keywords-patient advocacy organizations; leadership; media 
relations; corporate relatioms; health care systems; government 
agencies; 
stakeholders; 
personnel 
management; 
health 
promotion. 
 
I.     INTRODUCTION 
The Global Advocacy Leadership Academy (GALA) is a 
new public health educational initiative designed to facilitate 
needed training and support for leaders of health advocacy 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

organizations around the world.   Leadership of health 
advocacy organizations is a complex enterprise that demands 
a tremendous amount of specialized knowledge about the 
health care system and constituent groups, adaptability to 
evolving health care systems, and the ability to reach, 
influence, and collaborate with a wide range of individuals 
from different sectors of the health care system through 
strategic health communication.  The GALA program is 
introducing a unique international training and support 
model to prepare health advocacy leaders to meet the 
challenges of building and sustaining strong consumer 
advocacy organizations to champion the needs of patients 
and their caregivers within the modern health care system.   
 
Effective leadership of health advocacy organizations is a 
demanding and complicated enterprise.  While many 
aspiring advocacy organization leaders are passionate about 
helping to improve the modern health care system and to 
represent the needs of health care consumers, they may not 
be particularly well prepared to meet the demands of 
achieving these goals.  The development of the GALA 
program grew out of the work of its founders (Gary Kreps 
and Paula Kim) in advising new health advocacy leaders 
from around the globe to achieve their goals.  We recognized 
the many challenges that advocacy leaders face in 
influencing health research, health care practices, and health 
care policies and decided the best way to assist these leaders 
was to develop a formal system (GALA) for building 
advocacy organization leadership capacity.  Moreover, we 
realized that health advocacy organizations were situated 
within a global health care system, concerning many of the 
same health care problems that affect consumers around the 
world.  There was a tremendous need to link health advocacy 
organizations within a global advocacy network to promote 
international cooperation and collaboration for achieving 
shared goals of consumer empowerment and support within 
an interdependent, challenging, and evolving global health 
care system [1].  This paper outlines the goals and strategies 
of the GALA program for supporting the development of 
effective and influential health advocacy leaders and 
organizations. 
 
 
II.     MEETING HEALTH ADVOCACY CHALLENGES 
The GALA program is designed to help leaders 
understand the unique sociopolitical structure of the modern 
health care system, both on a broad societal level and also 
within the unique health issue communities that address the 
specific areas of direct interest to different health consumer 
groups (for example, communities interested in lung cancer, 
diabetes, Lupus, kidney transplantation, hemophilia, or other 
challenging health issues).  Strong and effective health 
advocacy organization leaders need to understand the lay of 
the land within the rapidly evolving health care system so 
they can help influence health care policies and practices to 
reflect the needs and goals of the health care consumers they 
represent.   
 
Health advocacy leaders also need to know which 
specific organizations and individuals exert influences in the 
delivery of care, development of health policies, conduct of 
health research, and translation of research into health 
practices within the health domains in which they want to 
support the needs of consumers.  Effective leaders must build 
collaborative 
relationships 
with 
key 
organizational 
representatives to exchange relevant information and 
cooperate on issues of importance to consumers.  There is a 
daunting amount of information to learn to prepare for 
effective advocacy group leadership and a vast number of 
relational connections to establish for new advocacy leaders.  
Often, new health advocacy leaders have serious information 
deficits and limited relational connections that limit their 
abilities to accomplish important consumer support goals. 
 
The GALA program is introducing new and relevant 
training, support, advising, and collaboration training 
programs to help health advocacy leaders build their 
knowledge base and learn how to work effectively with key 
representatives of different segments of the health care 
system.  GALA will help connect advocacy leaders to 
relevant health researchers, educators, government and 
regulatory agency officials, health care delivery system 
personnel, health product and services corporation leaders 
(pharmaceuticals, health equipment, medical devices, 
insurance companies, and health informatics firms), media, 
representatives, as well as leaders of other related advocacy 
and support organizations.  Not only is the GALA program 
designed to teach leaders about these different relevant 
segments of the health care system, but the GALA program 
will introduce health advocacy leaders to key representatives 
of these health sectors to initiate development of cooperative 
relationships for achieving advocacy goals.   
 
The GALA program is also designed to help educate 
advocacy leaders about the nature of health research, 
including how research is funded, who conducts health 
research, how research results are reported, how to make 
sense of health research findings, and how research is 
translated into relevant health care policies and practices.  
The GALA program will help advocacy leaders understand 
the intricacies of the modern health care system, including 
the design of health care delivery systems, the key roles 
performed by different professionals and support personnel 
working within the health care system, and the evolving 
policies governing health care delivery and reimbursement.  
The GALA program will also educate advocacy leaders 
about  the development of government legislation for health 
care policies, programs, and research, corporate influences 
on the health care system, and the unique roles performed 
within the health care system by professional associations, 
regulatory 
agencies, 
educational 
institutions, 
support 
organizations, foundations, and other assorted non-profit, 
for-profit, and government agencies. 
 
III.       HEALTH INFORMATION DEMANDS 
Access to and effective use of relevant, accurate, and 
timely health information is critically important for guiding 
the important health-related decisions that consumers and 
providers must make across the continuum of care to 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

promote health and well-being [2].  This includes decisions 
about the prevention of health risks, health promotion 
behaviors, the detection and diagnosis of health problems, 
health care treatment strategies, and best practices for living 
with health threats (successful survivorship) [3].  Yet, health 
information is complex, with many different kinds of health 
risks, each with different causes, stages, symptoms, detection 
processes, and treatment strategies.  Health care knowledge 
is rapidly evolving with advances in research and 
applications concerning etiology, prevention, detection, 
diagnosis, and treatment of health problems.   
 
Health advocacy organizations have the potential to help 
break through the complexity of health and health care by 
disseminating relevant, timely, accurate, and clear health 
information  to consumers to help guide informed health 
decision making.  However, there are significant barriers to 
the dissemination of health information, especially for at-risk 
populations, due to limited access to health information, 
health literacy challenges, limited education levels, and the 
complexity of health research and health care processes [4].  
The GALA program is designed to help health advocacy 
leaders develop a wide range of necessary knowledge and 
skills to enable them to achieve important consumer goals.  
For example, GALA can help health advocacy leaders learn 
how to support the information needs of the health care 
consumers they represent, providing these consumers with 
access to relevant, timely, and accurate health information.  
The GALA program is also designed to help advocacy 
organization leaders learn how to promote and advocate for 
increased funding for relevant health research needed to 
improve prevention, detection, treatment, and survivorship 
for the consumers they represent.   
 
The GALA program will help leaders learn how to run 
effective advocacy organizations to serve the needs of their 
constituents and influence health practices.  Strategies for 
recruiting, 
mobilizing, 
and 
serving 
the 
needs 
of 
organizational volunteers and personnel will be examined.  
Fund raising, investment, and fiscal management demands 
will be carefully examined.  Strategies for using funds wisely 
for disseminating information, influencing legislation and 
policies, and planning and implementing influential health 
campaigns will also be examined. 
 
The GALA program will help advocacy organization 
leaders learn how to disseminate relevant health information 
through a variety of media to raise awareness and educate 
health policy makers, health care administrators, providers, 
and consumers about the health issues of concern to their 
constituents.  The GALA program will help advocacy 
organization leaders learn how to lobby legislators, 
regulators, and health care administrators to improve health 
care policies and practices.  The health advocacy leaders will 
learn how to provide needed support and assistance to 
consumers confronting challenging health care problems, as 
well as to support the needs of their caregivers, family 
members, and loved ones.  Perhaps most importantly, the 
GALA program is designed to promote local and global 
cooperation within the health care system to support health 
promotion, prevention, early detection, the best treatments, 
and successful survivorship for the health issues of concern 
to their constituents. 
 
IV.     THE UNIQUE GALA DELIVERY MODEL 
The GALA program is designed to provide advocacy 
leaders with relevant information and strategies for working 
effectively with key internal and external groups.  For 
example, training programs will be conducted concerning 
development of effective relationships and collaborations 
with media representatives, government representatives, 
corporate leaders, researchers, and health care system 
representatives.  Moreover, the GALA program will provide 
advocacy leaders with ongoing information support, 
consultation, updates on new opportunities/constraints, and 
continuing education to meet changing needs and refine 
advocacy knowledge and skills.   
 
GALA programs will be delivered in several different 
complementary ways.  Advocacy leaders will be invited to 
attend training programs conducted at a centralized site 
(George Mason University), where they will also be 
introduced to relevant government, corporate, and health 
care system representatives, researchers and scientists, legal, 
fiscal, and administration advisers, campaign planners and 
fundraising experts, as well as experienced and successful 
health advocacy group leaders.  In addition to centralized 
training programs, GALA program educators will travel to 
advocacy organizations in different parts of the world to 
provide on-site training programs.  Arrangements will be 
made on demand to provide individual follow-up personal 
consultation with advocacy leaders to address specific 
emergent 
issues 
and 
concerns. 
 
Field 
experience 
opportunities will also guide advocates to participate in 
important meetings, conferences, and other relevant events, 
as well as to examine with GALA personnel the implications 
of these meetings.  GALA is also proposing to link advocacy 
leaders and their constituents with an online information 
system (a collaboratory) to provide continuous support, on-
line educational modules, repositories of health information 
documents, 
case 
studies, 
and 
media, 
as 
well 
as 
networking/collaboration opportunities for solving problems 
and developing new health advocacy initiatives.   
 
The GALA training programs will model effective health 
advocacy leadership strategies.  Leaders will learn how to 
establish and build effective advocacy organizations.  They 
will learn how to recruit volunteers, organization members, 
and support staff.  They will develop strategies for 
collaborating with other advocacy groups, locally, nationally, 
and internationally.  They will develop skills for establishing 
working relationship with government representatives, 
corporate leaders, media representatives, educators, and 
researchers.  They will also learn how to raise, manage, and 
invest funds for achieving advocacy goals. 
 
The global nature of the GALA program is designed to 
promote international cooperation and collaboration for 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

addressing 
advocacy 
issues, 
sharing 
resources, 
and 
implementing new policies and practices within the health 
care system. Advocacy leaders from different parts of the 
world who may be addressing similar issues will be linked to 
share information and resources for addressing these 
common issues.  These leaders will be encouraged to build 
international collaborations for influencing global health 
practices and policies.  The GALA program will combine 
support for leveraging research, theory, policies, and 
innovative applications to promote development of robust 
and adaptive advocacy programs to support the needs of 
health care consumers and their caregivers. 
 
V.     GALA DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITIES 
To promote the growth and development of the GALA 
program, new strategies are being examined for seeking 
government and corporate support for GALA training and 
outreach programs.  Survey data are being collected from 
key members of the advocacy, health care, government, and 
corporate communities to expand understanding about the 
unique training needs of advocacy organization leaders and 
the best strategies for meeting these training needs.  GALA 
team members are identifying leading experts to work with 
the program to serve as mentors and trainers for aspiring 
advocacy leaders.  New training modules, educational 
materials, and instructional guides are being designed and 
refined to use with the program.  The GALA online 
collaboratory system is being designed and information is 
being collected to include in the collaboratory’s online 
repository of documents, case studies, articles, research and 
funding opportunities, advocacy resources, and media 
programs.  Information about the GALA program is being 
disseminated to key individuals and organizations around the 
globe to increase awareness and support for the new and 
exciting GALA health advocacy leadership activities.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Strong support for this exciting new international health 
advocacy leadership training and support program is being 
provided by George Mason University’s Center for Health 
and Risk Communication and Translating Research Across 
Communities (TRAC), a global advisory consulting firm 
serving 
as 
trusted 
advisors 
to 
leading 
businesses, 
organizations, institutions, and governments.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Kim, A. Singhal, and G. Kreps.  (Eds.).  Handbook of 
global health communication strategies:  Theories and 
practices.  New York:  Peter Lang Publishers, in-press. 
[2] J. Johnson, and D. Case, Health information seeking.  
Cresskill, NJ:  Hampton Press, in-press. 
[3] G. Kreps. The impact of communication on cancer risk, 
incidence, morbidity, mortality, and quality of life.  Health 
Communication, 15(2), 161-169, 2003. 
[4] G. Kreps.  Strategic use of communication to market cancer 
prevention and control to  vulnerable populations.  Health 
Marketing Quarterly, 25(1/2), 204-216, 2008. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

