HemiPhysio App: 
A smartwatch-based application for measuring upper limbs movement in children with Hemiparesis  
 
Moez ur Rehman 
Dept. of Computer and Information Science 
Dubai Men’s College - Higher Colleges of Technology  
Dubai, United Arab Emirates 
e-mail: moez.rehman@hct.ac.ae 
Tauseef Kamal 
Dept. of Computer and Information Science 
Dubai Men’s College – Higher Colleges of Technology  
Dubai, United Arab Emirates 
e-mail: tkamal@hct.ac.ae
 
 
Abstract—A smartwatch’s constant contact with the wrist 
provides opportunity to measure the differences in the 
movements of hands (upper limbs) in children with Hemiparetic 
Cerebral Palsy (CP) while performing daily physical activity 
(e.g., walking, eating). Children with Hemiparesis have 
significant weakness (spastic, contractures) on one side of the 
body that leads to impaired functions on that side. This paper 
gives the concept and design of a “HemiPhysio” app to collect 
the activity-related data of both upper limbs using sensors in a 
smartwatch. The machine learning models trained on collected 
data are then used to detect the impaired functions by the 
smartwatch. The child is then instructed for appropriate 
movement or correcting posture using alert or haptics. The 
HemiPhysio app should work for dynamic motion activities 
(e.g., walking) and for the static posture activities (e.g., eating), 
as well as the related upper limbs movements in these activities. 
The goal of our application is to encourage Hemiparetic 
children to use both hands during daily activities. 
Keywords-Smartwatch; Hemiparesis; machine learning; alerts 
and haptic feedback; activity and gesture detection. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Today’s smartwatches are like strapping a networked 
computer with sensors to one’s wrist [1]. Recently, the 
hardware and software capabilities of smartwatch technology 
has advanced to an extent where these smartwatches can be 
used to diagnose certain medical conditions. The latest 
smartwatches have many sensors with sufficient computing 
to recognize variety of human physical activities [2]. These 
sensors provide accurate data to apps to track user’s 
movements and other health related activities. However, it is 
still too early to know that smartwatches will work as truly 
independent computing devices. 
Motor skills are heavily affected in the children with the 
Hemiparesis or weakness on one side of the body (arm-
dominant or leg-dominant) [3].  Hemiparesis is often 
associated with Cerebral Palsy (CP) or pediatric stroke, and 
characterized by functional motor impairment [4]. Children 
with impaired function on one hand (arm dominant) typically 
experience problems with day-to-day activities that can range 
from using the bathroom, and eating to difficulty 
participating in sports or playing video games. This 
functional impairment is due to muscle weakness and/or mild 
paralysis on the affected side of the body. 
These children tend to use only the normal side to do all 
their routine tasks and they need a constant reminder of using 
weak arm and hand as well. These physical impairments can 
impact social and emotional health and cause significant 
stress on the family. Physical and occupational therapies are 
natural approaches to rehabilitation that encourages the use 
of two hands during daily activities, and hence improving the 
gross and fine motor skills. However, it is costly in terms of 
therapy sessions, transportation, and time for parents and 
caregivers. 
Hemiparesis leads to muscle weakness, decreased 
coordination, decreased control of muscles and muscles 
spasticity. Spasticity prevents the stretching of muscles and 
tendons and if not treated it causes contraction where the 
muscles and tendons are stuck in the shortened position, and 
forming difficulty with fine- or gross-motor movement. For 
example, if ankle is spastic it can lead to toe walking. 
A smartwatch’s constant contact with wrist and high user 
acceptance makes it ideal to collect, understand, measure, and 
compare hand, wrist, forearm, elbow, upper arm and shoulder 
movements of both upper limbs of hemiparetic children using 
accelerometer and gyroscope sensors. 
Section II describes the existing work using smart devices 
and wearables in health informatics. Section III gives high 
level functional requirements and the conceptual design of 
HemiPhysio app. The acknowledgement and future work 
close the paper. 
II. 
SENSOR BASED ACTIVITY AND GESTURES 
RECOGNITION STUDIES 
Smartphones and smartwatches today come with many 
advanced sensors and programming interfaces to interact 
with them. These sensors collect real time data about the 
world around these devices. Most smartwatches have at least 
accelerometer, gyroscope, and pedometer sensors. These 
smartwatches give a unique opportunity to understand user’s 
hand and arm movements. In the remaining section, some 
related work to evaluate the progressive use of sensors 
technology, mainly in health, is discussed. 
A study conducted with young, healthy participants 
showed that smartphone applications and wearables using 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

pedometer and accelerometers are accurate for tracking steps 
count [5]. The smartphone applications included iOS and 
Android apps, whereas waistband and wrist devices were 
used as wearables. 
The accelerometer and gyroscope sensors in smartwatch 
can identify user’s arm, hand and finger gestures [6]. Motion 
energy measured using the smartwatch is sufficient to 
uniquely identify hand and finger gestures. Accelerometer 
and gyroscope data reflects the movement of tendons 
(passing through the wrist) hand and fingers gestures. These 
features uniquely identify 37 (13 finger, 14 hand and 10 arm) 
gestures with an accuracy of 98%. The finger gestures are 
especially challenging to detect using smartwatch since the 
movement in the wrist when doing a finger gesture is very 
small and it is not clear whether it can be recognized 
uniquely. The possible application of gesture recognition is 
to remotely control the devices such as televisions, 
computers, and smartphones.  
A recent study showed high usability and high technology 
acceptance when a mobile app (mHealth) was used and 
evaluated by the patients for frozen shoulder physiotherapy 
[7]. The mobile app provides instructions for exercise at 
home and tools to monitor patients training compliance and 
progress. The training compliance and progress data are then 
used by physiotherapists and physicians to assess the 
mobility of the shoulder and pain in shoulder movement and 
adjusting the therapy accordingly. The app includes a mobile 
phone sensor–based mobility measurement for monitoring 
the progress of the effect of the treatment of frozen shoulder.  
Another study evaluated the accuracy, precision, and 
overall performance of seventeen wearable devices (fitness 
trackers, body sensor devices) with direct observation of step 
counts and heart rate monitoring [8]. The study focused on 
accelerometers used in applications of trackers on Android or 
iOS devices. Data of accelerometer sensors was recorded and 
the mean step count, standard deviation, accuracy, and 
precision were estimated for each tracker. The accuracy of 
the tested wearable devices ranged between 79.8% and 
99.1%, while the coefficient of variation (precision) ranged 
between 4% and 17.5%. 
Another smartwatch-based activity recognition study 
using a machine learning approach has shown a high 
accuracy in recognizing hand-oriented activities [9]. It 
showed that smartwatches are more accurate (93.3%) for 
recognizing 
specialized 
hand-based 
activities 
than 
smartphones (77.3%) and can form the basis of new health 
applications. The study focused on apps capable of tracking 
eating activities to replace the manual methods for 
maintaining a food diary. The eating-related activities (total 
5) have the lowest prediction accuracy than non-eating (a 
total of 13 e.g., walking, kicking, typing, etc.). Among 
machine learning algorithms, the Random Forest (RF) 
algorithm showed overall highest accuracy in classifying 
activities. 
Real-time and Online Assessment and Mobility 
Monitoring (ROAMM) is a smartwatch-based framework for 
mobility monitoring and data visualization of personal health 
[10]. The smartwatch application component is for collecting 
and preprocessing data and a server component to store, 
retrieve, and remote monitoring. The framework is limited to 
measure average minutes spent on some movement activity 
without requiring any machine learning approach.  
The above applications and framework show the 
suitability of smartwatches in health systems and are 
considered a replacement of specialized devices for 
recognizing physical activities. 
III. 
HEMIPHYSIO APPLICATION DESIGN 
This section discusses the requirements and conceptual 
design of HemiPhysio application.  
A. Motivation and Requirements 
As discussed in section II, the existing applications using 
smartwatches do not collect and identify differences in the 
upper or lower limbs movements of children with 
Hemiparesis. Also, the existing studies either recognize 
gestures of hands, fingers, forearm, etc., independent of any 
physical activity or recognize the physical activities without 
considering gestures in that activity. Our work is recognizing 
the activity as well as the gestures or movements in that 
activity. 
 
Following are some high level requirements: 
1. Collection of patient’s data from accelerometer and 
gyroscope of physical activity and the activity related 
gestures and movements. For example, a walking 
activity consists of hands, wrists, elbows, forearms 
movements. Samples are collected from weak and 
healthy limbs simultaneously. The HemiPhysio 
framework will work for dynamic motion activities 
(e.g., walking, running) and static posture activities 
(e.g., eating, standing). It will also work for activities 
where gestures or movements in both limbs are 
usually symmetric (e.g., walking) and for activities 
where one limb moves more than the other. 
2. Training machine learning models on collected data. 
Patients are different in terms of spasticity and 
contractures therefore models trained on patient’s 
own data are preferable. The machine learning 
models trained using only the participant’s own data 
of activities performed much better in activity 
recognition than the impersonal models trained on the 
samples from all participants applications [9]. 
3. Identify child’s spastic parts of upper limb and the 
resulting contractures using the machine learning 
models. 
4. Measuring the difference in movements of weak and 
healthy limbs. 
5. App reminds the patient to move or use weak limb in 
order to participate in activity. 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

B. HemiPhysio Design 
Our proposed design has two main components: the 
training component, and the detection and notification 
component. In the first phase as shown in Figure 1, two 
smartwatches are used, one on each hand, to collect 
timestamped sensors data from both limbs for a certain 
physical activity. This data is used to train and create 
customized Machine Learning (ML)vmodels to recognize 
sufficient gestures from the dominant (normal) limb and the 
corresponding impaired functions data from the weak limb. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. HemiPhysio App training phase. 
 
Figure 2 shows the second component of our design that 
deals with real time activity detection (e.g., walking or 
eating). When a certain activity is detected our app running 
on the smartwatch starts to collect gesture or movements. 
This data is then fed to the on-device ML model at regular 
intervals. The ML model will be able to detect if there was 
insufficient movement on the weaker limb. The app will then 
instruct the child to move the weaker limb through alerts and 
haptics. The insufficient movement event is then recorded in 
the application’s database to be synchronized later on with 
devices of caregivers and parents as this data will be of 
immense help to them to identify patterns of insufficient use 
of upper limbs in children. 
Currently, we are developing HemiPhysio application on 
Apple platform as devices (Apple Watch and iPhone) and 
developers APIs come from same vendor. We found issues 
with Google’s WearOS support for Samsung and other 
smartwatches. However, later we will test our app on other 
platforms as well. Apple iOS and WatchOS provide stable 
framework WatchKit and app services, such as CoreMotion 
for sensors data, HealthKit for monitoring physical activities, 
CoreML for creating machine leaning models [11]. 
CoreMotion API of WatchOS also provides us with software 
based sensors, such as CMDeviceMotion, which provides us 
various values of rotation and acceleration of the smartwatch, 
which can help us better detecting gestures during an activity. 
The current health kits that are available on mobile and 
smartwatch platforms focus more on common activities such 
as walking, running, climbing steps and storing and retrieving 
various health related data. Though smartwatches have 
progressed to detect conditions such as cardiac problems 
thanks to a heart sensor, however they cannot detect impaired 
functions on a weak hand in a condition, such as Hemiparetic 
CP, which our work aims to tackle.  
 
 
 
Figure 2. HemiPhysio Detection phase. 
C. Data Collection 
In our proposed app, the movement data is collected 
from smartwatch sensors of both (normal and weak) upper 
limbs. Movements include: arm movement (lateral arm lift, 
frontal arm lift, lateral external rotation, and back rotation), 
elbow movement, hand movement, wrist movement, and 
finger movement. HemiPhysio App prototype will support 
two sensors initially: accelerometer and gyroscope. An 
accelerometer measures the linear acceleration of movement. 
We will use accelerometer to detect the linear orientation of 
upper limb. A gyroscope adds an additional dimension to the 
information supplied by the accelerometer by tracking 
rotation or twist. 
D. Machine Learning Models 
ML leaning algorithms such as Naïve Bayesian, Neural 
Networks, Binary decision, Random Forest e.g., will be used 
as they have been already tested in physical activities 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

classifications [9]. Running ML classifiers on the watch itself 
ensures the privacy of data and works even without paired 
device. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We do not argue that these health applications can replace 
the need for human physiotherapists but augment the work of 
therapists and caregivers. Health or mobile health (mHealth) 
apps running on smart devices can be an affordable solution 
for children and parents and can improve healthcare system. 
This research will open the doors to extend the benefits of 
collected data in other health applications for Hemiparetic 
children. We hope to achieve with HemiPhysio app the CP 
management goal to increase functionality, improve 
capabilities, and sustain health in terms of locomotion [4]. 
The treatment includes physical therapy depending on 
patient’s specific symptoms. Physical training increases 
muscles strength and possibly improves motor activity in 
Hemiparesis patients.  
Once the application development is complete we will test 
its working and accuracy on the collected data from the 
patients. This will be done with the help of healthcare 
professionals and the feedback from patients and caregivers. 
The 
experiment 
results 
will 
be 
analyzed 
for 
the 
appropriateness of training data collection, the detection of 
insufficient mobility during the activity, and the alerts to 
patient from smartwatch to engage the weak side in ongoing 
activity. This research will help us to develop future apps and 
games for children with Hemiparetic CP. This includes 
instructional physical therapy, reminding using voice 
commands to encourage the use of weaker upper limb, etc. 
This work will help us in developing an architectural 
framework that can be used for developing similar health 
apps, which use machine learning on a smartwatch to detect 
similar medical conditions. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is supported by a seed grant from the HRG 
– the HCT Research Grants. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  R. Rawassizadeh, B. A. Price, and M. Petre, "Wearables: Has the Age 
of Smartwatches Finally Arrived?," Communications of the ACM, 
vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 45-47, 2015.  
[2]  P. Lamkin, "Best smartwatch 2019," [retrieved: August, 2019], 
https://www.wareable.com/smartwatches/best-smartwatch-buyers-
guide-2019-7283. 
[3] P. Humphreys, P. Whiting, and B. Pham, "Hemiparetic cerebral palsy: 
clinical pattern and imaging in prediction of outcome., The Canadian 
Journal of Neurological Sciences, vol. 27(3), Aug 2000, pp. 210-219.  
[4]  K. W. Kirigger "Cerebral Palsy: An Overview," American Family 
Physician, vol. 73, no. 1, pp. 91-100, 2006.  
[5]  H. A. Burwick, M. A. Case, and K. G. Volpp, "Accuracy of 
Smartphone Applications and Wearable Devices for Tracking 
Physical Activity Data," Journal of American Medical Association 
(JAMA), vol. 313, no. 6, pp. 625-626, 2015.  
[6]  C. Xu, P. H. Pathak, and P. Mohapatra, "Finger-writing with 
Smartwatch: A Case for Finger and Hand Gesture Recognition using 
Smartwatch," HotMobile '15 Proceedings of the 16th International 
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, New 
Mexico, USA, ACM, Feb 2015, pp. 9-14.  
[7]  T. Stütz, G. Emsenhuber, D. Huber, M. Domhardt, M. Tiefengrabner, 
G. Janneke, U. Fötschl, N. Matis and S. Ginzinger, "Mobile Phone–
Supported Physiotherapy for Frozen Shoulder: Feasibility Assessment 
Based on a Usability Study," JMIR Rehabilitation and Assistive 
Technologies, 2017.  
[8]  F. El-Amrawy, B. Pharm and M. I. Nounou, "Are Currently Available 
Wearable Devices for Activity Tracking and Heart Rate Monitoring 
Accurate, 
Precise, 
and 
Medically 
Beneficial?," 
Healthcare 
Informatics Research, vol. 21(4), p. 315–320, 2015.  
[9]  G. M. Weiss, J. L. Timko, C. M. Gallagher, K. Yoneda and A. J. 
Schreiber, "Smartwatch-based activity recognition- A machine 
learning approach," in IEEE-EMBS International Conference on 
Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI), NV, USA, 2016.  
[10]  M. Kheirkhahan, S. Nair, A. Davoudi, P. Rashidi, A. A. Wanigatunga, 
D. B. Corbett, T. Mendoza, T. M. Manini and S. Ranka, "A 
smartwatch-based framework for real-time and online assessment and 
mobility monitoring," Journal of Biomedical Informatics, vol. 89, pp. 
29-40, 2019.  
[11]  "Apple Developer Documentation," [retrieved: August, 2019], 
https://developer.apple.com/documentation. 
[12]  S. Jusoh, "A Survey on Trend, Opportunities and Challenges of 
mHealth Apps," Journal of Interactive Mobile Technologies (iJIM), 
2017.  
[13]  M. A. Case, H. A. Burwick, K. G. Volpp, and M. S. Patel, "Accuracy 
of Smartphone Applications and Wearable," Journal of American 
Medical Association (JAMA), vol. 313, no. 6, pp. 625-626, 2015.  
 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-742-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2019 : The Eighth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

