"Concept Car" Design Method in Medicine: Redesigning an Incubator’s Mattress 
Misha Croes, Zhihui Zhang, Sidarto Bambang Oetomo, Wei Chen, Loe Feijs 
Department of Industrial Design 
Eindhoven University of Technology 
Den Dolech 2, 5612 AZ Eindhoven, the Netherlands 
E-mail: {m.j.g.croes, z.zhang, s.bambang.oetomo, w.chen, l.m.g.feijs}@tue.nl 
 
Abstract — When a child is born premature, he is usually 
placed inside an incubator in the hospital’s Neonatal Intensive 
Care Unit. With the goal to design a new mattress for within 
these 
incubators 
a 
multidisciplinary 
consortium 
was 
established. In order to broaden the creative space, and, thus 
inspire further innovation, the design team decided to develop 
a controversial, but plausible incubator bed prototype through 
a “concept car” approach. This paper describes the process of 
introducing the “concept car” method into a medical setting 
and its effect within a multidisciplinary consortium. Through 
an in depth discussion and presentation of the prototype, an 
evaluation of the design was achieved. Questions, discussions 
and criticism were elicited from the consortium partners, 
which would serve as inspiration material for future 
developments within the consortium. This way of realizing 
ideas into a 1:1 scale prototype proved to stimulate inter-
disciplinary thinking and opened doors to creativity on various 
levels.  
 
Keywords-neonate; incubator; innovation; concept car; 
multidisciplinary; design. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Within this paper, we describe the process and 
development of an incubator mattress design within a 
multidisciplinary 
consortium 
(MC) 
composed 
of 
neonatologists and nurses, designers, engineers and mattress 
developers. The method used for the development is called 
“concept car” design. The goal of using this design method 
was to broaden the creative space and thus inspire further 
innovation within the consortium. We describe the 
development of the mattress design, its effect on the creative 
mindscape of the MC and why we believe the design is 
unique in the field of neonatology. 
A. Neonatal Intensive Care Unit 
If a child is born extremely premature, before the 
gestational age of 32 weeks, the child is small, fragile and 
most likely in a life threatening situation. In order to give 
the child the protection and (medical) care it needs, the child 
is placed inside an incubator in the hospital’s Neonatal 
Intensive Care Unit (NICU). 
Due to the, usually, unexpected child birth, sudden 
hospitalization of the child and stress over the uncertainty 
about their child’s future, parents tend to experience 
difficulty in their efforts to bond with their child [1].  
Luckily, however, in the past decades, the mortality 
among IC neonates has been substantially reduced by the 
introduction of new innovations in the fields of technology 
and medicine [2]. However, the long-term cognitive, 
neurological and behavioral developments of the neoanates 
are still undesirable compared to full term neonates [2].  
  
B. Incubator design history 
The first incubator for prematurely born infants was 
developed in the year 1880 by the French obstetrician 
Stéphane Tarnier [4]. Inspired by incubators for chicken 
eggs, the main purpose of the incubator was to keep 
prematurely born babies warm by means of a warm water 
reservoir [4]. 
Over the years, incubator technology has come a long 
way. By means of new technologies and innovations in the 
field of medicine, infants can survive ever younger 
premature birth and overcome otherwise lethal diseases. 
However, from an aesthetics point of view, current 
incubators have not changed all that much. It is still a 
transparent “box”, that, among others, keep the child warm 
and safe. 
The reason for the transparent casing is obvious. In order 
to properly treat these fragile patients, nurses and 
practitioners should be able to observe the child. Research 
has, however, shown that the stimuli these children 
experience during their hospitalization has potential large 
adverse effects on the child’s brain development [4][5]. Due 
to the large number of stressful and painful procedures, the 
brain of these small prematurely born babies is inhibited of 
proper development. Therefore, the MC has set the goal to 
design a new incubator mattress that will protect 
prematurely born babies from these adverse stimuli in the 
hope to ensure a more pleasant hospitalization experience 
by both parents and child.  
C. Approach 
In order to spice up the creativity within the MC, the 
decision was made to develop a design by using the 
“concept car” method. Although new in the medical 
environment, the “concept car” method is generally used in 
car industry. Through a 1:1 scale prototype, car designers 
show the company’s vision of the future in car design and 
inspire other designers with new ideas [6].  
Our design had similar goals in mind. The main goal 
was to ensure the future vision of the consortium’s incubator 
bed design would be translated and visualized into a 
prototype. Furthermore, the goal was to ensure that no 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

innovative ideas were lost or hindered in the process. Just 
like a concept car in car industry will never roll over our 
streets, our design was not meant to be inside an actual 
incubator.  
In order to realize our design by means of the “concept 
car” method, a basic, but effective design cycle of various 
phases (analyze, synthesize, simulate and evaluate) was 
initiated and was executed in 2 months.    
In the analysis phase, the problems and design 
opportunities expressed by the various partners in the 
consortium were gathered. These statements were to be used 
as input for the synthesis phase, within which various 
concept designs were realized. One concept design was then 
realized in the simulation phase and concluded with the 1:1 
scale prototype. 
In order to determine whether the “concept car” method 
would have the desired outcome, a presentation and 
discussion session with all partners was prepared.  
In this paper we describe the design process within 
which we apply the “concept car” method. We then describe 
the final design and the realization of the 1:1 scale 
prototype. Finally the evaluation of the design by the MC is 
presented and conclusions are drawn based upon the 
feedback.  
II. 
PROCESS 
A. Analysis phase 
In order to identify problems and possible design 
opportunities, interviews were conducted with all the 
partners within the consortium. By discussing their desires 
and opportunities on future development, vital information 
was gathered to function as a baseline for the design. By 
combining this input with the consortium’s original goal to 
develop a new incubator bed, the choice was made to focus 
on two main aspects within this design cycle: 
 
1. Parent-Child 
bonding: 
specifically, 
the 
“approachability” of the child inside the incubator 
by parents. 
2. Child comfort: the comfort of the sleeping 
environment for the child.  
 
It was concluded that most of the partners found the 
physical acrylic transparent casing of the incubator very 
disturbing (it should be mentioned that as part o f the 
consortium there are also medical practitioners and nurses 
of the NICU). This physical barrier between parents and 
child is perceived as obtrusive and interruptive to the 
physical contact between parents and child. 
Furthermore, the various partners expressed that it 
seemed unnatural to place a child that should be in a womb 
onto a flat mattress. Therefore, the second focus was put on 
the redesign of a more comfortable sleeping environment 
for the child. We chose specifically the sleep environment in 
order to provide a more open design space, relative to for 
instance emergency situations.  
 
B. Synthesis phase 
The second stage in the design process was the synthesis 
phase. In this phase, various ideas are generated and 
developed into the final concept.  Due to the diversity of 
design experience within the consortium, a basic technique 
was applied in this phase. By first developing a large 
number of ideas (100) in a short period of time, it was 
believed out-of-the-box ideas were pushed forward. From 
these 100 ideas, 10 different design directions were distilled 
by means of grouping. Every group would then be molded 
into a concept resulting into 10 different concepts. Finally, 
of the 10 concepts 3 concepts were chosen by means of 
ranking of which one final concept would be developed 
further.  
            
The final concept, called “womb environment” (Figure 
1), consists of replacing the mattress inside the incubator 
with an “artificial womb” in which the child would stay. 
Key elements within this concept are:  
• 
To keep the child’s movement restricted by 
presenting a flexible “womb”. 
• 
To keep the child in a warm, dark and sound 
limiting environment, mimicking the womb 
• 
To provide the child with a rounded bottom of the 
incubator in order to ensure a swinging movement 
of the whole womb. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Womb environment concept. 
 
Before this concept could be developed into a prototype, 
various small developmental cycles were introduced. During 
these cycles, the “womb” idea was further developed. Next 
we will discuss the final design as a result from these cycles. 
 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

III. 
FINAL DESIGN 
1) CRIB 
The final concept consists of two distinct products, an 
incubator bed and a mattress. The first product to be 
described is called the Child Rocking Incubator Bed or 
CRIB (Figure 2). This bed consists of two wooden shells 
that can rotate around each other by means of an elevated 
axis inside two side stands. This rotation allows the CRIB to 
be in two distinct positions.  
In the first position, the child will lie on a mattress, 
inside the CRIB with the top shell rotated downwards, 
called the open position. In this situation, parents are invited 
to observe and interact with their child. Due to the use of 
wood, normally not present in incubators, the design 
provides a more homelike feeling expected to pull parents 
their attention away from the acrylic cover and more 
towards the inside of the incubator. 
The final feature of the open position is the fact that 
parents can rock the bed inside the incubator, hence the 
name CRIB. The goal of this feature is to elicit a more 
natural, home-like interaction between parent and child. Just 
like a crib at home, parents can provide comfort to their 
child by means of rocking the bed. During this interaction 
parents can for instance decide to sing a lullaby to the child 
or talk to the child.  
 
 
 
The 
second 
position 
possibility 
of the CRIB comes 
as a redesign of a 
practice performed in 
current day NICU’s. 
In order to protect 
the 
child 
from 
external stimuli, such 
as light and sound, a 
blanket is nowadays 
placed 
over 
the 
incubator (Figure 3). 
During the design, we believed however that this blanket 
creates an even bigger barrier between the parents and the 
child, because the blanket completely restricts the 
observation possibility of the child inside the incubator.  
As a solution to this problem, the CRIB design can be 
closed in one single motion towards the, so called, closed 
position. This will ensure that both light and sound will be 
restricted to the child just like the blanket. In order to 
provide parents and nurses the opportunity to still observe 
the child, a section of self-polarizing glass is implemented 
in the outer shell. This glass darkens by itself when light is 
shone onto it (like a pair of sunglasses), therefore, protecting 
the child automatically from excess light, but still enabling 
parents and medical practitioners to observe the child. 
Finally, the inside of the CRIB is outfitted with soft foam. 
This will allow the infants to push against the CRIB, just 
like they would experience inside their mother’s the womb.  
 
2) Comfort Mattress 
In present day NICU’s, snuggles and blankets are used 
in order to provide boundaries and position support for 
unstable babies. Especially when babies lay on their side, 
the limited muscle strength limits babies to maintain this 
posture on their own.  
Based 
on 
the 
comfortable 
and 
movement restricting 
features of the womb, 
a Comfort Mattress 
design was proposed 
to be placed inside 
the CRIB (Figure 4). 
 
The 
Comfort 
Mattress is an oval shaped mattress filled with silicone 
beads. These beads allow the mattress’s shape to be flexibly 
molded. When the baby lies on the mattress, the silicone 
beads will shift and make sure the mattress adapts to the 
child’s body shape.  
Nurses are able to mold the mattress into boundaries and 
supports for the baby according to the baby’s desired 
sleeping posture.  
To approach the natural situation of skin-to-skin contact 
[7], the idea was proposed to make the surface of the 
mattress of a water proof, skin-like material (elastic, 
smooth, soft). This makes the cover easy to clean with 
alcohol, which saves the effort of washing the various 
sheets, blankets and cushions.  
Wrapped in by a “skin” in a dark and rather closed 
sleeping 
environment 
with 
unobtrusive 
vital 
sign 
monitoring, it is expected to supply a comfortable and safe 
environment for premature babies within the NICU. 
B. Simulation phase 
As a final step in the design phase, both the CRIB as 
well as the Comfort Mattress were brought together into a 
working physical 1:1 scale prototype (Figures 5 and 6). The 
prototypes contained all the materials proposed in the design 
Figure 2. Closed (left) and open (right) position of the CRIB 
 
Figure 4. Comfort mattress 
Figure 3. Blanket over incubator 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

apart from the self polarizing glass and the skin-like 
mattress cover. These two features were, however, clearly 
explained during the presentation of the design to the 
consortium partners during the evaluation phase. 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Prototype CRIB and comfort mattress 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Prototype CRIB and comfort mattress 
 
C. Evaluation Phase 
In order to test the effect of the design, a presentation 
was set up for all consortium partners. The prototype was 
displayed in an NICU incubator together with a realistic and 
detailed picture presentation. By doing so, the NICU 
environment was recreated in order for everybody to 
transcend into the NICU atmosphere prior to presenting the 
details of the design itself.  
The design was then presented through interactions with 
the prototype and an illustrative PowerPoint presentation. 
After the presentation, participants were invited to interact 
with the prototype, and in the meanwhile discuss the design. 
Finally the individual discussions were brought together in a 
group discussion concerning the presented design. 
 
In order to test the effect of the design on the innovative 
and creative thinking of the participants, the different newly 
generated ideas and comments were documented and 
grouped together. The diversity of techniques used to 
generate new ideas were perceived as an indication to the 
effect of creativity generation among the partners. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Below the various techniques observed to generate new 
ideas and innovations generated during the discussion are 
categorized, accompanied by examples.  
 
A. CRIB discussion 
 
1) Taking a feature and place it in context 
The first category is based upon the fact that a feature 
was highlighted from the design and was developed further 
by placing it into context. An example is the self polarizing 
glass. The feature was not only perceived as useful, but the 
possibility was proposed to use it as an active indicator of 
environmental light conditions to parents and medical staff. 
The original idea behind the glass was only to protect the 
child from excess light in the NICU environment. However, 
as commented upon during the discussion, the glass could 
also be used to inform parents and or medical personnel 
there is simply too much light in the child’s environment. 
By doing so, they would become more aware of their 
environment and possibly undertake action to make it 
darker, hence more comfortable for the child.  It was noted 
that this would also involve parents more in the care of their 
baby, giving them a foothold for something they can 
actively do as a means of care for their baby.   
Furthermore, the function of the glass as an augmented 
information display was proposed. This display could 
indicate the health status of the baby while looking at the 
baby. The idea could potentially make the monitoring of the 
child more comprehensible for parents and more convenient 
for medical staff. 
 
2) Taking a feature and build upon it 
The second approach observed during the discussion is 
to take a feature of the design and further built upon it. An 
example of this can be related to the closed position of the 
top-shell of the CRIB design. Originally intended to 
passively protect the baby from external stimuli like sound 
and light, the idea was proposed to see what other functions 
could be added to the top-shell itself. “It might contain 
sensors to monitor the child” or “light therapy LED’s could 
be built into the shell”. This shows that interaction and 
shape can be an inspiration in itself to those who are 
unfamiliar to the prior design. 
 
3) Turning critique into creativity 
The third technique explains the moment where a point 
of concern was used as an inspiration for future innovation. 
One of the comments expressed by one of the medical 
practitioners was “that the design looked like an incubator 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

inside an incubator, possibly creating an even bigger barrier 
between parents and their child”. Although accepted by the 
design team this comment on itself provided inspiration for 
future development. Because what if the design would 
actually be an incubator inside an incubator? Due to its size 
this would mean that, if guaranteed to provide the required 
safety, the design could be used as a portable incubator. 
This would allow parents to walk around with their child 
inside the NICU ward, which would elicit whole new kinds 
of interactions between parents and their baby. It would for 
instance give parents much more freedom within the safety 
of the hospital. From a technological point of view, it would 
mean full wireless communication would be needed. 
Providing new opportunities and challenges for both 
designers and engineers. From this example, one can see 
that the physical presentation of a concept in the early stage 
of a design process can contribute greatly on the inspiration 
and development in future phases.  
 
4) Would this concept really work in the NICU setting? 
Apart from being nursed in the incubator, patients in the 
NICU may become ill and experience situations that the 
immediate access to the patient and institution of treatments 
(stimulation of breathing, resuscitation etc.) are indicated. In 
addition 
the 
performance 
of 
diagnostic 
procedures 
(Echocardiography, cranial ultrasound) in the incubator 
must be possible. In the next version of the CRIB mattress 
these considerations have to be taken into account. 
 
B. Comfort Mattress Discussion 
 
1) Where different disciplines meet – part 1  
A topic of inspiration provided by the Comfort Mattress 
was the fact that the designers dared to make design 
decisions early on in the project. For instance if we consider 
the Comfort Mattress, during the design process it showed 
innovation was hard to realize in something so common as a 
mattress. The “half-egg” shape of the mattress design 
challenges the widely accepted flat configuration of 
everyday mattresses.  
Although the idea behind the shape was welcomed and 
accepted by designers and engineers, concerns were 
expressed by medical practitioners. The question was put 
forward “whether the Comfort Mattress could cause 
asphyxia?” Since the autonomic motor ability of premature 
infants is not well developed, they are unable to push the 
supports away by themselves. This could make breathing 
difficult, especially when the child is in a lateral- or prone 
position.  
This subject, asphyxia, was pointed out as a concern 
from both the medical practitioner’s and mattress 
developer’s side and was not presented earlier within the 
project, and, therefore, not seen as a potential problem. 
However, due to the presentation of the design, the subject 
is on the table.  
2) Where different disciplines meet – part 2 
The second topic concerning the Comfort Mattress was 
its cover material. Nowadays, babies don’t lay immediately 
on the mattress, but on top of cotton sheets. The proposed 
cover has a skin-like feeling. From design and medical 
points of view, the child with frequent skin-to-skin contact 
has a more stable heartbeat and breathing rate [7][8][9]. 
However, it has to be investigated whether this skin-like 
material has similar beneficial effects to the baby.  
To prevent liquids from damaging vital sign sensors 
inside the mattress and be easily clean, the cover was 
required to be waterproof by technical and medical staff. 
However, medical practitioners and the mattress developer 
gave their concerns on this subject: can the material also be 
breathable?  
The answer to this question is considered beyond the 
scope of this paper. However, if we look at the large field of 
material innovation, the solution probably will not be so far 
in the future or even already existent.     
 
C. Summary 
To summarize, the overall impression of the various 
disciplines in the MC was quite positive. They agreed that 
the design contained most important elements that were 
gathered during the interviews. Furthermore, they believed 
the design is expected to elicit a better “approachability” of 
the child by the parents. Especially, the rocking of the bed 
was seen as a natural and intuitive approach of a small child.  
Finally, the idea of converting a flat mattress into a 3D 
moldable mattress that fits the child’s individual needs was 
seen as a great advantage. Since it has been shown that even 
these small patients need individualized care [10], this 
would 
further 
support 
in 
this 
hypothesis.  
From a design point of view the large amount of techniques 
used to draw inspiration from the design was perceived as 
successful. Since one of the original goals was to inspire 
future development within the MC.   
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Within a multidisciplinary consortium the decision was 
made to design and build an out-of-the-box, but plausible, 
incubator bed to be placed inside present day NICU 
incubators. The focus of this design was to enhance the 
sleeping comfort of NICU neonates and provide support to 
the bonding process between parents and their child.  
The final goal of the design cycle was to develop a 1:1 
scale “concept car” model of the final concept. This to 
ensure a visual and “experiencable” prototype could be 
presented to the full variety of partners in the consortium. 
This model was presented to the various partners in 
order to receive critique and develop new ideas that could 
be used in the future design process. 
During the discussion session, new interactions were 
developed, features inspired new ideas, lessons were learned 
from decisions that had been made, and teams learned from 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

each other’s expertise fields. Overall, this resulted in a 
thorough document of delight, appraisal and criticism 
greatly facilitating future design and development stages.  
In general, it can be said that the CRIB and the Comfort 
Mattress, as they are presented now, will never see the light 
of day in an actual NICU. This, however, was also never the 
intention of the design, just like concept cars in car industry 
never get to drive on our streets. The main goal of inspiring 
fellow partners by means of a physically build 1:1 scale 
“concept car” prototype in an integrated design solution has 
shown its positive impact and will hopefully be used more 
in the field of medical design. 
VI. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of the 
Point One National R&D grant “Embedded Neonatal 
Monitoring” (E-Nemo) Project of SenterNovem in the 
Netherlands. 
 
VII. REFERENCES 
[1] A. Talmi and R. J. Harmon, (2003). Relationships between 
preterm 
infants 
and 
their 
parents: 
Disruption 
and 
development. Zero to Three, 24(2), 13–20 
[2] D. Wilson-Costello, “Is there evidence that long-term 
outcomes have improved with intensive care?,” Seminars in 
fetal & neonatal medicine, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 344-54, Oct. 
2007. 
[3] S. Blackburn, “Environmental impact of the NICU on 
developmental outcomes,” Journal of Pediatric Nursing, vol. 
13, no. 5, pp. 279–289, Oct. 1998. 
[4] J.P. Baker, (2000) The incubator and the medical discovery of 
the premature infant. J Perinatol 20: 321–328. 
[5] R. E. Grunau, L. Holsti and J. W. B. Peters, “Long-term 
consequences of pain in human neonates.,” Seminars in fetal 
& neonatal medicine, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 268-75, Aug. 2006. 
[6] M. Backma, S. Börjesson (2006) Vehicles for attention 
creation: the case of a concept car at Volvo Cars. European 
Journal of Innovation Management 9(2): 149– 160. 
[7] G.C. Anderson, E.R. Moore, J. Hepworth and N. Bergman  
Early skin-to-skin contact for mothers and their healthy 
newborn infants (Cochrane review). In: The Cochrane 
Library, Issue 2. Chichester, UK: John Wiley & Sons, 2003. 
[8] T.C. Castral, F. Warnock, A.M. Keite, V.J. Haas and C.G.S. 
Scochi The effects of skin-to-skin contact during acute pain in 
preterm newborns. European Journal of Pain, 2007, 
doi:10.1016/j.ejpain.2007.07.012. 
[9] R. Feldman, et al. Skin-to-Skin contact (Kangaroo care) 
promotes self-regulation in premature infants: sleep-wake 
cyclicity, arousal modulation, and sustained exploration. Dev 
Psychol 2002;38(2):194– 207. 
[10] H. Als, “Newborn Individualized Developmental Care and 
Assessment Program (NIDCAP): new frontier for neonatal 
and perinatal medicine,” Journal of Neonatal-Perinatal 
Medicine, vol. 2, pp. 135–147, 2009. 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-243-1
GLOBAL HEALTH 2012 : The First International Conference on Global Health Challenges

