Medical Requirements for Selecting
Local Picture Archiving and Communications Systems
Influences from Information Technologies and Business Models
Ivan Evg. Ivanov
Technical University
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: iei@tu-sofia.bg
Vesselin Gueorguiev
Technical University
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: veg@tu-sofia.bg
Dimitar Tcharaktchiev
Medical University
Department of Medical Informatics, USHATE
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: dimitardt@gmail.com
Desislava Georgieva
New Bulgarian University
Sofia, Bulgaria
email: dvelcheva@nbu.bg
Abstract—For a period of 10-15 years (2005 - 2018), the
number of PACS (Picture Archiving and Communication
System) offered on the market has increased more than 10
times. Despite this growth, some of the main disadvantages of
this class of systems persist: the systems are complex and
expensive to acquire, replace, maintain, or repair. This paper
aims to show an approach that allows us to choose the right
PACS for the needs of a particular group of hospitals and
health care institutions. This choice takes into account the
limitations of IT and business requirements.
Keywords-
regional
(local)
PACS;
PACS
selection;
regulatory requirements;
business requirements; medical
requirements.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The last two decades have seen a steady increase in the
clinical application Picture Archiving and Communication
Systems (PACSs) [1]. The reason for this increase is the
desire to both reduce costs and improve patient care. At
present, this is a sustainable trend, which suggests its
significant impact on the speed of changes in medical
infrastructure. The problem is to select PACS for long-term
use that is adaptive for extensions, user-friendly for medical
personnel and easy-to-connect to other medical institutions,
upper-level PACSs and medical information systems.
II.
PACS MAIN COMPONENTS AND STRUCTURE
The history of the development of PACS goes through
several stages. Perhaps the most characteristic of all these
stages was that the systems were oriented towards the
practically identical infrastructure architectures [1]-[4]. This
trend of the regularity of the infrastructure is preserved,
notwithstanding
the
increase
in
the
use
of
newer
programming technologies and newer types of medical
devices. One of the main features for comparing modern
PACSs is the ability to adapt to the specific infrastructure,
i.e., to the possibility of removing or adding new PACS
nodes or communication buses.
The general infrastructure of modern PACS contains the
following elements (see Figure 1):

Apparatus
that
generates
medical
images
in
an
appropriate format (most often, PACS uses one or more
versions of Digital Imaging and Communications in
Medicine (DICOM).

An image storage server. This is the PACS’ key
component.

The archiving system is the second key component of a
PACS.

The interoperability brokers responsible for solving the
task of integrating the PACS with the other information
systems in the health organization.

The terminal workstation (i.e., the computer system for
displaying medical images).

The printer for medical images.

Remote connection to PACS. Now, it is mandatory
function for any more or less "professional" product in
this group.
III.
PACS: KEY BUSINESS REQUIREMENTS
The need to use medical images throughout all hospital
departments, as well as the possibility of their remote use by
authorized external organization or physician, has defined
the following list of mandatory business requirements for
modern PACS:
Figure 1. The general infrastructure of modern PACS (adapted from
[4]).
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges


Any strategy for the management and dissemination of
medical images within the hospital must provide the
opportunity for a wide variety of medical users to work
effectively. These are not just physicians in functional
radiology departments. Therefore, the system must not
change physician's stereotypes of working with images
but at the same time must allow managing the image
quality according to needs of the diagnostic process.

No one likes to wait to get data from some source.
Clinicians are not an exception to this rule. Very often,
they are even more demanding on the access time and
restrictions to obtain the whole required information
about the patient. The most common manifestation is the
desire for almost immediate access and it does not
depend on whether physicians work in traumatology, in
the emergency rooms, in the intensive care department,
or the outpatient clinic. This business requirement is one
of the most complex problems in everyday life.

Improving the ability to diagnose and treat many
diseases has increased the use of medical images in
practice. From a technical point of view, this change has
led to increased size of generated images, increased
number of requests to use medical images, and the size
of archived history of patient morbidity needed to
monitor the condition of patients. All this changed the
understanding of the minimum required levels of
scalability, efficiency, performance, and adaptability of
the system.

In the diagnostic process, to avoid mistakes, physicians
need the best possible image quality. A very serious
technical problem is the fact that the judgment of quality
varies according to the particular usage of the image.
The only workable solution to this problem is the
presence of a system for automatic or semi-manual
adaptation of the display workstation to environmental
characteristics. This complicates the PACS functions
responsible for handling workstations' settings.

Every doctor has his understanding of the workstation's
ergonomics. The main differences are not only in the
arrangement of buttons and menus on the screen, but the
scenarios of using images and meta-information in the
diagnostic process

As
part
of
daily
activities,
physicians
integrate
information from medical images with other clinical
data to make decisions about patient's diagnosis and
treatment. Much of this additional information is not
directly available and needs to be obtained from the
information systems of other hospital departments. The
main problem, in this case, is the compatibility of data
storage and data transfer standards.

Physicians not only use data from patient's medical
examination, but also they generate new data about the
patient's medical condition. Therefore, PACS needs to
provide an opportunity not only to review existing data
but also to add new data to the patient's history file. The
complexity of the problem is not in the data insertion
itself but in the ability to validate the added data and to
verify the process of data insertion.

Medical systems store and handle patients' data. The
solution to the problem is to use very high-level
standards of data security. The extension of a PACS
with remote access functionality (e.g., Internet-based
remote connections) increases the complexity of the
problem.
Regardless
of
the
existing
rules
and
regulatory
provisions, when a new PAC has to be installed in a
hospital, it is mandatory to answer the question of how
these
requirements
are
implemented.
As
not
all
requirements are always met, the system is considered
allowed if there is a mechanism to add the necessary
functionality.
IV.
CONCLUSION
A PACS is purchased and installed with an intention of
long time use without replacement. At the same time, like
most computer systems in this category, PACS has a
complex
structure,
internal
interactions,
and
implementation. Frequently occurring problems can create
significant inconveniences at work, including blocking
routine clinical activities due to the unavailability of PACS
resources or functions. This constitutes a great complexity
of static approaches to new PACS characteristics validation.
Therefore, we explored another way to pre-assess the
suitability of a PACS for an individually selected hospital or
group of hospitals.
The article represents our approach, which optimizes
costs and time for selecting a new PACS for installation and
long-term use. The main phases of the approach are
outlined, as well as the required activities for each of the
phases. The presented approach is put in practice in a
government-funded project for a group of hospitals.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the National Scientific
Program “е-Health in Bulgaria” D01-200/2018. 
REFERENCES
[1]
H. K. Huang, PACS: Picture Archiving and Communication
Systems
in
Biomedical
Imaging,
VCH,
1996,
ISBN:
978-
1560816850
[2]
H. K. Huang, PACS-Based Multimedia Imaging Informatics: Basic
Principles and Applications, 3rd Edition,
Wiley-Blackwell, 2019,
ISBN: 978-1118795736
[3]
A. Peck, Clark's Essential PACS, RIS and Imaging Informatics,
CRC Press, 2019, ISBN: 978-1498763233
[4]
E. Samei et al., "AAPM/RSNA tutorial on equipment selection:
PACS equipment overview: general guidelines for purchasing and
acceptance testing of PACS equipment" in Radiographics, Jan-Feb
2004; 24(1), pp. 313-334, doi: 10.1148/rg.241035137.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-817-4
GLOBAL HEALTH 2020 : The Ninth International Conference on Global Health Challenges

