Modelling and Simulation of Mechanical Behaviour of an Ultra-Long Porous Silicon 
Neural Microelectrode 
Rayan Fayad, Soumaya Berro, Bakri AbdulHay, Houssein Hajj-Hassan, Hassan M. Khachfe, Mohamad Hajj-Hassan  
Dept. of Biomedical Engineering 
Lebanese International University 
Beirut, Lebanon 
{bakri.abdulhay, houssein.hajjhassan, hassan.khachfe, mohamad.hajjhassan}@liu.edu.lb 
 
 
Abstract—Porous silicon has become the gold standard when 
it comes to improving biocompatibility and bioactivity. For 
this reason, it has become a primary candidate in neural 
electrodes research and development. Consequently, the 
purpose of this work was to investigate the mechanical 
strength of porous silicon neural electrodes. Thus, a finite 
element model representing the proposed electrode was 
generated. Mechanical simulation was done on porous and 
non-porous electrodes using COMSOL® Multiphysics. 
Results showed that porosity decreased the mechanical 
strength of the neural electrode without risking the 
mechanical requirements for neural applications. 
Keywords-biocompatiblity; finite element model; failure 
analysis; neural microelectrodes; porous silicon 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
For centuries, people have fantasized about the 
possibility to communicate with the human brain to 
understand its structure and how it functions. In the recent 
decades, due 
to progresses 
in 
neuroscience 
and 
microtechnology, this fantasy became a reality with the 
introduction of neural electrodes. Neural electrodes are 
implantable micro-dimensional structures that enables a 
bidirectional communication between the brain and an 
outer electronic circuitry [1]. These electrodes are used in 
both recording action potentials from neurons and 
stimulating specific brain regions, which aid in the 
diagnosis and treatment of several brain diseases such as 
seizures, epilepsy, and migraine [2]. Such interfaces have 
applications in neuroscience research and brain-machine 
interfaces [3][4].  
Several types of neural electrodes have been designed 
and developed to date. These electrodes can be classified 
under three main categories: metal wire based, silicon 
based, and polymer based neural electrodes. A metal-based 
electrode is composed of a metal wire entirely insulated 
except for its tip; it is left exposed acting as a recording 
site [5]. The drawback of this type is that only one 
recording site was available and any attempt to increase 
the number of recording sites would increase the overall 
size of the electrode which is not generally desired. This 
drawback was solved with the introduction of silicon 
based neural electrodes that emerged with the advances of 
microfabrication techniques. 
Silicon offers 
suitable 
biocompatibility and mechanical strength and allows the 
incorporation 
of 
multiple 
recording 
sites 
without 
increasing the overall size of the electrode. Another type is 
the polymer-based neural electrode characterized by 
improved flexibility and biocompatibility. However, it 
suffers from lack of rigidity which leads to less accurate 
neural targeting [6]. 
This article covers the simulation of the mechanical 
behavior of porous silicon neural electrode. The next 
section presents the major limitation of neural electrodes 
and the advantages of using porous silicon. Section III 
introduces the design of the proposed electrode. Section IV 
discusses the simulation strategy followed. Section V 
details the results yielded. 
II. 
ADVANTAGES OF POROUS SILICON FOR NEURAL 
ELECTRODES 
The major limitation facing the previously mentioned 
types is the resultant tissue response, which is provoked 
by the neural injury upon the implantation of the 
electrode. This tissue response threatens the long-term 
functioning of the neural electrode. The implantation of 
any neural electrode is always a traumatic procedure. 
When a neural electrode is inserted into the brain, it 
breaches the vasculature and kills the neurons in its path. 
This provokes the activation of an acute immune 
response, which is characterized by the recruitment and 
activation of glial cells whose role is to digest the cellular 
debris with enzymes. This gives rise to a chronic 
response. This response results in the formation of an 
encapsulation layer termed the “glial scar” around the 
electrode. This scar isolates the electrode from nearby 
neurons and these neurons are in turn pushed away from 
the recording sites the thing that leads to signal 
deterioration [5]. 
It has been proven that tissue response is highly 
dependent on the surface topography. That is to say that 
rough 
surfaces 
such as porous ones are 
more 
biocompatible than smooth surfaces [7]. Particularly, 
porous silicon has shown enhanced biocompatibility and 
bioactivity [8]-[10]. For instance, in a study performed by 
Hajj-Hassan et al. [10], the biocompatibility and 
bioactivity of porous silicon wafers (Si) was assessed by 
examining the survival and replication of mesenchymal 
stromal cells (MSC) isolated from the bone marrow of 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

wild type mice. These results were compared with that of 
cells growing in 2D culture on tissue culture plastic (TCP) 
and on smooth titanium (SmTi), which is well known for 
its superiority (gold standard) for the manufacture of 
implants. In the first experiment performed, bone marrow 
derived MSC were seeded in porous silicon wafers etched 
to a depth of 20 μm (Si20) in 12 well plates and harvested 
after 3, 6 ,and 9 days of culture. Control cells plated at the 
same density on tissue culture plastic were harvested at 6 
days and stained with toluidine blue to visualize the cells. 
Results showed that the Si20 substrate supported the MSC 
growth. Additionally, an Alamar Blue metabolic assay 
was used to analyze the metabolic activity of cells grown 
porous silicon substrates etched to a depth of 20 μm 
(Si20) or 30 μm (Si30) and compared with TCP or 
smooth titanium, which is a common implant material. 
Representative results of the Alamar Blue assay, shown in 
Figure 1(A), indicate a small increase in metabolic 
activity of the cells grown on Si20 and Si30 samples 
compared to smooth titanium and tissue culture plastic 
controls. The cell counts indicated a steady increase in 
numbers that appeared to be dependent on the substrate 
on which they were grown. 
 
Figure 1. Quantitative analysis of MSC grown on porous silicon etched 
to a depth of 20 μm (Si20), 30 μm (Si30), commercial grade smooth 
titanium (SmTi) and tissue culture plastic (TCP) using the Alamar Blue 
assay to assess the metabolic activity [10]. 
 
So, it has been shown that the introduction of the pores 
improves the biocompatibility and bioactivity. However, a 
fundamental question imposes itself regarding whether 
their introduction influences the mechanical strength of 
the electrode. In other words, we are interested in 
knowing if the implanted porous electrode will still 
survive the forces exerted by the brain environment 
during and after implantation. The solution to this 
question is demonstrated in the sections that follow. 
III. 
DESIGN  
The following section covers the design of the 
proposed neural electrode. The developed neural electrode 
is constructed using a silicon substrate and is considered to 
be ultra-long with a length of 10.5 mm. Its overall 
structure is tapered, which facilitates the penetration. The 
geometry of the electrode is sectioned into three main 
regions; a base region, a measuring region incorporating 
the metal recording sites, and a piercing region. The 
relative dimensions of these regions are indicated in Figure 
2. The electrode was implemented using COMSOL© 
Multiphysics 4.3 as depicted in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 2. 2D drawing of the designed electrode with annotations. 
 
 
Figure 3. Complete 3D model of electrode. 
 
As for the pores, they were characterized by a 
cylindrical geometry with a radius of 1.5 µm and a depth 
of 0.6 µm. This is illustrated in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4. 3D model of porous electrode in COMSOL® Multiphysics. 
 
Arrays of pores were distributed along the top surface 
of the electrode with a distance of 3 µm separating one 
pore and the other. 
IV. 
SIMULATION STRATEGY 
Regarding the adopted simulation strategy, increasing 
forces were gradually applied on both a porous and a non-
porous electrodes until the failure stress of silicon, which 
is equivalent to 1GPa [11], is reached. During simulation, 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

two types of forces, which are naturally exerted by the 
brain environment, are applied on the electrodes [12]. The 
first force is vertical force that occurs as a result of the 
movement of the brain relative to the skull. This vertical 
force causes the bending of the electrode and is applied 
along the negative z-axis. The second force is an axial 
force that occurs during penetration and results in the 
buckling of the electrode. This force is applied along both 
the negative x and y axes. These forces were applied on 
the front face of the piercing tip while fixing the back face 
of the support base region as illustrated in Figure 5. 
 
 
Figure 5. Marked in green is (a) Area on which the stress is applied, (b) 
area, which is a fixed constraint. 
 
It is notable to mention that during the simulation of 
the porous electrode, pores were restricted to the weakest 
regions of the electrode as seen in Figure 6.  
 
 
Figure 6. (a) Porous region on the middle of the probe, (b) porous region 
on the base. 
 
This was done to reduce the computational complexity. 
These regions are the middle of the electrode (during 
axial loads), and the base region of the electrode (during 
vertical loads) [12]. 
 
V. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The following section elaborates on the results 
obtained from the simulation of both the porous and non-
porous electrodes. For each simulation, a plot of the 
induced principal stress in MPa versus the length of the 
electrode in µm as a result of applying axial and vertical 
loads. 
Regarding the application of an axial force along the 
negative x-axis on the non-porous electrode, a force of 
527.5 mN induced a maximum critical stress of 1GPa at a 
length of around 10.5 mm as indicated in the graph in 
Figure 7. This location corresponds to the tip region of the 
electrode. As for the porous electrode, a force of 522.5 
mN induced a similar response at a similar location as 
shown in Figure 8. 
Most importantly, it is essential to mention that the 
maximum critical stress is determined using the 
“Maximum Distortion Energy Theory” also known as the 
“R. von Mises Theory”, which is demonstrated in equation 
1 [13]. 
     
                σe=(σ1
2+σ1σ2+σ2
2 )1/2                                    (1)  
 
where σe is the effective stress or von Mises stress and σ1, 
2 are the principal stresses. The maximum distortion 
energy theory is one of the famous failure theories for 
ductile material. This theory states that failure is 
predicted to occur in the multiaxial state of stress when 
the distortion energy per unit volume becomes equal to 
or exceeds the distortion energy per unit volume at the 
time of failure in a simple uniaxial stress test using a 
specimen of the same material [14]. In other words, a 
given structural material is safe as long as the maximum 
value of the distortion energy per unit volume in that 
material remains smaller than the maximum distortion 
energy per unit volume required to cause yield in a 
tensile test specified of the same material. The simulated 
effective stress is then compared to the yielding stress of 
the material. 
 
 
Figure 7. Von Mises stress induced upon applying an axial force along 
the negative x-axis versus the electrode length (non-porous). 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

 
Figure 8. Von Mises stress induced upon applying an axial force along 
the negative x-axis versus the electrode length (porous). 
 
As for the application of an axial force along the 
negative y-axis, for the non-porous electrode, a force of 
47.5 mN, induced a maximum stress of 1GPa at a length 
of the electrode approximately equal to 5750 μm, which 
corresponds to the middle region of the electrode. 
Meanwhile, in the porous electrode, a force of 37.5 mN 
caused a fluctuation in the induced stress in the porous 
middle region. This region also incorporated the 
maximum stress of 1GPa. These results are indicated in 
the plots depicted in Figures 9 and 10, respectively.  
 
 
Figure 9: Von Mises stress induced upon applying an axial force along 
the negative y-axis versus the electrode length (non-porous). 
 
Figure 10. Von Mises stress induced upon applying an axial force along 
the negative y-axis versus the electrode length (porous). 
 
Finally, regarding the application of a vertical force 
along the negative z-axis, for the non-porous electrode, a 
force of 18.25 mN, induced a maximum stress of 1GPa at 
a length of the electrode approximately equal to 400 μm 
which corresponds to the fixed base region of the 
electrode (Figure 11). On the other hand, in the porous 
electrode, a force of 11.5 mN caused a fluctuation in the 
induced stress in the porous base region. This region also 
contained the maximum stress of 1GPa (Figure 12). A 
summary of the results yielded is presented in Table 1. 
 
 
Figure 11. Von Mises stress induced upon applying a vertical force along 
the negative z-axis versus the electrode length (non-porous). 
 
 
Figure 12: Von Mises stress induced upon applying a vertical force along 
the negative z-axis versus the electrode length (porous). 
 
TABLE I. A COMPARISON OF FORCES THAT INDUCED 1GPA STRESS IN 
POROUS AND NON-POROUS ELECTRODES ALONG ALL THREE PRINCIPLE 
AXES. 
Type of 
Force 
Axis 
Non-porous 
(mN) 
Porous (mN) 
Axial 
 
 
Along –
ve x 
527.5 
522.5 
 
Along –
ve y 
47.5 
37.5 
Vertical 
 
Along ive 
z 
18.25 
11.5 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

Based on the mentioned results, since the forces 
needed to induce a maximum critical stress of 1GPa are 
less in the porous electrode than in the non-porous 
electrode, we can infer that the porous electrode is 
mechanically weaker than the non-porous electrode. This 
weakening is illustrated in Table 2.  
 
TABLE II. RELATIVE WEAKENING OF POROUS ELECTRODE. 
Weakening  
Axial (-ve x) 
Axial (-ve y) 
Vertical (-ve z) 
Percentage 
0.1% 
21% 
37% 
 
 Additionally, it has been shown that the penetration 
force that an electrode must withstand is equal to 
2.42±0.77 [12]. Since the forces that brought the porous 
electrode near failure are much higher than the force that 
the electrode must withstand during penetrating the brain 
tissue, we can deduce that the porous electrode would 
definitely survive the axial penetration force. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We have presented the novel idea of the mechanical 
simulation of a porous neural electrode. Even though the 
introduction of the pores relatively weakened the neural 
electrode, the electrode was found still capable of 
surviving the brain environment. Nevertheless, certain 
limitations were present especially related to the finite 
element model. The full arrays of pores could not be 
simulated due to computational complexity and they were 
restricted to the weakest areas. Moreover, different radii 
of pores and volume porosity percentages should be 
tested.  The porous electrode is superior to the non-porous 
electrode due to the improved biocompatibility and 
bioactivity it offers. Furthermore, the presence of the 
pores gives an additional advantage where they can 
behave as scaffolds for entrapping neural growth factors 
that encourage the re-growth of neurons. This alteration to 
the electrode’s design is able to advance the healthcare 
services provided to neural diseases’ patients all around 
the world. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. C. Cheung, "Implantable microscale neural interfaces," Biomed 
Microdevices, vol. 9, 2007, pp. 923–938. 
[2] R. Jung, Biohybrid systems: nerves, interfaces and machines: 
Wiley, 2012. 
[3] B. He, Neural Engineering: Springer London, Limited, 2013. 
[4] M. A. L. Nicolelis, "Brain–machine interfaces to restore motor 
function and probe neural circuits," Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 
vol. 4, 2003, pp. 417-422. 
[5] P. F. G. B. Kim, and M. R. Abidian, "Electrode–neural tissue 
interactions: immune responses, current technologies, and future 
directions," in Biomaterials Surface Science, J. F. M. A. Taubert, 
and J. C. Rodriguez-Cabello, Ed., ed: Wiley-VCH, 2013. 
[6] V. C. M. Hajj-Hassan, and S. Musallam, "NeuroMEMS: neural 
probe microtechnologies," Sensors, vol. 6704-6726, 2008, pp. 
6704-6726. 
[7] L. M. B. A. Rosengren, N. Danielsen, H. Persson , and M. Kober, 
"Tissue reactions to polyethylene implants with different surface 
topography," Journal of Materials Science: Materials in Medicine, 
vol. 10, 1999, pp. 75-82. 
[8] L. W. A. Rosengren, N. Danielsen, T. Laurell,  and L. M. Bjursten, 
"Tissue reactions evoked by porous and plane surfaces made out of 
silicon and titanium," IEEE Transactions on Biomedical 
Engineering, vol. 49, 2002, pp. 392-399. 
[9] S. H. K. A. Moxon, A. Aslani , N. M. Kalkhoran, and P. I. Lelkes, 
"Bioactive properties of nanostructured porous silicon for 
enhancing electrode to neuron interfaces," Journal of Biomaterials 
Science, Polymer Edition, vol. 18, 2007, pp. 1263–1281. 
[10] M. K.-K. M. Hajj-Hassan, H. Wang ,  V. Chodavarapu, and J. E. 
Henderson 
 
"Response 
of 
murine 
bone 
marrow-derived 
mesenchymal stromal cells to dry-etched porous silicon scaffolds," 
Journal of Biomedical Materials Research Part A, 2011, pp. 269-
274. 
[11] S. C. L. K. A. Moxon, G. A. Gerhardt, K. A. Barbee, and J. K. 
Chapin "Ceramic-based multisite electrode arrays for chronic 
single-neuron recording," IEEE Trans Biomed Eng., vol. 51, 2004, 
pp. 647-656. 
[12] V. C. M. Hajj-Hassan, and S. Musallam, "Reinforced silicon neural 
microelectrode array fabricated using a commercial MEMS 
process," 
Journal 
of 
Micro/Nanolithography, 
MEMS, and 
MOEMS, vol. 8, 2009, pp. 033011-033018. 
[13] A. Blake, Handbook of Mechanics, Materials, and Structures: 
Wiley, 1985. 
[14] J. A. Collins, H. R. Busby, and G. H. Staab, Mechanical Design of 
Machine Elements and Machines: Wiley, 2010. 
 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-359-9
GLOBAL HEALTH 2014 : The Third International Conference on Global Health Challenges

