An Exploration of the Impact of the Use of Standard Management Models on the
Adoption of Green IT
William M. Campbell
School of Computing and Digital Technology
Birmingham City University
Birmingham, UK
B4 7XG
Email: william.campbell@bcu.ac.uk
Abstract—This paper explores the extent to which senior man-
agers using standard management models as tools for develop-
ing corporate strategy, structures and culture are likely to be
encouraged to adopt green IT. A range of standard manage-
ment models are considered: strategic, tactical and operational.
Analysis reveals that many standard models, in particular older
ones that rely heavily on numbers and take a narrow view of
corporate responsibility, are not favourable to the adoption of
green IT. Accordingly, managers need to avoid excessive reliance
on such models and should consider using models which take
account of softer issues, in particular those models which address
sustainability directly. There is a need for the development of new
management models, which more explicitly integrate traditional
bottom line considerations with the wider ethical responsibilities
of companies, including sustainability.
Keywords–Green, Sustainability, Information Technology, Or-
ganizational Culture, Management Models.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The sustainable use of resources is a key issue facing
the human race. It is widely accepted that the emission
of Greenhouse gases has affected the climate. Other issues
include pollution and the careless disposal of waste.
Information Technology makes a major contribution to
Greenhouse gas emissions, producing around 2% of global
carbon dioxide emissions However, IT can also contribute to
the reduction of pollution through technologies such as “smart
cities” and environmental monitoring systems.
There has been pressure on individual companies to take
note of environmental issues [1]. This has come not only from
the need to comply with environmental legislation, but also
from consumer pressure and concern about reputation. Many
companies now accept that economic performance is not the
only measure of success and have adopted a “Triple Bottom
Line” of environment, society and economic performance [2]
[3].
In determining corporate strategy and organizational struc-
tures senior managers often seek guidance from the standard
management models taught in business schools. The extent
to which these models encourage the adoption of green IT
will, therefore, have an effect on the extent to which managers
regard green IT as a serious, mainstream issue.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section
2 looks at the green agenda, focusing in particular on green
IT. Section 3 explores management and organizational models
which speciﬁcally address green IT. Section 4 investigates the
extent to which standard management models are favourable
to green IT. Finally, there are some concluding observations.
II.
THE GREEN AGENDA
The deﬁnition of sustainability provided by the Brundtland
Commission has gained widespread acceptance: “Development
that meets the needs of the present without compromising the
ability of future generations to meet their needs”[4]. There
has been a number of agreements, most recently the Paris
Agreement in 2016. Its central aim was to strengthen the global
response to the threat of climate change, by keeping the global
temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees Celsius
above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the
temperature increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius [5].
Jenkin et al.[6] distinguish between “Green IT” and “Green
IS”. “Green IT” is the attempt to reduce energy consumption
and waste associated with the use of both hardware and
software. “Green IS” they deﬁne as the use of information
systems to support environmental sustainability initiatives, as
in “smart cities”. Here we use “Green IT” as a generic term,
covering both efforts to reduce the environmental damage
caused by the use of IT and the use of IT in a positive way
to support sustainability objectives.
IT has played an increasingly important role in industry
and commerce and makes a substantial contribution to the
environmental footprints of companies, through both the use
of IT and the construction and disposal of IT equipment
[7]. It is estimated that IT is responsible for around 2% of
worldwide carbon dioxide emissions [8]. Energy and resources
are consumed throughout the IT lifecycle. Furthermore, the
Basel Action Network estimates that 80% of electronic waste
is sent for recycling to the developing world [9]. Computing
equipment contains highly toxic materials such as cadmium.
A number of national and international laws have been
introduced to tackle this issue. The European Union Waste
and Electronic Equipment (WEEE) directive (2003) requires
producers, importers and resellers of electronic equipment to
dispose of, refurbish or recycle equipment in an environmen-
tally sound manner. The Japanese Home Electronics Recycling
Law (1998) has similar requirements. Sustainability issues
should be considered at all stages of the software lifecycle.
Software as a Service (SAAS) and Cloud Computing
offer ways for using IT resources more efﬁciently. Companies
purchase data storage and rent software, as required, from
external providers. These can be accessed using “thin client”
computers.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

However, the IT data centres which these technologies
require have a major carbon footprint. It is estimated that
data centres produce 150 million tonnes of carbon each year.
Server virtualization has provided the opportunity for servers
to be used more efﬁciently; this allows several servers to be
consolidated as virtual servers on one physical server, enabling
sharing of resources and economies of scale.
The application of IT can make a positive contribution
to sustainability in various ways. Environmental information
systems and “intelligent buildings” help to reduce energy
wastage; supply chain information systems optimize routing
and transportation [10]. Dao et al. [11] argue for combining IT
resources with supply chain management and human resource
management within an integrated sustainability framework,
III.
MANAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS FOR
GREEN IT
Bokolo et al. [12] provide a systematic and up-to-date
review of literature on green IT. This illustrates that much
effort, across a number of disciplines, has been put into
developing models and frameworks for analysing green IT.
Murugesan and Gangadharan [13] divide enterprise green
IT strategy into three approaches.
Tactical Incremental Approach. In this approach, the com-
pany retains the existing infrastructure and policies and intro-
duces simple measures such as switching off computers when
not in use.
Strategic Approach. In this approach, the company devel-
ops a comprehensive plan for making its deployment of IT
more energy-efﬁcient.
Companies following a Deep Green Approach go beyond
the Tactical Incremental Approach, adopting additional mea-
sures such as a carbon offset policy to neutralize greenhouse
gas emissions.
One of the mostly widely-cited models is Molla and
Cooper’s “Green IT Readiness” or “G-Readiness” framework.
It divides IT into IT Managerial Capability, IT Human Ca-
pability and IT Technical Capability. An organization’s green
IT maturity is assessed in terms of attitude, policy, practice,
technology and governance. There is an accompanying G-
Readiness Survey instrument.
Deng and Ji undertook a review of the literature, seeking
to identify the motivating factors for companies to adopt green
IT [14]. They noted that the literature has “scattered theoret-
ical foundations”, but identiﬁed the following key underlying
theories.
The Diffusion of Innovation Theory investigates the process
by which innovations spread.
Institutional Theory analyses the pressures which inﬂuence
the development of organizations. A key institutional pressure
is “mimetic isomorphism”, the tendency of companies to
follow leading companies in their ﬁeld.
Organizational Culture views organizations as social struc-
tures and examines the way shared assumptions and norms
emerge. This is discussed later in the section on Cameron and
Quinn’s Competing Values Framework .
The Resource Based View (RBV) [15] takes the view that a
company’s competitive advantage resides in its ownership of a
set of resources that are not easily duplicated by a competitor.
These resources can be physical, organizational or social.
Hart [16] extends this to the Natural Resource Based View
(NRBV), by including resources and capabilities particularly
relating to sustainability.
Deng and Ji introduce a theoretical framework for “Orga-
nizational Green IT Adoption” (OGITA). This has the external
drivers of technological context and institutional pressures;
and internal drivers of senior management attitudes, corporate
strategy and organizational culture.
However, senior managers looking for guidance on chang-
ing company strategy, structures and culture are likely to refer
to standard management models. The extent to which these
models “favour” green IT will, therefore, have a major impact
on its adoption. We discuss this in the next section.
IV.
STANDARD MANAGEMENT MODELS
Almost a third (31%) of the world’s largest 500 companies
have a chief executive with an MBA [17]. It is likely that the
management models they studied will have inﬂuenced them
in their later careers. We use a standard, widely used and
inﬂuential book on management models [18]. We follow its
separation of models into strategic, tactical and operational. In
each case, we explore the extent to which managers employing
these models are likely to be encouraged to adopt green IT.
A. Strategic Management Models
These models help a company to analyse its strategic
position and develop strategic plans for the future.
1) Ansoff’s Matrix: Ansoff’s Matrix is a widely used model
for helping companies determine their strategy for developing
new products and entering new markets [19]. In terms of prod-
ucts, they would have a choice of retaining existing products or
developing new products. In term of markets, they would have
a choice of focusing on existing markets or developing new
markets. This produces four top-level strategies, as illustrated
in Figure 1. The top left quadrant is the “conservative” strategy
of focusing on existing products and markets; the bottom
right quadrant is the “aggressive” strategy of developing new
products and seeking new markets.
The model has been extended to a cube, by introducing a
geographical dimension, where companies consider expanding
into new countries. This is illustrated in Figure 2.
The Ansoff model advises companies to consider four
issues: competitive advantage, potential synergies across the
company’s core competencies, strategic ﬂexibility (the ability
easily to modify strategy to cope with unpredicted events), and
the potential for geographical growth.
We now use the OGITA model discussed above to evaluate
the extent to which use of the Ansoff Matrix would be likely
to encourage companies to adopt green IT. We ﬁrst consider
external pressures.
From a technology perspective, the questions would be:
•
Would going green give the company a relative tech-
nological advantage?
•
Would it be technically challenging?
•
Would it make use of core technical competencies
within the company?
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Figure 1. Ansoff Matrix
Figure 2. Ansoff Cube [18]
In considering these issues, technological experts within the
company would be considering the challenges of developing
new products, against the backdrop of the possibility of just
going for greater market penetration in existing markets or
developing new markets. Unless there was a compelling reason
to suppose that the greener product would provide a competi-
tive technical advantage or the existing product would become
obsolete because of its poor green credentials, technology
experts would be likely to favour avoiding radical changes to
the existing product portfolio.
We noted above that there are essentially two types of
green IT: those which try to avoid negative environmental
impacts of IT-related products and those which use information
systems to promote sustainability in applications such as
environmental monitoring and smart cities. The latter are likely
to involve developing radically new products and be much
more challenging in technical terms. They are likely, therefore,
to be deemed unattractive.
From the perspective of external institutional pressures, the
questions would be:
•
Will the company be breaking the law, if it does not
make its products greener?
•
Will the company become out of step with the market
if it does not become greener?
•
Does the company face a risk of reputational damage?
Unless the company is driven by a powerful “mimetic
isomorphism” pressure, external pressures for greenness are
unlikely to be stronger than economic pressures.
Finally, we consider the internal motivations of the OSITA
framework. Senior managers tend to be driven by numbers
and veriﬁable evidence. It is likely to be easier to provide
clear evidence for the beneﬁts of taking existing products
into new markets than to demonstrate that a market will
exist for radical new green products. Many green products
are “disruptive technologies”, for which there is currently
no market. As Christensen argues in his inﬂuential work
“The Innovator’s Dilemma”, the company culture is frequently
hostile to such technologies [20]. Unless there are a number
of green champions within the company at a senior level, top
managers are likely to favour developing markets and making
only incremental changes to existing products.
In summary, the Ansoff model is likely to discourage
companies from developing new greener products, because it
juxtaposes the challenge of developing radical new products
with the easier option of expanding the market for existing
products. Insofar as the use of Ansoff’s Matrix encourages
the adoption of green IT, it is likely to be of a “Tactical
Incremental” nature, within Murugesan’s taxonomy of green
initiatives discussed above.
2) Porter’s Five Forces: Porter’s Five Forces is one of the
most established management models, and has been used for
around forty years. It is used by companies contemplating
entering a new industry. It identiﬁes ﬁve things that need to
be considered:
•
New entrants
•
Substitutes (will it be easy to replace the proposed
product with something else?)
•
Buyers
•
Suppliers (companies which will be below you in the
supply chain)
•
Existing Competitors
The employment of Porter’s Five Forces is likely to dis-
courage companies from developing radical new green prod-
ucts and services, for the same reason as Ansoff’s Matrix.
As Christenen (discussed above) notes, you cannot analyse a
market that does not exist.
3) The BCG Matrix: The Boston Consulting Group Matrix
goes back to the 1970s [21] [18]. It is used by companies for
planning their product portfolio. It is similar to the Ansoff
Matrix, having two dimensions; in this case, the dimensions
are the projected Market Share and Market Growth. This again
creates four main types of market:
1)
high market share, high growth (best)
2)
high market share, low growth
3)
low market share, high growth
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

4)
low market share, low growth (worst)
What “advice” will this model give? The market for a new
green Cloud service is likely to be of the third type. The Cloud
market is highly competitive but is likely to grow. The market
for a new environmental monitoring system for reservoirs is
likely to be of the second type. The market is small and
unlikely to grow substantially, but it is a small market and
a successful product could have reasonable expectations of
dominating it. Few green markets are likely to be of the ﬁrst
type. It seems probable that senior decision makers using the
BCG will favour potential new markets of the ﬁrst type rather
than green markets.
4) The Blue Ocean Strategy: This model makes a distinc-
tion between a Red Ocean Strategy, where a company seeks to
beat the competition in an existing market; and a Blue Ocean
Strategy, where a company seeks to develop a brand new
market. It encourages companies to focus on the big picture
rather than the numbers [22] [18].
Employment of the Blue Ocean model is likely to be
positive for the development of green IT products for new
applications, such as the Internet of Things.
5) Kay’s Distinctive Capabilities: The Kay’s Distinctive
Capabilities (KDC) model originates from the Resource Based
View, discussed above, which regards a company as a collec-
tion of skills and capacities, many intangible, which cannot
easily be imitated. [23] [18]. KDC separates these into three
categories:
•
Architecture (features intrinsic to the company and its
relationships with customers and suppliers)
•
Reputation
•
Capacity to innovate
To some extent this model encourages green innovation.
It acknowledges the value of a company having a reputation
for being ethical. Furthermore, the extension of the RBV
discussed above, the Natural Resource Based View, explicitly
recognizes that green capabilities are likely to be important in
the future. But the model emphasises that it is very difﬁcult
to convert innovation into competitive advantage. The success
of a radical new and efﬁcient Cloud Computing model will
be greatly affected by whether competitors are developing a
similar product.
B. Tactical Management Models
These models help a company to organize its process,
resources and people. They address “how to” questions.
1) Cameron and Quinn’s Competing Values Framework:
Anthropology takes the view that organizations are cultures;
sociology takes the view that organizations have cultures [24].
Most organizational theory adopts the sociological perspective,
regarding culture as an attribute of an organization that can
be measured and analysed. Schein [25] deﬁned organizational
culture as: “A pattern of shared basic assumptions that the
group learned as it solved its problems of external adaptation
and internal integration that has worked well enough to be
considered valid and hence to be taught to new members as
the correct way to perceive, think and feel in relation to those
problems.”
Schein identiﬁed three levels of culture:
•
Artifacts, those aspects which are on the surface such
as dress and can be easily identiﬁed;
•
Espoused Values, that is conscious goals, strategies
and philosophies;
•
Basic Assumptions and Values. These exist at a largely
unconscious level, form the inner core of culture and
are hard to identify.
Basic Assumptions and Values have the deepest inﬂuence and
are the most difﬁcult to change. Many attempts at organiza-
tional change fail because of a failure to change the underlying
culture [26].
Many dimensions of organizational culture have been
proposed, for example Hofstede [27]: power distance, un-
certainty avoidance, individualism, and masculinity. Cameron
and Quinn’s “Competing Values Framework” (CVF) originated
from a cluster analysis of these dimension schemes. It identi-
ﬁes two key dimensions: Internal Focus and Integration versus
External Focus and Differentiation; and Stability and Control
versus Flexibility and Discretion [28] [29]. The CVF has been
used in many research studies and has been shown to have a
high degree of validity [30].
The four key culture types identiﬁed by the CVF are
illustrated in Figure 3 and may be summarized as follows
(Adapted from [29]):
•
Hierarchy. Such organizations tend to be bureaucratic.
Formal rules and policies hold the organization to-
gether. The long-term goals of the organization are sta-
bility, predictability and efﬁciency, Government agen-
cies and the military are typical hierarchical cultures.
•
Market. The workplace is results-oriented. Leaders
tend to be aggressive and demanding. The glue that
holds the organization together is an emphasis on
winning. Success is deﬁned in terms of beating the
competition and market share.
•
Clan. The organization is held together by loyalty,
tradition, and collaboration. It is a friendly place to
work, where people share a lot of themselves. Leaders
are thought of as mentors and coaches. Success is
deﬁned in terms of internal climate and concern for
people. The organization places a premium on team-
work, participation, and consensus.
•
Adhocracy The workplace is dynamic, creative, en-
trepreneurial and risk-oriented. The emphasis is on
being at the leading edge of new knowledge, products,
and/or services. The glue that holds the organiza-
tion together is commitment to experimentation and
innovation. Success is deﬁned as the production of
innovative and original products and services.
The Organizational Culture Assessment Tool (OCAI) con-
sists of a questionnaire requiring employees to assess their
organization, using an ipsative scale, on six characteristics:
Dominant Characteristics, Organizational Leadership, Manage-
ment of Employees, Organization Glue, Strategic Emphases
and Criteria for Success. A culture proﬁle diagram can then
be produced.
The results can be used for various purposes, e.g.: to
calculate the average proﬁle of an organization and identify
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Figure 3. Cameron and Quinn [29]
Figure 4. Cameron and Quinn [29]
the main culture types(s); to identify discrepancies between
current and preferred culture; and to ascertain the degree of
congruence between results produced by different groups of
employees. Cameron and Quinn averaged the results for over
one thousand companies; this resulted in the average proﬁle in
Figure 4.
There has been a considerable amount of research on
the relationship between types of organizational culture and
effectiveness. Richard et al. [31] conducted a survey of US
ﬁrms. They found that clan cultures resulted in higher earnings
and employee satisfaction.
In the US health industry, Gregory et al. [32] found a
positive link between group (clan) culture and patient and
physician satisfaction and also a slight link between balanced
cultures and satisfaction.
The successful adoption and diffusion of green IT systems
is also affected by the organizational culture of companies.
Green IT systems are likely to be ‘disruptive technologies’,
which are regarded as risky. For example, attempts to reduce
energy use associated with data storage through the employ-
ment of “cloud computing” may raise fears about security.
Green IT systems are, therefore, more likely to be favoured
Figure 5. Strategic Alignment Model
by companies with clan or adhocracy cultures, which are non-
hierarchical, entrepreneurial and can embrace change.
The use of the Cameron and Quinn model as a framework
for discussing the impact of organizational culture on the
adoption of green IT is discussed in detail in [33] [34].
2) Beer and Nohria E and O Theories: Beer and Nohria
is a modern management model, which explicitly emphasises
the value of soft skills and the importance of companies
behaving ethically and taking account of their corporate social
responsibility [35] [18].
They have two main theories of change:
•
Theory E. This focuses on the creation of economic
value for shareholders. It involves formal systems and
structures. The decision making process is top-down.
Changes are carefully planned.
•
Theory O. This focuses on a culture that develops
employee commitment and takes note of a company’s
ethical responsibilities. Change is emergent.
To be successful, a company must embrace both Theory E
and Theory O and confront the tension between them.
The Beer and Nohria model is favourable to the adoption
of green IT, because it encourages managers and employees
to think of the bigger picture and not just focus on narrow
ﬁnancial considerations. In particular, it asks companies to take
account of their ethical responsibilities. But the model does
not ignore the practical exigencies of operating a successful
business. For companies successfully to adopt green IT they
must both have a vision and have the operational capability to
realise it in the real world of business. The Beer and Nohria
model provides a framework for constructively reconciling the
conﬂicting pressures this creates.
3) Henderson and Venkatram’s Strategic Alignment Model:
This model addresses IT strategy directly [36] [18]. It seeks to
promote alignment between business strategy and IT strategy
and also between the IT infrastructure and business operations.
A key feature of this model that it provides for IT strategy
inﬂuencing business strategy. This is visualized by the counter-
clockwise arrow from top-right to bottom left in Figure 5. This
is likely to be favourable to the adoption of green IT.
C. Operational Management Models
These models help a company to optimize operational
process and activities.
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Figure 6. Change Quadrants
The Change Quadrants model is a tool to assist companies
to effect a particular change [37] [18]. It analyses companies
on two dimensions: whether they are “warm” or “cold”; and
whether the key motivation for the proposed change is “warm”
or “cold”.
A warm organization is one where there is a shared sense
of values and employees do not have a merely transactional
relationship with the organization. It is rather like the “Clan
Culture” in the Cameron and Quinn Competing Values model.
A cold organization is one which is hierarchical and governed
by rules, systems and procedures.
A warm motivation for a proposed change is driven by a
shared sense of values across the company. A cold motivation
is a response to a crisis such as the emergence of a dangerous
competitor.
This produces the four quadrants in Figure 6. The change
strategy should be tailored to the quadrant. A “warm organiza-
tion that is willing” (the bottom right quadrant) will be open
to change. It will be possible to develop a long-term vision
bottom-up. A “cold organization that is obligated” (the top
left quadrant) will have to drive change top-down; employees
will only have a say in the implementational details. The key
message of the model is that real transformation, such as is
involved in the systematic adoption of green IT, requires a
warm organization and a warm motivation for change.
V.
GENERAL CONCLUSIONS ABOUT MANAGEMENT
MODELS
Most of the older models are driven by relatively short-term
bottom line considerations. These are likely to be unfavourable
to green IT. More recent models, such as Beer and Nohria
and Change Quadrants, tend to adopt a wider perspective on
the responsibilities of companies and also take more note of
“softer” people and ethical issues. They are more likely to be
favourable towards green IT.
Managers need to be cautious about over-reliance on
standard models, especially those which take a narrow view
of corporate responsibilities. They should consider employing
models which take account of wider issues, in particular those
models which incorporate consideration of sustainability.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper has considered the extent to which standard
management models are likely to support the adoption of green
IT. It explored strategic, tactical and operational management
models. It was concluded that many management models are
not favourable to the adoption of green IT, in particular many
of the older standard management models which do not take
a holistic view of corporate responsibilities. It is, therefore,
incumbent upon managers not to place excessive reliance on
such models.
There is a need for the development of new management
models, which more explicitly integrate traditional bottom
line considerations with the wider ethical responsibilities of
companies, in particular those relating to sustainability.
Future research directions include empirical analysis of the
impact of the use of management models on a sustainability
culture within IT and consideration of the effect of operating
within different cultures. There is also a need for development
of more rigorous metrics for green IT.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Menguc and L. Ozanne, “Challenges of the green imperative: a
natural resource-based approach to the environmental-business perfor-
mance relationship,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 58, 2005, pp.
430–438.
[2]
J. Elkington, “Towards the sustainable corporation.” California Man-
agement Review, vol. Winter, 1994, pp. 90–100.
[3]
——, “Enter the triple bottom line,” in The Triple Bottom Line: Does It
All Add up?, A. Henriques and J. Richardson, Eds. Earthscan, London,
2004, pp. 1–16.
[4]
G. H. Brundtland, “Our common future,” in Report of the World
Commission on Environment and Development.
Oxford University
Press, 1987.
[5]
U. Nations, “Paris agreement,” in Framework Convention on Climate
Change.
United Nations, 2016.
[6]
T. Jenkin, J. Webster, and L. McShane, “An agenda for ’green’ informa-
tion technology and systems research,” Information and Organization,
vol. 21, 2011, pp. 17–140.
[7]
K. Siegler and B. Gaughan, “A practical approach to green IT,” Webinar.
[8]
M. O’Neill, Green IT for Sustainable Business Practice.
British
Computer Society, 2010.
[9]
T. Velte, A. Velte, and R. Elsenpeter, Green IT: Reduce your Information
System’s Environmental Impact While Adding to the Bottom Line.
McGraw Hill, 2008.
[10]
R. T. Watson, M. C. Boudreau, A. Chen, and M. H. Huber, “Green
is: Building sustainable business practices,” in Information Systems.
Athens, GA, USA: Global Text Project, 2008.
[11]
V. Dao, I. Langella, and J. Carbo, “From green to sustainability:
Information technology and an integrated sustainability framework,”
Journal of Strategic Information Systems, vol. 20, 2011, pp. 63–79.
[12]
A. Bokolo, M. Majid, and A. Romli, “Organizational culture and lead-
ership: Preconditions for the development of a sustainable corporation,”
Sustainable and Applied Information Technology, vol. 95, no. 9, 2017,
pp. 1875–1915.
[13]
S. Murugesan and G. R. Gangadharan, Green IT: An Overview, S. Mu-
rugesan and G. R. Gangadharan, Eds.
Wiley, 2012.
[14]
Q. Deng and J. Shaobo, “Organizational green IT adoption: Concept
and evidence,” Sustainability, vol. 7, no. 12, 2015.
[15]
B. Wernenfelt, “A resource based view of the ﬁrm,” Strategic Manage-
ment Journal, vol. 5, 1984, pp. 171–180.
[16]
S. L. Hart, “A natural-resource based view of the ﬁrm,” Academy of
Management Review, vol. 20, no. 4, 1995.
[17]
Where did FT500 chief executives go to business school? Financial
Times. [Online]. Available: https://www.ft.com/content/3a63c054-b885-
11e5-b151-8e15c9a029fb [retrieved: 7 August, 2017]
[18]
M. VanAssen, Key Management Models: The 60+ models every man-
ager needs to know.
Prentice Hall, 2009.
[19]
H. I. Ansoff, Corporate Strategy.
Penguin Books, 1987.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

[20]
C. Christensen, The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies
Cause Great Firms to Fail.
Harvard Business Review Press, 1997.
[21]
D. C. Hambrick, I. C. Macmillan, and D. L. Day, “Strategic attributes
and performance in the BCG matrix,” Academy of Management Journal,
vol. 25, 1982, pp. 510–531.
[22]
W. C. Kim and R. Mauborgne, Blue Ocean Strategy. Harvard Business
School Press, 2005.
[23]
J. Kay, Foundations of Corporate Success: How business strategies add
value.
Oxford University Press, 1993.
[24]
K. Cameron and D. R. Ettington, “The conceptual foundations of
organizational culture,” in Higher Education: Handbook of Theory and
Research, J. C. Smart, Ed.
Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer, 1988, vol. 4.
[25]
E. Schein, Organizational Culture and Leadership.
Jossey-Bass, 1992.
[26]
K. Cameron, D. Bright, and A. Caza, “Exploring the relationship
between organizational virtuousness and performance,” American Be-
havioral Scientist, vol. 47, 2004, pp. 766–790.
[27]
G. Hofstede, Culture’s Consequences.
SAGE, 1980.
[28]
R. Quinn and J. Rohrbaugh, “A spatial model of effectiveness crite-
ria: Toward a competing values approach to organizational analysis,”
Management Science, vol. 29, 1983.
[29]
K. Cameron and R. Quinn, Diagnosing and Changing Organizational
Culture Based on the Competing Values Framework.
Wiley, 2011.
[30]
R. Quinn and G. Spreitzer, “The psychometrics of the competing values
culture instrument and an analysis of the impact of organizational
culture on quality of life,” in Research in Organizational Change and
Development, R. W. Woodman and W. A. Passmore, Eds.
Greenwich
Conn.: JAI Press, 1991, vol. 5.
[31]
O. Richard, A. McMillan-Capehart, S. N. Bhuian, and E. C. Taylor,
“Antecedents and consequences of psychological contracts: Does orga-
nizational culture really matter,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 62,
2009, pp. 818–825.
[32]
B. T. Gregory, S. G. Harris, A. A. Armenakis, and C. L. Shook,
“Organizational culture and effectiveness: A study of values, attitudes
and organizational outcomes,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 62,
2009, pp. 673–679.
[33]
W. M. Campbell, M. Ratcliffe, P. Moore, and M. Sharma, “The inﬂuence
of culture on the adoption of green IT,” in Green Services Engineering,
Optimization and Modeling in the Information Age, X. Liu and Y. Li,
Eds.
Earthscan, London, 2015, pp. 25–60.
[34]
W. M. Campbell, M. Ratcliffe, and P. Moore, “An exploration of
the impact of organizational culture on the adoption of green IT,” in
Proceedings of the Green Computing and Communications Conference
(Green-com), 2013, pp. 68–76.
[35]
M. Beer and N. Nohria, Breaking the Code of Change.
Harvard
Business School Press, 2000.
[36]
J. C. Henderson and N. Venkatram, “Understanding strategic align-
ment,” Business Quarterly, vol. 55, no. 3, 1991, pp. 12–89.
[37]
J. P. Cotter, Breaking the Code of Change.
A Force for Change: How
Leadership Differs from Management, 1990.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

