A Target System for the Introduction of IT-based 
Sustainability Management in Companies  
 
Volker Stich 
Managing Director 
FIR e. V. an der RWTH Aachen  
Aachen, Germany 
e-mail: st@fir.rwth-aachen.de 
Jan Hicking 
Information Management 
FIR e. V. an der RWTH Aachen  
Aachen, Germany 
e-mail: hg@fir.rwth-aachen.de  
Mathis Niederau 
Information Management 
FIR e. V. an der RWTH Aachen  
Aachen, Germany 
e-mail: ni@fir.rwth-aachen.de 
Robert Schröder 
Information Management 
FIR e. V. an der RWTH Aachen  
Aachen, Germany 
e-mail: sr9@fir.rwth-aachen.de 
 
 
 
Abstract— Sustainability is a fundamental issue for companies, 
especially for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SMEs). A 
key challenge for the realization of sustainability is its 
complexity and multidimensionality. The content of this paper 
is a target system in which the field of sustainability is broken 
down to a level that is manageable for SMEs. By means of a 
hierarchy of the target system, dependencies between goals are 
made transparent and prioritization is made possible. The 
target system consists of eight key objectives and sixteen 
accompanying targets that concretize the Triple Bottom Line. 
The approach enables SMEs to take sustainability-relevant 
aspects into account in a targeted and structured manner.  
Keywords-digital 
transformation; 
target 
system; 
sustainability management; energy management  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Rising awareness of sustainable business practices in the 
corporate world can be observed [1][20]. On the one hand, 
companies are motivated to establish a strategy for 
sustainable management due to regulations, e.g., taxation 
benefits for sustainable companies. On the other hand, 
customers call for change and reward sustainable products 
by increased willingness to pay [2]. 
Often, a company's first approach to sustainability can be 
found in energy management. Governments are also aware 
of the significance of energy management. In practice, 
Energy Information Systems are used for tasks related to 
energy management. Target systems that support companies 
selecting a suitable software for their needs are the origin of 
the target system described in this article. Thus, a significant 
part of the target system is referring to energy management. 
The article is structured as followed: Section 2 describes 
the state of the art, section 3 the approach, and section 4 the 
conclusions.  
II. 
STATE OF THE ART  
In this section, information regarding sustainability and 
target systems, in general, is provided. In addition to 
governments and NGOs, companies also need to play an 
active role to tackle global problems, such as climate change 
and social inequality. They are expected to play an active 
role. According to the triple bottom line approach, 
sustainability considers economic, ecological, and social 
aspects [3]. After [3], the founder of this approach, 
companies that pay attention to both ecological and social 
aspects can determine a positive effect on economic 
development, such as better access to new customers due to 
improved reputation regarding sustainability [4]. The 
Sustainable Development Goals of the United Nations 
(UN), which include, e.g., Climate Action or Reduced 
Inequalities, can serve as a further point of reference for 
companies, even if the goals are originally intended to 
address the member states of the UN [5]. The more globally 
a company operates and the larger its influence, the more 
goals are relevant. The Global Reporting Initiative is an 
independent, international organization, which aims to 
support companies when it comes to the preparation of 
sustainability reports [6]. Another initiative is the WIN-
Charta of the German state of Baden-Württemberg, which 
can be described as a regional response to the global trend 
towards sustainability. The provided guiding principles are 
closely correlated to the SDGs and thus also build on the 
Triple Bottom Line [7]. 
Entrepreneurial action is characterized by constant 
decisions to maintain profitability. Concrete goals and their 
regular monitoring make it easier to determine the progress 
of management measures, as well as to derive improved 
options for action. Often it is necessary to prioritize goals, 
thus a target system can facilitate this prioritization. One 
approach of target systems is the Goal-Means-Thinking 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

approach of HABERFELLNER, which defines a multi-level 
effect system [8]. The author distinguishes goals and means, 
where means serve as a solution for the goal above them on 
the one side, whereas the means represent a goal for the next 
subordinate level as well.  
Another approach is the Plural target system according 
to SCHEIBLER [9]. Plural target systems have such key 
objectives which are free of conflict among each other. A 
key objective is a top-level goal in the system, for example,  
profit maximization. There are two levels below filled with 
subordinate goals that are derived from the guiding goals. 
Only the integration of the lower levels, i.e., contradiction-
free, supply to superordinate goals constitutes a well-
structured goal system [9]. 
III. 
APPROACH 
The procedure for creating the target system is divided 
into three steps according to [3]. First, a target set is 
identified through desk research and analysis of relevant 
literature. The objectives of this set are abstracted based on 
measures, advice, and best practices cited in the literature, 
checked for relevance to SMEs, and summarized in case of 
overlaps. Then, complementary, or conflicting cause-effect 
relationships between the objectives are derived factually. 
Subsequently, the conflicting goals are mapped using 
HABERFELLNER’s goal-means thinking in such a way that 
there are no longer any conflicting relationships between a 
leading target and the subordinate target. Finally, the 
hierarchical target system is transformed into a plural target 
system according to SCHEIBLER [9].  
Tighter time 
table
Expansion of the 
rail network
More com-
fortable trains
Improved rate 
system
Support public 
transport
Stricter emission 
regulations
Self opening doors
More available 
seats
Reduction of 
urban pollution
Goal
Means
Goal
Means
Goal 
Means
 
Figure 1.  Structure of the target system 
An example for a target system is shown in Figure 1. It 
combines several targets in a hierarchical structure by the 
goal-means-thinking by HABERFELLNER.  
A. Economic dimension  
One of the top priorities of entrepreneurial activity is to 
perpetuate high profitability, which is why it has found its 
way into a key objective. In addition to pure profitability, 
customer loyalty is the key to the long-term success of a 
company.  
In economic terms, the main objectives listed are those 
aimed at reducing costs or ensuring the long-term existence 
of a company on the market through strong customer 
loyalty.  
Increase profitability: The objective can be divided into 
two accompanying objectives.  
Reduce risks in energy and raw material supply: This 
accompanying target is associated with the term resilience. 
Every manufacturing company depends on a reliable supply 
of energy and raw materials. Bottlenecks in the procurement 
of raw materials can bring production to a temporary 
standstill, and interruptions in the energy supply can cause 
additional damage to machinery and equipment. In either 
case, negative consequences for profit prospects must be 
expected.  
Reducing energy and resource procurement costs:  
Expenditures for energy and resources account for almost 
half of total costs in the manufacturing sector. Other costs 
such as wages, depreciation, and amortization are less 
significant. To increase profitability, measures must 
therefore be taken to achieve cost efficiency in energy and 
resource procurement.  
Expanding customer loyalty: Two accompanying targets 
are assigned to the key objective "Expand customer 
loyalty". 
Improve image: A positive image has paramount 
importance for companies. The interaction of the three 
pillars of sustainability can be seen here. Even small efforts, 
such as publishing image brochures on the social and 
ecological commitment performed, can improve the image 
and contribute to economic success [10].  
Increase customer satisfaction: The basis of stable 
customer loyalty is customer satisfaction [11]. All 
parameters during the contact between company and 
customer as well as the product's life cycle contribute to 
customer satisfaction. Starting with reliable and accurate 
information, a company's sphere of influence extends from 
pricing to after-sales service.  
Reduce risks in 
energy supply
Reduce energy & 
resource 
procurement costs
Improve company
image
Increase customer 
satisfaction
Increase 
profitability
Economic
dimension
Expand customer 
loyalty
 
Figure 2.  Economic dimension of the target system  
B. Ecological dimension  
Ecological aspects are prominent in the perception of 
sustainability. Sustainable ecological action encompasses 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

many aspects, such as emissions. The central goal is a 
general reduction in environmental impact.  
Optimize energy use: Making energy use sustainable 
means energy that is based on sufficient availability of 
suitable resources, while negative impacts are limited [12].  
Minimize energy use: The most effective way to reduce 
CO2 emissions is to consistently diminish energy use. Less 
energy use means less environmental impact, and 
companies also benefit from lower procurement costs. A 
detailed examination of the energy flows and the associated 
costs of a business unit is possible. 
Ecologize energy use: While it is important to use as little 
energy as possible, there are also limits to the scope of 
energy-saving measures. Efforts must therefore also be 
made to ensure that the energy usage is as environmentally 
friendly as possible.  
Optimize use of resources: Optimizing the use of 
resources 
can 
be 
realized 
by 
the 
efficient 
and 
environmentally compatible use of materials and production 
goods.  
Minimize resource use: Efficient material streams not 
only protect the environment, but also contribute to lower 
procurement costs. In addition, further savings are possible 
due to lower waste and reduced expenditures for further 
environmental 
protections, 
i.e., 
with 
innovative 
environmental technology.  
Ecologize resource use: Regarding resources, companies 
can also strive for more eco-friendly solutions. The use of 
alternative or recycled raw materials offers numerous 
possibilities for acting.  
Reduce environmental impact: To maintain or improve 
the current state of the world, a sustainable increase in 
energy and resource productivity is necessary. Furthermore, 
there is a need to limit the environmental impact caused by 
humans.  
Minimize 
negative 
consequence: 
Climate 
and 
environmentally neutral production are a vision that requires 
a considerable number of further efforts. A key measure that 
can be expanded iteratively is to minimize the negative 
consequences of a company's production activities. 
Create 
positive 
environmental 
impact: 
Another 
accompanying target of the ecological dimension offers 
companies numerous opportunities for action to go beyond 
reducing their ecological footprint and strive for targeted 
measures for a healthy environment.  
Minimize 
energy use
Ecologize energy 
use
Minimize resource 
use 
Ecologize resource 
use 
Minimize negative 
consequences 
Create positive 
environmental value
Optimize Energy use
Optimize use of 
resources 
Reduce environmental 
impact
Ecological dimension 
 
Figure 3.  Social dimension of the target system 
C. Social Dimension 
By pursuing social goals many companies can also 
determine economic benefits. Social commitment improves 
the brand image and can thus lead to higher sales.  
Promote health and safety: Employees of manufacturing 
companies in particular are exposed to a variety of health 
risks - for example, through the accumulation of 
problematic pollutants [12]. Thus, high motivation to 
perform 
occupational 
health 
management 
is 
given. 
Companies that actively care for the health of their 
employees are able to retain qualified employees in the 
company [13].  
Ensure 
good 
working 
conditions: 
Employees 
in 
manufacturing SMEs complain about stress, strain due to 
static posture and noise. Measures are therefore required to 
ensure health and safety at the workplace, i.e., the 
establishment of a medical expert [14]. To also ensure the 
mental health of employees, efforts to ensure a pleasant 
working atmosphere and regular reviews of employee 
satisfaction are needed. In the future, concepts for work-life 
balance will be needed, enabling suitable working time 
models. 
Provide 
a 
contractual 
framework 
for 
protection: 
Companies can protect employees by striving for long-term 
contracts, as employers feel financially secured and work in 
a stable environment. Since the search for new employees is 
a cost driver, it is worthwhile for companies. Extensive 
transparency regarding the pay structure also avoids 
potential conflicts. Added benefits for employees that go 
beyond 
monetary 
compensation 
increase 
employee 
satisfaction and strengthen the attractiveness of the 
employer in terms of employee acquisition. For example, 
companies can offer leasing models for company bicycles, 
or subsidize gym fees.  
Seek participation and transparency: To ensure long-term 
identification of the employee with the employer, 
companies need to encourage employees to participate in 
sustainability-related topics. The focus of this key objective 
is the collaboration within the company across different 
hierarchical levels and includes the involvement of external 
interest groups.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Increase organizational candor: Clear communication 
channels and sufficient feedback are elementary factors for 
employee satisfaction. Feedback should be given in both 
directions. Candor and extensive conversations result in a 
high level of job satisfaction; employees are motivated, 
there is less willingness to change jobs, and employees have 
a greater interest in the further development of the company 
[15]. In addition, management must grant all employees the 
same possibilities and opportunities.  
Strengthen employee involvement: Employees who 
experience a high degree of responsibility, competency, 
self-determination, and influence are also more satisfied 
with their work and identify more strongly with the 
company. Further positive consequences are increased 
productivity, performance, and innovation [16]. Not only 
large corporations but also SMEs can share the company's 
success with their employees. For example, a company will 
motivate its employees by sharing a percentage of the profit. 
Enhance empowerment and cooperation: Not only do in-
house training programs contribute to a sustainable 
employee base, but also external engagement that supports 
individuals enhances employer reputation.  
Support people by corporate activity: Apprenticeships 
provide companies with qualified specialists who are 
capable of manufacturing high-quality products and offering 
sophisticated services. In this way, companies can counter 
the shortage of skilled workers at an early stage. Regular 
training also creates greater value for companies. Lifelong 
learning across all employee groups as well as individual 
and 
flexible 
training 
measures 
increase 
employee 
productivity and thus contribute to innovative strength and 
competitiveness [17]. Internal disputes and competing 
departments cause a shift in the focus on value creation. A 
harmonious interaction among employees is the basis for a 
good working atmosphere.  
Support people beyond the company: Corporate giving is 
not yet very common among SMEs. Corporate giving is 
done above all to improve a company's image. Hence, a 
positive economic correlation has been proven between the 
extent of corporate giving and the company's success [18]. 
For smaller companies, topics with a regional or local 
connection are particularly suitable [19]. Furthermore, 
investment to individuals can be made.  
 
 
Ensure good 
working conditions
Provide contractual 
framework for 
protection
Increase 
organizational 
candor
Strengthen 
employee 
involvement
Support people by 
corporate activity
Support people 
beyond the company
Promote health and 
safety
Seek participation and 
transparency
Enhance empowerment 
and cooperation
Social dimension 
 
Figure 4.  Social dimension of the target system 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
Considering the increasing relevance of sustainability in 
society and industry, companies see an obligation to act. 
SMEs are asked by large companies to meet sustainability 
criteria, in particular, because of their role as a supplier. 
Hence, the scarce personnel and investment capacities of 
SMEs must be directed towards this topic to a greater extent 
in the future. To implement sustainability management on a 
systemic level in the company, information systems, 
especially energy information systems (EIS), represent a 
logical starting point.  
EIS provide functionalities that can also be used for 
other sustainability use cases. This offers enormous 
opportunities due to data-driven decision-making. 
Based on extensive literature research, a target system is 
presented, that companies can use to prioritize different 
targets. These targets can be used to define necessary 
features of EIS and define the necessary scope of IT-based 
sustainability management.   
Further research is needed to examine different software 
solutions for monitoring success in terms of their functions 
and relations to the goals specified in the target system. To 
achieve a level of complexity that is manageable for SMEs, 
software providers offering modular system worlds are a 
promising area of investigation for further research work. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS  
The research in this paper is part of the project 
FLEMING (project number 03EI6012D), funded by the 
German Federal Ministry for Economic Affairs and Energy. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Wühle, Nachhaltigkeit als Erfolgsfaktor. In: Englert, M., Ternès, 
A. (eds.) Nachhaltiges Management. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
Berlin, Heidelberg 2019 
[2] Statista: 
Treibhausgasemissionen 
in 
Deutschland. 
https://de.statista.com/statistik/studie/id/22904/dokument/treibhausga
semissionen-in-deutschland-statista-dossier/, vol. 2020 
[3] J. Elkington, Cannibals with Forks: The Triple Bottom Line of 21st 
Century Business 1997 
[4] G. Wecker & B. Ohl, Compliance in der Unternehmerpraxis. Springer 
Fachmedien Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden 2013 
[5] United Nations (Hrsg.): Agenda for Sustainable Development, vol. 
2015 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

[6] GRI: GRI Standards Consolidated, vol. 2020 
[7] Umweltministerium Baden-Württemberg: Die WIN-Charta im 
Zeichen der Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), vol. (o.J.) 
[8] R. Haberfellner, Systems Engineering. Grundlagen und Anwendung, 
vol. Orell Füssli Verlag, Zürich 2018 
[9] A. 
Scheibler, 
Zielsysteme 
und 
Zielstrategien 
der 
Unternehmensführung. Gabler Verlag, Wiesbaden 2013 
[10] LUBW (Hrg.): Leitfaden für ein naturnahes Betriebsgelände 2013, 
https://pudi.lubw.de/detailseite 
/-/publication/47500 
[11] M. Schawalder, V. Lenz and, H. Röllin (eds.), Industrielle Services 
strategisch optimieren, vol. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, 
Heidelberg 2013. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-36453-2 
[12] W. Krewitt, J. Nitsch, O. Langniß, and M. Fischedick, Leitlinien für 
eine 
nachhaltige 
Energieversorgung. 
https://fvee.de/fileadmin/publikationen/Themenhefte/th2006/th2006_
01_04.pdf 2006 
[13] A. S. Esslinger, Betriebliches Gesundheitsmanagement. Mit gesunden 
Mitarbeitern zu unternehmerischem Erfolg, vol. Gabler, Wiesbaden 
2010 
[14] M. Englert & A. Ternès (eds.), Nachhaltiges Management. 
Nachhaltigkeit als exzellenten Managementansatz entwickeln, vol.  
Springer Gabler, Berlin 2019 
[15] L. Volkelt, Geschäftsführung ohne Stress. Springer Fachmedien 
Wiesbaden, Wiesbaden 2019 
[16] C. C. Schermuly, Empowerment: Die Mitarbeiter stärken und 
entwickeln. 
In: 
R. van 
Dick, 
J. 
Felfe 
(eds.), 
Handbuch 
Mitarbeiterführung: Wirtschaftspsychologisches Praxiswissen für 
Fach- und Führungskräfte, pp. 1–13. Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
Berlin, Heidelberg 2015. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-55213-7_25-1 
[17] V. Meyer, “Unsere Studien zeigen, dass regelmäßige Weiterbildungen 
in der Wirtschaft keine Selbstverständlichkeit sind“. Wirtsch Inform 
Manag, vol. 11, 374–376, 2019. doi: 10.1365/s35764-019-00213-6 
[18]  R. Balakrishnan, G. B. Sprinkle, and M. G. Williamson, Contracting 
Benefits of Corporate Giving: An Experimental Investigation. The 
Accounting Review, vol. 86, 1887–1907 2011. doi: 10.2308/accr-
10127 
[19] Soziale Ziele — einfache Definition & Erklärung, vol. 
[20]  A. M. Clipa, C. I. Clipa, M. Danileț, and A. G. Andrei, “Enhancing 
Sustainable Employment Relationships: An Empirical Investigation 
of the Influence of Trust in Employer and Subjective Value in 
Employment Contract Negotiations.” Sustainability, vol. 11, 4995 
2019. doi: 10.3390/su11184995 
 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

