Simulation of Electric Vehicle Battery Behaviour for Frequency Regulation Use: 
Profitability Versus Mobility Constraints and Grid Needs 
 
Lamya Abdeljalil Belhaj1 2, Antoine Aubineau1, 
Antoine Cannieux1, Salomé Rioult1,  
1Institut Catholique d’Arts et Métiers, Icam 
Carquefou, France 
2 Institut de Recherche en Energie Electrique de Nantes 
Atlantique  
Saint Nazaire, France 
e-mail: lamya.belhaj@icam.fr 
 
Isabel Praça, Zita Vale 
GECAD – Research Group on Intelligent Engineering and 
Computing for Advanced Innovation and Development, 
Institute of Engineering, Polytechnic of Porto (ISEP/IPP), 
Porto, Portugal  
e-mail: {icp, zav}@isep.ipp.pt 
 
 
Abstract—Electric Vehicles Batteries are particularly adapted 
for frequency regulation service regarding their features and 
their availability. Many parameters have an important impact 
on the service profit like the grid needs, the driving patterns, the 
battery wear, the investments and the service remuneration. 
The aim of this study is to propose an algorithm in view of 
dynamic simulation taking into account grid requests, vehicles 
driving patterns and the electricity prices. The proposed tool 
can use real Electric Vehicles and grid data as well as simulated 
ones. It allows apprehending the profitability for various 
markets situations, mobility patterns and charging schedules. It 
also allows following the gains during the day in view of gains 
communication to the Electric Vehicle or fleet owner and for a 
dynamic decision about the service delivery depending on the 
profit and the battery availability. 
Keywords-Vehicle to Grid; Frequency regulation; Profitability 
calculation; 
Dynamic 
simulation; 
Regulation 
market 
remuneration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, the widespread use of Electric Vehicles (EVs) 
faces many difficulties due to their high prices and their 
limited autonomy compared to vehicles that use fossil fuels. 
However, with the foreseen advancements in storage 
technologies, EV will be an important tool under the context 
of smart grids to improve efficiency and sustainability of 
power systems. Indeed, it may be a very relevant means to 
provide grid services in order to better manage, with the 
uncertainty of renewable generation, grid congestions as well 
as using the batteries energy for other grid services. In fact, 
the vehicles are used 5% of the time for mobility and are 
available for other purposes during the remaining time [1]. 
Consequently, a good storage potential will be available 
according to the development of EV. On the one hand, the 
EV battery can support the intermittent renewable sources of 
energy by absorbing the production when there are no 
consumption needs in the grid. At the same time, the used 
energy for mobility will come from green sources ensuring 
the low carbon footprint of the EV. 
On the other hand, the EV battery can help the grid for 
balancing production and consumption and ensuring power 
quality. In fact, the available energy can be used for ancillary 
services like frequency regulation or peak shaving. 
In the context of Vehicle to Grid (V2G), an EV fleet acting 
like a generation unit is an interesting actor in the energy 
markets like in Germany and Sweden [2], California [3] or 
France [4]. Studies also proved that a single EV is able to 
provide ancillary services under real-time conditions [5] in 
the PJM market, which coordinates electricity in 13 states in 
USA and the District of Columbia. 
Some studies [6] highlighted that the peak power 
management corresponding to power injection in the grid 
during high consumption periods is more suitable with hybrid 
vehicle regarding the high amount of needed power versus 
mobility constraints and battery wear. Nevertheless, other 
ancillary services are very suitable for EVs batteries in 
particular frequency regulation [7] [8] characterized by low 
amount of energy requests many times during the day. 
Studies show gains between 100€ per year per vehicle in the 
French context [4] and 2000€ in the American one [3]. The 
EV battery is profitable for frequency regulation service 
because the initial capital cost of the battery purchased for 
driving may not be totally assigned to the V2G [1]. Besides, 
the battery response time is quick [1] [3] and the low quantity 
of energy induces shallow cycling and thus extended life 
cycles [9]. However, the profitability for several actors like 
the DSO, EV aggregator and EV owner must be ensured and 
is variable depending on the context. The profitability may 
concern EV owner or EV fleet aggregator. For the EV owner, 
the service may be profitable at his level if a single-vehicle is 
able to provide the service under real-time conditions in the 
regulation market. Otherwise, his gain will be shared with an 
EV fleet aggregator able to offer a higher level of power to 
the grid.  
This paper aims to present an interesting tool allowing the 
simulation of the dynamic behaviour of an EV Battery (EVB) 
while ensuring, mobility and frequency regulation service. 
The proposed algorithm calculates the service availability 
and the net profit for each request of the grid.  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

The first part of this article describes the frequency 
regulation service and some regulation markets in the world. 
The second one presents a detailed description of the 
profitability calculation methodology by request. The third 
part presents the algorithm allowing simulating the EVB 
behaviour during one day including the availability and the 
profitability. It also presents the used algorithm to generate 
the driving patterns that are one of the main inputs of the 
frequency regulation simulation. The other parameters and 
inputs are also described. Finally, realistic case studies 
compare the profitability for various situations. They 
illustrate the possibility of using the proposed tool in any 
context to simulate the EV behaviour under mobility and 
services constraints. It can also integrate real EV data to 
calculate the service profitability and to decide about the 
service delivery. 
II. 
FREQUENCY REGULATION 
The grid power quality is dependent on the real time 
balance between the electric consumption and the production 
while maintaining, for instance, rated voltage, frequency and 
harmonics level. Regarding the frequency regulation, it is 
dependent on the balance of active power in the grid. In fact, 
the frequency decreases if the consumed active power 
exceeds the generated one, thus, there is a need of “regulation 
up”. Contrariwise, if the generation exceeds the consumption, 
frequency rises and a “regulation down” is necessary. In 
order to achieve these operations, three frequency reserves 
exist: the primary and the secondary reserves, which are 
generally automatic, and the tertiary reserve or long-term 
reserve, which is triggered manually. 
The primary reserve is for an instantaneous adjustment 
(seconds) and activated automatically. Today, this regulation 
is implemented via the speed regulation of the production 
groups and the frequency of use is high. Obviously, as EVBs 
can offer the primary regulation, they are also able to offer 
secondary and tertiary ones. However, this study will 
concentrate on the primary regulation. 
Regarding the high amount of needed power at grid level 
compared to each EV battery capacity, new actors like EV 
aggregators will allow optimizing EV resources as storage. 
For the fleet manager, one of the main issues is the real 
available power for the service. In fact, EVBs may not be 
plugged in or not with the right State of Charge (SOC). In this 
context, various studies on the stochastic behaviour of EVs 
stated the reliability of the frequency regulation service 
despite the mobility constraints [10]. 
A. Markets 
Regarding the regulation market, we talk about Automatic 
Generation Control Market (AGC) in most of the countries. 
In the smart grid context, new grid components offer 
regulation services in the regulation market like controllable 
loads or electric storage. For instance, CAISO Market 
allowed Non-Generator Resource (NGR) such as batteries 
and flywheels, to bid in the regulation market [11]. 
Batteries are well positioned in the AGC market by nature 
because the time response of the electric storage is fast and 
adapted to high quality primary frequency regulation. The 
California Energy Commission stated that the storage 
resources are at least twice as effective as a combustion 
turbine for the grid regulation purposes [11]. 
The payment of regulation services is represented by 
various prices depending on the markets [12]. Most of them 
take into account capacity price for the energy made available 
for the service and service price for the effective supplied 
energy. For instance, in the ISO New England (ISO-NE), the 
payment includes capacity price and service price [13]. Some 
of the markets use only one of the two remunerations as in 
France where the primary reserve payment is provided by a 
fixed tariff and the payment is limited to a capacity price 
whereas secondary reserve includes both of the capacity and 
service prices [4]. 
The regulation market functioning is highly dependent on 
the electric grid features. It mainly depends on the 
geographical location, the renewables’ penetration, the EVs 
presence. Besides, it is also impacted by the advancements in 
the smart grid installations with possibilities of grid services 
offers based on storages, load management and other means. 
Many markets are under development or are currently 
changing depending on the grid situations. 
III. 
PROFITABILITY CALCULATION 
In this part, the annual net profit calculation [3] is extended 
to profitability calculation per grid request. 
A. Per request revenue calculation 
In the case of V2G used for frequency regulation, the 
capacity payment is for power being available in kW-h to 
support the grid. Whereas the energy payment is for the 
energy in kWh exchanged in real time. The per request 
revenue is calculated using the following equation:  
 
    Rreg−r = Rel−r + Rcap−r = (pel Qrequest) + (pcap P 
hplug
Tday) (1) 
For the remunerated produced energy per request Rel−r, 
the delivered energy Qrequest in kWh is multiplied by the 
electricity price pel, which is the market selling price of 
electricity in €/kWh. 
Besides, the capacity payment Rcap−r is calculated using: 
- pcap, the capacity price, which is in €/kW-h. It is the price 
for the service availability, it means the remuneration fixed 
by the contract for the participation to the service when the 
battery is plugged in and available. There is a remuneration 
even if there is no service. 
- P is the contracted capacity available for the V2G, in kW. It 
is the smallest value between vehicle power Pveh and the line 
power Pline because both of them limit the power. P may also 
be limited by the performance represented by the response 
ramp dynamic. The ability of ramping limits the total amount 
of power capacity in some markets like PJM [14]. Nowadays, 
95% of the charging stations are slow charging for instance 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

in France 3kW [15]. For V2G participation, fast charging is 
more interesting. We assume a value of 15kW with adapted 
installation [3]. 
- Tday is the number of transfers per day. 
- hplug is the number of hours during the day when the EV is 
plugged in and available for the service.  
In regulation down, we assume that the operation is always 
financially positive because the battery will have to be 
charged for mobility purposes. In fact, if the SOC matches 
with the demand, the regulation down is achieved, and the 
gain corresponds to the stored energy Esc (kWh) multiplied 
by the price of buying the electricity cpe (€/kWh) at the 
charging moment. The gain represents the charging cost if it 
had been realized using the grid. 
B. Per request cost calculation 
The cost for regulation up is defined as follows: 
 
          Creg−r = Cel−r + Cc−r = cen Qrequest +
cac
Tday dplug
 

 
Regarding the energy cost Cel−r calculation: 
- cen is the cost per energy unit in €/kWh, which includes: 
the cost of electricity, losses, plus battery degradation cost. 
It is calculated as follows: 
 
             cen =
cpe
ηconv
+ cd 
(3) 
 
Where cpe is the cost of purchased electricity for recharging 
in €/kWh. ηconv is the two-way electrical efficiency and is 
around 73% [3].  
cd is the cost of battery degradation calculated using : 
 
             cd =
cbat
3 Lc Es DOD 
(4) 
 
- Lc is the number of cycles fixed to 2000 cycles for Li-ion 
battery at 25°C [9]. 
We assume that shallow cycling has less impact on battery 
lifetime than deep cycling [3] [7]. Thus, factor 3 is used for 
the number of cycles.  
- DOD is the maximum Depth of Discharge in % fixed to 
80% [9]. 
- cbat is the total battery replacement cost in €, calculated 
using: 
 
            cbat = (Es cb) + (cl tl) 
(5) 
 
Where cb is the cost of the battery in €/kWh assumed to be   
cb = 300€/kWh [15]. 
 cl is the cost of labour in € and tl the labour time required for 
battery replacement. They are fixed to the average of the 
labour cost, in 2015 in Europe it was 35€/h [16] and a 
replacement labour time of 8 hours [3]. 
- Es in kWh is the energy of the battery fixed to 22 kWh, 
which represents 65% of EVs in France in 2013 [15]. 
For the capital cost calculation Cc−r: 
- cac is the annualized capital cost for additional equipment 
needed for V2G calculated using: 
 
              cac = cc CRF = cc
d
1 − (1 + d)−n 
(6) 
 
- cc is the capital cost i.e., the one-time investment assumed 
to be 1800€ including on board metering, adapted power 
electronics for V2G, wireless communication system, and 
wiring costs [3]. 
- CRF is the capital recovery factor calculated using d, which 
is the discount rate in % and n the amortization duration in 
years thus the lifetime of the V2G hardware fixed to 10% and 
10 years [4]. 
- dplug is the the number of days in the year when the EV is 
plugged in and available for the service. 
The cost from regulation down is assumed to be null 
because there is no need of additional equipment and it is 
considered as always interesting because it is free charging.  
IV. 
SIMULATION ALGORITHMS 
The frequency regulation simulation algorithm is 
implemented in Matlab. To make it available under SEAS 
Shared Intelligence Platform (SEAS-SI), developed by 
GECAD for SEAS project [17], inputs and outputs templates, 
as well as specific web services, needed to be developed 
accordingly. SEAS-SI platform allows algorithms sharing 
without confidentiality concerns. Those algorithms may be 
executed on-line, alone, sequentially or combined differently. 
The EV behaviour algorithm outputs are used for the 
frequency regulation simulation. 
A. EV behaviour algorithm 
Electric Vehicle Scenario Simulation tool (EVeSSi) has 
been actively developed since 2011 [18] with the goal of 
supporting the development of realistic case studies that 
include scenarios with EVs, eliminating the need to create 
manually each individual vehicle profile. 
EVeSSI includes several modules: scenario and input 
configuration, SUMO simulation, SUMO output data 
importer, electric grid creator, and an intelligent grid 
allocator. In the first stage, EVeSSi is used essentially as a 
parameterization tool to introduce the input data for the 
simulation in SUMO. These inputs can be summarized as 
follows: the first step is to generate/load the road network 
(load a real road network or generating a “virtual” one by 
introducing specific parameters), a second step is related to 
the creation of EVs and its parameters, and then it is 
necessary to specify the charging points or use a random 
generation to do it. Finally, an algorithm can perform the 
daily activities and generate the necessary trips, which are 
then simulated by SUMO engine (the actual traffic simulation 
results). The data importer module reads the files generated 
by SUMO application and then filters, treats and analysis the 
necessary data to be executed by the subsequent developed 
algorithms. The grid creator can generate an electric grid 
taking into account the dimensions of the road network. This 
creates a grid with intelligently distributed electrical buses 
and respective branches. This algorithm is used only if the 
user does not specify a local real grid. If the user loads the 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

respective real grid the mentioned generation is skipped. 
After this step, the intelligent grid allocator finds the 
corresponding electric bus where EV can connect, depending 
on the location, i.e., the street of the arrival or where it is 
parked. 
The traffic model allows evaluating the chaotic behaviour 
of traffic, which is affected by several factors, including the 
road network topology, the number of cars and their routes, 
the types of vehicles, traffic lights and the users’ driving 
behaviour, which is hard to predict. The influence of traffic 
patterns in travel times can be analysed, and the energy 
consumption measured. The integration of the traffic model 
with EVeSSi enables to bridge the road network and the 
electricity grid, therefore, overcoming the existent gap in 
current applications [19]. In fact, there is a huge potential in 
applications 
with 
EVeSSi, 
for 
instance, 
evaluating 
performance of electric public transports, analysing optimal 
location of charging points and charging stations, estimating 
electricity network impacts, testing different control 
strategies like smart charging and V2G approaches, 
predicting traffic patterns and user behaviour, among others. 
B. Frequency regulation algorithm 
There are three main loops in the frequency regulation 
algorithm (FreqReg). The first one decides about the EV 
availability for the service mainly according to mobility and 
charging constraints. The second one deals with frequency up 
requests and the third one with the frequency down requests. 
During all the simulation, the SOC is calculated according to 
the delivered services, the mobility and the charging. 
However, for a real EV, the SOC may be given by the EV 
Battery Management System using adequate communication 
solutions when possible. ISO 15118-2015 defines the 
bidirectional communications protocol for the Vehicle to 
Grid communication interface. It prepares a standardized 
context for EV integration to the power grid. For instance, 
communication requirements for energy demand/response 
information (local and grid) as well as vehicle charge status 
are defined. In our simulation, the algorithm inputs are 
described in Fig.1.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.   Frequency regulation algorithm interactions 
1) Availability for the service request: 
The algorithm decides about the availability of the EV for 
frequency regulation service:  
If the EV is not used for mobility and if it is plugged in and 
not charging, the EV is available for the service, thus, the 
capacity payment Rcap−r  and the capital cost Cc−r  are 
calculated. 
If the EV is not available, the SOC is calculated as follows: 
- In case of mobility use, using the vehicle driving efficiency 
ηveh in (kwh/km) and the travel distance (km).  
- In case of charging, according to the charger features. 
2) Frequency regulation up/down: 
If the EV is available and the grid demand is to 
supply/store energy, the request is for frequency regulation 
up/down. The loops calculation is as follows: 
- The available energy Esa /storage capacity Esc is calculated 
using the last calculated value of the SOC: 
 
                 {
ESC = ES  (1 − SOC) 
Esa = ES  (SOC − (DRB + (1 − DOD)))  
(7) 
 
DRB is the distance range corresponding to the EV owner 
needs for mobility. Daily trips in Europe and USA are around 
40 km [4]. Thus, for a typical working day, the average driven 
distance “home to work” is about 20 km. Nonetheless, people 
will probably overestimate their needs [15]. 
- If the battery SOC matches the demand, the service is 
realized, thus, the energy payment Rel−r and the energy cost 
Cel−r are calculated. 
- If the battery capacity does not match the demand, an offer 
is made with the available energy / storage capacity and the 
EVB is waiting for a new grid request. 
- The new SOC is calculated after the service delivery. 
3) Simulation inputs: 
All the algorithm inputs are vectors with length i representing 
the number of requests per day. 
a) Driving pattern: 
The inputs describing the EV behaviour are: 
- The vector “EV Plugged in” is: EVP = [EVP1 … EVPi]  
EVPi =1 if the EV is plugged in and EVPi = 0 if the EV is on 
the road or parked but not plugged in. 
- Driven Distance per Period in km: DDP = [DDP1 … DDPi]  
EVeSSi outputs are the EV status regarding mobility with 
the consumed energy, the driving hours and the connection to 
each bus. Thus, it is useful to define EVP and DDP vectors. 
The data-set generated using EVeSSi contains 1800 realistic 
EVs and PHEVs with a 24h-period scenario and a step time 
of 1h. It is available as “Case with 1800 EVs / GECAD” in 
IEEE-PES Working Group on Intelligent Data Mining and 
Analysis [20]. There are 180 EVs and we are focusing on 
three representative types of vehicles: 
- Type 1: 1h of daily trip with a round trip and a total of 
around 20 km. It represents the average of 40% of the 180 
EVs of the database. For the simulation, we use EV n° 39 – 
Bus n°30; 
- Type 2: 2h of daily trip with two travels and an average of 
20 km per travel. It represents a typical working day in 
Europe and USA [4]. For the simulation, we use a total of 46 
km – EV n°19 – Home (Bus n°7) – Work (Bus n°11); 
 
EV  
aggregator 
Market 
 perator 
Distribution  
 ystem  perator 
Grid  equest ( request)   Electricity prices (Pcap, Pel, Cpe) 
 requency  
 egulation  
Algorithm 
 
Charging  
 chedules 
AC, hplug 
 
EV or fleet 
owner 
Gains ( reg-r) 
 
EVe  i 
Algorithm 
Driving patterns (EVP, DDP) 
 eal EV    
behaviour data 
 equest  
acceptance 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

- Type 3: 2h of daily trip with high mobility needs with two 
travels. For the simulation, we use a total of 165 km – EV 
n°179 – Home (Bus n°3) – Work (Bus n°22). 
b) Charging: 
The charging vector is called “Availability to Charge”:  
AC = [AC1 … ACi]; ACi = 0 for EVB not available for 
charging and ACi =1 for EVB available for charging. 
In our case studies, the EV is charged during the low 
electricity price hours depending on the mobility constraints. 
Otherwise, the algorithm allows integrating any smart 
charging schedule. 
c) Grid requests: 
The energy needs, at each request, are: 
- Qrequest = [Qreq1 …  reqi]  
The DSO fixes its needs in kWh for frequency regulation up 
and down. Our simulation can be realized for any grid needs.  
Our studies highlighted a slight annual profit difference of 21 
€ per year between summer (2015/07/19) and winter 
(2015/02/25). Thus, the results are presented for winter day 
to investigate the parameters impact. The data is available on 
RTE (French DSO) data base [21]. Requests are given for 
each half an hour thus 48 requests are simulated per day. The 
inputs may also be recuperated in real time through the right 
communication devices with the DSO or the aggregator. In 
our approach, we assume 100 000 EVs under contract and 
carrying out the half of the frequency regulation demand.  
d) Remuneration and prices: 
- Pcap= [Pcap1 … Pcapi]. We use a constant capacity price     
Pcapi= 0,017€/kW-h, representing of the French market. 
However, the remuneration level will certainly change in the 
next years and may become variable [4]; 
- Pel= [Ple1 … Peli]. We assume a constant price of 
Peli=0.05€/kWh. It is a mean value of the electricity price in 
EPEX database in 2015 (average for one day by season) [36]. 
This value is mainly dependent on the regulation market and 
may vary during the day; 
- Cpe= [Cpe1 … Cpei] is the electricity price for charging the 
battery fixed to EPEX values [22]. 
V. 
CASE STUDIES 
A. Mobility 
Fig. 2 represents the grid requests for one EV and for the 
25th February 2015. It represents regulation up requests with 
positive values and regulation down ones with negative 
values. 
 
Figure 2.  Grid requests for one EV, 2015/02/25. 
 
Fig. 3 represents the batteries of the three types of vehicles 
submitted to grid requests, mobility and charging. 
  
 
Figure 3.  EVs batteries State of Charge (SOC) variation, 2015/02/25  
Regarding the EV n°39 (20km) and n°19 (46km), the SOC 
decreases according to the mobility of the day. Otherwise, the 
EVB is available for frequency regulation service except 
during the charging scheduled during the night taking 
advantage of low electricity price period. Fig. 3 shows that 
the regulations up and down have very low impact on the 
SOC regarding the low amount of energy and the 
compensation of the two kinds of requests. We notice that 
there is no need of charging during the day to allow the EV 
owner to ensure its requirements regarding mobility.  
The net profits for one day are as follows: 
- For EV n°39: 4,4 € per day (1 606 €  extended to 1 year). 
- For EV n°19: 4,2 € per day (1 533€  extended to 1 year). 
The net profits are very close. The main part of the gain is 
coming from the capacity remuneration (around 80%), which 
is impacted by the EV availability to offer the service. This 
conclusion is true under the adopted remuneration conditions, 
however it may be completely different in other contexts 
where the capacity price is low or does not exist. 
The EV n° 179 has more important mobility needs. 
Consequently, charging is necessary during the day to ensure 
the second trip of the day and is scheduled after the end of the 
first trip. The EV offers frequency regulation during the rest 
of the day and as for the previous cases, the service impact 
has low impact on the EV SOC. The net profit per day is 
around 3,7€ (1 350€  extended to 1 year). The benefit is lower 
than for the other EVs because of the lower availability of the 
EV due to the charging period and the mobility constraints; 
however, the gain is still very interesting.  
B. Charging and V2G equipment 
EV owners may plug the EVB at home on their primary 
EV Supply Equipment (EVSE) or at work on their secondary 
EVSE. Nevertheless, EVSE may not be available at work. 
Besides, even if the EV owner decides to participate to the 
regulation market through V2G investment at home, he is not 
ensured to have this possibility everywhere.  
Thus, we consider two scenarios for the same grid requests 
in Fig. 4: 
- C1: EV n°19 with EVSE at home and at work. 
- C2: EV n°19 with EVSE only at home. 
 
-1
0
1
0
6
12
18
Qrequest (KWh)
Time (h)
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
0
5
10
15
20
25
SOC (%)
Time (h)
EV n°179
EV n°19
EV n°39
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
Figure 4.  EV n°19 battery State of Charge (SOC) variation 2015/02/25. 
Notice that because the EV is not plugged in or because 
the V2G service is not possible, EVB SOC is not affected 
when the driver is at work. Fig. 3 also highlights the low 
impact of the service on the SOC. However, this situation has 
an important impact on the profit, which is about 1,43€/day 
(522€/year). In fact, the driver cannot offer the service at 
work, thus the plugged in time is low inducing no capacity 
payment and thus the net profit drop.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The proposed algorithm is an interesting tool allowing 
simulating the frequency regulation service offered by 
Electric Vehicle Battery. In fact, it allows the dynamic 
calculation of the service availability as well as the net profit 
taking into account the service cost, the service remuneration, 
the grid needs and the mobility constraints for each request 
during the day. The simulation approach takes into account 
the mobility patterns obtained thanks to the simulation 
algorithm EVeSSi. Otherwise, the real EV SOC can be 
obtained using adapted communications means with the 
Battery Management System when possible. Besides, the 
algorithm allows varying the market remuneration conditions 
during the day; therefore, it is adaptable to various energy 
markets conditions. The results highlight that the service 
profitability is interesting even with high needs of mobility. 
In fact, in a regulation market where the capacity price exists, 
one of the most important parameter is the availability of the 
EV. In contrary, if it is low or does not exist, the electricity 
price becomes more important in the net revenue. One of the 
main parameters that may affect the frequency regulation net 
revenue is the unavailability of the adapted EV Supply 
Equipment. The regulation markets are very different in the 
world and the smart grid context changes them. The proposed 
simulation tool is helpful to predict the dynamic net profits 
evolutions according to the varying prices and the EV 
owners’ behaviours. 
Finally, the algorithm outputs can be used to make the EV 
or fleet owner aware of the gains through adequate interfaces 
in order to support the incentive nature of such participation. 
They can also be used for the communication with the grid in 
order to decide about the service availability depending on 
the SOC level and/or the profitability. Forthcoming studies 
aim to include smart charging schedules in the simulation to 
apprehend their impact on the frequency regulation 
profitability. Besides, in the real time context, it will be 
interesting to investigate the algorithm functioning including 
all the estimations and optimizations that could be interesting 
to add in order to achieve various V2G services. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by SEAS Project (nr 12004), 
EUREKA - ITEA2. 
REFERENCES 
[1] W. Kempton and J. Tomić, "Vehicle-to-Grid Power 
Implementation: From Stabilizing the Grid to supporting 
Large-Scale Renewable Energy", Journal of Power Sources, 
vol. 144, issue 1, 2005, pp. 280-294. Elsevier 
[2] S. L. Andersson, et al., Plug-in Hybrid Electric Vehicles as 
Regulating Power Providers: Case Studies of Sweden and 
Germany, Energy Policy, vol. 38, issue 6, 2010, pp. 2751-2762. 
Elsevier 
[3] J. Tomić and W. Kempton, "Using Fleets of Electric-Drive 
Vehicles for Grid Support", Journal of Power Sources, vol. 
168, issue 2, 2007, pp. 459-468. Elsevier 
[4] M. Petit and Y. Perez, "Vehicle-to-Grid in France: What 
Revenues for Participation in Frequency Control?", 10th 
International Conference on the European Energy Market, 
2013, pp. 1-7. IEEE, Stockholm 
[5] W. Kempton, et al., A Test of Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) for 
Energy Storage and Frequency Regulation in the PJM System, 
Results from an Industry-University Research Partnership, vol. 
32, 2008 
[6] W. Kempton and T. Kubo, Electric-Drive Vehicles for Peak 
Power in Japan,  Energy Policy, vol. 28, issue 1, 2000, pp. 9–
18. Elsevier 
[7] A. Hoke, et al., "Electric Vehicle Charge Optimization 
Including Effects of Lithium-Ion Battery Degradation", IEEE 
Vehicle Power and Propulsion Conference, 2011, pp. 1-8. 
IEEE, Chicago IL 
[8] S. Han, S. Han, and K. Sezaki, "Economic Assessment on V2G 
Frequency Regulation Regarding the Battery Degradation",  
Innovative Smart Grid Technologies IEEE PES, 2012, pp. 1-6. 
IEEE, Washington DC 
[9] S. Han and S. Han, "Economics of V2G Frequency Regulation 
in Consideration of the Battery Wear", 3rd IEEE PES 
International Conference, pp. 1-8, IEEE, Berlin (2012) 
[10] A. Manjunath, "Reliability assessment of frequency regulation 
service provided by V2G", North American Power 
Symposium, 2015, pp. 1-5. IEEE, Charlotte NC 
[11] H. Bevrani, Robust Power System Frequency Control, Second 
edition, Springer, USA, 2014 
[12] KEMA, Research Evaluation of Wind Generation, Solar 
Generation, and Storage Impact on the California Grid, 
Prepared for the California Energy Commission, 2010. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.energy.ca.gov/2010publications/CEC-500-2010-
010/CEC-500-2010-010.PDF/ 2016.05.30 
[13] Dynapower EMS, 5 Things to Know about the ISO-NE 
Frequency Regulation Market, Dynapower corporation, 2015. 
Available from: http://www.dynapowerenergy.com/dpems-
blog/5-things-to-know-about-the-iso-ne-frequency-regulation-
market/ 2016.05.30 
[14] Forward Market Operations, PJM Manual 11, Energy & 
Ancillary Services Market Operations, PJM, 2012.  Available 
from: http://www.pjm.com/~/media/documents/manuals/m11-
redline.ashx/ 2016.05.30 
[15] P. Codani, M. Petit, and Y. Perez, "Participation d'une Flotte 
de Véhicules Electriques au Réglage Primaire de Fréquence" 
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
0
5
10
15
20
25
SOC (%)
Time (h)
Available
Unavailable
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

[Participation of an Electric Vehicle fleet to primary frequency 
control], Symposium de Génie Électrique, Hal, Cachan, 2014 
[16] Coe Rexecode, Labor cost indicators in Europe, 2015. 
Available from: www.coe-rexecode.fr/public/Indicateurs-et-
Graphiques/Indicateurs-du-cout-de-l-heure-de-travail-en-
Europe/ 2016.05.30 
[17] SEAS 
Shared 
Intelligence. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.sip.gecad.isep.ipp.pt/ 2016.05.30 
[18] J. Soares, et al., "Electric Vehicle Scenario Simulator Tool for 
Smart Grid Operators", Energies, vol. 5, no. 12, 2012, pp. 
1881–1899 
[19] J. Soares, et al., "Realistic traffic scenarios using a census 
methodology: Vila real case study", PES General Meeting, 
Conference & Exposition, 2014 IEEE, 2014, pp. 1–5  
[20] Intelligent Data Mining and Analysis, Electric Vehicles. 
Available 
from: 
http://sites.ieee.org/psace-idma/data-sets/ 
2016.05.30 
[21] RTE. Available from: http://clients.rte-france.com/ 2016.05.30 
[22] EPEX SPOT. Available from: https://www.epexspot.com/fr/ 
2016.05.30 
 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

