The Management of Risks Related to Innovation and Technologies
Application to the Ecosystem of Renewable Energy
Julie Chehaita, Eddie Soulier
University of technology of Troyes,
ICD, CNRS UMR 6281 Tech-CICO
Troyes, France
E-mail: Julie.chehaita@utt.fr
E-mail : eddie.soulier@utt.fr
Raed Kouta
University of technology of Belfort-Montbeliard
UTT ICD/LM2S
Troyes, France
Email: raed.kouta@utbm.fr
Abstract- Energy is a strategic sector in France. The concept of
energy transition has favored the development of renewable
energies. In the traditional energy model, a few large groups,
resulting into an oligopoly situation, control the market.
Systems based on renewable energies, on the other hand, can
be deployed in a decentralized way. The concept of Renewable
Energy Ecosystem (REE) is then relevant in order to think
about the transition. This emerging ecosystem relies heavily on
innovation, including start-ups. However, the risks posed by
innovation and technology are significant; they favor start-up
failures and limit the investments of venture capitalists and
business angels in the ecosystem. We propose the principles of
a risk assessment approach related to innovation, which takes
into consideration the characteristics of the ecosystem, the role
of economic models, and finally, the role of digital in
accelerating the energy transition.
Keywords- Ecosystems; Renewable Energies; Ecosystem Model; Risk
indicators; Evaluation of Innovation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In 2015, the energy sector represented 2.0% of the
Produit Intérieur Brut (PIB) [English: Gross Domestic
Product] in France, and the energy bill represented 1.8% of
PIB.
In
2015,
primary
energy
consumption
(at
the
production level) was 47.6% of fossil fuels (of which 30.1%
was petroleum products, 14.2% natural gas, and 3.3% coal)
and 42.5% of non-renewable primary electricity (nuclear +
pumping
production
-
electricity
exporter
balance).
Electricity
accounted
for
24.7%
of
the
final
energy
consumption in France in 2015. The electricity produced in
2016 comes 72.3% from nuclear energy, 17.8% from
renewable sources (mainly hydroelectric generation), and
11.1% and 8.6% from fossil thermal power plants. In fact,
France's energy bill in the third quarter of 2016 amounted to
31.4 billion Euros according to the general commission for
sustainable development [1].
Synthetically, the reserves of oil and natural gas are
limited, while, due to demographic and economic factors,
the consumption of oil, gas and coal will always be higher
in the future as compared to today’s consumption. The
energy transition, largely based on renewable energies, is
therefore imperative. Nevertheless, many experts estimate
that it will be possible to cover only 30% to 40% of the
needs with the help of renewable energies by 2050 if an
energy transaction is taken into consideration.
Innovation, especially on the technological level, appears
to be a determining factor in the competitiveness of
renewable energies. According to a recent study by Irena
(International Renewable Energy Agency), "All renewable
technologies will be competitive with fossil fuels in 2020"
[3]. Also, it must be added to the dimension cost, the non-
cost competitiveness factors, such as quality, innovation,
technological level, reliability, services, etc. This paper is
structured as follows. In Sections II and III, we present the
situation of renewable energy in France, and recall the
concepts of ecosystems, business models and innovation.
Sections IV and V are dedicated to the explanation of the
hypothesis and the elaborated research model. We conclude
in Section VI with discussions and perspectives.
II.
RENEWABLE ENERGY
At the turn of the 2000s, many countries are engaged in
the energy transition sector. This is one of the components
of the ecological transition. The latter results from technical
developments,
prices,
and
the
availability
of
energy
resources.
It
also
depends
on
the
political
will
of
governments, populations, and businesses, willing to reduce
the negative effects of this sector on the environment. In
France by 2050, the objective is to cut the greenhouse gas
emission by 4 to 5%, and reduce by 2025 the share of
nuclear energy to 50% of the French electricity production.
This is done by developing renewable energies and seeking
all forms of energy efficiency and therefore energy savings.
Renewable energies (RE) are energy sources whose
natural renewal is fast enough that they are considered
inexhaustible at the human time scale. Their renewable
nature depends partly on the speed at which the source is
consumed and on the other hand on the rate at which it
regenerates.
Renewable
energies
are
divided
into
hydropower, wind, solar, biomass, biogas, renewable urban
waste, geothermal energy, and marine renewable energies.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-667-5
GREEN 2018 : The Third International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Primary production of renewable energy has been steadily
increasing
since
the
mid-2000s, particularly
with
the
development of wind power, photovoltaics, biofuels and
biogas. In the third quarter of 2016, the electricity produced
in France by the renewable energy sector in one year equals
95 TWh. This volume covers 20.1% of the country's
consumption. This share is up to 6.6% in 2015 by the same
time of the year. According to the reports, renewable energy
accounts for about 12% of final energy consumption (at the
consumer level) in 2015 [1].
The energy sector is organized in France around a limited
number of very large companies. In fact, TOTAL is the
main player in the French oil sector, and the first French
market capitalization on February 27, 2014, and EDF, by far
the leading producer, carrier, distributor and supplier of
electricity in France, and finally, ORANO for the nuclear
professions. These companies are at the heart of a first
ecosystem of energy production. The recent opening to
competition driven by the European Union and the diffusion
of the concept of energy transition has forced these major
groups to invest in the field of renewable energies.
Renewable energies have thus become for some of these
players an investment priority [4].
III.
ECOSYSTEMS, BUSINESS MODELS AND
INNOVATION
Our first hypothesis is that the current and traditional
actors of energy represent the first classical ecosystem, we
will call it the Energy Ecosystem (EE). Next to this EE, a
second ecosystem is being articulated, more specifically
focusing on the renewable energies, as a clean and partly
emerging segment, the "Renewable Energy Ecosystem"
(REE). The EE/REE dynamic is the factor of complexity of
the field of analysis.
First, the concept of business ecosystem is now well
known, notably through its introduction by the work of
Moore [5]. In particular, this concept was defined as "All
the relations between heterogeneous actors guided by the
promotion of a common resource and an ideology that
drives the development of shared competencies (ecosystem
skills) [6].
Specific work on the concept of the ecosystem applied to
renewable energies is still rare. Yet the various reports of
the International Energy Agency show that 2016 was a
tipping point in the sense that investments in renewable
energy, especially electricity, exceeded those made in coal,
oil and gas [7]. Renewable energies thus become a massive
investment deployment sector underpinned by important
innovations. Renewable energies have benefited in 2016
from a series of technical advances that promise to make
sustainable energy more and more efficient and affordable
(artificial photosynthesis, CO2 storage, etc.).
Our second hypothesis is that this sector or, rather, this
ecosystem in the phase of creation, relies largely on
innovation, especially technological innovation. In the field
of renewable energies, a large number of startups are
currently developing. In fact, the Observatory of French
start-up cleantech has observed 952 start-up companies
cumulated since the creation of the Observatory in 2011.
The studies conducted by the Observatory confirm the
importance of belonging to an ecosystem. As a result, 62%
of start-ups belong to a competitiveness cluster, 32% to an
incubator and 27% to an accelerator [8]. New financing
methods are unfolding strongly, like crowdfunding (or
crowdfunding), which tends to show that the ecosystem of
renewable energies has different characteristics from the
traditional
energy
ecosystem.
This
creates
complex
networks, linking renewable energy start-ups with major
groups in addition to citizens and other stakeholders.
IV.
A EXPLORATORY MODEL FOR RISK EVALUATION
“In our model (see figure 1),” innovation plays the role of
intermediate variable between the REE, as it tends to be
structured today, and the desired performance by investors
(or dependent variable), which can be societal, ecological,
technological and financial. To set the stakes, the RE
fundraisers collected by French cleantech companies during
the year 2017 amounted to € 529 million, according to
GreenUnivers. Our research problem is articulated around
the innovation risk evaluation of the renewable energy
ecosystem (REE), in particular the risk factors related to the
dynamic of this ecosystem from its structuration and
innovation point of view.
Our contribution is the proposition of a risk evaluation
system for both business angels and venture capitalist of this
ecosystem, based on risk indicators related to innovation;
assessment
of
risks
through
models
inspired
by
dependability, and finally through management measures
that tend to improve the control of these risks.
Our third hypothesis is that there is a link between
failures of innovations in start-ups and the notion of
economic model. It is customary to share the risks of
innovation in current theories [9] in three fields of
uncertainty; the human need (desirability), technology
(feasibility) and economic potential (viability).
Recent work that examines companies' performance in
terms of their business model and the ecosystem structure to
which they belong, shows that the business model / business
ecosystem pair is a significant determinant of profitability
[10].
As pointed out in the introduction of a special issue of
Industrial Economics Review devoted to the links between
business model, business ecosystem and innovation: "The
use of the model of business as an independent variable has a
significant link to the performance of the business [11]. It is
therefore an important element in predicting the success of a
business in a given ecosystem. Stability of the ecosystem
(and the economic environment in general) is an important
determinant of business survival [12].
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-667-5
GREEN 2018 : The Third International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

A large number of failures could be avoided if the
company paid more attention to stakeholders and to the
interactions between the company and its ecosystem. To the
still too introverted view of the risks associated with a
business model, new dimensions must therefore be added,
especially those related to both the increasingly open nature
of innovations in ecosystems and the consideration of value
sharing within the value network in the ecosystem [13].
Many risk factors can explain the failure of companies in
the renewable energy ecosystem. However, by focusing on
the relation between the components of the innovation, and
on identifying sub-variables related to technology, it is
possible to identify an independent variable to explore. In
fact, the relation between these components can lead to a
presentation of a business model on one hand, and the
structural
and
dynamic
characteristics
of
a
business
ecosystem on the other hand. As a result, it is possible to
identify a dependent variable composed of three risk classes
and six sub-variable classes. The first class of risks regroup
the sub-variables related to the ecosystem and covers: 1) the
formation degree of the ecosystem 2) stability 3) state of
inter-company networks. The second class of risk concerns
the economic model, knowing that it depends strongly on
the
concerned
energetic
sub-system
such
as
(solar,
hydraulic, wind, etc.). Finally, the third class gathers the
sub-variables
related
to
the
digital,
its
function
and
deployment within the ecosystem.
The two-identified
variables are the digital maturity of the ecosystem and the
quality of platform responsible of the collaboration and the
cooperation between the different agents.
V.
TAKING THE DIGITAL IN CONSIDERATION IN
ACCELERATING THE ENERGETIC TRANSITION
We do not tackle all the risk factors in this short paper,
rather, we limit our study to what the concept “digital
maturity of the ecosystem” covers. In fact, the problematic
of digital maturity takes part in the problematic of digital
transformation. Based on the Annual Conference of the
Renewable Energies Union (SER) that was held on 8
February 2018, energy transition is now based on positive
trends, such as the cost of renewable technologies that
continue to decline dramatically, and the solar system that
gets anchored permanently in the French landscape. In
addition, innovation is a crucial factor in this transition and
takes
many
forms.
However, in the time
when the
acceleration of the energy transition will take place through
the digital world, these positive trends do not consider
digitalization as an essential way to achieve the objective of
the energy transition at the best cost.
In
one
of
the
first
reference
books
on
digital
transformation [14], the authors propose a model of digital
transformation. This very thorough study of the strategy of
400 major global groups, such as Nike and Pernod Ricard in
France, gives the keys to a successful digital transformation
in
terms
of
business
models,
management,
customer
experience, leadership, and the mobilization of employees.
The main conclusion of this study is that thanks to digital
technologies, higher level of profits, productivity, and
performance, the masters of digital exist but they are rare.
The proposed approach consist in diagnosing the digital
maturity of the company based on its digital capacities (both
managerial and digital), and then realign its competitive
strategy according to its digital maturity in order to be able
to plan for the energetic transformation within the company.
The second variable related to digital, which is not tackled
here, considers the ecosystem of renewable energies as a
new digital ecosystem. While some companies tend to
integrate the next generation of ecosystem, others are
designing platforms themselves and creating their own
ecosystems to position themselves at the center. In most of
the studied ecosystems, the platforms have rapidly became
the central hubs of ecosystems that are themselves more and
more digital. Providing platforms or participating in existing
offers is a strategic alternative, but it is also, from our risk
perspective, a structuring and stabilizing factor of the
ecosystem or, on the contrary, a new factor of risk, which
Figure 1. Research model
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-667-5
GREEN 2018 : The Third International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

will have to be taken into account. A significant example is
energy-purchasing platforms that are gaining importance,
especially in fuel oil where the risk of uberization is real
with actors such as fioulmarket.
VI.
DISCUSSION AND PERSPECTIVES
Until now, limited studies have been undertaken, linking
the performance of companies to their business model and
the ecosystem structure to which they belong. These studies
focus on the value proposition (innovation, target customer
segments), its architecture (the ecosystem) and the model of
incomes (value distribution mechanisms).
However, these models seem less suitable for emerging
ecosystems such as the ecosystem of renewable energies
(REE), which is articulated less around dominant firms and
more
around
eco-citizen
dynamics,
start-ups.
Second
characteristic, this REE maintains a strong dependence on
technological innovation, unlike other ecosystems more
sensitive to non-technological innovations. Therefore, the
question of risk management induced by innovation is
crucial, while it is not taken in to consideration in these
models. Thirdly, the actors of the REE do not seem to place
the digital transformation at the heart of the energy
transition and the decentralization of the productive model,
whereas industry specialists consider that the acceleration of
the
energy
transition
will
be
done
through
digital
technology.
We recall that the fundraising of renewable energies are
529 Million euros in 2017 and that the transaction market in
the renewable energy sector is dynamic. In fact, in France,
in the first semester of 2017, 19 transactions were initiated
for a total value of 1.2 billion euros [15]. As a result,
investors
expect
to
be
secure
against
technological
challenges in order to increase the volume of transactions in
the renewable energy sector, and thus accelerate the
progress of the market towards the energy transition. The
framework outlined here aims to develop a more integrated
approach explicitly taking into account, besides the business
model and the ecosystem, the risks related to innovation
within the REE as well as the place of the digital in
accelerating the energy transition.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Moreau, “Key numbers of Energy,” Datalab, p. 72,
2016.
[2]
S. Merceron, M. Theulière and Insee, "Household energy
expenditure for 20 years," Insee Prem., no. 1315,' pp. 10',
2010.
[3]
International
Renewable
Energy
Agency
(IRENA),
Technology Roadmap. 2014.
[4]
Jean-Michel
Bezat,
“TOTAL
is
streinghtening
in
Renewable Energies,” Le Monde Econ., 'pp. 4', 2017.
[5]
J. F. Moore, “The Death of Competition: Leadership and
Strategy in the Age of Business Ecosystems,” Leadership,
p. 297, 1996.
[6]
C.
Fourcade,
“Agri-food
systems
as
collective
modalities,” Rev. française Gest, vol. 32, no. 167, pp.
183–202, 2006.
[7]
IRENA, “Renewable Energy and Jobs: Annual Review
2018,” international renewable energy agency,2018.
[8]
Green univers, “ How do startups of the energy transition
evolve”,2018.
[9]
T. Brown and B. Katz, “Change by Design: How Design
Thinking
Transforms
Organizations
and
Inspires
Innovation”, 2009.
[10]
C. Zott and R. Amit, “The fit between product market
strategy and
business
model:
implications
for
firm
performance,” Strateg. Manag. J. Strat. Mgmt. J, vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 1–26, 2008.
[11]
A. Attour and T. Burger-Helmchen, “Ecosystems and
business models: introduction,”
http://journals.openedition.org/rei, no. 146, pp. 11–25,
June 2018.
[12]
G. Dosi and R. R. Nelson, “The evolution of technologies:
an assessment of the state-of-the-art,” Eurasian Bus. Rev.,
vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 3–46, 2013.
[13]
V. Chanal, “ Why we must rethink the business models of
innovations” , Grenoble University Press, pp. 15-23,2011.
[14]
G.
Westerman,
D.
Bonnet,
A.
McAfee,
“Digital
Transformation:
A
Roadmap
for
Billion-Dollar
Organizations,” MIT Center for Digital Business and Cap
Gemini Consulting, 2011.
[15] 
Thierry Iochem, “M&A : and if you specialize in 
renewable
energies?,”
2018.
[Online].
Available:
https://news.efinancialcareers.com/fr 2018/07/19.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-667-5
GREEN 2018 : The Third International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

