Development of a Solar Furnace with High Insulating Properties Using Date Palm
Waste
Rachida Oaddi, Rachid Tiskatine, Mohamed Boulaid, Lahcen Bammou, Ahmed Aharoune, Ahmed Ihlal
Material and Renewable Energy Laboratory, Thermodynamics and Energetic Laboratory
Department of Physics, Faculty of Sciences Ibn Zohr University
Agadir, Morocco
e-mail: rachidaoaddi@gmail.com, tiskatinerachid@gmail.com, mohamed.boulaid@ed.uiz.ac.ma,
lahcen.bammou@gmail.com, aharoune@gmail.com, a.ihlal@uiz.ac.ma
Abstract—This paper reports the results of a study on thermo-
physical properties of two varieties of local date palm wood,
called petiole, namely Boufeggous and Hafsa from Tinghir
oasis, southern Morocco. The goal is to use this natural
material as insulation for a solar furnace to reduce heat loss.
Experimental measurements of thermo-physical properties,
according
to
the
orientation
of
the
fibers
at
ambient
temperature and atmospheric pressure, have been conducted
and analyzed. Furthermore, a scanning microscopy (SEM)
analysis of the samples was investigated to characterize their
microstructure. Preliminary results deducted from this study
were compared with other insulation materials in literature in
order to evaluate the interest of these kind of materials for
solar cooking application.
Keywords-Solar
furnace;
date
palm;
insulation
and
efficiency
I.
INTRODUCTION
In many thermodynamic processes, the heat flow (gain or
loss) can be optimized using special materials to insulate the
system and, ultimately,
save
energy.
In solar cooker
applications,
numerous
materials
with
low
thermal
conductivity may be used for insulation. However, to ensure
optimal insulation, we have to take into account the thermo-
physical properties, environmental and economic impact, as
well as availability and durability of the used material [1]. At
present, there are a number of different insulating materials
used for solar furnace manufactured from fiberglass, mineral
wool (rock wool), cellulose or polystyrene (expanded) [2].
Although these materials have good physical properties, they
are very expensive to acquire and they can be unsafe to
human health and to the environment. For instance, the
fiberglass could irritate the eyes, skin and the respiratory
system. These disadvantages have necessitated research on
natural, ecological and economic insulation materials such as
flax, cotton, hemp, jute, sisal, kenaf, pineapple, ramie,
bamboo, banana, palm etc. The performance of these
materials is under study and their development is at an early
stage [2][3]. Several authors have analyzed and characterized
experimentally some of these natural materials, as described
in the rest of this section.
Nguyen et al. [4] studied the thermal performance of
hemp shives. They developed a multi-scale homogenization
approach that takes into account the shape and orientation of
pores
and
particles
in
order
to
predict
the
thermal
performance of hemp as an insulation material. As results,
they found that the thermal conductivity of hump increased
linearly with increasing saturation degree, density and
temperature. Tangjuank [1] presents the thermal properties of
insulation material produced from pineapple leaves. As
blinder, he used natural rubber latex. According to the
results, the thermal conductivity obtained was close to the
commercial insulator, with a value of 0.035W/m.K and with
density of 210 Kg/m3. This value ensures that pineapple
fibrous material can replace the synthesis insulator.
Agoujdil et al. [5] have carried out an experimental
investigation on the thermo-physical, chemical and dielectric
properties of three varieties of date palm wood. According to
the results, they noticed that date palm wood could be a good
candidate as insulating material, in order to use it to reduce
building heat loss. Oushabi et al. [2] analyzed a local date
palm waste from Errachidia oasis in Morocco, in order to use
it as a thermal insulation material in the vessel of refrigerator,
cooler and food flask. Their results showed that this material
had good thermal properties compared with other synthetic
materials.
Djoudi et al. [6] have performed an experimental study
and modeling of the effect of date palm fibers addition on
thermal properties of plaster concrete. They reported that the
thermal conductivity and density of this composite decrease
as the fraction of fibers increases. The same results are found
by Braiek et al. [7], who have analyzed the thermo physical
properties of date palm/gypsum composite, in order to use it
as insulating material in building.
The main goal of this paper is to evaluate the possibility of
using the date palm wood waste (Phoenix Dactylifera),
including petiole as an insulating material to reduce the heat
loss in the solar box cooker. No study up to date has been
conducted in terms of using the petiole of date palm as
insulating material in solar furnace application. This paper is
organized as following. Section 2 provides a description of
different
experimental
measurements
and
samples
preparation. The results are interpreted, discussed and
compared with some conventional material described in
literature in Section 3. We conclude the paper in Section 4.
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

II.
MATERIAL AND METHODOLOGY
A.
Experimental set up
1)
Solar cooker description
In the experimental tests, a solar box cooker was used
(Figure 1). It consists of the following main components:
cover double glazed glass, three reflectors placed on the
outer cover of the cooker, thermal insulator placed in the
lateral part of the solar cooker and rocks bed for heat storage.
The measured parameters are the ambient temperature,
temperature of rocks and temperature inside the solar cooker.
Type-k thermocouples were used for this purpose.
Figure 1.
Solar furnace with three external reflectors.
The main problem this prototype faces is heat loss
through the furnace walls as evidenced by thermographic
analyses.
Figure 2.
Infrared picture showing heat loss through the furnace walls.
Initially, we have tested glass wool as insulation material
and we found out that the heat losses remain high, as we can
conclude from Figure 2. Thus, we decided to go for date
palm wood as insulation due to its availability, low economic
and environmental impact.
B.
Samples preparation
The natural materials used in this research are from two
varieties of local date palm wood called petiole, namely
Hafsa
and
Boufeggous,
from
Tinghir
oasis,
southern
Morocco.
Two configurations of petiole (P), according to the
orientation of fibers, were studied. Figure 3 shows these
configurations.
Figure 3.
Samples cut out from the petiole (a) petiole sample I
longitudinal direction of fibers, (b) in transversal direction of fibers.
C.
Thermal conductivity and diffusivity
All thermo-physical measurements of date palm samples
at room temperature were determined using a Thermal
Analyzer TPS 1500 (Figure 4). Transient plane source (TPS),
or Hot-Disc method, is highly appreciated technique for
measuring thermal properties of materials from a single
measurement, with minimum sample preparation [8]. The
results are displayed directly on the device screen.
Figure 4.
Thermal properties test measurements.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

D.
Morphological analysis
Microscopic examinations of the samples were carried
out using a TESCAN VEGA3 LM scanning electron
microscope (SEM) in order to analyze the morphology of
these samples.
III.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A.
Thermo-physical properties
Thermal conductivity (k) is defined as the ability of a
material to conduct heat. This parameter is tremendously
important to evaluate an insulating material. The results of
the thermal conductivity measurements at room temperature
are provided in Table 1. The mean value of this parameter of
the samples studied is about k = 0.076W/m.K at room
temperature. This value is close to or lower compared to the
thermal conductivity of other natural insulating materials, for
example sisal (k = 0.070W/m.K), banana (k = 0.117 W/m.K),
and hemp (0.115 W/m.K).
TABLE I. THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY OF PALM PETIOLE, SISAL, HEMP AND
BANANA.
Sample
Thermal
conductivity
(W/m.K)
Reference
PLH (Hafsa petiole sample in
longitudinal direction of fibers)
0.0736 ± 0.001
Present
study
PTH (Hafsa petiole sample in
transversal direction of fibers)
0.0670 ± 0.001
Present
study
PTB (Boufeggous petiole sample in
transversal direction of fibers)
0.0893 ± 0.001
Present
study
Sisal
0.070
[9]
Hemp
0.115
[10]
Banana
0.117
[11]
For petiole of Hafsa variety, two types of measurements
were performed according to the orientation of fibers. Figure
5 shows that orientation of fibers has a weak effect on
thermal conductivity and diffusivity. Indeed, the number of
fibers is much less in the longitudinal direction than in the
transversal direction and, consequently, there should be more
thermal resistance across the axis. Therefore, the orientation
of the fiber should have a significant effect on the thermo-
physical properties of this kind of natural materials. And yet,
this behavior was not observed in this work neither in some
other similar studies [12].
Figure 5.
Thermal conductivity and diffusivity of Hafsa petiole samples
measured at atmospheric pressure.
B.
Structure and morphology
Figure 6 presents SEM images of a typical sample of
Hafsa petiole in transversal direction of fibers. Observing
these microstructures, it can be seen that the sample contains
cylindrical fibers with irregular and rough surface containing
many impurities. Likewise, the morphology of petiole fibers
of date palms is similar to those of coir fiber [13] [14].
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Figure 6.
SEM images of Hafsa petiole sample in transversal direction of
fibers (PTH). 500µm (a) and 200µm (b).
This kind of natural fiber has a cylindrical and irregular
form with many filaments and cells.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This
study
presents
the
results
of
experimental
measurements and tests conducted on two varieties of date
palm material, from Tinghir oasis, south in Morocco. The
aim of this research was to evaluate some thermo-physical
properties and investigate the possibility to use this local
material in building solar furnace insulation.
The
findings
from
this
study
reveal
low
thermal
conductivity compared to other conventional materials used
in this field.
In
perspective,
for
more
accurate
results
and
recommendations, other tests will be carried out. The
insulation efficiency will also be tested by manufacturing
thermal insulation based on these candidate materials and
using it as an insulating material in the solar furnace.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was supported by The Moroccan Ministry of
Higher Education and Research in the framework of
(PPR/2015/31) project.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Tangjuank, "Thermal insulation and physical properties of
particleboards from pineapple leaves," International Journal
of Physical Sciences, vol. 6, no. 19, 2011, pp. 4528–4532.
[2]
A. Oushabi, S. Sair, Y. Abboud, O. Tanane, and A. EL
Bouari, "Natural thermal-insulation materials composed of
renewable resources: characterization of local date palm fibers
(LDPE)," J.Mater. Environ. Sci., vol. 6, no. 12, 2015, pp.
3395–3402.
[3]
F. Asdrubali, F. D'Alessandro, and S. Schiavoni, "A review of
unconventional sustainable building insulation materials,"
Sustainable Materials and Technologies, vol. 4, 2015, pp. 1–
17.
[4]
S.T. Nguyen et al., "Modeling thermal conductivity of hemp
insulation material: A multiscale homogenization approach, "
Building and Environment, vol. 107, 2016, pp. 127-134
[5]
B. Agoudjil, A. Benchabane, A. Boudenne, L. Ibos, and M.
Fois, "Renewable materials to reduce building heat loss :
Characterisation of date palm wood, " Energy and Buildings,
vol. 43, 2011, pp. 491–497.
[6]
A. Djoudi, M. Khenfer, A. Bali, and T. Bouziani, "Effect of
the addition of date palm fibers on thermal properties of
plaster concrete: experimental study and modeling, " J. Adhes.
Sci. Technol, vol. 28, no. 20, 2014, pp. 2100–2111.
[7]
A. Braiek, M. Karkri, A. Adili, L. Ibos, and S. Ben Nasrallah,
"Estimation of the thermophysical properties of date palm
fibers/gypsum composite for use as insulating materials in
building," Energy Build, vol. 140, 2017, pp. 268–279.
[8]
P. Krupa and S. Malinaric, "Using the Transient Plane Source
Method
for
Measuring
Thermal
Parameters
of
Electroceramics,"
International
Journal
of
Mathematical,
Computational,
Physical,
Electrical
and
Computer
Engineering, vol. 8, No. 5, 2014, pp. 735–740.
[9]
G. Kalaprasad, P. Pradeep, G. Mathew, C. Pavithran, and S.
Thomas,
"Thermal
conductivity
and
thermal
diffusivity
analyses of low-density polyethylene composites reinforced
with sisal, glass and intimately mixed sisal/glass fibers, "
Composites Science and Technology, vol. 60, no. 16, 2000,
pp. 2967–2977.
[10] T. Behzad and M. Sain, "Measurement and prediction of
thermal conductivity for hemp fiber reinforced composites, "
Polymer Engineering and Science, vol. 47, no. 7, 2007, pp.
977–983.
[11] S.A. Paul et al., "Effect of fiber loading and chemical
treatments
on
thermophysical
properties
of
banana
fiber/polypropylene
commingled
composite
materials,"
Composites Part A-Applied Science and Manufacturing, vol.
39, no. 9, 2008, pp. 1582–1588.
[12] F.A. Al-Sulaiman, "Date palm fibre reinforced composite as a
new insulating, " International Jounrnal of Energy Research,
vol. 27, no.14, 2003, pp. 1293–1297.
[13] M.J. John and R.D. Anandjiwala, "Recent developments in
chemical modification and characterization of natural fiber-
reinforced composites," Polymer Composites, vol. 29, no. 2,
2008, pp. 187–207.
[14] A. Kriker, G. Debicki, A. Bali, M. Khenfer, and M.
Chabannet, "Mechanical properties of date palm fibres and
concrete reinforced with date palm fibres in hot-dry climate, "
Cement and Concrete Composites, vol. 27, no. 5, 2005, pp.
554–564.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-588-3
GREEN 2017 : The Second International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

