Green Hydrogen Production, Transportation,
Securitization, and Tokenization
W. Bernard Lee
HedgeSPA Pte. Ltd.
29 Mediapolis Circle #04-14
Singapore, 138565
bernard.lee@hedgespa.com
Anthony G. Constantinides
Financial Signals Processing Lab.
Imperial College London
London, UK SW7 2AZ
a.constantinides@imperial.ac.uk
Tasos Kounoudes
SignalGeneriX Ltd.
23C Gregory Afxentiou Str.
Limassol, Cyprus 4011
tasos@signalgenerix.com
Abstract—HedgeSPA is looking to launch a demonstration
project for a green hydrogen production and delivery hub in col-
laboration with a consortium including the Fraunhofer Institute
for Reliability and Microintegration (IZM), part of Germany’s
leading applied R&D institute Fraunhofer Institute, which will
be working with German and EU industrial electronics and
process control specialists. The consortium will bring German
sensor technology to work with HedgeSPA’s AI engine to drive
process control to produce green hydrogen. With the validation
and support from Amazon Web Services (AWS) and Nvidia,
HedgeSPA will deploy its graph-theoretic AI engine on their most
advanced hardware to control the hydrogen production processes.
Index Terms—Green Hydrogen; Solar-Thermal Hydrogen Pro-
duction; Transportation; Securitization; Tokenization
I. INTRODUCTION
While commercial photovoltaic panels have now achieved
efﬁciencies exceeding 20%, such efﬁciency is typically
achieved under optimal radiation conditions. [11] [16] Using
them to generate the type of high-voltage, steady-output elec-
tricity to produce hydrogen by electrolysis still faces technical
unknowns with low efﬁciency being the biggest hurdle to
wider commercialization. [4] The Ashalim Power Station in
Israel, [10] the Ivanpah facility in Mojave Desert, California,
[13] and the Planta Solar 10 in Andalusia, Spain, [15] have
demonstrated the commercial feasibility of solar-thermal elec-
tricity production with efﬁciencies starting from the 20s and
with the plants being able to operate for up to another 12
hours after sunset. [1] [6] Steam-based turbine generators are
proven, reliable, and cost-effective, and minimize inefﬁcient
downtime due to photovoltaic panels not being able to operate
under optimal solar radiation conditions at all times and after
sunset.
The project consortium as shown in Figure 1 is consisted
of senior academics in the relevant technical ﬁelds, proven
professionals in energy project ﬁnance, as well as engineering
professionals with deep industrial energy and process control
experience. While typical solar-thermal installations require
150 hectares (or 1,500,000 square meters) to 320 hectares
(or 3,200,000 square meters), we propose to build smaller
production sites starting from about 10 hectares (or 100,000
square meters, or 316.2 meters on each side in a square
conﬁguration). Such smaller sites are much easier to ﬁnd, and
Fig. 1. Consortium Organization Chart
we bring the cost down by economy of scale and improve
efﬁciency with practical designs, e.g. by controlling these
production sites on the cloud and servicing a cluster of them
with a technical staff centrally-located in an urban city. The
following is a 7-point summary of our proposed project:
1) Demonstration. The proposed demonstration plant is a
1∼2 metric tonnes per day facility targeted to meet
customary demonstration requirements to secure the
form of ﬁnancing that we intend to pursue. We are
looking at extraction sites with high solar radiation. The
transportation hub will be located near a port.
2) Production. The idea is to replicate these extraction sites
within reasonable transportation distance from the trans-
portation hub, with access to fresh, mixed, or seawater,
so that the produced hydrogen can be shipped to a port
for consolidation to ship to its ﬁnal destination. Once
proven, this “hub and spoke” production method shall
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

not be limited to one or two locations. We can choose
locations such as those with lower cyclone risks.
3) Financing. The form of ﬁnancing will be quite similar
to how Tesla uses third-party ﬁnancing to install pho-
tovoltaic panels on roofs across homes in California,
but those solar electricity generation units are controlled
from the cloud. We are proposing a similar setup because
there may be farms, aquafarms, or ranches with at least
a few percentages of unused land. Process control will
be driven by HedgeSPA’s AI engine working with AWS
IOT Core to connect to microcontrollers, which has been
validated by AWS’ technical team. This is intended to
be a relatively carefree solution for the landowners, who
will beneﬁt from access to cheap renewable energy, and
potentially steady income streams while contributing to
the global ﬁght against climate change.
4) End-Consumer. Our consortium has secured one com-
mitted buyer in Asia who runs a ﬂeet of hydrogen vehi-
cles that can take delivery of up to 2 metric tonnes/day,
under a highly achievable delivery price target, while
we are in conversations with other committed renewable
buyers in Asia and the Oceania. Our assessment of
current demand is that we can deliver as much green
hydrogen to corporate buyers as we can practically pro-
duce, provided that we deliver below a very achievable
price target per kilogram of hydrogen. Of course, we
must account for the cost and logistics of getting the
end product to the end-consumer. We plan to use the
high-quality cashﬂows to create asset-backed securities
and attach carbon credits to them.
5) Securitization. Just like in Tesla’s photovoltaic panel
use case in California, the smooth ﬁnancing of the
generation units will be the key to the success of the
program after our initial demonstration project. We plan
to ﬁnance these projects with asset-backed securities
and issue the securities as digital assets for investors
outside the issuance domicile to invest, to be custodied
using an independently-veriﬁable ledger at a brand name
custodian. We have discussed the issuance with a gov-
ernment agency outsourced by Hong Kong’s central
bank to validate the issue’s eligibility for the Hong Kong
Green bond program, but we are actively exploring other
jurisdictions, such as Australia, Japan, and Singapore.
6) Tokenization. There is an institutional pool of yield-
producing tokens that is interested in switching to these
asset-backed securities with carbon tokens attached to
support these green energy projects. With economies of
scale, we are projecting our costs and required invest-
ments to be consistent with industry estimates, which
is similar to the numbers published by research from
Goldman Sachs [12]. We also plan to attach carbon
credit tokens to the digital assets based on the non-
fungible feature of tokens. Doing so discourages the
prevalence of cheating among issuers of carbon credits
today, which often prevents carbon credits in some
markets from fetching their fair market values.
7) Transportation/Delivery. Shipment and transportation
can be done using one or more of the following methods:
Cryogenic storage (which may require a signiﬁcant
safety margin due to the very high pressure in the event
of any leakage but this is the cheapest over the long
run for long-distance delivery), MCH hydrogenation
(which requires a plant, and therefore space, for mid-
distance delivery) and compressed tanks (for shorter
distance delivery, e.g. to the transportation hubs), or via
delivering ammonia which is a jet fuel/petrol substitute.
II. OVERVIEW
This section provides an overview of the proposed project:
A. Background Technology
HedgeSPA has a proven graph-theoretic AI engine with a
successful track record in application to investment manage-
ment and related domains. [2] In particular, some of our latest
R&D projects have won global recognition by appearing in sci-
entiﬁc publications of respected publishers such as Springer-
Nature. [5] The plan is to deploy our AI engine to control
chemical processes for the green hydrogen demonstration plan.
AWS Greengrass can support Web Sockets and MQTT
protocols. HedgeSPA’s AI engine, already running on AWS,
supports Web Sockets, with plans to integrate with MQTT
eventually.
The planned collaboration model is for IZM
to help with the hardware integration until the point where
HedgeSPA programmers can read the signals from the UNIX
ports on microcontrollers, and then the HedgeSPA technical
team can take care of the rest of the integration from the
microcontrollers to the AI engine.
AWS has also reduced the absolute minimum RAM require-
ments to 1 megabyte for super light microcontrollers such
as the ARM Cortex M-class microcontrollers. Based on the
sensor design proposed by IZM, we aim to package the sensor
and its microcontroller into a single unit. The microcontrollers
can initiate orderly shutdowns in the event that connectivity
to the AI engine on AWS is lost due to extremely rare events
such as peak coronal mass ejections or solar ﬂares which are
expected to peak in this decade.
Why will such a setup become an innovative game-changer
in producing green hydrogen?
In the past, energy plants
tended to have a large footprint because it was quite costly
to run a data center to control the plants in terms of both
equipment and human resources. Reaching a certain economy
of scale was the only ﬁnancially feasible solution. Today, we
can offer more agile setups by using an AI engine to control
the production process from the cloud.
For instance, many
commercial farms, aquafarms, and ranches come with easily
5∼10% unused land that can sublease plots with water access
starting from 10 hectares (or 100,000 square meters) to build
smaller solar-thermal plants, which can be consolidated at a
hydrogenation plant for loading hydrogen in a transportation
hub for export shipment.
The value proposition will be
analogous to Tesla installing many photovoltaic units in homes
across California. Those units are subsidized by the State of
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

California and a separate ﬁnancing unit underwrites mean-
ingful portions of the unsubsidized installation costs for the
homeowners, who will end up not only with cheaper energy
but also in some cases earned income by feeding electricity
back to the power grid.
We are targeting roughly the same
model for more agile green hydrogen plants.
B. Project Objectives
This proposed project’s objectives include the following:
1) Reduction in the cost of renewable energy:
• We expect our hydrogen production cost to eventu-
ally get closer to the Biden Administration’s ambi-
tious target of 1 US dollar per kilogram of hydrogen
under the economy of scale. The current design
is based on the proven technology of Polymer
Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) Electrolysis coupled
with a Solar-Thermal Steam Turbine and feeding
the efﬂuent steam to the electrolysis surface. Both
improving the efﬁciency of the membrane surface
using more advanced materials and heating the
water (instead of superheating to 2600 degrees to
ionize water molecules into their plasma state under
High-Temperature Electrolysis, which may not be
energy efﬁcient even when the solar-thermal setup
is in a location with extreme heat) will allow a steam
turbine to produce the electricity to electrolyze
heated water molecules. The demonstration plant
will allow us to collect experimental data and ﬁne-
tune system control parameters to achieve the most
efﬁcient temperature/electricity combination given
the simulation models and the characteristics of the
sites.
• Active investigation of other safe methods of storage
and transportation, such as hydrogenation and dehy-
drogenation aiming to achieve more practically re-
alizable objectives on such aspects as heat/pressure
required in the MCH process and any signiﬁcant
residual, including transportation of hydrogen with-
out the signiﬁcant amount of energy required to
liquefy hydrogen at -253 Celsius to transport it.
2) Increase in the value delivered by renewable energy:
• The proposed setup can be augmented by other
methods to generate green electricity at other non-
sunlight hours to maximize usage of the elec-
trolyzer, which is a ﬁxed-cost investment. For exam-
ple, there can be a higher attitude wind farm feeding
green electricity to the electrolyzers to produce
hydrogen at night (slopes cool faster, and cool air
rushes down), and all such control mechanisms can
be driven from the cloud. This is similar to how
Tesla chooses to sell more expensive electricity to
the State of California grid during peak consumption
hours during the day but draws cheaper electricity
from the public grid to charge vehicles at night.
• Part of our testing efforts will ﬁne-tune the most
efﬁcient temperature-pressure-source combinations
based on physical characteristics such as the topol-
ogy of the production site. With this kind of dy-
namic management, we expect our hydrogen pro-
duction cost to eventually get closer to the Biden
Administration’s ambitious target of 1 US dollar per
kilogram of hydrogen under the economy of scale.
• Our process control engine will also consider other
factors such as access to consolidated distribution
units. More effective delivery methods to vehicles
based on ammonia are also considered.
3) Improvement in technology readiness and commercial
readiness of renewable energy technologies:
• We will start with proven technology and mod-
ify the temperate/electricity mix to achieve higher
efﬁciency. This may include using the demonstra-
tion plant to adapt to lower-temperature techniques
tested in laboratories before rolling out such tech-
nology in new plants:
– Sulfur Iodine Cycle
– Cerium (IV) oxide-cerium (III) oxide cycle
– Copper-chlorine cycle
– Hybrid sulfur cycle
– Iron oxide cycle
– Zinc-zinc oxide cycle
• The testing of materials that can stand up to
2600 Celsius for the reaction chamber in high-
temperature electrolysis (likely candidates are ce-
ramics – with some candidate materials already in
use in Japan for hybrid-hydrogen power generation),
or more efﬁcient materials for PEM electrolysis.
Part of our R&D efforts will ﬁne-tune the most
efﬁcient temperature-pressure combinations based
on the physical characteristics of each production
site. There are modeling solutions available for such
temperature optimization. [7]
4) Reduction in or removal of barriers to renewable energy
uptake:
• Integration of our AI engine with solar-thermal
mirror and control algorithms to focus solar rays
on the reaction chamber and with actual testing of
the thermal efﬁciency on the demonstration plant
means that any control software updates can be
deployed from the cloud. While we still expect to
have support professionals servicing multiple sites
around each major delivery center to meet health
and safety requirements, these plants should no
longer require large data centers and large crews to
run. Just like Tesla in California, we are proposing
a smart solution that can be deployed ﬂexibly by
any cattle station owner with a low barrier of entry.
• The proposed computational control architecture has
already been validated by AWS to work with AWS
IOT Core, while our AI engine is already working
with Web Sockets as required by AWS. Deploying
the control mechanism on the cloud will mean that
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Fig. 2. Demonstration Plant for Green Hydrogen Production in Australia
many cattle stations with at least 5∼10% of unused
land will have access to cheap renewable energy as
well as income streams while contributing to the
global ﬁght against climate change by delivering
green hydrogen to a transportation hub for domestic
consumption or exporting.
• Finally, one key to success in the world’s sustainable
energy transformation is ﬁnancing. We are propos-
ing an innovative way to ﬁnance these projects
using digital tokens. Once successful, there is an
institutional pool of yield-producing stable coins ex-
ceeding 1 billion US dollars that is interested in sub-
scribing to these asset-backed securities with carbon
tokens to support these green energy projects.
5) Increased skills, capacity, and knowledge relevant to
renewable energy technologies:
• Physical testing of all chemical steps to ﬁne-tune
the chemical simulations already completed on the
Chem-CAD software ASPEN – In particular, future
upgrades will follow the path of simulation to lab-
scale testing to demonstration-scale testing. Thus,
the demonstration plant will be used to test some
of the lower temperature cycles in electrolysis. This
will also involve the future construction of lab-scale
demonstration units that will allow a continuous
ﬂow of chemical processes rather than the hitherto
batch mode operations. These activities will include
the hiring of scientists, engineers, and technicians.
• The world cannot migrate away from fossil fuels
based on batteries alone because the use of batteries
in commercial transportation such as buses and
trucks has the known problem of low energy-to-
weight ratio with the need to transport the heavy
weight of batteries. In fact, batteries ﬁnish dead
last in an energy density chart published by the
top American manufacturer of locomotives. In the
same chart, the manufacturer suggests that hydrogen
can be one solution to this problem. Hydrogen
fuel cell supplement is one attractive solution for
mid-distance commercial vehicles with its far more
attractive energy-to-weight ratio, but voltage stabi-
lization and heat mitigation are necessary to avoid
the overheating of batteries and therefore poten-
tial explosions. Moreover, HICE (hydrogen internal
combustion engine) or the alternative of mixing fos-
sil fuels with ammonia requires no to extremely sim-
ple modiﬁcations to the existing gasoline-powered
vehicles, e.g. HICE has been deployed on buses in
California for over a decade. As we need to target
our capacities based on end customer demand, we
will also devote resources either to test the down-
stream technology directly or work collaboratively
with relevant R&D institutes.
III. PROPOSAL IMPLEMENTATION
The proposed project will be implemented with the follow-
ing steps:
A. Proposed Hydrogen Production Technology
The typical consumption rate of hydrogen by a passen-
ger vehicle has been estimated to be slightly above 10
grams/kilometer. Assuming that these vehicles travel 200
kilometers/day, the daily consumption of each vehicle will
be ∼2 kilograms of hydrogen. We have identiﬁed hydrogen
demands from a ﬂeet of 1,000 vehicles, which will consume
2 metric tons per day or about 700 metric tons/year (assuming
350 operating days/year, allowing for downtime due to public
holidays and maintenance). The demand volume is expected
to increase dramatically over the next few years. We expect
the aggregate demand that we can serve can eventually exceed
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

the yield of 2,000 metric tons/day. Based on current ﬁnancials,
the annual yield for the production plant will be roughly 12%.
We propose to produce hydrogen in scale using solar-
thermal electrolysis, which can be either based on a) High-
Temperature Electrolysis or one of its lower-temperature vari-
ants based on a different chemistry cycle, b) Polymer Elec-
trolyte Membrane (PEM) Electrolysis coupled with a Solar-
Thermal Steam Turbine and feeding the efﬂuent steam to the
electrolysis surface. Part of our R&D efforts will ﬁne-tune
the most efﬁcient temperature-pressure combinations based on
the physical characteristics of each production site. There are
modeling solutions available for temperature optimization. [7]
For high-temperature electrolysis, the most desirable region
to run such productions will be hot and dry desert areas with
access to water, such as Northern Territory and/or Western
Australia, Central Asia, and the Arabian Peninsula. The steam
will be extracted by solar-thermal distillation and the high
temperature will be generated by AI-controlled solar mirrors.
The generation of hydrogen via electrolysis is well under-
stood by scientists. We will start with a proven setup and
explore other alternatives to improve efﬁciency and lower
reactor temperature:
• Sulfur Iodine Cycle
• Cerium (IV) oxide-cerium (III) oxide cycle
• Copper-chlorine cycle
• Hybrid sulfur cycle
• Iron oxide cycle
• Zinc-zinc oxide cycle
The proven design is the decades-old technology of Polymer
Electrolyte Membrane (PEM) Electrolysis (as illustrated in
Figure 3) coupled with a Solar-Thermal Steam Turbine and
feeding the efﬂuent steam to the electrolysis surface. Both
modifying the membrane and heating the water (instead of
superheating to 2600 degrees to ionize water molecules into
its plasma state under High-Temperature Electrolysis, which
may not be energy efﬁcient even if the solar-thermal setup is
in a desert) will allow a steam turbine to produce electricity to
electrolyze vaporized water molecules. In short, we produce
steam in a solar-thermal plant, convert the thermal energy
into electricity, and then use the efﬂuent to feed steam to the
electrolyzer surface to produce hydrogen.
In the future, such a setup can be augmented by wind,
photovoltaic or tidal methods to generate green electricity. The
currently proposed design will be based on a triple-heat-circuit
solar-thermal design, as shown in Figure 4.
B. Transportation and Delivery
The harder technical challenge is the shipping of hydrogen
to its ﬁnal delivery sites, which can be complex and dangerous.
Three possible methods of transporting hydrogen are described
as follows:
1) For shorter distances (within 3,000 kilometers, we pro-
pose that we ship with Type 3 or Type 4 compressed
hydrogen tanks.
2) For mid-distance deliveries of about 3,000∼7,000 kilo-
meters, we propose that we use bulk carriers to ship
Fig. 3. PEM Electrolysis Process (Wikimedia Commons License).
methylcyclohexane (MCH). This method involves the
hydrogenation of toluene, a colorless and odorless liq-
uid, into methylcyclohexane. After arriving at a receiver
port such as Hong Kong or Kobe, Japan, the MCH can
be dehydrogenated (under heat and pressure) to release
the hydrogen for local consumption. Currently, hydrogen
delivered with this method can be delivered to the Port
of Kawasaki in Japan.
3) For future delivery over longer distances, we propose to
deploy cryogenic tanks to ship liquiﬁed hydrogen. This
is potentially the most expensive technology requiring
signiﬁcant upfront investments, but it may turn out to be
the cheapest method to ship long-distance to locations as
far as Europe at over 10,000 kilometers. Hydrogen has a
liqueﬁcation point of -253 Celsius. Cryogenic shipments
(as is currently done from Japan to Australia) require
signiﬁcant use of energy to achieve this extremely low
temperature.
4) We may propose using ammonia as a subsequent-
stage solution for transportation fuels, depending on
user demand. Ammonia can be deployed as a direct
substitute for gasoline and jet fuel, often requiring no
to relatively simple modiﬁcations to the power plant.
Upon combustion, ammonia emits nitrogen and water.
Neither of them causes any harm to the environment.
Unlike MCH which requires the shipment of toluene
back to the production site, ammonia does not require
any dehydrogenation at the delivery point and the “return
shipment” of toluene, resulting in more cost savings.
5) Certain transportation hubs can be of dual-use in nature,
mixing MCH hydrogenation and ammonia conversion
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Fig. 4. Solar-Therma Hydrogen Production Plant Schematic
Fig. 5. Hydrogenation Process
Fig. 6. Dehydrogenation Process
Fig. 7. Hydrogen to Ammonia Conversion
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

given that the equipment required is not hugely dissim-
ilar. Converting hydrogen to ammonia will be based on
the extensively-used Haber-Bosch process. The mixture
of Nitrogen and Hydrogen will be compressed to 100
ATM but cooled to 450 Celsius using a cooling coil.
The resulting gas will be fed into an absorber column
ﬁlled with water. The ammonia is extracted from the
bottom of the absorber column. Any unreacted gas will
be recycled from the top of the absorber column. This
will be done as a batch-based process because of the
pressure required.
6) The main goal of this project is to complete the full
hydrogen supply chain until delivery to end consumers.
This is likely to involve a certain “hub and spoke” setup
starting from locations where green hydrogen can be
generated efﬁciently. Other future production locations
may include say the Middle East. Doing so may balance
global demand and supply by generating more green
hydrogen in the December months in the Southern
Hemisphere and doing so in the June months in Northern
Hemisphere.
C. Securitization and Tokenization
This subsection contains the implementation details of the
securitization and tokenization piece of the project.
1) Token-based Financing Use Case:
1) Global investors can buy digital assets on renewal en-
ergy using an authorized central bank digital currency
(CBDC).
2) Their home central bank can conﬁrm the eligibility of
the investors to invest (instead of relying on payment
apps or commercial banks to do KYC/AML) according
to local regulations.
3) The identity of the qualiﬁed buyer can be lodged in a
“custody” ledger at a brand-name custodian that will be
kept under the watchful eyes of the issuance jurisdic-
tion’s central bank.
4) The issuance does not need to be for any speciﬁc juris-
diction such as Hong Kong. We are using Hong Kong as
one example because of a Green Bond program already
in existence, but we may choose to do so under the CBI
program in Australia or any other relevant jurisdiction
such as Singapore, in the event that Hong Kong may
require complicated licensing for issuing digital tokens.
5) If the security is redeemed (either at maturity or by the
market maker), the proceeds can be converted back to
the CBDC based on the prevailing exchange rate.
6) If working with one speciﬁc regulator may take too long,
then a similar idea can be applied to another jurisdiction,
e.g. Japanese investors provided the tokens comply with
ERC-721 requirements. We have been working with
one of Japan’s top two securities law ﬁrms to work
out whether we can meet the exempt status for selling
to Japanese investors. For a simpler proof of concept
without excessive licensing concerns, another possibility
is to issue the paper securities in Singapore while
running the digital token ledger in Dubai International
Financial Center.
7) The HedgeSPA core investment platform will integrate
with R3/Corda and offer the users of our solution a
secured way to keep the tokens. There would be no
additional security concern from investors in that the
actual ledger sits with a brand-name custodian.
8) We also intend to move some of our non-asset-backed
securities investment products to such a ledger to create
a form of e-ETF. This way, we attract more traditional
investors to use digital tokens as an asset class for
ﬁnancing all types of sustainable energy projects. The
more precise technical details are given below and
further illustrated in Figure 8:
Fig. 8. Asset Tokens in Custodian Ledger
• Construct an investor portal (or API calls to access
the R3/Corda blockchain) for an investor to transact
on one unit of security.
• API
calls
working
with
CBDC
portal
to
buy/subscribe to the asset-backed security:
– investor transfers the quoted CBDC amount to
the CBDC account of the custody bank
– local regulator allows the custody bank to con-
ﬁrm investor eligibility (preferably by electronic
means);
– log one unit of the security under the investor’s
name in the bank ledger;
– custody bank to issue one token (on the R3/Corda
blockchain) to the investor.
• API calls working with CBDC portal to sell/redeem
asset-backed security:
– investor to give instructions to the custody bank
to sell one unit of the token on the portal;
– conﬁrm investor instruction to sell based on the
latest bid price quoted by the market maker;
– conﬁrm account details and double-check that
the account has no KYC issues (based on local
regulatory requirements);
– sell or redeem one unit of security; reverse one
unit of the security under the investor name in
the bank ledger;
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

– custody bank to deposit proceeds to CBDC in-
vestors.
• API calls to detach carbon token from combined
security:
– investor to surrender token on the portal and give
instructions to detach carbon token from security
(note - once detached investors cannot reattach
based on industry practice, just like detaching a
warrant);
– reverse one unit of the combined security under
the investor name in the bank ledger;
– add one unit of the standalone security and one
unit of carbon credit token under the investor
name in the bank ledger;
– sends one unit of the standalone security and one
unit of carbon credit back to the investor.
2) Beneﬁts from Token Financing Proposal:
1) Financial Inclusion – CBDC does not receive any in-
terest payment unless it is deposited. Today, inﬂation is
driven heavily by surging energy prices, and the world is
getting ready for its expected transformation to adopting
renewable energy. The creation of straightforward ways
to convert CBDCs into renewable energy-linked securi-
ties allows the ﬁnancially “less involved” population to
participate in the upside of adopting renewable energy.
2) Minimize fraud and develop the carbon market – The
domestic carbon credit market in Asia is unable to
fetch international carbon prices to date due to the
(mis)perception of widespread fraud. Attaching non-
fungible serial numbers to digitalized carbon credits is
one solution since one ton of veriﬁed carbon credits
cannot be sold more than once under this setup.
3) A mechanism to settle cross-border transactions in secu-
rities issued in one jurisdiction for other CBDC investors
– This is expected to become a highly credible test case
for interoperability with large-value transactions under
delivery-versus-payment (DvP) in a shorter settlement
timeframe than t+2 via a brand-named custodian in two
ways:
• Settlement on a programmable CBDC can be made
as soon as a digital asset is received and the ledger
entries are updated. There is no reason for this
transaction to require T+2 settlement any longer.
As and when both the custodian and the investor
agree, this can be settled based on even end-of-
day or T+0 settlement. Please note that in a typical
setup like this, the paper security will be held by the
custodian in “street name”. This mechanism should
be done inside the custodian and does not require
any designated “oracle” unless there is a speciﬁc
regulatory requirement to do so.
• Similarly, a digital bond can release its coupons
as programmable CBDC automatically when certain
pre-deﬁned conditions (by a designated oracle) are
met. Without the need for servicing agents to send
out paper checks, digital bonds can be far easier
to manage to accommodate more retail investors,
especially retirees. Today, one reason for the high
minimum on most bond investments is that issuers
are unwilling to pay for the high costs of servic-
ing retail investors (e.g. sending coupons, manual
corrections of common book entry mistakes).
IV. PROJECT ANALYSIS
This section will discuss expected outcomes, success
drivers, and risk and mitigation methods.
A. Expected Outcomes
Our proposal aims to build the demonstration unit of this
hydrogen supply chain with German components so that even-
tually the ﬁnancing units (e.g. by underwriting asset-backed
securities with tokenization of carbon credits) can visualize
that our proposed technical setup will work in a demonstration
plant.
1) Generator Size: According to one manufacturer’s spec-
iﬁcations, [14] a 5-megawatt commercial PEM electrolyzer
can yield 83.75 kilograms of 99.999% high-purity hydrogen.
Such equipment can be ordered based on a more customized
speciﬁcation. In other words, a 6-megawatt electrolyzer is
expected to generate 100.5 kilograms of 99.999% high-purity
hydrogen per hour.
Citing the Weather and Climate website, [9] the average
annual amount of sun hours available in Northern Territory
is 3,100 hours or 8.5 hours per day. At over 3,000 sun
hours per year, Northern Territory has one of the world’s
highest exposure to solar radiation. For comparison, in Taiwan
today, solar mirrors and panels are regularly built on top of
aquaculture ponds to moderate temperature. Tainan enjoys
about 2,200 sun hours per year. Any location with more than
2,000 sun hours per year can be a potentially interesting target
site.
While the generators may take 0.5 hour to reach operational
efﬁciency, solar-thermal towers (with the right type of molten
salt or thermal oil) have the ability to continue operations for
hours after sunset due to the very high temperature already
accumulated in the heat circuit to generate steam. Therefore,
it is conservative to assume that we have at least 12 hours of
production per day, although some literature has suggested that
the solar tower can continue to run for up to another 12 hours
after sunset, allowing close to 24-hour production during the
summer months. [6]
As a result, the yield for a 6-megawatt PEM electrolyzer
in one year is 328,599 kilograms or 328.6 metric tonnes of
hydrogen if the plant can only run for 12 hours per day
on average, but the yield can reach as much as 657,000
kilograms or 657 metric tonnes if the plant can run 24 hours
per day. 329∼657 metric tonnes per year is consistent with our
production target of 1∼2 metric tonnes per day of hydrogen.
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

2) Water Intake: The amount of water required to produce
100.5 kilograms of hydrogen is 804 kilograms of pure water,
which is roughly equivalent to 804 liters at ambient temperate.
However, even if pure water is fed into the electrolyzer, there
should be an allowance for a 10% loss due to production
factors such as evaporation. So, we estimate 893 liters of pure
water or roughly 15 liters per minute. This is comparable to the
manufacturer’s recommendation of 1,000 liters per hour, which
typically includes an additional buffer to avoid commercial
liabilities.
Do note that the ﬂow rate of 15 liters of water per minute
is similar to the intake ﬂow rate of large-capacity washing
machines. In the worst case, even taking treated city water at
such a ﬂow rate is unlikely to draw signiﬁcant environmental
objections. Besides mixed water, we are exploring using either
used industrial water or sewage after primary treatment, since
we will perform a distillation step to extract the pure water. If
we are allowed to extract 10% of pure water from any mixed
water, we will require an intake of 10,000 liters of mixed water
per hour to extract 1,000 liters of pure water per hour.
3) Heliostat Mirror Site Size: At the Solar Two Power Plant
site near Barstow, California (shown below), a 10-megawatt
solar plant requires a ﬁeld size of 82,750 square meters. For
6-megawatt, we estimate the ﬁeld size required to be 49,650
square meters.
Fig. 9. Solar Two Power Plant (Wikimedia Commons License).
Do note that Solar Two is using older technology from the
1980s. The efﬁciency of solar-thermal technology has since
improved signiﬁcantly so it is reasonable to treat this as an
upper bound on the ﬁeld size. Moreover, Bartow’s latitude is
34.9 degrees north while most target sites are closer to the
equator, which means that the solar radiation will be stronger
in those locations due to their proximity to the equator. We
expect to require fewer mirrors to achieve the same thermal
output.
A ﬁeld size of 49,650 square meters will require 2,758
solar mirrors in a standard 18 square-meter conﬁguration. In a
rectangular site conﬁguration, that will take roughly 53 × 52
mirror units. Typical 18 square-meter mirrors come as a pair
of 3 meters by 3 meters solar reﬂectors. Allowing 2 meters
of margin for each mirror pair to minimize blockage from
each other means that each mirror pair requires 5 meters by
8 meters of space, or roughly 110,240 square meters in total,
translating to 332 meters on each side of a square conﬁguration
and 374.7 meters in diameter in a circular conﬁguration. In
other words, any regularly-shaped demonstration site of 1∼2
square kilometers for both hydrogen production and shipment
consolidation will meet the commercial requirements, and
still leaves plenty of room for safety margins and other
environmental considerations such as settlement and cooling
ponds if mixed water is used; typically, we are allowed to
extract only 10∼15% of pure water and return the rest to
the source “as close to ambient temperate as reasonable”.
Finally, NASA’s Surface meteorology and Solar Energy (SSE)
6.0 provides 1-degree latitude by 1-degree longitude grid-cell
data over the globe, which is reasonably accurate as a starting
point for the azimuth and elevation angle control software to
calibrate the reﬂecting directions of mirrors.
Fig. 10. Heliostat Schematic for Typical 3m×3m Solar Reﬂector Pairs.
4) Technical Goals of the Demonstration Project: Our
primary goal is to ﬁne-tune the optimal production parameters
based on physical experiments. For instance, is it better to
maintain a higher temperature and aim for 24-hour production?
Given that our goal is to implement smaller, self-running plants
that may sit on different sites, there may be fewer maintenance
issues (e.g. metal fatigue due to continuous high temperatures
and pressure) by running the plants at lower temperatures with
regular cooling down periods. While there is a large body
of similar performance studies based on simulations in the
scientiﬁc literature, there is no substitute for collecting the
empirical physical data to ﬁne-tune our performance models
before replicating the plant design en masse at other locations.
5) Costs and Beneﬁts: To meet all of our objectives above,
our budget worksheet is estimating a total cost of ∼14 million
US dollars over 3 years, primarily to pay for the equipment and
construction, as well as local costs such as land lease, access
rights, and environmental assessments. We target exporting
8∼13 metric tons of green ammonia/day or 1.4∼2.3 metric
tons of green hydrogen/day.
This is expected to satisfy up
to 2 kilograms/day of hydrogen demands per vehicle for a
ﬂeet of 1,000 hydrogen vehicles based on a highly achiev-
able delivery price target.
We will start with the blueprints
based on standard and proven technologies with Technology
Readiness Level (TRL) 7 or TRL8. The key innovation is
how we put highly proven components together: for instance,
by introducing the latest German high-temperature and high-
pressure sensor technologies running with the HedgeSPA AI
engine to drive the chemical processes to improve efﬁciencies
and yield.
6) Work Packages: The speciﬁc collaboration with the
Fraunhofer Institute will include the following R&D collabo-
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

ration areas to address immediate needs for the initial demon-
stration facility. In most energy plants, sensors are usually
placed at equal distances or in a topologically regular pattern
to detect “fault signatures”. Our goal for the First Phase is to
place the sensors outside the pipelines and reaction chambers.
Our goal for the Second Phase is to place some of them inside
the pipelines and reaction chambers. Each time we shall start
with a lab-scale setup, primarily to avoid unnecessary changes
and potential damages to the demonstration plant.
1) First Phase – Classic approach to set Project baseline:
• Ready-made components
• Some microcontrollers outside reaction chambers
(already from the AWS approved list)
• Aiming for 4-pin connections with insulated con-
nections
• Liquid/air cooling of microcontrollers and connec-
tions
• Ensure that the combination of sensors/actuators
(pressure, temperature, viscosity, movements) can
meet the AI control and safety shutdown require-
ments.
2) Second Phase – R&D approach to improve efﬁciency
and reliability:
• More specialized, bespoke components
• Microcontroller embedded into the sensor package
• Insulate the entire unit with insulation materials
• Study temperature/failure characteristics as well as
heat mitigation procedures
• Where feasible, upgrade speciﬁc components in
the overall design with the more advanced sensor
packages.
This project is exciting to the Fraunhofer Institute in that we
will be a good showcase to deploy IOT-style sensors and
actuators controlled by our AI engine on AWS using Web
Sockets or MQTT protocols. With a solid collaboration model,
we may explore further collaboration with the Fraunhofer
Institute on advanced high-temperature coating materials for
solar-thermal applications and the use of their Graph Neural
Network library to enhance the HedgeSPA AI engine.
7) Post-Demonstration Phase:
After the demonstration
phase, the ﬁnanciers are interested in funding the full-scale
production to meet the over 1 gigawatt in expected green
energy demands that we have already identiﬁed and can
begin delivery as soon as possible. As one example, we have
identiﬁed a signiﬁcant pool of institutional assets that will be
interested in placing meaningful AUM into this project.
B. Success Drivers
We anticipate the success of this demonstration project due
to one or more of these drivers:
1) Our team starts with a fully functional AI investment
platform that has generated outperformance (positive
returns and positive skewness) across 5 different mar-
kets, or an outcome with less than 0.1% probability
based on pure luck. That means users of our attractive
ﬁntech platform can be natural investors in our private
investment projects in sustainable energy.
2) Scientiﬁc research linked to our AI algorithm has ap-
peared at and was validated by top academic venues such
as American Statistical Association and Association for
Computing Machinery and will be published by the ven-
erable scientiﬁc publisher Springer-Nature. In particular,
we are known for advanced research on predicting “tail
loss”. These extremely sophisticated risk management
tools should give additional conﬁdence to future con-
sumers of any cross-border payment mechanisms.
3) The team has experience in energy investment projects at
BlackRock and energy majors such as Chevron-Texaco.
A few regulators have indicated that they are ready to
approve digital assets related to sustainable energy faster
than other asset classes, increasing the chance of project
success.
4) We have several seasoned and proven investors in sus-
tainable energy acting as our investors and advisors.
The tokenization piece was a ﬁnalist in the Tokenized
Assets and Digital Securities (TADS) award in 2020 and
named for similar awards in 2022. These awards and
name recognitions should help increase the conﬁdence
of future cross-border investors.
5) We work with identiﬁed investor demand (of Asian
investors interested in our sustainability projects) and
customer demand (of renewable energy users keen to
take delivery at or below a certain highly achievable
price target). Investors are keen to invest in sustainability
projects, and consumers are required by their own regu-
lator(s) to have a portion of their energy supply coming
from renewables. These facts lend credibility to how our
green bonds will be issued which will be sweetened
by a tokenization mechanism to accept cross-border
payments, increasing the chances of project success.
C. Risk and Mitigation
The technical processes involved are hazardous by nature.
Considering this, our team members have identiﬁed the risks
expected and possible risk management solutions as well as
areas of minimum casualties during operation to be:
1) Solar-thermal electrolysis – No known challenges, ex-
cept for ﬁnding suitable sites with high solar radiation
that are not too far from a delivery hub and without
unmanageable cyclone risks.
2) Similarly, while Polymer Electrolyte Membrane (PEM)
is a proven technology, there may be issues gaining
access to state-of-the-art polymer membrane currently
manufactured by primarily Western companies for a
plant targeting certain Asian buyers. Efﬁcient produc-
tion is the key to project success. Due to the current
geopolitical environment, we must account for a non-
zero probability that this project can be denied access
to the most advanced electrode materials unless we agree
not to deliver to customers in certain countries.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

3) Alternative to cryogenic tanks for hydrogen transporta-
tion – We are looking at potentially using Methyl-
cyclohexane as the transfer agent. Successful delivery
will depend on a solution to transport/store hydrogen at
reasonable costs.
4) Green-bond Issuance – As mentioned, we do not have
to issue in Hong Kong if the regulatory process is too
slow. There is plenty of interest in such issuance in other
jurisdictions, such as Australia, Singapore, or Japan.
5) R3/Corda Tokenization with carbon credits – No known
challenges except for the need to deploy time/resources.
R3/Corda is public domain.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The key takeaways of our proposal are as follows:
1) Einstein once said that “Insanity is doing the same
thing over and over and expecting different results.”
Global organizations have been driving green energy
solutions for at least 2 decades. Adoption is often driven
by former bureaucrats and project engineers from the
energy majors, who are naturally biased toward doing
things in the traditional way that they are comfortable
with. We present a disruptive, fresh approach that will
hopefully drive adoption faster to reverse worrisome
trends.
2) We do not need to wait for ground-breaking green
technologies to emerge to make an impact. Instead, the
most obvious bottlenecks are integration and ﬁnancing.
We can start with proven components and put them
together in innovative ways. Our engineers work side
by side with ﬁnanciers to work out the most innovative
way to remove each and every roadblock. There is now a
once-in-a-lifetime opportunity to pull this off due to the
dramatic change in attitudes among heavy users of fossil
fuels as a result of global geopolitical developments.
3) Our consortium consists of senior academics in the
relevant technical ﬁelds, proven professionals in energy
project ﬁnance, as well as engineering professionals with
industrial energy and system control experience getting
together, to throw “not completely crazy” ideas against
the wall and see “which one sticks” after technical
validation.
4) Instead of demanding large equity investments upfront,
one alternative is that a third-party issuer or a compa-
rable mechanism can issue a 5-year principal-protected
note. Upon the success of the demonstration project,
the note will be converted into asset-backed securities
backing our plants along with some equity upside. This
way, major users of green energy have the alternative
to use their strong balance sheets to help drive adoption
without making large equity investments upfront.
5) Finally, the carbon market in Asia failed due to a
(mis)perception of widespread fraud. We can try the
traditional way of ﬁxing such a problem with heavy-
handed regulations, which may kill off the nascent
carbon market completely, or we can try to address this
“trust issue” by using smarter technologies. We have
chosen the second approach and welcome other aspiring
ﬁnancial technology professionals to share any related
and perhaps even better suggestions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank the Fraunhofer Institute for Reliability and Mi-
crointegration or IZM (Dr. A. Ostmann, Dr. D. Manessis,
Dr. M. Hempel), ILFA (Mr. T. Cramer) for the concept
development of the electronic monitoring system, as well as
Mr. E. Lee of Olympus Capital Asia for his business insights
on sustainable energy project ﬁnance.
REFERENCES
[1] Ahmet
Aktas¸,
Yaˇgmur
Kirc¸ic¸ek,
“Solar
System
Characteristics,
Advantages,
and
Disadvantages”,
Chapter
1,
Solar
Hybrid
Sys-
tems: Design and Application, Academic Press, 2021, Pages 1-24,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-88499-0.00001-X.
[2] Nicos Christoﬁdes, “Bounds for the Travelling Salesman Problem”,
Operations Research, Vol. 20, No. 5 (Sep. - Oct., 1972), pp. 1044-1056
(13 pages). https://www.jstor.org/stable/169166?seq=1.
[3] Edward Farhi, Jeffrey Goldstone, and Sam Gutmann, “A Quantum
Approximate Optimization Algorithm”, MIT-CTP/4610, MIT Center for
Theoretical Physics, 2014. https://arxiv.org/pdf/1411.4028.pdf.
[4] Thomas L. Gibson, and Nelson A. Kelly, “Predicting Efﬁciency
of
Solar
Powered
Hydrogen
Generation
Using
Photovoltaic
Electrolysis
Devices”,
International
Journal
of
Hydrogen
Energy,
Volume
35,
Issue
3,
February
2010,
Pages
900-911.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0360319909018448.
[5] W. Bernard Lee, and Anthony G. Constantinides, “Quantumized Graph
Cuts in Portfolio Construction and Asset Selection”, forthcoming in
Springer-Nature Transactions on Computational Science and Compu-
tational Intelligence, 2022.
[6] Salahuddin
Qazi,
“Solar
Thermal
Electricity
and
Solar
Insolation”,
Chapter
7,
Standalone
Photovoltaic
(PV)
Systems
for
Disaster
Relief
and
Remote
Areas,
Elsevier,
2017,
https://www.sciencedirect.com/book/9780128030226/standalone-
photovoltaic-pv-systems-for-disaster-relief-and-remote-areas.
[7] Fabian Scheepers, Markus St¨ahlera, Andrea St¨ahler, Edward Rauls,
Martin M¨ullera, Marcelo Carmo, and Werner Lehnert, “Temperature
optimization for improving polymer electrolyte membrane-water elec-
trolysis system efﬁciency”, Applied Energy Volume 283, 1 February
2021, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2020.116270.
[8] Ljubiˇsa Stankovi´c, Danilo Mandic, Miloˇs Dakovi´c, Miloˇs Brajovi´c,
Bruno Scalzo, Shengxi Li and Anthony G. Constantinides, “Chapter
13: Portfolio Cuts”, Data Analytics on Graphs Part III: Machine
Learning on Graphs, from Graph Topology to Applications, Founda-
tions and Trends® in Machine Learning: Vol. 13: No. 4, pp 499-511.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2200000078-3.
[9] “Average monthly hours of sunshine in Darwin (Northern Territory)”,
Weather and Climate, https://weather-and-climate.com/average-monthly-
hours-Sunshine,Darwin,Australia.
[10] “Ashalim
Power
Station”,
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ashalim Power Station.
[11] “Best
Research-Cell
Efﬁciency
Chart”,
NREL,
2021.
https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efﬁciency.html.
[12] “Carbonomics:
The
Clean
Hydrogen
Revolu-
tion”,
Goldman
Sachs
Research,
07
Feb
2022.
https://www.goldmansachs.com/insights/pages/carbonomics-the-clean-
hydrogen-revolution.html.
[13] “Ivanpah
Solar
Power
Facility”,
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ivanpah Solar Power Facility.
[14] “High
purity
99.999%
green
energy
powered
ALK
PEM
wind
solar
hydrogen
generator
with
electrolyzer”,
Alibaba,
https://www.alibaba.com/product-detail/High-purity-99-999-green-
energy 1600557711970.html.
[15] “PS20
solar
power
plant”,
Wikipedia,
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PS20 solar power plant.
[16] “SunShot
Vision
Study”,
US
Department
of
Energy,
2022.
https://www.energy.gov/eere/solar/sunshot-vision-study.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-012-4
GREEN 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

