Best Practices Versus Practices That Work 
Rethinking Sustainability Strategies in the Mediterranean Region Using Data 
Mary Kombolias 
Independent Sustainability Consultant 
New Orleans, LA, USA & Chania, Crete, Greece 
e-mail: mk@marykombolias.com 
 
 
Abstract—The Mediterranean region encompasses three 
continents and a multitude of languages and forms of 
government. It is also remarkable that this part of the world 
contributed to the genesis and expansion of three of the 
world’s major organized religions.  Despite minimal political 
integration, there is considerable overlap in terms of 
lifestyles, diets, climate, history of colonization, and cultural 
sensibilities between Mediterranean nations.  These factors 
can be leveraged to improve sustainability outcomes, and 
with contextual data, develop new metrics and targeted and 
effective solutions for the region. However, before any 
metrology is created and adopted, there needs to be (1) an 
assessment of the types of avoided pollution which are a 
direct result of regional factors and circumstances that may 
not exist  in North America and in Northern Europe where 
the majority of climate thought leadership is centered and 
(2) in light of those factors and circumstances, a re-
evaluation of the effectiveness of sustainability practices 
adopted from outside the region.  
Keywords-sustainability; Mediterranean; contextual data 
analysis; green marketeering. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Mitigating environmental damage by human activity 
during the time when humanity is searching for more 
efficient and sustainable ways to maintain modern life is 
something that requires global cooperation.  A common 
issue has been in assessing blame for the current state of 
affairs which have wrought unacceptably high levels of  
climate change, biodiversity loss, and human interference 
in the nitrogen cycle  [1][2].  For instance, non-Western 
nations such as China feel that their economic progress 
should not be stymied by the West’s calls for strict 
environmental regulation when it was the West which 
benefited the most from the environmentally unregulated 
activities of Industrial Revolution and the resultant 
degradation of the natural environment [3].  Less 
industrialized 
nations 
which are experiencing the 
deleterious effects of climate change more directly are also 
demanding immediate assistance [4].  While it is 
understood that everyone must attempt something in good 
faith, what that course of action is cannot simply be levied 
by fiat uniformly across all cultures and climatic zones, as 
culture and climate dictate the extent of human activity in 
any given part of the world.   
No part of the world is more intersectional than the 
Mediterranean, the nexus of Africa, Asia, and Europe 
which is bound together by climate and culture.  But 
because this area is (1) not politically contiguous, (2) 
contains numerous overlapping transnational political 
bodies (i.e., the European Union, the Arab League, the 
African Union, and the Union for the Mediterranean), and 
(3) also includes non-aligned nations and nations engaged 
in deep adversarial relationships or active conflicts with 
neighboring states, it is often difficult to assess the true 
state of affairs in terms of sustainability and to coordinate 
efforts.  Applying sustainability practices and metrics 
developed by wealthier nations outside of the region 
obfuscates reality further.   
Incentivizing both individual and collective behavioral 
changes that have the power to  eliminate longstanding 
impacts toward the environment in the Mediterranean will 
require confronting the root causes of the worrying current 
state of affairs in the region.  On the other hand, it is also 
important to expressly acknowledge and promote 
throughout the region the indigenous cultural practices 
which are already environmentally beneficial but are not 
necessarily measured well or measured at all.   The 
purpose of this paper is thus to outline common cultural 
factors of the Mediterranean which do not necessarily exist 
in the countries where thought leadership on sustainability 
resides, to explain the impacts of them be it positive or 
negative, and to explain the barriers to properly collecting 
and 
assessing 
such 
contextualized 
data 
in 
the 
Mediterranean region.  Remedies to poor, inefficient, and 
incomplete data collection and why strategies from outside 
the region may not be effective also are discussed. 
II. 
CULTURAL FACTORS 
 
The two main categories of cultural factors that have 
an impact on sustainability but which are not properly 
quantified and therefore not discussed relate to diet and 
commercial activity.  These cultural factors are discussed 
in detail in subsections A and B below.  Table 1 provides a 
summary of factors within each category. 
A. Food and the Culture and Infrastructure which 
Surround It 
Throughout the Mediterranean, there is an emphasis on 
eating fresh foods which are locally sourced and 
unprocessed.  Canned and frozen foods are limited in their 
ability and are generally viewed as unpalatable.  There are 
immediate benefits to the climate because of this cultural 
preference in terms of forms of avoided pollution such as 
emissions related to industrialized food processing in 
factories and transportation to market.   
Lack of processing also results in a relative lack of 
food packaging waste.  Together, the food and beverage, 
pulp and paper, and rubber and plastics industries in 
Europe comprise over 20% of the customer base of the EU 
chemical industry [5].  As food packaging itself is 
produced 
through 
industrial 
processes 
such 
as 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

papermaking and plastic manufacturing, the net positive  
effect, or at least an effect which does not compound an 
already negative effect of these processes, is compounded.  
Also, as a result, food packaging (excluding beverage 
containers) does not dominate the recycling streams.   
The famous, heavily plant-centered Mediterranean diet 
is one that has been developed taking into account various 
cultural influences, including the indigenous religious 
faiths of the region.  Some faiths, such as Judaism and 
Islam, prohibit the consumption of certain animal proteins 
all together.  Orthodox Christianity stipulates that believers 
should consume a vegan diet every Wednesday and Friday 
and throughout the weeks of Lent and Advent; a strict 
adherent would then consume a vegan diet for over one-
third of the year.   
Matters of personal conscience are by their very nature 
difficult, if not impossible, to quantify.  Although faith is a 
cornerstone of culture in the region, economic constraints 
have a strong influence on daily dietary choices as well.  
Though meat and fish are widely available from local 
producers and preferred over those sourced from factory 
farms, most households are economically constrained to 
the point that most days are, in fact, meatless for many 
people consisting of meals prepared from whole foods 
instead of industrially-produced, soy-derived meat and 
dairy substitutes.   Typically, meat and fish are reserved 
for small children to sustain their growth and intellectual 
development.  The main daily household animal protein 
sources are eggs and dairy, typically yogurt and cheese, 
which are more easily digestible among populations in the 
region which have varying degrees of severity of lactose 
intolerance. A gallon of milk as it is sold in the US would 
be regarded as an obscene volume in Mediterranean 
countries.    
Dietary 
suggestions 
touted 
from 
outside 
the 
Mediterranean as critical to lessening humanity’s impact 
on global warming, such as “Meatless Mondays,” which 
originated in the United States during World War I, are 
simply ludicrous in this part of the world [6].  It has been 
proposed that if the whole United States (population: ca. 
300 million people) went without meat and cheese one day 
a week, this would have the same effect as removing 7.6 
million cars off the road [6].    If so, a means of calculating 
the avoided emissions across Mediterranean countries due 
to the indigenous, plant-centered diets with much smaller 
portions of meat and animal products due to cultural, 
religious, and economic factors is in order.    
While the overall food culture can be praised for its 
contribution 
to 
environmental 
sustainability, 
the 
consumption of prepackaged beverages, especially water, 
has created a major issue which is quite nuanced and 
typically only discussed superficially.  Plastic water bottles 
are by far the most pervasive type of litter and are poorly 
recycled across the region.  Recent estimates of plastic 
pollution from coastal areas into the Mediterranean Sea are 
approximately 500,000 tons per year, excluding the 
contributions from tourism and shipping [7].  
The root cause for the consumption of so much bottled 
water in developed countries is that there is little faith in 
the ability of the local public authorities in the region to 
produce clean, good tasting tap water suitable for drinking. 
Many freshwater sources are badly polluted along both the 
northern and southern shores of the Mediterranean Sea.  
The sources of pollution include inappropriate disposal of 
municipal wastewater, infiltration from onsite sanitation 
facilities, excessive use of fertilizers and pesticides in 
agriculture, and industrial run-off containing heavy metals 
and polycyclic aromatic compounds [8].  Lack of trust in 
the public authorities is a longstanding legacy of 
colonialism in the region; it is also the foundation for 
corruption. Water treatment is one of many public services 
administered at the municipal level.  Throughout the 
Mediterranean, corruption in the forms of favoritism in 
public procurements and nepotism is endemic at local 
levels of government, resulting in overall low confidence 
in the abilities of the people responsible to properly 
administer public works like water treatment, as well as 
waste management, recycling, and sanitation programs [9].   
B. Commercial Activity and The 3 R’s: Reuse, 
Repurpose, and Resale 
With the exception of the issue related to beverage 
containers, the sale of food in the region has a lower 
carbon footprint and negative environmental impact than 
in other developed nations because of the way it is sold.  
There is a higher prevalence of open air street markets, 
mini-markets, and fewer and smaller supermarkets 
overall.  For instance, the EU average share of 
supermarkets within the retail food market is 62%; for 
Italy, Cyprus, and Greece the market share of 
supermarkets within the retail food market for each nation 
is below 40% [10].  Open air street markets take place in 
most neighborhoods at least one day per week in which 
farmers and producers sell directly to the public, without 
burden of running lights and air conditioning. Food waste 
is generally low because nutritious, fresh food is available 
in every neighborhood and accessible by foot;  people 
generally buy only what they know they will need for the 
next 24-48 hours.  This type of commercial environment 
is the antithesis of what is seen, for example, in the United 
States, where access to farm-fresh foods and the people 
who grow it is considered a privilege of the well-to-do 
classes.   
The only downside, of course, to this otherwise highly 
sustainable means of commerce is the ubiquitous use of 
plastic bags.  For example, in Greece, a plastic bag tax has 
been implemented, but in reality, only large chain stores 
impose it, as the penalty to them from the government 
would be severe and easy to collect.  It has been cited that 
in Greece each individual will use 300 plastic bags per 
year [11].  While it seems plausible for an individual to 
conduct sales transactions which would result in the 
accumulation of almost one plastic shopping bag per day, 
the reuse of plastic bags in the Mediterranean region is not 
discussed.  It is common for households to maintain a 
stash of plastic bags separated by size.  The most common 
and ultimate reuse of plastic shopping bags is for trash 
disposal, and the purchase of rolls of plastic garbage bags 
by households is limited to businesses.  Individuals and 
households 
are 
primarily 
motivated 
by 
financial 
constraints, especially in light of the financial crisis of the 
past decade, more than environmental considerations, as 
reusing a bag results in one less thing to buy.  Sturdy and 
well-constructed plastic and glass containers for the few 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

pre-packaged foods that households consume (namely, ice 
cream, margarine, yogurt, and pickles) enjoy a long life 
preserving leftovers in the refrigerators of Mediterranean 
kitchens.  Aluminum foil is washed and reused until it is 
punctured with cracks and holes.  Thus, it is safe to say 
that waste generation, at least by households, is generally 
low, and investigations across the Mediterranean support 
this observation [11].  Fig. 1 also shows that the waste 
generated 
in 
kilograms 
per 
capita 
in 
northern 
Mediterranean countries is significantly less than in other 
EU countries [12].   
A phenomenon which also is not adequately discussed 
is the overall culture of reuse, repurpose, and resale that is 
pervasive throughout the region.  While declaring publicly 
that one has purchased an item secondhand or has 
modified and repurposed something for another use 
carries a big stigma, as that is regarded as an admittance 
of one’s personal poverty, it is something that is done 
without fanfare and is seen as an intelligent and sensible 
to do.   Like with diet, real economic constraints motivate 
this behavior more than environmental activism.  Because 
commerce within the greater economy of individual 
nations in the region, and especially the circular economy, 
is mainly transacted in cash [13] and executed at the 
individual level by sole proprietors or small businesses, 
many people involved in these activities are able to 
routinely evade paying a considerable portion of the 
rightful sales and income taxes related to their business 
activities [14].  This ultimately creates a metrological 
issue in quantifying the underlying impacts of these 
commercial activities that support the circular economy 
on regional environmental sustainability.   
Automobiles in the Mediterranean are generally driven 
until they are no longer serviceable, generally at around 
20 years after the date of manufacture, although in some 
countries, even older vehicles remain serviceable due to 
economic difficulty of buying a new car.  Greece 
maintains the oldest busses and trucks in all of Europe, 
whereas Italy and Spain operate the oldest van fleets on 
the continent [15].  While older cars are less fuel efficient 
and do not necessarily meet the most stringent fuel 
emission standards, the repair and resale of older vehicles 
leads to less waste in the form of automotive junkyards 
full of components which cannot be adequately reused or 
recycled, such as the plastic interiors and electronic 
components.  Although the region as a whole is far behind 
in the adoption of electric and hybrid vehicles, currently 
there is no adequate, economically viable industrial 
process available anywhere in the world to recycle the 
rechargeable batteries of these vehicles.  This means that 
this is a category of waste which is effectively not being 
produced here at present time, in addition to the avoided 
emissions related to producing these new vehicles and the 
deleterious environmental impacts of lithium and cobalt 
mining to produce the batteries for them [16].   
Repair shops for consumer electronics, which are 
nearly extinct in wealthier Western countries, flourish in 
this region, as nearly all electronics are imported.  Tailors, 
seamstresses, and cobblers can also be found in every 
neighborhood.  Used clothing stores, predominantly for 
women’s fashion, have sprung up in recent years due to 
the economic crisis.  Children’s clothing is not often 
featured in these shops because it would be embarrassing 
to be perceived as someone who could not afford the best 
for their children.  However, for other items, two main 
avenues of resale which provide some level of privacy 
exist: Facebook Marketplace and the Roma. 
Facebook Marketplace is popular for people with only 
a few items to sell, whereas the Roma deal with bulk 
goods.  The Roma are a minority group throughout the 
Mediterranean region who live on the fringes of the 
dominant society.  Though subject to racist stereotypes as 
thieving and lazy, the Roma are whom members of the 
dominant society rely upon to liquidate all manners of 
surplus goods off the books. In turn, the Roma resell these 
goods for cash back to members of the dominant society.  
One common area of resale is used furniture and 
household appliances.  Roma merchants particularly scour 
well-to-do neighborhoods with their trucks and via 
megaphone announce their availability to haul away 
furniture, mattresses, cabinetry, and any other large, 
unwanted household items.  The discrimination against 
the Roma, who experience major barriers toward entry 
into other types of work, ultimately fuels the shadow 
economy and vicious cycles of money laundering and tax 
evasion throughout the Mediterranean. 
Because no recording keeping and no tax is properly 
assessed on these activities, it is difficult to estimate the 
scale of the positive impact on the environment of the 
Roma’s refurbishing and resale of discarded consumer 
goods across the region.  Rather than be maligned and 
reviled as black marketeers, the Roma should be 
recognized, respected, and rewarded for the green 
marketeering that they do perform, a type hyper-efficient, 
human-driven materials recovery.   
III. 
THE PROBLEMS WITH APPLYING EXTERNAL 
PRACTICES BASED ON WHAT IS QUANTIFIABLE 
ELSEWHERE  
 
In addition to the gaps in metrology due to what is 
currently not quantified, there is a problem with applying 
externally-developed best practices based on what is easily 
quantifiable elsewhere.  What is quantifiable elsewhere is 
based on assumptions and conditions which may not be 
applicable to the Mediterranean.  Namely, these can be 
reduced to two factors which are not prevalent in the 
region:  (1) high levels of efficient and equitable tax 
collection and (2) high levels of trust in the public 
authorities to do the right thing with the public’s money.  
Strategies developed from outside of the region based on 
these two factors will naturally result in initiatives which 
will be executed with less efficacy and less efficiency and 
will produce data from which an accurate assessment of 
the impact cannot be deduced.  It is not that Mediterranean 
people are less trustworthy and more corrupt than other 
people in the world, but the legacy of hundreds of years 
colonialism in the region does not exist in most parts of the 
world 
which 
dominate 
thought 
leadership 
on 
environmentalism.  People who have been colonized by 
another power, regardless of the identity of the colonizer, 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

be it British, French, Ottoman, etc., view tax evasion as the 
ultimate act of patriotism because taxes collected by the 
occupier from the occupied population are, of course, used 
to maintain the occupation.  These days, in the minds of 
many people in the region, the role of the occupier has 
been replaced by politicians at all levels of government 
who are assumed to be corrupt by default, regardless of 
party affiliation or ideology.   
Two particularly problematic external strategies are 
plastic bag taxes and municipal mixed recycling streams.   
A. Plastic Bag Taxes 
Numerous countries in the region have instituted 
plastic bag taxes at points of sale.  In Greece, for instance, 
between 2018 and 2019, the use of plastic bags has 
dropped 85% as a result of levying the tax [17].  While this 
is statistic is encouraging it does not tell the full story.  
This data is based upon merchants who properly charge for 
bags and issue receipts, and as it was mentioned in 
previous sections, the vast majority of sales transactions in 
Greece and throughout the Mediterranean are cash only 
and most merchants, especially within the otherwise eco-
friendly open-air markets, are individuals.  The true reality 
cannot be depicted from data collected from the minority 
who do comply with the law.  Using tax receipts to 
measure the extent of individual behavioral changes can 
only work well in societies which trust the government to 
properly use public funds for the public good and where 
penalties are evenly applied against those who break the 
law. 
A common argument is to then substitute paper bags 
free of charge in the place of plastic bags for shoppers.  
The relative scarcity of water and forests in comparison to 
Northern Europe and North America places physical limits 
on how much paper manufacturing infrastructure can be 
established domestically in any given Mediterranean 
nation.  The use of paper bags is not very widespread 
because many paper products are, in fact, imported and are 
somewhat expensive.  Also, practically speaking from a 
materials standpoint, paper bags simply do not have the 
same reuse capacity as plastic bags.  Even in areas where a 
plastic bag tax has been instituted and is reliably collected 
and paper bags are provided to consumers without charge, 
problems can still arise.  For example, in July 2021, the 
residents of Linköping, Sweden were requested to stop 
using these free paper shopping bags to dispose of their 
trash because of problems that loose, leaking, and broken 
paper bags create for waste collectors [18]. 
B. Municipal Mixed Recycling Streams 
Nations like Sweden, Germany and Japan are often 
lauded in the media for their successes in recycling and 
deservedly so.  Countries such as these aggressively sort 
their 
recyclables 
by 
type 
and 
class, 
preventing 
contamination, which is the key factor in retaining the 
value of recyclable waste as commodity [19].   Also, it 
should be noted that in Germany, for example, the 
recycling apparatus is financed by industry rather than the 
state; Germany has also already reached the 2030 EU 
target for packaging recycling of 70% fourteen years early 
in 2016 [20].  This is not necessarily the case in 
Mediterranean countries.  Municipal recycling systems in 
Greece, for instance, mirror those found in some major 
US cities like Washington, DC, and rely upon mixed 
recycling or single streams where there is no sorting 
performed by the consumer–paper, metals, and plastics 
are all comingled together.  These single stream systems 
are attractive to municipal governments which finance 
them through taxpayer money due to supposedly lower 
costs of administration and higher rates of collection of 
recyclables 
[19].  
However, 
the true 
costs 
of 
administration are actually much higher due to the lower 
quality and value of recyclables collected in comingled 
schemes due to contamination and the resultant lower 
market demand for them [19].  In a Canadian study it was 
determined that single stream recycling only increased 
municipal recycling rates by 4% and on average is 
actually 28.5% more expensive than multi-stream 
recycling in which residents and businesses presort their 
recyclables [19].  Relying upon tax revenues to fund a 
recycling system which by its very nature is inefficient 
does not make sense in a wealthy country like Canada or 
the US much less in Mediterranean nations like Greece in 
which tax money is itself also collected inefficiently and 
significantly less of it is available to fund government 
projects.    
 
IV. 
SYNTHESIZING PRACTICES THAT WORK 
The key to synthesizing practices that work is to adapt 
the best practices from elsewhere with practices that are 
already successful locally which take into consideration 
cultural nuances and constraints. Publicly available data 
can assist with targeting hybrid initiatives.  Key pieces of 
data are unemployment figures, levels of tax collection (or 
lack thereof), and utilities usage. 
The areas in which unemployment is most severe are 
naturally going to have less taxes collected.  In cash-poor 
areas with high numbers of unemployed people, free 
market solutions, like reverse vending machines returning 
beverage bottle deposits make more sense that using 
limited 
public 
funds 
to empty 
mixed 
recycling 
receptacles, the contamination of which has rendered 
them into ersatz trash cans (Fig. 2).  Reverse vending 
machines are ubiquitous in within grocery stores in places 
like Sweden and Germany for the mechanized collection 
PET beverage bottles and aluminum cans and are capable 
of distributing payment to consumers in real time.  Paying 
people for recyclables can go even further – for instance, 
the recycling of paper is extremely high in India, a nation 
with low and unbalanced levels of tax collection.  No 
clean, dry paper is thrown out as door-to-door merchants 
will pay households by weight for their waste paper 
separated by grade (newsprint, writing, magazine, kraft, 
corrugated, etc.)  Post-consumer paper collection accounts 
for 95% of total recyclable waste in India [21].  This 
strategy makes more sense than dumping unsorted paper 
into a bin contaminated with all manners of items.   
Data on electrical and water usage should also be 
utilized.  These will to demonstrate which areas suffer the 
greatest fluctuation in demand in public resources due to 
the tourism industry and can be used as a basis to 
rebalance public services for optimizing sustainability.  It 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

is unfair to full-year residents of touristic areas to assume 
the full tax burden of funding municipal waste 
management systems, water treatment, and sanitation 
when the population throughout the region swells by one-
third and the marine litter can increase as much as 40% 
[11].  Tourists should bear responsibility for the stresses 
their presence creates on the public infrastructure and the 
natural environment, and they are a population from 
which it is far easier and more reliable to collect taxes.  
These taxes, so long as oversight systems are put in place 
to ensure their conscientious administration by local 
governments, could be applied toward efforts that make 
sense, such as national and transnational capital 
improvements on infrastructure related to water treatment, 
sanitation, and waste management.  Private enterprises 
should be incentivized to install water purification 
systems for drinking water, solar panels, and energy 
efficient appliances, and free market solutions should be 
encouraged to commoditize uncontaminated recyclable 
waste like corrugated board and beverage containers 
generated in large volumes by the hospitality industry 
rather than businesses paying employees and taxes in 
order to dispose of these items unsorted where they 
ultimately lose value due to contamination.  One such 
organization which has had success is Enaleia, a Greek 
startup that pays fishermen for marine plastics, which are 
then recycled into durable consumer goods.  Since 2016 
Enaleia has recruited ca. 1,300 fishermen who have 
collectively removed over 180,000 kg of plastic and over 
20,000 kg of used fishing nets from the Mediterranean 
Sea as part of their day-to-day work [22].   
Above all, Mediterranean nations should actively seek 
out the best practices amongst themselves before applying 
a solution from elsewhere.  To that point, the lidded blue 
mixed recycling bins work well in cold climates with lots 
of snow and rain in order to keep recyclables dry, but in 
hot climates, they are breeding grounds for pests and 
vermin and smell badly in the summer months.  Israel has 
a source-separated recycling system that utilizes simple 
and inexpensive metal cages with orifices sized to capture 
plastic bottles [23].  Contamination with other materials is 
prevented, maintaining the value of the materials, and air 
is allowed to circulate, eliminating odors and discouraging 
the nesting of pests.  
While measuring the positive impact of the Roma 
people’s business activity on the environment may seem 
nearly impossible, an indirect measure could be through 
measuring the sales and installation of new household 
goods and building materials, like doors and windows. A 
steady or lowered demand for new items correlated with 
an increase in building permits from local authorities may 
suggest the availability of acceptable used goods in the 
marketplace.  Governments should also seek  solutions to 
reward this commercial activity and drive it out of the 
shadows so it can be adequately quantified. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
What ultimately should be landfilled is the notion that 
something from a “wealthy” or “Western” nation is 
automatically superior to a homegrown system or 
methodology.  As the Roman philosopher Seneca, a native 
of what is now Spain, once said, “The law is general but 
each case is specific.” Each nation and each culture is 
doing something positive, and the focus should be on 
learning from each other, leveraging data contextually 
through an understanding of culture, and innovating to 
enhance sustainability and the metrology of sustainability 
in region-specific ways that can identify inefficiencies and 
shortcomings, as well as provide markers of progress.   
The next steps are to begin designing a model to estimate 
the positive contributions of the unmeasured aspects 
highlighted in this paper, particularly the green 
marketeering of the Roma merchants. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The title of this paper was inspired by the following 
statement made by the former Mayor of Barcelona, Dr. 
Octavi Quintana Trias while he served as an instructor at 
the 2021 Science and Technology Diplomacy Summer 
School of the Institut Barcelona Estudis Internacionals:  
“There are best practices, and then there are practices that 
work.” 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Hyman, E., 2020. Who’s Really Responsible for Climate 
Change?. Harvard Political Review, [online] Available at: 
<https://harvardpolitics.com/climate-change-responsibility/> 
[Accessed 29 October 2021]. 
[2] 
Rockström, J., Steffen, W., Noone, K., et al, 2009. A safe operating 
space for humanity. Nature, 461(7263), pp.472-475. 
[3] 
Wu, T., 2013. China's industrial revolution is happening on a new 
planet. 
[online] 
The 
Conversation. 
Available 
at: 
<https://theconversation.com/chinas-industrial-revolution-is-
happening-on-a-new-planet-18204> [Accessed 29 October 2021]. 
[4] 
Khadka, N., 2021. Climate change: Low-income countries 'can't 
keep up' with impacts. [online] BBC News. Available at: 
<https://www.bbc.com/news/world-58080083> 
[Accessed 
29 
October 2021]. 
[5] 
2013. Addressing the Avoided Emissions Challenge Guidelines 
from the chemical industry for accounting for and reporting 
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions avoided along the value chain 
based on comparative studies. [online] International Council of 
Chemical Associations & WBCSD Chemicals. Available at: 
<https://www.wbcsd.org/Projects/Chemicals/Resources/Addressin
g-the-Avoided-Emissions-Challenge> 
[Accessed 
29 
October 
2021]. 
[6] 
Kihlander, K., 2019. Can one meatless day out of the week make a 
difference?. [online] National Catholic Reporter. Available at: 
<https://www.ncronline.org/news/earthbeat/can-one-meatless-day-
out-week-make-difference> [Accessed 29 October 2021]. 
[7] 
Cózar Cabañas, A., 2021. Mediterranean, Medioplasticae. Analysis 
of Plastic Pollution in the Mediterranean during the Coronavirus 
Outbreak. Mediterranean Yearbook 2020. [online] Mediterranean 
Yearbook 
2020, 
pp.276-278. 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.iemed.org/publication/mediterranean-
medioplasticae-analysis-of-plastic-pollution-in-the-mediterranean-
during-the-coronavirus-outbreak/> [Accessed 29 October 2021]. 
[8] 
Mandi, L., 2014. Water resources in the Mediterranean: quantity 
and quality. In: EuroMEDCooperation. Inland and Marine Water 
Challenges. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
<http://DOI:10.13140/2.1.1662.8806> 
[Accessed 
29 
October 
2021]. 
[9] 
Volintiru, C. and Olivas Osuna, J., 2018. Preventing corruption at 
local and regional level in South Mediterranean countries. 
Research File for the European Committee of the Regions (CoR). 
London School of Economics and Political Science Consulting. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

[10] Karampour, M., Sawalha, S. and Arias, J., 2016. Eco-friendly 
Supermarkets - an Overview. 
[11] Dalberg Advisors, WWF Mediterranean Marine Initiative , 2019 
“Stop the Flood of Plastic: How Mediterranean Countries Can 
Save Their Sea.”  
[12] 2021. Municipal waste by waste management operations 
(env_wasmun). 
Eurostat. 
 
Available 
at: 
<https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/cache/metadata/en/env_wasmun_es
ms.htm#ref_period1633418247888> [Accessed 29 October 2021]. 
[13] Esselink, H. and Hernández, L., 2017. The use of cash by 
households in the Euro area. ECB Occasional Paper Series No 
201. European Central Bank. 
[14] Georgakopoulos, T., 2016. Tax Evasion in Greece – A Study. 
[online] diaNEOsis Research and Policy Institute. Available at: 
<https://www.dianeosis.org/wp-
content/uploads/2017/03/Tax_Evasion_diaNEOsis_Upd_17_03_20
17.pdf> [Accessed 30 October 2021]. 
[15] 2021. ACEA Report Vehicles in Use Europe. [online] European 
Automobile 
Manufacturers’ 
Association. 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.acea.auto/files/report-vehicles-in-use-europe-
january-2021-1.pdf> [Accessed 30 October 2021]. 
[16] Castelvecchi, D., 2021. Electric cars and batteries: how will the 
world produce enough?. Nature, 596(7872), pp.336-339. 
[17] Kathimerini (English Edition), 2019. Greece’s plastic bag usage 
drops 
85 
pct 
since 
charge. 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.ekathimerini.com/news/236183/greece-s-plastic-bag-
usage-drops-85-pct-since-charge-introduced/> 
[Accessed 
29 
October 2021]. 
[18] Tzvetozar, V., 2021. One year after Swedish plastic tax, a new 
problem: paper bags | TheMayor.EU. [online] Themayor.eu. 
Available at: <https://www.themayor.eu/en/a/view/one-year-after-
swedish-plastic-tax-a-new-problem-paper-bags-8559> [Accessed 4 
November 2021]. 
[19] Lakhan, C. (2015). A Comparison of Single and Multi-Stream 
Recycling Systems in Ontario, Canada. Resources, 4(2), pp.384–
397. 
[20] 2020. Overview of European Recycling Systems. [online] Retail 
Council 
of 
Canada. 
Available 
at: 
<https://www.retailcouncil.org/community/sustainability/overview
-of-european-recycling-systems/> [Accessed 30 October 2021]. 
[21] Das, A.K. (2021b). Pandemic and disrupted collections drive 
Indian scrap paper price surge. [online] Recycling International. 
Available at: https://recyclinginternational.com/paper/pandemic-
and-disrupted-collections-drive-indian-scrap-paper-price-surge-
2/45649/ [Accessed 29 Oct. 2021]. 
[22] Enaleia. (n.d.). [online] Available at: https://enaleia.com/about-us/ 
[Accessed 29 Oct. 2021]. 
[23] Lidman, M. (2019). Looking to dump poor recycling record, Israel 
asks public to start pitching in. [online] www.timesofisrael.com. 
Available 
at: 
https://www.timesofisrael.com/ministry-says-the-
public-is-key-to-sorting-out-israels-trashy-recycling-record/ 
[Accessed 29 Oct. 2021]. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Waste generated in units of kilogram per capita for selected European nations in 2019.  Figure has been generated from dataset in reference  
[12]. 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
 
Figure 2.   
Photo montage illustrating state of municipal recylcing in Chania, Crete, Greece.  Photo A (above) is of a waste management 
truck clearly depicting the types of items which are acceptable for municipal collection.  Photos B and C (below) depict blue recycling receptacles on 
the street in the “Kentro” (“Center”)  neighborhood of Chania contaminated with trash and improperly disposed recyclables.  Photo credit: M. 
Kombolias 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY CULTURAL, ECONOMIC, AND LIFESTYLE FACTORS WHICH AVOID OR MINIMIZE EMISSIONS, POLLUTION, OR WASTE 
Category 
 
Summary of Factors which Avoid/Minimize Emissions/Pollution/Waste 
Factor 
Description 
Areas of Avoided or Minimized 
Emissions/Pollution/Waste 
Challenges to Quantification 
Food 
and 
Diet 
Meat 
Consumption 
Generally low with cultural preference for meat 
of smaller animals over beef.  High availability of 
locally raised meat and minimal packaging 
(wrapped in paper).  Cultural preference for fresh 
meat versus frozen or processed meat products 
(cold cuts, canned meat). 
Packaging waste 
Methane Emission 
Transport to market 
Some black market activity; sales receipts 
may not produced by small-scale producers 
or may not accurately reflect a sale to avoid 
taxation. 
Dairy 
Consumption 
Preference for and higher availability of cheese 
and yogurt over fresh milk.  Dairy products are 
more often sourced from smaller animals (sheep 
and goats) than cows. 
Food waste due to spoilage of 
milk 
Some black market activity; sales receipts 
may not produced by small-scale producers 
or may not accurately reflect a sale to avoid 
taxation. 
Produce 
Consumption 
High with preference for locally sourced fruits 
and vegetables. 
Packaging waste 
Transportation to market 
Some black market activity; sales receipts 
may not produced by small-scale producers 
or may not accurately reflect a sale to avoid 
taxation. 
Religious 
Dietary 
Restrictions  
Some 
restrictions 
are 
cyclical/temporal 
(Orthodoxy, 
Islam, 
Judaism). 
Others 
are 
mandatory (Islam, Judaism). 
See 
meat 
and 
dairy 
consumption factors 
Levels of religious observance are deeply 
personal and vary; some nations do not 
collect population statistics on religious 
identity. 
Limited 
Consumption 
of 
Factory-
Produced 
Foods 
(i.e., 
canned 
and 
frozen 
products with 
the exception 
of ice cream) 
Low – culturally unpalatable 
Packaging waste 
Industrial food manufacturing 
processes 
Transportation to market 
Refrigerants (frozen food only) 
Electricity (frozen food only) 
Needs to be reported in comparison to 
another population. 
Commerce 
Open 
air 
street 
markets 
Located within walking distance of residential 
neighborhoods and present 1-2 times weekly.  In 
addition to fresh produce, clothing, shoes, and 
miscellaneous household items are also available 
for sale. 
Refrigerants 
Packaging waste (except for 
plastic bags) 
Electricity consumption 
Transportation by consumer to 
reach market 
Some black market activity; sales receipts 
may not produced by small-scale producers 
or may not accurately reflect a sale to avoid 
taxation. 
Plastic bags are main form of packaging. 
Plastic bag taxes often not levied against 
consumers. 
Mini Markets 
Located within walking distance in every 
neighborhood.  Smaller stores catered specifically 
to the items most popular among local residents.  
High turnover of fresh products. 
Transportation by consumer to 
reach market 
Food waste 
Electricity 
consumption 
(compared 
to 
large 
supermarkets) 
Some black market activity; sales receipts 
may not produced by small-scale producers 
or may not accurately reflect a sale to avoid 
taxation. 
Plastic bags are main form of packaging. 
Plastic bag taxes often not levied against 
consumers. 
Repair 
over 
Replacement 
Mainly driven by economic necessity and high 
price of imported goods, especially electronics 
and automobiles. 
Packaging waste 
Transportation to market 
Industrial processes required to 
manufacture 
a 
new 
item 
(mining, 
petroleum 
drilling/refining, etc.) 
 
Some black market activity; sales receipts 
often not produced. 
Local 
Salvaging 
and Resale of 
Large 
Household 
Goods 
(furniture, 
appliances, 
etc.) 
Mainly driven by economic necessity and high 
price of imported goods 
Packaging waste 
Transportation to market of 
new goods 
Industrial 
processes 
to 
manufacture a new item 
 
Nearly exclusive black market activity. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

