Outsourcing Electric Vehicle Smart Charging on the Web of Data
Maxime Lefrançois∗, Guillaume Habault†, Caroline Ramondou‡, and Eric Françon‡
∗École Nationale Supérieure des Mines,
FAYOL-ENSMSE, Laboratoire Hubert Curien,
F-42023 Saint-Étienne, France
Email: maxime.lefrancois@emse.fr
†IMT/TELECOM Bretagne,
IRISA, Rennes, France,
Email: guillaume.habault@telecom-bretagne.eu
‡Compagnie Nationale du Rhône,
69004 Lyon, France,
Email: {c.ramondou, e.francon}@cnr.tm.fr
Abstract—This paper describes the results of a joint work between
partners in ITEA2 12004 Smart Energy Aware Systems (SEAS)
project, which aims at developing an ecosystem of distributed
services that target energy efﬁciency. This paper particularly
focuses on Electric Vehicle (EV) need for smart charging, which
is made possible with Internet-of-Things (IoT) capabilities and
smart grid deployment. A use case is proposed by Compagnie
Nationale du Rhône (CNR) to tackle the emerging need for elec-
tric mobility. In this CNR scenario, a new player, named Smart
Charging Provider (SCP), exposes a charge plan optimization
algorithm on the Web. This service can be used by any Charging
Station Operator (CSO) over the world in order to optimize their
charge plans. These optimizations are computed with respect
to economical or environmental criteria, while ensuring the
satisfaction of constraints expressed by EV Drivers and CSOs.
Apart from describing the actual implementation and deployment
of this service as a RESTful Web service, this paper also overviews
three of the main contributions of SEAS project that were used
together to achieve this goal: (1) SEAS Reference Architecture
Model, designed to enable real-time interconnection of any energy
actors; (2) SEAS ontology, used throughout SEAS ecosystem
to quantify systems and their interconnections; (3) SPARQL-
Generate language and protocol, implemented to ensure semantic
and syntactic interoperability at low cost in SEAS ecosystem.
Keywords–Smart Charging; Electric Vehicle; Distributed Archi-
tecture; Web of Data; Ontologies
I.
INTRODUCTION
Lately, the number of Electric Vehicle (EV) has been
constantly increasing and it is expected to grow even more in
the coming years. However, [1] estimated that EV charging
may have a signiﬁcant impact on electricity peak demand,
at the level of giga watts, and at speciﬁc time and location.
Indeed, EVs are charged at a constant amount of power as
soon as they are plugged in. Hence according to [1], 90% of
the charging is going to take place in the late mornings when
drivers arrive at their ofﬁce, or in the evenings when drivers
come back home. This constant charging will therefore occur
during already existing electricity demand peaks, leading to
important ﬂuctuations in energy consumption. Such situation
will cause tremendous undesired effects for the distribution
grid – power peaks, voltage drops, expensive generation and
grid reinforcements, ﬁnally ending up with increased electricity
costs.
However, in most cases, these EVs stay parked for sev-
eral hours. Therefore, it would be possible to coordinate the
charging during such period. This concept is known as smart
charging. [2] deﬁnes smart charging as follows:
Smart charging of an EV is when the charging
cycle can be altered by external events, allowing for
adaptive charging habits, providing the EV with the
ability to integrate into the whole power system in a
grid and user-friendly way.
Smart charging targets the following beneﬁts for:
• Customers: it might reduce their electricity costs;
• DSOs (i.e., Distribution System Operators): it could assist
grid management with control signals;
• The society: it could avoid grid and generation invest-
ments;
• The environment: it may facilitate integration of renew-
able energies (e.g. self-consumption of electricity with
solar power and electric vehicles);
• Service providers and retailers: it would give them oppor-
tunity to provide customers with innovative products and
services.
In a broaden perspective, these beneﬁts are also targeted
by ITEA2 SEAS project, which aims at designing a global
ecosystem to help manage and optimize energy consump-
tion, production and storage. This will be made possible
by providing innovative services designed for various energy
stakeholders and energy-aware systems. Apart from smart
charging services, SEAS ecosystem includes a large spectrum
of services, as depicted in Figure 1, which all contribute to
better manage energy availability and needs.
monitor
estimate/forecast
order
plan
energy consumption
energy production
energy price
environmental factors
Figure 1.
General services envisioned in SEAS ecosystem
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section II
describes a Compagnie National du Rhône (CNR) Use Case
(UC) that involves the concept of smart charging. The paper
then focuses in Section III on CNR algorithm used to provide
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

a smart charging service. Then, an overview of three of
the main contributions of SEAS project follows: a SEAS
ecosystem architecture (Section IV); an energy domain based
ontology (Section V); and SPARQL-Generate protocol that
drastically lowers the costs for SEAS partners to become
semantically interoperable (Section VI). These contributions
were used together to design an implementation of CNR smart
charging service, whose deployment within SEAS ecosystem
is described in Section VII. Finally, Section VIII concludes and
presents how this work can be generalized in SEAS project.
II.
CNR SMART CHARGING SCENARIO
This section describes the ﬁrst contribution of this paper:
the deﬁnition of an innovative UC for smart charging. It
overviews the architectural, representational and interoperabil-
ity needs arising from this UC, which are then answered in
the following sections of this paper.
A. Roles Description
A charging station is an equipment comprised of one
or several Electric Vehicle Service Equipment (EVSE). Each
EVSE has a meter (m) to monitor any charging process and
is connected to an electric junction via a metering place.
This CNR UC targets private charging stations, which may be
owned and used by : 1) households, to charge ones vehicle at
home; 2) companies, to charge cars from corporate ﬂeet at a
workplace. Figure 2 illustrates this CNR Smart Charging UC.
Customer
MP
EV
Driver
EVSE
m
EVSE
m
Charging Station 2
EVSE
m
EVSE
m
DSO
Charging
Station
Operator
Smart
Charging
Provider
Energy Market
Energy
Retailer
Energy
Producer
Prices
Charge
needs
Charge
plans
Charge information
Monitoring
Charge
requests
E
E
E
E
E
Metering data
Supply contract
Sourcing
Figure 2.
Illustration of CNR Smart Charging UC
Let us overview the main players of this scenario. The
charging station is owned by a Customer, who pays electricity
supply for the area to its Energy Retailer based on a Metering
Point (MP) usually operated by a DSO. The charging station is
used by EV Drivers – either a resident of an household or an
employee of a given company – who plug their vehicles to an
available EVSE. A charging station is controlled by a Charging
Station Operator (CSO), which is responsible for monitoring
and applying charge plans (which include switching on and
off EVSE, but also charging with a limited power). The CSO
entrusts a new actor, the Smart Charging Provider (SCP), with
the establishment of an optimal charge plan for each EV based
on information provided. The SCP may request additional
information – e.g. Electricity Tariff – from other actors – e.g.
an Energy Retailer – in order to deﬁne such charge plans.
B. Interactions of the smart charging process
In Figure 2, the power distribution is represented by a black
line with a lightning bolt. Communications speciﬁc to this UC
are represented by blue arrows, whereas other communications
are represented by dashed arrows.
An EV Driver is authorized to use a charging station
connected to the grid, and managed by a given CSO. When
this EV Driver plugs its EV to an available EVSE, it ﬁrst
has to communicate with the CSO. The communication is
made available either directly – via its smartphone or a web
application – or through the charging station, in order for
the EV Driver to specify the charging requirements : energy
needs (related to battery situation) and preferences (in a given
maximum charging time). This can boil down to the estimated
departure time, but it may also include other information such
as the price he is willing to pay, or whether he wants to
consume only local green energy production.
The CSO takes these pieces of information into account
along with several other parameters such as power constraints
(limitation of maximum instantaneous power at the delivery
point, energy requested by other EV Drivers connected to the
same area) and asks the SCP for an optimized charge plan.
SCP combines the received information with other data
such as prices information (e.g. dynamic hourly price of
energy) and control signals (e.g. maximum power demand).
It then runs optimization algorithms to settle the EV charge
plan, which is a series of consecutive blocks of maximal power
value (Pmax) for deﬁned time periods.
The CSO, receiving the resulting charge plan from SCP, ap-
plies this plan and monitors the charging station in accordance.
The EV controls the actual power delivered by the charging
station to the battery, which should be lower than the Pmax
deﬁned by the charge plan – according to the mode 3 charging
process (international standard IEC 61851 and IEC 62196).
At any time, an EV Driver can change its charging needs.
For instance, he might request an immediate battery charging,
if he actually need its battery fully charged in a short amount
of time. Therefore, the charge plan may be re-optimized
by the SCP on CSO requests and at any time during the
charging process – especially if new EV charging events occurs
(plug/unplug), or if an EV Driver modify its requirements but
also and above all, if a modiﬁcation of available power is
notiﬁed.
Concretely, some incentives can be used to make EV
Drivers accept the smart charging service: they can be eco-
nomical (the charging will be cheaper), or environmental (the
charging will save CO2 emissions).
C. Decoupling Roles in the UC
Actually, CNR virtually already implements this UC for
its charging stations. We use the term virtually, because CNR
currently plays all the roles within this UC. Indeed, CNR is:
• The customer: CNR owns several charging stations lo-
cated at its head ofﬁce in Lyon (France) and at different
energy production sites along the Rhône river. These
charging stations are used by employees to charge CNR’s
EV ﬂeet.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

• The energy supplier: charging stations consume electricity
supplied by CNR. Even if the electricity is delivered by
the grid, CNR is the electricity supplier for each metering
point, and has to balance supply with its renewable
production.
• The CSO: charging stations are controlled remotely from
the CNR’s head ofﬁce.
• The SCP: CNR uses its own Energy Management System
that embeds optimization algorithms in order to provide
optimized charge plans.
In order for any customer to use this smart charging service,
it has been necessary to decouple each role. It has been a
complex task and the methodology used was to progressively
externalize roles from the original implementation by answer-
ing questions such as:
• How would it work if the EV user was not an employee
of the CNR ?
• How would it work if the charging station was located in
Turkey ?
As a consequence, any actor should be able to play any of
the aforementioned roles. Yet, this modularity is not direct.
Nevertheless, all of the information needed to run CNR’s
charge plan optimization algorithm is produced, modeled, ex-
changed, and processed internally in CNR Information System.
Hence, any change of actor who plays a given role in the
UC would require important integration efforts, which means
important conception and development costs.
Sections IV to VI hence overview work that target seamless
interoperability between actors, at the lowest possible cost.
First, let us describe the charge plan optimization algorithm.
III.
THE CHARGE PLAN OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM
It is incontestable that smartgrid and energy management
would beneﬁt from smart charging. [1] conducted a survey on
the effects of e-mobility in autumn 2014, which also lists all its
potential and beneﬁts. In addition, the literature includes many
studies related to the problem of coordinated EV charging
and discharging in a smart grid, to cite but a few, [3]–[8].
The various optimization approaches presented in these papers
are based on either single or multi-objective optimization,
according to solely current information, or including forecast-
based solutions.
CNR is an hydroelectricity producer which has developed
an electricity mixed renewable production (wind power, solar
power, small hydro-power). CNR has therefore become an
expert in managing an intermittent energy, by forecasting, op-
timizing, marketing and supervising production. CNR uses its
own algorithm in order to optimize EV consumption according
to several strategies. The smart charging strategy tested in CNR
UC is based on forecast and day-ahead electricity prices, the
available power at the metering point, the real-time connection
of the vehicles at the charging station and the EV Driver
requirements.
The goal of this optimization approach is to minimize the
charging cost without negotiating the charging needs, as the
customer satisfaction and the reliability of the charging service
have higher priority than the system operating cost. It then
integrates static and dynamic information related to:
• EV Drivers: their charging needs (maximum delay for
charging completion);
• EV: minimal and maximal charging power, and battery
State of Charge (SoC);
• Charging station: minimal and maximal charging power;
• Consumption place: network access tariff and load curve;
• Electricity contract with the Energy Retailer based on
time-varying prices (e.g. spot prices);
• Forecast and day-ahead electricity prices.
Note that the aim in this paper is not to review the existing
optimization algorithms, neither is to compare the CNR algo-
rithm to the existing algorithms. Instead, we are interested in
describing a methodology to make such an algorithm available,
a) in a real deployment, b) at low cost, and c) to any actual
CSO (via the Web). The result is the deployment of CNR SCP
that runs a charge plan optimization algorithm. Any node on
the Internet requiring a charge plan can contact this SCP for
any types of EVs and EVSEs.
IV.
ARCHITECTURE
One important task for SEAS project was to deﬁne an
architecture to enable real-time interconnection of any en-
ergy actors. This interconnection will then help actors offer
energy dedicated services to SEAS entities. Therefore, this
architecture should meet some general requirements such as:
a) being scalable, adaptable and dynamic; b) offering plug-
and-play solutions (having as less manual conﬁguration as
possible); and c) providing secure communications and privacy
of information.
Different UCs have been deﬁned to demonstrate SEAS
beneﬁts on different domains (EV, House, Building, Microgrid,
etc.). All these UCs have then been used to deﬁne functions
and communication requirements that such an architecture
should address. Several architectures exist such as [9] but
none of them address all SEAS project requirements. That is
the reason why SEAS partners deﬁne their own architecture,
named SEAS-Reference Architecture Model (S-RAM).
SEAS Field Domain
EU
SEAS Group 1
EN
EN
SEAS Group 2
EN
EN
GM
GM
SEAS Core Domain
SCE
SCE
SCE
SCE
Figure 3.
Illustration of SEAS Reference Architecture Model
Figure 3 is an illustration of S-RAM for CNR Smart
Charging UC as presented in Section II. As depicted in Fig-
ure 3, S-RAM is divided in two domains, Field Domain (SFD)
and Core Domain (SCD). Entities within SFD monitor and/or
help control local load and generation. For instance, in CNR
scenario, both EVSE’s meter – called End Node (EN) in S-
RAM — and Customer — called End User (EU) — help CSO
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

monitor and control any charging process. In addition, SFD
could be divided in SEAS Groups (SGs) in order to facilitate
energy management and optimization. Each group is therefore
managed or operated by a Group Manager (GM). This manager
– the CSO in CNR UC – is aggregating data coming from all
entities willing to participate in the group energy management.
GMs might analyze data collected in the ﬁeld in order to make
a decision to better manage the energy of their SGs. GMs being
at the edge between SCD and SFD, their decisions can also be
taken considering information (informative or control) coming
from outside the group. Indeed, SEAS Core Entities (SCE)
within SCD might both send energy demands to SGs and/or
provide information or services to help SGs in their energy
management — for instance, SCP in CNR smart charging
scenario. With this architecture, any node in SFD or any SG,
via its GM, can participate in a Demand- Response (DR)
system and so, help have better global energy consumption
plan.
As any communication architecture, S-RAM requires to be
secured so that information is not shared with untrustworthy
entities. S-RAM relies on its security service that helps authen-
ticate all entities participating in this architecture. Moreover,
Internet Protocol (IP) is widely present in current objects
deployed for energy related topics. And as it is assumed that
it will be even more present in the future, SCD relies on IP
and secured web protocols such as HTTPS. S-RAM SCD can
therefore be seen as an overlay of IP/HTTPS.
The SEAS project being an European project, it has several
partners and is not dedicated to only one domain of energy
management. Instead, it focuses on any energy management
domain. Data representation is therefore crucial. In fact, it is
important that all these potential actors can understand each
other and use common services without having to conﬁgure
each possible case manually. Furthermore, the structure of
energy networks is changing, and the current structure may
not be the reference in coming years. This has to be taken into
consideration in smart grid development, and, as mentioned
previously, the SEAS project wants its architecture to be
dynamic and adaptable, and so, auto-conﬁgurable. Therefore,
S-RAM requires to rely on data standard providing a) links
and relationships; b) abstraction in demands; and c) a common
language. That is the reason why the Resource Description
Framework (RDF) [10] formalism has been chosen as an
abstract data model in S-RAM.
Within S-RAM, a charging station is a SG operated by a
CSO. As mentioned previously, CNR smart charging service
relies upon an algorithm that deﬁnes the charge plan based
on information provided by the CSO and the Energy Retailer.
CNR SCP is an SCE providing a smart charging service. S-
RAM choices – especially with the usage of a common lan-
guage based on ontologies – help any SEAS Entities discover,
understand and have access to this service.
V.
ONTOLOGIES
This section overviews one of the ontologies that has been
developed in SEAS project, namely the SEAS ontology [11].
This ontology is used throughout SEAS ecosystem to ensure
inter-operability. But ﬁrst, let us recall some basics about
Knowledge Representation and Semantic Web.
A. Overview of the Semantic Web Stack
In the domain of Smart Grids, a huge amount of knowledge
is available and produced in heterogeneous and distributed
manner. Knowledge Engineering and Semantic Web actually
aim at answering generic needs that arise from the produc-
tion of such knowledge. One wants to represent, manipulate,
exchange, query, reason with, update, and validate the knowl-
edge.
The Wold Wide Web Consortium (W3C) standardized a full
stack of standards for Semantic Web on top of Unicode and
Universal Resource Identiﬁers (URIs) standards. The ﬁrst step
towards inter-operationalization of data is to unambiguously
name things with an URI. The second step uses RDF in order
to describe anything in terms of a set of triples (subject,
predicate, object). RDF is therefore an abstract data model
(a directed acyclic graph), and has multiple concrete syntaxes
such as RDF/XML [12], Turtle [13] or JSON-LD [14]. For
instance, the Turtle snippet from Figure 4 serializes an RDF
Graph with exactly ﬁve triples. This example describes the
geolocation of a charging station.
@prefix rdfs: <http://www.w3.org/2000/01/rdf-schema#> .
@prefix geo: <http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#> .
@prefix seas: <http://purl.org/NET/seas#> .
@base <http://data.mycsocompany.org/rest/> .
<cs/10001> a seas:ChargingStation ;
rdfs:comment "CSO Charging Station with id 10001."@en ;
geo:location [ geo:lat 45.763084 ; geo:long 5.692196 ] ;
Figure 4.
Turtle example describing the geolocation of a charging station.
There are multiple RDF vocabularies on the Web that
can be used, each deﬁning its own set of URIs. For instance,
geo:location
is
a
preﬁxed
URI,
whose
expanded
form
is
http://www.w3.org/2003/01/geo/wgs84_pos#location.
URIs
geo:location, geo:lat, geo:long are deﬁned within the W3C
Basic Geo (WGS84 lat/long) Vocabulary. Then, <cs/10001> is a
relative URI, that needs to be resolved against some base URIs,
which in this case is
http://data.mycsocompany.org/rest/.
These URIs are not chosen randomly. Indeed, except for the
dummy CSO company website and the SAREF ontology,
all URIs mentioned in this paper actually leads to some
document. Moreover, The Linked Data principle deﬁnes four
simple principles to publish RDF knowledge on the Web
[15]: (1) Use URIs as names for things; (2) Use HTTP URIs
so that people can look up those names; (3) When someone
looks up for an URI, provide useful information, using the
standards (RDF, SPARQL); and (4) Include links to other
URIs, so that they can discover more things.
For reasoning with RDF, one must choose some formal
semantics, and build inference engines (or reasoners) to un-
derstand such axioms and infer new knowledge (or reason)
with RDF graphs. Among other, [16] deﬁne semantics for
RDF and RDFS. [17] grounds the Web Ontology Language
(OWL) constructors (e.g., allValuesFrom) and axioms (e.g.,
subClassOf) on the First Order Logics (FOL). In this way,
RDF enables to represent knowledge about things that are
identiﬁed by URIs, and ontologies enable to capture the
semantics of this knowledge and to reason. For example, using
OWL 2 direct semantics, the RDF Graph and the logical
formula below are equivalent.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

saref:Currency owl:oneOf ( om:euro om:United_States_dollar
om:pound_sterling );
(∀x)[Currency(x) ⇒ (x = EUR) ∨ (x = USD) ∨ (x = GBP)]
This example illustrates a clear design issue in the current
SAREF ontology. It also illustrates that extra care has to be
taken when reusing existing ontologies.
B. The SEAS Ontology
Another important task in SEAS project was therefore to
design ontologies to represent and reason with knowledge
related to energy domain. We followed a three-step knowledge
engineering methodology [18]: (1) agree on a conceptualiza-
tion of the domain; (2) develop the ontology for the domain,
formally grounded on an appropriate knowledge representation
formalism; (3) operationalize it for the domain.
The ﬁrst step has been achieved by organizing interviews
between knowledge engineering researchers and energy do-
main experts during a dedicated workshop [19]. It helped
us unveil the importance of representing knowledge such as
time series, aggregated values, and quantity integration and
derivations for the energy domain. Yet, there exists no ontology
on the Web to represent this knowledge. Furthermore, the FOL
formalism behind OWL is not appropriate to reason with time
series and sums.
The result of the second step is an extension of the joint
W3C-OGC Semantic Sensor Network (SSN) ontology [20].
This exension enables to describe processes such as sensing,
actuating, forecasting, planning. All of these processes take as
input and output estimations of qualities of a) concepts sys-
tems; b) connections between these systems; and c) connection
points of a system where connections may occur. Inputs and
outputs are described using the W3C Data Cube ontology [21].
Figure 5 illustrates the core of the SEAS ontology:
s’:System
cp’:ConnectionPoint
c:Connection
s:System
cp:ConnectionPoint
Figure 5.
The core of the SEAS Ontology
The SEAS ontology also contains a module that deﬁnes
classical qualities for systems, connections and connection
points in the energy domain, as illustrated in Figure 6.
EnergySystem
ConsumptionPower
ProductionPower
StoragePower
TotalIncomingPower
TotalOutgoingPower
...
EnergyConnectionPoint
IncomingPower
IncomingEnergy
...
EnergyConnection
TransferingPower
TransferredEnergy
...
Figure 6.
Extract of qualities deﬁned for SEAS feature of interest.
This module is automatically generated from a JSON
conﬁguration ﬁle retrieved from SEAS GitHub repository [22].
And every expert in the SEAS project can contribute to this
ﬁle. The SEAS ontology can also be reused for any other
domain (e.g., water or waste management), provided that
a new JSON conﬁguration ﬁle is written for that domain.
Among other, the SEAS ontology enables to describe time
series, aggregations of quantities, derivations and integration
of quantities.
As a result, this ontology is used to model the input and
output of CNR SCP service: EVs and EVSEs are connected
energy systems, whereas the need and the plans are commands
or observations of the energy connections between these sys-
tems. It especially describes the TransferingPower measure
with respect to the Time dimension.
VI.
SEMANTIC AND SYNTACTIC INTEROPERABILITY
As previously mentioned, RDF is an abstract data model.
Much like in communication models, the transmitter node must
encode the RDF graph in a serialized form that next is sent to
the receiver node, which must decode the message. The ever-
lasting issue is then to ensure that the receiver “understands”
the message exactly as the transmitter expected. This is almost
impossible with human communication, but we want machines
to do so.
With RDF, one trivial solution to this issue is to choose
one of the concrete RDF syntaxes, and to impose every node
to be able to encode and decode messages with respect to this
syntax. Yet, this method is not practical for two reasons. First,
SEAS partners want to keep on using their legacy system.
Indeed, they are used to exchangeing messages with their
legacy partners in CSV, XML or JSON, and it would be too
expensive for them to completely switch to RDF. Second, using
RDF will increase message payload and resource required
to process them. In fact, it would be irrelevant for simple
messages sent by resource constrained SEAS nodes (e.g.,
simple time series of consumption values)to be sent in RDF
syntaxes.
As a consequence, one crucial piece of work in the SEAS
project was to drastically lower the cost in order to adapt
existing systems to RDF. The result of this work is to use
a new RDF-based solution, namely SPARQL-Generate [23],
which is both a language and a protocol.
The language part of SPARQL-Generate is an extension
of SPARQL 1.1, which enables to declaratively describe how
messages (in XML, CSV, JSON, or any other format) may
be interpreted in RDF. This language is more expressive than
SPARQL 1.1 itself, and is already implemented on top of
Apache Jena [24].
The protocol part of SPARQL-Generate enables the two
following scenarios:
• an HTTP client sends its request in a legacy format to
a server along with a SPARQL-Generate query, thus the
server may interpret the message properly in RDF using
SPARQL-Generate.
• an HTTP server answers in a legacy format to its client
along with a SPARQL-Generate query, thus the client may
interpret the message properly in RDF using SPARQL-
Generate.
CNR SCP implementation makes use of such SPARQL-
Generate protocol: it sends a SPARQL-Generate query along
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

with CNR legacy XML format information. As a result, it
allows any client to properly interpret any response in RDF
using SPARQL-Generate.
VII.
IMPLEMENTATION OF CNR SCP ENTITY WITHIN
SEAS PROJECT
The smart charging service offered by CNR SCP is imple-
mented and deployed as a RESTful Web Service. This service
deﬁnes two interactions with other SEAS Entities:
1) Requests for the execution of SCP algorithm. The request-
ing node sends an XML document with static information
about the charging station, the EVSEs, and charging needs
as formulated by EV Drivers. CNR SCP sends back an
acknowledgment, that provides the location where the
algorithm result will be retrievable.
2) Requests for an SCP algorithm execution result at a given
location. If available, CNR SCP sends back an XML
document containing the optimized charge plan, along
with a link to a SPARQL-Generate query that can be
used to interpret this XML document as RDF, according
to SEAS ontologies.
This service is available for testing, and documented on the
Web [25]. Moreover, the code is openly available on GitHub
and other partners in SEAS project already started using it to
implement their own service [26].
VIII.
CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES
This paper reported a joint work between partners in ITEA2
12004 SEAS project, which aims at developing an ecosystem
to help entities better manage, coordinate and optimize energy
consumption, production and storage. This ecosystem enables
to deploy distributed services that target energy efﬁciency. This
paper particularly focuses on CNR EV Smart Charging UC,
which tackles the emerging need for electric mobility.
In this CNR scenario, an SCP offers to any entities in SEAS
ecosystem the possibility to obtain EV charge plans. These
plans are computed based on different collected information
(economical or environmental). It has been made possible
thanks to SEAS project contributions a) S-RAM, designed to
enable real-time interconnection of any energy actors; b) the
SEAS ontology, used to quantify systems and their intercon-
nections; and c) the SPARQL-Generate language and protocol,
designed to ensure semantic and syntactic interoperability at
low cost.
Finally, we described the actual implementation and de-
ployment of CNR SCP as a RESTful Web service. Its code is
openly available on SEAS project GitHub. As a consequence,
this UC can now be instantiated anywhere, and any SEAS
entity can entrust CNR with the role of the SCP.
Further work includes the interconnection of this service
with other energy optimization services, or data generation ser-
vices. Furthermore, CNR SCP service – as any other RESTful
HTTP Web service – can be made secure using HTTPS, but
it also can be monetized.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work has been partially funded by the ITEA2 12004
SEAS project - http://the-smart-energy.com.
REFERENCES
[1]
“Smart
Charging:
steering
the
charge,
driving
the
change,”
Eurelectric,
Eurelectric
paper
D/2015/12.105/7,
March
2015,
last
accessed
2016-05-20.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.eurelectric.org/media/169888/20032015_paper_on_smart_
charging_of_electric_vehicles_ﬁnalpsf-2015-2301-0001-01-e.pdf
[2]
E-Mobility Coordination Group (M/468) and CEN-CENELEC-ETSI
Smart
Grid
Coordination
Group
(M/490),
“Smart
Charging
of
Electric
Vehicles
in
relation
to
smart
grid,”
CEN-CENELEC,
WG Smart Charging Report, May 2015, last accessed 2016-05-
20. [Online]. Available: ftp://ftp.cen.eu/EN/EuropeanStandardization/
HotTopics/ElectricVehicles/SmartChargingReport.pdf
[3]
S. Deilami, A. S. Masoum, P. S. Moses, and M. A. Masoum, “Real-
time coordination of plug-in electric vehicle charging in smart grids to
minimize power losses and improve voltage proﬁle,” Smart Grid, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 2, no. 3, 2011, pp. 456–467.
[4]
O. Sundström and C. Binding, “Flexible charging optimization for
electric vehicles considering distribution grid constraints,” Smart Grid,
IEEE Transactions on, vol. 3, no. 1, 2012, pp. 26–37.
[5]
Y. Cao, S. Tang, C. Li, P. Zhang, Y. Tan, Z. Zhang, and J. Li, “An
optimized ev charging model considering tou price and soc curve,”
Smart Grid, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 3, no. 1, 2012, pp. 388–393.
[6]
M. A. Ortega-Vazquez, F. Bouffard, and V. Silva, “Electric vehicle
aggregator/system operator coordination for charging scheduling and
services procurement,” Power Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 28,
no. 2, 2013, pp. 1806–1815.
[7]
E. L. Karfopoulos and N. D. Hatziargyriou, “A multi-agent system for
controlled charging of a large population of electric vehicles,” Power
Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 28, no. 2, 2013, pp. 1196–1204.
[8]
A. Zakariazadeh, S. Jadid, and P. Siano, “Multi-objective scheduling of
electric vehicles in smart distribution system,” Energy Conversion and
Management, vol. 79, 2014, pp. 43–53.
[9]
The Telecommunication Technology Committee, “oneM2M Technical
Speciﬁcation Functional Architecture,” oneM2M Working Group,
Technical
Speciﬁcation,
February
2016,
last
accessed
2016-05-
20. [Online]. Available: http://www.ttc.or.jp/jp/document_list/pdf/j/TS/
TS-M2M-0001v1.13.1.pdf
[10]
R. Cyganiak, D. Wood, and M. Lanthaler, “RDF 1.1 Concepts
and Abstract Syntax, W3C Recommendation 25 February 2014,”
W3C, W3C Recommendation, Feb. 25 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-rdf11-concepts-20140225/
[11]
M. Lefrançois, “The SEAS ontology,” Apr. 2016, last accessed
2016-07-17. [Online]. Available: https://w3id.org/seas/
[12]
D.
Beckett,
“RDF/XML
Syntax
Speciﬁcation
(Revised)
W3C
Recommendation 10 February 2004,” W3C, W3C Recommendation,
Feb.
10
2004.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2004/
REC-rdf-syntax-grammar-20040210/
[13]
E. Prud’hommeaux and G. Carothers, “RDF 1.1 Turtle - Terse
RDF Triple Language, W3C Recommendation 25 February 2014,”
W3C, W3C Recommendation, Feb. 25 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-turtle-20140225/
[14]
M. Sporny, G. Kellogg, and M. Lanthaler, “JSON-LD 1.0 - A
JSON-based Serialization for Linked Data, W3C Recommendation
16 January 2014,” World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), W3C
Recommendation, Feb. 25 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.w3.
org/TR/2014/REC-json-ld-20140116/
[15]
T. Berners-Lee, “Linked Data - Design Issues,” 2006. [Online].
Available: http://www.w3.org/DesignIssues/LinkedData.html
[16]
P. Hayes and P. F. Patel-Schneider, “RDF 1.1 Semantics, W3C
Recommendation 25 February 2014,” W3C, W3C Recommendation,
Feb.
25
2014.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/
REC-rdf11-mt-20140225/
[17]
B. Motik, P. F. Patel-Schneider, and B. Cuenca-Grau, “OWL 2 Web On-
tology Language Direct Semantics W3C Recommendation 27 October
2009,” W3C, W3C Recommendation, Oct. 27 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2009/WD-owl2-semantics-20091027/
[18]
B. Bachimont, “Engagement sémantique et engagement ontologique:
conception et réalisation d’ontologies en ingénierie des connaissances,”
in Ingénierie des connaissances, évolutions récentes et nouveaux déﬁs,
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

J. Charlet, M. Zacklad, G. Kassel, and D. Bourigault, Eds.
Eyrolles,
2000, ch. 19.
[19]
M. Lefrançois and P. Bourguignon, “SEAS Workshop - Boost the
Knowledge Model and the Pilot development,” Dec. 2015, last
accessed 2016-07-17. [Online]. Available: http://data.the-smart-energy.
com/workshop/2015/12
[20]
K. Taylor, K. Janowicz, D. Le Phuoc, and A. Haller, “Semantic
Sensor Network Ontology,” World Wide Web Consortium (W3C),
W3C First Public Working Draft, May 16 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2016/WD-vocab-ssn-20160531/
[21]
R. Cyganiak and D. Reynolds, “The RDF Data Cube Vocabulary, W3C
Recommendation 16 January 2014,” World Wide Web Consortium
(W3C), W3C Recommendation, Jan. 16 2014. [Online]. Available:
http://www.w3.org/TR/2014/REC-vocab-data-cube-20140116/
[22]
M. Lefrançois, “The sources of the SEAS ontology website on
GitHub,” Mar. 2016, last accessed 2016-07-17. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/thesmartenergy/seas
[23]
S. Harris and A. Seaborne, “SPARQL 1.1 Query Language - W3C Rec-
ommendation 21 March 2013,” W3C, W3C Recommendation, Mar. 21
2013. [Online]. Available: https://www.w3.org/TR/sparql11-query/
[24]
M. Lefrançois, N. Bakerally, and A. Zimmermann, “The SPARQL-
Generate demonstration website,” Apr. 2016, last accessed 2016-07-17.
[Online]. Available: https://w3id.org/sparql-generate
[25]
M. Lefrançois, E. Françon, and N. Benzine, “The CNR pilot Smart
Charging Provider demonstration website,” Apr. 2016, last accessed
2016-07-17. [Online]. Available: http://cnr-seas.cloudapp.net/scp/
[26]
M.
Lefrançois,
“The
CNR
pilot
Smart
Charging
Provider
demonstration
website
source
code,”
Apr.
2016,
last
accessed
2016-07-17. [Online]. Available: https://github.com/thesmartenergy/
CNR-SmartChargingProvider
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

