Deployment of a Campaign to Measure the ICT Carbon Footprint 
Experimentation in French-Speaking Europe 
 
Guillaume Bourgeois 
IT, Image, Interaction Laboratory (L3I),  
University of la Rochelle 
La Rochelle, France 
Email : guillaume.bourgeois@univ-lr.fr 
Vincent Courboulay 
IT, Image, Interaction Laboratory (L3I),  
University of la Rochelle 
La Rochelle, France 
Email : vcourbou@univ-lr.fr
 
 
Benjamin Duthil 
EIGSI 
La Rochelle, France 
Email : duthil@eigsi.fr 
 
 
Abstract — ICT Maturity Models are essential for any 
organization to improve the environmental footprint of its 
Information Technology (IT) operations and determine how its 
IT infrastructure, products, services, operations, applications 
and practices can be environmentally friendly. To combat 
global warming induced by greenhouse gas emissions, the IT 
industry is responsible for three to four percent of global carbon 
dioxide emissions. While organizations aiming for a green IT 
strategy should not only improve their environmental impact, 
but also their financial situation. IT hardware will never be 
absolutely sustainable, as its manufacturing process uses many 
non-renewable resources. However, its environmental impact 
can be reduced. There is only one way to do this: measure. This 
study explains how organizations can measure the impact of 
their IT systems and thus make decisions to reduce them using 
WeNR2021.  
Keywords-IT; Sustainable Information Systems; Literature 
Review; Environmental Awareness; Green Computing; eco-
responsible; ecological impact; sustainable development; energy 
consumption; WEEE.Introduction. 
I.  INTRODUCTION  
It is within a global framework that the Paris Agreement 
limits the global temperature increase to "well below 2°C" by 
2100 and calls on states to continue working towards +1.5°C. 
To achieve this ambitious goal, the agreement calls for "a 
balance between human-induced emissions and the Earth's 
natural absorption capacity to play a role in carbon 
sequestration such as forests" [1]. 
While the text does not mention any quantitative reduction 
in greenhouse gas emissions, the Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change (IPCC) states  states in its latest report that in 
order to keep global warming below 1.5 degrees, greenhouse 
gas emissions must be reduced by 70% to 80% over half a 
century. Zero emissions will be achieved by 2100 at the latest 
[2]. 
At the same time, most households and businesses use 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) on a 
daily basis. These technologies integrate information 
technology, telecommunications and electronic products. 
Furthermore, attention to the environment is inevitable. These 
technologies are generally considered as "intangible", and 
their impact on the planetary ecology seems to be neglected 
[3][4]. 
Moreover, 
we 
have 
also 
discussed 
ecological 
responsibility at length. Green IT is one aspect of the 
relationship between ICT and sustainability. Understanding 
and measuring the environmental impact of these technologies 
allows us to take better measures to reduce them. Raising 
awareness 
of 
environmental 
issues 
and 
integrating 
information systems into an organization's environmental 
policy should encourage the development of environmentally 
friendly information and communication technologies [5]. 
Finally, although the number of studies is small [6][7], 
more and more companies around the world are integrating 
global corporate social responsibility projects into their green 
IT strategies, which include information to measure the 
environmental impact of their enterprise systems. In this 
article, we will describe the first major French study on the 
environmental impact of information systems. Then, we will 
present the rest of the research and extend it to French-
speaking Europe, and present the different perspectives and 
expected benefits that it allows. 
II. CONTEXT  
First, the data center is big polluter. The electricity 
consumption of new technologies represents 8.5% of the 
world consumption, and one third of it comes entirely from 
data centers. In contrast, an "average" Facebook center 
consumes as much energy as the city of Strasbourg. There are 
45 million data centers in the world [8]. 
Moreover, digital devices (cell phones, tablets, computers, 
etc.) [9] are also a huge source of pollution. Indeed, the 
production of these devices requires the exploitation of rare 
and non-renewable mineral resources. According to the 
French Agency for Ecological Transformation (ADEME), the 
greenhouse 
gases 
generated 
during 
the 
extraction, 
manufacturing and transportation stages of the final product 
represent 90% of the emissions linked to the life of electronic 
equipment. The remaining 10% is released during use, for 
example when the device is charging. In addition, the update 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

rate of electronic devices is quite high (cell phones can be used 
for 2 years on average) [10]. 
Since the Kyoto Protocol of 1998, tools are needed to 
accurately measure environmental impact. A software-based 
carbon calculator can be used to "predict and monitor the 
carbon emissions of everything we do" [11]. 
To this end, Life cycle assessment or LCA is one of the 
most accurate methods for estimating carbon footprint [15]. 
Since LCA takes more time than simply estimating the energy 
footprint, as part of the procurement process, the organization 
needs to obtain information on the emissions included in the 
potential procurement and the emissions associated with its 
disposal. This information can be added to the product's 
activity footprint estimate, and if possible, its recycling 
footprint can be added to estimate the product's life cycle 
footprint via LCA [12]. 
Although, on June 10, 2021, the French National 
Assembly passed the first reading of a bill to reconcile digital 
and environmental issues. Its objective is to "guide the 
behavior of all digital actors, whether they are consumers, 
industry professionals, or public actors, to ensure sober and 
responsible digital technology and sound ecological 
development in France." Among the users targeted by the law, 
organizations obviously have a role to play [13]. 
Secondly, we need to gain unprecedented knowledge 
through an activity to measure the level of knowledge and 
commitment of the community to digital sobriety. The 
response will provide the initial foundation for the digital 
footprint repository that will enable digital and ecological 
transformations to be operationalized [14]. 
III. STATE OF THE ART 
In order to address this issue, a first study has been set up 
called WeGreenIT2018. The WeGreenIT study, published on 
11 October 2018, assesses the environmental footprint of 
digital technology. It is co-produced by WWF France and the 
Green IT Club, created in 2014 to lead green IT projects and 
at the origin of responsible digital methods [15]. 
First, the study came to a conclusion: even today, digital 
and sustainable development are still two areas where there is 
little overlap. Besides, as the first consumers of digital 
technologies, with the strengthening of national and 
international regulations, the company can play a central role 
in actively repositioning the digital revolution. Thus, in March 
2018, 24 companies from all walks of life responded to the 
questions of this research, including: Caisse des Dépôts, 
Engie, La Poste, Pôle Emploi, Schneider Electric, or SNCF. 
The results show that the main sources of environmental 
impact are the manufacture of IT equipment (accounting for 
54% of greenhouse gas emissions), the user's work 
environment (computers, screens, etc.) and even the IT 
department. The study also highlighted that there are large 
differences in the maturity of companies in terms of 
responsible digital technologies, depending on their sector of 
activity. However, whatever the sector, WeGreenIt underlines 
that good digital management represents a kind of lever, both 
social, job-creating and environmental for the company [16]. 
In addition to the results of the survey, this document aims 
to promote the development of a corporate culture and 
common strategies more widely in order to better integrate 
digital with sustainable development. In particular, it makes 
recommendations and provides methods and tools adapted to 
their departments so that they can better identify the main 
sources of digital environmental impacts and solutions to 
reduce these impacts [17]. 
Finally, while there is still considerable room for 
improvement, WeGreenIt's research highlights the company's 
progress in certain areas. Especially with the new channels 
created within the framework of the Social and Solidarity 
Economy (SSE), the life span of equipment is now longer and 
should be reused more frequently, which is the case. 
However, the study has many limitations: 
 
• 
It takes place in 1 country. 
• 
The study did not take into account the different 
entities that make up an organization. 
• 
The sample studied is not large enough to create a 
reliable model. 
• 
The level of granularity of the research is low. 
• 
The local community is underrepresented. 
• 
The Cloud part is not detailed. 
 
Based on this observation, a new, more ambitious tool 
designed to reach the largest number of people was officially 
launched on March 31, 2021, namely WeNR. 
IV. SPECIFICATION 
This section focuses on the specification, design and 
implementation of tools designed to support the analysis 
process for quantifying the carbon footprint of an 
organization's ICT [18]. 
The objective of this study is to assess the carbon footprint 
of the target organization's IT equipment and to help the 
company understand the environmental impact.  
The following research objectives achieve this goal : 
 
• 
Define the scope and objectives of the survey. 
• 
Conduct a literature review on current climate 
change and green IT issues. 
• 
Conduct a survey of current IT audit methodologies 
to determine the most appropriate method. 
• 
Conduct a survey to collect quantitative and 
qualitative data. 
• 
Provide 
recommendations, 
with 
supporting 
evidence, on how the organization can reduce its 
overall carbon footprint and compare this footprint 
with that of other organizations. 
• 
And finally, compare them with the company's 
current strategy to determine if they complement or 
reinforce the company's green IT strategy. 
 
In order to achieve this different objective, the technical 
specifications must be clarified. 
 
The tool must specifically : 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

• 
Use eco-friendly design and development practices 
(restricted exchanges, lean web pages, optimized 
transmission, etc.) 
• 
Be attractive to influence the perceived ease of use 
and usefulness of the tool. 
• 
With contextual help, e.g. a user guide accessible to 
all. 
• 
Ability to compare searches against previous benc 
hmark. 
• 
Flexible, with basic, simple and detailed views. 
• 
Use filters to display only partial results, e.g. filtering 
by equipment type (Desktop). 
• 
Sort by role category, customized results for each 
decision maker. Example: System and network 
administrator or accountant. 
• 
Possibility to quantify carbon emissions by 
integrating 
behavioral 
aspects 
of 
energy 
consumption (time use). 
V. STUDY 
To begin, WeNR [23] is an Institute for Sustainable IT 
(ISIT) project based on work conducted during the 2014-2018 
period: the ISIT (then called Club Green IT) conducted three 
consecutive benchmarks in 2016, 2017 and 2018 to calculate 
the environmental footprint of large French companies. In 
2018, this benchmark facilitated the dissemination of research 
on responsible digital. 
In addition, WeNR is more ambitious than WeGreenIT 
and contains more indicators. The questionnaire (see figure 1) 
is accessible online, then the data will remain confidential. 
The tool should therefore allow any organization to 
understand the impact of the "People-Planet-Prosperity" 
triptych and to measure its level of responsible digital 
maturity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Consequently to the previous WeGreenIT study, the 
objective of the WeNR2021 study is to cover most of the 
French speaking European countries, including France, 
Belgium and Switzerland. There is also Luxembourg, but 
there is currently no responsible sustainable it institute 
attached to this country. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
On the other hand, as shown Figure 2, the distribution of 
public organization types is 31%. For private organizations, 
this proportion is about 69%. This means that most of the 
organizations participating in WeNR are private, although 
there are large cities, public corporations, etc. WeNR has 
collaborated with the University of La Rochelle and EIGSI, 
based on thesis work funded by La Rochelle and scientific 
collaboration between ISIT France, ISIT Switzerland, ISIT 
Belgium and the University of Leuven (UCLouvain). 
Also, WeNR takes the form of an online questionnaire that 
all organizations (large and small) can use and access free of 
charge, so that as many people as possible can assess the 
footprint of their information system. 
To this end, ISIT is providing an open access tool based 
on open and public data, and we hope to publish its method in 
a peer-reviewed journal to ensure that the method is fully 
transparent. Thus, this questionnaire allows you to evaluate 
your equipment, your data center and its uses, your use of the 
cloud, and to assess the maturity of your organization in 
responsible digital. 
To date, more than 75 organizations have responded to 
WeNR, covering more than one million employees, including 
MICHELIN, ENGIE, CGI, EDENRED and many more. The 
responses provided free of charge to participants will allow 
them to quantitatively and qualitatively assess IS greenhouse 
gas emissions and maturity in many areas of digital business 
[21].  
Finally, what characterizes the WeNR2021 study is that 
the scale of the participating organizations varies greatly . To 
illustrate this point, we can see the number of employees in 
about 60 companies in the image above. We have a small 
organization with 15 employees to a large organization with 
120,000 employees. Figure 3 shows the great homogeneity of 
WeNR2021. 
 
 
Figure 2: Distribution by sector. 
Figure 1 : Homepage of the questionnaire. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Table 1 illustrates the differences that may exist between 
the old and new studies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VI. PERSPECTIVE 
WeNR tools can be developed in a variety of ways. The 
need to expand and improve the data sources used is critical. 
In the future, the WeNR tools will be developed in 
different ways. The data sources used will be expanded and 
optimized. But this is just the first step. In the future, WeNR 
will incorporate continuous monitoring over time. Monitoring 
is needed to highlight changes that can be made to reduce the 
carbon footprint. To that end, two future projects, WeNR 
Light and WeNR Plus, are planned. Users of the WeNR Light 
solution will be able to quickly and fairly accurately 
understand the environmental impact of their IT assets and 
their NR maturity directly online. 
WeNR Plus will use WeNR models and calculation 
methods to provide more comprehensive and detailed reports 
in terms of quantity, quality and comparison with the same 
industry organization, but most importantly to analyze the 
impact of strategic decisions. 
Also, the analysis tools provided will help determine the 
action plan for the formulation of a responsible digital 
strategy. 
Finally, with the liberalization of the carbon impact of 
different cloud providers, the next version of WeNR will 
include the implementation of APIs to quantify the 
greenhouse gas emissions of cloud systems. 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
A number of conclusions can be drawn from the WeNR. 
First, it can be seen that there are few solutions for 
estimating an organization's ICT carbon footprint, and the 
solutions that have been implemented are primarily focused 
on households and transportation, and rarely provide accurate 
information. The transparency issues discussed are partially 
addressed by WeNR, through a broad exchange of sources and 
factors used [23]. 
Second, our research related to green computing 
recognizes that ICT needs to pay more attention to its energy 
consumption. While most large data center manufacturers and 
vendors are aware of this need and are adopting varying 
degrees of emissions reduction, the study also found that there 
are few solutions available for smaller organizations. 
However, the results of this study confirm that there is still 
much work to be done in this area and that services are needed 
to help companies reduce their expenses and emissions [22]. 
In carbon reduction efforts, communication is as important 
as the policies and actions themselves. In order to reach as 
many of the organization's stakeholders as possible, publicity 
activities should be conducted. Such activities should help 
increase the number of people affected by the activities, and 
help trigger self-reflection, which can reduce carbon 
emissions. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] We Green IT study, WWF France, October 2018, 
https://club.greenit.fr/WeGreenIT2018.html 
[2] Green Concept white paper, digital eco-design, Feb 2020 
https://www.greenconcept-innovation.fr/ 
[3] "Towards digital sobriety: the new Shift report released," The 
Shift Project, Oct. 04, 2018. 
https://theshiftproject.org/article/pour-une-sobriete-
numerique-rapport-shift/  
[4]   "Paris Agreement." 
https://www.novethic.fr/lexique/detail/accord-de-paris.html  
[5] "Life Cycle Assessment: definition, example and how much 
does 
it 
cost?", 
Altermaker, 
Sept. 
12, 
2019. 
https://altermaker.fr/analyse-cycle-de-vie/  
[6] L. Belkhir and A. Elmeligi, "Assessing ICT global emissions 
footprint: Trends to 2040 & recommendations," Journal of 
Cleaner Production, vol. 177, pp. 448-463, March 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.12.239. 
[7] P. H. G. Berkhout, J. C. Muskens, and J. W. Velthuijsen, 
"Defining the rebound effect," Energy Policy, vol. 28, nᵒ 6, pp. 
425-432, June 2000, doi: 10.1016/S0301-4215(00)00022-7. 
[8] V. Court and S. Sorrell, "Digitalization of goods: a systematic 
review of the determinants and magnitude of the impacts on 
energy consumption," Environ. Res. Lett. vol. 15, nᵒ 4, p. 
043001, March 2020, doi: 10.1088/1748-9326/ab6788. 
[9] "Environmental Footprint of Global Digital," Green IT. 
https://www.greenit.fr/empreinte-environnementale-du-
numerique-mondial/  
[10] DMConseil, "LCA (Life Cycle Assessment) studies of 
computers and cell phones", DM Conseil blog - ICT news. 
http://dmconseil.over-blog.com/article-etudes-acv-analyse-
Figure 3 : Number of employees per 
organization. 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF THE TWO STUDIES. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

cycle-de-vie-ordinateurs-et-telephones-portables-
49486289.html  
[11] F. Berthoud and M. Parry, "Evaluation of the environmental 
impacts of IT. What tools? What limits?", Terminal. 
Information Technology, Culture & Society, nᵒ 106-107, Dec. 
2010, doi: 10.4000/terminal.1794. 
[12] A. E. Mzabi and F. Khihel, "Green IT an IT solution for the 
environment," African management journal, vol. 3, nᵒ 2, Apr. 
2018, doi: 10.48424/IMIST.PRSM/ram-v3i2.11178. 
[13] N. Jones, "How to stop data centers from gobbling up the 
world's electricity," Nature, vol. 561, nᵒ 7722, pp. 163-166, 
Sep. 2018, doi: 10.1038/d41586-018-06610-y. 
[14] Impact of ICT on energy consumption worldwide. EDP 
Sciences, 2020. 
[15] "Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) Methodology - Data 
Collection". http://stockage.univ-
valenciennes.fr/MenetACVBAT20120704/acvbat/chap03/co/
ch03_220_3-3-2.html 
[16] "Digital, a lever for the environment, CSR, circular economy 
and Digital Sobriety (5G, AI...)", Livosphere - Innovation 
Council: AI IoT, CSR Circular Economy, Sept. 09, 2020. 
http://www.livosphere.com/2020/09/09/politique-de-sobriete-
numerique-numerique-levier-pour-l-environnement-la-rse-l-
economie-circulaire/  
[17] A. S. G. Andrae and T. Edler, "On Global Electricity Usage of 
Communication Technology: Trends to 2030," Challenges, 
vol. 
6, 
nᵒ 
1, 
pp. 
117-157, 
June 
2015, 
doi: 
10.3390/challe6010117. 
[18] "For a Green Digital Transition." 
https://www.senat.fr/rap/r19-555/r19-55512.html 
[19] A. HAFS, "First initiatives to reduce the environmental impact 
of 
data 
centers," 
Digital 
Corner, 
Nov. 
24, 
2020. 
https://www.digitalcorner-wavestone.com/2020/11/premieres-
initiatives-permettant-de-reduire-limpact-environnemental-
des-datacenters/ 
[20] L.-P. P.-V. P. Clément, Q. E. S. Jacquemotte, and L. M. Hilty, 
"Sources of variation in life cycle assessments of smartphones 
and tablet computers," Environmental Impact Assessment 
Review, 
vol. 
84, 
p. 
106416, 
Sept. 
2020, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.eiar.2020.106416. 
[21] J. Thackray, A.-L. Kor, C. Pattinson, and L. Earle, "Audit of an 
Organisation's ICT Systems for Flexible Working," p. 7. 
[22] C. Mouchet, N. Urquhart, and R. Kemmer, "Techniques for 
Auditing the ICT Carbon Footprint of an Organisation:, 
International Journal of Green Computing, vol. 5, nᵒ 1, pp. 44-
61, Jan. 2014, doi: 10.4018/ijgc.20140104.  
[23] "WeNR | Information System footprint measurement tool," 
WeNR. https://wenr.isit-europe.org/   
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-924-9
GREEN 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

