Health Risks from Exposure to Electromagnetic Waves Radiation from 5G 
 
Rodrigo Cuevas-Terrones 
Facultad de Ciencias de la Electrónica 
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla 
Puebla, México 
e-mail: rodrigo.cuevast@alumno.buap.mx 
Josefina Castañeda-Camacho 
Facultad de Ciencias de la Electrónica 
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla 
Puebla, México 
e-mail: josefina.castaneda@correo.buap.mx
Ana María Rodríguez-Domínguez 
Facultad de Ciencias de la Electrónica 
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla 
Puebla, México 
e-mail: anamaria.rodriguez@correo.buap.mx 
Gerardo Mino-Aguilar 
Facultad de Ciencias de la Electrónica 
Benemérita Universidad Autónoma de Puebla 
Puebla, México 
e-mail: gerardo.mino@correo.buap.mx
 
 
Abstract— This work shows a compilation of the results of 
different studies related with the affectations in living 
organisms produced by electromagnetic waves radiation based 
on their power and frequency ranges. Currently, the growing 
of the population throughout the planet makes necessary an 
analysis of the nature of these electromagnetic waves and their 
effects on living beings, specially in wireless communications 
field. The information to be transmitted requires that the next 
generation of mobile telephony (5G) uses bands with 
frequencies higher than those used by the current generation 
and previous generations for its operation; for this reason, it is 
necessary to establish frequency ranges that could be 
considered non-harmful for living beings. In the present work, 
a detailed study was done about electromagnetic waves, 
including the frequency bands that were previously and 
currently used in mobile telephony, and some of their effects 
on living organisms, with the aim of publicizing some of the 
possible consequences of the evolution of mobile telephony on 
them. 
Keywords 
- 
5G; 
electromagnetism; 
frequency; 
electromagnetic radiation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
present 
work 
deals 
with 
the 
effects 
of 
electromagnetic 
waves 
radiation 
on 
living 
beings. 
Electromagnetic waves have the main characteristic of not 
needing guided medium for propagation; unlike other wave 
types (such as sound, which needs a material medium to 
propagate), electromagnetic waves can be radiated in 
vacuum or in various materials and environments. In [1], 
electromagnetic wave radiation is defined as a combination 
of oscillating electric and magnetic fields that propagate 
through space carrying energy from one place to another. 
The radiations, ordered according to their wavelength (λ), 
make up the electromagnetic spectrum, which is discussed in 
Section 
II of this 
work. The wavelength of 
an 
electromagnetic wave (λ) is related to its frequency (f) and 
propagation speed (v) according to: 
 
λ = v / f. 
(1) 
In free space, the propagation speed of electromagnetic 
waves is equal to the speed of light c; so, 
 
c=light propagation speed= 299 792 458 m/s, 
(aproximately 3x108  m/s). 
 
Therefore, for the radiation of electromagnetic waves: 
 
c = λ f 
(2) 
Since the light speed is constant, as the frequency 
increases (and the wavelength decreases at the same 
proportion), the radiated energy increases. 
X-rays, radio waves, infrared rays, ultraviolet rays, and 
visible light are some of the most important types of 
electromagnetic radiation, and humans have learned to 
usefully produce and control them. 
In this paper, we study the electromagnetic waves from 
the point of view of their frequency values according to their 
uses and their Ionizing and Non-ionizing quality. Some of 
their effects on living organisms are mentioned, and a 
reference is made to used frequencies in cell phones. The 
objective and the main contribution of this work is to present 
some of the results of previous studies about potential risks 
of the fifth generation of cellular telephony (5G); although 
there are no solid conclusions or hard data about the effect of 
this generation, it is already possible to know some of 
potential risks. In this work, information from previous and 
current works was collected and presented, indicating the 
proper references. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes electromagnetic waves in a general way and 
mentions some of their uses and their effects on living 
organisms according to their frequencies. It also describes 
certain characteristics of ionizing radiation and non-ionizing 
radiation. Section III deals with the generations of mobile 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

phones and some of the frequencies used so far. Section IV 
talks about the situation regarding 5G, showing the results of 
different studies that have been done in this regard, which is 
the reason for this work. Finally, conclusions are given in 
Section V. 
II. 
ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM, EFFECTS ON THE 
BODY, FREQUENCIES AND RISKS 
Electromagnetic spectrum is the set of frequency values 
of electromagnetic waves that humans have been able to 
detect and measure. Within this electromagnetic spectrum 
are (in order of lowest to highest frequency) radio waves 
(used 
for 
wireless 
communications, 
such 
as 
radio 
transmissions, TV, mobile telephony and mobile Internet), 
microwaves (used for detection radars and domestic 
microwave ovens), infrared light, visible light, ultraviolet 
light, X rays and Gamma rays. Figure 1 illustrates the 
electromagnetic spectrum, showing the frequency range for 
each classification. 
Within the same electromagnetic spectrum, also 
considering lower and higher frequency, ionizing radiation 
and non-ionizing radiation are considered. Remember that an 
ion is an atom that has lost or gained electrons; ionizing 
radiation is electromagnetic wave radiation which frequency 
(and energy) is as high that it acquires the ability to extract 
electrons from atoms of matter through which it passes. 
Ionizing and non-ionizing radiation mainly depend on where 
they come from. 
 
 
Figure 1: An electromagnetic spectrum illustration [2]. 
 
The frequency of non-ionizing radiation is below the 
ultraviolet light threshold, which means that visible light and 
wave radiation with lower frequencies fall into this group. 
Ionizing radiation is found from the ultraviolet frequency 
light and includes X-rays and Gamma rays. 
Ionizing radiation. Ionizing radiation interacts with 
matter producing excitations and ionizations that induce 
energy changes at atomic or molecular levels. Directly 
ionizing particles are electrically charged particles, such as 
electrons, protons, and alpha particles, that have enough 
kinetic energy to ionize by collision. Indirectly ionizing 
particles are uncharged particles, such as neutrons and 
photons, that can set directly ionizing particles in motion 
(photons move electrons; neutrons, protons) or initiate 
nuclear transformation. 
In medical applications, the most widely used particles 
are photons, called X-rays when they are generated 
electrically in X-ray equipment or linear accelerators, and 
Gamma rays when they come from radioactive material 
(such as Plutonium). The discipline that quantifies the 
amount of energy transferred and absorbed in the irradiated 
medium is Dosimetry, and the fundamental magnitude is the 
absorbed dose, which corresponds to the average energy 
(measured in joules) imparted by radiation at a volume of 
mass m (measured in kilos). The unit is the Gray (1 Gy = 
1J/1kg), used with its multiples and submultiples. In 
radiation protection, special quantities and units are used, but 
all of them are based on this fundamental concept [3]. 
When the irradiated object is living matter, the molecular 
changes produced by these atomic interactions can interfere 
with some biological process. Unless a repair mechanism is 
possible, this interference will determine a permanent 
biological change, a change that will eventually manifest 
clinically. The physical processes of energy absorption and 
ionization occur in femtoseconds (10-15 s); the interaction of 
ions with molecules, in microseconds (10-6 s); chemical 
changes at the cellular level, in seconds; the biological 
effects, from minutes to years. 
Although recent radiobiology studies have found post-
radiation cellular responses that appear to lead to genomic 
changes and / or cellular effects from epigenetic processes, 
the critical structure at the cellular level remains the 
Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) molecule. The action of 
radiation can be direct when the particle hits one of the 
components of DNA, or indirect when the interaction occurs 
in water and free radicals such as oxidrile and hydroxyl are 
formed, which migrate and interact with the DNA. The 
effects may consist of a single or double chain break, base 
changes, breakage of hydrogen bonds between the bases, 
etc.; the consequence is that the cell will undergo a mutation.  
One of three things can happen: 
a) The mutation is repaired (without errors) and the cell 
continues its functions as if nothing had happened. 
b) The cell “dies” (in radiobiology cell death means 
permanent loss of clonogenic capacity) due to apoptosis, 
necrosis, or senescence. 
c) The cell survives mutated, that is, there are “repairs” 
with errors [3]. This is the cause of mutations caused by 
exposure to ionizing radiation. 
The above refers to ionizing radiation, that is, radiation 
whose frequency exceeds 1016 Hz. It is of vital importance 
(and the main objective of this work) to mention that 
frequencies lower than those found in visible light and 
infrared light are, therefore, non-ionizing radiation. 
Non-ionizing radiation. Although non-ionizing radiation 
does not cause the aforementioned adverse effects, there are 
regulations (for each country internally and internationally) 
that determine maximum permitted levels of power with the 
aim of avoiding or minimizing possible damages caused by 
said radiation. Specific studies have been carried out to 
determine the possible damage to health caused by radio 
waves used for telecommunications. 
The non-ionizing electromagnetic frequency spectrum is 
usually subdivided into low frequency from 0 to 3 kHz (US) 
or 10 kHz (EU), and high frequency or radiofrequency from 
3 kHz – 300 GHz (US) or 10 kHz – 300 GHz (EU). In the 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

low frequency range, research results show an increase in 
probabilistic effects. In the high frequency range upper than 
microwaves, the number of well documented probabilistic 
effects is poor. 
The levels in the guidelines are conservative and should 
be reduced with a health factor. For high frequency, many 
countries have already applied a health factor. However, for 
low frequency where there is a weak evidence of 
probabilistic effects, no health factor has yet been 
implemented in regulations and laws [4]. 
 Exposures to Microwaves (MW, 300 MHz-300 GHz) 
vary in many parameters: incident Power Density (PD), 
Specific Absorption Rate (SAR), frequency/wavelength, 
polarization (linear, ellipsoidal, circular, unpolarized), 
Continuous Wave (CW) and pulsed fields, modulation 
(amplitude, frequency, phase), far field/near field, Static 
Magnetic Field (SMF) and stray Electromagnetic Fields 
(EMF) of Extremely Low Frequency (ELF, 3-300 Hz) at the 
location of exposure, overall duration and intermittence of 
exposure (interrupted, continuous), short-term acute and 
prolonged chronic exposures. With increased SAR, so-called 
thermal effects of MW are usually observed that result in 
significant MW-induced heating. SAR is the determinant 
main factor of thermal MW effects. The SAR based safety 
limits intends the protection from the thermal MW effects 
and damaging absorption, which depends of polarization, 
frequency, age, sex, and pregnancy status. In addition, the 
mobile phone SAR values are usually obtained when the 
phone is positioned about 2 cm from the head, a condition, 
which is not usually maintained during mobile phone calls. 
Other aforementioned physical variables of MW exposure 
have been linked to occurrence of so-called Non-Thermal 
(NT) biological effects, which are induced by MW at 
intensities well below measurable heating. The classification 
of MW effects into thermal and non-thermal is not based on 
physics of interaction between MW and biological tissues, 
but rather reflects experimental observation of heating 
induced by MW exposure, which at SAR levels higher than 2 
W/kg may result in thermal injury. Slight temperature 
increase is also observed in the head tissues during exposure 
to mobile handset radiation, but this increment is too weak to 
produce thermal injury and even to be sensed by the exposed 
subjects while some mobile phone users reported sensation 
of warmth around the ear. 
Some authors have reported pioneering data on the NT 
effects of Millimeter Waves (MMW, 30-300 GHz, 
wavelength 1-10 mm in vacuum, to be used in 5G mobile 
communication) upon exposure of various biological objects. 
Webb was the first to establish the highly resonant effects of 
ultra-weak MMW on the induction of λ-phage in lysogenic 
bacterial E. coli cells. These findings were subsequently 
corroborated by independent research groups. In these and 
subsequent studies, the observed spectra of MMW action 
were found to have the following regularities: 
(1) Strong dependence on frequency (frequency windows 
of resonance type), 
(2) Specific PD threshold below which no effect was 
observed, and above which the effects of exposure depended 
only weakly on power over several orders of magnitude (so-
called sigmoid or S-shaped dependence). 
(3) Occurrence of MMW effects depended on the 
duration of exposure, a certain minimum duration of 
exposure was necessary for an effect to manifest itself. 
These important regularities of NT MMW effects have 
previously been confirmed by independent laboratories. 
Since that time, multiple studies performed by diverse 
research groups over the world have provided strong 
evidence for the NT MW effects and have also indicated that 
there are several consistent regularities in occurrence of these 
effects: 
(i) 
Dependence on frequency of “resonance-type” 
associated with relatively narrow frequency windows. 
(ii) Dependence on modulation, pulse modulated MW 
being usually more effective as CW MW. 
(iii) Dependence on polarization, right -or left- circular 
polarization being more defective then opposite circular and 
linear polarization specifically for each resonance. 
(iv) Power windows and sigmoid dependence on PD 
within specific intensity windows including super-low PD 
comparable to intensities from base stations. 
(v) Thresholds duration of the exposure (coherence 
time). 
(vi) Dependence on post-exposure time, intermittence 
and duration of exposure resulting in interplay between 
accumulated effect and adaptation to exposure. 
(vii) Dependence 
on 
cell 
density 
suggesting 
electromagnetic cell-to-cell interaction during exposure. 
(viii) Dependence on several physiological conditions 
during exposure, such as concentration of divalent ions, 
oxygen and radical scavengers, stage of cell growth. 
(ix) Dependence on genotype. 
Cell type, sex, age, individual differences, SMF and stray 
ELF EMF during exposure can be important for the NT MW 
effects. The data showing dependence of MW effects on 
extremely low frequency and static magnetic fields at the 
location of exposure, suggested as a strategy for reducing 
health effects from MW of mobile communications [5]. 
III. 
MOBILE PHONE GENERATIONS AND USED 
FREQUENCIES 
So, given the growing concern about the damage that 
new wireless communication technologies could produce in 
the organism, the question continues: are current wireless 
communications dangerous or not? 
The technological advances in the field of wireless 
communications are the result of a growing demand not only 
for the number of devices that are simultaneously available 
to users, but also for the increasingly diverse services that 
these devices are capable of providing. The first mobile 
phones used the frequency bands of the available radio 
transmissions, so there were no frequencies for their own 
use, nor the technology to develop networks for exclusive 
use. Later, other frequency bands were available; the 
available technologies known as "generations" of mobile 
telephone networks have been distinguished by the uses and 
the services that these networks are capable of providing to 
users. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

The aforementioned generations are known as 1G, 2G, 
2.5G, 3G and 4G. 4G, currently in use, has its own update, 
4.5G, and tends towards 5G. 
The migration from each generation to the next has been 
mainly conditioned to the type of access scheme used and 
the services that the new generation is capable of providing. 
These services determine the need to have higher frequencies 
each time. 
As networks evolved, it was necessary to have ever 
increasing frequencies due to the nature of the content; from 
voice in real time it evolved to point-to-point text, then to the 
transfer of image, audio and video files, and currently to the 
transmission of them in real time (streaming), instant 
messaging, traffic information for GPS applications, or 
community video games, to name a few examples. All of this 
would be impossible if only the 1G frequency bands were 
used; in addition, frequency modulation was used for those 
transmissions, which would greatly limit the incorporation of 
the mentioned content. Then, from the evolution of services 
and devices, the need arises to use higher frequencies, for 
which it is essential to assess the risks to health and physical 
integrity that this implies, not just for people, but in general 
to alive organisms. 
Some 
signals 
from 
Global 
System for 
Mobile 
Communication 
(GSM) 
2G, 
and 
Universal 
Mobile 
Telecommunications System (UMTS) 3G mobile phones 
were tested in referred research [5]. Contrary to GSM 
phones, mobile phones of the 3rd generation irradiate wide-
band signal. UMTS MWs may result in higher biological 
effects due to the presence of selective resonance frequency 
windows.  
Most current discussion regarding MW health effects is 
focused on the 5G mobile communication, which is promptly 
enrolled in different countries and uses frequency ranges 
similar to 2G/3G/4G plus MMW. It follows from available 
studies that MW, under specific conditions of exposure at 
ultra-weak intensities below the International Commission 
on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) guidelines, 
can affect biological systems and human health. Both 
positive and negative effects were observed in dependence 
on exposure parameters. In particular, MMW inhibited repair 
of DNA damage induced by ionizing radiation at specific 
frequencies, modulations, and polarizations.  
While MMW are almost completely absorbed within 1-2 
mm in biologically equivalent tissues, it may penetrate much 
deeper in live human body. Biological objects including 
human being are not in thermodynamical equilibrium. Thus, 
except for considering penetration of 5G/MMW into 
biologically equivalent tissues being in thermodynamical 
equilibrium, the response of live human body should also be 
considered. Alive body represents a complicated system with 
fundamental frequencies; many of them lie in the MMW 
range. In particular, the acupuncture system (meridians of 
organs) has been considered as a waveguide system for these 
MMW fundamental modes in the Soviet/Russian literature.  
From this point of view, MW penetrates human body far 
deeply as compared to "dead" models. Electromagnetic 
origin of Chinese meridians has been studied in several 
Soviet research teams. For example, Sit'ko et al. described 
the frequency of 56.46 GHz, which was found during an 
ordinary search for therapeutic frequencies based on 
sensorial reactions of a patient with duodenal ulcer. Negative 
sensation (defined as spastic contraction of musculus 
quadriceps femoris) was repeatedly observed under applying 
MMW at this frequency. This sensory reaction allowed 
tracking the Chinese stomach meridian by using a static 
magnet at 4 mT. Exposure at the frequency of 56.46 GHz has 
worsened health condition of the patient. Thus, this exposure 
was aborted, and the patient received treatment at the 
resonance therapeutic frequency found by typical positive 
sensations. After successful healing the duodenal ulcer at the 
MMW resonance therapeutic frequency, the negative 
response of the patient to the frequency of 56.46 GHz 
disappeared. 
When a very fast RF pulse enters in a human body, it 
generates a burst of energy (a Brillouin precursor) that can 
travel much deeper than predicted by the conventional 
models. Brillouin precursors can be formed by high-speed 
data signals as used in 5G. 
To what extent the 5G technology and the Internet of 
Things will affect the human health is definitely not known. 
However, based on possible fundamental role of MMW in 
regulation of homeostasis and almost complete absence of 
MMW in atmosphere due to effective absorption (which 
suggests the lack of adaptation to this type of radiation), the 
health effects of chronic MMW exposures may be more 
significant than for any other frequency range. From the 
health perspectives, implementation of the 5G technology is 
premature. Extended research with chronic exposure of 
human cells, animals and man is needed to exclude the 
potentially harmful of 5G signals [5]. 
IV. 
5G TECHNOLOGY 
So, about 5G and its technological requirements, a large 
amount of new and harmonized spectrum is needed for 
mobile services, which is essential to ensure that 5G services 
can meet expectations and develop its full potential. 5G 
technology needs spectrum in three key frequency bands to 
provide greater coverage and include all use cases. The three 
bands are below 1 GHz, from 1 to 6 GHz, and above 6 GHz. 
a) Below 1 GHz: This spectrum will be used to provide 
broad coverage in urban, suburban, rural areas and contribute 
to the support of Internet of Things services. 
b) 1 to 6 GHz: This spectrum offers a good combination 
of coverage and capacity benefit, and includes the range 
between 3.3 and 3.8 GHz, which is expected to be used to 
develop the first 5G services. 
c) Above 6 GHz: This spectrum is required for ultra-fast 
broadband speeds contemplated for 5G. The focus will be on 
the bands above 24 GHz, including the 24 GHz and / or 28 
GHz bands, which have sparked growing interest and can be 
easily implemented on the same device, due to their 
proximity. Furthermore, there is some interest in exploring 
the bands found in the frequencies from 6 to 24 GHz [6]. 
According to [7], exposure of humans to MMW can 
occur through 5G devices with frequencies above 6 GHz, 
and may be primarily on the skin and, to a lesser extent, on 
the eyes. This is due to the very low penetration depth of this 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

MMW. Therefore, it is important to investigate whether 
there are any health-related eﬀects on the skin and/or eﬀects 
associated with the skin. These include acute skin damage 
from tissue heating (burns), but possibly also less acute 
eﬀects (such as inﬂammation, tumor development, etc.). 
Such eﬀects could appear after prolonged and repeated 
heating of superﬁcial structures (the skin). This would mean 
that there are thermal effects that are not due to acute but 
chronic damage. It may also be that local exposure causes 
energy deposition in the dermis of the skin, which may be so 
great as to aﬀect nerve endings and peripheral blood vessels 
through warming mechanisms. That study typically used 
exposures around 60 GHz at a power density of 10 mW/cm2 
on the skin in the sternum area to produce systemic eﬀects. 
The aim was to treat certain diseases and complaints. The 
idea was that the treatment induces the release of the body’s 
own opioids and additionally stimulates the peripheral 
nerves. The stimulation would depend on a local thermal 
eﬀect, which, due to the frequencies, induces locally high 
SAR values, even at low power densities, thus warming the 
tissue. 
Due to the contradictory information from various lines 
of evidence that cannot be scientiﬁcally explained and given 
the large gaps in knowledge regarding the health impact of 
MMW in the 6–100 GHz frequency range at relevant power 
densities for 5G, research is needed at many levels. It is 
important to deﬁne exact frequency ranges and power 
densities for possible research projects. There is an urgent 
need for research in the areas of dosimetry, in vivo dose-
response studies, and the question of non-thermal eﬀects. It 
is therefore recommended that the following knowledge gaps 
should be closed by appropriate research: 
• Exact dosimetry with consideration of the skin for 
relevant frequency ranges, including the consideration of 
short intense pulses (bursts). 
• Studies on inﬂammatory reactions starting from the skin 
and the associated tissues. 
• In vivo studies on the inﬂuence of a possible tissue 
temperature increase (e.g., nude mouse or hairless mouse 
model). 
• In vivo dose-response studies of heat development. 
• Use of in vitro models (3D models) of the skin for 
molecular and cellular endpoints. 
• Clariﬁcation of the question about non-thermal eﬀects 
(in vitro). 
An unrealistic scenario, however, is that MMW 
exposures at realistic power densities could cause systemic 
body warming in humans. Any local heat exposure would be 
dissipated by the body’s normal heat regulation system. This 
is mainly due to convection caused by blood ﬂow adjacent to 
the superﬁcial skin areas where the actual exposure takes 
place. In summary, it should be noted that there are 
knowledge gaps with respect to local heat developments on 
small living surfaces, e.g., on the skin or on the eye, which 
can lead to speciﬁc health eﬀects. In addition, the question of 
any possibility of non-thermal eﬀects needs to be answered. 
Since the ranges up to 30 GHz and over 90 GHz are 
sparingly represented, the authors in [7] mainly cover studies 
done in the frequency range from 30.1 to 65 GHz. Also, the 
majority of studies with MMW exposures show biological 
responses. From this observation, however, no in-depth 
conclusions can be drawn regarding the biological and health 
eﬀects of MMW exposures in the 6–100 GHz frequency 
range. The studies are very diﬀerent and the total number of 
studies is surprisingly low. The reactions occur both in vivo 
and in vitro and aﬀect all biological endpoints studied. 
There does not seem to be a consistent relationship 
between intensity (power density), exposure time, or 
frequency, and the eﬀects of exposure. On the contrary, and 
strikingly, higher power densities do not cause more frequent 
responses, since the percentage of responses in most 
frequency groups is already at 70%. Some authors refer to 
their study results as having “non-thermal” causes, but few 
have applied appropriate temperature controls. The question 
therefore remains whether warming is the main cause of any 
observed MMW eﬀects? 
In order to evaluate and summarize the 6–100 GHz data 
in this review, in [7] the following conclusions was reached: 
a) Regarding the health eﬀects of MMW in the 6–100 
GHz frequency range at power densities not exceeding the 
exposure guidelines the studies provide no clear evidence, 
due to contradictory information from the in vivo and in vitro 
investigations. 
b) Regarding the possibility of “non-thermal” eﬀects, the 
available studies provide no clear explanation of any mode 
of action of observed eﬀects. 
c) Regarding the quality of the presented studies, too few 
studies fulﬁll the minimal quality criteria to allow any further 
conclusions [7]. 
In [8], authors have investigated the effects of 5G 
radiations for different frequency candidates on human brain. 
This has been achieved by using Computer Simulation 
Technology (CST) software by conducting simulations on a 
Specific Anthropomorphic Mannequin (SAM), shown in 
Figure 2. A SAM is a model designed according to different 
international standards representing the average material 
properties of the head by calculating the SAR, in order to 
check whether the resulting exposure is safe or not by 
comparing it to the safety limit of exposure to high frequency 
radiations set by different international standards. 
The most affected areas are the ones proximate to the 
antenna. It can be concluded that the SAR for first and 
second candidate are above the safety exposure limit set by 
the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) of 1.6 
W/kg for 1g averaging mass since the results obtained had 
SAR values of 2.501 and 2.702 W/kg at 29 and 33 GHz 
respectively. However, the results of SAR obtained for 10g 
averaging mass are considered below the safety exposure 
limit according to ANSI/IEEE standards since the safety 
exposure limit of such standards is 2.0 W/kg for 10g 
averaging mass while the results obtained were 0.6291 and 
0.45045 at 29 and 33 GHz respectively. 87/5000. Moreover, 
the impact was negligible in areas not surrounding the 
mobile device. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
Figure 2. Specific Anthropomorphic Mannequin, SAM [8]. 
 
More studies should be done in order to determine the 
SAR values for the other candidates and to study the impact 
of such waves on the human’s head while taking into 
consideration more parameters in order to obtain accurate 
and reliable results [8]. 
In [9], energy absorption mechanisms and near-ﬁeld 
body-antenna interactions were studied at frequencies of 
relevance for 5G. While at the lower frequencies (e.g. 2 
GHz) and for short separation distances, the energy 
deposition is dominated by the coupling of the reactive near-
ﬁeld, at 24 GHz and above this factor is small and it becomes 
negligible for device to body separation distances larger than 
1 cm. 
For the investigated frequency range, the largest 
increased power absorption, compared with the zero-order 
interaction, was found for an exposure scenario with 
signiﬁcant multiple reﬂections between the antenna and the 
body surface: part of the reﬂected energy at the skin interface 
interacts with the antenna and is scattered back towards the 
body. The presence and relevance of this phenomenon is 
dependent by the antenna design, the separation distance and 
operating frequency. This effect is expected to be visible 
only for electrically large antennas and it decreases with 
increased separation distance and frequency. Despite the 
multiple reﬂections, the spatial energy distribution (the 
topography) was found to be well characterized by the free-
space incident ﬁeld. 
The effect of multiple reﬂections, when present, 
contributes to a change in the input impedance of the 
antenna. For an antenna designed for free space conditions, 
the induced mismatch contributes to a lowering of the output 
power compared with the free-space condition which, in 
part, mitigate the effect of enhanced power absorption. 
At or around the 
millimeter wave range, 
the 
electromagnetic ﬁelds from the antenna in free space can be 
used to characterize the energy absorption in the skin also for 
devices intended to be used in close proximity of the body. 
In addition, since the contribution from coupling of the 
reactive near-ﬁeld is small, free-space power density seems a 
reasonable quantity to characterize exposure in the ‘higher’ 
frequency range of interest for mobile communications (24 
GHz to 100 GHz). Overall, in relation to the wide safety 
margins typically included in the exposure limits, the effects 
of near-ﬁeld body interactions are negligible when 
evaluating compliance at the mmW [9]. 
Now, according to [10], to provide context for 
understanding how the strength of wireless signals from a 5G 
small cell transmitter diminishes with distance, they 
calculated typical exposures from 60-watt ERP 5G source at 
39 GHz mounted on a pole 25 feet above ground. The 
example described here is one application of a 5G wireless 
technology; other applications may differ in the details. The 
exposures in Figure 3 are expressed as a percent of the 
FCC’s maximum permissible exposure limit on power 
density of exposures of the general public (1 mW/cm2), 
applied to the range of frequencies between 1.5 and 100 
GHz. This is a convenient way to compare exposures from 
RF sources operating at different frequencies and exposure 
limits. 
Figure 3 illustrates the signal strength from an example 
5G small cell antenna mounted on a telephone pole 
(transmitting at 39 GHz). In addition, the signal strengths 
shows that exposures to RF from the small cell antenna are 
very low and diminish quickly with distance. RF signals 
from the small cell antenna measured inside buildings would 
be even lower. The calculated exposure in Fig. 3 at 50 feet is 
0.7% of the FCC’s standard directly in the main beam of the 
antenna, assuming all transmitted power is focused in a 
single direction; exposures outside the main beam of the 
antenna are lower. Small cell antennas are mounted far above 
the ground; therefore, exposure is in what is termed the far 
ﬁeld. At farther distances, the exposure is progressively 
lower, becoming less than 0.1% at 150 feet and vanishingly 
small at 500 feet. 
 
 
Figure 3. 5G signals from a pole-mounted small cell antenna as a 
function of distance [10]. 
 
Another way to compare the RF exposure of common 
devices or sources is to rank them by relative intensity. 
Figure 4 shows the contribution of eight common sources of 
RF exposure expressed as a percent of the FCC limit. Figure 
4 illustrates that the RF signal at a middle distance from 5G 
small cell antenna is roughly 5 times lower than a cordless 
phone and 20 times lower than a cell phone, both of which 
are typically used close to the body, but is higher than some 
other common sources of RF. These values represent typical 
exposure levels. If a person was to use a cell phone near a 5G 
small cell antenna, then the cell phone may only need to 
transmit at a low power level to communicate over the 
shorter distance, and RF exposure from the cellphone could 
be lower. It may be surprising to some that the human body 
and the earth itself are sources of exposure throughout the 
RF frequency range, including at 5G frequencies. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
 
Figure 4. Ranking of common examples of RF sources by percent 
of FCC limit from lowest (left) to highest (right) [10]. 
 
To date, the only conﬁrmed biological difference 
between exposures to RF frequencies less than 6 GHz and 
RF frequencies above 6 GHz is that at the higher frequencies 
the body’s electrical properties better limit energy deposition 
to a shallow depth, largely conﬁned to the skin. Thus, at 
frequencies above 6 GHz the hazard to be avoided is painful 
heating of the skin. 
Fixed small cell wireless communication installations—
such as small cell antennas—that operate in compliance with 
the regulations of the FCC will produce RF exposures well 
within the recommended exposure limits of the FCC, 
ICNIRP, and IEEE. Research to date does not provide a 
reliable scientiﬁc basis to conclude that the operation of 
these facilities will cause or contribute to adverse health 
effects in the population. Research on RF will continue, as 
often occurs with new technologies, but not because public 
health authorities have established that the use of RF 
communication technologies today causes adverse health 
effects [10]. 
On the other hand, based on the discussions carried out in 
[11], there are clearly some open questions regarding 
exposure levels and assessment in 5G and future wireless 
devices: 
• Multiple antennas technology is one of the key enablers 
of 5G for achieving high data rates, but it will increase the 
exposure in near ﬁeld. For instance, what would be the 
number of antennas that can be placed on a user device while 
maintaining a safe exposure level? In addition, the way in 
which the position of the hand(s) on a multi-antennas 
wireless device affects the SAR, needs to be evaluated. 
• In the ﬁrst stage of 5G implementation, 5G networks 
will operate in parallel with current mobile systems, with an 
unavoidable global increase in the exposure level that needs 
to be measured. 
• The number of smart IoT devices, in the close 
proximity of people, is likely to increase exponentially in the 
future and the impact of these devices on exposure needs to 
be assessed. 
• The deployment of small cells helps to reduce the levels 
of transmit power, but what about dense or very dense 
deployment of small cells? Will it increase the overall 
aggregated power as compared to a macro cell and create 
more EMF exposure? This should be properly explored. 
• The current safety rules regarding RF exposure do not 
specify limits above 100 GHz whereas spectrum use will 
inevitably move to these bands over time. Hence, there is a 
need for further investigating the effects of exposure at these 
frequencies and, then, deﬁning new safety limits. 
A comprehensive survey on the assessment, evaluation, 
limitation, and mitigation of exposure risk for current and 
future wireless devices and equipment is provided in [11]. 
From a human health point of view, it appears that the 
possibility of a brain tumor has been the main cause for 
concern related to the extensive use of wireless devices, 
although the effects of EMF exposure in new parts of the 
body are now being investigated (for example, eyes). 
Meanwhile, with the advent of 5G, more efforts have been 
made to understand the thermal and non-thermal effects of 
mmWave exposure on the human body. Regarding EMF 
exposure assessment, the most common metrics and 
assessment frameworks used in wireless communications to 
measure exposure were presented. It was also explained how 
new and more generic metrics have been defined by 
combining existing metrics to better reflect the exposure of 
large geographic areas and it was argued that a generic 
metric to measure individual exposure would also be of 
interest. Existing exposure guidelines were also reviewed 
and explained how they can be updated to better reflect the 
true nature of EMF exposure, i.e. better considering the 
duration of exposure. Finally, some insights were provided 
on how key 5G enabling technologies such as densification, 
massive MIMO, and mmWave, will affect EMF exposure in 
the near future; for example, the dense deployment of small 
cells and IoT devices is very likely to increase overall 
environmental exposure. There could be some technical 
opportunities in 5G to raise awareness of wireless users' 
exposure and allow them to decide if they want to reduce it 
at the cost of, for example, lower Quality of Service (QoS) 
[11]. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORKS 
The laws to establish regulations about the maximum 
limits allowed for 5G technology depend on the local 
regulations of each country; however (and although the 
effects of non-ionizing electromagnetic waves on living 
organisms are known), the large number of variables and 
factors that intervene in the process makes it very difficult 
and premature to know what will happen when 5G 
technology is implemented. The truth is that, due to the 
working frequencies that are considered for the entire 
network, it is possible to estimate that the risk is relatively 
low. Currently, 2.4 GHz frequency is used for most digital 
communications, so the frequency ranges are far from the 
frequency values considered highly dangerous. Although the 
transceiver antennas are not entirely innocuous, their 
distance from the users makes them safe, while security 
measures must be strictly monitored for mobile devices, 
since they are used personally. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

The present work is a compilation of some research 
reports carried out by different authors and institutions; 
although different procedures were carried out for their 
respective contributions, and these contributions provide 
valuable information on the subject, all authors agree on at 
least two conclusions: 
• Health risks from exposure to radiation from 
electromagnetic waves of 5G technology are directly related 
to the distance to the transmitting stations, since the intensity 
of the signals emitted is inversely proportional to said 
distance, in addition to depending on the environment and 
transmission conditions, so each case is particular. 
• It is necessary to carry out more exhaustive 
investigations, which will be achieved over time; to date, 5G 
technology has not yet been implemented in commercial 
services, and the real risks can be measured effectively to the 
extent that there is more infrastructure for this new 
generation. 
Future work will consist of monitoring and making a 
permanent observation and measurement in specific 
situations; however, the experience that we have concerning 
electromagnetic waves and previously existing networks 
means a base from which it has been possible to start. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. A. Revuelta, J. G. Fernández, R. M. Hidalgo, R. R. Rivera, 
and W. A. Gemin, "Electromagnetic Radiations and Their 
Effects on Human Body," Science Today, vol 18, no. 106, pp. 
24–33, 2008. 
[2] A. Kumar and V. Dangi, "Electromagnetic Spectrum and Its 
Impact on Human Life," International Journal of All Research 
Education and Scientific Methods (IJARESM), vol. 4, no. 8, 
pp. 2455–6211, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1021/ac50031a018 
[3] C. 
Borrás, 
"Ionizing 
Radiations 
Biological 
Effects," 
Continuing Medical Training in Primary Care (FMC), vol. 19, 
no. 2, pp. 68–77, 2012. 
https://doi.org/10.1016/S1134-2072(12)70298-0 
[4] W. Van Loock, "Human safety and health in electromagnetic 
fields," 7th International Symposium on Electromagnetic 
Compatibility and Electromagnetic Ecology the Proceedings, 
(EMCECO), pp. 315–318, 2007. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/EMCECO.2007.4371721 
[5] I. Belyaev, "Main Regularities and Health Risks from 
Exposure 
to 
Non-Thermal 
Microwaves 
of 
Mobile 
Communication," 2019 14th International Conference on 
Advanced 
Technologies, 
Systems 
and 
Services 
in 
Telecommunications (TELSIKS), pp. 111–116, 2019. doi: 
10.1109/TELSIKS46999.2019.9002324. 
[6] GSMA Espectro, "5G Spectrum: GSMA Position About 
Public Politics," p. 1, 2016. 
[7] M. Simkó and M. O. Mattsson, "5G Wireless Communication 
and Health Effectss—A Pragmatic Review Based on 
Available Studies Regarding 6 to 100 GHz," International 
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, vol 16, 
no. 
18, 
pp. 
15–16, 
2019. 
https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16183406 
[8] B. Awada, G. Madi, A. Mohsen, A. Harb, A. Diab, L. 
Hamawy and M. Hajj-Hassan, "Simulation of the Effect of 5G 
Cell Phone Radiation on Human Brain," 2018 IEEE 
International Multidisciplinary Conference on Engineering 
Technology, 
IMCET 
2018, 
pp. 
0–5, 
2019. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/IMCET.2018.8603063 
[9] D. Colombi, B. Thors, C. Tornevik and Q. Balzano, "RF 
Energy Absorption by Biological Tissues in Close Proximity 
to Millimeter-Wave 5G Wireless Equipment," IEEE Access, 
vol.6, 
pp. 
4974–4981, 
2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2790038 
[10] W. H. Bailey, B. R. T. Cotts, and P. J.  Dopart, "Wireless 5G 
Radiofrequency Technology - An Overview of Small Cell 
Exposures, Standards and Science," IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 
140792–140797, 
2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3010677 
[11] M. A. Jamshed, F. Héliot and T. W. C. Brown, "A Survey on 
Electromagnetic Risk Assessment and Evaluation Mechanism 
for Future Wireless Communication Systems," IEEE Journal 
of Electromagnetics, RF and Microwaves in Medicine and 
Biology, 
vol. 
4, 
pp. 
24–36, 
2020. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/JERM.2019.2917766 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-826-6
GREEN 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

