Hypergraph of Massive Digital Traces as Representation of Human Activities: A 
Way to Reduce Energy Consumption by Identifying Sustainable Practices 
 
Eddie Soulier 
Tech-CICO 
University of Technology of Troyes (UTT) 
Troyes, France 
email: eddie.soulier@utt.fr 
Philippe Calvez 
Crigen – Digital Lab 
ENGIE 
Saint-Denis, France 
email: philippe.calvez1@engie.com 
 
 
Abstract— On one hand, the ecological transition and 
sustainable development issues are today a reality that can not be 
ignored given the negative impacts of human activities on their 
environments. On the other hand, an increasingly important 
digitization of these environments results in the generation of 
massive volumes of digital traces, which are all signs of actors’ 
activities. A significant challenge is to understand the ins and outs 
of environmental impact due to activities and considering Energy 
Impact (EI) as a key indicator and how this indicator can strongly 
change from an activity to another. Our approach considers the 
Practices recognition on the basis of these digital traces generated 
by human and non-human entities during specific activities. 
Practice (instantiation of activity) uses more or less resources 
(physical and virtual) during their existence. Being able to identify 
which one is more resources dependent would help to better 
understand how to promote ecological transition. Promoting, or at 
least identifying on the basis of indicators (i.e., Energy Impact), 
practices that have a low impact on the environment could be an 
innovative approach. These practices, defined as coordination of 
multiple heterogeneous entities in time and space, can be 
formalized in the form of multidimensional activities structures – 
Activities’s Hypergraph – using the Assemblage Theory 
(“Agencement” in French) and using a set of mathematical tools 
(Simplicial Complexes, Hypernetworks). This research attempts 
to model the phenomenon of human and non-human activity based 
on the characterization of the context (massive contextual data). 
These Assemblages are represented and computed in a research 
platform (IMhoTEP), which aims to build these complex 
structures not based on a priori entities’ classification, but by 
focusing on the relationships they maintain in several dimensions. 
The main goal is to offer a decision tool, which supports actors’ 
ecological transition by understanding activities inducing 
consumption or production of resources. This academic research 
in the field of computer science is based on continuous digitization 
of physical and virtual spaces, particularly highly connected urban 
areas (Smart City, Internet of Everything).  
Keywords— Activities; Assemblage; Digital Traces; Energy 
Impact; Simplicial Complexe; Theory of Graph; Theory of Practice. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
It is observed that daily human activities have an 
increasingly impact – mostly negative – on the environment. 
They are mainly not sustainable due to excessive consumption 
and uncontrolled using of multiple resources (mostly non-
renewable). Electrical energy (Figure 1) is a leading resource in 
human activities. 
 
Figure 1. 1973 and 2012 fuel share of electricity generation. 
 
Energy companies, institutional, provide several 
indicators to measure electric energy consumption including the 
“Energy Impact”. We consider that each human activity has an 
Energy Impact (in French Emprise Energétique or EmE). We 
have chosen to use this indicator (EI) as a measure of electrical 
energy consumption in human activities. EI is the only indicator 
that takes into account the indirect consumption (not visible to 
the final consumer) in addition to the direct consumption visible 
to the final consummer. EI concept is based on research work 
of Pourouchottamin [1] and Figure 2 describes it. 
 
Figure 2. Energy Impact (Emprise Energétique (EmE)). 
Direct energy refers to the energy visible to consumers, i.e., 
their fuel bills for individual vehicles, electricity, gas and other 
fuels for housing, etc. Direct energy corresponds to the final 
energy consumed by households. Embodied energy is the 
energy necessary for the provision of property or the service 
offering to the end consumer. Embodied energy is needed to 
manufacture and delivery of equipment at home, or produce 
food, energy required to the construction of the house, etc. It is 
also called content of energy for goods and services. This 
embodied energy must itself be decomposed according to its 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

use. Embodied energy of the non-energy sectors means that it 
is used by economic actors in France and in the world to 
imagine, test, produce, and transport goods and services 
ultimately consumed by households. Embodied energy of direct 
energy corresponds to the share of energy required to develop, 
produce the “final” energy from natural resources and make it 
available to the consumer. The process requires extraction, 
conversion, 
transportation, 
manufacturing 
plants 
and 
infrastructures, etc. 
Today, the calculation of energy impact is not based on the 
actual activities of people. It is difficult to identify what human 
actors really do for daily activities. Besides the question of 
measuring of energy impact, the functional representation of 
these activities do not correspond to the image the people have 
of their own activities. This makes it difficult to build a 
supervisory activity system that would help to reduce the 
consumption of energy by managing activities. There is in this 
sense a real need to answer this lack. This classic definition of 
human activities based on statistical study bring two basic 
problems: 
• 
The first problem is that there is no overlap 
between the functional separation and real activities of 
people. 
• 
The second problem is that the data used, are 
only primarily the result of statistical surveys that 
provide aggregated results from data, which are not 
directly related to activities. 
Human activity is a very complex phenomenon to be 
observed except: 
• 
In the case of very trivial activity (or for 
which semantics is well controlled) 
• 
When it is based on pre-defined categories or 
declarative items. 
In all other cases, we are confronted to an activity 
recognition problem. 
Activity Recognition in computer science is a research area 
in strong development [2]. 
In this research field, there are two main approaches:  
• 
Activity Recognition based on Vision  
• 
Activity Recognition based on Sensor and 
two types of algorithms/representation: 
• 
Machine Learning 
• 
Representation of knowledge. 
We consider that these approaches do not allow to solve the 
problem as we consider it. Indeed, the computational approach 
of the recognition of activities do not take full account of the 
context of activities. For environment, lifestyles (context) 
significantly affect how activities are performed. That is why 
we have chosen to rely on specialized research work, which 
considers the influence of lifestyle on human activities. In 
particular, we study the academic work of Spaargaren [3-5], 
Røpke [6-8] and Shove [9-14]. Their conclusion is that 
changing the behavior of agents can not come from individual 
incentive micro level (micro) or institutional macro level (i.e., 
laws, ...). The basic and core assumption of our approach is that 
the behavior in the activity is determined by practice, in which 
activities are embodied (shown in Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Influence of Lifestyle and System of provision on Social 
Practices [15]. 
Practice is one of the main theoretical artefactsf of our 
approach and one of our key contribution is to develop a 
modeling framework of practices and/for building a computer 
system (IMhOTEP Platform) to calculate the energy impact 
(EmE) related to these practices based on massive digital traces 
(Big Data) related to human activities.  
The main problematic of our research work is how to 
identify (automatically and within computer science), in highly 
digitized environments, actors’ practices in which activities are 
encapsulated. How to recommend low environment impact 
practices without using a priori or declarative lists? 
II. 
FUNCTIONAL MODEL FOR BUILDING 
STRUCTURES OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES  
We present our research model and our hypotheses in Figure 
4. 
 
Figure 4. Global Research Model for building Sustainable Energy 
Assemblage (SEA). 
 
The Empirical dimension of our model is related to the 
phenomenon observed, it is to say, activities and practices. 
Specifically, the observed phenomenon is an interconnected set 
of practices of various fields (housing, transportation, leisure...) 
and their energy impact (EmE). In this area, it seeks to observe 
and measure the phenomenon, by taking advantage of 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

aggregating heterogeneous digital traces. It is in this empirical 
dimension that we establish a first form of the observed facts 
(basic activities) presented later in this work. We consider 
practice as the core conceptual artefact of our approach. 
Practice is defined by Reckwitz [16] as “a routinized type of 
behavior which consists of several elements, interconnected to 
one other: forms of bodily activities, forms of mental activities, 
‘things’ and their use, a background knowledge in the form of 
understanding, know-how, states of emotion and motivational 
knowledge. A practice – a way of cooking, of consuming, of 
working, ...” 
Our hypothesis is that practices are interconnected. For this 
key assumption, we suggest the concept of Assemblage 
(“Agencement” in French) based on previous academic works 
of Soulier with Delalonde [17], and with Bugeaud [18][19]. 
Assemblage is a methodological tool [18] for the study of 
any phenomenon consisting of: 
• 
a large number of heterogeneous entities, 
autonomous and active, 
• 
multidimensional network of relationships in 
which they associate, 
• 
forms of organization and ability to act that 
emerge from their interactions. 
In our field, we define a Sustainable Energy Assemblage 
(Agencement Energétique Soutenable [AED] in French), which 
is a multidimensional structure of entities in relationship in one 
or more dimension. In this structure – view as a Hypergraph – 
we aim to identify a cluster that represents Practice (group of 
heterogeneous entities in interaction). These practice have, as 
defined previously, an energy grip/hold (EmE). 
The conceptual dimension of our research Model, helps us 
to characterize relevant factors of the observed phenomenon of 
the empirical dimension. That is why we consider significant 
concept for our approach such as Activity, Practice, Energy 
Impact. 
We assume that an Assemblage is a multidimensional 
connectivity system and that we we could calculate this system 
and the connectivity of heterogeneous elements of a practice in 
several dimensions. For this we use the mathematical tool of  
Simplicial Complex developed by Atkin [20, 21] and 
generalized by J. Johnson [22] as Hypernetworks. 
The last part of our model describes the model dimension. 
In this area, we seek to operationalize previous cited dimension 
of our model, through a consistent and unambiguous formal 
system. In our case, this formal system is based on 
mathematical tools that are Simplicial Complex that help 
operationalize the structure as SEA in a specific information 
system platform called IMhOTEP (sustaInable MObility and 
Energy social-Practices inside Smart Cities), which we 
developed as a proof of concept to build and represent the 
dynamic structures of activities. This area of the model should 
confirm or not our theories from the conceptual dimension 
(theory of sustainable practices / Sustainable Energy 
Assemblage through the Energy Impact model) and confirm as 
well observation from the empirical dimension (Practice and 
Influence Energy). At this point, we transform our previous 
model into the model shown in Figure 5, in order to display our 
three core concept such Energy grip/hold (EmE), Practice and 
Assemblage. 
 
Figure 5. Research Model with Core Concept of the approach. 
III. 
BUILDING STRUCTURES OF PRACTICES FROM 
DIGITAL TRACES  
Calculating the Energy grip/hold (EmE) of practice from 
massive digital traces of activities (Big Data) generate many 
problems in data acquisition, data processing and modeling. 
Digital traces are modeled based on ActivityStream 
protocol developed by Messina [23], recently upgraded in a 
new version of protocol by Snell [24]. We consider multiple 
dimensions of digital traces, as shown in Figure 6. All these 
dimensions aim to define more accurately characteristics of 
human activities. 
 
 
Figure 6. Digital Dimension of Human Activities. 
The conceptual model takes into account the activity, 
location and mobility triangle, as shown in Figure 7. Activity 
can be localized or distributed and independent or dependent. 
 
 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 
 
Figure 7. Triptych of Pratice. 
The platform IMhOTEP developed for this academic 
research aims to build, from digital traces from multiple data 
sources (Figure 6), through automatic computing process based 
on Simplicial Complex mathematical tool, structures of 
activities in which Practice will be searched and identified. The 
model that we have chosen (Hyperconnectivity in multiple 
dimensions, paradigm of massive heterogeneous data, use of 
Natural Language Processing, automatic recognition patterns of 
activities with Machine Learning algorithms) creates numerous 
technical challenges. Figure 8 presents the architecture of 
IMhOTEP platform and how from Lifestream of data, we build 
structures of activities as a Hypergraph in which we seek, with 
Machine Learning algorithm (K-Means), to identify Practices 
and those who are sustainable. 
 
 
Figure 8. IMhOTEP Architecture. 
IMhOTEP could become in the near future an industrial 
solution with automatic recognition of activities from massive 
digital data.  
IV. 
EXPERIMENTATION WITH IMhOTEP 
PLATFORM  
We 
present 
in 
this 
section 
our 
framework 
for 
experimentation. We started with a hypothetical situation with 
two people who agree to install the application on their 
smartphone and share their data for a specific duration, inside 
two different geographical areas (France and Germany). The 
goal of our experiment is to validate the Assemblage model 
(conceptual validation), the IMhOTEP platform (technical) and 
calculating the Energy grip/hold (EmE) for each practice using 
massive digital traces and the Energy Control Model (ECM) 
that we develop for this experimentation.  
Hypothesis of our experimentation are that an unknown 
activity is caught by the system IMhOTEP, when someone is 
staying at the same spatial position (latitude/longitude) for at 
least 5 consecutive minutes. Then, the process of aggregation 
of digital traces can start, based on the localization of the person 
and the surrounding context.  The nature of the activity is 
determined by the context analysis. Depending on the location 
of the subject of reference, we consider the nearest Point Of 
Interest (POI) as a reference to aggregate digital traces around 
it. We consider categorization of the POI based on services such 
Foursquare or Google Place. We then extract from these 
provided information keywords related to POI’s. At the same 
time, we start to aggregate the social dimension information, 
with Tweets from Twitter service. We define a boundary Box 
based on the position of the POI and the person. These Tweets 
with use of NLP tools help us to identify more entities by 
extracting most cited keywords. These entities will be used later 
in the IMhOTEP Platform to build the structures of Activities. 
By using Simplicial Complex calculation, we use matrices of 
adjacency and matrices of incidences as shown in Figure 9.  
 
Figure 9. Use of Simplicial Complex mathematical tool – Example of 
Adjacenct Matrix. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

The key point is the allocation of a category of activities 
automatically by grouping activities, which are closed. To do 
this we apply K-Means Algorithm to define clusters of category 
of activities in which we could later identify Practices. Once 
these clusters are defined we use graph query to search for 
specific practice and its Energy Impact evaluation. Figure 10 
show the structure of activities. 
 
 
Figure 10. Structure of Activities – Practice searching based on Graph 
Queries. 
The scale of the following experiment was limited to 3 
people over one month, mostly due to limitation of 
Smartphones using a data/sensor for following people over 
time, and location and the willingness of people to share their 
constant spatial position during a long period of time. The 
mobile application energy consumption of the battery, due to 
work all day long and push every Lat/Lon position and other 
data every minute, was clearly a disadvantage at this point of 
the experiment. Regarding the acquisition of data from different 
context sources (Tweets, Google Place…), it depends on how 
many “activities” (defined stops over 5 minutes and considered 
as activity) are done by user. The average volume of data per 
day, per user, if we consider all digital traces needed for the 
IMhOTEP approach acquired for this period of time, reached 
12 Mo of data/per user/per day. This could be considered as 
relatively low. But if we scale up to hundreds or thousands of 
people, the volume could lead to a computational challenge, 
especially when considering to manage a large graph with 
hundreds, 
thousands, 
even 
millions 
of 
nodes 
with 
multidimensional relationships. 
This implementation of IMhOTEP was experimental in 
order to acquire data to build an Hypergraph of activities. 
Computational challenges were present, for instance to connect 
all open source tools (mobile application, Database, code to 
extract data, API access). This element was a heavy constraint 
because when you want to access to API like Twitter or Google, 
or others such Yelp, you only get a specific amount of query 
from the API. Moreover test and implementation suffer due to 
API’s limits. 
Another limit directly linked to the Matrix Calculation 
(Incidence and Adjacency) was the time required to calculate 
the experiment. It was not a huge problem at this point, but size 
of matrix (for hypergraph calculation / Simplicial Complex) 
could lead to combinatorics computation challenge. 
A data, collected every minute for Geo Position, starts to be 
acquired when someone stops doing activities. This “starting” 
point leads to aggregation of data. As already written, we came 
to an average of data per day per user of 12 Mo. We can imagine 
that if you acquire more data to better characterize the context 
of an activity and build a representation with Simplicial 
complex, you will have to scale and move to a probably more 
resilient infrastructure (such TitanDB/SPARK, which we are 
actually testing). 
Regarding computational challenge, it will depend mostly 
on the objective of the approach and use cases. Because 
collecting real time or/and predictive activity directly from a 
user and his mobile phone will represent a huge challenge 
(computing / hardware, i.e battery). If the ultimate goal is to 
produce a daily dashboard, computational challenge will still be 
present but definitively in a different scale. 
Based on our Energy Control Model, and the IMhOTEP 
platform, we have a 63% accuracy for identifying practices with 
the right categorization. When we ask people who participate to 
the experimentation if the practice found by the IMhOTEP 
platform has the right category and reflect what they did, they 
answer positively to more than 6 of 10. Regarding the initial 
objective to identify almost automatically complex practices, 
this intermediary result is relevant.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Our approach is based on massive digital traces aggregation 
and how from these pieces of heterogeneous information, we 
are able to build automatically and backward a structure of 
human activities. The other objective was to identify practice 
related to person without an a priori categorization of practices 
analyzed. Recognition rate could be improved by being able to 
better localize people in space and time and use more advanced 
machine learning algorithm to infer over the time lifestyles of 
people. IMhOTEP provides a new way of building large 
multidimensional Hypergraph to represent dynamic structures 
of heterogeneous entities. Perspective and next research should 
focus on how to manage large amount of users, which can lead 
to combinatory calculation limits due to large incidence and 
adjacency matrices.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Pourouchottamin, C. Barbier, L. Chancel and M. Colombier, “New 
representations of energy consumption,” IDDRI, UMR 8568 CIRED, 
EDF R&D, 2013. 
[2] L. Chen and I. Khalil, “Activity recognition: Approaches, practices and 
trends,” Activity Recognition in Pervasive Intelligent Environments, 
Springer, 2011, pp. 1-31. 
[3] G. Spaargaren and B. Van Vliet, “Lifestyles, consumption and the 
environment: The ecological modernization of domestic consumption,” 
Environmental Politics, vol. 9, no. 1, 2000, pp. 50-76.R. Nicole, “Title of 
paper with only first word capitalized,” J. Name Stand. Abbrev., in press. 
[4] G. Spaargaren, “Theories of practices: Agency, technology, and culture: 
Exploring the relevance of practice theories for the governance of 
sustainable consumption practices in the new world-order,” Global 
Environmental Change, vol. 21, no. 3, 2011, pp. 813-822.M. Young, The 
Technical Writer’s Handbook. Mill Valley, CA: University Science, 
1989. 
[5] G. 
Spaargaren, 
“Sustainable 
consumption: 
a 
theoretical 
and 
environmental policy perspective,” Society &Natural Resources, vol. 16, 
no. 8, 2003, pp. 687-701. 
[6] I. Røpke, “The dynamics of willingness to consume,” Ecological 
Economics, vol. 28, no. 3, 1999, pp. 399-420. 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

[7] I. Røpke, “Theories of practice—New inspiration for ecological economic 
studies on consumption,” Ecological Economics, vol. 68, no. 10, 2009, 
pp. 2490-2497. 
[8] I. Røpke, “New technology in everyday life–social processes and 
environmental impact,” Ecological Economics, vol. 38, no. 3, 2001, pp. 
403-422. 
[9] E. Shove, The design of everyday life, Berg Publishers, 2007. 
[10] E. Shove, H. Chappells, L. Lutzenhiserc and B. Hackettd, “Comfort in a 
lower carbon society,” Building Research & Information, Volume 36, 
Issue 4, 2008. 
[11] E. Shove, “Beyond the ABC: climate change policy and theories of social 
change,” Environment and planning. A, vol. 42, no. 6, 2010, pp. 1273. 
[12] E. Shove, M. Watson and M. Pantzar, The dynamics of social practice: 
Everyday life and how it changes, SAGE Publications Limited, 2012.  
[13] E. Shove and G. Walker, “Governing transitions in the sustainability of 
everyday life,” Research Policy, vol. 39, no. 4, 2010, pp. 471-476. 
[14] E. Shove, “Converging conventions of comfort, cleanliness and 
convenience,” Journal of Consumer Policy, vol. 26, no. 4, 2003, pp. 395-
418. 
[15] G. Spaargaren and C.S.A.K. Koppen, “Provider strategies and the 
greening of consumption practices: Exploring the role of companies in 
sustainable consumption,” The new middle classes, 2009, pp. 81-100. 
[16] A. Reckwitz, “Toward a Theory of Social Practices A development in 
culturalist theorizing,” European journal of social theory, vol. 5, no. 2, 
2002, pp. 243-263. 
[17] E. Soulier, C Delalonde and O Petit, “ Subjectivation and singularizing 
process in the perspective of situated learning and actor network theory,” 
International congress AREF, 2007. 
[18] F. Bugeaud, “Isamsara: for an engineering-based services and systems 
mereology hypergraphs ",” Troyes, 2011. 
[19] E. Soulier, F. Rousseaux, F. Bugeaud, J. Legrand and H. Neffati, 
“Modeling and simulation of new territories projects using agencements 
theory, mereological principles and simplicial complex tool,” Proc. 2011 
IET International Conference on Smart and Sustainable City (IET 
ICSSC2011), Shanghai, China July, 2011, pp. 6-8. 
[20] R.H. Atkin, Combinatorial Connectivities in Social Systems: an 
application of simplicial complex structures to the study of large 
organizations, Birkhäuser - 3764309121, 1977. 
[21] R.H. Atkin, Mathematical structure in human affairs, Heinemann 
Educational London - 0435820257, 1974. 
[22] J. Johnson, “Hypernetworks of Complex Systems,” Complex Sciences, 
2009, pp. 364-375. 
[23] M. Atkins, et al., “Atom Activity Streams 1.0,” Abgerufen am, vol. 22, 
no. 08, 2011, pp. 2013. 
[24] J. Snell, “JSON activity streams 2.0,” 2014. 
 
 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

