Nuclear Energy and Solving Global Environmental Problems
Vladimir Grachev
Global Ecology Center
Lomonosov Moscow State University
Moscow, Russia
Email: grachev@niipe.com
Natalia Kurysheva
A.I. Burnazyan Federal Medical Biophysical Center
State Scientific Center of the Russian Federation
Moscow, Russia
Email: grachev@niipe.com
Abstract—
This
paper
shows
how
nuclear
energetics
is
connected to global environmental problems, such as global
climate change, depletion of natural resources, accumulation of
industrial
and
consumption
waste,
air,
water,
and
soil
pollution,
deforestation,
desertification,
and
loss
of
biodiversity. The first six problems are closely intertwined with
the planet’s energy production. The use of fuels, especially of
black coal, leads to a dramatic increase in air, water, and soil
pollution levels, as well as to the accumulation of large waste
amounts and catastrophic emissions of greenhouse gases.
However, nuclear energetics allows harnessing energy without
causing greenhouse gases and having the lowest carbon
footprint all over its energy generation cycles. Nowadays, the
impact of human activity on the biosphere has reached a global
scale, changing the cycle of matter, the water balance of the
planet, and radically affecting soils, vegetation, and fauna.
Global environmental problems have become our reality.
Anthropogenic activities have created new sources of pollution
of the biosphere, which, ultimately, can create a threat to the
existence of humanity itself. The comparison of the ecological
effectiveness of various ways to generate energy shows that
nuclear energy has an advantage over fuel energy sources with
regards to all indicators and, along with water, wind and solar
energy, forms the "green square" of the prospective energy
development. Being natural-like as all the components of the
"green square" nuclear energy is a direct embodiment of the
sun’s energy on earth.
Keywords-energy; global environmental problems; climate
change;
depletion
of
resources;
accumulation
of
waste;
pollution; energy sources.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The environmental threat to the existence of human
civilization is officially recognized at the highest interstate
level. Consumer attitude towards nature has put it on the
brink of survival. The predominant patterns of production
and consumption lead to environmental depletion increasing
the risk to human life and health due to the reduced quality
of the environment. Scientific and technological progresses
have created a danger of an environmental catastrophe, and
the very concept of development has been put into question.
Many scientific works have analyzed problems existing
in modern global ecodynamics, including their connection to
the growth of the planet’s population, food and energy
resources scarcity. The key features associated with the
sustainable development of the nature-society system have
been determined [1]–[3]. Researchers have come to the
conclusion
that
global
environmental
problems
and
environmental safety are closely related to energy [4]–[9].
There is an urgent need to revise the scale of human
values. For sustainable development, the energy issue needs
to be dealt with.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section III
presents the state of the art. Section IV details our research
and we conclude in Section V.
II.
STATE OF THE ART
According to the report of the United Nations Committee
on Environment and Development (UNEP – United Nations
Environment Program), the prognosis for the development of
humanity until 2032 is disappointing. Irreversible changes
will occur under the influence of human activity on the
planet. More than 70% of the earth’s surface will be
impacted one way or another, more than a quarter of all
animal and plant species will be permanently lost; safe air,
clean drinking water, undisturbed landscapes will be in
deficit, and the ability of nature to recover from the human
impact will diminish [10].
The high quality of the natural environment is a core
value for humanity, an unconditional value category, and the
essence of global environmental interests. According to the
World Health Organization, 80% of all diseases are caused
today by consumption of poor-quality drinking water [11];
according to the International Atomic Energy Agency
(IAEA) estimates, five million people die from diseases
associated with consumption of polluted and poor-quality
water every year [12]. Water may become almost the main
cause of future armed conflicts, same as oil today.
Statistical data on the ecological condition of Russia give
disappointing forecasts. Today, more than a third of the
urban population of Russia lives in areas where there is no
atmospheric pollution monitoring, and more than half lives
in cities with high and very high levels of atmospheric
pollution [13].
Russia,
along
with
the
entire
planet,
has
been
experiencing serious environmental problems. The average
air temperature has been growing, the permafrost has been
receding, and various manifestations of climate instability
have been observed.
V.I. Vernadsky saw the solution to environmental
problems in changing worldview and ideological principles,
i.e., in the noospheric thinking [14]. Therefore, the teaching
of V.I. Vernadsky on the transition from the biosphere into
the noosphere has recently become particularly relevant; it
can
serve
as
the
basis
for
fundamental
research
on
environmental problems and the practical search for their
solution.
The
research
on
the
patterns
of
biosphere
development is key for rational environmental management.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-751-1
GREEN 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Noosphere is the area of interaction between society and
nature; within its boundaries, the rational human activity
becomes the determining factor of development. According
to Vernadsky, the basic prerequisites for creating the
noosphere are the following:
• unification of humanity
• transformation of the means of communication and
information exchange
• discovery of new sources of energy
• social welfare
• equality between all people
• eradication of wars
Vernadsky concluded that humanity would turn into a
new powerful geological force transforming the face of the
planet with its thought and work in the course of its
development.
Technical progress allows performing two main tasks:
• to improve the efficiency of the use of the planet’s
natural and resource potential;
• to exploit new forces of nature for the benefit of
humanity.
The reference to “new sources of energy” and “new
forces of nature” is a characteristic feature of Vernadsky’s
creative heritage.
Today, humanity has come close to the discovery and use
of new physical phenomena, which is confirmed by the
discovery of the Higgs boson, also referred to as the God
particle, which opens the era of practical use of brilliant
ideas that interconnect mass and energy. A kilo of matter can
be converted into the amount of energy equal to a half of the
annual Sayano-Shushenskaya
hydroelectric power plant
output.
The
Higgs
boson
is
the
golden
key
to
the
transformation of mass into energy; and this greatest
discovery confirms the correctness of noospheric ideas and
strengthens the faith in the power of intelligence.
The noospheric worldview, closely connected with the
development of science and education, will develop together
with further scientific discoveries. Noospheric thinking
outlines ways to use and develop natural forces in the
interests
of
humanity,
productivity
growth,
rational
environmental
management,
and
the
preservation
and
development of public health.
Scientific
thought
offers
energetic
and
material
capabilities that allow humanity not only to exploit the
biosphere but also to reasonably transform the earth's
biosphere itself in order to conserve and multiply all
resources, as well as to make them renewable.
For years, we lived without resource shortages because
we used to be a part of a self-consistent resource turnover,
we were self-sufficient. Over the past 200 years, we have
created the technosphere, in which we live. Before that, we
were a part of nature, we used muscular strength of our own,
of horses, mules, donkeys, and camels; we used the energy
of wind and water. We were a part of nature without
disturbing its “metabolism”. Then, we came up with a steam
engine, we invented electricity; as a result, we have built the
technosphere, which is absolutely antagonistic to nature.
This is a problem because this system is eliminating the
resources and it is working against nature itself.
The solution to the problem is the creation of a nature-
like technosphere, the use of nature-like technologies. It is
necessary to create fundamentally new technologies that can
be a part of the
natural circulation. The
Sun
is a
thermonuclear energy source and hundredths of a percent of
the Sun’s energy are converted through the mechanism of
photosynthesis into energy, which provides nutriment to
everything on Earth. This is a closed resource circulation.
Nature-like
technologies
and
the
achievements
of
scientific and technical progress will solve the problems of
sustainable development.
III.
RESEARCH
Global environmental problems are closely related to
energy problems. If all countries of the world reach energy
consumption levels of the United States of America or at
least of “saving” Japan in the next 15 to 20 years, the total
energy consumption will increase in accordance with the
population almost 15 times [15]. The world electric power
industry is not ready for such a “great leap”. There is not
enough organic fuel on the planet. Therefore, we can draw
the following conclusion: energy development must explore
the use of new powerful sources of energy and abandon
burning fossil fuels.
The relationship between global environmental and
energy problems is particularly apparent when comparing
two indicators: the mass of resources required to produce a
unit of energy and the global impact of greenhouse gas
emissions on nature.
Figure 1 shows the main characteristics of various energy
generation methods with two global indicators, namely
greenhouse gas emissions and energy output per unit of
weight of a substance. These indicate the efficiency of using
the
internal
energy
of
substances,
i.e.,
nuclear
and
thermonuclear energy. The existence of the solar system is
based on these; the two reactors—a nuclear one inside the
Earth and a thermonuclear one in the Sun—will remain main
sources of energy. The proportion of energy harnessed from
hydrocarbons
will
remain
the
largest.
However,
the
limitedness of oil and gas reserves is obvious. The prospect
for their active use is clear only for a few decades. During
this time, oil and gas in the energy industry must be replaced
by other sources. There are only two alternative options,
namely
the
use
of
coal
or
nuclear
energy.
Modern
technologies using both these types of raw materials will
allow meeting the growing energy needs of humanity for the
next few hundred years.
Nuclear is much more attractive compared to coal in
terms of its impact on the environment. Humanity has
already exceeded the limit of possible industrial development
while maintaining the stability of biological systems and has
reached the threshold of self-destruction of the biosphere.
Environmental threats, such as the greenhouse effect and
irreversible
climate
change,
acid
rains,
reduction
of
biodiversity, increase of the content of toxic substances in
the environment, require a new development strategy
involving the coordinated functioning of the economy and
ecosystem.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-751-1
GREEN 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

Figure 1. Global efficiency of different ways of energy generation [13]
In September 2017, at the International Ministerial
Conference on Nuclear Power in the 21st century organized
by the IAEA, Director General of the ROSATOM State
Atomic Energy Corporation Alexey Likhachev emphasized
the key role of the nuclear power industry in ensuring
sustainable development and the global switch to low-carbon
generation: “Everybody understands that the future belongs
to
green
power.
Sun,
wind,
water
and
atom,
while
supplementing and strengthening each other, must form the
green square which will be the basis of the world carbonless
mix…We are not competitors; all green energy sources are
parts of the solution to the problem of the global climate
change… The nuclear power industry meets all requirements
set for the power of the future. This is a source of stable and
environmentally friendly pure energy obtained at low cost.
Nuclear power along with solar, wind and hydro energy
make up the so-called “green square”, which will serve as a
basis of the global power balance in the future...”[16].
The concept of “green square” implies that nuclear power
is one of the key components of “green” energy. Together
with solar, wind and hydropower, nuclear power forms the
“green square” which will provide the basis for the world’s
future zero-carbon balance and sustainable development.
In addition to the removal of a substance per se, the use
of resources, as well as the generation of waste, should be
taken into account. For example, a water nuclear power
requires the use of water to cool condensates, as any other
power plant which uses thermal turbines (coal, oil, gas)
does. Other renewable energy sources have a number of
advantages in this regard. Water sources where they already
exist do not cause unnecessary difficulties, as the water used
to cool the condensates is returned to nature.
In addition, nuclear energy is related to the formation of
Radioactive Waste (RW). This issue requires
special
attention [13]. These are nuclear materials and radioactive
substances, the further use of which is not envisaged. The
problem of RW accumulation is primarily ecological. It is
inextricably linked to the legacy accumulated during the
period of the country's military arsenal build-up, but at the
same time, the solution of the task of the final placement of
RW is the key to the development of the nuclear industry in
the future. The problem exists and needs to be addressed
without shifting to subsequent generations.
Until recently, Russia adopted the practice of long-term
storage of RW and delayed resolution of issues regarding
their final isolation. That is why the solution of problems
with regards to radiation heritage and ensuring the safety of
the population and the environment is a serious technical,
economic
and,
above
all,
environmental
and
social
objective.
In 2015, the Russian Federation submitted the Fourth
National Report on the Implementation of Obligations
Arising from the Joint Convention, which confirmed that
the basic principle of State policy of the Russian Federation
in the field of RW is the transition to the practice of burying
RW.
The Russian Federation Federal Law No. 190-FZ "On
Radioactive Waste Management" initiated the establishment
of
the
Unified
State
System
for
Radioactive
Waste
Management (USS RWM) (Figure 2).
Figure. 2. Change of the system of handling the deleted RW after the
adoption of Federal Law No. 190-FZ "On Radioactive Waste Management"
[13]
The basic operating principles of USS RWM are:
 Priority to protect the life and health of present and
future generations of people and the environment from
the negative effects of RW;
 Prohibition of the import into and export from the
Russian Federation of RW for the purpose of storage,
processing and disposal, except in cases provided for in
article 31 of Federal Law No. 190-FZ;
 Responsibility of organizations for ensuring safety in
RW management up to their transfer to the national
operator and for financial support of RW management
works;
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-751-1
GREEN 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

 Accessibility to citizens and public associations of
information
related
to
safety
and
prevention
of
accidents regarding RW management, as well as other
information on RW management.
The main purpose of the USS RWM is to organize and
ensure
safe
and
cost-effective
management
of
RW,
including its disposal. The Federal Law No. 190-FZ
consistently reveals the composition, terms and stages of its
establishment, and Government Decision No. 1185 of 19
November 2012 defines the procedure and terms for the
establishment of the USS RWM. The formation of the USS
RWM required profound changes at all stages of RW
management (Figure 3) – starting with the technologies of
RW management in organizations where RW is generated,
and finishing with the formation of a national disposal
operator and components of its structure.
Figure. 3. Interrelation between IAEA safety requirements and Federal
rules and standards which regulate safety during RW handling [13]
A fundamental solution to the issue is the transition to a
closed nuclear fuel cycle [13]. The objectives of the
transition to a closed nuclear fuel cycle are being formulated
as follows. The first challenge is to fractionate high-level
waste to escape disposal into deep geological formations to
ensure safety and environmental acceptability. The second
task is to develop industrial technologies of waste-free
processing of Spent Nuclear Fuel (SNF), re-involvement of
uranium, multiple recycling of plutonium, which is possible
in a two-component system when by restoring the isotopic
composition of plutonium developed in fast reactors,
multiple recycling can be ensured. And the third, crucial
task is international cooperation in accordance with the
existing roles of countries in the two-component system, to
comply with the nonproliferation regime.
Nowadays, it became obvious that the lifecycle of
nuclear fuel does not end after it has worked the assigned
term in the rector’s core, and then was stored for the
required time period in the spent fuel pool. Open nuclear
fuel cycle provides for long-term storage of SNF and its
further disposal. Closed cycle refers to reusage of nuclear
fuel through the processing of SNF and manufacture of
secondary fuel. Secondary fuel refers to fuel based on fissile
material recovered from SNF. These are not only the
residues of uranium-235 (regenerate, regenerated mixture
REMIX) but also plutonium-239 accumulated in fuel tablets
during the operation of nuclear fuel in the reactor.
It should be noted that countries supporting the concept
of SNF reprocessing and recycling are now forming the
main agenda for expanding nuclear energy in the world.
Indeed, the development of technology and the public desire
to support the development of nuclear energy is connected
with the decision to process SNF.
Two-component
energy
refers
to
the
synergistic
existence of a reactor fleet on thermal and fast neutrons,
which allow to increase the efficiency of using the potential
of initial natural uranium by tens of times, due to the fact
that in fast reactors the 238th isotope of uranium will be
used almost in full. Of course, systems with 100%
efficiency do not exist, but the use of natural uranium in a
two-component system will increase the efficiency of
natural uranium usage by 100-150 times. This is sufficient
to
meet
humanity's
need
for
electricity
in
the
next
millennium.
Closing
the
nuclear
fuel
cycle
requires
effective
solutions
to
improve
SNF
processing
technologies,
fractionation, inclusion of minor actinides in the fuel and
afterburning them (as a possible option) in fast neutron
reactors.
Coexistence of reactors on thermal and fast neutrons will
make it possible to reduce the cost of nuclear energy
generation, in particular for the water-water energetic
reactor technology, because it will be possible to abandon
boron
regulation,
zirconium,
which
will
exclude
the
possibility of zirconium-steam reactions, transition to other
fuel element shells.
The schematic diagram of two-component
nuclear
power can be depicted with rather complex connections, but
in reality, is quite simple and understandable at the intuition
level. These are existing technologies with conversion,
enrichment,
fuel
fabrication,
energy
generation,
SNF
reprocessing and recycling products back to thermal neutron
reactors, as well as fuel fabrication for fast reactors,
reprocessing their SNF, "leveling" the isotope composition
of plutonium for its possible recycle.
When recycled in thermal neutron reactors, the isotopic
composition of plutonium is deteriorated. With the initial
content of about 1% plutonium in the SNF of these reactors,
the 239th isotope in the mass fraction of its isotopes is in the
range of 55-60%. As a result of the first recycle in thermal
neutron reactors, the proportion of the 239th isotope of
plutonium is reduced to 35-40% of the total volume of
plutonium contained in the fuel composition. Only the
addition of plutonium of fast reactors allows the recovery of
isotopic
composition
and
the
provision
of
multiple
recycling.
IV.
CONCLUSION
This analysis has shown that global environmental
problems, such as, first of all, global climate change,
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-751-1
GREEN 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

depletion of resources, waste accumulation, and pollution,
are closely intertwined with how humanity harnesses energy.
According to the results of the comparison of various
energy sources and from the point of view of influence on
the
abovementioned
environmental
problems,
the
best
energy source is nuclear, which along with hydropower,
solar and wind energy forms the "green square" of natural
energy technologies.
REFERENCES
[1]
V. F Krapivin, “Modern environmental, climatic and energy
issues”. Problems associated with the environment and natural
resources: a review by the Russian Institute for Scientific
Information of the RAS, Moscow. No.2, pp.3-24, 2010.
[2]
The G8 action plan on climate change, clean energy, and
sustainable development adopted by the G8 nations on 8 July,
Gleneagles, Scotland, Electrical energy newsletter, Moscow.
No.1, pp.5-9, 2006.
[3]
I. R. Utyamyshev, “Energy and ecology as main components
of
sustainable
development
of
civil
society”.
Integral,
Moscow. No.1, p.31, 2008.
[4]
O. Yu. Apolonskiy, “Global sustainable energy development
problems and the world’s experience in solving them. Energy
policy”, Moscow. No. 4-5, pp.80-91, 2010.
[5]
F. Hernández, M. A. Gual, P. Del Río, and A. Caparrós,
“Energy sustainability and global warming in Spain”. Energy
Policy. Vol.32, No.3, pp.383-394, 2004. doi:10.1016/S0301-
4215(02)00308-7.
[6]
V. А. Shirokov, E. E. Novgorodsky, and N. Yu. Gorlova, 
“Increasing environmental and economical level of energy
efficiency
of
heat-generating
facilities:
a
case
study”.
Environmental protection in the oil and gas sector. No.4,
pp.21-23, 2012.
[7]
N. Georgieva, “Before the X day comes ...”. Russia’s Oil,
Moscow. No.1, pp.60-62, 2011.
[8]
I.
L.
Dmitrieva,
“Environmental
safety of hydropower
facilities in the context of modern scientific and technical
views”. Bulletin of the RANS, Moscow. Т.11, No.1, pp.69-
75, 2011.
[9]
Y.A. Cengel, “Green thermodynamics”. International Journal
of Energy Research. Vol.31, No.12, pp.1088-1104, 2007.
[10] UNEP, “Global Environment Outlook 3. Past, present and future
perspectives”. London: Earthscan Publications, 2002.
[11] World Health Organization, “Water and Public Helath”, 2003.
https://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/dwq/S01.pdf
[12] M. Haseena, “Water pollution and human health”, Environmental
Risk Assessment and Remediation. Vol.1, No.3, pp. 16-19, 2017. doi:
10.4066/2529-8046.100020
[13] V. A. Grachev, “Ecology of the nuclear sector”, NIIPE,
Moscow, pp. 222, 2018.
[14] W. I. Vernadsky, “The Biosphere and the Noösphere”. American
Scientist. Vol. 33, No.1, pp. 1-12, 1945.
[15] Central
Intelligence
Agency,
“The
World
Factbook”.
https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/
[16] ROSATOM, “The head of ROSATOM Alexey Likhachev
names the main priorities for the development of the global
nuclear
power
industry at
the
International
Ministerial
Conference”,
30
October,
2017.
https://www.rosatom.ru/en/press-centre/news/the-head-of-
rosatom-alexey-likhachev-names-the-main-priorities-for-the-
development-of-the-global-nuc/?sphrase_id=855362
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-751-1
GREEN 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

