Enabling Green Heterogeneous Wireless Networks
Muhammad Ismail
Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Texas A&M University at Qatar
Doha, Qatar
email: m.ismail@qatar.tamu.edu
Erchin Serpedin
Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Texas A&M University
College Station, USA
email: serpedin@ece.tamu.edu
Khalid Qaraqe
Department of Electrical and
Computer Engineering
Texas A&M University at Qatar
Doha, Qatar
email: khalid.qaraqe@qatar.tamu.edu
Abstract—This paper focuses on a signiﬁcant research topic
“green/energy efﬁcient wireless networks” that has drawn huge
attention due to important environmental, ﬁnancial, and quality-
of-experience (QoE) considerations. We mainly target energy
efﬁciency in a heterogeneous wireless medium with overlapped
coverage due to the co-existence of different cells (macro, micro,
pico, and femto), networks (cellular networks, wireless local areas
networks, wireless metropolitan area networks), and technologies
(radio frequency (RF) and visible light communications (VLC)).
This paper summarizes the authors’ research work in green net-
working via radio resource and network management solutions.
First, we present green multi-homing radio resource management
mechanisms in downlink and uplink for both RF and RF-VLC
heterogeneous networks. These techniques can be adopted at high
call trafﬁc load conditions. Then, we present balanced dynamic
planning framework that can be adopted at low call trafﬁc load
conditions.
Keywords–Green networking; multi-homing resource allocation;
dynamic planning.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The increasing demand for wireless communications ser-
vices during the past decade has led to a wide deployment of
wireless access networks [1]. From the network operator point
of view, the base station (BS) is the main source of energy
consumption in the wireless access network (with almost 57%
of the operator total power consumption) [2] [3] [4]. From the
user perspective, high energy is consumed by mobile terminals
(MTs) in video and data calls. This high energy consumption
of BSs and MTs has raised environmental, ﬁnancial, and
quality-of-experience (QoE) concerns.
From an environmental perspective, the telecommunica-
tions industry contributes by 2% of the total CO2 emissions
worldwide, and such a percentage is expected to double
by 2020 [5]. In addition, the expected lifetime of the MT
rechargeable batteries is approximately 2−3 years and results
in 25, 000 tons of disposed batteries annually [6]. Moreover,
the high energy consumption in wireless networks presents
a source of high heat dissipation and electronic pollution
[7]. From a ﬁnancial point of view, technical reports have
demonstrated that the cost of energy bills of service providers
ranges from 18% (in mature markets in Europe) to 32% (in
India) of the operational expenditure (OPEX) [8] [9] and reach
up to 50% of the OPEX for cellular networks outside the power
grid [10] [11]. From a user QoE perspective, reports indicate
that over 60% of mobile users complain about their limited
battery capacity due to the increasing gap between the MT
offered battery capacity and the mobile user demand for energy
[12].
Such concerns have motivated an increasing demand for
energy efﬁcient (green) solutions in wireless access networks.
The research efforts carried out in this regard are referred to
as green network solutions. The main objectives of such a
paradigm are: 1) reducing energy consumption of communi-
cation devices (e.g., BSs and MTs) and 2) taking into account
the environmental impacts of the proposed solutions. In this
paper, we present our most recent research efforts in this
direction for both high and low call trafﬁc load conditions.
At a high call trafﬁc load condition, radio resource (e.g.,
power and bandwidth allocation) management techniques are
adopted, while network management solutions (e.g., dynamic
planning) are applied.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews the related work in green networks at both high and
low call trafﬁc load conditions. Section III summarizes our
research contributions for green solutions at a high call trafﬁc
load condition via a multi-homing radio resource allocation.
Section IV summarizes our research contributions at a low
call trafﬁc load condition via a balanced dynamic planning
approach. Finally, Section V presents conclusions and future
research directions.
II.
GREEN SOLUTIONS: STATE-OF-THE-ART
This section reviews state-of-the-art green networking so-
lutions and analytical models from network operator and
mobile user perspectives at different trafﬁc load conditions.
Overall, two categories can be distinguished for the green
networking solutions based on the call trafﬁc load condition.
Scheduling techniques are adopted at a high and/or continuous
call trafﬁc load, while resource on-off switching techniques are
implemented at a low and/or bursty call trafﬁc load [13].
Different scheduling techniques are employed at a high
call trafﬁc load condition. BSs can save energy via a margin
adaptive strategy where the objective is to minimize the
transmission power consumption while ensuring an acceptable
service quality for mobile users [14]. Furthermore, in a het-
erogeneous wireless medium with overlapped coverage from
different BSs, energy saving can be achieved by assigning MTs
to the BSs that consume the least transmission power [15].
On the other hand, MTs can save energy through sub-carrier
allocation and carrier aggregation techniques in orthogonal
frequency division multiple access (OFDMA) networks [16],
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

while in time division multiple access (TDMA) networks, MTs
save energy by opportunistic transmission [17]. Moreover, BSs
and MTs can save energy in a heterogeneous wireless medium
through multi-homing resource allocation. In this case, the MT
simultaneously connects to multiple BSs and aggregates the
offered resources from these BSs to achieve the required data
rate. BSs can save energy in the downlink by coordinating
their transmission power for different radio interfaces of the
MT [18]. Similarly, MTs can save energy in the uplink
through efﬁcient transmission power allocation to different
radio interfaces. In addition, small cell deployment can save
energy for both Bss and MTs by dividing the cell into several
tiers of smaller cells, and hence, reducing the transmission
range for BSs and MTs [19]. In this context, cell-on-edge
deployment can achieve more energy saving than uniform cell
deployment [19]. The main research challenge here is how to
deal with cross-tier interference between macro and small cells
[20]. Another approach that reduces the transmission range for
BSs and MTs and hence achieves energy saving relies on relays
or device-to-device (D2D) communications. When ﬁxed relays
are deployed for energy saving, two research issues must be
handled, namely, optimal relay placement and relay selection
for minimum transmission power consumption [21]. Employ-
ing MTs as relays necessitates adopting incentive techniques to
motivate selﬁsh mobile users to participate in data forwarding
[22]. In D2D communications, mobile nodes in close proximity
communicate directly with each other without going through
a BS. In this context, interference issues with cellular users
should be tackled for in-band underlay D2D communications
[23], while efﬁcient radio resource partitioning should be
adopted for in-band overlay D2D communications [24], and
coordination techniques should be employed for out-band D2D
communications [25]. Moreover, BSs and MTs can save energy
through efﬁcient scheduling among multiple energy sources.
For instance, the network operator can rely on multiple elec-
tricity retailers and decides how much electricity to procure
from each retailer to power the BSs using minimum cost and
CO2 emissions [26]. Also, using a mixture of on-grid and green
energy sources can lead to energy saving by maximizing the
utilization of green energy [27]. In this case, complementary
renewable sources (e.g., solar cells and wind turbines) can be
used to power the BSs [28]. For MTs, multiple batteries can
be employed where energy efﬁciency is improved due to the
batteries recovery effect [29].
At a low and/or bursty call trafﬁc load condition, resource
on-off switching is adopted for energy saving. Speciﬁcally,
dynamic planning can be adopted where BSs with low call
trafﬁc load can be switched off and the remaining active
BSs can support the ongoing calls [30]. Dynamic planning
mainly involves two phases, namely, user association and
BS operation. In user association, MTs are concentrated in
a few BSs to enable switching off lightly loaded BSs [31].
However, such a problem is highly complex due to its mixed-
integer nature. Consequently, greedy algorithms are adopted
to enable a suboptimal switching decision. In this context,
greedy algorithms can be based on user-BS distance decision
criterion [32], network impact decision criterion [33], and
coverage hole avoidance decision criterion [34]. Following the
user association phase, three tasks should be carried out in
the BS operation phase, namely, accommodating future trafﬁc
loads via bandwidth reservation [5], determining BS wake-
K = 3
K = 1
K = 2
K = 4
4G core 
network
WMAN 
backbone
Internet
WMAN BS
4G BS
WLAN AP
Femto-cell
D2D
VLC
Figure 1. Illustration of a heterogeneous wireless network [30].
up instants [35], and implementing the BS on-off switching
decision via BS wilting and blossoming [36]. For MTs, energy
saving can be achieved by on-off switching of the MT radio
interface according to trafﬁc load condition. For downlink
trafﬁc, the MT switches off its radio interface when no data
packets are available for the MT at the serving BS [37].
To further elongate the sleep duration, and hence, save more
energy, trafﬁc shaping techniques can be adopted either at the
MT side [38] or at the BS side [39] to enable a more bursty
trafﬁc. For uplink trafﬁc, the MT performs joint optimization
of radio interface on-off switching, transmission power control,
and modulation and coding scheme selection [40]. In presence
of bi-directional trafﬁc, a ﬁnite general Markov background
process is employed to model the uplink and downlink trafﬁc
activity [41].
III.
GREEN MULTI-HOMING RESOURCE ALLOCATION
Currently, the wireless communication medium is a hetero-
geneous environment with overlapped coverage from different
cells (macro, micro, pico, and femto), networks (cellular net-
works, wireless local area networks (WLANs), and wireless
metropolitan area networks (WMANs)), and technologies (ra-
dio frequency (RF) and visible light communication (VLC)),
as shown in Figure 1.
In a multi-homing access, the MT connects to all available
BSs of different networks, and radio resources (e.g., bandwidth
and power) are allocated to improve energy efﬁciency in
the networking environment. In the following, we highlight
our recent research efforts in green multi-homing resource
allocation for uplink and downlink scenarios and for RF and
RF-VLC inter-networking environments.
A. Green Uplink Multi-homing
One limitation with the existing mechanisms is that they
focus mainly on optimal power allocation to the MT different
radio interfaces, assuming an allocated bandwidth. These re-
search efforts aim to exploit the diversity in fading channels
and propagation losses between the MT and different BSs to
improve the uplink energy efﬁciency. Further improvement
can be achieved due to the disparity in available bandwidth
at the BSs of different networks. This necessitates a joint
optimization framework for bandwidth and power allocation
to maximize uplink energy efﬁciency. Moreover, the existing
aggregation schemes deal with a situation where all radio
resources are operated by the same service provider. Thus,
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

centralized radio resource allocation mechanisms can be em-
ployed. In a heterogeneous networking environment, the aggre-
gated resources belong to different service providers. As a re-
sult, novel decentralized mechanisms should be investigated to
enable coordination among MTs and BSs of different networks
to satisfy the required QoS in an energy efﬁcient manner.
One challenge that faces implementing such a decentralized
mechanism is the associated high computational complexity.
Finally, the existing research deals with a single-user system
where the objective is to maximize energy efﬁciency for a
given mobile user. In practice, multi-user systems exist where
multiple mobile users compete on the available bandwidth to
satisfy their target service quality in an energy efﬁcient manner.
In this context, maximizing the total (sum) energy efﬁciency
of all MTs may not be a good choice since the sum energy
efﬁciency can be maximized while some MTs achieve very
low energy efﬁciency.
In our research [42], we investigate the problem of joint
uplink bandwidth and power allocation to maximize energy
efﬁciency of a set of MTs with multi-homing capabilities. In
such a multi-user system, the objective is to maximize the
performance of the MT that achieves the minimum energy
efﬁciency in the geographical region. For each MT, energy
efﬁciency is deﬁned as the ratio of the total achieved data
rate to the total power consumption. The total achieved data
rate for each MT is the summation of the data rates achieved
on each radio interface of the MT. Power consumption of
the MT accounts for both circuit and transmission power
consumption, and circuit power consumption has two parts,
namely, ﬁxed power consumption and dynamic (bandwidth
scaling) power consumption. The resource allocation frame-
work should satisfy the minimum required data rate for each
MT and should respect the power consumption constraint
for each MT and the bandwidth availability constraint for
each BS. The optimization problem in [42] is shown to be
a max-min concave-convex fractional program. Through a
parametric approach, the problem is transformed into a convex
optimization problem. The optimal solution can be obtained
using an iterative Dinkelbach-type algorithm. For each step,
the convex optimization problem should be solved to determine
the joint bandwidth and power allocation that satisfy the
aforementioned constraints for a given parameter. The decom-
position theory is applied to solve the optimization problem,
which is decomposed into a power allocation sub-problem
and a bandwidth-allocation sub-problem. Through Lagrangian
multipliers, the two sub-problems are iteratively solved to
satisfy the minimum required data rate. Due to computational
complexity, a sub-optimal framework is designed, which is
based on determining the optimal Lagrangian multipliers for
maximizing the minimum average energy efﬁciency while
satisfying the average data rate constraint. Such Lagrangian
multipliers are then used in an online phase to allocate radio
resources to MTs according to the current channel conditions.
Simulation results in [42] have indicated an improved
energy efﬁciency performance over a power only allocation
benchmark, as shown in Figure 2, along with an improved
satisfaction index for the mobile users.
B. Green Downlink Multi-homing
Cooperative multi-homing radio resource allocation mech-
anisms can achieve higher energy saving compared with the
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 x 10
7
Total power available at MT (Watt)
Energy efficiency (bit per Joule)
 
 
Optimal−Case1
Suboptimal−Case1
Benchmark−Case1
Suboptimal−Case2
Benchmark−Case2
Figure 2. Average achieved energy efﬁciency versus total power available at
each MT [42].
single-network radio resource allocation mechanisms thanks to
the disparity in wireless channels and available radio resources.
However, the main limitation with the existing cooperative
mechanisms is the assumption that different networks are
willing to cooperate unconditionally so as to minimize the
total (sum) power consumption in the geographical region.
While this assumption can be true when different networks are
operated by the same service provider, however, in presence of
multi-service providers, cooperation is adopted only if mutual
beneﬁts can be achieved. In addition, existing research relies
mainly on power allocation to minimize the consumption, and
hence, employs solely the disparity in channel conditions.
Finally, decentralized radio resource allocation mechanisms
should be adopted in such a multi-operator environment.
In our research [43], we investigate developing a win-win
cooperative joint radio resource (e.g., bandwidth and power)
allocation mechanism that ensures mutual power saving for all
cooperating network operators. The problem is formulated as
a Nash bargain game that maximizes energy saving for co-
operating networks (compared with the non-cooperative case)
while ensuring that mutual power saving is achieved for all
participants. An asymmetric Nash bargain game is employed to
enable different networks to have different inﬂuence (bargain
power) to affect the resulting power saving for each network.
The rationale behind such an approach is to account for the fact
that some networks may have more capabilities (e.g., available
bandwidth) than other networks and this factor should be
accounted for in the problem formulation. The joint bandwidth
and power allocation framework should satisfy the minimum
required data rate of mobile users and the total bandwidth and
power consumption constraints for the BSs. The Nash bargain
game in [43] is shown to have a unique bargain point, and the
problem is transformed into an equivalent convex optimization
program. Using the decomposition theory, the joint bandwidth
and power allocation framework is decomposed into two sub-
problems for bandwidth allocation and power allocation that
are iteratively solved until the minimum required data rate is
satisﬁed.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

0
5
10
15
20
25
30
78
80
82
84
86
88
90
92
94
Network 2 subscribers who can connect to network 1 BS (Σ2)
Power consumption per BS (Watt)
 
 
NCS1
NCS2
SMS1
SMS2
NBS1
NBS2
Figure 3. Power consumption for each BS versus the number of network 2
subscribers who can connect to the BSs of both networks [43].
Simulation results in [43] have demonstrated the effective-
ness of the proposed win-win cooperative approach. While
more power saving can be obtained using the sum minimiza-
tion solution (SMS) as compared with both the Nash bargain
solution (NBS) and the non-cooperative solution (NCS), the
NBS is more practical as it provides incentives to network
operators to participate in a cooperative framework. As shown
in Figure 3, the SMS for the second network (SMS2) is always
higher than the non-cooperative solution (NCS2), indicating
that it is not beneﬁcial for network 2 to cooperate with network
1 under the SMS framework. On the other hand, the NBS2
is always less than or equal to the NCS2, indicating mutual
beneﬁts (power saving) for both network operators.
C. RF-VLC Inter-networking
Most of the existing research in heterogeneous networks is
based on RF network integration as in WLAN and cellular
networks and macro-femto cells. One challenging issue in
such scenario is spectrum congestion in RF networks. On the
other hand, VLC is introduced as a promising technology that
uses visible light for communications, and hence, offers larger
spectrum availability and can achieve high data rates. More
importantly, VLC consumes almost no transmission power
since VLC uses illumination energy, which is already used
for lighting, for communications. However, VLC suffers from
reliability issue in absence of line-of-sight (LoS) component
and cannot support uplink transmission. Such limitations of
VLC networks motivates RF-VLC network integration to ex-
ploit the potential beneﬁts of both networks and address their
limitations. In literature several Rf-VLC integration objectives
are investigated, namely, load balancing, throughput maximiza-
tion, and uplink support. However, the existing research does
not investigate Rf-VLC network integration for energy efﬁcient
(green) communications.
In our research [44], we investigate energy efﬁcient in-
tegration of a VLC access point (AP) with a femto AP.
MTs aggregate the offered resources from both APs to satisfy
the required data rate using the multi-homing capability. The
achieved data rate from each AP is averaged over the LoS
availability probability mass function. For the RF network,
the MT experiences LoS and non-LoS (NLoS) channels with
2
4
6
8
10
12
4
5
6
7
8
9 x 10
7
VLC Fixed Power Consumption (watts)
Energy efficiency (bit per joule)
 
 
RF−VLC
RF−RF
RF−Only
Figure 4. Energy efﬁciency against the ﬁxed power of the VLC system [44].
probabilities κ1 and (1 − κ1), respectively. On the other hand,
for the VLC network, the MT do not receive any data rate
for NLoS channel (with probability 1 − κ2) and receives data
rate only for LoS channel (with probability κ2). For each MT,
the total achieved data rate is the summation of the average
data rate achieved using VLC and femto APs, which should
satisfy a minimum required data rate. The total communication
power consumption for the APs has two components, namely,
VLC and femto AP power consumption. The VLC component
mainly includes a ﬁxed power consumption that captures
the consumed power for signal processing, since no power
is consumed in data transmission. For the femto AP, both
transmission and ﬁxed power consumption components are
accounted for. The objective in [44] is to maximize the total
energy efﬁciency (i.e., a ratio of total achieved throughput to
total power consumption) in the geographical region through
joint bandwidth and power allocation. The total allocated
bandwidth and power for each AP should satisfy the maximum
available bandwidth and power. The problem is shown to be
a fractional concave-convex program that can be transformed
into a convex optimization problem using a parametric ap-
proach. Using a Dinkelbach-type algorithm and decomposition
theory, the optimal joint resource allocation can be obtained.
Simulation results have demonstrated the improved energy
efﬁciency performance for the RF-VLC network compared
with multi-homing among RF only networks and in absence of
multi-homing. Such an improved performance mainly depends
on the amount of VLC ﬁxed power consumption as shown in
Figure 4.
IV.
BALANCED DYNAMIC PLANNING FRAMEWORK
At a low call trafﬁc load condition, network operators
can save energy by switching off lightly loaded BSs and the
trafﬁc is supported by the remaining active cells. The existing
research mainly focus on improving energy saving for network
operators (i.e., in the downlink) with no investigation on the
incurred energy consumption in the uplink and its impact on
service quality deterioration for uplink mobile users. Specif-
ically, the existing dynamic planning mechanisms switch off
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

the BSs that can balance energy saving for network operators
with service quality of downlink mobile users. However, such
an approach can lead to inefﬁcient MT-BS association in the
uplink (i.e., from mobile user perspective) due to switching
off nearby BSs resulting in larger transmission distances for
uplink mobile users. Consequently, MTs suffer from battery
drain at a faster rate leading to call dropping, i.e., deterioration
of service quality for uplink users. As a result, a balanced
dynamic planning approach is required to account for energy
saving and service quality both in the downlink and uplink.
In our research [45], we present a balanced dynamic
planning framework that is based on a two-timescale decision
problem. Consider a cluster of two BSs with overlapped cover-
age. Since BS operation (i.e., on-off switching) does not occur
at same rate as the MT association, time is partitioned into
two timescales. The BS operation occurs at a slow rate (with
scale of hours) according to temporal ﬂuctuations in call trafﬁc
load density. On the other hand, the MT association occurs at
a faster rate (with scale of minutes) according to user arrivals
and departures. The slow timescale system state represents
the uplink and downlink call trafﬁc load densities, which can
be inferred from historical trafﬁc load patterns. Based on the
slow timescale state, the slow timescale decision speciﬁes the
BS operation mode while satisfying a target call blocking
probabilities in the uplink and downlink. The fast timescale
state represents the number of mobile users in the uplink
and downlink. Two Geo/Geo/M/M queues captures temporal
ﬂuctuations in number of MTs in the uplink and downlink. Fol-
lowing the fast timescale state and the slow timescale decision,
the fast timescale decision controls the transmission powers of
the BSs and MTs. The decision problem objective is to balance
the expected uplink and downlink energy consumption based
on a weighting factor. Such a weighting factor captures the
signiﬁcance of uplink energy consumption and its impact on
uplink service quality degradation.
Simulation results have demonstrated the effectiveness of
the balanced dynamic planning approach compared with tra-
ditional approaches that accounts only for downlink service
quality. Unlike the traditional approaches, the balanced ap-
proach switching decision depends on the uplink arrival rate
and the weighting factor, as shown in Figures 5a, which leads
to improved energy saving for the MTs, as shown in Figures
5b.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
Radio resource scheduling techniques are adopted at a
high call trafﬁc load condition to improve energy efﬁciency
for network operators and mobile users. Green multi-homing
techniques in the uplink, downlink, and for RF-VLC inter-
networking have been investigated. Emphasis is given to de-
centralized joint bandwidth and power allocation to maximize
energy efﬁciency. At a low call trafﬁc load condition, balanced
dynamic planning can be implemented to achieve energy
saving for network operators while not jeopardizing service
quality for uplink users due to high energy consumption in
the uplink.
While most existing research focus on saving energy either
for the network operators or the mobile users, future research
directions should consider joint energy saving for network op-
erators and mobile users. For instance, BSs and MTs can save
energy at low call trafﬁc load condition via on-off switching
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
100
150
200
250
Uplink arrival rate
Weighting factor
Expected downlink energy consumption (kilo Joule)
(a) Downlink-Balanced Approach
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0
2000
4000
6000
8000
10000
0
0.05
0.1
0.15
0.2
 
Uplink arrival rate
Weighting factor
 
Expected uplink energy consumption (kilo Joule)
(b) Uplink-Balanced Approach
Figure 5. The expected energy consumption versus the arrival rate of uplink
users and the weighting factor [45].
mechanisms. The existing research allows an MT to switch
off its radio interface for energy saving while dealing with
buffer delay and/or overﬂow at the BS. However, the impact
of BS on-off switching is not considered. In addition, the
existing opportunistic scheduling mechanisms result in energy
saving either for network operators or mobile users. However,
opportunistic scheduling MTs with bidirectional trafﬁc should
ensure energy saving for both network operators and mobile
users.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This publication was made possible by NPRP grant #
NPRP 6-415-3-111 from the Qatar National Research Fund
(a member of Qatar Foundation). The statements made herein
are solely the responsibility of the authors.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Ismail and W. Zhuang, “Cooperative networking in a heterogeneous
wireless medium,” Springer Briefs in Computer Science, New York, April
2013.
[2]
T. Chen, Y. Yang, H. Zhang, H. Kim, and K. Horneman, “Network energy
saving technologies for green wireless access networks,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 8, no. 5, Oct. 2011, pp. 30-38.
[3]
C. Han, T. Harrold, S. Armour, and I. Krikidis, “Green radio: radio
techniques to enable energy-efﬁcient wireless networks,” IEEE Commun.
Magazine, vol. 49, no. 6, June 2011, pp. 46-54.
[4]
Y. Chen, S. Zhang, S. Xu, and G. Y. Li, “Fundamental trade-offs on green
wireless networks,” IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 49, no. 6, June 2011,
pp. 30-37.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

[5]
M. Ismail and W. Zhuang, “Network cooperation for energy saving in
green radio communications,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 5,
Oct. 2011, pp. 76-81.
[6]
K. Pentikousis, “In search of energy-efﬁcient mobile networking,” IEEE
Commun. Magazine, vol. 48, no. 1, Jan. 2010, pp. 95-103.
[7]
G. Miao, “Energy-efﬁcient uplink multi-user MIMO,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 5, May 2013, pp. 2302-2313.
[8]
I. Humar et al. “Rethinking energy efﬁciency models of cellular networks
with embodied energy,” IEEE Network, vol. 25, no. 2, April 2011, pp.
40-49.
[9]
D. Feng et al. “A survey of energy-efﬁcient wireless communications,”
IEEE Commun. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 15, no. 1, 2013, pp. 167-178.
[10]
S. Tombaz, A. Vastberg, and J. Zander, “Energy- and cost-efﬁcient ultra-
high-capacity wireless access,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 5,
Oct. 2011, pp. 18-24.
[11]
L. M. Correia, D. Zeller, O. Blume, and D. Ferling, “Challenges and
enabling technologies for energy aware mobile radio networks,” IEEE
Commun. Magazine, vol. 48, no. 11, Nov. 2010, pp. 66-72.
[12]
G. Miao, N. Himayat, Y. Li, and A. Swami, “Cross-layer optimization
for energy-efﬁcient wireless communications: a survey,” Wiley J. Wire-
less Commun. and Mobile Computing, vol. 9, March 2009, pp. 529-542.
[13]
M. Ismail, W. Zhuang, E. Serpedin, and K. Qaraqe, “A survey on
green mobile networking: from the perspectives of network operators
and mobile users,” IEEE Commun. Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 17, no. 3,
Nov. 2014, pp. 1535-1556.
[14]
H. Bogucka and A. Conti, “Degrees of freedom for energy savings in
practical adaptive wireless systems,” IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 49,
no. 6, June 2011, pp. 38-45.
[15]
K. Ying, H. Yu, and H. Luo, “Inter-RAT energy saving for multicast
services,” IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 17, no. 5, May 2013, pp. 900-903.
[16]
F. Liu, K. Zheng, W. Xiang, and H. Zhao, “Design and performance
analysis of an energy-efﬁcient uplink carrier aggregation scheme,” IEEE
Journal Selected Areas Commun., to appear.
[17]
H. Kwon and B. G. Lee, “Energy-efﬁcient scheduling with delay
constraints in time-varying uplink channels,” Journal of Commun. and
Networks, vol. 10, no. 1, March 2008, pp. 28-37.
[18]
X. Ma, M. Sheng, and Y. Zhang, “Green communications with net-
work cooperation: a concurrent transmission approach,” IEEE Commun.
Letters, vol. 16, no. 12, Dec. 2012, pp. 1952-1955.
[19]
M. Z. Shakir et al. “Green heterogeneous small-cell networks: toward
reducing the CO2 emissions of mobile communications industry using
uplink power adaptation,” IEEE Commun., vol. 51, no. 6, June 2013, pp.
52-61.
[20]
L. B. Le, D. Niyato, E. Hossain, D. I. Kim, and D. T. Hoang, “QoS-
aware and energy-efﬁcient resource management in OFDMA femtocells,”
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 1, Jan. 2013, pp. 180-194.
[21]
Y. Li, X. Zhu, C. Liao, C. Wang, and B. Cao, “Energy efﬁciency
maximization by jointly optimizing the positions and serving range of
relay stations in cellular networks,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technology,
vol. 64, no. 6, July 2014, pp. 2551-2560.
[22]
Y. Li, C. Liao, and C. Wang, “Energy-efﬁcient optimal relay selection
in cooperative cellular networks based on double auction,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., to appear.
[23]
M. Jung, K. Hwang, and S. Choi, “Joint mode selection and power
allocation scheme for power-efﬁcient Device-to-Device (D2D) commu-
nication,” Proc. IEEE VTC-Spring12, May 2012, pp. 1-5.
[24]
G. Fodor et al. “Design aspects of network assisted device-to-device
communications,” EEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 50, no. 3, March 2012,
pp. 170-177.
[25]
A. Asadi and V. Mancuso, “Energy efﬁcient opportunistic uplink packet
forwarding in hybrid wireless networks,” Proc. 4th Intl Conf. Future
Energy Systems, 2013, pp. 261-262.
[26]
S. Bu, F. R. Yu, Y. Cai, and X. P. Liu, “When the smart grid
meets energy-efﬁcient communications: green wireless cellular networks
powered by the smart grid,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 11,
no. 8, Aug. 2012, pp. 3014-3024.
[27]
T. Han and N. Ansari, “On optimizing green energy utilization for
cellular networks with hybrid energy supplies,” IEEE Trans. Wireless
Commun., to appear.
[28]
C. McGuire et al. “HopScotch-a low-power renewable energy base
station network for rural broadband access,” EURASIP J. on Wireless
Communications and Networking, vol. 112, March 2012, pp. 1-12.
[29]
C. F. Chiasserini and R. R. Rao, “Energy efﬁcient battery management,”
IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 7, July 2001, pp. 1235-
1245.
[30]
M. Ismail and W. Zhuang, “Green radio communications in a hetero-
geneous wireless medium,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Magazine, vol. 21,
no. 3, June 2014, pp. 128-135.
[31]
K. Son, H. Kim, Y. Yi, and B. Krishnamachari, “Base station operation
and user association mechanisms for energy-delay tradeoffs in green
cellular networks,” IEEE Journal Selected Areas Commun., vol. 29, no.
8, Sep. 2011, pp. 1525-1536.
[32]
T. Han and N. Ansari, “On greening cellular networks via multicell
cooperation,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 20, no. 1, Feb. 2013, pp.
82-89.
[33]
E. Oh, K. Son, and B. Krishnamachari, “Dynamic base station
switching-on/off strategies for green cellular networks,” IEEE Trans.
Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 5, May 2013, pp. 2126-2136.
[34]
C. Y. Chang, W. Liao, H. Y. Hsieh, and D. S. Shiu, “On optimal cell
activation for coverage preservation in green cellular networks,” IEEE
Trans. Mobile Computing, to appear.
[35]
J. Wu, S. Zhou, and Z. Niu, “Traffc-aware base station sleeping
control and power matching for energy-delay tradeoffs in green cellular
networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 8, Aug. 2013,
pp. 4196-4209.
[36]
A. Conte et al. “Cell wilting and blossoming for energy efﬁciency,”
IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 18, no. 5, Oct. 2011, pp. 50-57.
[37]
A. P. Azad, “Analysis and optimization of sleeping mode in WiMAX via
stochastic decomposition techniques,” IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun.,
vol. 29, no. 8, Sep. 2011, pp. 1630-1640.
[38]
H. Yan et al. “Client-centered, energy-efﬁcient wireless communication
on IEEE 802.11b networks,” IEEE Trans. Mobile Computing, vol. 5, no.
11, Nov. 2006, pp. 1575-1590.
[39]
R. Wang, J. Tsai, C. Maciocco, T. Y. C. Tai, and J. Wu, “Reducing power
consumption for mobile platforms via adaptive trafﬁc coalescing,” IEEE
J. Selected Areas Commun., vol. 29, no. 8, Sep. 2011, pp. 1618-1629.
[40]
Y. Jin, J. Xu, and L. Qiu, “Energy-efﬁcient scheduling with individual
packet delay constraints and non-ideal circuit power,” J. Commun. and
Networks, vol. 16, no. 1, Feb. 2014, pp. 36-44.
[41]
K. D. Turck, S. D. Vuyst, D. Fiems, S. Wittevrongel, and H. Bruneel,
“Performance analysis of sleep mode mechanisms in the presence of
bidirectional trafﬁc,” Computer Networks, vol. 56, March 2012, pp. 2494-
2505.
[42]
M. Ismail et al. “Uplink decentralized joint bandwidth and power
allocation for energy-efﬁcient operation in a heterogeneous wireless
medium,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 4, April 2015, pp. 1483-
1495.
[43]
M. Ismail, K. Qaraqe, and E. Serpedin, “Cooperation incentives and
downlink radio resource allocation for green communications in a
heterogeneous wireless environment,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technology,
vol. 65, no. 3, March 2015, pp. 1627-1638.
[44]
M. Kashef, M. Ismail, M. Abdallah, K. Qaraqe, and E. Serpedin,
“Energy efﬁcient resource allocation for mixed RF/VLC heterogeneous
wireless networks,” IEEE J. Selected Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 4,
March 2016, pp. 883-893.
[45]
M. Ismail, M. Kashef, E. Serpedin, K. Qaraqe, “On balancing energy
efﬁciency for network operators and mobile users in dynamic planning,”
IEEE Commun. Magazine, vol. 53, no. 11, Nov. 2015, pp. 158-165.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-524-1
GREEN 2016 : The First International Conference on Green Communications, Computing and Technologies

