The Design and Testing of a Personalized Health Engagement Platform  
A Case Study in Relationship-centered Innovation 
Sara Chokshi 
Healthcare Innovation and Technology Lab (HITLAB) 
New York, USA 
email: sak141@columbia.edu 
Antoinette Schoenthaler 
Dept. of Population Health, NYU Langone Health 
New York, USA 
email: Antoinette.Schoenthaler@nyulangone.org 
 
 
Jeannette McClennan 
The McClennan Group 
New York, USA 
email: jeannette@mcclennangroup.com 
 
Abstract—Engagement remains a primary challenge to the 
adoption and success of public health interventions. Digital tools 
offer unprecedented capability to reach individuals where they 
live, even in underserved communities; however, lack of 
engagement is a persistent barrier to their effectiveness. Prior 
efforts at intervention and solution design attempt to employ a 
human-centered approach to address this challenge but have 
lacked the ability to use large data sets to both inform content 
and drive precision delivery of that content.  Additionally, 
evaluation of the impact of these solutions takes a long time, 
hampering ability to test and tweak content and delivery 
strategies to achieve better engagement along the way.  
GoodLife Media’s solution is a data-driven health participant 
engagement platform with dashboards for real-time monitoring 
of performance. This paper provides an overview of the 
GoodLife solution, the relationship-focused approach taken to 
its design, and the outcomes and learnings from the study of 
initial implementation. 
Keywords-health engagement; health communication; machine 
learning; human-centered design; innovation. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
Engagement remains a primary challenge to the adoption 
and success of public health interventions [1]. Research cites 
lack of personalization as a barrier to user engagement with 
digital health tools [2]. Prior efforts at intervention and 
solution design attempt to employ a human-centered 
approach to address this challenge but have lacked the ability 
to use large data sets to both inform content and drive 
precision delivery of that content [3][4]. Additionally, 
evaluation of the impact of these solutions takes a long time, 
hampering ability to test and tweak content and delivery 
strategies to achieve better engagement along the way.   
Human-Centered Design as a best practice has at its core 
a focus on the patient’s needs, motivations, and lifestyle 
[3][4]. The challenge remains exactly how to deliver 
solutions that yield the high rates of participant engagement 
necessary 
to 
deliver 
an 
intervention’s 
intended 
results.  Designed to address this challenge, the GoodLife 
MediaTM (GLM) platform is a precision communication 
solution powered by a novel card sorting game designed to 
collect end users’ behavior, motivation and lifestyle data. It 
was developed by The McClennan Group [5], an innovation 
agency that creates digital health products and marketing 
programs for corporate clients such as IBM, AARP, Humana, 
Gilead, Vanguard, Blue Cross Blue Shield Carefirst, Partners 
in Primary Care, among others.  
This paper outlines each component of the GoodLife 
solution, featuring the relationship-focused approach that 
drove the design of the platform and content strategy (Section 
II). Following is a brief description of the initial 
implementation of the platform presented as a case study 
(Section III) along with the evaluation of the platform’s 
impact on average closure of care gaps for older adults 
receiving Medicare benefits (Medicare is a federally-funded 
program in the U.S. that provides health insurance coverage 
to individuals who are age 65 and over, and some people 
under age 65 with certain disabilities, including people with 
severe, end-stage kidney disease.  Medicare Advantage 
refers to Medicare-approved health insurance plans from a 
private company providing health and drug coverage to the 
Medicare population) from a top five U.S. payor. We 
conclude (Section IV) by discussing future plans to adapt the 
platform to serve individuals from historically underserved 
communities. 
II. GOODLIFE MEDIA SOLUTION 
The GoodLife Solution aims to engage users while 
prompting and enabling them to take specific health-related 
actions. The solution consists of four major components: (1) 
engaging, data-driven personalized content fueled by a (2) 
behavioral science-informed strategy that leverages the 
engaging power of relationships, (3) bi-directional, omni-
channel 
communication 
infrastructure, 
and 
(4) 
a 
comprehensive dashboard allowing for understanding of 
program progress on a variety of levels, identification of 
specific areas for intervention or shift in strategy, and design 
and testing of targeted campaigns aimed at specific 
participant segments or tasks. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-004-9
HEALTHINFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

A. Data-driven personalized content  
The key to solving the personalization challenge lies in 
collecting hard-to-get datasets, including data on individual-
level motivation & lifestyle. To accomplish this, we created 
a first of its kind card sorting game designed to collect hard 
to get non-clinical data in a fun and engaging way. It enjoys 
86.5% completion rates, and it is the initial primary driver of 
the solution’s personalized experiences. This device-agnostic 
card sorting game collects patients' behavior, lifestyle, and 
motivation with that challenge in mind, delivering as a result 
a Purpose Statement sentence consisting of their Talents, 
Passions, Impacts, Values, and Goals along with a 
compelling collage reflecting the output of the activity. As 
the target audience for the initial application of the solution 
was Medicare Advantage participants, the card sort activity 
was initially conceived in collaboration with colleagues at 
AARP's Life Reimagined Institute [6].  
In our hypothesis, the benefit of using a card sorting 
activity in a health context points to theories of intrinsic 
motivation, which is central to one's engagement in and 
maintenance of health. Research has shown that tapping into 
patients' intrinsic motivation (acting for the inherent 
enjoyment of the activity involved) is the most autonomous 
form of motivation [7]. When the desired behavior is not 
inherently enjoyable (e.g. embarking on a restrictive diet), 
one may still be autonomously motivated through integrated 
regulation (i.e., acting in line with one’s own goals and 
values).  
B. Evidence-based behavioral science inspired content 
strategy 
At its core, the GoodLife solution strategy is built upon 
evidence- both clinical evidence regarding healthful behavior 
as well as behavioral and social science principles proven to 
engage and impact the way that people conceptualize and 
address health-related issues.  GoodLife’s extensive Health 
Content 
Library 
contains 
a 
series 
of 
sequential 
communications designed to educate recipients around basic 
health-related topics (e.g. importance of blood pressure 
awareness) and principles of health management (e.g. annual 
wellness exams). Communications pathways are designed to 
be experienced as asynchronous, ongoing dialogues as one 
might enjoy with a trusted friend or care provider. The 
personalization as well as relationship focus of content are 
key to the GoodLife solution’s content strategy. 
To increase the impact of these dialogues, Health 
Content Library material is infused with behavioral 
economics inspired “nudges” based on the BASIC toolkit 
strategy 
for 
developing 
behaviorally 
informed 
interventions.  Developed by the Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development (OECD), an international 
organization that works to build better policies for better 
lives, BASIC consists of four principles (Attention, Belief 
Formation, Choice, Determination) derived from the 
behavioral and social sciences—including psychology, 
cognitive sciences, and group behavior—to provide adopters 
with a step-by-step process for analyzing a problem and 
building strategic solutions [8]. Combining the power of 
analytics to personalize content and target the most 
prominent and costliest care gaps using behavioral 
economics enables us to increase our impact on member 
behavior in the areas that matter most to their health and well-
being. Our systematic approach to developing and 
implementing these strategies allows us to monitor, test, and 
tweak tactics based on their success. 
C. 
Bi-directional, 
omni-channel 
communication 
infrastructure 
We used dynamic segments, generated by applying 
machine learning techniques to participant data, to drive 
communication plans in various ways (see Section III for 
details on techniques used). Firstly, dynamic clusters 
correlate directly to tone determined most likely to resonate 
with that segment. And each cluster is further segmented by 
conditions and healthcare gaps which drive overall content, 
subject lines, and call-to-action statements. Additionally, 
tones are constantly enhanced by how users respond to the 
communications. For example, if during our communications 
with a particular member we perceive a Social Determinants 
Of Health (SDOH) barrier, messages will shift to conform to 
their reality. As a result, we produced 108 communication 
streams with bilateral capabilities, i.e., the ability to collect 
information from users along the way.  
GoodLife’s communication infrastructure is illustrated 
here (see Figure 1) and includes: 
• 
SDOH data curated from public databases. 
• 
An analytics engine designed to power our real-time 
Analytics Dashboard 
• 
Member Personal Health Information (PHI), 
provided by the large payor every week and including 
claims data allowing us to measure gap closures. 
• 
A  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act of 1996 (HIPAA)-compliant database designed to 
Figure 1.  GoodLife Solution Infrastructure 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-004-9
HEALTHINFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

hold member PHI as well as the communication streams 
and card sorting data [9]. 
• 
SendGrid and Twilio implementations designed to 
maximize the deliverability of content by allowing for 
participants to seamlessly receive communications via 
text and/or email. 
• 
A web application that provides users with a 
responsive experience, no app download needed.  
 
As the participant experiences progress, we keep our 
stream of communication conversational by allowing them to 
provide us with self-reported data, including their personal 
goals, barriers, distractions, reasons for missed appointments, 
etc. Communication streams are built with trust and 
reciprocity at their core so that over time participants come 
to view communications from GoodLife as relevant and 
valuable- making clear there is “payoff” for every data point 
shared in line with that participants goals and values. We 
utilize simple, accessible language, avoiding jargon to ensure 
content is approachable and understandable at first read. Our 
range of strategically motivated formats is continuously 
evolving and includes:  
• 
HIPAA-compliant 
bidirectional/conversational 
SMS (supports conversational tone). 
• 
Talking Clinician Videos (authority or subject 
matter experts build credibility and trust). 
• 
Storytelling/Animated 
Videos 
(supports 
understanding ideas in new ways) 
• 
Cartoons/Webtoons (promotes relatability and 
playfulness)  
• 
Emojis, Memojis (animation with authentic voices 
to make content easily digestible 
• 
Stickers (supports peer to peer dissemination of 
simple calls to action) 
We are constantly adding new formats as they are 
invented and tested. They are carefully selected based on 
project goals, the cohort’s literacy level, age, call-to-action, 
and culture/language.  
 
D. Real-time dashboards 
Precision-communication demands increased rigor in 
measurements of results. The custom-built, real-time 
analytics dashboard delivers intelligence around key 
performance indicators and allows our partners to adapt and 
change direction as needed. The analytics dashboard can be 
accessed by a variety of users with various permissions levels 
and was designed to be standalone or integrated with our 
partner’s system.  
This first dashboard (right) image illustrates an overview 
of the population of the data, focusing on compliance for 
several healthcare measures. All the visuals are controlled by 
interactive filters that enable focus on specific groups within 
the population.  This second dashboard image (left) features 
statistics around the different communications and activities, 
indicating how successful each campaign was in closing 
gaps.  Other dashboards show detailed information regarding 
email delivery (e.g. sent, received, read) trended by date. 
 
III. CASE STUDY: GOODLIFE APPLIED TO OLDER 
ADULT HEALTH ENGAGEMENT 
In its first implementation, GLM partnered with a top 
five U.S. payor to apply the GoodLife solution to a group of 
older adult Medicare participants who were provided the 
opportunity to opt into communications from GoodLife as 
part of their regular benefits and communications from their 
payor.  
Utilizing the latest data science techniques, including 
silhouette analysis and K-means [10], we created dynamic 
participant segments infused with insights generated from 
101.9MM data points from 80 thousand members. These 
techniques were chosen for their ability to best utilize the card 
sort data to generate clusters that informed how participants 
would be segmented for targeted communications. K-means 
is a centroid-based clustering algorithm that identifies groups 
of program participants with common characteristics; 
Silhouette Analysis measures the distances between clusters, 
allowing us to divide participants into segments with the least 
amount of feature overlap between individuals in different 
clusters. 
Using these techniques to combine card sorting output 
with payor provided SDOH and clinical data, we were able 
to generate insights on members’ psychological drivers, 
preferences, attitude formation, and decision-making 
approach. Using this data-driven approach to communication 
and messaging, the GoodLife Solution delivered a 
personalized participant journey to 1000+ participants that 
directly addresses key challenges for public health programs: 
1) relevance in messaging; 2) ability to address a broad range 
of psychosocial (i.e., depression), structural (i.e., transport), 
clinic-based (i.e., no access, waiting times, etc.), and other 
barriers (i.e., stigma and others, alone or in combination). 
 
Figure 2: Real time dashboards illustrating participant program enrollment, 
status, and measure compliance 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-004-9
HEALTHINFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Evaluating Impact 
 
To evaluate the impact of the program, two groups were 
set up: “test” group (exposed to standard Payor 
communications & GLM personalized content) and a 
lookalike “control” group (exposed only to Payor 
communications). Comparing these two groups provides 
insight into how effective the program is. To increase 
confidence in the ability to compare the two groups, 
additional analysis was performed to confirm the level of 
similarity between them.   
 
      To verify the effectiveness of our program, we designed 
a test to measure the higher gap closure rates among program 
participants. The gap closure rates for the test and control 
groups were compared for each measure, calculating the delta 
between each. The delta was then applied to the total group 
size for each measure to find the incremental gap closures, or 
the number of gaps closed in the test group due to the 
increased closure rates.  
Our test results show both that there was an increase in 
gap closures among program participants and the increase in 
gap closures was statistically significant (at p<0.05) for 6 out 
of the 9 gaps. An average reduction in gaps of care of 9.4% 
was observed.  In the case of breast cancer screening the 
reduction was more than 25% (26.89%). Chi-square analysis 
indicated that test and control groups were highly alike 
regarding their healthcare needs, further confirming findings 
of program effectiveness.  
 
IV.  CONCLUSION 
This initial case study illustrates how, through s 
relationship-focused approach to design, along with data- and 
evidence-based development, 
the 
GoodLife 
Solution 
provides the foundation for a comprehensive program to 
reach, engage, educate, and sustain engagement of 
participants in their health behavior.  In the future, 
applications of the GoodLife Solution will be applied as an 
engagement solution for members of historically underserved 
communities. The relationship-focus of the GoodLife 
solution, along with its modular infrastructure and tailorable 
content provides a strong foundation from which to build 
community and individual level engagement strategies. 
                                                REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. O’Connor, P. Hanlon, and C. O’Donnel, “Understanding 
Factors affecting patient and public engagement and 
recruitment to digital health inventions: a systematic review of 
qualitative studies,” BMC Med Inform Decis Mak, vol. 16, 
2016, doi: 10.1186/s12911-016-0359-3 
[2] C. Lyles, R. Watchter, and U. Sarkar,  “Focusing on Digital 
Health Equality,” JAMA, vol. 326, pp. 1795-1796, 2021, 
doi:10.1001/jama.2021.18459 
[3] P. Koen, “Lean Startup in Large Enterprises Using Human-
Centered Design Thinking: A New Approach for Developing 
Transformational and Disruptive Innovations,” Howe School 
Research Paper, Jan 2015, doi:10.2139/ssrn.2556187 
[4] T. Schulte and S. Bohnet-Joschko, “How can Big Data 
Analytics Support People-Centered and Integrated Health 
Services: A Scoping Review,” Int J Integr Care, vol 16, June 
2022, doi: 10.5334/ijic.5543. 
[5] McClennan 
Group, 
[online] 
www.mcclennangroup.com 
[accessed October, 2022] 
[6] AARP 
Life 
Reimagined 
Institute, 
[online] 
www.aarp.org/about-aarp/life-reimagined/  [accessed October, 
2022] 
[7] E. Deci, and R. Ryan, “Self-determination theory,” in 
Handbook of theories of social psychology, P. Van Lange, A. 
Kruglanski, and & E. Higgins, Eds. New York: Sage 
Publications 
Ltd., 
pp. 
416-436, 
2012, 
doi:10.4135/9781446249215.n21 
[8] OECD, “Tools and Ethics for Applied Behavioral Insights: The 
BASIC Toolkit,” Paris: OECD Publishing, 2019, doi: 
10.1787/9ea76a8f-en. 
[9] HIPAA, [online] www.hhs.gov/hipaa/index.html [accessed 
October, 2022] 
[10] D. Sharma, K. Thulasiraman, D. Wu, and J. Jiang, “Power 
Network Equivalents: A Network Science Based K-Means 
Clustering Method Integrated with Silhouette Analysis,” 
Studies in Computational Intelligence, vol 689, C Cherifi, H. 
Cherifi, M. Karsai, and M. Musolesi, Eds. New York: Springer 
International Publishing, pp. 78-89, 2017, doi: 10.1007/978-3-
319-72150-7_7  
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Example Communication 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-004-9
HEALTHINFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

