Architecture for Monitoring Security State of ISO/IEEE 11073 Healthcare User 
Domain 
 
 
Gaeil An, Doyoung Chung, and Byungho Chung 
Information Security Research Division 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute (ETRI) 
Dajeon, Korea 
e-mail: {fogone, thisisdoyoung, cbh}@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— With an increase in concern about one’s health, 
Ubiquitous healthcare (U-health) service industries are getting 
more and more developed. Because the health data is very 
important one, security should be essentially applied to 
healthcare area. This paper proposes a healthcare security 
architecture, which can monitor the security state of a 
healthcare user domain and evaluate its security level. 
Through the proposed architecture, healthcare providers can 
determine trust or distrust of health data received from 
healthcare user domain by checking its security level.  
Keywords-Heahthcare; security state; monitoring; trust; 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With an increase in concern about one’s health, U-health 
service industries are getting more and more developed. 
Through U-health service, users can conveniently measure 
their own health status at home or fitness center without need 
to go to the hospitals and receive medical services in remote 
diagnostics.  
Continua Health Alliance (CHA), an international 
healthcare organization, has proposed an end-to-end 
healthcare architecture for enabling end-to-end connectivity 
of devices and services for personal health management and 
healthcare delivery and for providing interoperability among 
various kinds of healthcare devices [1]. The Continua 
healthcare architecture consists of a healthcare user domain 
where the health data (i.e., bio-data) of users is measured 
through personal healthcare devices and a healthcare 
provider domain where the health status of users is 
diagnosed by analyzing the health data. 
Because health data is very important and sensitive one, 
security should be essentially applied to healthcare area. 
Accordingly, the CHA uses security standards such as TLS 
to protect health data in the healthcare provider domain. To 
protect health data in the healthcare user domain, the CHA 
employs link layer security standards. Because the link layer 
security standards do not sufficiently support security 
requirements of healthcare service, there has been research 
for applying security function to the ISO/IEEE 11073 
protocol which is a health data transport protocol [2]-[4].  
Even if the healthcare architecture considers security 
function, there is a problem that healthcare providers cannot 
determine trust or distrust of the health data received from a 
healthcare user domain because they have no information 
about how the health data has been handled in the user 
domain. 
To address the health data trustworthiness issue, this 
paper proposes a healthcare security architecture, which can 
monitor the security state of a healthcare user domain and 
evaluate its security level. Through the proposed architecture, 
healthcare providers can determine trust or distrust of health 
data received from a healthcare user domain by checking its 
security level. 
II. 
HEALTHCARE END-TO-END ARCHITECTURE 
Fig. 1 shows the healthcare end-to-end architecture 
which has been proposed by CHA. The architecture defines a 
Personal Healthcare Device (PHD), Aggregation Manager 
(AM), Tele-health Service Center (TSC), and Health 
Records Network (HRN). 
 
 
Figure 1.  Continua architecture: healthcare end-to-end architecture. 
The PHD is a personal device which measures the health 
status of users. An example of PHDs includes a thermometer, 
a pulse oximeter, a weight scale, a glucose meter, and so on. 
The AM is a communication gateway which collects health 
data from PHDs and transmits them to a TSC or a HRN. An 
example of AMs includes smart-phone, PC, and so on. The 
TSC is a healthcare server which provides healthcare service 
such as a chronic disease management and an old people 
health care. Finally, the HRN indicates a hospital medical 
information system such as hospital Enterprise Health 
Record (HER), physician Electronic Medical Record (EMR), 
or Personal Health Record (PHR). 
In the Continua architecture, there are three kinds of 
interface: User Domain Network (UDN), WAN and HRN. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

The UDN interface is one between PHD and AM. It uses the 
ISO/IEEE 11073 protocol [5] as data transport protocol. As 
link layer protocol it employs Bluetooth, BLE, USB, ZigBee, 
and NFC. The WAN interface is one between AM and TSC 
or between AM and HRN. It uses the IHE HL7 protocol as 
data transport protocol. The HRN interface is one between 
the TSC and the HRN and uses the IHE HL7 protocol [6]. 
Because health data is very important and sensitive one, 
security should be essentially applied to healthcare area. 
Accordingly, the CHA uses security standards such as TLS 
and IHE (Integrating the Healthcare Enterprise) XDM 
(Cross-Enterprise Document Media Interchange) to protect 
health data in the healthcare provider domain. To protect 
health data in the healthcare user domain, the CHA employs 
link layer security standards such as Bluetooth health device 
profile and ZigBee healthcare application profile. The link 
layer security standards do not sufficiently support security 
requirements of healthcare service. For example, the link 
layer security does not support user authentication. To 
directly protect health data in the healthcare user domain, 
there has been research for providing security function to the 
ISO/IEEE 11073 protocol which is a health data transport 
protocol [2]-[4]. But currently any of those research results 
has not been accepted as international standard. 
Even if the healthcare architecture can protect the health 
data from cyber-attack by using security function such as 
confidentiality, integrity, and availability, there is still a 
health data trustworthiness issue. Namely there is a problem 
that the healthcare providers cannot determine trust or 
distrust of the health data received from a healthcare user 
domain because they have no information about how the 
health data has been handled in the user domain. 
III. 
SECURITY STATE MONITORING ABOUT HEALTHCARE 
USER DOMAIN 
This section proposes the architecture for security state 
monitoring and explains in detail about security state data 
collection and security level evaluation. 
A. Architecture for security state monitoring 
In this paper, we propose five steps in order to determine 
trust or distrust of the health data received from a healthcare 
user domain as shown in Fig. 2. The five steps are as 
follows:  
 Raw security state information collection step: collect raw 
security state information by monitoring PHD and AM, 
such as communication security state, healthcare protocol 
state, healthcare environment, and AM security state. 
 Abnormal behavior detection step: detect abnormal 
behavior by analyzing the raw security state information 
which was collected in the previous step and by using 
security software installed in the AM. 
 Security state information normalization step: normalize 
the collected security state information by removing 
duplicated or useless data. As a result, it is generated 
security state information about communication security, 
cyber-attack detection, healthcare environment, and AM 
security. 
 Security level evaluation step: evaluate the security level 
of a healthcare user domain by using the security state 
information acquired through the previous steps.  
 Security response step: determine trust or distrust of the 
health data received from the healthcare user domain. If it 
is regarded as unreliable data, it is ignored and the 
communication from its sender is refused. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Five steps for determining trust or distrust of health data 
received from healthcare user domain 
 
Figure 3.  Architecture for security state monitoring about healthcare user 
domain 
Fig. 3 shows architecture for security state monitoring 
about the healthcare user domain. In the architecture, we 
propose two core components for security state monitoring: a 
healthcare security monitoring (HSM) agent and a HSM 
manager. The HSM agent operates as a component of the 
AM and the HSM manager resides at a separated system 
such as security management server. 
The HSM agent operates as follows. Firstly, it collects 
security state information. And then it detects cyber-attacks 
(e.g., Denial service of attack) by analyzing the collected 
security state information or by using security software 
installed in the AM. Finally, it summarizes the collected or 
analyzed security state information (i.e., communication 
security state, cyber-attack state, health data collection 
environment, and AM security state) and reports them to the 
HSM manager. 
The HSM manager operates as follows. First of all, it 
determines the security level of the healthcare user domain 
by analyzing the security state information received form the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

HSM agent. Lastly, it provides the security level of the 
healthcare user domain to TRC or HRN so as to help them 
determine trust or distrust of the health data received from a 
PHD. 
B. Collection of raw security state data 
The raw security state data which is collected by the 
HSM agent is as follow. 
- Communication security state: indicates whether or not the 
communication 
security 
mechanisms 
such 
as 
authentication, confidentiality, and integrity are applied to 
the UDN interface (e.g., ISO/IEEE 11073 over Bluetooth) 
- Healthcare protocol state: indicates information about 
protocol warning/error messages and protocol connection 
on the UDN interface  
- Health data collection environment: indicates information 
on PHD and AM (e.g. product name and model), whether 
or not a PHD is shared by people, whether a PHD is 
installed in open or private area, and so on  
- Gateway security state: indicates whether or not security 
software or chipsets are being performed on the AM, such 
as a firewall, an anti-virus, a Trust Platform Module 
(TPM), and so on. 
 
A HSM agent can detect abnormal behavior by analyzing 
healthcare protocol state information. An example of 
abnormal behavior includes a denial of service attack which 
requests communication connections so excessively as to 
exhaust the computing resources of an AM. 
C. Evaluation of security level 
If a HSM manager receives security state information 
about a healthcare user domain, it evaluates the security level 
of the domain by analyzing the received information based 
on its own local policy. The following is a simple example of 
such policy-based security level evaluation algorithm.  
 Extract security state attributes from the security state 
information which is received from the HSM agent 
 Convert the value of security state attribute to numeric 
one. (e.g., if authentication function is supported at the 
UDN interface, its value is 1. Otherwise its value is 0) 
 Normalize the value of security state attributes by 
applying different weight to them. The weight value by 
security state attribute is determined by a user-defined 
policy 
 Calculate a total security state score of the healthcare user 
domain by adding all the values of security state attributes 
 Finally determine the security level of the healthcare user 
domain by using the security state score. The relation 
between security state score and security level is set by a 
user-defined policy. 
 
In this paper, we define four kinds of security level: 
Safety, Watch, Warning, and Risk. The security level is 
determined by a user-defined policy. An example of such 
policy is described in Table. 1. According to Table 1, if all 
the security state of a healthcare user domain is perfect, then 
its security level becomes ‘Safety’. If the security state is 
good in the communication security but bad in the gateway 
security or the cyber-attack, then its security level becomes 
‘Watch’. If the security state is bad in the communication 
security, then its security level becomes ‘Warning’. Finally if 
all the security state is bad, then its security level is ‘Risk’.  
TABLE I.  
 AN EXAMPLE OF USER-DEFINED POLICY FOR 
DETERMINING SECURITY LEVEL 
 
IV. 
CONCULSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we have proposed a healthcare security 
architecture which can monitor the security state of a 
healthcare user domain and evaluate its security level. Our 
architecture can help healthcare providers determine trust or 
distrust of health data received from the healthcare user 
domain by checking its security level. Our future work is to 
implement and verify the proposed architecture. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by Institute for Information & 
communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded 
by the Korea government (MSIP) (No.B0713-15-0007, 
Development of International Standards Smart Medical 
Security Platform focused on the Field Considering Life 
Cycle of Medical Information) 
REFERENCES 
[1] ITU-T, “Interoperability design guidelines for personal health 
systems,” ITU-T Recommendation H.810, Dec. 2013. 
[2] Rubio ÓJ, Trigo JD, Alesanco Á, Serrano L, and García J, “Analysis 
of ISO/IEEE 11073 built-in security and its potential IHE-based 
extensibility,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics, pp 270-285, April 
2016 
[3] A. Egner, Florica moldoveanu, N. Goga, A. Moldoveanu, V. Asavei, 
and A. Morar, “enhanced communication protocol for iso/ieee 11073-
20601,” U.P.B. Sci. Bull., Series C, Vol. 75, Iss. 2, pp. 3-16, 2013 
[4] A. Egner, A. Soceanu, and F. Moldoveanu, “Managing secure 
authentication for standard mobile medical networks,” IEEE 
Symposium on Computers and Communications (ISCC),  pp. 390-
393, 2012 
[5] The Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, “ISO/IEEE 
11073-20601 Standard for Health Informatics - Personal health 
device communication - Application profile-Optimized exchange 
protocol,” ISO/IEEE 11073-20601, 2014 
[6] Health 
Level 
7 
Inc., 
“HL7 
Resource 
Library,” 
2005, 
http://www.hl7.org. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

