First Iteration Test of the Navigation User Interface from ADAPEI Transport App 
with Adults Having Intellectual Disabibilities 
Jesus Zegarra Flores 
Research and innovation Department 
Capgemini Engineering  
Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France  
e-mail: jesus.zegarraflores@altran.com    
Nadia Laayssel 
Centre Ressources Enfance & Adolescence  
ADAPEI du Territoire de Belfort 
Belfort, France  
e-mail: n.laayssel@adapei90.fr  
Emma Charbonnier 
Research and innovation Department 
Capgemini Engineering  
Illkirch-Graffenstaden, France 
 e-mail: emma.charbonnier@capgemini.com  
Rémi Coutant 
Centre Ressources Enfance & Adolescence  
ADAPEI du Territoire de Belfort 
Belfort, France  
e-mail: r.coutant@adapei90.fr 
 
Abstract— People with intellectual disabilities face cognitive 
problems that affect their memory, spatial and time perception. 
The “ADAPEI Transport” app has been created by Capgemini 
engineering and the ADAPEI association from Belfort in 
France. It is a tool to help children and young adults having 
intellectual disabilities to learn how to use a public transport 
and to walk in their own cities independently. The reference 
route is first physically (in situ) created by a specialist. Along the 
path, steps are recorded to help the user with intellectual 
disabilities to interact with his/her environment in the 
navigation part. The aim of this article is to show the results of 
a first iteration feedback done with three adults having 
intellectual disabilities and a specialist in mobility to improve 
and adapt the app to adult’s special needs to walk and to take 
the public transport independently in unknown environments. 
Keywords-GPS; intellectual disability; user interface, mobile 
app. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The ADAPEI (association of friends and parents of 
mentally disabled people in France) is working with educators 
to teach intellectual disabled children (aged 10 to 20) to 
become more autonomous to take public transport. Specialists 
are currently working with paper leaflets to teach them which 
point of interests to look for and what action to do (pedestrian 
crossing, stop a bus, walk to a bus station, etc.) for the journey. 
The creation of leaflets and learning process can be long, a 
solution to accelerate this learning has been the creation of the 
ADAPEI Transport app [1]. 
Currently, most navigation tools are not accessible 
enough, to people having intellectual disabilities. Most of the 
mobile apps rely on Google Direction API to define simple 
instructions to guide the user. An application is WaytoB, 
which serves to guide the disabled person with his/her phone 
and a smartwatch [2], the person is tracked on real time by 
his/her caregiver thanks to internet connection.  Another 
mobile app is AssisT-OUT [3], which provides street views 
from Google Maps to help the user to recognize his/her 
environment and to take decisions. Indeed, these mobile apps 
do not focus enough on the learning notion, which is essential 
to help children to become independent. In this article, we will 
show a first iteration test done with adults having intellectual 
disabilities for improving and adapting the current ADAPEI 
transport app developed for children to adults who work and 
are autonomous in known paths and environments.  
In Section 2, authors will explain the current ADAPEI 
transport app, the different user interfaces and how the 
information is delivered to have feedback form end-users. In 
Section 3, feedback results from 3 adults having intellectual 
disabilities and a specialist are presented. Finally, the 
conclusions and the future work are presented in Section 4.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
In this section, it is going to be presented a brief 
explanation of the current adapei transport app, some 
information about the user navigation interface and the kinds 
of pedagogical videos created to be shown to adults having 
intellectual disabilities.   
A. ADAPEI Trasnport app  
The app (created in Android) has been developed in 
narrow collaboration with the specialists and young adults 
from the transport workshop from the ADAPEI’s Belfort local 
branch. It has been tested constantly from 2018 with end users 
(aged from 10 to 20) to meet their special needs. The app 
allows the specialist to create an adapted reference path using 
GPS, pictograms, photos, times and voice message indicating 
the action to do. The app also has a navigation part in which a 
specific user interface has been developed delivering 
information of the whole path selected and from every step of 
this path when the person is close to a landmark. 
B. The navigation user interface 
Firstly, the app recovers the reference path selected 
already recorded by the specialist. The user interface of the 
navigation part is presented in a way of list showing all the 
steps to do (Figure 1) with pictograms, photos and vocal 
message. The GPS starts working and when the person is close 
to the zone of a landmark step (less than 30 meters), the 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

smartphone will vibrate and will show in a bigger size the 
current step information to do on the screen (for example, 
crossing the street or going to the bus station Emile Mathis, 
get into the bus at 9 o’ clock, etc.) compared to the other steps. 
Additionally, it will launch the voice message information 
if it is demanded. When the person has finished the action, the 
current action disappears and the next action to do will appear 
in a bigger size. Many algorithms and GPS data filters have 
been implemented to understand when the person has finished 
an action and that a new action has to be done. A video of the 
app can be watched in [4].  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Navigation user interface in a list mode.  
 
In the Figure 1 above we can see a sequence, once the 
person has done the first action, after walking in the path, the 
closest current action is crossing the street (3) but before 
he/she has to cross a previous street (2) (steps 2 and 3 are very 
close). 
C. Creation of the pedagogical videos  
The video was created and edited in order to show in a 
pedagogical way how the information appear during 
navigation. Two paths were created as reference paths using 
the app recording all the information. After, a navigation 
simulation is created using the navigation interface screen 
synchronized with the video from the environment showing 
the information presented to walk from one-step to another. 
We have edited two videos: one having the information of 
photos of landmark, pictograms and the actions to do (see 
Figure 2) and another who has photos, pictograms and arrows 
to indicate to turning right or left in an intersection.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. On the left, crossing the street (step 3) from a video, on the right 
progression bar (the person has walked half of the distance going to the 
step 5) 
 
Because of the COVID sanitary problem, these videos 
were presented using Microsoft Teams meetings.  
In the focus group, there are three adults having 
intellectual disabilities who are able to walk independently in 
known paths and environments and a specialist in mobility.  
The 3 disabled subjects are older than 20 years old. One of 
them, is not familiar with the use of smartphones. 
The paths shown in the videos and the app are unknown 
for the subjects. (an example of the video shown can be found 
in [5]).  
In the TEAMS meeting, researchers have explained the 
different information (pictograms and photos) to them and we 
have asked to the participants what they will do in every step. 
We have taken notes from their responses. 
III. 
RESULTS 
In this part, we are going to present the feedbacks from the 
adults and a specialist.  
The progression bar showing the distance walked by the 
person was not very visible. It should be bigger and with more 
contrast color compared to the background.  
All of them agree that images and pictograms are more 
understandable than turning right and turning left arrows on 
the screen. 
Currently, the landmark steps of the path disappears 
automatically once the person has finished the action and gets 
out from the step zone. For the specialist, one improvement is 
not to make the image of the step disappears, in contrast, to 
validate a landmark step it could be more convenient to put on 
the step a big X cross once the step has been done by the user. 
Currently, the validation when a person is in the zone of a 
step is done 30 meters before the GPS coordinates recorded of 
the step position. Users ask if that could be done the closest 
possible to the step position to avoid confusion when 2 steps 
are very close. 
A user who already uses Google maps in cars has told us 
that one of the problems about car navigation is that they do 
not have the photo or image of the destination. An advantage 
of our app is that we can create and edit a specific path with 
the photo of the landmarks and the destination. 
According to the specialist, the subjects seem not to have 
problems of comprehension of the environment but they could 
experience lack of self-confidence in new environments. The 
app can help them to be reassured.  
All the subjects would also like to be informed that they do 
not take the right direction in the path (for example, in case of 
intersection). 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article we have presented a brief explanation of the 
adapei transport app and the pedagogical videos edited to 
show the possibilities to adapt the user interface app to the 
special needs of adults having intellectual disabilities.  
In general, the three people having intellectual disabilities 
seem to have understood, after asking them, the indications in 
our video and all the steps using the images and the 
pictograms.  
The app can be used to reassure the person that he/she has 
taken the right path especially in unknown environments.  
Announcing 
bus is late 1 
minute. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

For giving information about if he/she has taken the wrong 
path in an intersection, the use of the information of the 
compass of the phone could be integrated.   
After this first iteration, we will rework on the code to add 
and change the parts in the app to improve the user interface. 
The next iteration will consist on testing the user interface 
of the app with end-users using the path creation and 
navigation user interfaces in a real situation. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Zegarra Flores, G. Malnati, J.J. Stevens, E. Bournez, L. 
Boutros, N. Laayssel, G. Geneviève, J.B. de Vaucresson, R. 
Coutant, 
J.P. 
Granger 
and 
J.P. 
Radoux. 
“ADAPEI-
TRANSPORT: A GPS Based Mobile App for Learning Paths 
and Improving Autonomy for Young Adults Having Intellectual 
Disabilities to Take Public Transport”, Computers Helping 
People with Special Needs. ICCHP 2020. Lecture Notes in 
Computer pp. 112-119.  
[2] R. Fryers, T. Holzer Saad, K. Kelly and J. Dinsmore.  “Report 
Defining The Needs of Stakeholders For a Wayfinding Platform 
For Individuals With Intellectual Disabilities and Their Carers”, 
Trinity College Dublin, Trinity College Dublin, 2018, pp. 1-29. 
[3] J. Gomez, G. Montoro, J. C. Torrado, and A. Plaza. “An 
Adapted Wayfinding System for Pedestrians with Cognitive 
Disabilities” in Mobile Information Systems, Volume 2015, 
Article ID 520572, pp. 1-11. 
[4] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hJp-qIrbNTY 
[5] https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=5-ZHv833jdk  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

