Argumentation Schemes for Clinical Interventions
Towards an Evidence-Aggregation System for Medical Recommendations
Olivia Sanchez-Graillet and Philipp Cimiano
Cognitive Interaction Technology Cluster of Excellence (CITEC)
Bielefeld University, Germany
Email: olivia.sanchez@uni-bielefeld.de
Abstract—The paradigm of evidence-based medicine requires
that medical decisions are taken based on available, veriﬁed
and high quality evidence. Such evidence has to be obtained
from multiple relevant studies, considering their potential bi-
ases and shortcomings. Rationalizing and aggregating evidence
from multiple studies is key to evidence-based decision making.
Towards a system that is able to aggregate and summarize
the evidence available in multiple studies, we have deﬁned two
argument schemes, which respectively provide reasons as to why
a certain therapy may be regarded superior to another in terms of
efﬁcacy and safety. The argument schemes can be automatically
instantiated via the semantic query language SPARQL from a
knowledge base in which clinical studies have been formalized
according to our own clinical trial ontology. The argument
schemes are meant to be part of the framework of a conﬁgurable
system that generates clinical recommendations by aggregating
and summarizing the evidence from different clinical studies. We
demonstrate the instantiation of the argument schemes in a study
case on glaucoma and show that they are able to capture the
reasoning behind determining such intervention superiority.
Keywords–Argumentation
in
Medicine;
Argumentation
Schemes; Evidence-based Medicine; Summarization of Clinical
Evidence
I.
INTRODUCTION
Medical decisions are taken based on available, veriﬁed
and high quality evidence. Randomized Clinical Trials (RCTs)
are considered as the gold-standard for clinical research [1].
There are thousands of such controlled clinical studies and
related publications available in open-access databases, such
as PubMed [2]. Since clinicians are interested not only in
obtaining effective intervention outcomes, but also in that
the outcomes rely on high quality evidence, it is necessary
to collect evidence from multiple relevant studies, whilst
considering the possible presence of bias and the shortcomings
of those studies [3]. The summarization and comparison of
the aggregated information is normally done in the form of
systematic reviews and meta-analyses.
Rationalizing and aggregating evidence from multiple clin-
ical trials are crucial tasks for evidence-based decision making
[4]–[7]. Criteria for grading the level of evidence have been
already developed (e.g., The Grading of Recommendations
Assessment, Development and Evaluation GRADE [8], [9]).
However, applying such criteria to aggregate and summarize
the evidence available in the vast number of relevant publica-
tions, requires an extensive manual effort. As a part of a system
for generating medical recommendations based on clinical trial
evidence, in this paper we present argument schemes that
provide reasons as to why a certain therapy is regarded as
superior to another – in terms of efﬁcacy and safety – by
aggregating the evidence found in multiple studies. The studies
are formalized in a knowledge base structured according to
our own Clinical Trial Ontology (C-TrO) [10]. The arguments
are automatically instantiated from the knowledge base by
extracting evidence via the SPARQL query language [11]. The
argument schemes can be, in principle, used to rationalize the
evidence for therapies of any health condition or disease. In
this paper, we show the use of the schemes through a study
case on glaucoma.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
Section II describes the proposed argumentation schemes and
Section III the knowledge base deﬁned on basis of C-TrO.
The exemplary use of the schemes on glaucoma is presented
in Section IV. Our conclusions and plans for future work are
given in Section V.
II.
ARGUMENT SCHEMES FOR AGGREGATING AND
SUMMARIZING CLINICAL TRIAL EVIDENCE
In the deﬁnition of the argument schemes presented in this
paper, we followed the model proposed by Walton et al. [12],
in which argument schemes are seen as defeasible inference
patterns that make explicit how a certain conclusion follows
from a set of premises or assumptions. Thus, such arguments
consist of a set of premises (assumptions), a conclusion, and
critical questions that could invalidate the conclusion if satis-
ﬁed. In our case, the conclusion of an argument corresponds to
the claim that a certain therapy is superior to another given the
evidence available in the form of multiple studies. Such type
of arguments represent tools to systematically reason about
the available evidence and thus support decision making. The
arguments are defeasible reasoning patterns in the sense that
the conclusion that one therapy is superior to another may
be challenged and even invalidated by additional information
(e.g., biases in the publications, lack of signiﬁcance of size of
effect, etc.).
Through the empirical analysis of published clinical trials
of different types, and meta-analyses and systematic reviews
on different health conditions, we identiﬁed the basic forms of
argument schemes for inferring superiority of interventions in
terms of efﬁcacy and safety. The schemes can be applied in
different conﬁgurations. For example, considering a given type
of population, patient preconditions, country, etc. The different
scenarios can be formed from the information contained in C-
TrO. These schemes allow to structure available evidence as
a basis to reason about the superiority of a certain treatment
over another one. Each scheme states a major premise that is
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Major premise: For people who suffer a given
disease/health-disorder, it is desirable that a certain outcome
indicator (or measurement) related to that
disease/health-disorder changes, either increasing or decreasing.
Minor premise: It has been shown in a bigger number of
clinical trials that T1 changes (either increasing or decreasing)
a given disease/health-disorder indicator from the baseline in
terms of an aggregation method in greater magnitude than T2.
Conclusion: T1 is a more effective medication treatment
compared to T2 for changing the given disease/health-disorder
indicator in the desired direction.
Critical Questions:
CQ1: Is the change (either increasing or decreasing) of the
given disease/health-disorder indicator statistically signiﬁcant
(p-value)?
CQ2: Is the size of effect of T1 bigger than the one of T2?
CQ3: Are T1 and T2 applied to a similar number of patients
across the different studies?
Figure 1. Scheme for superiority in terms of efﬁcacy.
assumed to hold independently of the current level of evidence.
Whilst the minor premise summarizes the current level of
evidence as supporting the conclusion. The critical questions
proposed pretend to challenge the validity of the conclusion
based on the available information. The proposed argument
schemes are described in what follows.
A. Argument Scheme for Superiority Based on Efﬁcacy
In this argument scheme, the major premise expresses the
general objective of the primary outcome of the intervention in
question, and the minor premise considers the magnitude of the
differences between the intervention results. The ﬁrst critical
question considers the statistical signiﬁcance of the results; the
second one refers to the size of the population that receives
the intervention, which is important to consider since the p-
value may vary according to this size; and the third one is
about the absolute size of effect, i.e., the magnitude of the
difference between groups. An intervention in which both size
of effect and statistical signiﬁcance are reported, tends to be
more convincing than one in which only the size of effect is
mentioned.
Figure 1 presents the corresponding argument scheme and
its critical questions, where T1 and T2 are different drug
treatments. In this scheme, it is implied that when there is a
smaller number of clinical trials in which the outcome indicator
in T1 changes in a bigger magnitude than in T2, the conclusion
would be that T1 is less effective than T2. If the number of
clinical trials is the same (or very similar), then T1 and T2
would be considered as being equally effective.
B. Argument for Superiority Based on Safety
In this argument scheme, the major premise expresses the
general objective of the intervention outcome relative to safety.
The minor premise considers the magnitude of the adverse
effect that can be expressed in different ways, such as:
•
Absolute magnitude, which refers to the number of
people affected by a given adverse effect (e.g., “The
most signiﬁcant side effect of latanoprost was in-
creased pigmentation of the iris which was observed
in 15 patients”).
Major premise: For people who suffer a given
disease/health-disorder and who are under a medication
treatment, it is desirable not to suffer any adverse effect.
Minor premise: It has been shown in a number of clinical
trials that the administration of T1 leads to less incidence of
adverse effects compared to the administration of T2.
Conclusion: Therefore, T1 is superior to T2 in terms of its
safety proﬁle, leading to less cases of the adverse effects.
Critical Questions:
CQ1: Are the adverse effects statistical signiﬁcant?
CQ2: Are the size of effect of the adverse effects bigger for
T2 than for T1?
Figure 2. Scheme for superiority in terms of safety.
•
Relative magnitude, which refers to the percentage of
people affected by a given adverse effect (e.g., “The
most frequent drug adverse event was reported in 0.5%
patients”) .
•
Uncertain magnitudes that denote uncertainty about
the presence of an adverse effect (e.g., “The presence
of an adverse effect was suspected”).
•
Modal words that indicate the degree of affection (e.g.,
“slightly affected”) or expressions like “bigger degree
(or amount)”.
The corresponding argument scheme and its critical ques-
tions are presented in Figure 2. The critical questions are
related to the statistical signiﬁcance of the observed adverse
effects.
C. Critical Questions Relative to the Quality of the Evidence
The following are the critical questions that apply to both
schemes.
CQ3: How reliable is the evidence from these studies?
•
CQ3.1 Is there a risk of bias?
•
CQ3.2 Is the study randomized?
•
CQ3.3 Is the study blind?
•
CQ3.4 Is the study multi-center?
•
CQ3.5 Is the study intention-to-treat?
These critical questions are based on the following reasons:
•
Intention-to-treat (ITT) studies are more realistic and
unbiased than pre-protocol studies because they in-
clude all the patients in the results, while pre-protocol
studies exclude patients who deviated from the proto-
col.
•
Multi-center studies are more inclusive than single-
center studies.
•
Blind (or double-blind) studies are more objective than
those of different type.
•
There might be a risk of bias when a conﬂict of interest
exists.
The context in which the argument schemes and critical
questions are applied can be constrained by considering further
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

information. For example, the population’s country, gender and
age range. This evidence is available in the knowledge base,
which is described in the next section.
III.
THE KNOWLEDGE BASE AND C-TRO
As part of the system for generating medical recommen-
dations, we have developed the C-TrO ontology [10] that
describes clinical studies with the adequate level of formal-
ization and granularity for instantiating the proposed argument
schemes and for deﬁning different contexts of interest in which
the argument schemes could be used.
The knowledge base follows the C-TrO structure and is
described in Resource Description Framework (RDF) triples
[13]. Below is an abbreviated example of the RDF triples
corresponding to a clinical trial, one of its arms and one of
the arm’s interventions.
:CT_3 rdf:type :ClinicalTrial ;
:hasObjectiveDescription "Latanoprost, a ..."
:hasArm Arm_31, Arm_32 ;
:hasPopulation CT3_Population ;
:hasCTDesign DoubleBlind, Randomized .
:Arm_31 rdf:type ctro:Arm ;
:hasNumberPatients 134 ;
:hasIntervention :CT3_Intervention1 .
:hasPrimaryOutcome :CT3_A1_OC1 ;
:CT3_Intervention1 rdf:type ctro:Intervention ;
:hasFrequency "Once_at_evening";
:hasInterval "Daily" ;
:hasDuration "3 months";
:hasMedication :CT3_I1_M1 .
IV.
STUDY CASE ON GLAUCOMA
Glaucoma is a disease that damages the optic nerve and
can lead to permanent visual loss. The damage of the optic
nerve usually occurs when the Internal Ocular Pressure (IOP)
increases. Therefore, the reduction of IOP is a desired outcome
in an intervention for glaucoma.
For our study case, we formalized the clinical trials in-
cluded in the meta-analysis carried out by Zhang et al. [14]
which compares the efﬁcacy and safety of the drugs timolol
and latanoprost. The quality of the evidence was assessed by
considering the design characteristics of the clinical trials such
as masking, randomization, etc. The main outcome indicators
studied were the percentage of IOP reduction for efﬁcacy, and
the relative risk for side effects (e.g., hyperaemia, conjunc-
tivitis, etc.). The meta-analysis suggested that latanoprost was
more effective than timolol in lowering IOP.
Figure 3 shows the instantiation of the argument scheme for
the treatment superiority in terms of efﬁcacy. This instantiation
is carried out by executing a SPARQL query that represents the
argument scheme with the information referent to glaucoma
over the knowledge base. This query retrieves the appropriate
evidence.
In this scheme, the major premise states the main objective
of medical interventions for glaucoma, which refers to the
greatest reduction of the diurnal IOP mean from baseline. The
minor premise mentions that in the eleven studies compared, it
was found that latanoprost interventions were more efﬁcacious
in reducing the diurnal IOP mean than timolol interventions.
The table below this premise contains the evidence that sup-
ports this assertion (only ﬁve out of eleven studies are shown).
Each row is a pairwise comparison of the interventions of each
clinical trial. The ﬁrst column contains the trial identiﬁers,
the second column contains the publications that describe the
clinical trials, and the remaining columns display the reduction
of IOP mean (in mmHG units) by the latanoprost and the
timolol treatments, respectively.
Given this evidence, the conclusion in this argument
scheme states that the latanoprost treatments are more effective
than the timolol treatments under the speciﬁed conditions. The
critical question is related to the statistical signiﬁcance (p-
value) of the IOP mean reduction from the baseline. Since
the p-values of the interventions of some clinical trials were
not reported, the conclusion of the argument can be weakened.
Major premise: For people who suffer glaucoma it is
desirable that the diurnal mean IOP is reduced.
Minor premise: It has been shown in eleven clinical trials that
latanoprost treatments reduced the diurnal mean IOP from
baseline in a greater magnitude than the timolol treatments.
Evidence (Mean IOP Reduction (mmHg))
CT Id
Reference
Latanoprost
Timolol
CT 1
Alm A et al,1995
7.8
6.7
CT 2
Aquino MV et al.,1999
11.1
9.1
CT 3
Camras CB et al.,1996
6.7
4.9
CT 4
Diestelhorst M et al.,1998
4.9
2.1
CT 5
Mastropasqua L et al,1999
4.8
4.6
Conclusion: latanoprost treatment is a more effective
medication treatment compared to timolol treatment for
reducing the diurnal mean IOP.
CQ1: Is the reduction of the diurnal mean IOP statistically
signiﬁcant? Only some p-values were reported.
Figure 3. Instantiation of the scheme for efﬁcacy.
The argument schema in terms of safety for glaucoma is
instantiated as shown in Figure 4.
Major premise: For people who suffer glaucoma and who are
under a medication treatment it is desirable not to suffer any
adverse effect.
Minor premise: It has been shown in eleven clinical trials that
the administration of the timolol treatment leads to less
incidence of Conjunctival hyperemia than the latanoprost
treatment.
Latanoprost
Timolol
Adverse Effect
No.
Adverse Effect
No.
ConjunctivalHyperemia
7
ConjunctivalHyperemia
2
IncreasedPigmentation
2
ReducedHeartRate
2
IrisPigmentationChange
1
ReducedBloodPreasure
2
ChangeBloodVelocity
1
Smarting
1
IrisPigmentationChange
1
Conclusion: The timolol treatment is superior to the
latanoprost treatment in terms of its safety proﬁle, leading to
less cases of the adverse effect ConjunctivalHyperemia.
Figure 4. Instantiation of the scheme for safety.
The major premise states that the ideal outcome of the
medical interventions is that they do not cause any adverse
effect. The minor premise states that across the eleven studies
it was found that the presence of conjunctival hyperemia
occurred more times in the latanoprost interventions than in
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

the timolol interventions. The table below this premise contains
the evidence that supports that assertion (i.e. seven mentions
in the case of latanoprost and only two mentions in the case
of timolol).
Given this evidence, the conclusion in this scheme states
that the timolol treatment is safer than the latanoprost treatment
relative to conjunctival hyperemia. This schema can be applied
to any other adverse effect of interest. In this study case, we
have analyzed glaucoma and only the effect of two drugs.
However, the scheme can consider any other disease and drugs
that are contained in the knowledge base.
V.
CONCLUSIONS
We have presented basic argument schemes for deciding
the superiority of medical interventions in terms of efﬁcacy
and safety based on the aggregation of clinical trial evidence.
From these schemes, more speciﬁc argument schemes could
be derived. A study case on glaucoma was used as a proof-of-
concept of our argument schemes, showing the feasibility of
their use.
Other approaches that rely on argument schemes are those
for identifying argument schemes in genetic research articles
[15] and in letters for genetic counselling [16]. More recently,
Mayer et al. [17] presented a method for recognizing evidence
in the form of premises and conclusions in RCT abstracts,
and Mayer et al. [18] developed a method for classifying the
type of evidence found in clinical trials. Furthermore, several
argumentation-based approaches for medical and health-care
decision support have been proposed [19]–[23]. Hunter and
Williams [20] developed an argument-based framework to
aggregate clinical trial evidence, in which inductive arguments
are generated from a set of evidence. Afterwards, the supe-
riority of the interventions is determined according to given
preference criteria across the generated arguments. In contrast
to this approach, we have deﬁned argumentation schemes
supported by an ontology to rationalize the decision as to
which intervention is superior, as well as to aggregate the
corresponding level of evidence. Furthermore, our knowledge
base is populated with evidence extracted from published
clinical trials, while in the Hunter and William’s method,
the input evidence is taken from partially aggregated and
synthesized information contained in medical guidelines.
As future work, we plan to validate our argument schemes
via user studies. We want to extend our approach so that efﬁ-
cacy and safety are not considered as independent dimensions,
but that they can be weighted against each other in the form
of a meta-argument with an internal structure that resolves the
trade-off depending on the relative weight given to safety over
efﬁcacy or vice versa. Finally, we are currently developing
an information extraction system that automatically encodes
the study results and clinical evidence in a knowledge base
following the C-TrO ontology.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been funded by the Deutsche Forschungsge-
meinschaft (DFG) within the project Rationalizing Recommen-
dations (RecomRatio), as part of the Priority Program “Robust
Argumentation Machines (RATIO)” (SPP-1999).
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Akobeng, “Understanding randomised controlled trials,” Archives of
Disease in Childhood, vol. 90, 2005, pp. 840–844.
[2]
“PubMed”, URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed [Last access:
August, 2019].
[3]
D. L. Sackett, W. M. C. Rosenberg, J. A. M. Gray, R. B. Haynes, and
W. S. Richardson, “Evidence based medicine: what it is and what it
isn’t,” BMJ, vol. 312, no. 7023, 1996, pp. 71–72.
[4]
G. Tsafnat, A. Dunn, P. Glasziou, and E. Coiera, “The automation of
systematic reviews,” BMJ, vol. 346, 2013, p. f139.
[5]
A. M. OConnor, G. Tsafnat, S. B. Gilbert, K. A. Thayer, and M. S.
Wolfe, “Moving toward the automation of the systematic review pro-
cess: A summary of discussions at the second meeting of international
collaboration for the automation of systematic reviews (ICASR),”
Systematic Reviews, vol. 7, no. 1, 2018, p. 3.
[6]
M. H. Murad and V. M. Montori, “Synthesizing evidence: Shifting the
focus from individual studies to the body of evidence,” JAMA, vol. 309,
no. 21, 2013, pp. 2217–2218.
[7]
H. Bastian, P. Glasziou, and I. Chalmers, “Seventy-ﬁve trials and eleven
systematic reviews a day: How will we ever keep up?” PLoS Medicine,
vol. 7, no. 9, 2010, p. e1000326.
[8]
H. Balshem et al., “GRADE Guidelines: 3. Rating the quality of
evidence,” J Clin Epidemiol, vol. 64, no. 4, 2011, pp. 401–406.
[9]
G. H. Guyatt et al., “What is quality of evidence and why is it important
to clinicians?” BMJ, vol. 336, no. 7651, 2008, pp. 995–998.
[10]
O. Sanchez-Graillet, P. Cimiano, C. Witte, and B. Ell, “C-TrO: An
ontology for summarization and aggregation of the level of evidence
in clinical trials,” in The Joint Ontology Workshop (JOWO) 2019:
Ontologies and Data in the Life Sciences (To appear).
[11]
“The SPARQL Query Language”, URL: https://www.w3.org/TR/rdf-
sparql-query [Last access: August, 2019].
[12]
D. Walton, C. Reed, and F. Macagno, Argumentation Schemes.
Cam-
bridge University Press, 2008.
[13]
“The RDF Working Group”, URL: https://www.w3.org/RDF/ [Last
access: August, 2019].
[14]
W. Y. Zhang, A. L. W. Po, H. S. Dua, and A. Azuara-Blanco, “Meta-
analysis of randomised controlled trials comparing latanoprost with
timolol in the treatment of patients with open angle glaucoma or ocular
hypertension,” Br J Ophthalmol., vol. 85, no. 8, 2001, pp. 983–990.
[15]
N. Green, “Towards creation of a corpus for argumentation mining the
biomedical genetics research literature,” in Proc. of the 1st Workshop
on Argumentation Mining, 2014, pp. 11–18.
[16]
N. L. Green, “Annotating evidence-based argumentation in biomedical
text,” in IEEE Intl. Conf. on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine (BIBM),
2015, pp. 922–929.
[17]
T. Mayer, E. Cabrio, M. Lippi, P. Torroni, and S. Villata, “Argument
mining on clinical trials,” in Proc. of COMMA 2018, vol. 305.
IOS
Press, 2018, pp. 137–148.
[18]
T. Mayer, E. Cabrio, and S. Villata, “Evidence type classiﬁcation
in randomized controlled trials,” in Proc. of the 5th Workshop on
Argumentation Mining, 2018.
[19]
N. Gorogiannis, A. Hunter, and M. Williams, “An argument-based
approach to reasoning with clinical knowledge,” Intl. J. of Approx.
Reasoning, vol. 51, no. 1, 2009, pp. 1–22.
[20]
A. Hunter and M. Williams, “Aggregating evidence about the positive
and negative effects of treatments,” Art. Int. in Medicine, vol. 56, no. 3,
2012, pp. 173–190.
[21]
R. Craven, F. Toni, C. Cadar, A. Hadad, and M. Williams, “Efﬁcient
argumentation for medical decision-making,” in Proc. of the 13th Intl.
Conf. on Principles of Knowledge Representation and Reasoning (KR),
2012, pp. 598–602.
[22]
L. Longo and L. Hederman, “Argumentation theory for decision support
in health-care: a comparison with machine learning,” in Proc. of the Intl.
Conf. on Brain and Health Informatics, 2013, pp. 168–180.
[23]
M. A. Grando, L. Moss, D. Sleeman, and J. Kinsella, “Argumentation-
logic for creating and explaining medical hypotheses,” Art. Int. in
Medicine, vol. 58, no. 1, 2013, pp. 1–13.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

