A Secure Blockchain for Electronic Health Records 
 
Jihad Qaddour 
School of Information Technology 
Illinois State University  
Old Union Building, Box 5150, Normal, IL 61790, USA 
jqaddou@ilstu.edu 
Kanz Ul Eman) 
School of Information Technology 
Illinois State University  
Old Union Building, Box 5150, Normal, IL 61790, USA 
keman@ilstu.edu
 
 
Abstract—Blockchain technology has attracted considerable 
attention and has grown constantly since its introduction in 
2008. It has emerged as a valuable tool in several industries, 
including healthcare, particularly regarding protecting and 
securing electronic health records. They contain sensitive 
patient data that is often vulnerable to cyberattacks. 
Blockchain's decentralized and immutable nature can help to 
protect EHRs from unauthorized access, modification, or 
deletion. This paper proposes a blockchain-based architecture 
for EHRs that incorporates Ethereum-based smart contracts, 
decentralized off-chain storage with the Interplanetary File 
System, and strong symmetric encryption. This architecture 
provides a robust solution that guarantees the security and 
scalability of EHRs. The paper also provides a thorough analysis 
of the framework's security merits and improves our knowledge 
and ability to use secure electronic health record systems.  
Keywords- Blockchain; health data; electronic health records; 
security; decentralize; confidentiality. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The healthcare industry generates and maintains a vast 
amount of data daily, including highly sensitive information 
such as medical records, diagnoses, vital signs, and drug 
regimens [1]. Electronic health records (EHRs) have become 
widely adopted in the healthcare industry due to significant 
technological advances. In fact, by 2017, 96% of non-federal 
acute hospitals in the United States had adopted EHR systems 
[2]. This adoption demonstrates the industry's understanding 
of the benefits of EHRs in improving data management and 
accessibility, optimizing workflows, and improving patient 
care. 
EHRs and well-established health information exchange 
(HIE) systems work together to provide a number of benefits, 
including lower healthcare costs and higher care quality [3]. 
However, using digital technologies to transmit highly 
private and sensitive information raises concerns, particularly 
about privacy and security. When information is shared 
between different healthcare organizations, there is an 
increased risk of unauthorized access, making it vulnerable 
to potential hackers who could launch targeted attacks [4]. 
To address these concerns, it is essential to create strong 
security controls and privacy protections. Solutions such as 
encryption, access controls, secure authentication protocols, 
and data anonymization techniques can be used to preserve 
the confidentiality and integrity of shared data [4]. Secure 
sharing of health information can also be ensured through 
ongoing monitoring, frequent security assessments, and 
employee training. These measures can also help to mitigate 
risks. 
This research proposes a novel decentralized approach to 
enhancing the security of electronic health records (EHRs). 
The proposed system provides a scalable and decentralized 
alternative for storing and distributing EHR data using the 
Ethereum blockchain and the Interplanetary File System 
(IPFS) [4]. This approach leverages the built-in security 
features of blockchain technology and the durability of IPFS 
to guarantee the integrity and privacy of private medical 
records. The project's focus on decentralization is coherent 
with the growing demand in the healthcare industry for secure 
and effective EHR storage and interchange. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
provides background and related work. Section III discusses 
the proposed model. Section IV concludes the paper with the 
future direction.  
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK 
The healthcare industry is facing a critical challenge in 
ensuring the security of information flow. Data breaches in 
the healthcare industry have affected millions of people in 
recent years, highlighting the need for strong security 
measures to safeguard sensitive healthcare data [5][6]. 
Blockchain technology is a promising solution for 
information exchange in the healthcare industry. Blockchain 
uses a distributed ledger to ensure that every participating 
node keeps an exact copy of the ledger, improving data 
integrity and transparency [6]. Blockchain is also 
decentralized and irreversible, which makes it ideal for secure 
data sharing [6]. While blockchain technology presents 
exciting possibilities for electronic health records (EHR) in 
the healthcare sphere, there are significant challenges to 
overcome. Scalability is a major challenge because the bulk 
of EHR data can be enormous, resulting in slower and longer 
transactions when stored on the blockchain [6]. Another issue 
is transparency, as all transactions on a blockchain are public, 
posing privacy issues for sensitive healthcare data [6]. 
Balancing the need for privacy while guaranteeing effective 
blockchain tracking and recordkeeping becomes a critical 
challenge [6]. 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

There is a growing body of research on how to overcome 
the challenges of using blockchain technology in healthcare. 
Matos et al. [7] presented a system design that uses cloud 
services and granular access control to successfully 
administer EHR. The goal was to create a safe and scalable 
solution that allows patients and clinicians to access EHR 
from anywhere in the world. Intercloud storage was used, 
which entails joining separate clouds to form a bigger 
network, allowing for end-to-end anonymity and smooth data 
migration between providers. In their access control method, 
Matos et al. emphasized the need for authentication and 
permission checks. However, despite efforts to prioritize 
patient privacy, the system may still be open to exploitations 
that could allow unauthorized access to critical data [7]. 
A. The Hyperledger Fabric blockchain 
The Hyperledger Fabric blockchain, a private blockchain 
system, is used by the proposed framework, Action-EHR, 
presented by Dubovitskaya et al. [8] to improve 
authentication and authorization procedures. Hyperledger 
Fabric offers tighter control over node involvement and 
transaction visibility than open public blockchains. This 
system uses smart contracts to manage access control and  
preserve state variables pertaining to patient health 
records, much like the Ethereum network. Action-EHR 
intends to provide secure and auditable access to patient data 
by utilizing the smart contract logic. Fine-grained control 
over access permissions is made possible using Hyperledger 
Fabric and smart contracts, improving data privacy and 
security [8]. This strategy supports ongoing research into the 
effective and safe management of electronic health records 
using blockchain technology [8]. The misconception that 
blockchain 
technology 
was 
first 
developed 
for 
cryptocurrencies is a common one. However, the idea of 
blockchain was first proposed in 1991 [10]. The original 
concept behind blockchain was to create a system for digital 
document timestamping to prevent manipulation or 
backdating. This suggests that blockchain has applications 
beyond cryptocurrencies and can be used in various 
industries that require secure record-keeping and transaction 
tracking [10]. 
Distributed ledgers are used by blockchain technology to 
record and keep all transactions made on the network. An 
immutable hash signature is present in each block to which a 
transaction is added. Data manipulation within the 
blockchain is typically impossible due to the decentralized 
structure of the blockchain network and this hash, which 
assures that any unauthorized modifications to the blocks 
would be instantly identified and rejected [6]. 
B. Ethereum with Smart Contracts 
Blockchain 
technology 
has 
made 
significant 
improvements since it was first used in Bitcoin. In 2015, 
Ethereum joined Bitcoin as a prominent cryptocurrency, 
building on the research report written by Vitalik Buterin two 
years prior [11]. A new blockchain was introduced by 
Ethereum that was comparable to Bitcoin's but distinguished 
itself by including smart contracts. Smart contracts allow 
logical code to be executed directly on the ledger, expanding 
the capabilities of the blockchain beyond basic transactions 
[11]. This innovation by Ethereum helped blockchain 
technology become more widely used and developed, making 
it a promising solution for information exchange in the 
healthcare industry. 
Figure 1.  Process of hash signing [6] 
Figure 2: Connections of the blocks [9] 
 
C.  IPFS: A Decentralized File Access and Storage Protocol 
Interplanetary File System (IPFS)) is a peer-to-peer 
hypermedia protocol that provides a decentralized file access 
and storage system. IPFS differs from previous peer-to-peer 
protocols such as Bit Torrent in that it uses a content-
addressable addressing scheme. This means that data is 
divided into manageable portions, hashed, and assigned a 
CID (Content Identifier) value. This special addressing 
scheme ensures data integrity and reduces duplication, which 
enables efficient file retrieval on the IPFS network [12].  
D.  MedRec: A Blockchain-Based Electronic Health 
Records Platform 
MedRec is a cutting-edge electronic health records 
(EHR) platform that is built on the Ethereum network. 
MedRec uses smart contracts written in Python to manage 
access to and permissions for EHR data. MedRec also 
features an innovative incentive system that rewards 
healthcare practitioners for contributing anonymized medical 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

data. This incentive system helps to build trust and facilitate 
access to valuable healthcare information [13]. 
E. 
Ancile and BHEEM 
In addition to MedRec, there are several other 
blockchain-based EHR platforms that have been proposed. 
These platforms share many similarities with MedRec, in that 
they all use blockchain technology to provide a secure and 
decentralized way to store and manage EHR data, including 
Ancile [14] and BHEEM 15]. Both frameworks use the 
Ethereum network/blockchain for access management and 
permissions while keeping health records off-chain in a local 
database. While Ancile uses two encryption techniques for 
record storage and distribution, BHEEM omits a specific 
description of the encryption method used. Asymmetric 
encryption and proxy re-encryption are used in the 
distribution encryption in the Ancile framework. This enables 
the restoration of fully encrypted messages using a user's 
private key, even if the encryption was carried out using a 
different user's public key [16]. 
 
Figure 3. An example of proxy re-encryption [16]. 
F. Patient-centric framework for personal health 
 
records (PHR) 
Madine et al. [17] developed a patient-centric framework 
for personal health records (PHR) using blockchain 
technology, specifically the Ethereum network. The 
framework uses smart contracts to create an access control 
system. IPFS and proxy re-encryption are used as 
complementary techniques to overcome scalability issues. 
Madine et al.'s [17] research included a thorough comparison 
between their blockchain-based PHR architecture and current 
cloud-based PHR solutions. The comparison focused on a 
number of factors, including provenance, immutability, 
trustworthiness, patient-centered approach, decentralized 
storage, decentralized execution, and privacy. A full 
comparison of the results is presented in Table 1 of their 
research. 
TABLE 1. COMPARISON OF BLOCKCHAIN-BASED PHR ARCHITECTURE WITH CLOUD-
BASED PHR SOLUTIONS. 
Factor 
Blockchain-Based PHR 
Cloud-Based PHR 
Provenance 
All data modifications are 
tracked and recorded on 
the blockchain, providing 
a complete audit trail. 
Data modifications are typically 
not tracked or recorded in the 
cloud, making it difficult to audit 
changes to data. 
Immutability~ 
Once data is added to the 
blockchain, it cannot be 
modified or deleted. 
Data in the cloud can be modified 
or deleted at any time by the 
cloud provider or by authorized 
users. 
Trustworthiness 
The 
blockchain 
is 
a 
decentralized network, so 
there is no single point of 
failure or control. 
Cloud-based PHR solutions are 
typically 
centralized, 
which 
means that there is a single point 
of failure and control. 
Patient-
Centered 
Approach 
Patients have complete 
control over their data and 
who has access to it. 
Patients typically do not have 
complete control over their data 
in cloud-based PHR solutions. 
Decentralized 
Storage 
Data is stored on multiple 
nodes on the blockchain, 
making it more secure 
and resistant to data 
breaches. 
Data is typically stored on a 
single server in the cloud, which 
makes it more vulnerable to data 
breaches. 
Decentralized 
Execution 
Smart 
contracts 
are 
executed 
on 
the 
blockchain, 
which 
ensures that they are 
tamper-proof and cannot 
be censored. 
Smart contracts are typically 
executed on a centralized server 
in the cloud, which makes them 
vulnerable to tampering and 
censorship. 
Privacy 
Data can be encrypted on 
the blockchain, which can 
help to protect patient 
privacy. 
Data in the cloud is typically not 
encrypted, which makes it more 
vulnerable 
to 
unauthorized 
access. 
 
III. 
PROPOSED MODEL  
The proposed system uses the Ethereum blockchain to 
store and manages electronic health records (EHRs). 
Ethereum is an open-source platform for smart contracts and 
decentralized applications. Smart contracts are self-executing 
contracts that are stored on the blockchain and cannot be 
tampered with. Figure 4 shows the architecture of the 
proposed model. The proposed architecture is secure in terms 
of confidentiality, security, and integrity. Patients have full 
control over their EHRs and who has access to them. The 
secret keys used to encrypt EHRs are randomly generated and 
not user-dependent, which provides a defense against brute-
force attacks. The blockchain provides integrity by ensuring 
that EHRs cannot be tampered with. 
Figure 4. Architecture of the proposed model 
The proposed architecture consists of four types of nodes: 
administrator, hospital, patient, and provider, as illustrated in 
Figure 4. The system starts with the administrator node, 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

which is maintained and owned by the system developer. The 
administrator node is responsible for managing the system 
and connecting hospital nodes to the blockchain. Hospital 
nodes are responsible for issuing Ethereum addresses to 
patients and providers. Patient nodes store patient 
identifiers, such as gender and Ethereum address, as well as 
a mapping of which providers have access to the patient's 
EHR. Therefore, the patient is still in charge of keeping this 
mapping up to date, authorizing or denying access to 
providers as needed, and preserving control over their private 
medical data.  Provider nodes store provider identifiers, such 
as Ethereum address and specialty. This node can create and 
edit health records, as well as access an existing patient's 
health record. However, it is the patient's obligation to add 
the provider to their access list, providing them permission to 
read and interact with the patient's health records.   
The following are the steps involved in the operation of 
the proposed architecture: 
1. The patient authorizes the creation of an EHR by a 
particular provider. 
2. The authorized provider creates the patient's EHR. 
3. The EHR is uploaded to the IPFS-distributed file storage 
system. 
4. The EHR is encrypted using the Advanced Encryption 
Standard (AES) symmetric encryption algorithm. 
5. The hash of the encrypted EHR is stored on the 
blockchain. 
6. The patient or provider enters the hash to access the 
EHR. 
7. Smart contracts are included in the framework to create 
the access control system. Only authorized parties can 
see and edit health records thanks to the execution of 
access control restrictions which are made possible by 
the incorporation of smart contracts. 
8. Smart contracts can be created using Ethereum-specific 
programming languages such as Solidity programming 
or Python. 
9. The encrypted EHR is downloaded using the hash. 
10. The EHR is decrypted using the shared encryption key 
generated during the encryption process. 
11. The encryption key is kept private and is only securely 
shared with the patient and authorized providers who 
need access to the EHR. 
The proposed architecture provides a secure and scalable 
mechanism for managing EHRs. It is patient-centric, giving 
patients full control over their data. It is also tamper-proof, 
ensuring that EHRs cannot be modified without the patient's 
consent. 
The proposed architecture uses blockchain, smart 
contracts, and decentralized storage to improve the security, 
integrity, scalability, and access control of EHRs. 
The proposed architecture has several advantages over 
traditional EHR systems, including: 
• 
Security: Blockchain provides a high level of security 
for EHRs by making them tamper-proof and immutable. 
• 
Integrity: Decentralized storage ensures that EHRs are 
not lost or corrupted. 
• 
Scalability: The blockchain can be scaled to support 
many users and transactions. 
• 
Access control: Smart contracts can be used to enforce 
access control policies for EHRs. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION   
In this paper, a framework for the blockchain-based 
management of electronic health records (EHR) is presented. 
The proposed architecture uses the Ethereum blockchain, 
smart contracts, and decentralized storage systems like IPFS 
to address the issues of privacy, security, scalability, and 
access control in the healthcare industry. 
The architecture improves the security and integrity of 
EHR by utilizing blockchain's distributed ledger, immutable 
transactions, and cryptographic techniques. This makes it 
difficult for unauthorized parties to access or modify EHR 
data. Additionally, the architecture enables fast and 
transparent data sharing by allowing authorized parties to 
view and edit EHR data. This is made possible using smart 
contracts to enforce access control restrictions. 
Decentralized storage solutions also increase data 
availability and lower the risk of data loss or tampering. This 
is because EHR data is stored on multiple nodes in the 
decentralized network, making it more difficult to lose or 
alter. 
The patient-centric approach of the framework gives 
individuals control over their own health information. This 
includes the ability to store, view, and share their EHR data 
with authorized parties. 
The architecture works as follows: 
1. Patients create their own EHRs and store them on the 
blockchain. 
2. Providers can access patients' EHRs if the patient has 
granted them permission. 
3. Access control is enforced using smart contracts. 
4. EHRs are stored in a decentralized storage system, 
making them more secure and available. 
The proposed architecture appears to be promising in 
terms of resolving the problems of traditional EHR systems. 
However, more research and evaluation are needed to 
demonstrate its effectiveness, scalability, and real-world 
applicability. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
The National Coordinator for Health Information Technology, “What 
information does an electronic health record (ehr) contain,” [Online] 
Available: 
https://www.healthit.gov/faq/what-electronic-health-
record-ehr, 2019.  
[2] 
“Non-federal acute care hospital electronic health record adoption,” 
Health 
IT 
Quick-Stat 
47, 
09 
2017, 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://dashboard.healthit.gov/ 
quickstats/pages/FIG-Hospital-EHR-
Adoption.php, 2017. 
[3] 
N. Menachemi, S. Rahurkar, C. A. Harle, and J. R. Vest, “The benefits 
of health information exchange: an updated systematic review,” 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 25, no. 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

9, 
pp. 
1259–1265, 
04 
2018. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://doi.org/10.1093/jamia/ocy035, April 2018. 
[4] 
J. Goodman, L. Gorman, and D. Herrick, “Health information 
technology: Benefits and problems,” 2010. [Online] Available: 
https://www.ncpathinktank.org/pdfs/st327.pdf, 2010. 
[5] 
P. 
R. 
Clearinghouse, 
“Data 
breaches.” 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://privacyrights.org/ data-breaches. 
[6] 
S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system,” 2009. 
[Online] Available: http://www.bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf.  
[7] 
D. R. Matos, M. L. Pardal, P. Adão, A. R. Silva, and M. Correia, 
“Securing electronic health records in the cloud,” in Proceedings of the 
1st Workshop on Privacy by Design in Distributed Systems, ser. W-
P2DS’18. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing 
Machinery, 
2018, 
 
[Online] 
Available: 
https://doiorg.proxy.lnu.se/10.1145/3195258.3195259, 2018.  
[8] 
A. Dubovitskaya, F. Baig, Z. Xu, R. Shukla, P. S. Zambani, A. 
Swaminathan, M. M. Jahangir, K. Chowdhry, R. Lachhani, N. Idnani, 
M. Schumacher, K. Aberer, S. D. Stoller, S. Ryu, and F. Wang, 
“Action-ehr: Patient-centric blockchain-based electronic health record 
data management for cancer care,” J Med Internet Res, vol. 22, no. 8, 
p. 
e13598, 
Aug 
2020. 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://www.jmir.org/2020/8/e13598/, 2020. 
[9] 
M. Gupta, Blockchain For Dummies, 3rd IBM Limited Edition. John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc, doi:10.1126/science.1065467, Dec. 2020.  
[10] S. Haber and W. S. Stornetta, “How to time-stamp a digital document,” 
J. Cryptol., vol. 3, no.    2, p. 99–111, Jan. 1991. [Online] Available: 
https://doi-org.proxy.lnu.se/10.1007/BF00196791, 1991. 
[11] V. Buterin, “Ethereum: A next-generation smart contract and 
decentralized application platform,” 2013. [Online] Available: 
https://github.com/ethereum/wiki/ wiki/White-Paper, 2013. 
[12] J. Benet, “IPFS - content addressed, versioned, P2P file system,” 
CoRR, 
vol. 
abs/1407.3561, 
2014. 
[Online] 
Available: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/1407.3561, 2014. 
[13] A. Ekblaw, A. Azaria, J. D. Halamka, and A. Lippman, “A case study 
for blockchain in healthcare:“medrec” prototype for electronic health 
records and medical research data,” in Proceedings of IEEE Open & 
big data conference, vol. 13, 2016, p. 13. 
[14] G. G. Dagher, J. Mohler, M. Milojkovic, and P. B. Marella, “Ancile: 
Privacy-preserving framework for access control and interoperability 
of electronic health records using blockchain technology,” Sustainable 
Cities and Society, vol. 39, pp. 283–297, 2018. [Online] Available: 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ 
pii/S2210670717310685, 2018.  
[15] J. Vora, A. Nayyar, S. Tanwar, S. Tyagi, N. Kumar, M. S. Obaidat, and 
J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Bheem: A blockchain-based framework for 
securing electronic health records,” in 2018 IEEE Globecom 
Workshops (GC Wkshps), pp. 1–6, 2018. 
[16] T. Matsuo, “Proxy re-encryption systems for identity-based 
encryption,” in PairingBased Cryptography – Pairing 2007, T. Takagi, 
T. Okamoto, E. Okamoto, and T. Okamoto, Eds. Berlin, Heidelberg: 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 247– 267, 2007. 
[17] M. M. Madine, A. A. Battah, I. Yaqoob, K. Salah, R. Jayaraman, Y. 
Al-Hammadi, S. Pesic, and S. Ellahham, “Blockchain for giving 
patients control over their medical records,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 
193 102–193 115, 2020. 
 
APPENDIX A 
Simple outline for a secure Algorithm for Blockchain-Based 
Architecture for HER in Python   
def create_ehr(patient, provider): 
  # Create a new EHR for the patient. 
  # The provider must be authorized to create the EHR. 
  ehr = { 
    "patient": patient, 
    "provider": provider, 
  } 
  # Upload the EHR to IPFS. 
  ehr_hash = ipfs.upload_file(ehr) 
  # Encrypt the EHR using AES. 
  encryption_key = generate_encryption_key() 
  encrypted_ehr = encrypt_ehr(ehr, encryption_key) 
  # Store the hash of the encrypted EHR on the blockchain. 
  blockchain.store_hash(ehr_hash) 
  # Create a smart contract to manage access to the EHR. 
  smart_contract = create_smart_contract() 
  # Add the patient and authorized providers to the smart contract. 
  smart_contract.add_user(patient) 
  for provider in ehr["authorized_providers"]: 
    smart_contract.add_user(provider) 
  # Share the encryption key with the patient and authorized 
providers. 
  patient.set_encryption_key(encryption_key) 
  for provider in ehr["authorized_providers"]: 
    provider.set_encryption_key(encryption_key) 
def access_ehr(patient, hash): 
  # Check if the patient is authorized to access the EHR. 
  if not smart_contract.is_user_authorized(patient): 
    raise UnauthorizedAccessError() 
  # Download the encrypted EHR from IPFS. 
  encrypted_ehr = ipfs.download_file(hash) 
  # Decrypt the EHR using the shared encryption key. 
  ehr = decrypt_ehr(encrypted_ehr, patient.get_encryption_key()) 
  # Return the EHR. 
  return. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

