CIPROS – An Instrument for Evidence-based Evaluation of EDC Systems and the 
DBFORM Example 
 
Doris Lindoerfer, Thomas H. Müller, Kathrin Halfter, Ulrich Mansmann 
Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München  
Institute for Medical Information Processing, Biometry and Epidemiology (IBE) 
Munich, Germany 
e-mail: lindoerf@ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de, mueller@ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de, halfter@ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de, 
mansmann@ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de, 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—The success of medical research projects depends on 
efficient and powerful information systems. To assess the 
needed range of functionalities of such systems, we developed 
the evidence-based Checklist with Items for Patient Registry 
sOftware Systems (CIPROS), consisting of 72 items, organized 
within 12 aspects/topics. In this paper, we demonstrate how 
CIPROS can be used to assess the functionality of an 
information system. To this end, we evaluated an in-house 
Electronic Data Capture (EDC) system DataBase FORM 
generator (DBFORM). The assessment is helpful for project 
managers and medical scientists to select EDC systems for 
their own projects. The assessment may also help system 
developers to assess their systems and inspire them to develop 
new features. It may also be an efficient tool to evaluate 
research proposals with respect to the suitability of the selected 
software.  
Keywords-Information 
Systems; 
Software; 
Checklist; 
Evaluation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Efficient 
information 
systems 
are 
essential 
to 
successfully perform medical research projects such as 
clinical trials and medical registries. Various commercial and 
open-source Electronic Data Capture (EDC) systems support 
biomedical researchers handle complex data collections. 
Academic institutions often develop systems in-house in 
order to accommodate changing requirements. But provide 
existing information systems sufficient functionalities which 
are needed in innovative research projects?  
An instrument to assess the range of functionalities of 
register systems is the Checklist with Items for Patient 
Registry sOftware Systems (CIPROS), consisting of 72 
items, organized within twelve aspects/topics [1]. The 
CIPROS checklist was developed to evaluate existing 
information systems. While the evaluation has to be done in 
cooperation with the system specialists the result indicates to 
the medical scientist how appropriate the system may be for 
a planned project. A special elaboration paper in which each 
item is explained and enhanced with examples is prepared 
which can help to perform the systems assessment [2].  
In contrast to common generic Software Requirements 
Specification (SRS) templates [3]-[5] or standards [6] 
available for developing software systems for all fields and 
considering the different steps which must be done in 
software 
engineering, 
CIPROS 
is 
a 
comprehensive 
assessment tool specifically designed for the evaluation of 
patient registry software systems and the specification of 
requirements for patient registry software systems. The 
evaluation can be done in a few hours or less.  
Since requirements engineering is also essential in the 
medical domain [7], it is of interest, that the evaluation is 
done by 
applying 
a domain 
specific 
requirements 
engineering process. 
The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate the use of the 
CIPROS checklist in assessing a registry system and how the 
assessment can be used to plan downstream developments of 
a system. We apply it to assess our in-house EDC system 
DataBase FORM generator (DBFORM), which has been 
used to implement medical research projects in recent years. 
In Section 2, RELATED WORKS, the in-house 
developed EDC system DBFORM is presented and some 
projects in which DBFORM has been used are introduced. In 
Section III, METHODS, we first introduce the evidence-
based CIPROS checklist and then the way the evaluation of 
the EDC system DBFORM with the CIPROS checklist was 
done 
is 
described. 
Section 
IV, 
RESULTS 
AND 
DISCUSSION, first presents the results of this evaluation. 
Then results are discussed, as well as the implementation of 
special items in special projects. Section V, CONCLUSION 
AND FUTURE WORK, gives a conclusion of this work and 
an outlook to the next planned steps. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
In this section we first introduce the in house developed 
electronic Case Report Form (eCRF) system DBFORM. 
Then we describe some projects in which the DBFORM 
system is used to complement the IT infrastructure of the 
projects.    
A. The EDC System DBFORM 
The system was first described in 2002 [8] and its 
functionality has been extended and adapted during the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

following years to the specific requirements of several 
research projects. In brief, the core system provides a generic 
implementation of EDC functionality for a variety of data 
types, including unstructured text, numeric data, coded data, 
and other more structured types. Major components of 
DBFORM are a generic configurable web forms generator 
(dbform.cgi) and a form compiler (ddict.pl) that derives the 
appropriate configuration data from a tabulated data 
dictionary. The form generator runs on a platform providing 
a webserver and DataBase Management System (DBMS) 
environment. 
Specifically, 
Linux, 
Apache 
[9], 
and 
PostgreSQL [10] are used, but other environments are 
possible. The major implementation programming language 
is Perl [11]. A schematic overview of the DBFORM system 
and how it is used in a project is shown in Fig. 1.  
The basic DBFORM project environment consists of 
development systems and a live (or production) system with 
nearly the same structure. Each type of system can 
accommodate multiple DBFORM instances for separate 
EDC projects. The development systems should be 
connected to a Common Software Repository (CVS). The 
deployment process is automated. The system developer 
develops the core system functionalities, while the project 
developer develops the project-specific functionalities and 
communicates with the users.  
One of DBFORM’s key features is its extensibility via a 
number of interfaces. In several instances data dictionary 
entries can call on other resources to perform additional 
processing, for example as SQL or JavaScript phrases, or via 
a shell-like environment providing access to any other 
programming language. While DBFORM computes its own 
form layout for convenience, overrides can be taken from 
custom HTML/JavaScript templates. These tools allow 
adaption to project-specific requirements, albeit at different 
levels of expertise. The basic project development requires 
managing the data dictionary according to the specifications 
in the DBFORM documentation. The following paragraphs 
describe several instances of this adaptability. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.A schematic overview of DBFORM used in a data capture 
project. 
B. The EUTOS Population-based registry 
 The EUropean Treatment and Outcome Study (EUTOS) 
Population-based registry collected baseline, treatment, and 
outcome data from patients with Chronic Myeloid Leukemia 
(CML) across Europe [12][13].  
Part of the requirements called for a differentiated access 
authorization scheme for clinical centers in various countries. 
Role-based authorization is included in DBFORM’s core 
functionality and can be configured in the data dictionary. 
Furthermore, 
we 
complemented 
DBFORM 
with 
an 
extension to manage offline-generated queries to support this 
project. The queries were imported into the system ready to 
be processed online. Implementation made use of the 
“report”-programming interface, originally intended for 
reports, but suitable for any additional arbitrary functionality.  
The extension of DBFORM with the query module is 
shown in Fig. 2.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.Extension of DBFORM with an automatic Query module. 
 
Initially, the captured data is extracted from the database 
and verified offline using a SAS software system according 
specific rules. The query information is stored in a simple 
tabular format in text files. These are uploaded into the query 
tool of the EDC patient registry software system. Each query 
consists of a unique number, a query text with a question 
about the variable, and the corresponding unit. It is also 
possible to add new queries during the project. A worklist of 
queries can be executed by the study groups. The correct 
replies will be adopted automatically in the database and the 
query will be removed from the worklist. The described 
online query module is an efficient tool to communicate a 
large number of queries at low cost. 
Fig. 3 shows a Query screenshot. The wrong value is 
highlighted. When the Query is answered the correct value 
will be inserted automatically in the database. 
C. The BreathEase study 
The BreathEase study was designed to evaluate palliative 
care in support of patients with respiratory distress. 
Participating patients were visited and interviewed by a study 
nurse in their homes using a variety of questionnaires. The 
responses were documented in an offline instance of 
DBFORM, residing on a notebook computer as a mobile 
system. In this case, the challenge consisted of providing a 
 
 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

means to update the mobile "slave" systems and stationary 
"master" system with the study nurse's assignment details 
and questionnaire responses.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3.A selected Query with answer and reason. 
 
The BreathEase implementation was based on a generic 
synchronization module that can be configured by a special 
part of the data dictionary. 
The additional functionality is found in the web 
application's patient selection or “home” menu as shown in 
Fig. 4. 
Most clinical research projects can be documented with 
this repertoire of automatically generated layouts: lists, plain 
forms, and overview forms. In addition, more specific 
combinations and options are available. 
Fig. 5 shows an example of an ordinary questionnaire or 
Case Report Form (CRF), documenting the patients 
Integrated Palliative Outcome Scale (IPOS).  
D. The HTCR project 
Two instances and two major extensions were necessary 
to fill the requirements of the bio-banking project HTCR 
[14]. The first is related to identifying and characterizing 
biomaterial samples, i.e., including it in the data model as a 
separate entity.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.This is the user's root menu where all tasks begin. The mouse 
pointer marks the button triggering the synchronization process. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.A questionnaire that is part of the “Baseline” documentation. 
 
The second enhancement is related to data protection 
requirements, and consists of separating identification data 
and medical data into two separate databases. These are 
linked using a common arbitrary key and an encrypted 
version as a logical link between corresponding records. This 
link can only be accessed by authorized users of both 
datasets, thus providing additional privacy protection. Again, 
logical links were implemented as an extension subject to 
configuration in the respective data dictionaries.  
 
E. The PASTURE project 
The PASTURE project [15] investigated the conditions 
for allergy development during childhood in four different 
countries and required three different languages (Finnish, 
French and German), as well as English as the common 
language. While translated forms are part of the DBFORM 
core functionality, site-specific questionnaire dependencies 
and fixups at the template level were needed to correctly 
implement some of the country-specific variants (e.g., 
slightly different questions asked, different units of measure, 
etc.) of the questionnaires used.  
F. The RESIST study 
The RESIST study is a translational research project 
using xenograft mouse models to find an individualized 
therapy for secondary resistance for colorectal carcinoma 
patients. The RESIST study consists of two parts. The first 
part is a registry for an avatar model. Patients are registered 
and have to agree to give a tumor tissue sample to be used in 
the avatar model. The second part is the clinical study. 
Special challenges in this project are the combination of the 
two studies with clinical and biomedical data, the 
collaboration of different user-groups, and a sophisticated 
data protection model. We extended DBFORM to provide 
various pseudonyms. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

III. 
METHODS 
In this section we first introduce the evidence-based 
CIPROS checklist. Then we describe how the CIPROS 
checklist is used to evaluate the DBFORM system.   
A. The evidence-based  CIPROS checklist 
CIPROS is an evidence-based checklist, to assess patient 
registry software systems [1]. It consists of 72 items, 
organized within twelve aspects/topics. The CIPROS 
checklist was developed after an initial Systematic Literature 
Review (SLR) in PubMed. The papers were analyzed using 
Qualitative Content Analysis (QCA) methods published for 
social research [16] and adapted to the field of patient 
registry software systems. In an iterative process the items 
were assorted in the CIPROS checklist.  
In this paper we describe the use of CIPROS to evaluate 
the in house developed EDC system DBFORM.  
B. Evaluation of the EDC system DBFORM with CIPROS 
The evaluation was performed by two raters (DL and 
TM). First, each rater evaluated DBFORM with the CIPROS 
items independently. Each item of the CIPROS checklist was 
considered and whether or not the item was implemented in 
DBFORM or not. The evaluation showed that a simple 
yes/no answer is not for all items possible. Some items are 
implemented fully in DBFORM and some are not. Some 
items are implemented for individual projects, while a few 
items are only partly implemented. Other items can be 
configured for special projects, if necessary. Both raters 
discussed their results and reached an agreement in the 
answers for all items. For some items it was easy to find an 
answer, while other items needed to be discussed to find an 
appropriate answer. In the latter case it was very helpful to 
refer to the elaboration paper [2] and review the item to 
clarify the meaning of the item. 
In 
order 
to 
avoid 
misunderstandings, 
and 
for 
unambiguous assignment, we recommend using the full 
CIPROS checklist [1] in the evaluation where each item is 
described and not just the Aspect/Topic list, as shown in 
Table I. If there are still ambiguities in special items, we 
recommend using the elaboration paper [2], in which each 
item includes examples from the literature and explanations 
by the authors, for the evaluation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.Evaluation result of the EDC system DBFORM with CIPROS. 
 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
In this section we first present the cumulative evaluation 
results and the detailed results for each item. Then we give 
further insights in the implementation of the items and 
discuss them.    
A. Overall evaluation results 
The 
evaluation 
of 
DBFORM 
shows 
substantial 
conformity with CIPROS. Compliance is achieved in 44 out 
of 72 items: 22 are fully implemented in the system and 
another 22 are implemented at the project level. 
In four items DBFORM agrees partly with CIPROS, two 
are implemented partly in the system and two are 
implemented partly in projects. Two items can be configured 
in projects and one item can be configured partly at project 
level. Only 21 items of CIPROS are not available in 
DBFORM. The evaluation result is shown in Fig. 6.  
The overall result of the evaluation for each CIPROS 
item is shown below in Table I. Because of the limited space 
only the Aspect/Topic and the Item-No., of each item and the 
corresponding result if it is implemented in DBFORM or not 
is listed. For a description of each item we refer to the full 
CIPROS checklist [1].    
If the item is fully implemented in the DBFORM system, 
the answer is “Yes, System” if it is implemented for special 
projects, the answer is “Yes, Project”, if the item is partly 
implemented the answer is “Partly System” or “Partly, 
Project”, respectively. If it is not implemented, the answer is 
“No”, if the item is configurable for Projects it is stated with 
“Conf. Project”.  
A summary of the items by the possible answers is given 
in Table II. The first column contains the possible evaluation 
answers for the items. The second column contains the item 
numbers and the third column gives the summary number of 
the items for this answer.  
B. Features generally implemented in DBFORM 
Here we describe shortly the items which are generally 
implemented in the system DBFORM.  
DBFORM provides a multi-tier system architecture and 
a framework for the development of new projects. 
DBFORM also provides a table-based questionnaire builder. 
The framework supports early field tests. The system 
provides a web-interface which is compatible with the major 
web-browsers. In addition E-mail alerts are possible. The 
system provides a programming interface with third-party 
access and an Application Programming Interface (API) for 
inserting and retrieving data. Extensibility is possible. All 
data types are supported in the system. The system has an 
interface for a manual data check. Datasets can be 
downloaded, complete or selected cohorts only. The system 
has a role-based authorization module and supports 
encrypted data transfer. All changes are documented in an 
audit trail. The server is behind a firewall and located in a 
server room. The costs are controlled, because we have to 
pay no license costs for the system. 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE I.  EVALUATION OF THE EDC SYSTEM DBFORM WITH THE 
CIPROS ITEMS. 
Aspect / Topic 
Item- 
No. 
In DBFORM 
implemented 
System Architecture  
1.1 
Yes, System 
Platform independence  
1.2 
No 
Open Source 
1.3 
Partly, System  
Design model 
2.1 
No 
Framework-based design 
2.2 
Yes, System 
Questionnaire builder 
2.3 
Yes, System 
(table-based) 
Usability testing 
2.4 
Yes, System 
Performance testing 
2.5 
Partly, Project  
(estimated) 
Web Interface  
3.1 
Yes, System 
Compatibility 
3.2 
Yes, System 
Email-alert 
3.3 
Yes, System 
Messaging interface  
3.4 
Yes, Project 
Online discussion forum 
3.5 
No 
Mobile interface 
3.6 
Partly, Project 
(offl. No app) 
Patient interface 
3.7 
No 
Third party access 
3.8 
Yes, System 
API for inserting data 
3.9 
Yes, System 
API for retrieving data 
3.10 
Yes, System 
Data update mechanism 
3.11 
Yes, Project 
Interface to HIS / CIS 
3.12 
No 
Integration of biological data 
3.13 
Yes, Project 
Extensibility is possible 
3.14 
Yes, System 
CRFs 
4.1 
No 
Data 
4.2 
No 
Metadata 
4.3 
No 
Vocabularies 
4.4 
No 
XML Schema 
4.5 
No 
Multilingualism 
5.1 
Yes, Project 
Pseudonymous patient identifier 
6.1 
Yes, Project 
CRF is divided in parts 
6.2 
Yes, Project 
Customizable CRF parts 
6.3 
Yes, Project 
Minimal and extended dataset 
6.4 
Yes, Project 
All data types are supported 
6.5 
Yes, System 
Special data types are possible 
6.6 
Yes, Project 
Multiple choice is used 
6.7 
Yes, Project 
No predefined selection 
6.8 
Yes, Project 
Aspect / Topic 
Item- 
No. 
InDBFORM 
implemented 
Data validation components 
6.9 
Yes, Project 
Data query tool 
6.10 
Yes, Project 
Interface for manual data check 
6.11 
Yes, System 
Manual data queries 
6.12 
No 
Data Query Flags 
6.13 
No 
Plausibility Flags 
6.14 
No 
Insertion of unplanned visits 
6.15 
Yes, Project 
Software ergonomics 
6.16 
Partly, System 
Query builder for researchers 
7.1 
No 
Report generation 
7.2 
No 
Download of datasets 
7.3 
Yes, System 
Graphical Presentation of results 
7.4 
No 
Risk Analysis 
7.5 
No 
Authorized users 
8.1 
Yes, System 
Role-based access 
8.2 
Yes, System 
Encrypted data transfer 
8.3 
Yes, System 
Encrypted data storage 
8.4 
No 
Audit trail 
8.5 
Yes, System 
Master-Slave replication 
8.6 
Conf.,Project 
Backup management 
8.7 
Yes, System 
Firewall 
8.8 
Yes, System 
Server room 
8.9 
Yes, System 
Data Protection concept 
9.1 
Yes, Project 
Double pseudonymization 
9.2 
Conf., Project 
Costs 
10.1 
Yes, System  
(no licence costs) 
Multi-client capability 
10.2 
No 
Update mechanism 
10.3 
No 
Source documentation in pdf 
10.4 
No 
Compliance with regulations 
11.1 
Yes, Project 
Informed Consent 
11.2 
Yes, Project 
Rights on the data 
11.3 
Yes, Project 
Data protection guidelines All 
11.4 
Yes, Project 
User manuals 
12.1 
Yes, Project 
User training 
12.2 
Yes, Project 
User feedback 
12.3 
Yes, Project 
Online help 
12.4 
Partly conf., Project 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE II. SUMMARY OF THE EVALUATION OF DBFORM WITH 
CIPROS. 
Is the Item implemented 
in DBFORM? 
Item numbers 
∑ 
Yes, System   
1.1, 2.2, 2.3, 2.4, 3.1, 3.2, 
3.3, 3.8, 3.9, 3.10, 3.14, 6.5, 
6.11, 7.3, 8.1, 8.2, 8.3, 8.5, 
8.7, 8.8, 8.9, 10.1 
22 
Yes, Project   
3.4, 3.11, 3.13, 5.1, 6.1, 6.2, 
6.3, 6.4, 6.6, 6.7, 6.8, 6.9, 
6.10, 6.15, 9.1, 11.1, 11.2, 
11.3, 11.4, 12.1, 12.2, 12.3 
22 
Partly, System 
1.3, 6.16 
  2 
Partly, Project 
2.5, 3.6 
  2 
Configurable, Project 
8.6, 9.2 
  2 
Partly configurable, Project 
12.4 
  1 
No 
1.2, 2.1, 3.5, 3.7, 2.12, 4.1, 
4.2, 4.3, 4.4, 4.5, 6.12, 6.13, 
6.14, 7.1, 7.2, 7.4, 7.5, 8.4, 
10.2, 10.3, 10.4 
21 
 
 
72 
 
C. Features partly fulfilled in DBFORM 
Open-source components are used to create DBFORM 
but it is not yet made open-source, so this item is only partly 
fulfilled. Software ergonomics, defined in ISO 9241-110 are 
only partly fulfilled in DBFORM, because they are mostly 
dependent on the implementation of web-forms for the 
special project. 
D. Features implemented in DBFORM in special Projects 
In this sub-section, we describe the items which are 
implemented in special projects. This generally indicates that 
while the feature is not strictly part of DBFORM, there is an 
appropriate configuration or at least a workaround to obtain a 
satisfactory result.  
Many of the Project items are fulfilled in several projects. 
For example item 6.1, pseudonymous patient identifier, is 
implemented in several projects, for example in EUTOS and 
in RESIST. Also item 6.2, CRF is divided in parts, item 6.5, 
all data types are supported, item 6.7, multiple-choice is 
used, and item 6.8, no predefined selection, are used in 
EUTOS and in RESIST. Also the regulatory items 11.1, 
compliance with regulations, 11.2, informed consent and 
11.4, data protection guidelines, are fulfilled in EUTOS and 
in RESIST. 
1) The EUTOS Population-based registry 
In the EUTOS population-based registry we implemented 
an automatic query tool to perform queries as explained in 
Fig. 2. This enhancement is implemented in the system at the 
project level. The questions can be answered by the users 
and the given results were automatically inserted into the 
database, so Items 3.11 and 6.10 of CIPROS are 
implemented in EUTOS with this feature. We have also a 
messaging interface in EUTOS to send messages to the 
users, this fulfilled item 3.4. Item 6.15, insertion of 
unplanned visits is also implemented in EUTOS, since it was 
necessary to collect the results of all performed cytogenetic 
and molecular samples.  
Since EUTOS was a pan-European project with many 
participants we held a user training session at the study start. 
We also provided a user manual and collected user feedback. 
Hence the items 12.1, 12.2 and 12.3 of CIPROS are 
implemented in EUTOS. 
All participating study-groups had the right to access 
their own data at any time during the project phase from the 
central database by placing a request via the project manager. 
With this statement item 11.3 was fulfilled in EUTOS. In the 
EUTOS population-based registry we had many study-
groups and users, we determined the performance of the 
system before we started, so item 2.5 performance testing 
was estimated in this project. 
2) The BreathEase study 
The mobile system used in the BreathEase study to 
collect the answers from the patients needed to be 
synchronized with the central database. The synchronization 
mechanism was implemented as a DBFORM extension 
subject to configuration in the data dictionary [17]. So with 
this study item 3.6, mobile interface, from the CIPROS list 
was partly fulfilled. This means that data can be collected 
offline and integrated in the central database at a later time, 
however, there is no special app for mobile phones.  
3) The HTCR project 
Due to the implementation of an identification module of 
biomedical data and a special privacy model item 3.13, 
integration of biological data and item 6.1, pseudonymous 
patient identifier are fulfilled within this project [18]. 
Identification data and medical data are stored in two 
separate databases. Corresponding records are linked using a 
common arbitrary key and an encrypted version as a logical 
link, which can only be accessed by authorized users. 
4) The PASTURE project 
DBFORM supports multilingualism, which means that 
the complete eCRF can be displayed in different languages. 
Since this study was performed in Germany, France, and 
Finland, all items were translated and inserted in different 
languages in addition to English. The user can select the 
language in which the eCRF will be displayed. With this 
feature item 5.1, multilingualism, of CIPROS is fulfilled. 
5) The RESIST study 
In the RESIST study a sophisticated data protection 
concept 
was 
established, 
this 
included 
double 
pseudonymization. DBFORM was enhanced to support this 
data protection concept [19]. A schematic overview how the 
role-based access and the double-pseudonymization with 
different identifiers for different users were implemented is 
shown in Fig. 7. The users in the clinics have access to the 
medical data with a Patient IDentifier (PID). They retrieve 
the tumor_no and send it with the tumor to the pathology. 
The users in the pathology have access to the molecular 
tumor analysis data with the tumor_no. They are able to 
retrieve the av_no and send a tumor sample with this av_no 
to the laboratory with the AVATARMODEL.  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.Simplified data model of the RESIST study. 
 
The users in the AVATARMODEL have access to the 
data in the AVATARMODEL with the av_no. Using this 
mechanism the data is strictly separated through different 
identifiers for different users and role-based user access. So 
in this project, beside other items mentioned before, items 
9.1 and 9.2 of CIPROS are fulfilled. 
6) Influence of the project features for CIPROS 
Since some projects were performed before the CIPROS 
checklist was developed, the project features also influenced 
the development of the CIPROS checklist by bringing own 
experiences into the development of the CIPROS items. For 
example item 6.10 Data query tool, was implemented in the 
EUTOS Population-based registry and then introduced in the 
CIPROS checklist as own experiences.  
The mobile interface which was implemented in the 
BreathEase study is also part of the CIPROS checklist, but 
this item is not solely based on own experiences, since it was 
also found by the SLR. 
E. Configurable Features 
Item 8.6, Master-slave replication is not yet implemented 
but it is configurable, the same applies to item 9.2, double-
pseudonymization. We have no complete online-help 
implemented, but some features, for example mouse-over-
field help can be configured, so we considered item 12.4 
online-help as partly configurable. 
F. Features not implemented in “DBFORM” 
Our system runs on Linux, therefore we decided to reply 
“no” for item 1.2 platform independence. Since all major 
components (DBMS, webserver, and the main programming 
language) are available on multiple platforms, DBFORM 
should be portable to other environments with reasonable 
effort, but this has not yet been attempted. The system was 
not developed following a design model, item 2.1, but we 
have our own design model for new projects. The idea is 
shown in Fig. 1, which is an adaption of agile software 
development. We have no implemented online discussion 
forum, item 3.5, since we have mainly relied on email 
correspondence with the users until now. We have no patient 
interface, item 3.7 implemented, because there has not been 
any project until now for which it was necessary. We have 
no interface to Hospital Information Systems / Clinical 
Information Systems (HIS/CIS), item 3.12. We replied “no” 
for 
standardization 
of 
CRFs, 
data, 
metadata, 
and 
vocabularies (items 4.1 – 4.4) because we have no 
implemented thesaurus. However, we use standardized 
answers with multiple choice menus. We have no eXtensible 
Markup Language (XML)-procedure for data exchange (item 
4.5.), manual data queries (item 6.12), are not possible also 
data query flags (item 6.13), and plausibility flags (item 
6.14), are not implemented. We have no query builder for 
researchers (item 7.1), and report generation (item 7.2), 
graphical presentation of results (item 7.3), and risk analysis 
(item 7.5), are not possible. Encrypted data storage at the 
single-item level (item 8.4) is not possible, except for user 
passwords. Multi-client capability, (item 10.2), is not 
supported, there is no update mechanism, (item 10.3), and 
source documentation of CRFs in pdf format (item 10.4) is 
also not possible. 
G. Planned improvements of DBFORM 
The evaluation of DBFORM with the CIPROS checklist 
showed some shortfalls of DBFORM. In the near future we 
want to implement some of the features proposed in the 
CIPROS checklist. For example, source documentation in 
pdfs (item 10.4), was regarded as very helpful and will be 
implemented soon. Also item 3.7, patient interface, is on the 
list of features to be implemented. It will most likely rely on 
the more general tool of form templates. Also the 
standardization of CRFs, data, metadata and vocabularies is 
regarded as very important and is considered for 
implementation. If a project includes monitoring visits in the 
study centers it is also very helpful to document the results of 
these visits in the system near the captured data. Therefore 
the system should provide data query flags (item 6.13).  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The evaluation detailed above has shown that the 
CIPROS checklist is a practical solution for the assessment 
of patient registry software systems. It also showed that a 
simple yes/no answer is not possible for many of the items. 
So 
a 
more 
differentiated 
assessment 
was 
applied 
(implemented 
at 
System 
or 
Project 
level, 
partly 
implemented, etc.) see Table II. It is also highly 
recommended to use the full CIPROS checklist [1] for the 
assessment, and not just the aspect/topic list as shown in 
Table I of this paper. If the two raters chose different 
answers when the intention of the item was not clear the 
elaboration paper [2] helped to clarify the meaning of the 
items.  
The evaluation also showed that it would be very helpful 
to have a quantification mechanism for the answers to 
generate a rating scale. So if different patient registry 
software systems would be compared the users would have 
an objective instrument to choose the appropriate system for 
their projects. This rating scale may be developed in the 
future.  
It is also planned to update the CIPROS checklist with a 
new SLR and with input from other persons, for example 
 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

performing a workshop or establishing a focus group to get 
input. 
The evaluation was successful for both, the system 
DBFORM because it showed the advantages and the 
deficiencies, and the CIPROS checklist because it showed 
that there are possibilities for improvements, such as a scale 
to rate the replies. 
This was the first evaluation of an EDC system using the 
CIPROS checklist.   
The presented evaluation of DBFORM with CIPROS can 
be a template for other researchers to evaluate their systems 
using the CIPROS checklist. It can also be an inspiration for 
scientists and system developers to develop new features of 
their own systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Lindoerfer, U. Mansmann, “A comprehensive assessment 
tool for patient registry software systems: the CIPROS 
checklist,” Methods Inf Med. vol. 54(5), pp. 447-54, 2015, 
doi: 10.3414/ME14-02-0026. 
[2] D. Lindoerfer, U. Mansmann, “Data for the elaboration of the 
CIPROS checklist with items for a patient registry software 
system: Examples and explanations,” Data in Brief, 2017 Aug 
3; 14:494-497. doi: 10.1016/j.dib.2017.07.075. eCollection 
2017 Oct. 
[3] K. Wiegers, J. Beatty, Software Requirements, Third Edition. 
Redmont, Washington. Microsoft Press. 2013 
[4] AD. 
McKinnon, 
“Software 
requirements 
specification 
template,” 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
http://users.tricity.wsu.edu/~mckinnon/cpts322/cpts322-srs-
v1.doc. 2017.08.18 
[5] Volere Requirements Specification Template. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.volere.co.uk/template.htm. 
2017.05.07 
[6] IEEE STANDARD. 29148-2011 - Systems and software 
engineering 
-- 
Life 
cycle 
processes 
--Requirements 
engineering. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://standards.ieee.org/findstds/standard/29148-2011.html. 
2017.08.18 
[7] Kossmann M, The significance of requirements engineering 
for the medical domain, J Med Eng Technol. 38 (2014), 238-
43. doi: 10.3109/03091902.2014.918199. 
[8] TH. Müller, K. Adelhard, “A web-based central diagnostic 
data repository,” Stud Health Technol Inform. vol. 90 pp. 
246-250, 2002. 
[9] Apache HTTP SERVER PROJECT. [Online]. Available 
from: https://httpd.apache.org/ 2017.08.18 
[10] PostgreSQL. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.postgresql.org/ 2017.08.18 
[11] The perl programming language. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.perl.org/ 2017.08.18 
[12] D. Lindörfer, TH. Müller, „Integration und analyse von 
patienten mit chronischer myeloischer leukämie (CML) in 25 
europäischen 
ländern 
mit 
webbasierter 
elektronischer 
datenerfassung,“ in: P. Schmücker, K-H. Elsässer, S. Hayna, 
Eds.: Tagungsband der 55. GMDS Jahrestagung 2010, 
Mannheim, pp. 494-5, 2010. 
[13] VS. Hoffmann, et al., “The EUTOS population-based 
registry: incidence and clinical characteristics of 2904 CML 
patients in 20 european countries,” Leukemia. vol. 29(6) pp. 
1336-43, Jun 2015, doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.73. 
[14] WE. Thasler, TS. Weiss, K. Schillhorn, PT. Stoll, B. Irrgang, 
KW. Jauch, „Charitable state-controlled foundation human 
tissue and cell research: ethic and legal aspects in the supply 
of surgically removed human tissue for research in the 
academic and commercial sector in germany,” Cell Tissue 
Bank. vol. 4(1) pp. 49-56  2003. 
[15] U. Gehring, et. al., “Endotoxin levels in cow's milk samples 
from farming and non-farming families - the PASTURE 
study,” Environ Int. vol. 34(8) pp. 1132-6 Nov 2008, doi: 
10.1016/j.envint.2008.04.003. 
[16] P. Mayring, “Qualitative content analysis. Forum Qualitative 
Sozialforschung / Forum: Qualitative Social Research,” Vol. 
1, No. 2, Art. 20, June 2000. ISSN 1438-5627. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.qualitative-
research.net/index.php/fqs/article/view/1089/2386 2017.08.18 
[17] TH. Müller, “Synchronising mobile electronic case report 
forms with a central database,” Stud Health Technol Inform. 
vol. 228 pp. 307-11, 2016. 
[18] TH. Müller, R. Thasler, “Separation of Personal Data in a 
Biobank Information System,” Stud Health Technol Inform. 
vol. 205, pp. 388-92, 2014. 
[19] D. Lindoerfer, U. Mansmann, “IT infrastructure of an 
oncological trial where xenografts inform individual second 
line treatment decision,” Stud Health Technol Inform. vol. 
235 pp. 226-30, 2017.  
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

