Relationships between Quantitative and Subjective Evaluations of
Assistive Effect on Standing Function of the Smart Suit
Hijiri Hiraishi
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
Hokkaido University
Sapporo, Japan
Email: hiraishi@hce.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
Takayuki Tanaka
Graduate School of Information Science and Technology
Hokkaido University
Sapporo, Japan
Email: ttanaka@ssi.ist.hokudai.ac.jp
Mami Sakata
Graduate School of Engineering
Yokohama National University
Yokohama, Japan
Email: sakata-mami-dz@ynu.jp
Dai Kawahara
Graduate School of Engineering
Yokohama National University
Yokohama, Japan
Email: kawahara-dai-ph@ynu.jp
Keisuke Shima
Graduate School of Engineering
Yokohama National University
Yokohama, Japan
Email: shima@ynu.ac.jp
Abstract—The Smart Suit is a power assist suit that reduces the
burden on the lumbar region by reducing the activity of the spinal
column erector muscle and has a trunk stabilizing effect. The suit
also has assistive effect on stabilizing human trunk motion by
tightening the pelvis. By using this as prevention of work-related
accidents, it leads to the elimination of labor shortages. However,
for the smooth introduction of Smart Suit, it is important to
match the objective auxiliary effect with the subjective auxiliary
effect. In this study, we focus on the balance assistive effect
of Smart Suit and clarify the objective support and subjective
assistive effects.
Keywords–Assist Tool; Standing Function; Quantitative and
Subjective Evaluations.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Japan has a rapidly aging population. According to the
Annual Health, Labour and Welfare Report 2016 [1], the
aging rate was 26.7% in 2015, whereas it was less than 5%
in 1950. The aging rate is expected to increase, and one in
2.5 people in 2060 will be 65 or older. Thus, the working-
age population supporting the elderly is decreasing and it is
becoming difﬁcult to maintain the labor force. To address
this problem, one idea is to reduce the burden of labor,
thereby reducing the risk of injury and illness and allowing
people to work longer. KEIROKA technology reduces the
physical burden without interfering with the movement of the
worker. The Smart Suit [2][3] is an assistive technology used
by various workers, including farmers, ﬁshers, construction
workers, industrial workers, and nursing care workers.
The Smart Suit is an assistive tool that uses a rubber belt
to exert an assistive effect in a forward bending position.
The suit reduces the activity of the spinal erector muscles by
assisting the muscle force and stabilizes the trunk by increasing
joint stiffness via the tightening force. However, there are
individual differences in the exertion of the assistive effect and
the agreement between the objective and subjective assistive
effects. Therefore, the subjective assistive effect of the Smart
Suit can indicate what the objective assistive effect of the
Smart Suit feels like, allowing the efﬁciency of the suit to
be improved. Understanding these relationships is expected to
help the introduction and diffusion of Smart Suit. In this paper,
we focus on the balance assistive effect of the Smart Suit and
clarify the relationship between the objective and the subjective
assistive effects.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Although we measure the subjective assistive effect of the
Smart Suit here, several studies have subjectively measured the
work load. NASA-TLX (Task Load Index) developed by Hart
et al. [5] is a widely used technique for measuring subjective
mental workload. It uses a multidimensional construct to derive
an overall workload score based on the weighted average of
evaluations on six subscales: mental demand, physical demand,
temporal demand, performance, effort, and frustration level.
Subjective workload experience tasks, behaviors, and subject-
related correlations are deﬁned as a function of difﬁculty of
manipulation within the experiment, various workload sources
between experiments, and individual differences in workload
deﬁnition.
Yamada et al. [6] proposed an assist system for subjec-
tive burden called Skill-Assist, which varies its mechanical
impedance to give workers who have been working for many
years a sense of achievement in being able to perform the
skilled tasks they were capable of when younger again. A Skill-
Assist control algorithm based on variable impedance control
has been proposed.
The present study describes the relationship between sub-
jective and objective assistive effects for the balance assistive
effect of Smart Suit. However, we think that the results are
relevant to other assist tools and workload support.
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Figure 1. Schematic of elastic belts [2].
III.
ASSIST MECHANISM OF SMART SUIT
We describe the conﬁguration of the Smart Suit and its
effects. Figure 1 shows a schematic of the Smart Suit and Fig.
2 shows the assist mechanism. Elastic belts connect the thighs
and shoulders to the back. The Smart Suit ﬁts closely to the
wearer’s body and the assistive force is set according to the
expected workload.
The elastic belt for the upper body, R1, and the elastic belt
for the thigh, R2, are connected by a movable pulley at a point.
The initial length of the path between A and C to the waist belt
at point D after folding back at point B is the natural length of
the elastic belt, and the change in path length when the wearer
changes posture, ∆lAC, generates force F1 at A and force F2
at C. Assist torques τs1 and τs2 expand hip joint θ1 and lumbar
spine joint θ2, respectively. The supporting torque reduces the
wearer’s joint torque and reduces the load on the muscles that
move the joints. Simultaneously, force F1 acts on the resilient
waist belt at point D. F1 increases the compression on the belt
and lumbar spine at the tightening point. The combined torque
τs12 and force F1 are given as
τs12 = τs1 + τs2 = 6
5rsks∆lAC
(1)
F1 = 2
5ks∆lAC
(2)
where rs is the moment arm of the elastic material and ks
is the coefﬁcient of elasticity.
Equation (2) is derived from the balance of forces between
elastic materials with a pulley conﬁguration. The extended
length of the entire line from shoulder to leg is divided by
a ratio of 1:4 between the upper and lower elastic material.
According to Imamura, the rigidity of the trunk is increased
and the posture is stabilized by force F generated during
the forward bending posture [3]. In other words, wearing a
Smart Suit exerts a sensory stabilizing effect and improves the
stability of the entire body. And Imamura et al. presents an
enhanced framework for evaluating an assistive effect of Smart
Suit using a humanoid robot[4]. In this paper, we consider
these assistive effects as balance assistive effects and perform
subjective and objective evaluation.
IV.
EVALUATION OF STANDING FUNCTION BASED ON
VIRTUAL LIGHT TOUCH CONTACT
We describe a Standing Function Evaluation System [7]
used for quantitative measurement of the balance assistive
Figure 2. Assist mechanism of Smart Suit [2].
effect of the Smart Suit. The Standing Function Evaluation
System uses Virtual Light Touch Contact (VLTC) [8] devised
by Sakata et al. Maintaining a standing position requires mit-
igating the risk of falling. A high standing function indicates
good balance and low falling risk.
We describe the VLTC. Jeka et al. reported a phenomenon
called light touch contact (LTC), in which touching a ﬁxed
point of a light force reduces postural ﬂuctuation [9]. Because
physical contact is required for LTC, VLTC provides the effect
of LTC virtually with no touch.
Figure 3 shows a simple system conﬁguration. See [7],
[8], and [9] for details. The system consists of a Wii balance
board as a force plate for measuring the Center Of Pressure
(COP), a web camera for photographing the subject during
measurements, a vibrator attached to the subject’s ﬁnger for
VLTC, and a computer for controlling the system. The mea-
surement is performed with the subject standing on the Wii
balance board. The subject touches a virtual wall conﬁgured
around the body. In the measurement, the subject is switched
between a state in which the virtual reaction force is presented
when touching the virtual wall and a state in which no virtual
reaction force is presented. Evaluate the change caused by .
The measurement time is 40 s.
First, the COP is calculated for the sagittal plane (X
direction) and the coronal plane (Y direction) from the Wii
balance board. The following eight indices are used to evaluate
the support standing function: d1: total trajectory length of
COP (LCOP ); d2: rectangular area of COP (Srect); d3: outer
peripheral area of COP (Speri); d4: average velocity of COP
(vCOP ); d5: average vector of COP (L); and d6−8: index
variations associated with virtual partition state changes.
The standardized indices (Il) are determined using the
standard deviation (σl) and the mean (µl) of the standard
subject data for each index value.
Il = dl − µl
σl
(3)
Considering Il allows the inconsistencies between the mea-
sured and controlled values to be assessed. Then, the weighted
sum of Il (S(I) = ΣN+8
l=1 wlIl) is calculated for comprehensive
evaluation of the stationary functions. It is assumed that
the relationship between age and standing function can be
expressed as a non-linear function,
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Figure 3. Overview of the Standing Function Evaluation System [7].
Sage = fage(S(I))
(4)
where fage(S(I)) is a nonlinear function of the weighted
sum, S(I), for estimating the subject’s age, and Sage is the
subject’s age estimated by the system, called ”standing age”
here. Similarly, it is assumed that the relationship between age
and balance function can be expressed as a linear function in
the current system as
Bage = gage(Inc
1 )
(5)
where gage(Inc
1 ) is the total trajectory length of COP when
VLTC is OFF, Inc
1
is used for estimating the subject’s age ,
and Bage is the subject’s other age estimated by the system,
called ”balance age” here.
Because standing age is calculated using several evaluation
indices, it is an index of balance including the subject’s sensory
feedback. The smaller the standing age, the better the sense
of balance. On the other hand, because the balance age is
calculated from the index when VLTC is OFF, it indicates an
individual’s balance with no sensory factors. Therefore, the
smaller the balance age, the better the potential balance.
V.
EXPERIMENT FOR QUANTITATIVE AND SUBJECTIVE
EVALUATION
A. Experimental Setup
The introductory tests were conducted on nine men and
women aged 20s to 50s to verify the effects of assistance of
the Smart Suit according to the schedules shown in Table I. The
subjects are working at a distribution center, and is inspecting
and loading on a truck. They are in the middle and lower back
posture when carrying luggage and working on lanes. Table
II shows the results of physical ﬁtness tests as the physical
abilities of each subject, and their working style.
First, a 1-day advance measurement was performed to
determine the subject’s physical ability and to explain the in-
troductory test, including the physical ﬁtness test, the standing
function evaluation, the signiﬁcance of the Smart Suit, and
the instructions for its use. For 5 days in the following week,
the subjects performed their usual work while completing the
subjective working environment survey [10] without wearing
TABLE I. SCHEDULE FOR INTRODUCTORY TESTS FOR
EVALUATING THE ASSISTIVE EFFECT OF THE SMART SUIT.
the ﬁrst week
the second week
the third week
Days
Five days
Five days
Five days
Labor environment investigation Wearing period Introduction test period
Conduct
awareness examination
usual work
awareness examination
contents
usual work
usual work
Smart Suit
non-wear
wear
wear
Figure 4. Measurements with the Standing Function Evaluation System
wearing the Smart Suit.
a Smart Suit. In the next 5 days, they wore the Smart Suit, but
they did not complete the subjective survey. In the subjective
working environment survey, we conducted a questionnaire
to ask about the languors of body and feelings at the start
and end of work. The 5 days in the last week were the
introductory test period, and the subjects did their usual work
while wearing a Smart Suit and completed a subjective survey.
After the introductory test period, a follow-up measurement
similar to the pre-measurement was conducted and the subjects
completed a feeling-of-use questionnaire for the Smart Suit.
Figure 4 shows the advance measurement using the Standing
Function Evaluation System with the Smart Suit.
The physical strength tests performed in the pre- and post-
measurements were standing physical anteﬂexion, functional
reach test, and grip strength measurement. These were mea-
sured twice each and the average value was used.
B. Experimental Results
1) Experimental Results of Subjective Evaluations: For the
introductory test, we describe the results of the surveys of
subjective experience and questionnaires for standing function
evaluation and subjective evaluation. The results of the follow-
up measurements were used. The results for the nine subjects
are shown in Tables III and IV. The feeling of the assistive
effect measured by the post hoc measurement questionnaire
was evaluated by rating how much the assistive effect of
the Smart Suit was felt on a 10-point scale. The response
of subjects who could not determine whether there was an
assistive effect was recorded as ”none”, that of the subjects
who felt a subjective assistive effect from the Smart Suit was
recoded as ”yes”, and that of the subjects who felt no assistive
effect was recorded as ”no”. As shown in Table III, some
subjects felt uncomfortable wearing at the time of walking or
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE II. PHYSICAL FITNESS TEST AND WORKING STYLE.
Physical Fitness Test
Working Style
Standing
FRT
Grasping
Job
Working
NO. Position[cm] [cm] Power[kgf]
Description
Road
a
7.0
41
46.0
Response to lane clogging
heigh
b
-7.5
37
50.5
Tractor docking
heigh
c
4.0
43
53.5
Loading and transporting luggage
heigh
d
11.0
46
25.0
Product inspection
low
e
-4.0
40
54.5
Reﬁll items on the shelf
middle
f
1.5
50
48.0
Tractor docking
heigh
g
4.0
47
33.5
Store products on the shelf
low
h
-7.0
44
44.5
Sort the package
heigh
i
-3.5
41
34.5
Product inspection and sorting
middle
TABLE III. FEELING OF WEARING AND SUBJECTIVE EVALUATION.
Proﬁle
Feeling of wearing
Subjective evaluation
Age
Feeling of
Subjective
NO.
[years]
Sex
At ﬁrst
In the end
Assistance Effect
Survey
a
46
male
Discomfort
Improved
8/10
none
b
33
male
Discomfort
Discomfort
6/10
No
c
53
male
Discomfort
Improved
8/10
none
d
38
female Accustomed soon No discomfort
2/10
Yes
e
42
male
Discomfort
Discomfort
7/10
Yes
f
55
male
Accustomed soon No discomfort
8/10
none
g
28
female Accustomed soon No discomfort
1/10
Yes
h
56
male
Accustomed soon No discomfort
8/10
Yes
i
52
male
Accustomed soon No discomfort
7/10
none
at the beginning of use, but most subjects eventually became
accustomed to using Smart Suit.
In the experience of the assistive effect in Table III, the
two women may have felt the assistive effect less because their
work did not involve much forward bending and their working
roads are low as shown in Table II and III; thus, there was
little opportunity to demonstrate the assistive effect of the suit.
However, similar to subjective experiences of illness, the actual
assistive effect does not necessarily agree with the feeling of
the assistive effect. Thus, we identiﬁed subjects who did not
feel the assistive effect, although there was an actual assistive
effect .
Table IV shows the standing age and balance age measured
using the Standing Function Evaluation System when the
Smart Suit was not worn and when it was worn. The differ-
ences between the measurements show how much the standing
function was improved by wearing the Smart Suit. In other
words, the larger the difference between the measurements
while not wearing the suit and wearing the suit, the larger the
balance assistive effect. The effect was seen in six subjects;
thus, several subjects beneﬁtted from the Smart Suit.
2) Quantitative Evaluation Results.: The body sway mea-
sured in the Standing Position Function Evaluation System was
analyzed. According to Yamamoto et al., body sway and low
back pain risk are related [11]. People with lumbar lordosis
had a large sway in the lateral direction (X direction), and
those with a tendency to scoliosis or cervical tilt had a large
sway in the anteroposterior direction (Y direction). Based on
these observations, the risk of occurrence of lumbar pain could
be reduced if the X direction and the Y direction of the center
of gravity ﬂuctuation are decreased when wearing the Smart
Suit. Figures. 5 and 6 show the decrease in the effective value
and speed of the body sway in each direction when the Smart
Suit is worn. Six of the nine subjects showed a reduction in
body sway in either the X or Y direction. We conﬁrmed the
TABLE IV. STANDING AGE AND BALANCE AGE.
Difference between
Non-Wearing
wearing and non-wearing
Age
Standing
Balance
Standing
Balance
NO. [years]
Age
Age
Age
Age
a
46
7
-15
-32
22
b
33
36
-30
7
5
c
53
55
36
10
9
d
38
33
6
12
13
e
42
38
-13
46
2
f
55
17
-15
16
5
g
28
32
-39
6
0
h
56
21
-21
19
-5
i
52
16
1
-6
-10
-60.0
-40.0
-20.0
0.0
20.0
40.0
60.0
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
Reduc

on rate of e

ec

ve value[%]
X direc
TABLE V. COEFFICIENT OF DETERMINATION BETWEEN BODY
SWAY AND THE STANDING FUNCTION EVALUATION SYSTEM.
Difference of standing age
Difference of balance age
Effective value
Speed
Effective value
Speed
X direction
0.23
0.14
0.43
0.51
Y direction
0.08
0.07
0.22
0.8
sensory stimuli [12]. The balance assistive effect of the Smart
Suit may affect the sensory system, similar to the VLTC of the
Standing Function Evaluation System. We examined the effect
of wearing a Smart Suit on the sensory system.
The evaluation method is as follows. First, wavelet trans-
formation was performed on body sway measured by the
Standing Position Function Evaluation System. The wavelet-
transformed time series gain was divided by the frequency
band of each sensory system. The frequency band was 0.02–
0.3 Hz for vision, 0.3–1.0 Hz for vestibular + tactile sense,
and 1.0–3.0 Hz for position sense. Then, the time average
and the variance of the gain of each frequency band were
calculated to evaluate quantitatively how much each sensory
system contributed to posture maintenance. A large gain in a
sensory system indicates that the system is preferentially used
for balance in posture maintenance.
The VLTC used in the Standing Function Evaluation Sys-
tem decreased the gain of the vestibular + tactile and position
sensory systems, indicating that these systems were replaced
by the effect of VLTC. Therefore, when the Smart Suit caused
a similar decrease in the gains of these systems, it indicated
that the Smart Suit exerted a balance assistive effect on the
sensory systems.
Figure 7 shows a box and whisker plot of the sum of
vestibular + tactile and position sensory system gains after
wavelet transformation of typical subjects h and i for when
the Smart Suit was worn or not worn and VLTC was OFF
or ON. For subject i, when the VLTC was OFF the gain was
signiﬁcantly reduced when the Smart Suit was worn, whereas
there was no signiﬁcant difference (conﬁdence of 95% or
more) for subject h. In addition, for subject i, when the Smart
Suit was not worn, the gain was signiﬁcantly reduced when
the VLTC was ON, whereas for subject h, the gain was similar
to when the VLTC is OFF. These results show that wearing
the Smart Suit assisted subject i with similar sensory systems
to the VLTC. Although the assistance of the sensory system
by the VLTC was observed in one subject, the assistive effect
of wearing the Smart Suit was conﬁrmed in subjects a–e, g,
and i. In addition, subjects b, d, and i showed reduced gains
compared with the other subjects when the VLTC was ON and
the Smart Suit was worn. Thus, the assistance from the VLTC
and from the Smart Suit do not need to be simultaneous.
VI.
DISCUSSIONS
The balance assistive effect of the Smart Suit was evaluated
by subjective evaluation, body sway, and sensory systems.
There were some subjects who could not conﬁrm whether
they felt the assistive effect and some who thought that they
did not feel the assistive effect. The presence or absence of
the auxiliary effects did not necessarily coincide with these
experiences.
Subjective evaluation showed that seven men felt the 10
levels of assistive effects. Among them, in the subjective
Non-wearing
VLTC OFF
Wearing
VLTC OFF
Non-wearing
VLTC ON
Wearing
VLTC ON
p=3.01E-118
p=6.01E-134
p=8.53E-158
Subject h
Non-wearing
VLTC OFF
Wearing
VLTC OFF
Non-wearing
VLTC ON
Wearing
VLTC ON
p=0.0593
p=0.608
p=0.0843
Subject i
Figure 7. Sum of visual and vestibular + tactile gains for subjects h and i for
when the Smart Suit is worn or not worn and VLTC is OFF or ON.
survey, two of these subjects indicated they felt subjective
assistive effects. In addition, the subjective survey results
for the two female subjects who did not feel the assistive
effects indicated that they did experience assistive effects .
Therefore, simply examining the feeling of the assistive effect
is insufﬁcient for indicating the subjective assistive effect, and
it is necessary to use a survey method, such as a subjective
survey. In addition, all of the nine subjects reported a subjective
Smart Suit assistive effect either by feeling the assistive effect
or through their answers in the subjective survey.
Considering the suppression of body sway in the left and
right direction and the front and back direction by the Smart
Suit as an objective balance assistive effect, the assistive effect
was recognized in subjects a–f. However, although subject
b reported no assistive effect in the subjective survey, their
body sway was suppressed by the suit. In contrast, subjects h
and i did not have their body sway suppressed, but reported
a subjective assistive effect in the subjective survey, and in
particular, subject h evaluated the experience of the assistive
effect as high. Therefore, the suppression effect of body sway
does not necessarily coincide with the subjective evaluation.
The evaluation of the assistive effect of the Smart Suit on
the sensory system was conﬁrmed in seven subjects (subjects
a–e, g, and i). Although subject h experienced an auxiliary
effect subjectively, no objective suppression of body sway or
auxiliary effect on the sensory system was observed. Although
subject f experienced an assistive effect, the objective sup-
pression effect of the center of gravity sway was recognized
in only the front and back direction and no assistive effect
on the sensory system was observed. The other seven subjects
showed either an objective suppression effect on body sway or
an auxiliary effect on the sensory system, and these auxiliary
effects are factors in determining an auxiliary subjective effect.
Although the suppression of body sway and the auxiliary
effect on the sensory system are factors that determine the
subjective auxiliary effect of the Smart Suit, they are not the
only factors. This may be because the balance assistive effect is
evaluated in the standing posture and that the muscle assistive
effect of the Smart Suit is not considered. The Smart Suit
was designed to exert an assistive effect via the expansion
and contraction of the elastic material in the forward bending
posture; thus, the subjective evaluation may be determined by
the assistive effect for forward bending. Depending on the
subject, the muscle strength assistive effect may also have a
large effect on subjective evaluation.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

We conﬁrmed that a balance assistive effect was exhibited
even when standing. The results suggested that the assistive
effect might not only suppress the center of gravity sway, but
also have an assistive effect similar to LTC on the sensory
system. The subjective assistive effect, suppression of body
sway, and assistive effect on the sensory system measured in
this research are factors in judging whether the Smart Suit
will have an assistive effect. Therefore, our results will allow
quantitative evaluation of the balance assistive effect of the
Smart Suit by suppressing body sway and assisting the sensory
system.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this paper, we evaluated the balance assistive effect of
the Smart Suit subjectively and objectively. Subjective assistive
effects were evaluated by the feeling of assistive effects and
subjective experience. In the interviews, seven men out of
nine subjects felt the assistive effect. On the other hand,
according to the subjective survey, four subjects experienced
the assistive effect, and these results were not necessarily con-
sistent. Therefore, investigating subjective experience showed
that there were subjects who needed the assistive effect even
though they did not feel the assistive effect. The suppression
of the body sway was evaluated by the effective value of
the body sway in the lateral direction (X direction) and the
longitudinal direction (Y direction) and the speed of the sway.
Wearing the Smart Suit suppressed the body sway in six
subjects, and the suppression was correlated with the difference
between the balance ages measured by the Standing Function
Evaluation System while not wearing and wearing the Smart
Suit. Therefore, we showed that the body sway suppression
effect can be measured quantitatively by using the Standing
Function Evaluation System. In addition, by looking at the
change in frequency gain of each sensory system in a Smart
Suit based on the sensory reweighting model, we veriﬁed
the auxiliary effect on the sensory systems using wavelet
transform. A decrease in the frequency gain of the vision and
vestibular + tactile systems was observed in seven subjects.
We conﬁrmed that the Smart Suit has an assistive effect on the
sensory system similar to LTC. However, these evaluations of
the relationship between the subjective and objective assistive
effects did not necessarily agree. Although the suppression of
body sway and the auxiliary effect on the sensory system were
recognized as objective auxiliary effects, they could not explain
the subjective auxiliary effect; however, they are probably
important elements.
In future, we intend to examine not only the standing
posture, but also the assistive effects in a forward bending
posture that the Smart Suit was designed to exert. In addition
to balance assistive effects, we also want to evaluate the muscle
assistive effects and the physical abilities of the subjects. It is
necessary to investigate how much these other effects affect the
subjective auxiliary effect. Our goal is to establish a method to
assess these effects comprehensively and conduct quantitative
screening to see if a person can beneﬁt from the Smart Suit.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was partially supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Number JP18H03276.
REFERENCES
[1]
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, ”Annual Health, Labour and
Welfare Report 2016”, Health, Labour Addministration Annual Report
2015, Oct. 2016.
[2]
Y. Imamura, T. Tanaka, Y. Suzuki, K. Takizawa, and M. Yamanaka,
”Motion-Based-Design of Elastic Material for Passive Assistive Device
Using Musculoskeletal Model”, J. of Robotics and Mechatronics, .23-6,
pp. 978-990, Dec. 2011.
[3]
Y. Imamura, ”Analysis of Trunk Stabilization Effect by Passive Power-
Assist Device”, Journal of Robotics and Mechatronics, 26-6, pp. 791-
798, Dec. 2014.
[4]
Y. Imamura, Ko Ayusawa, Eiichi Yoshida and Takayuki Tanaka, ”Eval-
uation Framework for Passive Assistive Device Based on Humanoid
Experiments”, International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, 15-03,
1750026, 1-25, 2018
[5]
S. G. Hart and L. E. Staveland, ”Development of NASA-TLX (Task
Load Index): Results of Empirical and Theoretical Research”, Advances
in Psychology, 52, pp.139-183, 1988.
[6]
Y. Yamada, H. Konosu, T. Morizono and Y. Umetani, ”Proposal of Skill-
Assist: a system of assisting human workers by reﬂecting their skills in
positioning tasks”, IEEE SMC’99 Conference Proceedings. 1999 IEEE
International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (Cat. No.
99CH37028), 4, pp.11-16, 1999.
[7]
M. Sakata, K. Shima, K. Shimatani and H. Izumi, ”Simpliﬁed Standing
Function Evaluation System for Fall Prevention”, Proceedings of Intel-
ligent Robotics and Applications- 9th International Conference(ICIRA),
Part II, LNAI 9835, pp. 48-57, Aug. 2016.
[8]
K. Shima, K. Shimatani, A. Sugie, Y. Kurita, R. Kohno and T.
Tsuji, ”Virtual Light Touch Contact:a Novel Concept for Mitigation
of Body Sway”, 2013 7th International Symposium on Medical Infor-
mation and Communication Technology(ISMICT), 978-1-4673-5772-2,
pp.108-111, Mar. 2013.
[9]
John J. Jeka, ”Light Touch Contact as a Balance Aid”, Physical Therapy,
77-5, pp.476-487, May. 1997.
[10]
Industrial Fatigue Research Group, ”Subjective survey”, ⟨http://square.
umin.ac.jp/of/service.html⟩, Oct. 2017.
[11]
S. Yamamoto, K. Sunami, M. Aoyagi, and H. Sakurai:”Evaluation of
the reduction effect of low back pain occurrence risk by the body sway
test”, Industrial Hygiene Journal, 47, p.453, Apr. 2005.
[12]
D.J. A. Eikema, V. Hatzitaki, V. Konstantakos and C. Papaxanthis,
”Elderly adults delay proprioceptive reweighting during the anticipation
of collision avoidance when standing”, Neuroscience, 234, pp.22-30.
Jan. 2013.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

