HealthSonar: A System for Unobtrusive Monitoring
of Elders and Patients with Movement Disorders
Adamantios Ntanis∗, Spyridon Kontaxis∗, George Rigas∗, Anastasia Pentari†, Kostas Tsiouris‡,
Efstathios Kontogiannis∗, Eleftherios Kostoulas∗, Ilias Tsimperis∗, Theodoros Vlioras∗,
Aristotelis Bousis∗, Styliani Zelilidou‡, Kalypso Tasiou‡, Manolis Tsiknakis†§ and Dimitrios Fotiadis¶
∗PD Neurotechnology Ltd., Ioannina, Greece, GR 455 00
†Institute of Computer Science, Foundation for Research and Technology—Hellas, Heraklion, Greece, GR 700 13
‡Biomedical Research Institute, Foundation for Research and Technology—Hellas, Ioannina, Greece, GR 455 00
§Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Hellenic Mediterranean University, Heraklion, Greece, GR 710 04
¶Unit of Medical Technology and Intelligent Information Systems, University of Ioannina, Ioannina, Greece, GR 451 10
Corresponding author: Adamantios Ntanis, e-mail: a.ntanis@pdneurotechnology.com
Abstract—This work presents the HealthSonar, a novel un-
obtrusive, privacy-focused, health monitoring system for elders
and patients with movement disorders, capable of tracking the
quality of their sleep, identifying sleep apnea events, evaluating
their mobility and detecting falls. The system comprises a
impulse radio ultra-wideband (IR-UWB) radar-based device, a
web portal, a web dashboard and a mobile application. Due to
its nature, HealthSonar is perfectly suited for care homes, and
generally for clinical environments, where residents are in need
of continuous monitoring, especially during their sleep, as well
as during their presence in hazardous rooms, such as bathrooms.
Index Terms—ultra-wideband radar; health monitoring; sleep
monitoring; gait analysis; fall detection
I. INTRODUCTION
The world’s older population is rising, along with the
number of patients suffering from sleep, neurological and
movement disorders [1]–[4]. Impaired mobility, in particular,
can result in falls, which in turn can result in life-threatening
injuries, especially in older people. A practical solution, of-
fering a unified approach for monitoring sleep, evaluating gait
and identifying falls, could be of great interest, specifically for
care homes and clinical environments. As of now, to the best
of our knowledge, there is no such practical unified solution
offering all those features.
Lately, progress in ultra-wideband (UWB) radar technology
has resulted in the development of affordable, practical and
accurate radar sensors [5] that can be used as a platform
for building health monitoring solutions. Specifically, because
of their high accuracy, penetrating capabilities and reliability,
UWB radars can track micro and macro motions, even through
different weather conditions and obstacles (such as walls and
furniture), making them ideal for a diverse set of applications.
Some of them are, respiratory and heart rate extraction,
sleep monitoring, presence detection, fall detection, people
counting, gesture recognition, baby monitoring, assisted living
of elderly people, as well as mobility monitoring [5], [6].
What is more, UWB radar technology provides an unobtrusive,
contactless, low-consumption and privacy-focused approach,
perfectly suited for devices meant to be used for long periods
of time, inside the most private areas of people’s homes,
such as bedrooms, bathrooms, etc. Due to their nature, radar-
based devices are a suitable choice for applications pertaining
to sleep, where a wearable solution would inevitably cause
discomfort, while a camera-based one would be privacy-
intrusive. Moreover, regarding sleep, radars offer unparalleled
opportunities for contactless sleep monitoring as their pen-
etrating abilities result in posture recognition even in low
temperatures where people would be covered with blankets
[7]. Given radar sensors devices are constantly emitting energy
in the form of radiation, a logical concern would be that of
safety, regarding their continual use. Thankfully, UWB radars
are safe to use, due to their low emitted power levels of non-
ionizing radiation that are harmless to human health [5].
In this work, we present a novel health monitoring system,
the HealthSonar, based on UWB radar technology. The system
itself can be used easily in a plethora of clinical scenarios
and even as a general tracker for improving the quality of
life of healthy people, but its applicability in clinical environ-
ments and care homes is particularly noteworthy. Specifically,
in Section II the various hardware and software parts of
the HealthSonar system are presented and in Section III its
functionality is described. Next, in Section IV the innovative
aspects of the system are discussed along with possible future
directions for its improvement. Last but not least, in Section
V some concluding remarks are presented.
II. THE HEALTHSONAR SYSTEM
The HealthSonar system was created to fill the gap in accu-
rate, unobtrusive, privacy-focused, continuous and particularly
contactless, health monitoring. More specifically, the system
was created to serve elders (especially those with deteriorated
mobility) and patients with movement or sleep disorders in
tracking the quality of their sleep, identifying sleep apnea
events, evaluating their mobility and detecting fall events.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Fig. 1. A prototype of the HealthSonar device.
Moreover, the system also detects human presence, which is
a prerequisite and important step for choosing when the sleep
monitoring or the fall detection pipelines will initiate.
The development of the system was propelled by the recent
advances in IR-UWB radar technology, especially the small
sizes of the available sensors and their affordable prices. Those
features rendered them commercially viable options to be
used as platforms for building health monitoring devices. The
HealthSonar system consists of the following “components”:
(1) a radar-based monitoring device, (2) a web dashboard
application, (3) a web portal to the radar device, (4) a mobile
application (or app), (5) a cloud data processing service, (6) a
cloud data storage service, and (7) an API for communication
purposes.
The system was developed as an ecosystem with different
users in mind, such as elders, patients, nurses, care workers or
attending physicians. It was also designed to provide different
administrative and monitoring utilities to each one of the afore-
mentioned groups. The HealthSonar system is meant to be
straightforward and easy to use, while still being customizable
for advanced, mainly research, use cases. It is important to note
that HealthSonar was built as a centralized, extensible system,
as a result multiple devices can be connected and administrated
at once, in order to cover the needs of a care home, or generally
of a clinical environment. On the other hand, the system is
modular enough to be usable as a single unit, ideal for home
use applications, or even research purposes. Last but not least,
HealthSonar is operational with minimal user interaction and
after its first setup, it can continually monitor either a bed for
sleeping individuals or a bathroom for human activity. Given
its lack of a battery, as it will be described below, the system
does not even need the users to manually check its power level
at regular intervals.
A. The radar-based monitoring device
The cornerstone of the HealthSonar system is the radar-
based monitoring device, which was designed, developed and
produced, in-house, by PD Neurotechnology Ltd. You can see
the prototype of the HealthSonar monitoring device in Fig. 1.
The front side of the device can be seen on the left half of Fig.
1, while the back side can be seen on the right half. The case
TABLE I
ARIA SENSING LT102 RADAR SPECIFICATIONS.
General specifications
Values
Radar’s operating frequency
6.5 GHz to 8.5 GHz
Temperature operating range
−40 ◦C to 85 ◦C
Radar module’s dimensions
36 mm×68 mm
Maximum power consumption
220 mW at 5 V
Integrated antenna aperture
±60◦ by ±60◦
Typical detection range
12 m
for the prototype was produced using additive manufacturing
techniques. The device comprises an Aria Sensing LT102
IR-UWB radar sensor, embedded within the top part, and a
Raspberry Pi 4 Model B board encased within the bottom
base. The specifications of the Aria Sensing radar module can
be found in Table I. On the top, back and side of the device,
various connection ports can be seen. The radar connects to
the Raspberry Pi board via 1 external USB cable.
The radar sensor identifies micro motions (such as the
oscillation of the chest) and macro motions (such as the human
gait) translating them into data, while the Raspberry Pi board
is the main processing unit of the device. The HealthSonar
device is not powered by a battery, but through a wall
socket, as a result it can work indefinitely without any user
interaction for charging purposes. The intended placement of
the device is: (1) next to a bed, on top of a nightstand, enabling
nighttime sleep monitoring, (2) mounted on a bathroom wall,
enabling fall detection, or (3) mounted on top of a tripod, or
other suitable furniture, for general mobility evaluation. The
system’s intended use is depicted in Fig. 3 and includes 2
HealthSonar devices, one placed on top of a nightstand and
one on the bathroom wall.
B. The web dashboard application
The web dashboard (see Fig. 2a) is a web application that
runs on the cloud and can be accessed through the Internet.
Its purpose is to act as the central hub for managing multiple
(or more aptly, at least one) connected HealthSonar devices.
The dashboard is meant to be used by care home workers or
nurses as an administrative and overview tool.
The functionality of the dashboard is: (1) Manually initiat-
ing and terminating recording sessions. (2) Manually selecting
data for upload to the cloud storage. (3) Accessing telemetry
data (logs) for connected devices. (4) Accessing system infor-
mation (metadata) about each device. (5) Assigning users (e.g.,
elders, patients) to specific devices. (6) Viewing the connection
status of each available device. (7) Managing the recorded
stored data of all connected devices. (8) View reports and
notifications for the extracted health analytics.
C. The web portal to the radar
The web portal to the radar (see Fig. 2b) is a web application
that runs locally on the HealthSonar device itself and can
only be accessed through the local network that the device is
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

(a)
(b)
(c)
Fig. 2. (2a) The main screen of the web dashboard. (2b) The settings page of the web portal. (2c) The mobile app’s login screen.
connected to, without the need for an Internet connection. Its
purpose is to facilitate direct communication with, and access
to, one specific HealthSonar device, while also serving as the
main configuration tool of its settings.
Generally, the web portal shares a similar purpose with the
mobile application, that will be described below (see Section
II-D), although the latter is not able to configure the radar. The
portal is meant to be used by care workers or nurses, that have
been trained in its use, as a tool for setting up the radar device,
for rapid implementation of various testing scenarios and data
gathering (e.g., sleep or mobility evaluation scenarios), or for
easy access to stored radar data.
Specifically, the functionality of the web portal is: (1) Set-
ting up the radar through Wi-Fi. (2) Configuring the settings of
a device. (3) Initiating and terminating a recording. (4) Setting
up a scheduler for a recording. (5) Accessing previously-stored
radar data. As a result, the web portal is intended as a tool for
advanced, trained users, that understand the consequences of
having direct access to the HealthSonar device’s settings and
storage, and specifically the effects of changing the internal
parameters of the radar.
An example of an ideal use case for the web portal would
be that of a clinical trial, or generally any research endeavor,
in which the portal would be the main tool of the researchers
for configuring the radar based on the needs of specialized
scenarios, as well as for accessing the resulted data. It should
be noted that, under normal circumstances, the web portal
should not be used, as the HealthSonar device is delivered to
a user preconfigured. As a result, no tinkering with advanced
settings is needed, while the HealthSonar’s full functionality
can be achieved with the user-friendlier web dashboard and
mobile application. This is the main reason that the web
portal’s user interface is not as polished as the web dashboard’s
as its target user group.
D. The mobile application (mobile app)
The mobile application (see Fig. 2c) facilitates the initial
setup of the system and provides, to the end user, sleep
and mobility extracted metrics based on data acquired with
the HealthSonar device, enables the user to evaluate their
mobility and receives notifications for fall events. The end
users of the mobile app are the ones being monitored by the
HealthSonar device (usually those are the elders and patients).
The functionality of the mobile app, apart from setting up
the system during its first use, revolves around providing
detailed analyses about sleep quality (through sleep staging
and sleep duration), sleep-related events (such as obstructive
sleep apnea), mobility metrics indicating deteriorated gait,
or a higher fall risk, as well as real-time notifications in
the event a fall takes place within the bathroom. Note that
the aforementioned presented mobility metrics are calculated
using data generated through a TUG test, which the users need
to manually initiate through the HealthSonar mobile app itself.
As a result, the initiation of a TUG test session is one more
feature of the mobile application.
Contrary to feature-rich mobile applications for commer-
cial sleep and fitness trackers, the HealthSonar app is built
around user-friendliness and targeted functionality, taking into
account, first and foremost, the needs and experience of their
users, those being elders and patients. Said groups of people,
are not accustomed to technology, or they are not capable
of operating an app extensively due to impaired dexterity (for
example patients with Parkinson’s disease). As a result, in such
cases, the most concise, and focused, user experience should
be preferred, with the HealthSonar app being, intentionally, a
reporting tool.
E. System’s data storage and processing
The radar data acquired during the HealthSonar system’s
operation are either stored and processed locally on the radar-
based monitoring device, or uploaded to the cloud for storage
and further processing. Whether the storage and processing is
done offline or online is determined by how time-critical the
resulting analytics are for the user.
The gait monitoring and, crucially, the fall detection
pipelines should provide their outputs as close to real-time
as possible. Nurses and physicians should receive the results
of a TUG test when it concludes in order to plan ahead based
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

on the mobility state of the test’s subject. The results of a TUG
test can indicate a high risk of falls in the future, thus such
information is necessary in order to take preventative steps and
arrange medical interventions before any misadventure takes
place. Moreover, nurses and caregivers should receive notifi-
cations for a fall immediately in order to take timely action.
Falls can lead to serious injuries, and given that they can go
unnoticed if the faller is unable to move, real-time notifications
can be a matter of life and death. As a result, all processing for
those tasks is done locally on the radar-based device itself in
order to avoid the time-consuming data uploading procedure
or any Internet connection issues that may lead to problems in
data uploading altogether. Nevertheless, as the TUG test raw
radar data can be useful for research purposes, or simply for
further custom analysis, there is the option to upload them to
the cloud for storage and future use. This can be done via the
web dashboard application.
On the other hand, sleep monitoring, does not provide time-
critical data to the users. Generally, nighttime monitors are
meant to gather data while a person is asleep, conclude the
recording when they wake up, followed by processing the
stored data and presenting them in a report when available.
Note that, although sleep apnea events identified by the
HealthSonar system during a person’s sleep can be serious,
they are not time-critical information and there is no advantage
in sending real-time notifications to alert either the person
sleeping or nurses and caregivers. As a result, the sleep mon-
itoring pipeline includes automatically uploading the stored
data to the cloud, as soon as the user wakes up, where they
will be further processed and presented in a sleep report via
the mobile app or the web dashboard.
Last but not least, presence detection is a necessary step
prior to sleep monitoring and fall detection. As a process, it
does need to run in real-time but it does not generate any data
for further processing, apart from an event indicating that the
sleep or fall pipeline should initiate. Hence, presence detection
has to run locally on the HealthSonar device but no data are
stored (for long-term use) or uploaded to the cloud.
F. Application programming interface (API)
The communication between the cloud services and the
“local” parts of the HealthSonar system is enabled by an
application programming interface (API). The API acts as the
middleman for data access and integration between databases,
web services and the device itself, as well as the mobile
application. More specifically, the API is accessed through
the web dashboard and the mobile application with the goal
of bringing into contact the device with the cloud. The
functionality offered by the API serves a pivotal role in the use
of the HealthSonar and enables building its overall ecosystem.
The facilitated communication is conducted in a secure manner
to safekeep the sensitive user data.
G. HealthSonar: Customizable, extensible
The HealthSonar system was built to be customizable and
extensible. As a result, the system can be used as a single
X
X
X
Fig. 3. Three suggested scenarios with the HealthSonar system inside a typical
bedroom with a bathroom. Green area: A falling detection scenario. Red
area: A sleep monitoring scenario. Blue area: A suggested Timed Up and
Go (TUG) test scenario.
unit or as a “network” of radar-based devices, with all the
radar’s parameters able to be finely-tuned depending on the
application at hand. The term “network” does not denote
that the devices are connected with each other, but with
a service offering centralized management of all the active
HealthSonar devices of the organization using them. The
centralized management is conducted via the web dashboard
application.
The HealthSonar system is customizable enough to offer a
plethora of options regarding how to use it and which features
are needed for a certain application. More specifically, one
can use at least one radar-based device along with all its
accompanying software (namely, web portal, web dashboard,
mobile app), or only with the ones they need. For research
purposes, the web portal could offer complete functionality
and elevated access to the device’s embedded radar parameters,
although the administrator should be knowledgeable regarding
the theory and operation of IR-UWB radars.
On top of that, HealthSonar is extensible and can be
deployed with one, or with as many radar-based devices is
necessary. The extensibility is particularly important for care
homes, and generally for clinical environments, as their needs
change over time based on the number, and needs, of their
residents or inpatients. The ease of extending, or even shrink-
ing, the “network” of connected HealthSonar devices, can
also help the organizations utilizing it to better-manage their
human resources easily based on their needs. In a moment’s
notice, routine, yet important monitoring tasks, could be easily
arranged to be performed by the HealthSonar system itself,
leaving the personnel free to provide other vital tasks.
III. PRESENCE, SLEEP, MOBILITY AND FALLS
The HealthSonar system uses the IR-UWB radar module in
order to capture rich micro and macro body movements that
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

are subsequently used for monitoring health through: (1) de-
tecting human presence within a space (2) studying nighttime
sleep (staging, duration), (3) identifying sleep-related events
(sleep apnea), (4) evaluating mobility (gait evaluation), and
(5) detecting sudden, dangerous fall events. A description
regarding the applications of the HealthSonar system (presence
detection, sleep monitoring, gait evaluation and fall detection)
can be found in more detail in the subsequent Sections III-A,
III-B, III-C and III-D.
The performance of the HealthSonar system in those appli-
cations was evaluated, in a sleep lab of Evangelismos General
Hospital (ethical committee’s approval number 198/06-06-
2022), with patients suffering from sleep disorders, in the
neurology clinic of the University Hospital of Ioannina (ethical
committee’s approval number 7/21-03-2023), with patients
suffering from movement disorders, as well as in-house, with
healthy individuals, through experimental setups similar to the
ones depicted in Fig. 3.
A. Presence detection
Presence detection is the cornerstone of the HealthSonar’s
features as it is a necessary step taking place prior to both
sleep monitoring and fall detection. Presence detection is a
procedure running constantly (apart from when the device is
used for mobility evaluation), by default, on the HealthSonar
device, as it is a prerequisite for initiating either the sleep
monitoring or the fall detection pipeline.
Through presence detection, the HealthSonar system is
capable of detecting whether someone is lying on a bed with
the intention of sleeping, resulting in automatically initiating
the sleep monitoring pipeline, based on the absence of activity
and the monitoring of vital signs. On top of that, presence
detection enables the bathroom wall-mounted HealthSonar
device to identify whether someone is using the bathroom,
resulting in automatically initiating the fall detection pipeline
based on abrupt decreasing changes in signal’s energy.
B. Sleep monitoring
Sleep monitoring is an important aspect of the Health-
Sonar system’s functionality. Monitoring sleep in enabled for
a nightstand-mounted HealthSonar device by the presence
detection pipeline. More specifically, after the system detects
a person lying on the bed, and until they move away from it,
the sleep monitoring pipeline is initiated and runs continuously
gathering data. Once the person moves away from the bed, the
sleep monitoring routine comes to a halt and the generated
data, which up to this point were stored locally on the
HealthSonar device, are uploaded to the cloud for further
processing, leading to the extraction of rich sleep-related
metrics pertaining to sleep staging classification (including
wake/sleep identification) and sleep apnea events detection
that are presented either through the web dashboard or the
mobile application. Contrary to the fall detection and gait
evaluation pipelines, the processing of the gathered sleep data
takes place on the cloud as there is no imminent need for the
user to receive the extracted nighttime metrics in real-time. It
is important to note that, during the sleep monitoring routine,
the respiratory rate and the heart rate are calculated as they
are a necessary preprocessing step prior to sleep staging and
sleep apnea detection.
C. Gait evaluation
The HealthSonar system evaluates the gait of an individual
based on the Timed Up and Go Test (TUG) [8], a well-
established, standardized test, used for assessing various as-
pects of one’s mobility, such as gait, balance and risk of
falling [9], [10]. Performing a “classic” TUG test requires
minimal instrumentation, namely an armchair (it is important
for the chair to have arms), a mark for the 3 m distance and a
stopwatch, although there are versions of the TUG test where
extra instrumentation is used to better track the performance
of the participants, (iTUG tests) [9]. A participant starts the
test while sitting on the armchair, then, after being instructed,
proceeds to stand up unaided, walk for 3 m, turns around the
mark 180◦, walks back to the armchair and sits down, thus,
ending the test. The performance of the participant is timed
with the stopwatch, and the total time of the test is used as
the final score.
In order to evaluate gait using the HealthSonar device, a
modified version of the TUG test is utilized. The modification
lies in the use of a 3 to 5 m walking path instead of the
“classic” 3 m, as it leads to the acquisition of more gait data,
and as a result to a richer representation of the participant’s
mobility state. A suggested setup for a TUG test scenario
with the HealthSonar can be seen in Fig. 3, where the device
placed on top of the nightstand can be positioned in such a
way as to monitor the path in front of the armchair. Note
that due to the use of the radar-based device, this modified
TUG test is considered instrumented (iTUG). The test results
in the generation of a body of rich gait data, which are used
to extract a set of gait metrics useful for the evaluation of a
person’s mobility. Those are, the total walking duration, the
turning duration and the average gait speed [11].
The gait evaluation pipeline of the HealthSonar device does
not run automatically, but is initiated manually through the
mobile app (or the web portal to the radar for advanced, or
custom use cases) by arranging a TUG test session. After
the TUG test is finished, the resulting data are stored and
processed locally on the HealthSonar device itself and the gait
evaluation metrics are presented to the user via the mobile app
through a Bluetooth connection. Note that there is the option
to manually upload the generated TUG test data to the cloud
storage though the web dashboard for future use.
D. Fall detection
Fall detection is a pipeline initiated through the presence
detection feature of the bathroom wall-mounted HealthSonar
device. The detection of fall events was designed to run for
the bathroom area as it constitutes one of the most hazardous
areas for elders and patients [12], [13]. Due to its nature, the
fall detection pipeline is run locally, and continually (in case
the presence detection procedure indicates there is a person
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

using the bathroom), on the HealthSonar device as it needs
to monitor for falls in real time. In the event of a fall, the
system will identify it and sent a notification to both the
web dashboard, as well as to the mobile phone application in
order to notify caregivers to attend to the faller’s needs. Fall
detection is a crucial feature for any system facilitating assisted
living of elders and patients as falls can result in serious, even
fatal, injuries, thus their identification in real time can lead to
timely interventions preventing further serious consequences
for the faller.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this work, a complete, unified, assisted living solution,
the HealthSonar, targeted at monitoring sleep, evaluating gait
and identifying falls was presented. The innovative nature of
the solution lie in the fact that it is cheap, easy to use and
home-based, while offering all the aforementioned features
combined. As far as we know, currently no other alternatives
exist that tick all those “boxes”. The HealthSonar system was
designed and built in-house, from the ground up, into a fully
functioning assisted living monitor. The system was designed
to be operated with minimal to no interaction from the user.
Apart from the installation and the first setup, it was of
paramount importance for HealthSonar to be unobtrusive while
continually monitoring its surroundings, either for sleeping
individuals or falls. As a matter of fact, it is possible for
the user to bypass using any of its software application
and “ignore” the system altogether. In that case, a treating
physician or a nurse can be responsible for reading reports
about the user’s sleep, as well as receive notifications regarding
falls. It is important to note that the device has no battery and
can be permanently connected to a wall socket, thus existing
on top of the nightstand (or the wall) indefinitely.
As of now, the functionality of the HealthSonar system is
significant, yet future directions could extend it in various
ways. One of the most useful, lie in the improvement of the
mobility evaluation to include the identification of freezing
of gait events in patients with Parkinson’s disease. Moreover,
as already mentioned, fall detection within the bedroom area
could also be explored in the future based on the feedback
we will gather from more users of the system. Last but not
least, the heartbeat extraction, being a preprocessing step for
sleep monitoring, could be further improved. Last but not least,
the device was built as a prototype, thus technical limitations
prohibited the design and construction of a more refined case
for the inner hardware. As a result, in a future version, the
device could be redesigned from the ground up, and one
particularly useful addition would be a screen showing the
time, the weather or the news of the day. This feature would
be useful for the nightstand-mounted device, as it would then
serve as a dashboard showing useful information.
V. CONCLUSIONS
The population of elders and patients with sleep and
neurological disorders is rising, leading to a growing need
of accurate continuous health monitoring, mainly revolving
around sleep and mobility. Continuous, privacy-preserving,
contactless, monitoring solutions, such as the HealthSonar,
have the potential to disrupt the way clinical organizations
(care homes, clinics, hospitals, etc.) monitor their residents,
by providing a stream of health analytics, while helping them
preserve human resources from repetitive, yet necessary tasks
such as continuous health monitoring.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded by the European Regional De-
velopment Fund of the European Union and Greek na-
tional funds through the Operational Program Competitive-
ness, Entrepreneurship, and Innovation, under the call RE-
SEARCH–CREATE–INNOVATE (project name: HealthSonar,
project code: T2EDK-04366)
REFERENCES
[1] D. T. Kasai, “Preparing for population ageing in the Western Pacific
Region,” The Lancet Regional Health - Western Pacific, vol. 6, p.
100069, Jan. 2021.
[2] J. Acquavella, R. Mehra, M. Bron, J. M.-H. Suomi, and G. P. Hess,
“Prevalence of narcolepsy and other sleep disorders and frequency of
diagnostic tests from 2013–2016 in insured patients actively seeking
care,” Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine, vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1255–
1263, Aug. 2020.
[3] N. P. Gordon, J. H. Yao, L. A. Brickner, and J. C. Lo, “Prevalence of
sleep-related problems and risks in a community-dwelling older adult
population: a cross-sectional survey-based study,” BMC Public Health,
vol. 22, no. 1, p. 2045, Nov. 2022.
[4] C. Ding, Y. Wu, X. Chen, Y. Chen, Z. Wu, Z. Lin, D. Kang, W. Fang,
and F. Chen, “Global, regional, and national burden and attributable risk
factors of neurological disorders: The Global Burden of Disease study
1990–2019,” Frontiers in Public Health, vol. 10, p. 952161, Nov. 2022.
[5] G. Tiberi and M. Ghavami, “Ultra-Wideband (UWB) Systems in
Biomedical Sensing,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 12, p. 4403, Jun. 2022.
[6] D. N. Wickramarachchi, S. P. Rana, M. Ghavami, and S. Dudley, “Com-
parison of ir-uwb radar soc for non-contact biomedical application,” in
2023 IEEE 17th International Symposium on Medical Information and
Communication Technology (ISMICT).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 01–06.
[7] D. K.-H. Lai, Z.-H. Yu, T. Y.-N. Leung, H.-J. Lim, A. Y.-C. Tam,
B. P.-H. So, Y.-J. Mao, D. S. K. Cheung, D. W.-C. Wong, and J. C.-
W. Cheung, “Vision Transformers (ViT) for Blanket-Penetrating Sleep
Posture Recognition Using a Triple Ultra-Wideband (UWB) Radar
System,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 5, p. 2475, Feb. 2023.
[8] D. Podsiadlo and S. Richardson, “The Timed “Up & Go”: A Test of
Basic Functional Mobility for Frail Elderly Persons,” Journal of the
American Geriatrics Society, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 142–148, Feb. 1991.
[9] P. Ortega-Bastidas, B. G´omez, P. Aqueveque, S. Luarte-Mart´ınez,
and R. Cano-de-la Cuerda, “Instrumented Timed Up and Go Test
(iTUG)—More Than Assessing Time to Predict Falls: A Systematic
Review,” Sensors, vol. 23, no. 7, p. 3426, Mar. 2023.
[10] B. M. Kear, T. P. Guck, and A. L. McGaha, “Timed Up and Go
(TUG) Test: Normative Reference Values for Ages 20 to 59 Years and
Relationships With Physical and Mental Health Risk Factors,” Journal
of Primary Care & Community Health, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 9–13, Jan.
2017.
[11] A. Ntanis, N. Kostikis, I. Tsimperis, K. Tsiouris, G. Rigas, and D. Fo-
tiadis, “Evaluating Parameters of the TUG Test Based on Data from IMU
and UWB Sensors,” in 2022 18th International Conference on Wireless
and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob).
Thessaloniki, Greece: IEEE, Oct. 2022, pp. 142–147.
[12] R. Blanchet and N. Edwards, “A need to improve the assessment of
environmental hazards for falls on stairs and in bathrooms: results of a
scoping review,” BMC Geriatrics, vol. 18, no. 1, p. 272, Dec. 2018.
[13] J. A. Stevens, E. N. Haas, and T. Haileyesus, “Nonfatal bathroom injuries
among persons aged ≥ 15years—United States, 2008,” Journal of Safety
Research, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 311–315, Aug. 2011.
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

