Towards a Clinical Risk Reduction: A Hospital Information System Based on 
Software and Hardware Integration  
 
Raffaele Chianese 
Department of Healthcare Solutions 
KIRANET I.C.T Research Center 
Aversa, Italy 
e-mail: Raffaele.chianese@kiranet.it 
Francesco Gargiulo 
Healthcare Services 
Napoli, Italy 
e-mail: francescogargiulo@inwind.it
 
 
Abstract— This article presents FID-MED, an integrated 
platform composed of a web based clinical application, named 
FIDCARE, and a medical cart called FIDRUN and describes 
the possibilities that FID-MED offers, both for quality 
assurance and risk management, and for cost reduction. FID-
MED is an industry research product and the design effort 
aims to reduce the risk in healthcare services by means of a 
deep integration between hardware and software and leads to 
a Hospital Information Systems (HIS) including a specifically 
designed medical cart. The introduction of key concepts, as 
abstract drug, and the overall and complete control of clinical 
processes 
provides 
valid 
tools 
for 
the 
control 
and 
rationalization of costs. FID-MED aims to overcome barriers 
that prevent the adoption of a HIS using enabling technologies 
– Radio-Frequency IDentification (RFID) and Internet of 
Things (IoT) – adherence to the main international standards – 
Health Level 7 (HL7), Digital Imaging and COmmunications 
in Medicine (DICOM®), etc. – and the ease of integration with 
third-party software. 
Keywords-Hospital Information System (HIS), FID-MED, 
FIDCARE, FIDRUN, healthcare risk management, healthcare 
cost control, medical cart. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In the Health sector, risk management and cost control 
are very important. Risk management means the adoption of 
a set of actions and measures aiming to improve the quality 
of health services and to ensure the safety of the patient. The 
control of cost is related to the best management and 
scheduling of the available resource, such as expensive 
materials, products and drugs. For these reasons, the 
possibility to keep under control the involved processes, i.e., 
medical prescriptions, administrations of drugs, stock 
management and supply, etc., can lead to a reduction of the 
possibility of error and economic losses and to savings in 
time. 
Errors in drug therapy represent an important percentage 
of medical errors and outline not only a clinical problem, 
with regard to the quality of care, but also an economic 
problem, with regard to the major cost derived [1] – [3]. The 
priority needs to ensure greater safety for the patient and the 
need to facilitate health workers in the performance of 
specific activities can find effective answers in the 
computerization and automation of the process of drugs 
management. 
It is widely acknowledged that the patient's safety and 
centrality in the care process are of interest to anyone dealing 
with health care and that the best approach to reducing errors 
in therapy is multidisciplinary. This approach deals with the 
HIS that involve a number of roles and functions - doctors, 
nurses, pharmacists and the patient himself – and a set of 
related processes. 
The error cannot be completely cancelled but it can still 
be strongly reduced with the use of technological tools, such 
as HIS [1] [4]. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II describes the related works. Section III introduces 
our proposal named FID-MED. Section IV describes the 
clinical risk reduction in FID-MED. Section V addresses the 
cost control in the proposed HIS. Section VI describes a brief 
comparison with competing system. The conclusions close 
the article. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
International studies [1] [4] show how the introduction of 
HISs contributes to general errors reduction even if they also 
warn against errors related to the use of system. 
Developers of health care software have attributed 
improvements in patient care to these information systems. 
Like any health care intervention, such claims require 
confirmation in clinical trials. 
The authors of [4] reviewed controlled trials assessing 
the effects of HISs by searching the MEDLINE, EMBASE, 
Cochrane Library, Inspec, and ISI databases and consulting 
reference lists through September 2004. Very briefly, the 
results are that the HISs improved practitioner performance 
in 62 (64%) of the 97 studies assessing this outcome, 
including 4 (40%) of 10 diagnostic systems, 16 (76%) of 21 
reminder systems, 23 (62%) of 37 disease management 
systems, and 19 (66%) of 29 drug-dosing or prescribing 
systems. Fifty-two trials assessed 1 or more patient 
outcomes, of which 7 trials (13%) reported improvements. 
Improved practitioner performance was associated with HISs 
that automatically prompted users compared with requiring 
users to activate the system (success in 73% of trials vs 47%) 
and studies in which the authors also developed the HIS 
software compared with studies in which the authors were 
not the developers (74% success vs 28% respectively). 
While several studies [1] - [3] deal primarily with injuries 
associated with errors in health care, the cost of 
inefficiencies related to errors that do not result in injury are 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

also great. The effort associated with “missed dose” 
medication errors is just an example: when a medication 
dose is not available for a nurse to administer and a delay of 
at least two hours occurs or the dose is not given at all [6]. 
Nurses spend a lot of time tracking down such medications. 
Such costs are harder to assess than the costs of injuries and 
they may be even greater. 
It is easy and common to blame operators for accidents 
but investigation often indicates that an operator “erred” 
because the system was poorly designed. In fact, machines 
can also produce errors or can mislead operators, e.g., if two 
medications that are spelled similarly are displayed next to 
each other, substitution errors can occur. Humans and 
machines are rather different and the combination of both 
has greater potential reliability than either alone. How best to 
make this synthesis is a very real problem. Humans are 
erratic, and err in surprising and unexpected ways; they are 
also resourceful and inventive and they can recover from 
errors in creative ways. In comparison, machines are stupid, 
more predictable but they cannot deal with a variable that 
was never anticipated, so that there was never any basis for 
equations to predict it or computers and software to control 
it. 
As cited in [1], the system analysis [7] of a large series of 
serious medication errors (those that either might have or did 
cause harm) identified 16 major types of system failures 
associated with these errors. Of these system failures, all of 
the top eight could have been addressed by better medical 
information, e.g., laboratory systems do not communicate 
directly with pharmacy systems;  prescribing, dispensing, 
and administering systems are not integrated, etc. Again, 
alerts are not delivered to caregivers in a timely way, while 
an increasing number of HISs contains data worthy of 
generating the alert message and many computerized 
physician order entry systems lack even basic screening 
capabilities to alert practitioners to unsafe orders relating to 
overly high doses, allergies, and drug–drug interactions. 
An interesting side effect in HISs adoption is the 
awareness of the magnitude of problem human errors. In 
fact, [8] reports that while 92 % of hospital CEOs reported 
that they were knowledgeable about the frequency of 
medication errors in their facility, only 8 % said they had 
more than 20 per month, when in fact all probably had more 
than this. 
Finally, several barriers have prevented implementation 
of these systems. Among these, the tendency of health care 
organizations to invest in administrative rather than clinical 
systems, the issue of “silo accounting” and the complexity of 
an effective systems integration due to the lack of standards 
and the difficulties with regard to the disclosure of data with 
third-party systems. 
III. 
OUR PROPOSAL: FID-MED 
The proposed HIS, named FID-MED, place itself in the 
sector of Health digitization and in particular of the 
computerized management of drugs, a growing sector 
seeking effective solutions. FID-MED is compliant with the 
main international medical standards, such as HL7 and 
DICOM, and can be easily integrated with third-party stocks 
management systems. It is oriented to the Electronic Health 
Record (EHR) and Electronic Medical Record (EMR) and it 
is compliant with Italian Personal Health Record (Fascicolo 
Sanitario Elettronico [9]). 
FID-MED is mainly composed of a clinical Java web 
based application, named FIDCARE based on Oracle 
database, Figure 1, and an expressly designed medical cart, 
called FIDRUN, Figure 2. FIDCARE and FIDRUN work in 
synergy together and they are closely integrated. FIDRUN is 
equipped with PC on board with Monitor Touch 10.1" that 
allows accessing FIDCARE by Wi-Fi connection. FIDRUN 
has two series of drawers, one on the front (A side) and the 
other on the back (B side). Each series of drawers is divided 
into 8 configurable modules. Each module can be configured 
to with 6 small drawers or alternatively with 2 large drawer. 
FIDRUN represents a very valuable tool in the drug 
preparation and administration phases and has an operating 
autonomy that covers the working shifts.  
A simplified deployment diagram of FID-MED is 
represented in Figure 3.  
IV. 
CLINICAL RISK REDUCTION 
FID-MED aims to reduce primarily the clinical risk 
through a tight control over the supported clinical processes 
(in accordance with the Italian applicable law) and 
consequently it works toward an efficient resources 
management and cost control. Mainly, FID-MED mitigates 
the clinical risk by means of: 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  FIDCARE: Therapy prescription and administration pages. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
 
 
The tight control of the association of drugs to 
patient during the prescription, dispensing, and 
administration phases; 
 
The correct identification of the patients and the 
correct identification of the drugs in their therapies 
before drugs administration;  
 
The recognition and unique identification of the 
nurse who administers the therapy and the patient. 
 
Once a physician prescribes a medicine to a patient 
through the computerized order entry, even if that medicine 
will be prepared (if needed) and administered by other 
operators (pharmacist or nurse) none of them can change 
drug, dose or the sequence without the physician permission. 
Through the correct identification of the patient and the 
drugs of his/her therapies, it is more difficult to be mistaken 
and the identification of the nurse who administers the 
therapy enforces the traceability of drugs from the physical 
order entry to the administration. After taking medications, 
the physician may perform a follow-up of your drug intake 
by displaying the patient's card. 
The identification of patients, operators (physician, nurse, 
pharmacist, etc.) and drugs plays a central role in clinical risk 
mitigation with FID-MED. Essentially, in FID-MED the 
identification may occur in two different ways, other than the 
trivial selection in a list. 
A. Reading barcodes.  
The patient receives a bracelet with his/her own new 
unique barcode created by FIDCARE in the admission phase 
and the nurse uses a portable barcode scanner to identify the 
patient. The nurse may also type the barcode, if he/she does 
not has a barcode scanner or if it is temporarily unavailable 
or not working. In addition, operators have a barcode 
uniquely assigned to themselves, typically included in their 
badges, and they can use it for login in FIDCARE or 
FIDRUN, other than using user and password.  
 
Figure 2.  FIDRUN with fours modules. The first two at the top have each 
six small drawers and two modules at bottom have each two large drawers. 
Figure 3.  The deploy diagram of FID-MED. 
All medicines have a barcode on the carton and it is quite 
easy to verify that, given a drug barcode, the corresponding 
drug belongs to a therapy (on that day, at that time) of a 
previously identified patient. A separate discussion is 
required for drugs that must be prepared before their 
administration, such as drips. In these cases, the package has 
not the barcode, and then FIDCARE creates a new unique 
barcode and print it on a sticker. The sticker includes details 
about the drugs, such as the chemical composition, the 
patient name and code, the preparation and expiration date 
and time, etc. From now on, FIDCARE will use this code to 
identify the drug, as in the previous case. Finally, barcodes 
can also be used to identify medical devices, such as stents. 
Here again, FIDCARE creates and prints a sticker. 
B. Reading RFID tags 
As in the barcode case, FIDCARE prints a new unique 
wearable passive tag during the admission and assigns it to 
the patient. Again, the nurse identifies the patient using a 
portable reader, and if necessary, the code may be manually 
typed. Substantially, RFID tags can be used in place of 
barcodes 
also 
for 
operators 
and 
medical 
devices 
identification. 
 
These identification methods are reliable and fast, the 
main difference among them is that the reading of the RFID 
does not require the patient’s vicinity to the nurse, unlike the 
barcode reading. It is worth mentioning that barcode and 
RFID technologies are not mutually exclusive. In fact, even 
if a drip may be tagged with RFID, it is not efficient to tag 
all drug’s cartons due to the volume. A number of readers 
can read both barcode and RFID and FIDRUN is compliant 
with both of them. FIDRUN is equipped with this kind of 
reader connected via Bluetooth. 
 
FIDRUN has two modes of operation: patient mode and 
drug mode. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

In patient mode, before the administration of therapies, 
the web application requires an empty drawer for the patient 
and the cart automatically assigns and opens it. The nurse 
loads this therapy drawer with the drugs of the therapies of 
the patient and closes it. Then, when the patient is identified, 
the FIDRUN automatically opens the corresponding therapy 
drawer to allow the administration of the drugs. This 
operating mode contributes to the reduction of the risk of 
administration of a drug not present in the therapy of the 
patient. By default, the FIDRUN allows the opening of a 
single therapy drawer to further reduce the risk of 
administration of a wrong drug.    
In drug mode, the FIDRUN automatically assigns a 
drawer, called the drug drawer, to each drug. The nurse pre-
loads the cart by reading the barcode of a drug. If FIDRUN 
already assigned a drawer to the drug then it opens that 
drawer, otherwise FIDRUN assigns a new empty drawer. 
During the administration phase, the cart automatically opens 
the drug drawer if the corresponding medication is to be 
administered in a therapy. This case happens after the patient 
recognition and after the selection of a drug in its therapies in 
the web application. This mode of operation also reduces the 
risk of administration of the wrong drug. 
Although these two modes of operation are described 
separately, FIDRUN can operate in mixed mode. In fact, it is 
possible to configure the medical cart to allocate a number of 
drawers to the patient mode and the remaining drawers to the 
drug mode. Finally, it is possible to use the drawers in a 
different way from the ones described above. This last 
operating mode, named storage mode, does not provide any 
form of drawer control by the cart and allows for greater 
freedom in their use. 
V. 
COST CONTROL 
As mentioned above, the control of cost is a matter of 
considerable importance in a HIS. FID-MED aims to 
controls the cost in multiple ways, among them: 
 
Introduction the concept of abstract drug; 
 
Optimization 
of 
chemotherapeutic 
medicinal 
products usage; 
 
Effective stocks management and usage product 
control. 
A. Abstract Drug 
Surprisingly, the introduction of the concept of abstract 
drug may affect significantly the cost related to drugs. An 
abstract drug has the following distinguishing features 
(pursuant to Italian legislation, DL n.95/2012): 
 
a) Active ingredient: the active constituent of the drug. 
FIDCARE includes more 
than 1.100 active 
ingredients;  
b) Dosage form (and its unit of measure) and 
concentration (and its unit of measure): e.g., 8% 
100ML; 5 ml 400 UI/ml. 
c) Pharmaceutical form: the physical characteristics of 
the combination of active substance and excipients 
(non-active ingredients) forming a medicinal product 
(tablet, liquid, capsule, gel, cream, sprays, etc.). 
FIDCARE includes more than 150 pharmaceutical 
forms. 
 
From a conceptual point of view, an abstract drug 
includes all information required for a physician order entry, 
i.e., a physician may insert a therapy using only abstract 
drugs. Of course, FIDCARE allows for commercial drugs 
selection if required. FIDCARE includes a list of about 2.500 
abstract drugs and 3.200 commercial drugs. The association 
between abstract drugs and commercial drugs is one-to-
many, that is, an abstract drug contains links to more than 
one commercial drug (having its active ingredient, dosage 
and pharmaceutical form) and a commercial drug is related 
to one abstract drug. Two commercial drugs are considered 
equivalent if they links the same abstract drugs. Under this 
assumption, before the administration, each abstract drug in a 
therapy can be substituted with one of the commercial drugs 
linked to it and FIDCARE allows a set of configurable rules 
with increasing degree of automation to do this. Given an 
abstract drug, the system can: 
 
1) Require the explicit manual selection of the 
commercial drugs; 
2) Choose 
the 
commercial 
drug 
having 
some 
(configurable) properties, for instance: bigger stocks, 
stocks as close as possible or any other rule. In this 
case, FIDCARE requires physician’s confirmation to 
continue; 
3) Same as previous one without confirmation. 
 
The introduction of abstract drugs leads to a better drugs 
management because it allows a separation of functions. The 
physician can select an abstract drug without worrying about 
the policy on drugs stocks. Please, note that it is also possible 
to replace a commercial drug with an equivalent one. For 
instance, during the administration a nurse discovers that a 
drug package is empty. To complete the therapy, an 
equivalent commercial drug is needed and FIDCARE allows 
for the substitution after physician confirmation.   
Finally, FIDCARE can automatically extract abstract 
drugs from a commercial drugs list. It analyses each 
commercial drug and extracts the abstract drug (if it does not 
exist) and creates the link between them. There are a lot of 
commercial drugs databases that FIDCARE can connect 
with, e.g., Farmadati Italia s.r.l. (Farmadati.it). 
B. Chemotherapeutic Medicinal Management 
The chemotherapeutic medicinals are among the most 
expensive 
medicinal 
products 
and 
their 
effective 
management can affect costs in a considerable way. From a 
point of view a little more formal, such medicinal can be 
seen as non-renewable resources that should be allocated to 
patients. Very often, such products may be used within a 
relatively short time-frame once the foil sachet is opened. 
The inefficiencies derive therefore from the non-use of 
products before their expiration. The optimization problem 
consists in the optimal planning of the therapy of the patients 
in order to minimize the non-use of the resources. The 
solution is a scheduling of therapy that also takes into 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
account some constraints. Several constraints are: time 
constraints on therapies; patients preferences (days, times, 
etc.), the number of chairs available for patients, staff shifts, 
etc. This optimization problem falls into a family of 
problems very well studied in the scientific literature and 
FIDCARE implements a genetic algorithm specifically 
developed. 
C. Stocks management and usage product control 
Stocks management and therapies management are 
processes strictly correlated. As mentioned above, the 
abstract drug represents a separation element among them 
and the tight control over therapies scheduling provided by 
FIDCARE allows for a reduction of the stocks of the 
departments and of the warehouse. Furthermore, FIDCARE 
provides an Enterprise Data Warehouse module for reporting 
and data analysis. FIDCARE exposes a set of pre-set reports 
but users who are familiar with data Warehouse tools can 
easily create their own reports. Reports allow analysing the 
consumption of drugs by department, by period, by 
pathology, Figure 4. Based on these data, FIDCARE 
provides also a number of features for automatic reordering 
of stocks. The cost of therapies is inclusive of a number of 
cost items: drugs, equipment, staff, structure, etc. The report 
on the use of medications and medical devices also includes 
non-use due to: expiration date, breakage and damage, 
rejection by the patient, loss, etc. Finally, FIDCARE is 
designed to integrate with third-party stock management 
systems.  
It is important to note that FIDCARE provides actual 
data on the consumption of drugs and devices. Otherwise, 
these data must be estimated using specific methodologies, 
such as Activity Based costing (ABC) or must be collected 
manually from paper documents. In the first case, it is 
inaccurate data while in the second case a substantial effort is 
required. 
VI. 
COMPARISON WITH COMPETING SYSTEMS 
This section describes a brief comparison with competing 
system having similar features. From an in-depth market 
analysis, the main competitors of FID-MED, on the Italian 
territory, are the computerized medical carts of the 
companies SPID S.p.A., IPSA s.r.l. and Max Medical Group 
s.r.l., three companies located in the North of Italy. 
 
The cart of SPID S.p.A. allows the computerized 
management of the process of administering the drugs in the 
department. The system is the result of the combination of a 
computerized drugs trolley and a software for the 
prescription/administration of pharmacological therapies, 
integrated with an identification system.  
The identification system, based on barcode or RFID 
technology, allows to identify the individual operator, the 
patient and the drug to be administered. Unlike FIDRUN, the 
cart of SPID unlocks the single drawer on operator's 
command. FIDRUN unlocks drawers automatically as the 
clinical processes require even if a drawer can be also 
unlocked on operator’s request, if needed. 
The Smart Cart of IPSA s.r.l, associated with a software 
for the management of therapies, allows the optimized 
management of all the phases of the pharmacotherapy 
process directly in patient bed and guarantees the traceability 
of the drugs and the activities of prescription and 
administration. 
Smart Cart guides nurses in the distribution of therapies 
and allows automatic identification of operators, patients and 
medications by portable wireless barcode/RFID readers, 
finger-print readings, smart-cards. It is equipped with PC  
with Monitor Touch 10.1", medical keyboard, Wi-Fi, 
Bluetooth, long-life battery and a system of an access 
mechanism controlled to the contents of the drawers. Unlike 
FIDRUN, the Smart Cart does not allow multiple operating 
modes (patient, drugs and storage modes). 
The automated cart of Max Medical Group s.r.l, named 
Click, 
uses 
a 
software 
for 
the 
management 
of 
prescription/administration. Click is equipped with an 
automatic mechanism of opening drawers and a control 
system that allows the nursing staff to have access to the 
only drawer containing the drug to be administered, while 
the other drawers remain locked. It is possible to configure 
the drawers according to the principle of assignment bed-
drawer or alternatively active ingredient-drawer. FID-MED 
provides a more flexible assignment patient-drawer and a 
strong patient recognition mechanism. 
FID-MED has some other interesting distinguishing 
features, among them: Voice User Interface, Gesture 
Interface, Adaptive User Interface, IoT Architecture and 
API. 
A. Voice User Interface 
Users interact with FIDCARE and FIDRUN through a 
voice in order to perform some tasks, e.g., initiate a new 
therapy, confirm an administration an automated, etc. 
Furthermore, FIDRUN gives acoustic feedbacks for a 
number of functionalities (e.g., correct execution, alerts, 
errors, etc.). 
 
Figure 4.  In the background, drugs consuption by period and by usage 
(therapies, manually unloaded, dismissal therapies). In the foreground, 
Cardioaspirin 100 mg consuption chart by departments. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

B. Gesture Interface 
Gesture recognition is achieved by FID-MED through 
small wearable three axis accelerometers for users. These 
sensors allow detection of a set of user gesture, such as move 
left/right and move top/down. The functionalities associated 
to that gesture (e.g., close, go to detail) can be customized. 
C. Adaptive User Interface 
FIDCARE adapts user interface in a light way. In 
particular, if the user must select a value from a list, it 
presents the preferred and most common previous choices of 
the user. For instance, this happens with drugs list, 
therapeutic protocols list, pathologies list. 
D. IoT Architecture and API 
FIDRUN implements a three levels IoT paradigm and, as 
previously described, it is deeply integrated into FID-MED 
but it is designed to be used in conjunction with third-party 
software as well. For this purpose, a set of Application 
Programming Interfaces (API) accessible via JSON 
messages on sockets or through Web Services is available. 
Through these APIs all capabilities of FIDRUN can be used 
in a programmatic way with any programming language (as 
FIDCARE do). 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This article presented FID-MED platform, a HIS 
composed by a Java web based application, named 
FIDCARE, and an especially designed integrated medical 
cart, called FIDRUN.  
FID-MED is co-funded by Ministry of Economic 
Development START-Up 46/82 FIT DM 7/07/2009 (FID-
MED 1.0) and Horizon 2020 – PON 2014/2020 and 
Campania Region Programma Operativo Regionale (POR) 
Fondo Europeo di Sviluppo Regionale (FESR) 2007/2013 
(FID-MED 2.0). The article illustrates how the FID-MED 
platform may support the mitigation of the risk in healthcare 
activities leveraging on a tight integration between hardware 
and software technologies. Other than the complete control 
over all clinical processes (prescription, administering, 
stocks management, etc.), comparisons with competing 
system shows that FID-MED has some very interesting 
distinguishing features, such as voice and gesture user 
interface and easy integration with third party systems by 
design. FID-MED platform passed successfully several 
experimental usage trials to the hospital “Policlinico di 
Napoli”. In this trial, FID-MED was integrated with the pre-
existing acceptance module in the hospital from which it 
receives all information about hospitalized admissions.  At 
present, the hospital in Pozzuoli uses FIDRUN in its urology 
department.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan, and M. S. Donaldson “To Err Is 
Human: Building a Safer Health System.” Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press, 1999. 
[2] C. J. McDonald, M. Weiner, and S. L. Hui “Deaths due to 
medical errors are exaggerated in Institute of Medicine 
report”. JAMA. 2000;284: pp. 93–95. 
[3] L. L. Leape, et al. “The nature of adverse events in 
hospitalized patients: results from the Harvard Medical 
Practice Study II”. N Engl J Med. 1991;324(6): pp. 377–384. 
[4] A. X. Garg, et al. “Effects of computerized clinical decision 
support systems on practitioner performance and patient 
outcomes a systematic review”. JAMA.2005;293(10): pp. 
1223–1238. doi:10.1001/ jama. 293.10.1223, March 2005. 
[5] J. H. Gurwitz, et al. “Incidence and preventability of adverse 
drug events in nursing homes.” Am J Med. 2000;109(2): pp. 
87–94. 
[6] D. W. Bates, D. L. Boyle, M. B. Vander Vliet, J. Schneider, 
and L. L. Leape “Relationship between medication errors and 
adverse drug events.” J Gen Intern Med. 1995;10(4): pp. 199–
205. 
[7] L. L. Leape, et al. “Systems analysis of adverse drug events.” 
ADE Prevention Study Group. JAMA. 1995;274(1): pp. 35–
43. 
[8] Bruskin-Goldring Research. (1999, February). B-D.id and 
CAP Today Co-Sponsor Survey Among Hospital Executives 
to Determine Awareness of Medication Administration and 
Specimen 
Collection 
Errors, 
from 
http://www.bd.com/contentmanager/b_article.asp?Item_ID=2
1202&ContentType_ID=1&BusinessCode=20001&d=&s=pre
ss&dTitle=Press&dc=Worldwide&dcTitle=Worldwide. 
Rerieved: August, 2018 
[9] nsis.salute.gov.it. Access date: August, 2018 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

