User Privacy in Mobile Health Applications 
Analysis of e-Pulse application 
Tolga Çakmak 
Department of Information Management 
Hacettepe University 
Ankara, Turkey 
e-mail: tcakmak@hacettepe.edu.tr 
Şahika Eroğlu 
Department of Information Management 
Hacettepe University 
Ankara, Turkey 
e-mail: sahikaeroglu@hacettepe.edu.tr
Abstract— Mobile health (mhealth) applications that are 
widely used for many different purposes such as tracking 
chronical diseases and lifestyle management have many 
advantages as well as potential limitations and privacy 
concerns. In this regard, it is seen that the studies with 
different points of view on the personal data, data protection, 
and privacy and security features and architectures of these 
apps are increasing in the literature. This study aims to 
evaluate the privacy and data protection conditions of the e-
Pulse app that is developed by the Ministry of Health in 
Turkey. In line with this aim, personal data security and 
privacy conditions of the e-pulse app that is the official mobile 
health app of Turkey are described with a checklist developed 
according to the literature review. Privacy and personal data 
protection issues of the app are highlighted and potential 
recommendations are discussed in the results of the study.  
Keywords-mobile applications; privacy policies; mobile 
health applications; data protection; data privacy.  
I.
INTRODUCTION
Users can do many things that are necessary for the 
routine life processes with mobile devices and mobile apps, 
which are being an integral part of daily life. Applications 
installed on smartphones enable users to benefit from a 
variety of mobile internet services including personalized 
services. In recent years, it is seen that mobile apps affect 
businesses, social life, and lifestyle. The rapidly increasing 
use of mhealth apps also helps not only to improve the 
quality of life of the citizens but also to improve health 
services. mHealth apps that are used by physicians and 
patients to manage and observe health information, with their 
features, such as getting blood test results, glucose reading 
and displaying medical images and medical information 
convert mobile devices (tablets, smartphones, etc.) into 
medical devices [1]. In this regard, potential advantages of 
mhealth apps are stated as offering a fast diagnosis, 
providing feedback for monitoring health status, promotion 
of healthy behavior, providing easy access to treatment and 
rehabilitation, receiving electronic prescriptions, faster 
access to consent and reducing waiting times [2]. In light of 
this information, it is possible to describe many mhealth apps 
as the information or data providers increasing awareness 
and literacy level about health. 
mHealth apps those usage increased especially with 
wearable medical devices provide many advantages for 
medical tracking and consent. However, these apps 
potentially have some limitations and privacy concerns. In 
this regard, it is seen that many healthcare app providers are 
not certified by any authority institutions and they do not 
have training about health information privacy and 
confidentiality. This is stated as one of the reasons for the 
concerns [1]. For instance, app providers can request to 
access users’ contacts stored in mobile devices without any 
permission. When the user allows the app to see or use the 
GPS data, apps often disclose that this information will be 
sent to advertising companies. Moreover, it appears that 
many app users do not know where the information goes or 
how the developer plans to use it [3]. mHealth apps require 
many personal data to provide their services. This situation 
brings the user's privacy and security concerns. These 
concerns can be listed as monitoring by the unauthorized 
agents and sharing location or health data to third parties. As 
a matter of fact, given the distributed and wireless nature of 
sensor networks, the difficulty of ensuring data security in 
mobile apps is mentioned in the studies [4]. Privacy 
violations that may occur in the use of mhealth apps may 
harm users. Users who are subject to loss of personal data 
can lose their reputation and social insurance or they can face 
with employment discrimination [5][6]. At this point, it is 
very important for the app providers to make efforts to 
produce beneficial apps and to take precautions for user 
privacy and confidentiality in the apps considering the 
potential threats. In addition, it is seen that privacy policies 
are insufficient level in terms of clarity of data collection, 
storage, and transmission processes. It would not be wrong 
to say that the difficulty of the readability and 
understandability of these policies is another factor for this 
insufficiency. It is expressed that the main reason for this 
situation is lack of a standardized format and terminology 
[1][7][8]. 
mHealth apps with their potentials have been the subject 
of many scientific studies in recent years. In this context, it is 
seen that different models are developed on the reduction of 
privacy concerns and the improvement of systems in mobile 
apps. In general, it is seen that different models are suggested 
in the studies, which emphasize the importance of the 
reliability of mhealth apps [9]-[11]. There may be privacy 
issues in the architecture of mhealth apps, which benefit 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

from significant information communication infrastructures. 
In this context, one of the most important areas for mhealth 
apps to reach wider use areas and to utilize their potential 
benefits more effectively is the security and privacy 
opportunities offered by these apps for personal data. The 
privacy and security of mhealth apps can be examined within 
the framework of three components (such as law, 
culture/custom, and technology). In addition to the 
technological safety and user analysis of apps, it is seen that 
governments and app producers are working on the resources 
that include guidelines and recommendations for the 
implementation of privacy and security in apps [12]-[15]. On 
the other hand, in spite of this guidance published in 
different sectors, the lack of formal and one-stop standards 
and guidelines for implementation is stated in the studies [5]. 
mHealth apps have access to user-identifiable information 
and personal health information, including diagnosis, 
symptoms, and use of therapeutic services. Legislation on 
privacy seeks to protect individuals by requesting consent for 
the collection, use, disclosure or storage of personal data, 
including sensitive health information. However, many 
mobile apps are known to access private data without users' 
permission. 
The usability and effectiveness of mhealth apps are 
mostly based on user data. These apps can directly request 
data from users. Furthermore, they can gather user data 
through a social network connection or location data. It is 
possible to state that these apps can collect a wider range of 
data that the user may not be aware of, such as the user's 
lifestyle, location tracking, social network connections. This 
situation increases the exposure of users to privacy attacks. 
In this context, users need to be aware of the increasing 
privacy risks with ever-changing mobile technology. In 
mhealth applications, it is seen that there is no 
comprehensive protection policy for the privacy of personal 
data. Privacy protections are mostly limited to the protection 
required by the developer's privacy policy. In this regard, the 
study shows that only 30% of the most commonly used 600 
mhealth apps have a privacy policy [16]. On the other hand, 
since there is no standard privacy policy content, different 
applications have different content policies and lack of users' 
awareness about the issue is an important factor. 
In mobile apps, the protection of patient privacy can 
prevent individuals from particular activities and lead them 
to remain passive. This may result in the loss of the right of 
the person to develop his / her material and spiritual 
existence. Respect for the private lives of persons benefiting 
from health services is important for the protection of their 
personal rights, dignity, and personalities. The protection of 
the patient's information is primarily the responsibility of 
healthcare providers. Although this responsibility of 
healthcare providers, users are required to improve their self-
efficiency and awareness about privacy issues. Additionally, 
the state and authority institutions have also vital 
responsibilities regarding the privacy of the patients, and the 
implementation of related policies efficiently.  
In this study, the privacy policies of the e-pulse 
application, which was developed by the Ministry of Health 
in Turkey are analyzed. Accordingly, the methodology of the 
research is discussed in the second part. The third section 
presents the findings. In the fourth and final section of the 
study, conclusion, and recommendations are given. 
II.
METHODOLOGY
This study aims to analyze privacy policies, data sharing 
and transmission processes, and privacy settings of the e-
pulse mobile app, which is a mobile health application 
developed by the Republic of Turkey Ministry of Health 
within the scope of e-government approaches. The main 
feature of this app is to help citizens for tracking their daily 
activities such as steps and heart rates and their health 
records created as a result of the interactions with hospitals. 
In line with this information, the research questions of the 
study are as follows: 

What features does the e-pulse application have in 
relation to the protection of personal data? 

What kind of improvements does e-pulse need in 
terms of security of personal data and user privacy? 
The qualitative research processes were followed in this 
study. In light of research questions, a checklist is developed 
according to the literature review. The checklist, which is 
used to analyze the e-pulse app consists of three sections 
titled privacy policy document, data sharing and handling, 
and privacy settings and security. Questions in each section 
have three answers (such as yes, no, partially) and a textbox 
for a description of current status. In addition, the checklist 
and the questions were reviewed through interviews with 
experts on personal data security. The data were gathered 
according to two techniques within the scope of content 
analysis. Firstly, the app was observed and its features used 
according to questions in the checklist. Secondly, the policy 
and help documents were analyzed to get deeper answers. 
Additionally, the gathered data were reported by the titles 
given in the checklist. Percentage values presented in each 
section were calculated by dividing the number of completed 
questions to the number of questions in the section.  
III.
FINDINGS
In this part of the study, the e-pulse platform, which is a 
personal health application developed within the scope of e-
government applications in Turkey is evaluated in terms of 
the privacy policy document, data sharing and handling, and 
personal account information. The findings obtained from 
the evaluations are presented in this section.  
A. Test-bed: e-Pulse App 
mHealth apps, which are increasing in number and are 
widely used by individuals, are developed by governments as 
well as private developers. They are presented to citizens 
within the framework of health information systems and e-
government applications. According to benefiting from 
management information systems in healthcare, the 
electronic pulse (e-pulse) app is developed as a mhealth app 
by the Ministry of Health in Turkey. The e-pulse app is a 
mobile and web-based information sharing and retrieval 
platform that enables citizens to reach all examination 
information, appointment, diagnosis, treatment, prescription, 
and medication details, allergy information, laboratory test 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

results and radiological images with their reports in all health 
facilities in Turkey. Containing many goals, the app aims to 
prevent patients from recurrent examinations, to allow both 
users and physicians to access recent and previous health 
data, and to make a contribution to the efficiency and 
effectiveness of health services. 
The patients can evaluate the quality of health services 
they received and express their opinions and complaints by 
using the app. Patients also can record their data (such as 
blood pressure, sugar, and pulse data, steps) to their profiles 
and display this information comparatively. Patients who can 
access their health data from anywhere with the E-Pulse app 
will be able to use this data without having to contact the 
hospitals. The E-Pulse app can be used from a personal 
computer with its web-based structure. It is also accessible 
from any smart device with any of the operating systems 
(Windows Phone, IOS or Android).  
B. Privacy Policy Document 
At the beginning of the assessment, the privacy document 
is evaluated in terms of its structure and clarity. It is seen 
that the application has a privacy document, but this 
document also includes usage and copyright explanations of 
the app. Although the scope of the document is not limited 
to the privacy policy, the document is named as “privacy - 
data protection statement”. Additionally, this document does 
not contain a summary and a section of links that help 
readers to navigate through the document. Moreover, the 
document does not have the definitions of privacy terms and 
dates reflecting the latest revisions and updates. Plus, it is 
seen that the application has a feature to notify users about 
any updates in privacy conditions. 
Secondly, the scope of the privacy policy document is 
analyzed according to expressions related to data collection, 
sharing and storing processes. In this context, findings 
indicate that the privacy document clearly informs users 
about the gathered data and how these data are used. In 
contrast to this finding, the methods being used for data 
collection processes are not explained in the document. It is 
also seen that the document states which information will be 
shared with third parties and the sharing purposes. 
Accordingly, findings reflect that the data protection 
measures are slightly presented in the document. On the 
other hand, the document does not cover how long the 
gathered data will be stored and its deletion procedures. 
Although the contact information is provided in help 
documents, the privacy document does not contain this 
information. 
Evaluations about the privacy policy document of the e-
pulse app show that the document is insufficient in terms of 
scope and structure. The document meets only five (38%) of 
13 criteria that are expected to be given in a privacy policy 
document. 
C. Data Sharing and Handling 
In the second section of the survey, data sharing and 
handling functions of the e-pulse system analyzed with 12 
questions. These questions are categorized under three titles. 
These categories are data sharing with third parties, policies, 
and accessibility. 
Findings illustrate that the app is in a very sufficient level 
in terms of data sharing with third parties. Since the health 
organizations, mostly hospitals, feed the app with patient 
transactions in data creation processes, the data handled in 
third parties is not used in the app. Additionally, the app 
does not make a request for creating persistent cookies. The 
third-party tracking cookies blocked by web browsers are 
not used in the app. Lastly, the privacy policy document 
strongly emphasizes the conditions related to data sharing 
and usage conditions with third parties. 
Analysis indicates that the e-pulse application provides a 
secure connection (https) in the web platform and provides 
access to whole data about the user. It is also seen that the 
app authenticates the user via e-government account 
information. Accordingly, users are allowed to modify or 
delete some of the data such as comments, weight, and size. 
In contrast, users can not make any changes in their health 
records. They can only view this data by using the app. It is 
a remarkable finding that the privacy document partially 
informs the users about these features. The app also does not 
provide an explanation of data transmission and storage 
processes in the privacy document. Findings reveal that the 
app successfully performs 10 of 12 questions. Findings also 
demonstrate that one question is partially carried out. In this 
context, the efficiency of the app in data sharing and 
handling issues was measured as 87.5%. 
D. Privacy Settings and Security 
As the third section of the research instrument, privacy 
settings and security features offered for personal accounts 
were assessed with 11 questions. In this regard, the 
authentication process of the app during the login was 
analyzed. Findings reflect that the app uses a two-factor 
authentication process and validate users by sending an 
SMS. Additionally, the app allows users to set which profile 
information or transaction will be shared with whom. 
The app provides five options related to sharing patient 
transactions with third parties. These options are sharing 
health data with the family doctor, only the doctor who 
examines the user, all doctors in the hospital, all doctors 
employing for the Turkish Ministry of Health or sharing the 
health data with no one. When the user selects this option, 
the app asks for approval with SMS. Accordingly, although 
the user selects "do not share my data with doctors" option, 
the app allows whole doctors in the hospital where the user 
made an appointment will see the health data without 
approval. The related notification is also given under this 
option. It is a remarkable finding that the privacy policy 
document does not contain any information about these 
options, but help documents partially provide these details 
by giving screenshots. 
The app also helps users to make their privacy settings by 
providing a default setting about sharing health data. 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Moreover, users are expected to make their privacy settings 
in the first use of the app and they are directed to settings 
panel after the download. 
The app allows users to snooze, close or re-open their 
accounts. In parallel with the findings of the data sharing 
settings, the privacy policy document does not cover these 
functions. Users can only learn their rights related to 
snoozing or closing their accounts via help documents 
linked on the official web page of the app. Lastly, the app 
has data validation features and asks users to provide 
feedback about the misinformation presented in their profile 
panel. In general, the assessments about privacy settings and 
security reveal that the app provides many options and 
features related to privacy and security. It is seen that the 
technical part of the app meets the basic criteria for privacy 
and 
security 
settings. 
Although 
given 
advantages, 
documentation of these settings is seen insufficient level 
especially regarding privacy policy documents. As a result 
of these insufficiencies, the app performs eight questions 
completely and it is seen that the requirements in one 
question are partially carried out. The performance of the 
app in this part is measured as 70.3%. 
E. General Overview 
In addition to specific results presented in previous 
sections of the study, the app was analyzed in terms of 
general scores obtained according to responses to questions 
in each section. In this context, the general overview of the 
app is illustrated in Figure 1 to display obtained percentages 
of each component, and to compare the levels of each 
section. 
Figure. 1. A general overview of the analyzed components 
According to the general situation illustrated in Figure 1, 
the level of data sharing and handling functions (87%) 
which are mostly based on the technical processes are 
higher than the other two sections analyzed in the study. In 
contrast, the privacy policy document is the weakest 
component (38%) of the app. 
IV.
CONCLUSION
The e-Pulse app is an app that is used in Turkey to meet 
goals expected from mhealth apps such as ensuring that 
patients have 
more information about their health 
information and their participation in treatment decisions. As 
is in other mhealth apps, processes like patient privacy, 
security, and privacy of personal data are important for the e-
pulse app. Since the app is developed by the Turkish 
Ministry of Health, all data created in Turkish health 
institutions are accessible by the app. This situation makes 
the app’s data processes more important. According to the 
analysis conducted with a checklist developed in this study, 
it is understood that the app has a privacy, use and copyright 
agreement. Assessments based on the structure and clarity of 
the agreement reveal that although the agreement has 
headings related to the security of personal data, limits of 
responsibility and copyrights, the provided information 
under these titles has not been made clear and detailed. It is 
seen that the processes about data sharing with third parties 
are expressed in the agreement. In contrast, information 
about data collection, processes and storage conditions are 
not expressed. Assessments reflect that the responsibilities 
during the loss or vulnerability of personal data are not 
accepted by the app developers. This situation is considered 
a significant deficiency in the security and confidentiality of 
the data of the users. Although the application provides 
users’ confidentiality, use, and copyright agreement, the fact 
that this agreement does not contain detailed information on 
the confidentiality, security, and information about the 
protection of patient privacy. These insufficiencies constitute 
a weakness for the users who need to be clearly informed 
before using the app. It is clear that there are deficiencies in 
the documentation for the functions and features related to 
the privacy and data collection processes of the app. 
Additionally, evaluations of the application's privacy policy 
document point out that the document is insufficient in terms 
of scope and structure. In this context, it is recommended 
privacy policy document of the app should be improved in 
terms of data collection, processing and storage issues. 
The results presented under the Privacy Settings and 
Security section of the study reflect that the app provides 
users five different security options. In this part, users are 
allowed to select one or more options given by the app. It is 
remarkable that there is a description given under one of 
these options. It is located under the “no physician needs to 
see my data (with SMS code or password required by this 
option is checked)” option. The description is “If you check 
this box and make an appointment with the Central Patient 
Appointment System, all physicians in the relevant hospital 
will be able to access your health records without obtaining 
further approval during that examination day.” Although the 
user checks “the physician is not allowed to see the user’s 
data” option, all physicians in the hospital could see the 
records on the appointment day. This situation conflicts with 
patient privacy that is also emphasized in the Patient Right 
Regulation in Turkey [17]. The 16th article of this regulation 
is “The patient may examine the file and records, which have 
information on his/her health status, directly or through 
his/her representative or legal representative and take a copy. 
These records can only be seen by those directly involved in 
the treatment of the patient”. In addition, the app's privacy 
policy document does not provide detailed information about 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

these sharing options. On the other hand, two-factor 
authentication function and user feedback features of the app 
were evaluated as positive security and validation methods in 
the study. 
It is understood from the results of the analysis conducted 
on the e-pulse that the app has deficiencies in the scope of 
the privacy, use and copyright agreement and this document 
needs to be improved regarding this issue. In this respect, the 
application developers are recommended to inform the users 
about the data collection, storage, and distribution in the 
privacy policy of the app. As another suggestion, the policy 
developers of the app are recommended to ensure the 
readability and intelligibility of the policy documents. Lastly, 
as stated in the literature, the lack of standardized format and 
terminological unity in these policies are considered as one 
of the weaknesses in this topic. In this regard, publications 
like standards and guidelines that can be published by 
authority institutions are seen as one of the major steps. 
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Rowan and J. Dehlinger, “A Privacy Policy Comparison 
of Health and Fitness Related Mobile Applications,” Procedia 
Computer 
Science, 
vol. 
37, 
pp. 
348-355, 
2014, 
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2014.08.051. 
[2]
G. Catan, R. Espanha, R. Veloso Mendes, O. Toren, and D. 
Chinitz, “The Impact of eHealth and mHealth on doctor 
behavior and patient involvement: an Israeli and Portuguese 
comparative approach,” Stud Health Technol Inform. vol. 
210,  pp. 813-817, 2015. 
[3]
A.M. McDonald and L.F. Cranor, “The Cost of Reading 
Privacy Policies,” vol. 4:3, pp. 543-568, 2008. 
[4]
D. Ding, M. Conti,  and A. Solanas, “A smart health 
application and its related privacy issues,” 2016 Smart City 
Security and Privacy Workshop (SCSP-W),  pp. 1-5, 2016, 
doi:10.1109/SCSPW.2016.7509558. 
[5]
L. Parker et al. “A health app developer’s guide to law and 
policy: a multi-sector policy analysis,” BMC Medical 
Informatics and Decision Making. vol. 17, pp.1-13, 2017, 
doi:10.1186/s12911-017-0535-0. 
[6]
Privacy and Mobile Apps, Office of the Information 
Commissioner. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.oic.qld.gov.au/guidelines/for-
government/guidelines-privacy-principles/applying-the-
privacy-principles/privacy-and-mobile-apps  2019.03.28. 
[7]
M. Al Ameen, J. Liu, and K. Kwak, “Security and Privacy 
Issues in Wireless Sensor Networks for Healthcare 
Applications,” J Med Syst., vol. 36, pp. 93-101, 2012, 
doi:10.1007/s10916-010-9449-4. 
[8]
T. Giannetsos, T. Dimitriou, and N.R. Prasad, “People-centric 
sensing in assistive healthcare: Privacy challenges and 
directions,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 4, 
pp. 1295-1307, 2011, doi:10.1002/sec.313. 
[9]
P. Dadhich, K. Dutta, and M.C. Govil, “Trust Enhanced 
Authorization for Distributed Systems,” International Journal 
of Scientific & Engineering Research, vol. 2,  pp. 1-7, 2011. 
[10] C. Lin and V. Varadharajan, MobileTrust: a trust enhanced 
security architecture for mobile agent systems, International 
Journal of Information Security. vol.9 (3), pp. 153–178, 2010. 
doi:10.1007/s10207-009-0098-x. 
[11] Z. Yan, Y. Chen, Y. Shen, “PerContRep: A Practical 
Reputation System For Pervasive Content Services,” J 
Supercomput, 
vol. 
70, 
pp.1051-1074, 
2014, 
doi:10.1007/s11227-014-1116-y. 
[12] App Review - App Store - Apple Developer. [Online]. 
Available from https://developer.apple.com/app-store/review/ 
2019.03.28. 
[13] GSMA Public Policy | Privacy Design Guidelines for Mobile 
Application 
Development. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.gsma.com/publicpolicy/resources/privacy-
design-guidelines-mobile-application-development 
2019.03.28. 
[14] Medical devices: software applications (apps). [Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/medical-
devices-software-applications-apps 2019.03.28. 
[15] Office of the A.I. Commissioner, Mobile privacy: a better 
practice guide for mobile app developers - Office of the 
Australian Information Commissioner (OAIC). [Online].
Available 
from
https://www.oaic.gov.au/agencies-and-
organisations/guides/guide-for-mobile-app-developers 
2019.03.28.
[16] A. Sunyaev, T. Dehling, P. Taylor, K. Mandl, “Availability 
and Quality of Mobile Health App Privacy Policies,” Journal 
of the American Medical Informatics Association, vol. 22, pp. 
e22-e28, 2015, doi:10.1136/amiajnl-2013-002605. 
[17] Patient Rights Guide, Legislation for Physicians and Managers of 
Medical 
Chamber. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
http://www.ttb.org.tr/mevzuat/index.php?option=com_content&view
=article&id=984:hasta&catid=26:etik&Itemid=65 2019.05.06. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

