Chair-Stand Device for the Assessment of Elderly Patients in Risk of Frailty 
Alberto Sánchez-Sánchez, Elena Villalba-Mora, 
Xavier Ferre, Cristian Moral  
Centro de Tecnología Biomédica 
Universidad Politécnica de Madrid 
Madrid, Spain 
e-mail: {alberto.sanchez, elena.villalba, xavier.ferre, 
cristian.moral}@ctb.upm.es 
Leocadio Rodriguez-Mañas 
Servicio de Geriatría 
Hospital de Getafe 
Getafe, Spain 
e-mail: leocadio.rodriguez@salud.madrid.org  
Dieter Hayn 
Digital Health Information Systems 
AIT Austrian Institute of Technology 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: dieter.hayn@ait.ac.at  
Raquel Bernabé Espiga, Juan Luis Sánchez Sánchez, 
Andrea López Diez-Picazo 
Fundación para la Investigación Biomédica  
Hospital de Getafe 
Getafe, Spain 
e-mail: {raquel.bernabe, juanluis.sanchez, 
andreajulia.lopez}@salud.madrid.org 
 
Abstract— Frailty is an intermediate state in the ageing 
trajectory, preceding the onset of disability. It can be assessed 
via clinical, cognitive, nutritional, and physical performance 
components, whereas one component of physical assessment is 
measurement of lower limb strength. We propose a device for 
measuring lower limb strength based on the 30s sit-to-stand test 
(30s-STS) in an autonomous environment. The device is based 
on an ultrasound sensor that is mounted on the backrest of a 
chair and measures the distance to the back of the patient. A 
signal processing algorithm was developed with a dataset of 
healthy subjects and evaluated prospectively with geriatric 
patients. Results of evaluation show that measurement for 
geriatric patients is poorer than expected. Thus, we plan to re-
train the algorithm with additional geriatric patients, and to 
study further the complexities of the 30s-STS analysing aspects 
such as the inter-observer-variability of reference annotations. 
The new algorithm will be evaluated as part of a clinical trial 
with 40 elderly patients at their dwelling. The clinical trial will 
also assess the acceptability of such a device in a home setting.  
Keywords- frailty; ultrasound sensor; mHealth. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Frailty is conceptually defined as a state of older adults 
with increased vulnerability, resulting from age-associated 
declines in physiologic reserve and function across multiple 
organ systems, which compromises the ability to cope with 
stressors [1][2]. In contrast to permanent disability, frailty 
advance can be potentially reversed through appropriate 
interventions [3][4][5]. 
The project FrAilty Care and wEll funcTion (FACET) 
targets the development of tools that facilitate the detection of 
frailty advance, enabling intervention to prevent or delay the 
onset of frailty. FACET assessment strategy comprises 
clinical, cognitive, nutritional, functional and physical 
performance 
components. 
Among 
them, 
physical 
performance stands as a strong predictor of undesired clinical 
outcomes in elderly patients such as deaths, hospitalisation, 
disability [6], and falls [7]. The measurement of lower limb 
strength is one of the three basic physical assessment tools 
along with balance and gait speed assessment [8]. FACET 
project aims to measure both gait speed [9] and lower limb 
strength via specialized devices. The latter complements the 
former, since it directly measures lower limb power, a relevant 
factor leading to sarcopenia and higher risk of falls.  
We present in this paper the device for lower limb strength 
measurement in the patient’s dwelling, to be used together 
with a tablet, empowering the patients through self-
assessment and a continuous and closer follow-up. In the next 
section the device and the algorithm used to interpret the 
measurements are described, along with the evaluation results 
and refinement steps taken accordingly. Section III includes a 
discussion of such results and, finally, Section IV presents the 
next steps in this line of research. 
II. 
METHODS & RESULTS 
The designed device offers the possibility of an automatic 
and unsupervised 30s-STS [10], counting the times elderly 
patients stand up and sit down from a chair in thirty seconds. 
It is attached to the backrest of a chair (see Figure 1), and it is 
equipped with an ultrasound sensor that continuously 
measures the distance between the device and the test subject 
with a sampling frequency of 10 Hz.  
It is meant to be used by patients with the help of informal 
caregivers, to measure lower limb strength according to their 
geriatrist established plan, (i.e., once or twice a week). A 
training session is held at patient homes to ensure a safe usage, 
particularly focusing on avoidance of falling hazards.  
A signal pre-processing and measuring algorithm (v1) was 
developed in MATLAB (The MathWorks, Nattick, MA, 
USA), and trained with the data from 30s-STS tests with 25 
healthy young subjects in a controlled laboratory environment 
(dataset A). The mean number of stands per test was 11.2 with 
a standard deviation of 3.9. The pre-processing in v1 consisted 
of removal of outliers (distance > 70 cm) moving median 
filtering with a moving window length of 0.7 s detection of 
local maxima. Each detected peak was interpreted as a 
successful stand-up-event. 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

When applied to dataset A, the first version of the 
algorithm was able to exactly count 88 % of the measurements 
(i.e., the calculated number of sit-to-stand events = reference 
number of sit-to-stand events as annotated via human 
counting). The mean absolute error was 0.16 stands and the 
mean relative error was 2.22 %. 
This v1 of the algorithm was evaluated in a pre-clinical 
environment at the University Hospital of Getafe (HUG) with 
30 volunteer geriatric patients and a trained nurse manually 
counting the stands in 30 s (dataset B). The mean number of 
stands was 9.2 ± 1.7 stands per test. The results of this 
prospective test showed a dramatically lower accuracy of the 
device in the assessment of potential real subjects. Only 7 % 
of measures were consistent with the manual measurements 
by the trained nurse. The mean absolute error was 2.57 stands 
and the mean relative error was 27.49%.  
Based on dataset B, the algorithm was refined to a v2, 
trained retrospectively with dataset B. An adaptive threshold 
was defined based on the mean value of the moving median 
and minimum within a 4s window. The threshold for outlier 
detection was increased from 70 to 99cm. Successful stand-
up-events were counted whenever a) the moving minimum of 
the signal with a window length of 0.7 s exceeded this 
threshold and b) the moving median within a 0.7 s window 
right after this timepoint exceeded 25 cm. Events that were 
closer than 1s to one another were not considered. V2 of the 
algorithm improved the accuracy of the measurements up to 
40%. The mean absolute error was 1.10 stands and the mean 
relative error was 12.80 %. 
III. 
DISCUSSION 
We found that the results achieved with the v1 of our 
algorithm were rather poor when applied to elderly patients. 
Due to the heterogeneous biomechanics of elderly patients 
while performing the test, the data differed remarkably as 
compared to healthy subjects. This fact, along with the poor 
adaptability of the algorithm to different chairs and subjects, 
were identified as potential sources of error in the 
measurement. V2 of the algorithm offered better results, but 
overfitting cannot be excluded.  
In some cases, it is hard to tell whether a sit-to-stand event 
should be counted or not, i.e., whether the patient reached a 
complete upright position. Especially, the decision whether 
the final event was within the 30 s time interval is sometimes 
hard to make. Therefore, even our reference annotations 
(manual counts of sit to stand events) might show some 
uncertainties. Considering the study itself, we can identify as 
limitations the sample size and the current status of the device 
as a prototype.  
For the system to be used in a clinical setting, it will be 
necessary to improve the accuracy by feeding the algorithm 
with additional measurements of real patients. The aim will be 
to make it at least as good as the average manual measurement 
by health professionals, which will also need to be measured. 
Nevertheless, for the system to be useful for monitoring frailty 
in a home setting, it is only necessary that the measurements 
are consistent within the same subject, to ensure decline in 
lower limb strength is detected early. 
IV. 
FURTHER STEPS 
In a next step, our algorithm will be evaluated in a 
prospective way with an additional test-set, which will be 
recorded from patients at the HUG. During this next step, it is 
planned that more than one person will manually count the sit-
to-stand events, in order to quantify the inter-observer-
variability of our reference annotations.  
Next, the device will be used in a clinical trial with 40 
elderly patients at their dwelling. The collected data will be 
analysed, inquiring the clinical relevance of a home-based 
chair stand test, and its ability to prevent frailty evolution to 
disability. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was funded by the EIT Health in the FACET 
(FrAilty Care and wEll funcTion) project. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. P. Fried, et al., “Frailty in older adults: evidence for a phenotype,” J 
Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci, vol. 56(3), pp. M146-157, 2001. 
[2] 
X. Chen, G. Mao, and S. X. Leng, “Frailty syndrome: an overview,”  
Clinical Interventions in Aging, vol. 2014:9, pp. 433-441, 2014, 
doi:10.2147/CIA.S45300. 
[3] 
L. Rodriguez-Mañas, and L.P. Fried, “Frailty in the clinical scenario,” 
Lancet Lond Engl, vol. 385, pp. e7–e9, 2015. 
[4] 
L.R. Pollack, et al., “Patterns and Predictors of Frailty Transitions in 
Older Men: The Osteoporotic Fractures, “ Men Study. J Am Geriatr 
Soc, vol. 65, pp. 2473–2479, 2017. 
[5] 
M. Cesari, et al., “ A physical activiy intervention to treat the frailty 
syndrome in older persons – results from the LIFE-P study,” J Gerontol 
Ser A Biol Sci Med Sci, vol. 70(2), pp. 216–222, 2014. 
[6] 
D. Legrand, et al., “Muscle Strength and Physical Performance as 
Predictors of Mortality, Hospitalization, and Disability in the Oldest, 
“ Journal Of The American Geriatrics Society, vol. 62(6), pp. 1030-
1038, 2014, doi: 10.1111/jgs.12840. 
[7] 
A. Wihlborg, M. Englund, K. Åkesson, and P. Gerdhem, “Fracture 
predictive ability of physical performance tests and history of falls in 
elderly women: a 10-year prospective study,” Osteoporosis 
International, vol. 26(8), pp. 2101-2109, 2015, doi: 10.1007/s00198-
015-3106-1. 
[8] 
J.M. Guralnik, et al., “A short physical performance battery assessing 
lower extremity function: association with self-reported disability and 
prediction of mortality and nursing home admission,” J Gerontol, vol 
49, pp. M85-94, 1994.  
[9] 
X. Ferre, et al. “Gait Speed Measurement for Elderly Patients with Risk 
of Frailty”. Mobile Information Systems. Hindawi, vol. 2017, 2017.  
[10] C. J. Jones, R. E. Rikli, W. C. Beam, “A 30-s chair-stand test as a 
measure of lower body strength in community-residing older adults,” 
Research Quarterly for Exercise and Sport, vol. 70, pp. 113-119, 
1999.0 
 
Figure 1. Chair-Stand device as tested with data set B 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

