Biomechanical Perspective on Effect of Angle in Arm Swing Movement on Vertical 
Ground Reaction Force for Gait Improvement 
 
Sota Miura  
 Kochi University of Technology 
Tosayamada, Kami, Kochi, 782-8502, Japan 
e-mail: ssanpu98@gmail.com 
Kyoko Shibata 
 Kochi University of Technology 
Tosayamada, Kami, Kochi, 782-8502, Japan 
email: shibata.kyoko@kochi-tech.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract— This study focuses on arm swinging movements in 
gait for active self-healthcare. However, most of the research on 
arm swing movements is clinical approach and biomechanical 
mechanisms of why these movements are effective are not well 
understood. Therefore, this study aims to biomechanically 
elucidate the coupled process of arm swing and lower limb 
movement. This coupled process can lead to an effective gait 
according to his/her gait at the time. In this paper, we focus on 
the bimodality of vertical ground reaction force, which is also 
used for gait evaluation in clinical practice. The purpose of this 
paper is to experimentally clarify how the bimodality of vertical 
ground reaction force varies with arm swing, and to determine 
mechanistically what coupled processes are responsible for this 
variation. The experiment is carried out with four volunteers. 
In the experiment, each volunteer performs six different gait 
conditions. In these experiments, the ground reaction forces 
and mechanical parameters of each body segment are measured.  
The results of the analysis showed that an increase in the angle 
of lateral pelvic tilt and the vertical ground reaction force 
increased in the valleys and decreased in the part of late peaks, 
as the angle of arm swing increased. The angle of lateral pelvic 
tilt also showed a change in value at the same time as the late 
peak of the vertical ground reaction force. This suggests that 
the bimodality of vertical ground reaction force is related to the 
pelvic lateral tilt movement induced by arm swing. 
Keywords - Biomechanics;  Pelvic angle;  Arm movement; ground 
reaction force . 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recent advances in medical care have led to the aging of 
the population in many developed countries [1]. In Japan, 
according to the 2021 Simple Life Chart published by the 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, the average life 
expectancy for men is 81.47 years and 87.57 years for women, 
and the percentage of people reaching 90 years of age is 3.9 
times higher for men and 3.3 times higher for women 
compared to 1980[2]. These data suggest that society will 
continue to age further. Under these circumstances, the social 
issue is to reduce the gap between average life expectancy and 
healthy life expectancy. Walking is often viewed as the 
easiest way to solve this problem and as it has a low risk of 
disability even for people with knee or back diseases [3]. 
Therefore, walking has been studied from various approaches. 
Research on the effects of arm swinging has revealed changes 
in lower limb muscle activity [4], increased stride length 
[5][6], increased maximum walking speed [7], and improved 
stability in walking [8]. However, these studies are clinical 
approach, and it is not known why arm swing movements are 
effective. Consequently, depending on an individual's gait, 
changing the arm swing movement may not result in an 
effective gait, such as no change in walking speed or stride 
length, or conversely, a worsening of walking speed or stride 
length. Therefore, research is conducted from the point of 
view of biomechanics to clarify the factors that contribute to 
the effectiveness of walking. Most biomechanical studies that 
focus on arm swing have discussed the stability and symmetry 
of gait [9], but few have discussed how arm swing leads to an 
increase in walking speed and stride length. Hence, this study 
aims to biomechanically elucidate the coupled process of arm 
swing and lower limb movement. This coupled process can 
lead to an effective gait according to his/her gait at the time. 
As a first step, this article focuses on the vertical ground 
reaction force, which is one of the most important indices in 
the evaluation of walking behavior [10] and is related to the 
propulsive force of walking. It is clinically known that the 
vertical ground reaction force is bimodal in normal gait and 
the bimodality of force changes with differences in gait. For 
example, the difference between the peaks and valleys of the 
bimodality of vertical ground reaction force increases with 
increasing walking speed [11], and the early peaks become 
larger, and the valleys and late peaks become smaller with 
increasing stride length [12], indicating a close relationship 
between walking motion and the bimodality of vertical 
ground reaction force. Additionally, the bimodality of vertical 
ground reaction force has been reported to be lost with aging 
due to a decrease in walking speed [13]. Therefore, the 
purpose of this report is to experimentally clarify how the 
bimodality of vertical ground reaction force is affected by the 
arm swing movement and to clarify the coupling between the 
arm swing movement and the vertical ground reaction force 
by observing the mechanical parameters. In the experiment, 
an optical motion capture system and a ground reaction force 
meter are used to measure and analyze the motion of each 
segment and the values of the ground reaction force induced 
by the swing of the arm setting the angle of arm swing 
condition.  
Section II describes the conditions and methods of the arm 
swing experiment, Section III presents the results of the 
analysis, Section IV discusses the results of the analysis, and 
Section V summarizes this paper and discusses future 
developments. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

II. 
EXPERIMENTAL METHOD 
The purpose of this experiment is to measure the 
mechanical parameters and the vertical ground reaction force 
of each segment during gait to clarify the effect of adjusting 
the angle of arm swing on the vertical ground reaction force 
values. This experiment will focus on steps 5-7, which is the 
steady-state gait. The purpose and contents of this study were 
explained to four volunteers (age: 22.5±0.5 [years], height: 
1.70±0.03 [m], weight: 66±2 [kg]) who gave oral and written 
consent. In addition, this study was approved by the Ethical 
Review Committee. There are six gait conditions: (a) walking 
natural without awareness of arm swing, walking with arms 
attached to the body (b) without swinging arms, (c) backward 
arm swing, (d) large backward arm swing, (e) forward arm 
swing, and (f) large forward arm swing, with five trials in 
each condition. In the case of a large arm swing, the upper 
body motion would differ between backward and forward 
swings, the effect of the upper body on the lower limbs would 
also be different. For the large arm swinging movement, the 
volunteer is instructed to raise his arms to a level parallel to 
the ground within a comfortable range. In addition to arm 
swing, we do not give any instructions on stride length or 
walking speed, considering the ease with which the volunteer 
can walk. In all walking conditions, except for natural 
walking and walking without swinging arms, volunteers 
practice walking five times before each trial to familiarize 
themselves with the walking motion. 
To obtain a large number of mechanical parameters, such 
as muscle activity and joint angles, from body data, the 
musculoskeletal modeling simulation AnyBody (AnyBody 
Technology), one of the analysis software, was used. The 3D 
positional coordinates of the markers are measured by taking 
pictures using the MAC3D system (Motion Analysis 
Corporation), which is an optical motion capture system. 
Twelve cameras with a sampling frequency of 100 [Hz] are 
used. The measured marker positions are denoised with a 
low-pass filter of 6 [Hz]. Three force plates (TF-4060 and TF-
6090 manufactured by Tec-Gihan) were used to measure 
reaction force values, with the right foot, left foot, and right 
foot moving on one force plate in the order of 5 to 7th step of 
the experimental volunteer, respectively. After the above 
measurements, a total of 119 data, excluding one trial of the 
forward arm swing condition for Volunteer A, whose data 
were found to be incomplete, are used as input data for 
AnyBody analysis. 
III. 
RESULTS 
First, the results of the vertical ground reaction force 
values are shown. Figure 1 shows the vertical ground reaction 
force values for each randomly selected condition for 
volunteer D, representing Volunteers B~D who showed 
similar tendencies, and Volunteer A, who showed different 
tendencies from the other collaborators. The abscissa axis 
indicates the time when the right foot lands on the ground as 
0[%] and the time when the right foot leaves the ground as 
100[%].In natural walking, an early peak appears in the first 
half of the stance phase (around 20[%]), a valley in the second 
half of the stance phase (around 40[%]), and a late peak in the 
terminal stance phase (around 80[%]). 
Table I summarizes the mean values of the peaks and 
troughs of the vertical ground reaction force for each 
volunteer and condition. The characteristics of the vertical 
ground reaction force values for each volunteer, as seen in 
Figure 1 and Table 1 are shown below. 
For volunteer A, the anterior peak values increased in the 
swinging of the large arm swing walking compared to the 
natural walking condition. For volunteer B, the peak values 
decreased and the valley values increased with increasing 
angle of arm swing compared to natural walking. However, 
compared to volunteers C and D, who showed a similar 
tendency, the vertical ground reaction force fluctuation due to 
an increase in the angle of forward arm swing was reduced by 
a small amount. For volunteer C, the initial peak tended to 
increase as the arm swing angle became more forward, but 
decreased in the largely backward arm swing condition. The 
late peak decreased with increasing arm swing angle. For 
volunteer D, the value of the early peak increased with 
increasing backward angle of arm swing, but decreased with 
increasing forward angle of arm swing. 
In all volunteers, the late peak values decreased as the arm 
swing angle increased both forward and backward. 
Furthermore, the bimodality of vertical ground reaction force 
values tended to be lost in the rearward arm swing condition 
due to the increase in the valley and the late peak values. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Comparison of vertical ground reaction force values for one trial of 
each gait condition during the stance phase.  
 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE I. BIMODAL AVERAGED VERTICAL GROUND REACTION 
FORCE VALUES FOR EACH GAIT CONDITION DURING THE 
STANCE 
PHASE. 
VALUES 
IN 
BOXES 
ARE 
INITIAL 
PEAK/VALLEY/LATE PEAK. 
ID 
Volunteer A 
Volunteer B 
Volunteer C 
Volunteer D 
a 
687/537/734 
634/492/732 
712/473/726 
719/475/765 
b 
688/505/747 
590/475/750 
706/461/760 
724/442/807 
c 
701/639/662 
624/509/710 
714/508/684 
731/522/701 
d 
926/596/575 
614/570/674 
709/560/645 
788/535/583 
e 
683/613/670 
613/498/721 
724/499/692 
748/481/758 
f 
867/612/596 
610/525/712 
738/520/658 
716/521/716 
 
The results of the pelvic lateral tilt angles are shown next. 
Figure 2 shows the pelvic lateral tilt angles for each randomly 
selected condition for Volunteer D, who represented 
Volunteers B~D who showed a similar tendency, and 
Volunteer A, who showed a different tendency from the other 
volunteers. Pelvic lateral tilt angle 90 ° and is the pelvic tilt 
angle horizontal to the ground; When the pelvis is tilted 
anticlockwise (ACW) as viewed from the direction of travel, 
the value tends toward the minus side.  
Since symmetric movement between the stance and swing 
phases and similar changes can be observed in the waveforms, 
Table 2 summarizes the mean values of the troughs and peaks 
in the early phase and the troughs in the late phase of the 
stance phase. 
 The characteristics of each volunteer's transverse pelvic tilt 
angle seen in Figure 2 and Table 2 are shown below. In the  
 
 
 
Figure 2. Lateral pelvic tilt angle for one trial of each gait condition in one 
gait cycle.  
TABLE II. MEAN PELVIC LATERAL TILT ANGLE FOR EACH GAIT 
CONDITION DURING STANCE PHASE. VALUESV IN BOXS ARE 
EARLY VALLEY/PEAK/LATE VALLEY. 
 
 
case of volunteer A, the peak tended to disappear in the large 
arm swing condition, and the lateral tilt angle also decreased. 
For volunteer B, the peak values decreased and the valley 
values increased with increasing angle of arm swing 
compared to natural walking. For volunteer C, the difference 
between the early valleys and peaks tended to decrease as the 
angle of swing of the arm increased, and the late valleys 
showed a decreasing trend compared to natural walking. For 
volunteer D, the trends of the early valleys and peaks were 
similar to those of volunteer C. However, the late valleys 
decreased with increasing backward angle of arm swing, but 
increased with increasing forward angle of arm swing. 
 In all volunteers, the late valleys tended to decrease with 
increasing angle of arm swing compared to natural walking. 
Finally, the vertical ground reaction force values and the 
pelvic lateral tilt angle under the same conditions are shown 
in Figure 3. 
As shown by the red dashed line in Figure 3, the late peak 
of vertical ground reaction force and the timing of the 
decrease in the pelvic lateral tilt angle were identical for all 
volunteers and all conditions. The data showed that the 
minimum value and the timing of the pelvic lateral tilt angle 
were the same in the late peak of the vertical ground reaction 
force and that the pelvic lateral tilt angle tended to lose its 
bimodality in the data of ground reaction force values in 
which bimodality was lost, suggesting that the pelvic lateral 
tilt angle affected the late peak of vertical ground reaction 
force values. 
 
 
Figure 3. Lateral pelvic tilt angle and vertical ground reaction force values 
during the stance phase under the same conditions. 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

IV. 
CONSIDERATION 
The biomechanical relationship between the arm and the 
bimodal change in the lateral pelvic tilt angle and the vertical 
ground reaction force is discussed. Regarding the change in 
the pelvic lateral tilt angle, the shoulder on the side where the 
arm is forward is tilted downward due to the swing angle of 
the increase in the backward arm. The pelvis moves upwards 
as a reaction to this shoulder tilt, which is thought to increase 
the angle of lateral tilt. 
Regarding the relationship between vertical ground 
reaction force and pelvic adduction, vertical ground reaction 
force is correlated with acceleration of the body’s center of 
gravity [14]. This suggests that the vertical ground reaction 
force at the stance terminal phase also decreased because the 
sacrum, which is considered the center of gravity of the 
human body, moved up and down due to the lateral pelvic tilt. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this paper is to experimentally clarify how 
the bimodality of vertical ground reaction force changes with 
arm swing and to clarify mechanically what kind of coupling 
caused this change. In the experiment, six conditions of arm 
swings were set up and the mechanical parameters of each 
segment and vertical ground reaction force were measured for 
each gait condition. Experimental analysis showed that the 
lateral tilt angle of the pelvis changed as the arm rotation 
angle increased, and the bimodal disappearance of the vertical 
ground reaction force was observed. 
The results of the present paper suggest that the lateral 
pelvic tilt motion induced by arm swing is involved in the 
bimodality of vertical ground reaction force. Therefore, it is a 
future task to clarify the coupling process between the lateral 
pelvic tilt angle and the vertical ground reaction force. As an 
approach to solving the problem, mechanical parameters are 
observed for the segments of the pelvis and lower extremities. 
Furthermore, to clarify the coupling between the upper 
and lower limbs, we will try to approach not only from the 
joint angles, but also from the muscle activities induced by 
arm swing. The future research will include the development 
of an application that provides biofeedback of effective 
movement indicators to each individual based on the coupled 
process. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
２
International 
Trends 
in 
Aging 
- 
Cabinet 
Office, 
https://www8.cao.go.jp/kourei/whitepaper/w-
2022/html/zenbun/s1_1_2.html#:~:text=, Reading Date: 28 July 2023 
[2] 
Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare, 2021 Summary of Brief Life 
Tables, 
https://www.mhlw.go.jp/toukei/saikin/hw/life/life21/index.html, 
Reading Date: 20 July 2023 
[3] 
Walking Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare e-Health 
Nethttps://www.e-
healthnet.mhlw.go.jp/information/dictionary/exercise/ys-080.html, 
Reading Date: 20 July 2023 
[4] 
T. Sato, S. Yamamoto ， N. Kawashima, and K. Nakazawa, 
“Functional role of upper limb motion inhuman bipeda1locomotion,” 
(in Japanese) The Japan Society of Mechanical Engineers, No.09-55, 
Proceedings of the 22nd Bioengineering Conference pp. 163, 2010  
[5] 
S. Inoue and K. Saitou, “Effects of upper limb movement on walking 
motion during walking- As an aid to fall prevention-,” (in Japanese) 
Japan Society of Physical Education Conference Issue pp.331, 2004  
[6] 
S. T. Eke-okoro, M. Gregoric, and L. E. Larsson, “Alterations in gait 
resulting from deliberate changes of arm-swing amplitude and phase,” 
Clinical Biomechanics Volume 12 Issues 7-8 pp.516-521, 1997 
[7] 
T. Siragy, C. Mezher, A. Hill and J. Nantel, “Active arm swing and 
asymmetric walking leads to increased variability in trunk kinematics 
in young adults,” Journal of Biomechanics Volume 99 Article. 
109529, 2020 
[8] 
P. Meyns, S. M. Bruijn, and J. Duysens, “The how and why of arm 
swing during human walking,” Gait & Posture Volume 38 pp.555-
562, 2013 
[9] 
C. A. Bailey, A. Hill, R. B. Graham, and J. Nantel, “Effects of arm 
swing amplitude and lower limb asymmetry on motor variability 
patterns during treadmill gait,” Journal of Biomechanics Volume 130 
Article. 110855, 2022 
[10] Y. Hattori, “Gait Analysis in Clinical Practice,” (in Japanese) 
Physical therapy, Vol. 33, No. 4 pp.207-210, 2006  
[11] K. Adachi, M. Okada, S. Kuno, and M. Isizu, “The Effect of Walking 
Speed and Aging on Ground Antica-taiyo Village Health Promotion 
Project (14),” (in Japanese) Physical Fitness Science Vol. 48, No. 6 
pp.751, 1999  
[12] R. Nakamura, S. Hiroshi, and N. Hiroshi, “BasicKinesiology, 6th 
Edition, Revised,” (in Japanese) pp.392, 2003  
[13] M. Takami and K. Fukui, “A study of walking of normal volunteers 
by ground reaction force meter- especially with respect to differences 
by age and gender –,” (in Japanese) Rehabilitation Medicine vol. 24 
no. 2 pp.93-101, 1987  
[14] Y. Ehara and S. Yamamoto, “Body dynamics beginning analysis of 
gait and gait Initiation,” (in Japanese) ISHIYAKUPUBLISHERS, 
INC. pp.108, 2002  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

