Promotion of Wellbeing in Japanese Culture using
Positive Computing
Isabel Schwaninger
Digital Medicine Group
LCSB, University of Luxembourg
Esch-sur-Alzette, Luxembourg
isabel.schwaninger@uni.lu
Sissi Zhan
Human-Computer Interaction Group
Faculty of Informatics, TU Wien
Wien, Austria
e1325880@student.tuwien.ac.at
Abstract—Many Japanese tend to associate mental health
issues with a weak personality, which leads to people hiding their
problems and avoiding help-seeking. Thus, this paper presents
user research and design of a smartphone application tailored
to people with a Japanese background that promotes wellbeing
using positive psychology, focusing on positive feelings and events
as well as methods to increase positive emotions. To this end,
a narrative literature review has been conducted on mental
health in the Japanese context and positive computing/positive
psychology, which was followed by five qualitative interviews with
participants with a Japanese background living in Europe. The
literature review and interviews resulted in 24 design implications
(12 for each step), and a high-fidelity prototype for an application
to foster mental wellbeing through self-help.
Keywords- wellbeing; Japanese culture; positive comput-
ing; mental health app; qualitative user research
I. INTRODUCTION
Mental health tends to viewed as a taboo topic by the
general public in Japan, where people tend to believe that
mental health concerns are the effect of a weak personality
instead of a real health issue [1]. Showing mental health
symptoms is also highly associated with feelings of shame
due to concerns to be perceived as weak by other people
or the community in general [2]. The consequence of this
concern is that people tend to avoid seeking help from friends,
family or professionals and prefer to handle their problems
on their own [3]. While much psychological research applied
in Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) is tailored to Western
contexts, people with other cultural backgrounds also live in
Western contexts like Europe, where they often use technology
designed with Western values. Therefore, taking views of users
with Japanese background into account when designing digital
interventions for mental wellbeing could be beneficial.
The aim of this paper is to present a concept for a
smartphone application that promotes mental wellbeing for
people with a Japanese background living in Western contexts
with the idea to focus on self-help and interventions to be
carried out alone for people who avoid help seeking. For this,
suitable practices from positive psychology [4] were integrated
in the conceptual application, in particular gratitude and humor
interventions. Furthermore, qualitative interviews with five
participants with a Japanese background living in Europe were
conducted to specify the concept and requirements in detail.
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we present
the approach and methods used, including a narrative literature
review and qualitative interviews to gather data, and a short
description prototype implementation procedure. Results of the
literature analysis are presented in Section III, followed by the
interview results in Section IV. The final design requirements
and the concept are then presented in Section V. Section VI
discusses the outcome and limitations of the research, followed
by the concluding Section VII.
II. METHODS
The identification of requirements and implementation of
the prototype was conducted in three phases: (1) narrative
literature review, (2) qualitative interviews, and (3) concept
and prototype design. From the literature review, we pulled
out a set of design implications (see Table I). These formed
the basis for defining questions for the qualitative interviews
(see Table II). Extensions and adjustments were made to the
design implications after gathering insights from the inter-
views. Based on these results, a high-fidelity prototype of a
smartphone application was created.
A. Phase 1: Literature Review
Research papers for following areas were relevant for this
work: perception of mental health in Japanese society (includ-
ing stigmatization and causes of stigma), positive psychology
& positive computing (including a general outline and its
focus on Western contexts, gratitude interventions, humor
interventions), and user engagement and motivation (including
the use of chatbots & avatars for promoting wellbeing).
Several journals and conference proceedings were screened for
searching papers: Human-Agent Interaction (HAI), Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI), PubMed, and JStage specifically
for Japanese papers. Keywords used in literature search were
combinations of the following: Japan, mental health, percep-
tion, stigma, mental wellbeing, cultural, positive psychology,
positive computing, intervention, gratitude, humor, chatbot,
woebot, avatar, gatebox as well as variations of the above
words. In total, 43 papers were reviewed. The papers and
topics were clustered and analysed using the Miro software.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

B. Phase 2: Qualitative Interviews
Five qualitative interviews were conducted with students
with a Japanese background living in Europe, who were all
acquired through a common acquaintance. These interviews
were hold as online video conferences through Jitsi or Zoom
using English for communication. The format was a semi-
structured interview using an interview guide containing ques-
tions that addressed how participants personally deal with
negative emotions, their perception of gratitude and humor
interventions and their impressions of digital mental health
companions, in particular the application Woebot and avatars
for chatbots, in particular the device Gatebox. Furthermore,
presentation slides were used during the interview as an
addition to the questions for showing pictures and videos.
The interviews were video-recorded and semi-transcribed as
interview notes in the next step. Reflexive thematic analysis
[5] was conducted to identify themes across the data.
C. Phase 3: Prototype Implementation
For the concept, a high-fidelity prototype was created to
depict the resulting design implications. First, the prototyping
tool Figma was used to build the design of different smart-
phone application screens, which were then exported to the
prototyping tool Protopie for implementing interactivity and
logic functionality allowing the prototype to react to user input.
III. LITERATURE REVIEW
To inform requirements from previous research, a narrative
literature review was conducted. The results will be presented
in the following, covering the topics A. Perception of Mental
Health in Japan, B. Positive Computing, and C. User Engage-
ment and Motivation.
A. Perception of Mental Health in Japan
1) Stigmatization: Mental health topics such as depression,
schizophrenia and suicide are still heavily stigmatized in Japan
and seen as a taboo [1]. Moreover, there tends to be a lack
of awareness regarding mental health in general, as many
Japanese (1) do not believe in the effectiveness of treatments or
in a high chance of recovering, or/and (2) blame the weakness
of one’s personality or lack of willpower as the cause of mental
health issues [1], [2], [6].
This mindset leads to the problem that people who suffer
from mental health issues often feel shame and self-criticism
for their concern and do not seek help from family, friends
or professionals [2], [7]. People tend to avoid talking to other
people about their problems due to the fear to be perceived
as weak by others, which can result in feeling the need for
social isolation [3], [8]. Additionally, acquaintances of people
with mental illnesses even tend to socially distance themselves
from a person who is affected by a mental condition, especially
those with a closer relationship [1].
2) Cause of Stigma: Possible factors that have been studied
to potentially have an influence on stigma towards mental
health conditions. There are individual factors, such as socio-
demographic data like age and gender, as well as socio-
economic data such as education and occupation. Moreover,
knowledge and familiarity of mental illnesses could also be
influencing factors, as well as if a person knows or has
been in contact with other people with mental illnesses [9].
Ando et al. [1] have also stressed that missing knowledge
contributes to stigma. Apart from this, there is a lack of
provided education and national programs in Japan to help
tackle incorrect knowledge about mental health issues and pro-
vide insights from latest research. Then, there are communal
factors, such as the social capita which is, e.g., composed of
social networks, trust or relation between people that create
a shared believe and social rules among the community [9].
Some also see cultural factors as a cause of negative mindset
towards mental problems and emphasize that the norms in
Japanese culture and community lead to such attitudes [2],
[10]. In general, mental health issues tend to be seen as a
topic to avoid in discussions, and individual feelings tend to
be disregarded or hidden [1], [11]. A study further showed
that people were aware of the presence of their mental health
issues, however lacked knowledge about solutions for their
problem and countermeasures [11]. Research further suggests
that people in Japan tend to feel more comfortable with
implicit support, contrary to the preference for explicit support
in Western contexts [12].
B. Positive Computing
1) Fostering Wellbeing in Western Contexts:
In recent
years, the idea to promote happiness and well-being of humans
through computer-based technologies grew increasingly in the
HCI community. This led to the emergence of the area of
positive technology or positive computing, which is a interdis-
ciplinary field of two studies: HCI, which concerns itself with
the incorporation of a human-centered approach in the design
process of ICT applications and positive psychology [13],
[14]. The study of positive psychology aims to identify and
understand positive emotions, positive character and finding
ways to increase them, as well as the institutions that enable
their flourishing [15]. Thus, the design of strategies or so-
called interventions to foster positive feelings is one of its
key aspects [16]. As a result, positive technology consists of
a theoretical pillar, that develops concepts and frameworks to
integrate positive psychology into technology and a method-
ological part for the design, implementation and evaluation
of applications to enhance positive affect [14]. To foster
wellbeing in and through technology, determinant factors and
strategies for improvement can be used, which showed a direct
impact on humans wellbeing. Higher level of these factors also
result in higher levels of wellbeing. Some identified examples
for determinant factors are positive emotions, self-awareness,
mindfulness, gratitude, compassion [4].
However, positive psychology is strongly influenced by
Western or more precisely, North American mentality, which
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

has been criticized often [17]. As Western countries developed
a more individualistic cultural mindset, researched interven-
tions and strategies tend to focus on improving individual
wellbeing, which are not ideal to implement and may not be
as effective for users with collective background that sets great
value on the community and how the individuals can contribute
to the whole [18].
Due to the above stated cultural influences in the state-of-
the-art interventions of positive psychology and the importance
of incorporating cultural aspects when developing applications
to foster wellbeing, our approach will take characteristics of
Japanese culture and perceptions of users with a Japanese
background on mental health conditions into consideration.
We argue that even for people with Japanese background living
in in Western contexts, this could be beneficial. Target users
tend to avoid talking about personal problems and seeking
help from friends, families or professionals, and they may
even feel guilt for receiving social support [12]. Therefore,
our approach is to focus on interventions and strategies not
based on social factors but instead on self-help, self-care or
anonymous interventions.
2) Interventions using Gratitude: Gratitude has been listed
as one of the top character strengths that have been robustly
and consistently related to life satisfaction [19]. Thus, in-
terventions focusing on gratitude have been developed and
seem to be promising for increasing the level of wellbeing
and happiness as well as for reducing negative feelings [20],
[21]. In long-term studies, it has been reported that practicing
gratitude gives good results in improving mood, such as in
the work of Seligman et al., in which their participants were
asked to complete the three good things intervention over a
duration of six months. This intervention requires to think of
three good things at the end of every day that occurred on that
day and write them down. They were also asked to describe
the cause of the good thing. After one month positive effects
could be seen: participants reported higher levels of happiness
and lower levels of negative feelings [15].
However, multiple studies investigated gratitude practices
in a cultural context, partly comparing two groups of different
cultural backgrounds and reported that participants from East
Asia are not as positively affected from the interventions as
those from Western cultures due to their collectivist culture
[22]–[24]. Although it can lead to a decrease in negative
emotions, gratitude had no significant influence on positive
emotions and wellbeing [22]. Though, one common aspect of
the named papers is that they defined gratitude in relation
to other people, e.g., being thankful for others or for the
action of others. Though, there are also studies that do indicate
the effectiveness of gratitude exercises for Japanese users,
such as one conducted by Otsuka et al., which reported that
practising gratitude is beneficial for increasing positive affect
and happiness among Japanese workers [25].
Although there are several studies that show a low com-
pability of gratitude interventions to improve wellbeing in
collectivistic societies, such as Japan, this work will still
incorporate gratitude strategies. As highlighted, often times
gratitude only refers to showing thankfulness to other person
or even directly communicating one’s thoughts of gratitude to
a recipient (gratitude visit), which could also cause negative
feelings. Nevertheless, gratitude can also be defined much
broader, e.g., as gaining awareness of the good things in
one’s life, being thankful for them and taking time to show
thankfulness [19].
3) Interventions using Humor: The idea to put the character
strength humor into use to promote wellbeing and the relation
of these two factors have been explored in multiple studies,
e.g., [26], [27] and others which were named by Ruch and
McGhee [28]. The respective studies showed evidence in
favor of using humor interventions, as a high level of humor
seems to be in accordance with higher levels of wellbeing
and less negative emotions [28]. According to [29], there are
different ways to attain happiness with one them being based
on hedonism, which means to increase the amount of pleasure
while decreasing the amount of pain as much as possible. The
trait with the highest correlation to pleasure in life has been
shown to be humor [29].
One example of a specific intervention using humor is
the adaption of other interventions, e.g listing three funny
things instead of the traditional three good things, as seen
in Gander et al.’s work, which additionally used the adapted
intervention in an online format [26]. The participants were
instructed to think of three funny things that happened for
each day and note them. In contrast to a placebo control
group, the humor intervention group showed an increase in
happiness as well as a decrease in negative feelings. In another
study [27], the following intervention strategies showed to be
effective to increase feelings of happiness: (1) counting the
amount of funny things happened on the day and writing
down the total number, (2) applying humor to daily life
meaning to be more aware to humorous experiences and
notice them but also incorporating humorous activities, such
as reading jokes, enjoying comedy movies or books (3) and
the before mentioned three funny things a day intervention.
Tsukawaki et al. [30] studied the relation between wellbeing
and different types of humor. Both adults and children who
belong to the type with a self-defeating humor interestingly
showed the highest level of wellbeing compared to the other
humor types playful and aggressive humor. Further, Tsujita
and Rekimoto investigated how forced smiles using technology
could improve the mood of participants, namely through smile
therapy. The effects of technology-induced smiling showed
positive effects on feelings of happiness when tested on a small
participant group [31].
C. User Engagement and Motivation
One concern of digital psychology interventions is that an
online intervention can only be effective when it is used by
users. Therefore, one important aspect is to achieve user com-
mitment and creating enjoyment, which raises the questions
how to (1) make users choose an application, (2) get users
to engage with it, and (3) motivate users to keep using the
application [32]. Equipping the online intervention with a
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

chatbot and an avatar may present potential methods to raise
user experience.
1) Chatbots: Chatbots are used in many sectors and have
also found its way into psychology. One of them is a smart-
phone application called Woebot, which uses a conversational
agent combined with researched psychology techniques to help
people to overcome negative thoughts and feelings, deal with
stress and anxiety and improve their mood [33]. This is done
by checking in with the user on a daily basis, and recommend-
ing different interventions based on their personal problems.
Another aim of the application is to build rapport with users
through a human-like technology that shows empathy and thus
improving the efficacy of the interventions, which has been
noted as a factor that other digital solutions to improve mental
wellbeing [34]. Positive reviews in the app store reported that,
e.g., using it felt very personal, helped reduce their anxiety,
but also that users felt support when they couldn’t talk with
other people about their problems and emotions and did not
feel judged about their feelings by the chatbot [35], [36].
2) Avatars: In recent years, the exploration of avatars
in mental health strategies has been increasing and lead to
promising results when used, e.g., in interventions for improv-
ing mental wellbeing, reducing anxiety, and lessen depressive
symptoms [37]. There are multiple ways to integrate an avatar,
such as for representation of the client in online therapies in
a virtual space, the support of interventions in face-to-face
therapy or as autonomous virtual therapists. The latter one
describes a virtual agent playing the role of a virtual health
coach with a graphic representation, i.e., an avatar to embody
the coach [38]. Studies that used such avatars reported great
efficacy, e.g., for imparting knowledge and promoting self-
care [37]. In addition, when technologies combine an avatar
with a conversational agent and thus providing a talking avatar,
they have a higher potential to build a prolonged relationship
with its users and hold a greater appeal and persuasiveness
compared to technologies without such components [37].
Some studies also investigated the influence of different
types of avatars and suggested that avatars with a similar
appearance to the users are more persuasive compared to ar-
bitrary ones [37]. The possibility of personal customization of
avatars can additionally increase user enjoyment and support
longer lasting engagement with the application [32].
Another way avatars can be differentiated is between re-
alistic representations depicting real people and animated
characters. [38]. One example of an animated avatar is the
Japanese Gatebox, a virtual holographic-like character that can
answer questions and be used as a smart home device [39].
The Gatebox can be compared to other home assistants such as
Alexa, Google Assistant and Co, however its aim is to provide
emotional support and act more as an virtual companion than
an assistant, while imitating a female voice [39], [40].
IV. QUALITATIVE INTERVIEWS
To further specify the requirements, five qualitative in-
terviews were conducted. The age of the participants were
between 20 and 30, and all the five participants grew up
in Japan and have been also living in Europe for several
years, e.g., for studies or work. Furthermore, as far as it is
known, none of the recruited people have a case of psychiatric
diagnosis and are thus cognitively able.
The interviews lasted around 30 minutes, and questions
addressed how participants deal with negative emotions, help-
seeking, gratitude and humor interventions, the application
Woebot and chatbots in general, the product Gatebox and
avatars in general. Participants were asked to try out the
Woebot application before the interviews were conducted. The
results will be presented in the following.
A. Dealing with Stress and Negative Emotions
Participants used a variety of activities to deal with negative
emotions, such as listening to music, watching movies or
concentrating on work, studies, hobbies or any other activities.
One participant also likes to visit their neighbourhood cat to
cuddle it to reduce their stress. Furthermore, sleep and alcohol
were also listed to be helpful. Thinking positively was also
applied, such as one participant explained: ”I just tell myself
repeatedly ’it will be alright, it will be alright’, it’s really
simple”. Another participant also showed a positive mindset,
as they said that what happened can not be changed anymore
so it is best to try to forget about it and move on.
B. Help-Seeking
Several participants stated they usually avoid asking for help
from other people due to them not wanting to bother anybody
and having the mindset to need to solve their problems on their
own. Moreover, they want to talk about nicer things and do not
want to reveal their ’bad side’ to others. However, consulting
friends and family was also often mentioned as a method
participants usually use when they encounter problems. They
stated they feel better after talking, can organize their thoughts
better and the cause of their stress gets clearer. They also
encourage other friends to talk to them if they have problems.
One important aspect that has been stated when providing
support to other people is to listen to their feelings and to
’accept what they are’. Furthermore, it was emphasized to
not provide advice unless the person specifically asks for it.
Participants who seek help from other people find it helpful as
talking to other people allows them to organize their thoughts
and understand their situation or cause of their stress better.
C. Journal Interventions
For the most part, participants could imagine practicing
journaling exercises, such as three good things, gratitude, and
three funny things as an intervention, and they had good
attitudes towards theses interventions. Participants commented
that looking back on the support they received made then feel
happy or that these exercises could help them focus on good
aspects. However, many thought the integration into daily life
and forming a habit to write a journal entry everyday would
be difficult. In addition, they worried about not being able
to recount everything at the end of the day but on the other
hand writing down good or funny events every time something
happens is not realistic either.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

D. Applying Humor
Doing funny activities, such as watching funny movies or
reading funny books and comics were in general well accepted
by the participants. Nevertheless, there were also concerns
that these exercises could have a counterproductive effect, as
people may feel they have wasted their time instead of working
something important and thus feel more stressed. In addition,
the idea of a daily smile camera has been commented as weird
and creepy by some participants.
E. General Attitudes towards Chatbots
Regarding the idea to use chatbots as an emotional com-
panion in general, participants had various different views. Al-
though participants believed that writing down their throughts
and feelings is helpful for moving forward, they would also
not consider using such a chatbot as the first choice but rather
as an alternative when they have no one to talk to or only when
they feel stressed and get a notification. In that case it may be
nice to interact with a chatbot to talk about what is bothering
them or get sent some funny content to uplift their mood:
’maybe the chatbot could even recommend some funny videos
or photos of cute animals or maybe even flowers to make users
feel more relaxed and affect their mind positively or it could
propose some activities in order to manage what happened,
like keep me talking and thinking about what happened’.
On the other hand, participants also perceived chatbots only
as a service that provides information and they wished to
interact with an ’objective chatbot’, which only replies with
information about exercises and tips for shifting the mood and
also shows evidence for why they are effective. This was espe-
cially mentioned for ’normal times’ when participants would
not feel negative emotions or stress: ’For normal times I would
need some objective information and platform, they can just
provide me with information for how to deal with the problem
better and tell me it’s good to do this exercises’. Another
topic that participants would find interesting is seeing some
analysis of their own data about mood, stress and emotions.
They talked about the chatbot being able to recognize when
users are stressed and that users can monitor their own mood
patterns and being shown tips to improve their situation.
F. Chatbot Personality
Regarding the personality of chatbots, many participants
talked about a calm personality that is friendly and shows
empathy. Especially for difficult times, the chatbot should
be ’empathic, show understanding and encourage the user’,
however it should not be ’too emotional’ either. It seemed
important for the participants that the chatbot listens to their
problem and support them to keep talking instead of acting too
’persuasive or aggressive’ to provide solutions and answers.
On the other hand, some participants also wished for a
solution-focused chatbot that can give good advice. It was also
mentioned that the chatbot ’should not be too human-like and
rather objective to some extent, just for exercise clearly and
for tasks or activities’.
G. Attitudes towards Woebot
For the specific chatbot Woebot, the participants did not try
out the app for longer than a couple hours, and some did not
download it at all. Those who did use the application per-
ceived it as repetitive, as ’it keeps asking the same questions’
and suggests users interventions but does not explain them
beforehand and thus received as troublesome.
H. Attitudes towards Gatebox
When the participants were asked about their first impres-
sion of the gatebox device, many perceived the device as
’weird’, ’strange’ or even ’creepy’, as one person pointed
out:’It’s creepy because it acts like your girlfriend’. It was also
mentioned that they see gatebox as ’nerdy stuff’ and something
that is targeted towards ’otaku culture’, hence it was also often
stressed by participants that they ’personally don’t need it’.
Nonetheless, the general idea of having a virtual character as
a companion was accepted and participants could see that for
some people it can be very helpful if they feel lonely or have
no one to talk to. In that case, the avatar should appear real, as
stated in some interviews: ’if they say good morning every day
I will get bored and think it is a machine’ or ’I would think it
is a robot and wouldn’t believe its emotional affect, I would
think they are not really thinking about me and understanding
me’.
I. General attitudes towards Avatars
In the interviews different kinds of avatars were discussed
and compared: real person, animated person, non-human,
media characters. All participants did not like real human
pictures as avatars, as explained in the interviews: ’Real people
would be weird, I would feel like who are you’, ’I would
definitely not like realistic ones, I don’t want to talk with
them’ or ’The realistic avatars are maybe too creepy, it’s like a
real person in my home’. One participant also expressed that it
would feel easier interacting with non-human avatars: ’If it is a
real or animated person I would think they’re too real, I wanna
talk to someone who is not thinking anything, maybe it would
be easier to talk because I think they would forget about it next
day’. The majority of participants preferred either non-human
avatars such as cute animals or some media characters they
are familiar with, examples mentioned were, e.g., characters
from marvel, animal crossing, favourite actors, mascots from
their favourite groups. One participant specifically mentioned
’I can feel more familiar with media characters, with other
characters I don’t know them. With media characters I can
feel or imagine that we are friends’.
1) Frequency: The frequency of engaging in interventions
for wellbeing and the willingness to be notified by the ap-
plication varied greatly from person to person, from daily
interaction to notifications only when feelings of stress occur.
Some participants noted that it would be bothersome if they
get notified regularly and would only use the application
when they are in a bad mood. In particular, one participant
mentioned that ideally they would only receive a notification
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

when the application recognizes a high stress level, e.g.,
through analysis of users mood pattern.
V. CONCEPT
The concept aims to promote mental wellbeing for users
with Japanese background, focusing on self-help and selfcare
without being dependent on social relationships in order to
avoid feelings of bothering others and indebtedness caused
by cultural aspects and characteristics of collectivist societies.
The concept of a smartphone app has been created based on
the literature review and user research. The ideas have been
collected into the concept for a smartphone application that
integrates psychological interventions.
A. Psychological Interventions
In the literature review, the two wellbeing factors gratitude
and humor to increase wellbeing were explored.
Regarding gratitude, the particular intervention named was
the ’three good things’ practice, which consists of thinking
about three good things that happened that day and writing
it down at the end of every day. Good results were reported
for improving positive affect and reducing negative feelings.
Therefore, the application will prompt users to perform the
three good things practice on a daily basis. However, the
definition of gratitude will not be limited to gratitude towards
other people or to the actions of other people (e.g., ’I’m
thankful my friend helped me with a problem’) and will take
on a broader sense: possible gratitude entries are e.g., ’I’m
grateful that I could take a walk in the park today’, or ’I’m
thankful for this movie which I enjoyed’.
One intervention based on the factor humor is a variation
of the ’three good things’ practice, which has been modified
to the ’three funny things’ practice. Other effective humor
practices are counting the amount of funny things each day,
applying humor to daily life and solving stressful events with
humor. Additionally, smile therapies have also shown potential
to uplift mood and wellbeing, including technology-induced
smiling.
Therefore, the application will provide a toolbox of different
interventions and prompt users to carry them out regularly.
For this, explicit design implications have been derived out of
the results of literature analysis and the conducted interviews.
Table I and Table II describe the resulting requirements for
the application concept based on literature and interviews
respectively, the reason for including the requirement and on
which section it is referring to.
B. Emotional Support Companion
Similar to the Woebot, an intelligent chatbot will be inte-
grated to guide users through interventions. As target users
tend to avoid to seek help from friends and family and prefer
to keep problems to themselves, the chatbot should moreover
show empathy and embody a companion for emotional support
to which users can without social barriers.
In addition, the chatbot will be represented by an avatar to
support building rapport with its users, which (1) increases
their trust and thus willingness to talk about their problems,
and (2), to improve user enjoyment to prolong their engage-
ment with the application and included interventions.
C. Prototype Walkthrough
1) Starting the Application: At the beginning the applica-
tion displays a starting screen with a character from the game
Animal Crossing as an animated non-human avatar. The user
is asked how frequent they like to be notified by the avatar or
the application, which covers requirement IA11.
2) Home: The homescreen allows the user to access all
functionalities of the application: opening the personal journal
of the user, saved activities, exploring new or other journal
or activity exercises that users can try out. It also depicts the
avatar with a message, to which the user can answer. Two
buttons at the top of the screen are for recording the current
mood and the smile camera to take a photo of the user smiling.
Alternatively, a navigation bar at the bottom also leads to the
journal, activities, explore page but also to the mood tracker,
which shows all recorded mood data of the user.
3) Journal: A daily journal entry can be created for grati-
tude and humor interventions that involve writing notes such
as a gratitude journal or count the funny things exercises,
described by requirements LA04, LA05 and LA06 (see Figure
1). However, there is no predefined schedule for any of the
interventions, thus letting users fully decide the time and
frequency of exercises, which refers to IA01 and IA02 of
design implications. Moreover, the journal is flexible and
can be extended with preferred journal exercises to make it
possible for users to configure their journal entry each time.
For example, they can choose to write down three good things
only or they can add three funny things and a gratitude journal
as well if they feel like it. After saving, changes in the users’
mood are tracked.
4) Activities: The activities screen lists all activities saved
by the user, i.e. exercises to integrate humor into daily life such
as reading a funny book or watching a funny movie. A detailed
explanation about these interventions can be displayed, and
users can then conduct the exercise according to the given
instructions and mark if they have completed an activity,
depicting implication LA06. Again, the user is asked about
mood changes to track the effectiveness of the intervention.
5) More Exercises: In the explored section, users can slide
through different exercises they haven’t saved yet and click
on one to learn more about the exercise, its effectiveness and
instructions. Based on requirements LA03, IA04 and IA06
the application also offers the possibility to learn more about
it through a more detailed explanation or by reading through
the sources attached in the app. Using the save button, users
can add the intervention to their favourites.
6) Chatbot: Users can talk with the chatbot or the avatar
if they feel like it. The purpose of the chatbot is to play
the role of a virtual friend that users can seek help from
at any time. The chatbot reacts to messages of the user and
answers in a friendly manner and shows empathy when users
talk about their emotions, thoughts and worries. Furthermore,
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE I
DESIGN IMPLICATIONS FROM LITERATURE REVIEW
ID
Reason
Section
Implication
LA01
Japanese tend to keep their problems to themselves
and avoid talking to other people
Perception of Mental Health in Japan
The app focuses on self-help: interpersonal aspects
should not be a requirement for performing in-
terventions (interpersonal interventions are, e.g.,
thanking another person, social network elements,
gratitude intervention focused on other people)
LA02
Lack of education about mental health issues con-
tribute to stigma
Stigmatization
Offer educational content about mental health
LA03
Some people are aware of mental health issues but
lack knowledge about solutions and countermea-
sures
Cultural Comparison
Offer educational content about psychological in-
terventions
LA04
Gratitude interventions may increase positive feel-
ings
Gratitude Interventions
Integrate gratitude interventions as
exercises, such as the following:
• three good things
• up to five things I‘m grateful for
LA05
Interpersonal gratitude could cause negative feel-
ings, such as feelings of indebtness and guilt for
Japanese
Gratitude Interventions
Do not limit gratitude interventions to interper-
sonal gratitude
LA06
Humor interventions may increase positive feel-
ings
Humor Interventions
Integrate humor interventions as
exercises, such as the following:
• three funny things
• count the funny things
• applying humor to daily life
• solving stressful situations with humor
LA07
Taking a picture of oneself with a smile may
increase positive feelings
Humor Interventions
Integrate a ’smile camera’, which users can use to
take a picture of themselves smiling
LA08
A chatbot may improve user engagement
User Engagement and Motivation
Integrate a chatbot, that users can talk with
LA09
A chatbot with empathy may improve user rapport
and thus efficacy of interventions
User Engagement and Motivation
The chatbot should act empathic
LA10
Conversational avatars may improve prolonged
user relationship and persuasiveness. Avatars may
support imparting knowledge and promoting self-
care
User Engagement and Motivation
The chatbot should be represented through an
avatar (graphic representation)
LA11
Avatars with a smiliar appearance to the users may
be more persuasive
User Engagement and Motivation
The chatbot should have a Japanese appearance
LA12
The possibility to customize avatars may improve
user enjoyment and engagement
User Engagement and Motivation
Provide the possibility to customize avatars
it aims to uplift their mood through encouraging words,
showing understanding, and by sending funny content, such
as humorous pictures of animals. Another purpose is to build
rapport with the user and improve user engagement to promote
their selfhelp. This covers requirements LA08, LA09, IA05,
IA07 and IA08.
7) Mood Button: To track the current mood without doing
exercises, the mood button can be clicked, which opens a
simple pop-up with the avatar asking how the user is feeling.
8) Smile Camera: Requirement LA07 describes possible
effects on wellbeing when smiling at a camera. For this, the
camera icon navigates to the smile camera, which instructs
users to take a picture of themselves while smiling. A picture
of a happy smiley is overlaid with the camera to remind users
to show a smile.
9) Explore & Learn: In the explore and learn page, users
are provided with learning material about mental health and
various interventions to improve wellbeing categorised in
journal and activities interventions. The icons either open
learning content about a specific intervention or topic in the
application or links to external material such as blog articles
or online videos. Thus, users are offered educational content,
as defined in LA02, LA03, IA04 and IA06.
10) Mood Tracker: Finally, the mood tracker screen dis-
plays a calendar that shows all mood entries made by the user
(see Figure 2). For each day with an entry it is possible to show
the tracked mood for the given day and the specific exercises
done that day. Based on this information, the application
also suggests the top exercises with the highest effectiveness
specific for that user. This feature refers to IA12 from the
design implications.
VI. DISCUSSION
The aim of this paper is to explore positive psychology to
promote wellbeing and self-help for Japanese people living
in Europe. While previous research indicates stigmatization
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE II
DESIGN IMPLICATIONS FROM INTERVIEWS
ID
Reason
Section
Implication
IA01
It may be a challenge for users to form a habit for daily
journal exercises
Journal Interventions
Users should be able to choose the frequency of journal
interventions: daily, every second day, every third day or
every week.
IA02
Interventions, especially those with longer duration such as
watching a funny movie may be perceived as time-wasting
for users
Applying Humor
Interventions should not be scheduled as a regular activity
IA03
Participants did not like Woebot‘s repetitive questions and
Woebot
The chatbot should have variety in its dialog
IA04
Participants wished for more explanation before trying out
an intervention in Woebot
Woebot
The application should provide information and explana-
tions about interventions before suggesting them to users
IA05
Participants wish to be sent funny content to uplift their
mood
Chatbots
The chatbot should not only talk with users, but also
show them funny and uplifting content,e .g. funny pic-
tures/videos, pictures of cute animals, pictures of flowers
IA06
Participants wish for a solely informative chatbot for nor-
mal‘ times when they are not in a bad mood
Chatbots
User should have the possibility to ask the chatbot for
information about exercises, tips for uplifting mood and
scientific evidence.
IA07
Participants wish for a calm and friendly chatbot personal-
ity
Personality
The dialog of the chatbot should appear calm and friendly.
IA08
Participants wish for a chatbot that shows empathy, under-
standing and encourages the user
Personality
The chatbot should show empathy and reply with encour-
aging answers
IA09
Some participants only want to be listenend to while others
want to receive advice.
Personality
The chatbot should first ask for user‘s preference to give
advice
IA10
Participants preferred non-human avatars or media charac-
ters
Avatar
The chatbot should be represented by a non-human avatar
or media character
IA11
Participants may feel bothered by frequent notifications
Frequency
The application should ask users about their preferred
frequency of notifications: multiple times a day, daily, every
couple days, weekly
IA12
Participants wish to see analysis of their mood, stress and
emotions
Chatbots
The application should provide analysis for a user‘s mood,
stress and emotions
of mental health in Japan [1], [2], [6], HCI research and
wellbeing tends to be focused on users from Western contexts.
The prototype presented in this paper is a result of both
design implications from a narrative literature review and
views expressed by interviewees with Japanese background,
implementing gratitude and humour interventions, and in ad-
dition, implementing a chatbot to provide companionship and
engagement.
Through the interviews, it could be seen that participants
needs were very diverse (also found previously with other
user groups, e.g., [41]), in particular, regarding the idea of a
chatbot that embodies a virtual companion. Some interviewees
found the chatbot aspect unnecessary and preferred a solely
informative application to access knowledge about different
positive psychology interventions without the need to commu-
nicate with a chatbot. Other participants showed a high interest
in a virtual companion which they can share their thoughts,
feelings and problems with. As also proposed for the design
of other devices and use cases (e.g., [42], [43]), this indicates
the need for a personalised application to promote wellbeing.
Some participants initially rejected the idea of an avatar
stated that they would perhaps think differently about it when
they actually feel stressed or other negative emotions. It can
be difficult to imagine how they would feel in different moods.
Therefore, flexibility of the application is certainly needed.
It was also mentioned that notifications should not appear
frequently, but only when needed, e.g., when the user feels
stressed. Ideally, the application would be able to recognize
mood changes of the user in real-time and only then send
a notification. This would require additional solutions, for
example, incorporating the use of wearables that are able to
identify bad mood through biosignals [44]. Another approach
could be the use of articifial intelligence to recognize patterns
or seasons in mood data.
During the interviews, the device Gatebox was shown
and explained, however it was not well received by some
participants and it was often stressed that they personally do
not need the the device. This may be because the target group
of gatebox seems to be otakus, which is a term with a negative
connotation referring to people highly interested in popculture
such as manga, anime or video games including featured
virtual characters [45]. Therefore, there is a possibility that
participants talked about chatbots and avatars in association
with gatebox and otaku culture and perceived them as more
negative, thus stressing that they do not want to talk to a virtual
companion or human-like avatars.
Not all requirements could be depicted through the proto-
type. Especially implications for a chatbots dialog were not
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Fig. 1. Journal Exercises
built into a high-fi prototype, such as offering a variety in
answers of the chatbot (IA03). Another requirement based on
literature was omitted as it contradicted with the interview
results: according to previous research, integrating avatars
with a similar appearance to users seems to lead to a higher
persuasiveness [37]. However, most interviewees stated that
they prefer a non-humanlike avatar. This confirms the need
to conduct research grounded in case studies [46], [47], and
furthermore, at least one additional step of evaluating the
prototype should be considered in future work.
There are several limitations to be mentioned. We recog-
nize that Japan is a large country with a high diversity in
cultural values and mindsets, which could not be discussed
in-depth in this paper. Due to the language barrier, there is
the possibility that the literature analysis is missing relevant
papers in Japanese language. Furthermore, the interviews were
conducted on a smaller scale, and thus interviews with more
participants would be useful to obtain more enrich the results
in a follow-up step, and including also an evaluation.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a prototype for a smartphone application
was implemented with the aim to promote mental wellbeing
for people with Japanese background living in Europe. As
Fig. 2. Mood Tracker
stigma is still prevalent regarding mental health issues in
Japanese society, people tend to avoid help-seeking and deal
with problems on their own. Therefore, this prototype should
provide a tool for self-help and to improve wellbeing through
the use of positive psychology. Although a great amount of
research regarding positive psychology has been done, it has
been mainly tailored to individualistic cultures. This work
also aimed at exploring the suitability of positive computing
for people for collectivistic cultural backgrounds like Japan,
considering its suitability while designing the prototype. Inter-
views were conducted to specify design implications in detail.
Moreover, the usage of chatbots and avatars has been explored
and integrated into the application, representing a virtual
companion that users can talk with and seek encouragement
from. At the same time, the application offers journal exer-
cises and activities to increase positive mood and in addition
educational content about mental health and methods to deal
with negative emotions. An evaluation of the prototype was not
conducted and is something to consider in future work. Also,
the integration of wearables or machine learning for automatic
mood identification may be an interesting addition. Certainly,
more research is needed to diversify the knowledge on positive
psychology interventions when it comes to target users with
more diverse cultural backgrounds.
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

REFERENCES
[1] S. Ando, S. Yamaguchi, Y. Aoki, and G. Thornicroft, “Review of mental-
health-related stigma in Japan,” Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences,
vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 471–482, 2013.
[2] Y. Kotera, P. Gilbert, K. Asano, I. Ishimura, and D. Sheffield, “Self-
criticism and self-reassurance as mediators between mental health
attitudes and symptoms: Attitudes toward mental health problems in
Japanese workers,” Asian Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 22, no. 2,
pp. 183–192, 2019.
[3] K. Yoshioka, N. J. Reavley, L. M. Hart, and A. F. Jorm, “Recognition
of mental disorders and beliefs about treatment: results from a mental
health literacy survey of Japanese high school students,” International
Journal of Culture and Mental Health, vol. 8, pp. 207–222, Apr. 2015.
[4] R. A. Calvo and D. Peters, Positive Computing: Technology for Well-
being and Human Potential. MIT Press, Nov. 2014. Google-Books-ID:
uI6ZBQAAQBAJ.
[5] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Reflecting on reflexive thematic analysis,”
Qualitative Research in Sport, Exercise and Health, vol. 11, pp. 589–
597, Aug. 2019.
[6] E. B. R. Desapriya and I. Nobutada, “Stigma of mental illness in Japan,”
The Lancet, vol. 359, p. 1866, May 2002.
[7] M. Kasahara-Kiritani, T. Matoba, S. Kikuzawa, J. Sakano, K. Sugiyama,
C. Yamaki, M. Mochizuki, and Y. Yamazaki, “Public perceptions toward
mental illness in Japan,” Asian Journal of Psychiatry, vol. 35, pp. 55–60,
June 2018.
[8] K. Yoshioka, N. J. Reavley, A. J. MacKinnon, and A. F. Jorm, “Stig-
matising attitudes towards people with mental disorders: Results from a
survey of Japanese high school students,” Psychiatry Research, vol. 215,
pp. 229–236, Jan. 2014.
[9] Y. Kido, N. Kawakami, Y. Miyamoto, R. Chiba, and M. Tsuchiya,
“Social Capital and Stigma Toward People with Mental Illness in Tokyo,
Japan,” Community Mental Health Journal, vol. 49, pp. 243–247, Apr.
2013.
[10] A. Masuda, S. C. Hayes, M. P. Twohig, J. Lillis, L. B. Fletcher, and
A. T. Gloster, “Comparing Japanese International College Students’ and
U.S. College Students’ Mental-Health-Related Stigmatizing Attitudes,”
Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development, vol. 37, no. 3,
pp. 178–189, 2009.
[11] D. Houri, E. W. Nam, E. H. Choe, L. Z. Min, and K. Matsumoto, “The
mental health of adolescent school children: a comparison among Japan,
Korea, and China,” Global Health Promotion, vol. 19, pp. 32–41, Sept.
2012.
[12] K. Ishii, T. Mojaverian, K. Masuno, and H. S. Kim, “Cultural Differences
in Motivation for Seeking Social Support and the Emotional Conse-
quences of Receiving Support: The Role of Influence and Adjustment
Goals,” Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, vol. 48, pp. 1442–1456,
Oct. 2017. Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.
[13] A. Gaggioli, G. Riva, D. Peters, and R. A. Calvo, “Chapter 18 - Positive
Technology, Computing, and Design: Shaping a Future in Which Tech-
nology Promotes Psychological Well-Being,” in Emotions and Affect
in Human Factors and Human-Computer Interaction (M. Jeon, ed.),
pp. 477–502, San Diego: Academic Press, Jan. 2017.
[14] A. Gaggioli, D. Villani, S. Serino, R. Banos, and C. Botella, “Editorial:
Positive Technology: Designing E-experiences for Positive Change,”
Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 10, 2019. Publisher: Frontiers.
[15] M. Seligman, T. Steen, N. Park, and C. Peterson, “Positive Psychology
Progress: Empirical Validation of Interventions.,” The American psychol-
ogist, vol. 60, pp. 410–21, July 2005.
[16] S. Wellenzohn, R. T. Proyer, and W. Ruch, “Who Benefits From Humor-
Based Positive Psychology Interventions? The Moderating Effects of
Personality Traits and Sense of Humor,” Frontiers in Psychology, vol. 9,
2018.
[17] H. Kim, K. Doiron, M. Warren, and S. Donaldson, “The international
landscape of positive psychology research: A systematic review,” Inter-
national Journal of Wellbeing, vol. 8, July 2018. Number: 1.
[18] Ando, Hideyuki and Watanabe, Junji and ドミニク, チェン and 一真,
青山 and 杏介, 坂倉, “Wellbeing を促進する情報技術の検討,” ”横
幹連合コンファレンス予稿集”, vol. 2017, pp. A–1–3, 2017.
[19] N. Park, C. Peterson, and M. E. P. Seligman, “Strengths of Character
and Well-Being,” Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, vol. 23,
pp. 603–619, Oct. 2004.
[20] A. M. Wood, J. J. Froh, and A. W. A. Geraghty, “Gratitude and well-
being: a review and theoretical integration,” Clinical Psychology Review,
vol. 30, pp. 890–905, Nov. 2010.
[21] D. E. Davis, E. Choe, J. Meyers, N. Wade, K. Varjas, A. Z. Gifford,
A. Quinn, J. Hook, D. V. V. Tongeren, B. J. Griffin, and E. Worthington,
“Thankful for the little things: A meta-analysis of gratitude interven-
tions.,” Journal of counseling psychology, 2016.
[22] C. Gherghel and T. Hashimoto, “The meaning of kindness and gratitude
in Japan: A mixed-methods study,” International Journal of Wellbeing,
vol. 10, Sept. 2020. Number: 4.
[23] K. Layous, H. Lee, I. Choi, and S. Lyubomirsky, “Culture Matters When
Designing a Successful Happiness-Increasing Activity: A Comparison
of the United States and South Korea,” Journal of Cross-Cultural
Psychology, vol. 44, pp. 1294–1303, Nov. 2013.
Publisher: SAGE
Publications Inc.
[24] J. K. Boehm, S. Lyubomirsky, and K. M. Sheldon, “A longitudinal
experimental study comparing the effectiveness of happiness-enhancing
strategies in Anglo Americans and Asian Americans,” Cognition and
Emotion, vol. 25, pp. 1263–1272, Nov. 2011.
[25] K. Otake, S. Shimai, J. Tanaka-Matsumi, K. Otsui, and B. L. Fredrick-
son, “Happy People Become Happier through Kindness: A Counting
Kindnesses Intervention,” Journal of Happiness Studies, vol. 7, pp. 361–
375, Sept. 2006.
[26] F. Gander, R. T. Proyer, W. Ruch, and T. Wyss, “Strength-Based
Positive Interventions: Further Evidence for Their Potential in Enhancing
Well-Being and Alleviating Depression,” Journal of Happiness Studies,
vol. 14, pp. 1241–1259, Aug. 2013.
[27] S. Wellenzohn, R. T. Proyer, and W. Ruch, “Humor-based online positive
psychology interventions: A randomized placebo-controlled long-term
trial,” The Journal of Positive Psychology, vol. 11, pp. 584–594, Nov.
2016.
[28] W. Ruch and P. E. McGhee, “Humor Intervention Programs,” in The
Wiley Blackwell Handbook of Positive Psychological Interventions,
pp. 179–193, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2014.
[29] C. Peterson, W. Ruch, U. Beermann, N. Park, and M. Seligman,
“Strengths of character, orientations to happiness, and life satisfaction,”
2007.
[30] R. Tsukawaki, N. Kojima, T. Imura, Y. Furukawa, and K. Ito, “Rela-
tionship between types of humour and stress response and well-being
among children in Japan,” Asian Journal of Social Psychology, vol. 22,
no. 3, pp. 281–289, 2019.
[31] H. Tsujita and J. Rekimoto, “Smiling makes us happier: enhanc-
ing positive mood and communication with smile-encouraging digital
appliances,” in Proceedings of the 13th international conference on
Ubiquitous computing - UbiComp ’11, (Beijing, China), p. 1, ACM
Press, 2011.
[32] M. V. Birk and R. L. Mandryk, “Improving the Efficacy of Cogni-
tive Training for Digital Mental Health Interventions Through Avatar
Customization: Crowdsourced Quasi-Experimental Study,” Journal of
Medical Internet Research, vol. 21, p. e10133, Jan. 2019. Company:
Journal of Medical Internet Research Distributor: Journal of Medical
Internet Research Institution: Journal of Medical Internet Research La-
bel: Journal of Medical Internet Research Publisher: JMIR Publications
Inc., Toronto, Canada.
[33] “Woebot Health,” 2022.
[34] A. Darcy, J. Daniels, D. Salinger, P. Wicks, and A. Robinson, “Ev-
idence of Human-Level Bonds Established With a Digital Conversa-
tional Agent: Cross-sectional, Retrospective Observational Study,” JMIR
Formative Research, vol. 5, p. e27868, May 2021.
Company: JMIR
Formative Research Distributor: JMIR Formative Research Institution:
JMIR Formative Research Label: JMIR Formative Research Publisher:
JMIR Publications Inc., Toronto, Canada.
[35] “Woebot: your self-care expert in CBT & mindfulness – google play
reviews,” 2022.
[36] “Woebot: Your self-care expert appstore reviews,” 2022.
[37] M. Franco, C. Monfort, A. Pi˜nas-Mesa, and E. Rincon, “Could Avatar
Therapy Enhance Mental Health in Chronic Patients? A Systematic
Review,” Electronics, vol. 10, p. 2212, Jan. 2021. Number: 18 Publisher:
Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.
[38] I. C. Rehm, E. Foenander, K. Wallace, J.-A. M. Abbott, M. Kyrios,
and N. Thomas, “What Role Can Avatars Play in e-Mental Health
Interventions? Exploring New Models of Client–Therapist Interaction,”
Frontiers in Psychiatry, vol. 7, 2016.
[39] “Gatebox inc.,” 2022.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

[40] D. White and P. W. Galbraith, “Japan’s Emerging Emotional Tech,”
Anthropology News, vol. 60, Jan. 2019.
[41] I. Schwaninger, C. Frauenberger, and G. Fitzpatrick, “Unpacking Forms
of Relatedness around Older People and Telecare,” in DIS’ 20 Compan-
ion: Companion Publication of the 2020 ACM Designing Interactive
Systems Conference, pp. 163–169, New York, NY, USA: Association
for Computing Machinery, July 2020.
[42] P. Sripian, M. N. A. M. Anuardi, J. Yu, and M. Sugaya, “The Im-
plementation and Evaluation of Individual Preference in Robot Facial
Expression Based on Emotion Estimation Using Biological Signals,”
Sensors, vol. 21, p. 6322, Sept. 2021.
[43] I. Schwaninger, F. G¨uldenpfennig, A. Weiss, and G. Fitzpatrick, “What
Do You Mean by Trust? Establishing Shared Meaning in Interdisci-
plinary Design for Assistive Technology,” Int. J. Social Rob., vol. 13,
pp. 1879–1897, Dec. 2021.
[44] S. Lee, H. Kim, M. J. Park, and H. J. Jeon, “Current Advances in
Wearable Devices and Their Sensors in Patients With Depression,” Front.
Psychiatry, vol. 12, June 2021.
[45] E. Civil, “Otaku: Japanese ’obsessive’ subculture explained,” n.a.
[46] H. R. Lee and S. ˇSabanovi´c, “Weiser’s dream in the Korean home:
collaborative study of domestic roles, relationships, and ideal technolo-
gies,” in UbiComp ’13: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM international joint
conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing, pp. 637–646, New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Sept. 2013.
[47] B. M. Nur, “A case study of socio-cultural and technical factors in
automobile design: Discourses between designers and potential users
on a new electric vehicle in Africa,” Technology in Society, vol. 63,
p. 101398, Nov. 2020.
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

