 
A Mobile Health Application for Medication Reconciliation using RxNorm and FHIR 
 
Thomas Agresta 
Department of Family 
Medicine University of 
Connecticut Health Center 
Farmington, USA 
e-mail: 
Thomas.Agresta@uconn.edu 
 
 
Steven Demurjian 
Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering 
University of Connecticut 
Storrs, USA 
e-mail: 
Steven.Demurjian@uconn.edu   
 
 
Eugene Sanzi 
Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering 
University of Connecticut 
Storrs, USA 
e-mail: 
Eugene.Sanzi@uconn.edu  
 
 
John DeStefano 
SMC PartnersLLC,  
10 Columbus Blvd, USA 
e-mail: 
jdestefano@smcpartners.com 
 
Stacy Ward-Charlerie 
WardRx Consulting 
 Pembroke Pines, USA 
e-mail: wardrx@outlook.com 
 
 
 
 
Rachel Rusnak 
Center for Quantitative 
Medicine University of 
Connecticut Health Center 
Farmington, USA 
e-mail: Rusnak@uchc.edu  
 
Ryan Tran 
Center for Quantitative 
Medicine University of 
Connecticut Health Center 
Farmington, USA 
e-mail: Rtran@uchc.edu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— Medications are a large and growing component of the 
prescriber’s armamentarium and are the first line treatment for 
88% of chronic diseases. The percentage of patients taking 
multiple prescription medications is also increasing. According to 
the most recent data (2011-2014) from the Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention (CDC), 40.7% of seniors (65 years or 
older) and 10.9% of the total population were taking five (5) or 
more prescription medications within the past 30 days. For 
seniors, the 40.7% represents almost a three-fold increase from the 
period of 1988-1994 (13.8%). Because a patient’s medication 
regimen is the basis for many treatment decisions, it is extremely 
important that medication lists are accurate in order to maximize 
therapeutic impact and prevent potentially life-threatening 
patient safety events. This paper  presents our work on a mobile 
health (mHealth) application for medication reconciliation that 
can: retrieve medications from multiple electronic health records, 
personal health records, and other health information technology 
systems; combine and reconcile medication into a medication list 
that identifies potential conflicts between the same and/or 
different medications; develop an adaptive multi-use algorithm 
for medication reconciliation for multiple medications pulled from 
different sources; and, provide a Fast Healthcare Interoperability 
Resources 
FHIR-based 
extensible 
software 
solution 
for 
medication reconciliation which can seamlessly include new 
medication sources and algorithm modifications. 
Keywords-Medication reconciliation; FHIR; Mobile health; 
Interoperability 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The healthcare industry is increasingly adopting new 
techniques for sharing secure healthcare data. Health 
Information Exchange (HIE) [1] allows multiple Health 
Information Technology (HIT) systems (e.g., electronic health 
records (EHRs), e-prescribing systems, pharmacy information 
systems, patient portals, etc.) to interact with one another in 
order for healthcare data to be effectively shared between 
providers. This has the potential to both positively affect patient 
outcomes and satisfaction.  This exchange is increasingly being 
facilitated utilizing newer standardized technologies such as the 
Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR) [2], a health 
information exchange (HIE) standard created by HL7 to 
promote secure sharing of healthcare data among multiple health 
information technology (HIT) systems.  
Medications are one of the most critical kinds of healthcare 
data that need to be shared. Medications are a large and growing 
component of the prescriber’s armamentarium and are the first 
line treatment for 88% of chronic diseases [3]. The percentage 
of patients taking multiple prescription medications is also 
increasing. According to the most recent data (2011-2014) from 
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), 40.7% 
of seniors (65 years or older) and 10.9% of the total population 
were taking five (5) or more prescription medications within the 
past 30 days. For seniors, the 40.7% represents almost a three-
fold increase from the period of 1988-1994 (13.8%). Because a 
patient’s medication regimen is the basis for many treatment 
decisions, it is extremely important that medication lists are 
accurate in order to maximize therapeutic impact and prevent 
medication misadventures  which could potentially result in life-
threatening patient safety events. Recognizing this critical need, 
the Connecticut General Assembly in May 2018 passed Special 
Act 18-6: An Act Requiring the Health Information Technology 
Officer to Establish a Working Group to Evaluate Issues 
Concerning Polypharmacy and Medication Reconciliation 
(MRP Workgroup) [4]. This paper reports on our efforts to 
develop 
a 
mobile 
health 
application 
for 
medication 
reconciliation that integrates information from multiple HIT 
systems. 
The MRP Work Group utilized the Joint Commission’s 
(TJC) [5] definition of Med Rec: 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

“Medication reconciliation is the process of comparing a 
patient's medication orders to all of the medications that the 
patient has been taking. This reconciliation is done to avoid 
medication errors such as omissions, duplications, dosing errors, 
or drug interactions. It should be done at every transition of care 
in which new medications are ordered or existing orders are 
rewritten. Transitions in care include changes in setting, service, 
practitioner, or level of care. This process comprises five steps: 
1. Develop a list of current medications; 
2. Develop a list of medications to be prescribed; 
3. Compare the medications on the two lists; 
4. Make clinical decisions based on the comparison; and 
5. Communicate the new list to appropriate caregivers 
and to the patient.” 
The current medication management process often impedes 
our ability to determine a current and accurate list of medications 
for each patient. Major challenges of the current state include: 
 
Despite widespread adoption of (attempting to perform) 
medication reconciliation at each transition of care, a large 
number of medication-related errors occur. 
 
Substantial difficulty remains in compiling a patient’s 
medication list from numerous disparate sources, often 
containing duplicate, missing, or inaccurate information. 
 
Not knowing a clear indication or reason why each 
medication was prescribed impedes best practice for both 
pharmacist and physician decision-making and reduces 
patient understanding and engagement. 
 
Under-utilization of the available messaging standard, 
CancelRx, to electronically discontinue a medication puts 
patients at risk for adverse outcomes and this standard 
should be more routinely adopted and used by prescribers 
and pharmacies. 
 
Physicians often bear the responsibility for reconciling 
complex medication regimens outside their professional 
expertise and this can have a significant impact on effective 
medical decision-making. A robust solution that allows 
shared reconciliation of medications could potentially 
improve this. 
 
We currently lack an efficient, effective, and patient-
centric 
means 
of 
incorporating 
patient-reported 
medications and a method of sharing that information in a 
methodical manner. 
Current EHRs have built-in processes for updating the 
patient’s medication list from external sources using national 
health networks (e.g., Surescripts) using similar data sharing 
standards and even share it with other EHRs. However, this 
often creates a number of unique instances of a list of current 
medications that exist in data silos. An interoperable 
“Medication Service” available to each data user could allow the 
HIE to host the patient’s current med list and allow each EHR to 
interact and update the HIE list, rather than create a standalone 
list that may no longer be up to date beyond the single EHR 
encounter. 
The work reported in this paper is the first step to collect and 
reconcile medications across disparate clinical and pharmacy 
information systems. An enhanced solution for medication 
reconciliation has the potential for substantial safety benefits. 
An additional intent of this paper is to address the industry 
recognition that there is under-documentation of patients’ over-
the-counter medications and supplements that could potentially 
be improved through a patient-facing system. The primary 
objective of this paper is to explore current technology 
standards, such as the FHIR RESTful API and other data 
standards, that could support medication reconciliation and 
improve the acquisition of a more accurate medication list from 
a number of electronic and human sources. In support of this, we 
discussed the current development of a new mobile health 
application and its user interface and features that can be 
leveraged by a patient (or guardian/parent) to report useful 
information (e.g., side effects, adherence, and undocumented 
OTC meds, prescriptions and supplements) that is often 
overlooked today. This should lead to the improvement of the 
longitudinal sharing of this information across the various health 
IT platforms and venues of care. 
This paper  presents our work on a mobile health (mHealth) 
application for medication reconciliation that can: retrieve 
medications from multiple electronic health records, personal 
health records, and other HIT systems; combine and reconcile 
medication into a medication list that identifies potential 
conflicts between the same and/or different medications; 
develop an adaptive multi-use algorithm for medication 
reconciliation  for multiple medications pulled from different 
sources; and, provide a FHIR-based extensible software solution 
for medication reconciliation which can seamlessly include new 
medication sources and algorithm modifications. The remainder 
of this paper is organized into 4 additional sections. Section II 
presents background on medication reconciliation, relevant 
medication standards such as National Drug Code (NDC), 
RxNorm, and RxTerms and the browser RxNav, and FHIR. 
Section III introduces our approach and efforts in medication 
reconciliation. Section IV presents a discussion of our prototype 
mobile health application for medication reconciliation. Section 
V has a conclusion for the paper. 
II. BACKGROUND 
This section provides background information for the 
remainder of the paper. Section II.A provides a brief 
introduction to medication reconciliation in the medical field. 
Section II.B reviews two common drug nomenclature and 
identifier systems, NDC, and RxNorm. Section II.C briefly 
reviews the FHIR standard. 
A. Medication Reconciliation (Med Rec) 
An optimal Med Rec process would begin with an accurate 
list of the patient’s current medications. We often find it difficult 
to establish an individual’s true and accurate list of medications. 
It is not uncommon for each caregiver and the patient to have 
their 
own 
unique 
version 
of 
“current 
medications”. 
Unfortunately, medication errors due to omission (missing 
medications) and commission (giving the wrong medication, 
duplications, and mis-dosing) are all too common. 
The very tools we designed to help us make clinical care 
safer and more efficient, such as ePrescribing (ordering 
medications electronically), and our EHRs, may have 
inadvertently led to further complexity as we store information 
in different formats and locations, often complicating our efforts 
to access and collate it accurately. One significant opportunity 
to improve clinical care and reduce unnecessary harm is our 
vision to develop and maintain an up-to-date, accurate, and 
shareable medication list for patients, their families, and clinical 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

providers. Experts and accrediting bodies champion medication 
reconciliation as a solution to “get everyone on the same page” 
[6]. Despite this effort, obtaining a true and accurate list of 
medications remains elusive due to a multitude of problems. 
The current state of medication management in the U.S. is 
significantly tied to transitions of care, which represent the most 
dangerous time for patient care due to communication gaps as 
one (or more) provider(s) hands off to another provider(s). 
Transitions of care can occur in all of the following settings:  
 
Ambulatory Office visits with Primary Care or 
Specialty Clinicians 
 
Emergency Department visits 
 
Admissions to a hospital or skilled nursing facility 
 
Transfer from one level of care to another within the 
same facility (e.g., critical care to standard inpatient 
care and vice versa) 
 
Hospital discharge to home 
Forty percent of Americans have one or more chronic 
conditions and take more than one medication [7]. As age 
increases, the number of chronic conditions and medications 
increase. According to the CDC, by age 85, most individuals 
have two or more chronic conditions and take six or more 
medications [7]. In the United States, formal medication 
reconciliation occurs over 1 billion times each year and 
consumes over 64 million person-hours (> 32,000 Full-Time 
Equivalents) of physician, pharmacist, and nursing time [3]. 
Transitions of care between one care location and another are 
the most dangerous times for patients due to communication 
gaps (i.e., lack of transfer of an accurate medication list). This is 
especially true when a different (or no) HIT system or EHR is 
used between care locations, with medication errors a major 
component of this harm. In fact, medication errors account for 
over 1 million ED visits, 3.5 million physician office visits, and 
over 125,000 hospital admissions  annually [7]. 
It should be possible to address all of these issues, by 
defining a digital health service within the HIE that would 
compile a list of medications from various HIT systems into a 
single source-of-truth database which users would access 
seamlessly within their clinical and pharmacy HIT systems for 
medication management. A single place to manage transactions 
(add, modify, cancel, comment, validate, and reconcile) can 
theoretically improve medication management safety and 
reduce medication-related errors, even ensuring that the “right 
prescriber” validates and updates the right information on a 
patient’s medication list, reducing the risk that specialists and 
primary care physicians would inadvertently make errors on 
medications prescribed outside the scope of their usual clinical 
practice. In support of this, Connecticut is in the midst of 
developing a “Network of Network” HIE that will use a modern 
API and Web-service architecture. Medication Reconciliation is 
one of the stated “Use Cases” that this HIE is attempting to 
improve. The challenge of data silos for medication is 
exacerbated by proprietary semantic and database ontologies 
and storage  differences between EHR systems. In addition, the   
“prescribed” medicine in an EHR might be different (brand 
name) than a filled medication at a pharmacy (generic).  
Correctly matching them via corresponding product identifiers 
(RxNorm, NDC) linked through standardized mapping tables is 
an area needing further research, which will be one of our tasks.  
FHIR, a requirement for the Office of National Coordinator 
(ONC) certification for EHRs, can extract data from each of 
these source HIT s and affords a potential to aggregate through 
the HIE and direct abstraction from various EHRs to combine 
data. We have already set up a series of FHIR enabled data 
sources to evaluate de-duplication, semantic matching, and data 
presentation layers to allow end users to visually understand and 
choose the best medication list that can be shared back to various 
source systems via another FHIR interface. 
B. NDC, RxNorm, RxTerms, and RxNav 
An NDC [9] code is required for each medication under the 
authority of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and are 
10-digit/character, 3-segment numeric identifier assigned by the 
FDA to each product.  The FDA registers an NDC for each 
medication intended for human use, yet those codes can be 
recycled at times and therefore may not be unique to each 
medication. Each NDC code contains 3 segments that identify 
the vendor, product and trade package of the drug: 
 
Segment 1: is 4-5 digits long and represents the 
“Labeler code” A labeler is any firm that manufactures, 
repacks, or distributes a drug product. 
 
Segment 2: is 3-4 digits long and identifies a specific 
strength, dosage form, and formulation of a particular 
firm/manufacturer. 
 
Segment 3: is 1-2 characters long and identifies the 
package forms and sizes. This segment may contain 
numbers and/or letters. 
 
NDC’s have been historically reused from time to time. Note 
also that CMS has created an 11-digit NDC derivative to create 
a fixed 5-4-2 segment length with a leading zero as needed in 
each segment. Some applications use a 9-digit code with a 5-4 
representation of first two segments (whenever packaging is 
irrelevant.). Despite their flaws, NDCs are used primarily for 
billing and have become ubiquitous in EHRs and PHRs as a 
product identifier to aid in interoperability. 
RxNorm [10], produced and updated weekly by the National 
Library of Medicine (NLM) is a free drug terminology that 
provides standard normalized names (active ingredient + 
strength + dose form) and unique identifiers for commercially 
available drug products. It serves as a tool for supporting 
semantic interoperability with the goal of efficiently and 
unambiguously 
communicating 
drug-related 
information.  
RxNorm creates an RxNorm name for every unique concept and 
assigns an RxNorm concept unique identifier (RxCUI) to each 
concept and a RxNorm atom unique identifier (RxAUI) to each 
atom. Furthermore, RxNorm creates RxNorm names and 
relationships with different levels of granularity (e.g., ingredient 
+ strength or ingredient + dose form) and uses term types 
(TTYs) to delineate branded and generic drugs names at 
different levels of specificity (e.g., Sematic Clinical Drug  
[SCD], Semantic Brand Drug [SBD]) 
In the spring of 2019, the University of Connecticut hosted 
a  Medication Reconciliation Hackathon [10] that demonstrated 
how current and emerging technology standards, such as the 
FHIR RESTful API and RxNorm, could improve the acquisition 
of a medication list and permit new user interfaces and features 
(e.g., specialty applications or features in a patient portal that 
could empower the patient (or guardian/parent) to report useful 
information (e.g., side effects, adherence, and undocumented 
OTC meds, prescriptions, and supplements)) and improve the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

longitudinal sharing of this information across platforms and 
venues of care.  
RxTerms [12] improves drug search capabilities by further 
normalizing the full drug names found in RxNorm. While 
RxNorm presents full drug names in multiple formats identified 
by a term type, the RxTerms database separates RxNorm’s full 
names into drug name + route and strength + dose form. The 
increased granularity of medication names allows easier 
automatic 
matching to EHR 
medication 
lists, 
where 
prescriptions may be recorded with more free-form names that 
do not match any of the provided RxNorm term type formats. 
Once a drug name has been identified via an RxTerms search, 
the RxCUI, for the drug can be retrieved and utilized to match 
discovered drugs with the entries in RxNorm. 
RxNav [13] is a browser that ties together multiple 
medication information sources including RxNorm and 
RxTerms. The RxNorm and RxTerms sources are also provided 
through a REST API, allowing access to both  RxNorm and 
RxTerms databases through simple REST calls including: 
search by RXCUI or NDC, approximate term search, search by 
RxNorm full name parts, and support for drug-drug interaction 
search. RxNav also provides the RxNorm and RxTerms data sets 
as downloadable databases for more efficient local search. 
Utilizing the APIs provided by RxNav, the RxNorm, 
RxTerms, and RxCUI provide a powerful combination for 
parsing natural language or free-text entered prescriptions and 
identifying 
potential 
duplicates. 
RxNorm, 
through 
its 
approximate term search, provides a list RxCUIs corresponding 
to possible candidate drugs and RxAUIs. With these IDs, a 
search by RxCUI retrieves the full name of the candidate 
medications which can be matched against records pulled from 
EHRs. An RxTerms search by the RxCUI retrieves a full 
normalized version of the drug name and dosage, allowing 
easier matching when the medication entry provided by the EHR 
combines the drug name and dosage in one field. The enhanced 
capabilities of RxTerms eases the identification of potential 
duplicate entries caused by mismatches of the dosages in the 
EHR. 
RxNorm is often used for clinical decision support (CDS) 
systems that determine risks for drug-drug, drug-food and drug-
allergy interactions. Lack of such a system puts reliance on free-
text entry of medications which would limit the ability for 
clinical decision support (CDS) rules to address duplications, 
interactions, and validations. However, while RxNorm can 
assist in providing a single source of truth normalization, gaps 
remain in ensuring an accurate summary of a patient’s 
comprehensive medication regimen. Furthermore, RxNorm is 
still being continuously expanded and may lack some over-the-
counter (OTC) medications and supplements, which may 
interact with the patients current prescribed medications thereby 
hampering full interoperability. This can therefore jeopardize 
the comprehensiveness of the vital link among physicians and 
pharmacists and impacts the efficiency, effectiveness, and safety 
of the medication reconciliation process. That said, RxNorm 
hold great promise and may be a superior system to NDC’s [33].  
C.  The Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource, FHIR 
The Office of the National Coordinator for Health 
Information Technology (ONC) under the U.S. Department of 
Health and Human Services continues to drive the adoption of 
digital health records and their interoperability. With this comes 
a drive to improved sharing of information among providers of 
healthcare. All of this occurs with the overarching need to 
address the privacy and security of medical information. The 
recently announced 21st Century Cures Act NPRMs from ONC 
and CMS specify the use of FHIR as the API for EHR 
certification and access to health information by patients, 
providers, and payers. 
FHIR [2] is a standard for healthcare data exchange 
published by HL7 and leverages common tools and approaches 
like: RESTful architectures, HTTP, XML, JSON, and RDF, 
which have transformed HIE through the Internet. This approach 
allows developers to use the tools of the World Wide Web to 
tackle healthcare challenges. FHIR is web-based and free for 
use, and allows extensibility (i.e., the ability to address unique, 
local needs) in addition to the interoperability features. FHIR is 
now another tool including: HL7 version 2; HL7 v3, which has 
a steep learning curve; and, the  CDA (Clinical Document 
Architecture), which is a standard for exchange of common 
clinical documents which may contain such elements as 
medication and problem lists, allergies, demographics, and 
immunizations. In other words, healthcare is moving from a 
model of siloed data in propriety EHRs to open standards that 
will readily allow developers to leverage common web-based 
standards for health data interoperability. This will potentially 
result in a healthcare “app” economy [14],  allowing patients and 
their care provides easy access to relevant health data in a timely 
and convenient manner without vendor lock-in. 
In December 2018, FHIR R4 (4.0.0) [2] was released, which 
was the first “Mixed Normative” (i.e., a number of FHIR 
resources have reached a normative state) content, which should 
provide a reliable foundation for development. Changes, if any, 
to Normative content are expected to be infrequent and are 
subject to strict FHIR Inter-version Compatibility Rules. 
Previous FHIR releases and parts of the current content are 
“Trial Use”, meaning that they are subject to potentially 
breaking changes, but significant effort is under way to bring 
these parts of the specification to Normative status as rapidly as 
possible. With the increasing acceptance and promotion of FHIR 
by the major EHR vendors and the ONC, and the availability of 
Normative content, FHIR became the logical choice for use in 
the Medication Reconciliation Hackathon [11]. 
The decision to use FHIR enables support for SMART on 
FHIR application development, CDS hooks [15] (providing 
clinical decision support services), and support for the Apple 
Health Kit. Further information on SMART on FHIR is 
available at SmartHealthIT.org. FHIR provides structures for 
sharing EHR data between healthcare providers. Data is 
accessed through resources. Resources are accessed utilizing a 
location URL as part of a REST API in conjunction with a 
logical ID. This allows data that resources describe to sync 
between separate FHIR systems. 
FHIR enables the retrieval of healthcare data by providing a 
common API to locate and exchange healthcare records. FHIR’s 
data exchange structure is built on the concept of a resource, 
which provides a meaningful set of healthcare related data for 
transfer. FHIR provides over 125 different resources for: 
patients, observations, medications, patient consent, etc. 
Requests for a specific resource are available through a REST 
API that supports instance level interactions such as: read, vread 
(version read), update, patch (update a portion of a resource), 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

delete, and history interactions. FHIR [16] and Google has 
created a cloud healthcare API using FHIR [17]. Large EHR 
providers such as Epic [18] (Epic Systems Corporation, 2020) 
and Cerner (Cerner, 2020) [19] have leveraged FHIR to 
facilitate HIE for patient use.  
FHIR resources are organized in categories: foundation 
resources, base resources, clinical resources, financial 
resources, and specialized resources. We highlight only a subset 
relevant for the paper. The base resources describe: patients, 
practitioners, and family relationships; organizations, services, 
appointments, and encounters. The clinical resources are for a 
patient’s health history, including: diagnostic data, medications, 
care provision, and request/response communication. HAPI 
FHIR [20] is a Java implementation of the FHIR resources 
including: 
 
Patient, 
FamilyMemberHistory, 
Condition, 
Observation, Diagnostic Report, Medication, Immunization, 
AllergyIntolerance, 
Coverage, 
EligibilityRequest, 
Claim, 
PaymentNotice, etc. The resources are available through the 
FHIR standard's REST API.  
On a final technical note, electronic prescribing in the United 
States occurs through standards set through the National Council 
for Prescription Drug Programs (NCPDP). SureScripts is the 
largest of the vendors that provides an electronic prescribing 
communications hub between providers, pharmacies, and 
pharmacy benefit managers. The standards provide that the 
Diagnostic code (ICD-10-CM) and SNOMED CT (used in 
Problem Lists and Conditions) codes can be used for indications 
during electronic prescribing. Both the SCRIPT v10.6 (previous 
but still in use) and v2017071 (effective 1/1/2020) standards 
include a field for this indication. 
III. MEDICATION RECONCILIATION 
This section provides an in-depth discussion of the issues 
that are critical for medical reconciliation in the healthcare 
domain along with our research objectives for our overall 
research on medication reconciliation as applicable to this paper. 
Section III.A reviews the critical issues for medication 
reconciliation including why reconciliation is so important in the 
problems that need to be solved. Section III.B discusses our 
three research objectives in detail. Section III.C reviews 
personas of four different patients that have interesting 
medication profiles which are utilized for testing. Section III.D 
explores related research from medication reconciliation and 
computer science perspectives. 
A. Issues 
Despite this huge investment of time and resources to 
perform medication reconciliation, medication management is 
still difficult as we struggle to address a number of critical 
issues: 
1. Define a true and accurate list of current medications for 
each individual, in the face of multiple medication list 
sources, 
2. Ascertain the gaps between what has been prescribed to 
what is being taken (i.e., adherence), 
3. Understand why each medication has been prescribed (i.e., 
“Indication”), and 
4. Reconcile this information into a new medication list (i.e., 
new “current medication list”) that defines the medication 
management plan and can be accurately communicated to 
the patient, care givers, and any members of the patient’s 
care team both now and in the future. 
It is essential to consider that the medication list is not static. It 
is forever in flux based on changes in medications, changes in 
doses of current medications and the fact that it changes the 
minute a patient stops taking a medication whether or not they 
have made their doctor or pharmacist aware. 
B. Medication Reconciliation Research Objectives 
The research objectives for medication reconciliation as 
discussed in this paper are as follows: 
A. Develop adaptive multi-use algorithms for medication 
reconciliation and drug-drug interactions for multiple 
medications pulled from different EHRs, entered by 
different individuals over time and reusable in different 
contexts; such as patients via mobile apps, physicians 
via an EHR, visiting nurses in a remote setting, etc.  
B. Research and develop a prototype technology starting 
with a mobile health application for medication 
reconciliation which is under development and will be 
available in mid-August. This will be coupled with an 
appropriate server and database backend solution that 
demonstrates a method to incorporate the ONC 
Interoperability Rules within a state or regional HIE 
using Medication Reconciliation as the key use case and 
the state of CT HIE infrastructure as the model.  
C. Develop and test a FHIR-based extensible software 
solution for medication reconciliation that facilitates:  a 
seamless integration of new data sources; and easily 
updating the medication reconciliation algorithm to 
address emergent pharmaceutical needs. The  solution 
should be transferable to multiple settings for use by 
patients/medical stakeholders via mobile apps, web app, 
or direct embedding into HIT systems via SMART on 
FHIR. This effort will leverage user-centered design 
and development to arrive at a best possible medication 
list across all settings.  
Medication reconciliation requires the application of  skills 
and knowledge from computer science and  healthcare 
perspectives. From a computer science perspective, medication 
reconciliation requires the ability to: obtain potentially 
incomplete or erroneous patient medication lists from multiple 
secure sources; extract the exact medications listed in a 
potentially free-form format suitable for physicians and 
pharmacists to understand but difficult for a computer; match 
medications with similar effects but different names (e.g., 
generic or multiple brand names) or doseages; perform both 
tasks efficiently so as not to keep a physician waiting; and, create 
an intuitive user interface for reconciling potential matches 
between drugs targeted at physicians who need to balance device 
usage with patient interaction. Additionally, the retrieval of 
patient medication lists and the dissemination of reconciled 
medication lists must be able to utilize popular healthcare 
interoperability standards such as FHIR. In support of 
objective/goal A, achieving medication reconcilation will 
require an adaptive algorithm that is able to read and match 
medications from multiple HIT systems with varying structure, 
implemented in a prototype mobile health application with an 
appropriate server and database backend solution. This must 
adhere to the most current ONC interoperability rule [21] and 
leverage the FHIR standard with support for new data sources 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

and updating to address emergent pharmaceutical needs; this 
supports objectives/goals B and C. 
From a healthcare perspective, medication reconciliation 
requires: knowledge of medication components and standards 
for expressing the medication in an EHR, freeform clinical 
notes, or normalized medication repositories such as RxNorm 
and RxTerms; knowledge of the way physicians categorize 
medications on an intuitive level and interact with EHRs; and.  
understanding the way EHRs store, categorize, and retrieve 
medications. Most important is the unification of  computer 
science and healthcare perspectives  into a coherent set of 
research that is easy to understand, easy to incorporate into 
existing HIT systems, and useful to the stakeholders and policy 
makers in both the computer science and healthcare 
communities, which also supports objectives/goals B and C.  
This knowledge is needed to create an adaptive algorithm that 
finds and annotates duplicates in medication lists and displays  
in a coherent manner to a physician or pharmacist in support of 
objective/goal A. 
C. Patient Personas 
In support of medication reconciliation in testing the app,  we 
developed  personas of four different patients. Millie Bryant’s 
journey began with problems around obesity, which led to 
diabetes mellitus type 2 with peripheral neuropathy and 
increasing issues with mobility, especially with her hips and 
knees. Now 72 years old, Millie is battling an increasing number 
of health problems, her son has medical power of attorney but 
everything regarding her healthcare still feels hard. Recently, 
Millie was admitted to the local emergency room with chest 
pains. Following the onset of atrial fibrillation, Millie was 
admitted to the Emergency Department due to a heart attack. 
George Tullison suffers from Type 2 Diabetes brought about 
because of obesity. He also has hypertension, Hepatitis C, and a 
history of alcohol abuse. Recently, George lost his job, which 
has put his healthcare, home, and life at risk. George recently 
had an inpatient visit and was diagnosed with congestive heart 
failure. Since the diagnosis George has frequently landed in the 
hospital or ER with complications from his congestive heart 
failure, diabetes, hepatitis C, and hypertension. George’s 
complex care needs make him a high risk for re-hospitalization 
after discharge. 
Sarah Thompson suffered a back injury while working, and 
was prescribed Oxycodone for pain. In hindsight, if she knew 
where it would lead, she would have never taken the drug. Sarah 
quickly became addicted to the drug, but she had no health 
insurance through work, and she could no longer afford it. A co-
worker offered her heroin as an affordable alternative. Sarah said 
no at first, but the pain persisted and before she knew it she was 
addicted. Sarah was charged with DUI and possession of a Level 
1 controlled substance after being pulled over by the police 
while speeding down the interstate. She was given the choice of 
“getting clean” or going to jail. Sarah spends time in and out of 
methadone clinics before maintaining her sobriety. Recently, 
Sarah visits her PCP but doesn’t share her history of narcotic 
dependence for using IV heroin. 
Christy Munson has never been the kind of person to give 
her health a second thought. She is now 38 and has seen her 
weight rises and lowers each year. In the last year, Christy’s 
weight increased more than usual and for the first time began to 
impact her emotional well-being as well. Then other problems 
began to emerge. She complained to her doctor about fatigue as 
well as pain in her lower back and hips. After a multitude of 
tests, Christy felt no better and her doctor was no closer to 
providing her with a diagnosis or reason for the pain. Christy’s 
doctor even noted at one point that her symptoms could possibly 
be a manifestation of depression or psychosomatic in nature. 
This idea really angered Christy. Christy’s pain only seemed to 
increase. She changed doctors (after the psychosomatic 
comment) and began to see specialists, most focused on pain. 
After another round of blood draws and scans, Christy and her 
specialists could not pinpoint the problem either. Christy had a 
recent flare up and her intolerable pain resulted in a visit to the 
ER where they prescribed her a 30-day opioid prescription. 
D. Related Research 
In this section, we review related research on medication 
reconciliation from two perspectives. One perspective is in 
terms of medication reconciliation and its utility, relevance, and 
usage by medical providers in different care settings. The second 
perspective is from a computer science viewpoint considering 
algorithmic issues and user interface issues in support of 
medication reconciliation. For the first perspective, we explored 
6 related works. In this perspective, the first effort [22] involves 
the way that a personal health record (PHR) can be utilized to 
achieve medication accuracy and safety for patients. The intent 
was to compare the medications entered by a patient in a PHR 
with the documented medications in an EHR. The study 
concluded that when PHR medication review was conducted 
against the provider’s EHR, it is possible to identify medication 
discrepancies that might be harmful. Our medication 
reconciliation approach could pull data from the PHR in addition 
to the multiple HIT systems in order to reconcile all of the 
known prescribed medications with the ones that the patient has 
been tracking. The second effort [23] involves an analysis of 
CancelRx which is an e-prescribing standard to communicate 
among EHRs and pharmacies regarding the discontinuation of 
medications to arrive at an accurate medication list. The study 
demonstrated that correctly utilizing CancelRx can improve 
clinical workflow required to remove medications from an EHR 
or pharmacy IT system in order to ensure that unnecessary risks 
to patient safety are avoided. In our medication reconciliation 
approach, when pulling data from multiple HIT systems, 
leveraging a CancelRx message sent from an EHR could be 
useful in order to ensure that discontinued medications are 
identified when arriving at the reconciled medication list. 
The next effort [23] considers a scenario where the 
medications need to be reconciled when the patient visits his/her 
primary care physician after a hospitalization. During a 
hospitalization, new medications may be prescribed, existing 
medications may be discontinued or have altered dosages, and 
both situations need to be assessed in the primary care office in 
order to reveal errors and discrepancies. The medication 
reconciliation process is critical to be undertaken after 
hospitalization.  The study revealed errors even when there was 
electronic discharge information, as sometimes that information 
was not available when the patient saw the primary care doctor 
after the hospitalization or it was in a format that was not 
automatically incorporated into the EHR. Our approach could 
assist in this effort by drawing the medications from the hospital 
and other HIT sources of the patient. 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

The fourth effort [25] involved the performance of 
medication reconciliation in the medical home.  A medical home 
is a primary care practice that encompasses clinicians and 
medical staff, and incorporates the family as appropriate in order 
to oversee comprehensive care for a patient. The Medication 
Reconciliation challenge in this work is to ensure that the 
prescriber or on-staff pharmacist can obtain access to all of the 
medications for the patient in order to do the reconciliation 
process. This study demonstrates that the medication 
reconciliation process can be quite time-consuming for complex 
patients, taking 24 minutes on average when all data is available, 
but taking up to 2 to 4 weeks for historical outside records to be 
returned. The fifth effort [25] is related since it involves the 
medication review for a patient by a pharmacist at the patient’s 
home. This effort demonstrated that it was very challenging to 
try to identify medication-related problems for patients who had 
issues that included storing multiple drugs in the same container 
and having illegible labels. Our medication reconciliation 
approach can assist in both of these efforts  by gathering 
medications from all of the HIT systems for a patient. 
The final effort [27] involves a study in Taiwan that 
investigated the utility of having access to cloud-based data from 
medication claims in order to improve the reconciliation 
process. This effort studied a cloud-based solution that provided 
access to claims data from insurance reimbursements for 
medications. This instant access to data assisted in collecting and 
detecting medication-related information that could inform a 
physician about medication safety problems.  Their cloud-based 
approach pulls data from multiple sources which is similar to 
our approach. 
For the second perspective, we review four efforts related to 
computer science. The first effort [28] utilizing the Timeline 
software from MIT employed visualization in order to provide a 
pictorial view of the way that pharmacy orders and discharge 
summary reports are overlapped, concurrent, or contiguous over 
time. This is very important for medical providers when a patient 
is moving between care settings such as from a hospital to a 
rehabilitation facility or from the facility back to home. The 
second effort [29] involves the development of a clinical 
decision support algorithm in order to reconcile medications to 
arrive at a complete medication history. The approach uses 
regular expressions to parse medication information which 
could be represented differently in different EHRs, using 
RxNorm and RxTerms to assist in that process. The next effort 
[30], as with [28], was focused on user interface design and 
utilized animations to show the medication reconciliation 
process in order to recommend suggestions for which drugs may 
need to be reconciled. The final effort [31] utilized machine 
learning and natural language processing (NLP) to match drugs 
in clinical notes and discharge prescriptions to look for 
discrepancies between the notes and discharge prescription. This 
is critical since medications in different EHRs can have radically 
different formats that need to be reconciled with one another. 
IV.  INFRASTRUCTURE AND MOBILE APP FOR MED REC 
This section provides a discussion of our prototyping efforts 
for the development of: a back-end infrastructure that is capable 
of pulling medications from multiple HIT sources; an algorithm 
that is capable of doing medication reconciliation for a particular 
patient; and, a mHealth application that allows a stakeholder to 
view and reconcile medications for a particular patient. Section 
IV.A reviews the overall architecture and infrastructure of our 
medication reconciliation framework. Section IV.B discusses 
the MedRec FHIR API for aggregating and reconciling FHIR 
resources from multiple HIT systems using the NDC, RxNorm, 
and RxTerms APIs. Section IV.C reviews the capabilities and 
functionality of the MedRec mHealth app. Section IV.D 
explains the current version of our medication reconciliation 
algorithm. 
A. HAPI FHIR VMs & Test HITs 
In order to support the medication reconciliation app, we 
have developed an infrastructure and installed  a set of HIT 
systems.  From the hackathon we sponsored in spring 2019 [10], 
we developed 4 personas as given in Section III.D, each of 
whom had specific health conditions and appropriate 
medications.  To establish our test environment, we set up 4 
separate HIT systems: 1 HIT is set up as a gold standard to have 
the exact correct medications for every patient without any 
duplications or problems; the other 3 HIT systems are set up 
with perturbed versions of that gold standard with missing 
medications, different medications, errors in dosage, old 
medications etc.  The intent is to be able to support testing of our 
algorithm against these 4 different HIT systems. The 
architecture for our MedRec application is shown in Fig. 1 and 
includes the following technologies and systems: 
 
Three copies of  [32]  set up as simulated EHRs with patient 
and medication data as shown at the top of Fig. 1 along 
with a set of Docker containers for OpenEMR (middle 
right of Fig. 1) which is an open source EHR [34] which 
will serve as a gold standard of 6 to 10 patient personas. 
Note that three simulated EHRs contain perturbations each 
with a different subset of the 6 to 10 personas in order to 
demonstrate the situation where a patient is seen by 
multiple medical stakeholders, which could result in 
different medications. Collectively all of these 4 EHRs and 
their differences in medications will allow testing on 
reconciliation. 
 
A Docker multi-container application with containers for: 
a MySQL database with the Spring 2019 Hackathon 
patient and drug data, OpenEMR installation with a custom 
API for sharing data, and a HAPI FHIR interface for 
sharing the OpenEMR data with the FHIR standard on the 
mid right of Fig. 1. The box contains three containers. 
 
Container 1 has the MySQL database with the 
patients/medications 
from 
the 
Spring 
2019 
Hackathon, plus one added patient with copies of 
Lipitor created within a minute of each other with two 
different dosages, all other fields matching. Patient 
data is loaded via .sql file backup at the container’s 
volume’s 
creation. 
Connection 
parameters are 
specified via the provided .env file, which allows 
access to connection parameters to the OpenEMR 
container. 
 
Container 2 has the modified OpenEMR version 5.0.1 
installation. The modifications include an API for 
retrieving Patient and MedicationStatement data from 
the MySQL database. It is also modified to pull 
MySQL connection parameters from environment 
variables, which allows it to connect to the MySQL 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

database via environment variables specified in the 
provided .env file. 
 
Container 3 has a modified version of the 2019 
Hackathon FHIR installation. The modifications pull 
in the OpenEMR connection parameters from 
environment variables, which allows it to connect to 
the OpenEMR container via environment variables 
specified in the provided .env file. 
The left middle of Fig. 1 lists all of the different APIs related 
to medications, names, formats, dosage, etc. from Section II.B 
that allows all of the standards information and common 
terminology on medications to be pulled in in support of the 
algorithm for the reconciliation process. The MedRec backend 
server in the middle of Fig. 1 is where all of the logic for the 
medication reconciliation algorithm is located so that all of these 
medications can be pulled from all the different HIT sources for 
reconciliation. The server also takes all the communication and 
interactions to and from the HIT systems using the FHIR 
standard via the MedRec FHIR interface to be discussed in 
Section IV.B. 
B.  MEDREC UConn FHIR Interface 
The MedRec UConn HAPI FHIR interface for medication 
reconciliation aggregates and reconciles FHIR resources from 
multiple HIT systems. The MedRec FHIR interface uses HAPI 
FHIR and is configured to pull FHIR resources from a defined 
list of other FHIR interfaces when a resource request is made to 
it. A HAPI FHIR client merges the resources into a single 
Bundle. Reconciliation is then performed on the Bundle by 
making requests to the RxNorm API for similar medications on 
a per-medication basis, then attempting to find duplicates within 
the Bundle. Duplicates are removed from the queue for RxNorm 
requests for efficiency, since they have already been matched. 
When a duplicate is found, a DetectedIssue resource is created 
and added to the bundle. The returned medication list is intact as 
returned from the multiple FHIR sources and the duplicates must 
be displayed in the app through processing the DetectedIssue 
resources so that final authority as to which medications are 
duplicates rests with the user. The medications are displayed 
reconciled in the app, allowing the user to confirm that the 
reconciled medications are correct. 
C. Flutter MedRed Application 
The Flutter MedRec mobile health app shown in Fig. 1 is 
being developed supporting iOS and Android and can request, 
parse, and display FHIR resource data to display the medication 
list that has been reconciled from multiple HIT systems. Before 
the discussion of the screens of the flutter MedRec app, we 
briefly review the medications of the Millie Bryant persona 
given in Section III.C which are given in Fig. 2. Millie has three 
different medications, with inconsistencies across the three 
different EHRs. Medication reconciliation is intended to allow 
for medical providers to identify these potential discrepancies in 
order to determine the correct medication list for Millie Bryant. 
Note that these three EHRs are the copies of [32] set up as 
simulated EHRs referred to in Section IV.A. 
Fig. 3, 4, and 5 contain three of the screens from the MedRec 
app.  The first screen in Fig. 3 is shown after the user has 
searched for and selected the patient Millie Bryant (search 
screens omitted due to space). From the screen, the user can 
either select the button for the complete list of the medications 
which is shown in Fig. 4, or for the reconciled medications in 
Fig. 5. Notice that in Fig. 4, the medications are organized by 
EHR, with the window scrollable to see all the medications.  Fig. 
5 reconciles the conflict between the two dosages of warfarin, 
showing the three medications but only the one dosage of 
warfarin; this is the patient’s reconciled medication list. 
The patients are queried through the new MedRec FHIR 
project. When a response is received the app displays the list of 
patient names that the user can scroll through. When a patient 
name is selected by pressing it, the app makes a 
MedicationStatement request to the MedRec FHIR interface for 
the patient selected by patient ID. The MedRec FHIR interface 
processes the request and returns a Bundle resource listing the 
 
Figure 1. MedRec architecture. 
Millie Bryant Meds 
EHR1  
EHR2 
EHR3 
Gabapentin 300mg 
x 
x 
x 
Warfarin 7.5mg 
x 
 
x 
Warfarin 5mg 
 
x 
 
Nitroglycerin 0.3MG 
x 
x 
 
Figure 2. Millie's medications across 3 EHRs. 
 
Figure 3. Screen for patient. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

patient’s medications, with any reconciled drugs also having a 
DetectedIssue resource in the Bundle naming the matching 
drugs through the MedicationStatements’ FHIR URLs. 
Although MedicationStatements are parsed and displayed 
correctly in the medication list screen, parsing the DetectedIssue 
resources and displaying the DetectedIssues through the 
interface is still a work in progress. 
D. Medication Reconciliation Algorithm 
The MedRec reconciliation algorithm begins by retrieving 
the Bundle supplied by the FHIR interface, created by initiating 
FHIR requests to all of the HIT systems the MedRec FHIR 
interface is configured to pull FHIR data from and merging it 
into one Bundle. A copy of the list is created to perform 
reconciliation 
analysis 
while 
leaving 
the 
original 
MedicationStatement list intact. 
The first MedicationStatement is retrieved from the Bundle 
and a request sent to RxNorm’s approximate term search with 
the medication’s name to retrieve any synonyms of the drug as 
well as different versions of the drug. The response is parsed for 
a list of RXCUIs similar to the drug listed in the first 
MedicationStatement. For each of the RxCUIs returned, the 
algorithm makes a request to RxNorm’s all related API that 
returns all concepts related to the RxCUI by TTY. The concepts 
returned by RxNorm are parsed, with both the name and the 
synonyms of the responses given in the concept groups and 
concept properties added to a set of potential duplicates to check 
against. The algorithm then iterates over the list of 
MedicationStatements removing any MedicationStatement with 
a name in the set of potential duplicates and creating a set of 
related resources, later processed into DetectedIssues. Once the 
algorithm reaches the end of the culled MedicationStatement 
list, 
it 
repeats 
starting 
with 
the 
second 
remaining 
MedicationStatement in the list. This process repeats until there 
are no remaining MedicationStatements. Once the process is 
complete, a DetectedIssue is generated for each set of related 
resources and are added to the original Bundle containing the 
full MedicationStatement listing originally sourced from the 
configured HIT systems. Note that full DetectedIssue resource 
compliance is a work in progress. The bundle is then sent to the 
flutter app to be displayed to the user. 
V. CONCLUSION AND ONGOING RESEARCH 
 This paper  presented our work to date on a mobile health 
(mHealth) application for medication reconciliation. The paper 
began with background on relevant medication standards such 
as NDC, RxNorm, and RxTerms and the browser RxNav, and 
FHIR in Section II.  Then, Section III explored medication 
reconciliation in detail by reviewing: the critical issues and 
importance of reconciliation; three research objectives; four 
different 
personas 
of 
patients 
that 
have 
medication 
reconciliation needs; and, related research from medication 
reconciliation and computer science perspectives. The 
infrastructure and MedRec mHealth application was presented 
in Section IV by reviewing the overall architecture and 
infrastructure, discussing the MedRec FHIR API for 
aggregating and reconciling medications, illustrating the 
MedRec mHealth app, and reviewing the current version of our 
medication reconciliation algorithm. We believe that this is a 
very good initial first step developing the infrastructure and an 
algorithm that is capable of retrieving medications from multiple 
HIT systems so that they can be combined and reconciled into a 
medication list that identifies potential conflicts between the 
same and/or different medications.  
In terms of ongoing and planned research, we are focusing 
on a number of directions.  We intend to continue to evolve and 
improve the MedRec mHealth app by leveraging user-centered 
design and development to arrive at best possible medication list 
across all these multiple settings. This will involve interacting 
with potential stakeholders including medical students, 
clinicians, pharmacists, visiting nurses, home health care aides, 
patients, and other family members.  A second direction would 
involve continued improvements to the algorithm for 
medication reconciliation particularly in regards to identifying 
drug-drug interactions which can have serious consequences if 
they are not found. 
 
Figure 4. Meds from EHRs. 
 
Figure 5. Warfarin reconciled. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to acknowledge the Medication 
Reconciliation Polypharmacy Committee in Connecticut for 
their development of some of the original concepts described as 
well as the participants in the Medication Reconciliation 
Hackathon who helped refine additional issues and possible 
solutions for Medication Reconciliation. The work of some of 
the co-authors was supported in part by a grant from the State of 
CT Office of Health Strategy, award no. 18SIM0002. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. De Pietro and I. Francetic, “E-health in Switzerland: The 
laborious adoption of the federal law on electronic health records 
(EHR) and health information exchange (HIE) networks,” Health 
Policy, 122(2), pp. 69-74, 2018.  
[2] HL7 
International, 
"Overview," 
https://www.hl7.org/fhir/overview.html. Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[3] M. J. Ekstrand, Transforming "Med Wreck" into "Med Rec:” One 
Health System’s Journey. Webinar presentation: Pharmacy 
Quality Alliance; https://portal.ct.gov/-/media/OHS/Health-IT-
Advisory-
Council/MRP/MRP_WG_FINAL_Recommendations.pdf, 2017, 
Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[4] https://www.cga.ct.gov/2018/act/sa/pdf/2018SA-00006-R00SB-
00217-SA.pdf. Retrieved Sept., 2020 
[5] The Joint Commission. Medication reconciliation sentinel event 
alert. 
2006. 
http://www.jointcommission.org/SentinelEvents/SentinelEventA
lert/sea_35.htm. Retrieved Sept., 2020 
[6] https://www.jointcommission.org/-
/media/tjc/documents/standards/national-patient-safety-
goals/historical/npsg_chapter_hap_jan2019.pdf. Retrieved Sept., 
2020. 
[7] Summary Health Statistics for the U.S. Population: National 
Health Interview Survey, 2012. U.S. Department of Health, 
December 
2013, 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_10/sr10_259.pdf. 
Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[8] https://health.gov/hcq/ade.asp, Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[9] https://www.fda.gov/Drugs/InformationOnDrugs/ucm142438.ht
m. Retrieved Sept., 2020.  
[10]  https://www.nlm.nih.gov/research/umls/rxnorm/, 
Retrieved 
Sept., 2020. 
[11] https://portal.ct.gov/-/media/OHS/Health-IT-Advisory-
Council/MRP/MRP_WG_FINAL_Recommendations.pdf, 
pp. 
25-76, Retrieved Sept., 2020.  
[12]  https://mor.nlm.nih.gov/RxTerms/, Retrieved Sept., 2020.  
[13]  https://rxnav.nlm.nih.gov/, Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[14] https://www.healthcareitnews.com/news/healthcare-app-
economy-coming-get-ready-dataquake. Retrieved Sept., 2020.  
[15]  https://cds-hooks.hl7.org/1.0/, Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[16] https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/azure-api-for-fhir/, 
Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[17] https://cloud.google.com/healthcare, Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[18]  https://www.cerner.com/, Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[19]  https://www.epic.com/, Retrieved Sept., 2020.  
[20] HAPI FHIR - The Open Source FHIR API for Java.  
https://hapifhir.io/, Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[21] https://www.healthit.gov/curesrule/, Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
[22] J. Schnipper  et al., “7 Effects of an online personal health record 
on medication accuracy and safety: a cluster-randomized trial,” 
Journal of the American Medical Informatics Association, 19(5), 
pp. 728-734, 2012.  
[23] Y. Yang et al., “Analysis of medication therapy discontinuation 
orders in new electronic prescriptions and opportunities for 
implementing CancelRx,” J Am Med Inform Assoc. 25(11), pp. 
1516-1523, 2018.  
[24] Y. Jani, C. Shah, and J. Hough, “Medicines reconciliation in 
primary care following hospitalization,” International Journal 
for Quality in Healthcare. 29(suppl_1), pp. 39-40, 2017.  
[25] A. S. Mixon & S. Kripalani, “The challenges of medication 
reconciliation for the medical home,” Jt Comm J Qual Patient 
Saf. 45(8), pp. 531-533, 2019.   
[26]  D. Chandrasekhar, E. Joseph, F. A. Ghaffoor, and H. M. Thomas, 
“Role of pharmacist led home medication review in community 
and the preparation of medication list,” Clinical Epidemiology 
and Global Health, 7(1), pp. 66-70, 2019.  
[27] C. Y. Liao et al., “Improving medication safety by cloud 
technology: progression and value-added applications in 
Taiwan,” Int J Med Inform., 126, pp. 65-71, 2019. 
[28] X. Zhu, S. Gold, A. Lai, G. Hripcsak, and J. J. Cimino,  "Using 
timeline displays to improve medication reconciliation,"  
Proceedings 
of 
International 
Conference 
on 
eHealth, 
Telemedicine, and Social Medicine,  pp. 1-6, 2009. 
[29] J. Long & M. J. Yuan, “A novel clinical decision support 
algorithm 
for 
constructing 
complete 
medication 
histories,” Comput Methods Programs Biomed, 145(C) pp. 127-
133, 2017. 
[30] C. Plaisant, J. Wu, A. Z. Hettinger, S. Powsner, and B. 
Shneiderman, “Novel user interface design for medication 
reconciliation: an evaluation of Twinlist,” J Am Med Inform 
Assoc., 22(2), pp. 340-349, 2015. 
[31] Q. Li et al., “An end-to-end hybrid algorithm for automated 
medication discrepancy detection,” BMC Medical Informatics 
and Decision Making, 15(1) pp. 37, 2015. 
[32] https://github.com/hapifhir/hapi-fhir-jpaserver-starter. Retrieved 
Sept., 2020. 
[33] A. A. Dhavle et al., “Evaluating the implementation of RxNorm 
in ambulatory electronic prescriptions,” J Am Med Inform Assoc., 
2015 
[34] https://www.open-emr.org/. Retrieved Sept., 2020. 
 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-834-1
HEALTHINFO 2020 : The Fifth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

