Enacting Eldertech in Senior Citizens’ Communities of Japan: A Social Support 
Perspective 
 
Tingting Huang 
Graduate School of Economics and Management 
Tohoku University 
Sendai, Japan 
Email: yoruhuang@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—This work-in-progress research focuses on “the ICT 
enabled community-based support system” in Japan, which 
has done a great job on improving the quality of the seniors’ 
social life. The goal is to adopt a qualitative research approach 
with a multiple case design and the Social support theory to 
zoom in the research questions: 1) how do various communities 
use the deployed ICT to support the social life of the seniors? 
2) How the general Critical Success Factors (CSF) acts during 
constructing and managing the ICT project? The originality of 
this research is that it takes multiple representative cases and 
reforms them into a generalized conceptual model for further 
research and application.  
Keywords-ICT; social support; senior; community; CSF. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In Japan, the need to explore practical ways to maintain 
senior citizens’ functional abilities and promote independent 
living is urgent [1]. The proportion of people aged 65+ years 
in the total population in Japan is more than 27% [2], which 
means that the Japanese population aging is still 
unprecedented in the world [1]. Meanwhile, other issues like 
the shrinking working population, the low birth rate, etc. will 
lead to the shortage of seniors supporting staff and the 
growth in social security costs [3]. The projections for 2050 
show that considerable countries will face the similar 
population challenge soon [4].  
Today, various assistive technologies have been adopted 
to help the seniors improving their living quality, such as 
general Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICTs), 
robotics, 
telemedicine, 
sensor 
technology, 
medication management applications, and video games [5]. 
On the other hand, how to use assistive technology fulfilling 
mental needs of the seniors is a significant research topic [6]. 
Loneliness and social isolation [6] is one of the most severe 
problems affecting the elder, which is expressed in little 
participation in social activities, dissatisfaction with social 
lives, or even no contact with other people at all.  
The experiences of Japan suggested that one of the 
solutions to loneliness and social isolation is to rebuilding 
community-based 
support 
systems 
[1]. 
Close-knit 
community-based social networks enhanced provision and 
receipt of social support [1], which is fundamental to ease 
the critical issue—how to provide appropriate support to the 
seniors who live alone [7]. Nevertheless, only a limited 
number of studies [8][9] in Japan have focused on this topic 
from a theoretical perspective.  
To address the above research gaps, this research aims to 
select the representative cases of ICT enabled community-
based support system in Japan, which have done a great job 
on improving the quality of the seniors’ social life. In order 
to choose a better angle to look into the research question of 
this research, the Social Support Theory (SST) [12] is 
considered to be a perfect fit for this study to zoom in the 
following questions: 1) how do various communities use the 
deployed ICT to support the social life of the seniors? 2) 
How the general CSF acts during constructing and managing 
the ICT project? In order to explore the above questions, the 
three key notions of SST might provide a comprehensive 
perspective. Using a qualitative method to analyze the 
multiple representative cases [13] can clearly and concisely 
tell the development of the appropriate designs which 
combine the various ICTs and the communities’ activities 
[14][15][16]. The originality of this research is that it takes 
multiple representative cases in Eldertech field for the first 
time and reforms them into a generalized conceptual model 
for further research and application. 
The theoretical and practical contributions of this 
research are expected in the following. First, there is limited 
research that focuses on the ICT enabled community-based 
support systems and what they can do for the seniors. This 
study can address critical issues and contributes to the 
growing gerotechnology research. Second, this research 
might extend the adopted theory to form a new framework 
for explaining the similar phenomenon. Third, Japan’s 
successful experiences in developing and operating the ICT 
enabled community-based support systems might present 
examples for other countries, especially the Asian countries 
that will face the population issues soon. Finally, this 
research might offer other practitioners a specific agenda for 
developing the senior support system.  
The outline of this paper is in the following. A literature 
review of the phenomenon and the theory lens will be 
explained In Section 2. Section 3 is about the methodology. 
Case description and expectable findings are in Section 4 and 
5. Finally, there is the conclusion. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
In this section, the background of the phenomenon and 
the social support theory will be introduced. 
A. the Eldertech  
There is an increasing number of studies focused on 
assistive technology for the seniors living with chronic 
illness in their own home within the medical health, nursing, 
and gerontology literature [5][17]. The issues related to 
material needs and the physical condition of the seniors 
population are usually adopted the telemedicine systems 
[3][5][11], mobile social alarming systems and online 
monitoring systems based on sensor technology [5][11], and 
other devices combined with the services offered by the 
emerging ubiquitous computing and intelligent home 
appliances [3][5]. According to the findings of Khosravi, et 
al. [6], within the studies on various technologies applied to 
alleviate 
social 
isolation, 
the 
commonly 
adopted 
technologies consist of the general ICT contained the 
computers and the internet, social network sites, robotics, 
telecare systems, etc. Most of these studies used 
experimental methods and survey to argue the relationship 
between social isolation and the new assistive technology. 
There was little research focused on how to use the assistive 
technologies—appropriate design—effectively to ease the 
loneliness and social isolation. It is not an issue that only 
matters to the person in need, but also to a healthy and 
sustainable society in the future. 
With the proliferation and ubiquity of ICTs, in recent 
years, the usage of ICTs in rebuilding community-based 
support systems certainly brings more efficiency and variety. 
In Japan, under the promotion of the Japanese government, 
considerable regions have started various ICT enabled 
regional activation projects [18] which include many 
community-based support models for the senior citizens. 
Nevertheless, only a limited number of studies [8][9] in 
Japan have focused on this topic from a theoretical 
perspective, which usually adopted survey methods and 
concluded from the users’ perspective. Also, similar research 
[3][10][11] in the western countries generally took the 
technical point of view. 
B. Social Support Theory 
The SST perspective is well-suited to address our 
research subjects. Some key concepts of this theory are 
constructive on knitting critical features of our research 
subjects together. Social support refers to the availability of 
interpersonal resources [19]. SST focuses on the ways 
individuals are embedded in a social network through social 
connections, and how these connections are used to request 
or offer support [19]. There are three key concepts in SST. 
First, social embeddedness focuses on the structure of the 
social network of individuals in terms of size or density and 
covers the actual connections among individuals in the social 
environment. Second, perceived social support focuses on 
an individual’s beliefs about whether or not members of 
one’s social network provide support and the positive as well 
as negative consequences of these beliefs and is used to 
explain the effects on those individuals confronted with 
adverse events. Third, enacted social support focuses on 
network members who perform behavioral actions when 
assisting a specific individual in their networks and is used to 
explain behavioral actions and their consequences performed 
by others to provide social support. This concept evaluates 
an individual’s actual behavior when providing support and 
the associated consequences. 
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
A qualitative research approach is adopted with a 
multiple case design to find answers to the “how” research 
questions [20][21]. This research will reveal the nature of the 
deployed ICT embedded in the applying and operating 
support system in each case, the relationship between the 
case background and the chosen ICT plan, the CSF, the 
effect of social support and the ICT. In the field of 
information systems, the CSF of the adopted information 
systems is well studied. The CSF usually refers to the factors 
that determine the success of a system to a great extent [23].  
The CSF in this research means the design, task, 
management, and procedure, which are the most critical to 
the success of the system. Four representative cases will be 
studied mainly through in-depth interviews, observations, 
and related documents. The interview plan is constructed 
through the selected theory lens. The Social support theory 
provides three concepts which will enrich the dimensions of 
the research data—not only the subjective feelings of the end 
users as the previous research. For instance, social 
embeddedness focuses on the structure of the social network 
of individuals regarding size or density. It provides an 
objective measurement; perceived social support focuses on 
an individual’s beliefs about whether or not members of 
one’s social network provide support; enacted social support 
focuses on network members who perform behavioral 
actions when giving assistance to a specific individual in 
their networks, which reveals the efforts to achieve the ideal 
social integration. The observations consist of the use of the 
support systems, the management of the support systems, the 
routine and exceptional operations, the issues, etc. Finally, 
based on the Social integration measurement and the ICT 
measurement, four clear ICT usage patterns from four 
communities and the corresponding CSF will be concluded 
and form a conceptual model. 
IV. 
CASE STUDIES 
Four selected cases in Japan are analyzed in this research, 
which had been promoted as the successful ICT usage cases 
from the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications [22]. Table 1 shows the relevant 
information of the four cases. In case IRO, a leaf business is 
called ‘Irodori’. Irodori business means cultivating, 
processing, and selling natural plants that are used as 
decorations for Japanese dishes. Less than 2000 people live 
in Kamikatsu, and young people take only 7.8 percent of the 
local population. It is the investment to the information 
network infrastructure (not advanced technology but the 
technology that can be used easily by the seniors) in 2000 
that made Kamikatsu Town the No.1 of the leaf business. In 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

the OTS case, social media (e.g., facebook & twitter) 
combined the official website intends to draw citizens and 
travelers to engage in various events in Otsuki. Seniors in 
Otsuki can rent their farmland to visitors, manage it for them, 
and post the status of the plants regularly by the social media. 
In the TOK case, an easy-to-use application for a smartphone 
is developed for communicating regularly with the local 
seniors who live by themselves in order to ensure their 
safety; they can also communicate with others easily. In the 
KAT case, multiple information community centers with 
many IT/ICT devises are set up. The seniors can gather to the 
nearest community center to report their safety, to use 
various devices, and to communicate with each other.    
The investigations will be conducted following the 
research plan (Figure 1). The research subjects of each case 
include the seniors, the control organization, the support 
agencies, and the relevant people from the society. The plans 
of interviews and observations for each research subject from 
three perspectives are listed. 
 
TABLE I.  
THE SENIORS’S SOCIAL LIFE SUPPORTED BY THE ICT 
ENABLED COMMUNITIES 
Geographic 
Location 
ICT project 
Start 
Date 
Kamikatsu-cho, 
Tokushima 
Prefecture 
IRODORI VILLAGE KAMIKATSU 
(IRO) 
1999 
Otsuki City, 
Yamanashi 
Prefecture 
HALLO NATURES OTSUKI (OTS) 
2012 
Tokushima City, 
Tokushima 
Prefecture 
TOKUTTER (TOK) 
2010 
Katsuragi City, 
Nara Prefecture 
NEW ERA KATSURAGI CREATION 
PROMOTION PROJECT (KAT) 
2013 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Investigation plan in detail. 
 
V. 
EXPECTED FINDINGS 
Based on the previous analysis of the secondary data of 
the four cases, this research intend to form a 2×2 matrix with 
Social integration and Social network platform dimensions 
(Figure 2). Social integration is a sense of belonging to a 
group of people who share common interests and 
recreational activities. Public or private means whether the 
platform belongs to a third-party. The characteristics of each 
case’s findings will be discussed through the theoretical lens 
as well as the rational enablers. In detail, the research agenda 
in each case consists of the strategy and method of the 
control organization, the social situation and feelings of the 
elderly, the primary interactions with support agents and 
society, the CSF of the case, the distinguishing features of 
the design and outcomes. In the current state, the contents in 
Figure 2―the titles of the above research agenda―are the 
same; they will be specified during the investigation. For 
instance, the ‘strategy and method of control organization’ in 
four places of Figure 2 will be replaced by the research 
findings, such as ‘Designing, constructing, and operating the 
whole information system and hardware for the seniors’ in 
Case IRO, ‘Using the social media and office website for 
information distribution’ in Case OTS, etc.  
From the current analysis, four success cases already 
show different features through the theory lens (Table II).  
Case IRO and Case TOK will be used as examples to explain 
the Table II. From the perspective of Social embeddedness, 
the seniors’ social lives are analyzed through the social 
activities before and after. In the Case IRO, the seniors are 
organized by the Irodori company to engage in product 
manufacturing, information processing, business managing, 
etc. They have to interact with the company, the customers, 
the visitors, etc. The changes in the social activities of 
seniors before and after are enormous. Hence, the cell of 
Social embeddedness in Case IRO in Table II is filled with 
‘High’. In the Case TOK, each senior living alone is 
provided with a smartphone and the special application 
developed for them. The application is based on twitter and 
is designed for seniors to use it easily. Every day, the seniors 
will receive a message from support group inquiring about 
their status, and they should reply to this message for 
confirming their safety. Additionally, they can also twit 
something else as well. Right now, they are connected with 
volunteers of the support group and the other seniors in the 
living area, which might bring them many opportunities to 
attend social events and make friends. However, comparing 
to the seniors in the first case, the support is valued as 
relatively ‘low’.  
From the perspective of Perceived social support, the 
interviews for the seniors will be about their feelings 
regarding their current social lives, the ICT enabled support, 
the services, the feedback from the people of society that 
have interacted with them. The conjectural results are listed 
in Table II. The seniors in Case IRO might feel their social 
lives are more fulfilling than the seniors in Case TOK.  
Finally, from the perspective of Enacted social support, 
the interviews for the seniors will be about the activities and 
events they experienced and the assistance they received. 
From the current data, in Case IRO, the seniors have 
engaged in learning the leaf business, learning how to use the 
information system and hardware to do business, information 
and equipment upgrade, interaction with visitors, training 
new trainee, etc. On the other hand, the introduction of 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

smartphone and the application is the main support activities 
for the seniors in Case TOK. Hence, ‘High’ is for Case IRO 
and ‘Low’ is for Case TOK. Similarly, the other two cases 
are evaluated currently through the same process.   
The ongoing investigations will provide more detail 
information to refine the conceptual model and to enrich the 
qualitative analysis. Information during constructing and 
managing the ICT project of each case will be analyzed for 
locating the CSF as well as for generating survey for the 
system managers. General CSF for this kind of support 
system can be expected.   
 
 
Figure 2.  Different Approaches Revealed within Current Case Analyses 
TABLE II.  
THE EXPETABLE SENIORS’S SOCIAL LIFE SUPPORTED BY 
THE ICT ENABLED COMMUNITIES 
 
ICT 
Social 
embedded
ness 
Perceived 
social 
support 
Enacted 
social 
support 
IRO 
Private 
High 
High 
High 
OTS 
Public 
High 
High 
Low 
TOK 
Public 
Low 
Low 
Low 
KAT 
Private 
Low 
Low 
High 
*The most complex Social Integration is presented with ‘High’ in 
all three notions; the simplest Social Integration is presented with 
‘Low’ in all three notions. 
 
 
The findings are highly expected to answer the research 
questions. From the primary analysis of secondary data, four 
success cases have already shown the distinguishing features 
on supporting the seniors with different approaches of 
deployed ICT. Although the current data have not covered 
the identification of the CSF, the further investigations are 
expected to generate more valuable data on the projects’ 
implementation and management details. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
This research focuses on “the ICT enabled community-
based support system” in Japan, which has done a great job 
on improving the quality of the seniors’ social life. There is 
limited research that focuses on the ICT enabled community-
based support systems and what they can do for the seniors. 
The CSF of these success cases has not been studied well 
enough in the prior research as well. This study can address 
critical issues, such as the key issues and the CSF on ICT 
usage in a community, and contributes to the growing 
gerotechnology research. This research might extend the 
adopted theory to form a new framework for explaining the 
similar phenomenon. The previous research of ICT enabled 
community-based support systems usually adopted a survey 
method to evaluate the satisfaction of the seniors. In this 
research, the social support theory provides multiple 
perspectives not only from the seniors, but also from the 
control organization, the support agencies, and the society. 
Japan’s successful experiences in developing and operating 
the ICT enabled community-based support systems might 
present examples for other countries, especially the Asian 
countries that will face the population issues soon. 
Comparing to other studies on the similar subject, the 
conceptual model proposed by this research will provide four 
success examples with specific CFS and the ICT usage 
patterns. Other communities can modify or refine their 
support systems by choosing one success example with 
similar background and ICT application. This research might 
offer other practitioners in Japan a specific agenda for 
developing and implementing the community-based support 
system and expand the research approaches on the similar 
phenomenon. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Muramatsu and H. Akiyama, "Japan: Super-Aging 
Society Preparing for the Future," The Gerontologist, vol. 51, 
pp. 425-432, Aug. 2011, doi: 10.1093/geront/gnr067. 
[2] Statistics Bureau. Population density. [Online] Available 
from: http://www.stat.go.jp/data/jinsui/new.htm/ [retrieved: 
August, 2018]. 
[3] L. M. Camarinha-Matos and H. Afsarmanesh, "Virtual 
communities and seniors support," MIV’01 in Advances in 
Automation, Multimedia and Video Systems, and Modern 
Computer Science, WSES press, Sep. 2001, pp. 279-284, 
ISBN: 960-8052-40-8. 
[4] World Health Organization, World report on ageing and 
health: World Health Organization, 2015. 
[5] P. Khosravi and A. H. Ghapanchi, "Investigating the 
effectiveness of technologies applied to assist seniors: A 
systematic literature review," International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 85, pp. 17-26, Jan. 2016, doi: 
10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2015.05.014. 
[6] P. Khosravi, A. Rezvani, and A. Wiewiora, "The impact of 
technology on older adults’ social isolation," Computers in 
Human Behavior, vol. 63, pp. 594-603, Oct. 2016, doi: 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

10.1016/j.chb.2016.05.092. 
[7] T. Obi, D. Ishmatova, and N. Iwasaki, "Promoting ICT 
innovations for the ageing population in Japan," International 
Journal of Medical Informatics, vol. 82, pp. 47-62, Apr. 2013, 
doi: 10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2012.05.004. 
[8] K. Kobayashi and K. Goto, "Development, Present State and 
New Initiatives of the “Seniors Person Watching System” : 
Case Studies on FUKUYAMA and FUKUOKA," Journal of 
Nagoya Gakuin University, vol. 52, pp. 23-38, 2016, doi: 
10.15012/00000643. 
[9] C. Jia and T. Noda, "Investigation on the Effect of Services 
for Aged Persons by Using Information and Communication 
Technology in Okuizumo-Cho," San'in Research, vol. 4, pp. 
23-36, 2011.  
[10] L. M. Camarinha-Matos and W. Vieira, "Intelligent mobile 
agents in seniors care," Robotics and Autonomous Systems, 
vol. 27, pp. 59-75, Apr. 1999, doi: 10.1016/S0921-
8890(98)00083-9. 
[11] L. Camarinha-Matos and H. Afsarmanesh, "TeleCARE: 
Collaborative virtual seniors care support communities," The 
Journal on Information Technology in Healthcare, vol. 2, pp. 
73-86, 2004. 
[12] M. Barrera, "Distinctions between social support concepts, 
measures, and models," American journal of community 
psychology, vol. 14, pp. 413-445, Aug. 1986, doi: 
10.1007/BF00922627. 
[13] S. L. Pan, G. Pan, and D. E. Leidner, "Crisis Response 
Information Networks," Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems, vol. 13, pp. 518-555, Jan. 2012, doi:  
10.17705/1jais.00283 
[14] C. L. M. Ling, S. L. Pan, P. Ractham, and L. Kaewkitipong, 
"ICT-enabled community empowerment in crisis response: 
Social media in Thailand flooding 2011," Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems, vol. 16, pp. 174-212, 
Mar. 2015, doi: 10.17705/1jais.00390. 
[15] Y. Tim, S. L. Pan, S. Bahri, and A. Fauzi, "Digitally enabled 
affordances 
for 
community ‐ driven 
environmental 
movement in rural Malaysia," Information Systems Journal, 
vol. 2017, pp. 1-28, Mar. 2017, doi:10.1111/isj.12140. 
[16] Y. Tim, S. L. Pan, S. Bahri, and A. Fauzi, "Digitally enabled 
crime-fighting communities: Harnessing the boundary 
spanning competence of social media for civic engagement," 
Information & Management, vol. 54, pp. 177-188, Mar. 2017, 
doi:10.1016/j.im.2016.05.006. 
[17] L. Magnusson, E. Hanson, and M. Borg, "A literature review 
study of information and communication technology as a 
support for frail older people living at home and their family 
carers," Technology and Disability, vol. 16, pp. 223-235, Jan. 
2004. 
[18] Y. Takata, "Transition of the poligy on ICT promotion in 
regional community," Media・Communication, vol. 62, pp. 
135-147, 2012.  
[19] C. Maier, S. Laumer, A. Eckhardt, and T. Weitzel, "Giving 
too much social support: social overload on social 
networking sites," European Journal of Information Systems, 
vol. 24, pp. 447-464, Sep. 2015, doi: 10.1057/ejis.2014.3. 
[20] S. L. Pan and B. Tan, "Demystifying case research: A 
structured–pragmatic–situational 
(SPS) 
approach 
to 
conducting case studies," Information and Organization, vol. 
21, 
pp. 
161-176, 
Nov. 
2011, 
doi:10.1016/j.infoandorg.2011.07.001. 
[21] G. Walsham, "Interpretive case studies in IS research: nature 
and method," European Journal of information systems, vol. 
4, pp. 74-81, 1995, doi:10.1057/ejis.1995.9 
[22] MIT, ICT usage cases, [Online] 
Available from: 
http://www.soumu.go.jp/main_sosiki/joho_tsusin/top/local_s
upport/ict/jirei/index.html#anc02 [retrieved: August, 2018]. 
[23] E. J. Umble., R. R. Haft, & M. M. Umble, “Enterprise 
resource planning: Implementation procedures and critical 
success factors,” European journal of operational research, 
vol. 
146, 
pp. 
241-257, 
2003, 
doi: 10.1016/S0377-
2217(02)00547-7 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

