A Cuffless Blood Pressure Monitor for Home Healthcare Systems Monitored
by Health Professionals
A cuffless blood pressure monitor
Toshiyo Tamura
Future Robotics Organization
Waseda University
Tokyo Japan
e-mail: tamurat@aoni.waseda.jp
Masaki Sekine
Department of Medical care Technology
Tsukuba International University
Tsuchiura Ibaragi Japan
e-mail: m.sekine@tius.ac.jp
Zunyi Tang
Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering
Nihon University,
Koriyama ,Fukushima, Japan
e-mail: tangzun-yi@gmail.com
Hiroshi Kobayashi
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
Nara Medical University
Kashihara, Nara, Japan
e-mail: hirokoba@naramed-u.ac.jp
Abstract—We tested a new model of healthcare that involves
monitoring physiological parameters to improve team-based
healthcare. The system consisted of unobtrusive monitoring, a
database, and interventions by health professionals. This
report discusses the core technologies used, focusing on those
involved in monitoring. An unobtrusive blood pressure (BP)
estimation system, and web-based care system, including its
database, were designed and tested. BP was estimated with a
cuffless BP monitor combined with electrocardiography and
photoplethysmography.
The
mean
difference
(MD)
of
estimated SBP and reference SBP was 0.2 ± 5.8 mmHg and the
limits of agreement ranged from -11.2 mmHg to 11.6 mmHg.
The MD of estimated DBP and reference DBP was 0.4 ± 5.7
mmHg and the limits of agreement ranged from -10.8 mmHg
to 11.6 mmHg. The estimated BP was enough accurate
compared with the cuff-based BP. The core technologies
operated well. The proposed system may prove effective for
home-based healthcare. Further studies are needed to evaluate
the entire care system.
Keywords-home
healthcare;
cuffless
blood
pressure
;
decision making system.
I.
INTRODUCTION
It is crucial that the healthcare system becomes more
effective so that it can meet the needs of the future ultra-
aged society. Hospitals can play an important role in the
prevention of diseases, but issues related to the increased
demand on medical insurance and the decrease in medical
personnel are critical challenges for an aged society. Indeed,
physicians
and
their
associates
working
in
small
communities must not only provide primary care but also
keep up with new medical technology. Long-term care
facilities have been established and home-based healthcare
services have been recommended to reduce the medical
costs associated with caring for the elderly.
In Japan, cardiovascular disease and stroke are the second
and third leading causes of mortality, respectively; these
conditions have high rates of recurrence [1]. Blood pressure
(BP) plays an important role in these conditions. Key
lifestyle changes and at-home BP monitoring may help
patients to avoid another stroke. Indeed, an occasional BP
reading at a health checkup may not be a sufficient basis for
effective treatment decisions because BP varies. The use of
home BP monitors may help those with high BP to better
understand their control over this condition; thus, this
population should be encouraged to measure and record
their BP and share their BP logs with their doctors [1][2].
Results from randomized trials have suggested home BP
telemonitoring (HBPT) as a promising tool for improving
BP control of hypertensive patients. Most studies have
found significant BP reductions in those using HBPT and
HBPT interventions. These approaches have also garnered a
high rate of acceptance, helped to improve users’ quality of
life, and reduced the costs of medical insurance. Although
HBPT can be advantageous, older patients tend to be less
technologically skilled and may require more user-friendly
home healthcare technology. Cuff-based BP monitors are
commonly used; however, it can be difficult to properly
apply these devices in terms of appropriate fitting and
identification of the correct measuring site.
Low-cost wireless monitoring has probably led to more
data-sharing between patients and clinics. In addition,
HBPT may enhance the quality of data reporting and the
ease with which the results are interpreted by doctors. A key
contributor to the successful management of BP by HBPT is
networking among healthcare providers and consultation
between doctors and pharmacists or nurses. This process
constitutes a new model of care designed to control BP
based on telephone/web services. The effectiveness of this
model has been demonstrated in several trials [3].
As
feedback
from
doctors
is
not
immediate
and
evaluation may be time-consuming and inaccurate, a new
model of care called e-BP has been proposed [4][5]. There
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

is strong evidence that BP can be controlled using a team-
based approach involving health professionals, such as
pharmacists and nurses. Indeed, the use of team-based care
has increased the proportion of individuals whose BP is
under control and has reduced both the systolic and diastolic
BP, especially when the team included pharmacists and
nurses. Implementation of this multidisciplinary approach
will require system-level organizational changes and may be
an important element of home-based medical care [6][7].
This study examined a new intervention system based on
unobtrusive monitoring. First, we developed a healthcare
scenario and core technology, mainly unobtrusive monitors,
to create a new model of care. The results of this
preliminary study will provide information for reconfiguring
the system for further research.
II.
METHOD
In this section, the propose system is desribed.
A. Proposed system
Fig. 1 shows an overview of the proposed system. The
central concept is the use of a team-based care system
consisting of three main parts: unobtrusive monitors, a rule-
based expert health management system, and interventions
by health professionals. Specifically, BP is monitored
unobtrusively by cuffless blood pressure which described
more detailed at (B); the BP data are automatically
transmitted to a server, and health status is ascertained using
a ruled-based expert system, which considers data on the
estimated BP in the morning and evening, steps walked,
weight, and other factors. The expert system automatically
generates alerts based on comparisons with predetermined
threshold
values.
When
alerts
are
issued,
a
health
professional
calls
the
client
and
conducts
a
clinical
evaluation. Based on the findings, the health professional
judges the client’s health status and decides whether a visit
from a clinician is warranted or if a caregiver should be
called. Health professionals manage both chronic conditions
and emergency situations. Clients can also monitor their
health via a browser.
Figure 1. Overview of the system. SBP: systolic blood pressure; DBP:
diastolic blood pressure; HR: heart rate; PPG: photoplethysmograph; ECG:
electrocardiograph.
B． Design of unobtrusive monitoring
The BP was measured with a cuffless BP monitor, a
system that was developed in the 2000s [8] and approved as
a standard by the Institute of Electronics and Electrical
Engineers (IEEE) in 2014 [9]. BP is related to the stiffness
of blood vessels: if the blood vessel is rigid, the velocity of
the blood is rapid, while if the blood vessel is soft, the
velocity is slow. The pulse transit velocity based on the R
wave of the electrocardiograph (ECG) and the associated
peak of the pulse wave are related to the BP. If we know the
calibrated BP, calibrated systolic blood pressure (SBPCAL),
and calibrated pulse transit time (PTTCAL) at SBPCAL, the
estimated systolic (SBPEST) and diastolic (DBPEST) blood
pressures are defined as
(1)
(2)
where γ is the peripheral resistance, and △PTT is the
difference between the obtained PTTMEAS and PTTCAL
[8][10].
The chair-based system consists of an ECG and a
photoplethysmograph (PPG). ECG electrodes are placed on
both arms of an armchair and a PPG sensor is placed on one
arm of the armchair, as shown in Fig. 2. The client gently
touches the electrodes and inserts the index finder in the
sensor box. Beat-by-beat signals are then collected to
estimate SBP and DBP using the above equations. The
algorithm for data collection is shown in Fig. 3.
The device was compared with a simultaneous recording
with a beat-by-beat BP monitor (Finometer, Finapres
Medical Systems, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) based on
the unloading method. The distribution of BP readings and
long-term data were also compared with readings using a
cuff-based BP monitor (HEM 7510C, Omron Healthcare,
Inc., Kyoto, Japan).
Figure 2. Cuffless blood pressure monitor and chair.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Figure 3. A flow chart of decision making program
The accuracy and validity of the setup were tested in ten
normal young males (age, 24.1 ± 5.4 years) who sat in the
chair while the BP was measured.
C. Database
A database was created from information obtained from
clients, including the estimated BP and heart rate. All data
were uploaded to the server, and a health professional
checked the continuity of data collection. The database
software included an expert system and verified client
participation. A health professional was encouraged to
monitor the status of clients who did not participate in this
system. At the same time, the clients checked their own
health status via the Internet.
D.Expert system
A problem-solving expert system is useful for managing
the healthcare of individuals. Home monitoring depends on
patients measuring their BP regularly, recognizing when
readings
consistently
exceeded
the
target
values,
understanding the need for the intensification of treatment,
and visiting their physician for review and appropriate
management. Therefore, we developed criteria to enable the
expert system to generate alerts when values exceeded the
predetermined values listed in Table 1. The criteria have
been made by guidance of physicians. If the client’s health
is relatively good, then a
message
saying
“fine”
is
automatically transmitted to him or her. When alerts are
generated, the alerts are sent to a health professional and not
to the client, who instead receives a message saying, “Your
data are being checked by a health professional who will
reply shortly.”
TABLE 1 ALERT CONDITIONS OF THE EXPERT SYSTEM.
.
Items
Conditions
SBP
>160 mmHg
DBP
>95 mmHg
Pulse pressure (SBP – DBP)
>50 mmHg
SBP (morning – night)
>±30 mmHg
Spontaneous SBP
>160 mmHg
Continuous SBP at successive three
days
>150 mmHg
Changes in the average SBP over 1
month
>30 mmHg
Heart rate
<40 or >120
SBP: systolic blood pressure; DBP: diastolic blood pressure
E. Intervention by health professionals
After receiving an alert, the health professional calls the
client
to
make
relevant
clinical
inquiries.
Initially,
information
is
obtained
regarding
life-threatening
conditions, such as stroke and heart failure. After collecting
physiological data and completing the medical inquiries, the
health professional decides whether to arrange for a
clinician to visit the patient or to contact the patient’s
caregivers. For our trial runs, we recruited and trained
retired register nurses to serve as the health professionals,
and the system was tested on healthy subjects.
F. Experimental set-up
Total system was operated for a healthy young male. The
subjects sat down the chair and touched the electrode on the
chair arm. The experiments were performed two months to
check the reliability of expert system as well as the
operation of intervention.
III.
RESULTS
Results show the accuracy of developed cuffless blood
pressure monitor and a preliminary result of a long term
recording for daily life.
A. Unobtrusive monitoring of BP
Fig. 4 shows the distribution of the BP values obtained
from ten subjects in different environments. The mean
difference (MD) of estimated SBP and reference SBP was
0.2 ± 5.8 mmHg and the limits of agreement ranged from -
11.2 mmHg to 11.6 mmHg. The MD of estimated DBP and
reference DBP was 0.4 ± 5.7 mmHg and the limits of
Figure 4. Bland–Altman plots of systolic blood pressure (SBP,
left) and diastolic blood pressure (DBP, right).
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

agreement ranged from -10.8 mmHg to 11.6 mmHg.
B.Database and intervention system
The database stored information on the estimated BP.
Figure 5 shows the screen display that a health professional
would see. Red indicates outside the normal BP range.
When red values were seen on the screen, the health
professional contacted the client and asked about various
medical conditions before making a decision.
Figure 5. Screen display for the health professional.
Figure 6. Example of long-term BP recordings.
The success of this intervention was tested using long-term
BP monitoring, as shown in Fig. 6.
IV.
DISCUSSION
We developed and tested a model to be used as a new
healthcare system. The novel elements of this approach are
that it involves unobtrusive monitoring and a team-based
healthcare system, which operates efficiently due to its
simplicity.
Based on our preliminary trial, the following problems
remain to be solved. In terms of unobtrusive monitoring,
further studies are required to determine how to eliminate
unreliable signals caused by motion artifacts or other
factors. Cuffless monitoring was performed according to the
IEEE standards, and measurements obtained while the client
sits in a chair are relatively reliable because they are taken at
rest. Although the error was within the standard deviation,
the interval of calibration and measurement site warrant
additional consideration to increase the accuracy of the
measurements.
Furthermore a monitoring device was battery- operated
and client safety is satisfied
The effectiveness of an expert system rests on the
development of a set of rules that produce clinically relevant
alerts that ensure client safety. The existing team-based care
depends on physiological data, such as the BP and ECG, but
the monitoring depends on the clients. Our system measures
physiological parameters without interrupting the daily lives
of the clients, and beat-by-beat information is more accurate
than spot monitoring.
The innovative aspect of this system is related to the
interventions and consultations provided by professional
nurses and medical staff. Although physicians may be too
busy to review all records, health professionals such as
registered nurses can help to diagnose patients and interpret
the BP data obtained in the morning and evening. It is also
important
to
provide
relevant
education
for
health
professionals,
including
registered
nurses,
registered
dieticians,
and
pharmacologists,
and
to
identify
the
experience
and
skills
that
should
be
required
of
professionals involved in this system.
The final goal should be cost-effective eHealth imitative
in daily home healthcare and practice [11] and we collect
data of many clients to prove the system.
V.
CONCULUSION
We proposed a team-based healthcare system. The core
technologies operated without any trouble. We obtained
long-term BP records smoothly and automated decision
making
system
worked
to
classify
either
normal
or
abnormal values. The next step will involve testing the
entire system in a home-based healthcare setting. In addition,
other
cardiovascular
parameters
such
as
ECG
and
respiratory rate should add for better description of medical
service.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We thank Mr. Hashimoto, of Proassist, Osaka, Japan, and
Dr. Watsuji and Mr. Enomoto, of Sharp for designing and
constructing the interface and database.
This work was supported partly by Grants-in-Aid from
the Regional Innovation Strategy Support Program in 2011–
2015 of the Japanese Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology; the Strategic Information and
Communications R&D Promotion Programme (SCOPE) in
2014–2016 of the Japanese Ministry of Internal Affairs and
Communication, and Health and Labour Sciences Research
Grants for Comprehensive Research on Persons with
Disabilities, Japan Agency for Medical Research and
Development (AMED), 2015-2017
REFERENCES
[1] S. Ovaisi,et al. , Stroke patients’ perceptions of home BP monitoring: a
qualitative study. Br J Gen Pract vol. 61, no.. 590, pp e604-10, 2011
[2] S. Ovaisi et al., Home BP monitoring in hypertensive stroke patients: a
prospective cohort study following a randomized controlled trail. Fam
Pract vol. 30, pp398–403, 2013
[3]
G. Pare, K.Moqadem, G. Pineau, and C. St-Hilaire, Clinical effects of
home telemonitoring in the context of diabetes, asthma, heart failure
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

and stroke: A systematic review. J Med Internet Res vol. 12, no.2, p
e21, 2010
[4]
B.B. Green, et al., Effectiveness of home BP monitoring, Web
communication, and pharmacist care on hypertension control: The e-
BP randomized controlled trail. JAMA vol. 299, no.24, pp:2857–
2867, 2008
[5]
B.B. Green, et al., Online first BP 1 year after completion of Web-
based pharmacist care. JAMA Intern Med vol. 173, no. 13, pp1250–
1252, 2013
[6]
K.K. Proia, et al., Team-based care and improved BP control: A
community guide systematic review. Am J Prevent Med vol. 47, no. 1,
pp 86–99, 2014
[7]
Community Preventive Services Task Force,Team-Based Care to
Improve BP Control, Recommendation of the Community Preventive
Services Task Force. Am J Prevent Med vol. 47, no.1, pp100–
102, 2014
[8]
C.C.Y.
Poon
and
Y.T.
Zhang,
Cuff-less
and
noninvasive
measurements of arterial BP by pulse transit time Proc. 27th Intern
Conf. IEEE-Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society Aug
(EMBC 2005) pp5877–5880, 2005
[9]
IEEE standard for Wearable, Cuffless Blood Pressure Measuring
Devices: IEEE std 1708, 2014
[10] W. Chen, T. Kobayashi, S. Ichikawa, Y. Takeuchi, and T. Togawa,
Continuous estimation of systolic BP using the pulse arrival time and
intermittent calibration. Med Biol Eng Comput vol.38, no.5, pp569–
574, 2000
[11] NJ Elbert, et al., Effectiveness and Cost-Effectiveness of eHealth
Interventions in Somatic Diseases: A Systematic Review of
Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses. J Med Internet Res 2014;
vol.. 16, no.4, pThe deivcee110.
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-527-2
HEALTHINFO 2016 : The First International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

