Serious Games for Rehabilitation: Requirements for a Collaborative Environment 
 
 
Hugo Barbosa 
Dept. of Informatics Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering 
University of Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
pro11027@fe.up.pt 
 
 
António V. Castro 
Dept. of Informatics Engineering 
Engineering School 
Polytechnic of Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
avc@isep.ipp.pt 
 
 
Eurico Carrapatoso 
Dept. of Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 
Faculty of Engineering 
University of Porto 
Porto, Portugal 
emc@fe.up.pt
 
Abstract - Healthcare is continually being improved, especially 
regarding the use of the current technologies. In the field of 
rehabilitation, the use of serious games and related 
technologies 
may 
help 
to 
develop 
new 
rehabilitation 
procedures. An example is a collaborative environment, in the 
broad sense of the word, a place where people from all areas 
can exchange information about the area under study. So, 
these possibilities create endless opportunities of use in those 
games and attract attention from other areas of knowledge. 
This contribution presents research on environments applied 
to the rehabilitation, focusing on the elderly. It provides an 
overview of the use of technological environments by health 
professionals 
who 
perform 
functions 
related 
to 
the 
rehabilitation process. For this, a questionnaire and a set of 
interviews with health professionals of the rehabilitation area 
were carried out, in order to understand the needs. The study 
intends to be a support for the future work in this area. The 
aim of this work is to study and provide a patient-adaptive 
collaborative environment with recourse to serious games in 
order to facilitate rehabilitation. 
Keywords - Serious games; rehabilitation; multidisciplinary 
approach; support technology; collaborative platform. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The proximity of the technologies with rehabilitation has 
been accentuated in recent times as a result of technological 
developments, which led to the evolution of a traditional 
approach based almost exclusively on a connection between 
therapist and patient for systems that resort to technologies 
that take on a supporting role to therapy. The assistive 
technologies, according to several studies, enable user to 
have a better quality of life as well as assist in various tasks. 
In the construction of assistive technologies in the 
rehabilitation process, it is not only necessary to know the 
physical principles that govern their designs, but also to 
adhere to some key principles that govern the applications of 
technologies for people with disabilities. To be successful, 
the needs, preferences, abilities, limitations, and even 
environment of the individual seeking the assistive 
technology must be carefully considered. There are at least 
some considerations that exist in the field of assistive 
technology. 
Although 
assistive 
devices 
can 
make 
accomplishing tasks easier, technology alone cannot mitigate 
all the difficulties that accompany a disability. Assistive 
technologies are sometimes complicated and expensive. 
Sometimes low technology devices are the most appropriate 
and even preferred for their simplicity, ease of use, 
maintenance, and low cost [1].  
As with other technologies, there has been an increased 
interest in serious games for elderly people over the last few 
years. This can be largely attributed to the worldwide 
increase in aging population. According to [2][3], the 
proportion of the world’s population aged 60 years or over is 
growing. 
This paper focuses on serious games in the rehabilitation 
area, with emphasis on the study of requirements for an 
interactive collaborative environment for rehabilitation 
activities.  
Rehabilitation, defined as "a set of measures that assist 
individuals, who experience or are likely to experience 
disability, to achieve and maintain optimum functioning in 
interaction with their environments", is instrumental in 
enabling people with limitations in functioning to remain in 
or return to their home or community, live independently, 
and participate in education, the labour market and civic life. 
Rehabilitation measures are aimed at achieving the 
following broad outcomes: prevention of the loss of 
functions, slowing the rate of loss of functions, improvement 
or restoration of functions, compensation for lost functions 
and maintenance of current functions [4]. In that sense and 
after the study of several data, such as concepts and numbers 
associated with the rehabilitation process, an opinion survey 
was conducted, with the collaboration of rehabilitation 
centers, as well as health professionals related to this area. 
To this end, a questionnaire was distributed and interviews 
were conducted with health professionals with links to the 
rehabilitation process. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 
presents an introduction to serious games in the rehabilitation 
process including terminology and concepts. Section 3 
introduces the motivation of collaborative environment. 
Section 4 presents suggestions and opinions on the 
requirements of a collaborative environment, focused in 
particular on the elderly, through the collection of data from 
a questionnaire and interviews with health professionals. 
Finally, in Section 5, conclusions are drawn and referred 
future work. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

II. 
SERIOUS GAMES IN THE REHABILITATION PROCESS  
There are several definitions for serious games, but all 
have in common the fact that such games have an explicit 
educational purpose as their priority, rather than serving just 
for fun and entertainment [5]. However, this does not mean 
that such games are not or cannot be a form of entertainment 
[6]. Serious games can be used in various fields such as 
education, medicine, in the business environment and by the 
military community. It should be noted that one cannot apply 
any given game for rehabilitation purposes. As noted in [7], 
there are games, generally called "common games", that 
could be interesting for patients, but they present small 
therapeutic potential because they generally require rapid 
responses from the users or complex movements that the 
patient cannot perform at that moment, thus making their use 
impracticable. It is therefore necessary to adapt the game to 
the limitations of the patient [8]. In [9], it is expressed the 
need to customize the experience of the treatment and to 
make the game highly adaptable, either by means of 
algorithms that will adapt the game during the session or by 
the use of predetermined settings defined by the health 
professional before the session. Although it requires more 
development time, the real-time adaptive approach with 
algorithms can provide better results in motivating the 
patient, for it would be easier to identify his difficulties and 
modify the game to make it easier to play before it can cause 
frustration; in the same way, the algorithm could gradually 
increase the difficulty, for instance, when the game is too 
easy for the patient, so that he feels challenged and does not 
get tired of the activity [10]. 
The rehabilitation provided along a continuum of care 
ranging from hospital care to rehabilitation in the community 
[11] can improve health outcomes, reduce costs by 
shortening hospital stays [12], reduce disability, and improve 
quality of life [13]. Educating people with disabilities is 
essential for developing knowledge and skills for self-help, 
care, management, and decision-making. People with 
disabilities and their families experience better health and 
functioning when they are partners in the rehabilitation [4]. 
By using serious games therapy, it is possible to provide 
real-time visual feedback, besides offering a challenge to the 
patient and strategies that can increase his motivation by 
giving meaning to the movements being performed [14]. 
Depending on the necessary equipment, these games can 
be used by the patient even in the comfort of his own home. 
But, in order to avoid a complete lack of monitoring by a 
health professional, serious games can register the patient's 
performance and/or his movements, making the data 
available for further medical follow-up [10]. There are 
several serious games projects, some of them with quite 
impressive results in the recovery of functionality, while 
others have not yet had enough time to yield conclusive 
results, but have managed to please the patients [15]. Besides 
their entertainment value, serious games can have beneficial 
therapeutic effects for elderly people that improve their 
health and well-being. 
As with other technologies, there has been an increased 
interest in serious games for elderly people over the last few 
years. This can be largely attributed to the worldwide 
increase in aging population. According to [16], the 
proportion of the world’s population aged 60 years or over 
reached 12% in 2013 and this proportion is growing. As a 
result, we will have more elderly people needing healthcare 
and support services than ever before [3]. 
III. 
COLLABORATIVE ENVIRONMENT  
With the development of information and communication 
technologies, new forms of training and knowledge transfer 
have emerged and are spreading. Knowledge is accessible 
anywhere, anytime. To access knowledge does not require 
being locked in a specific location at a specific time with a 
specific trainer [17]. 
The idea of computer supported collaborative learning 
has been investigated for the last few years. Since a few 
years, game-based approaches like video games for learning 
(Serious Games) offer new fields of application [18]. 
Collaborative environment is often defined by describing 
it as a construction of shared knowledge through activities 
with others, where the participants, patients, health 
professionals or others, are committed to or engaged in 
shared goals and problem solving. Thus, members of the 
group are not only engaged in individual activities but also in 
group interactions such knowledge sharing [19]. This 
environment offers the opportunity to create a highly social 
learning environment, characterized by participation and 
interactivity between elements, for example for both patients 
and health professionals. 
In a collaborative learning environment, knowledge is 
shared or transmitted among users as they work towards 
common rehabilitation goals, for example, a shared 
understanding of the subject at hand or a solution to a 
problem. These environments offer an opportunity to build 
social networks linking different stakeholders. This may 
allow health professionals to use a serious gaming approach 
to combine the advantages of gaming-based learning with 
collaborative environments to support the rehabilitation 
process. However, there are many design challenges that 
must be addressed in the development of collaborative 
environments for rehabilitation. 
The combination of serious games based learning 
concepts with collaborative learning may enable new 
methods. The design of such games, however, is challenging. 
The gameplay has to fulfill requirements of traditional games 
(fun, narration, immersion, graphics, sound) and serious 
games design (seamless inclusion of content, adaptation & 
personalization). Furthermore, requirements of collaborative 
environment have to be considered, like communication and 
a proper group setup [20]. 
The concept of collaborative learning is being used in 
various training scenarios today, ranging from mere group 
works over concepts like mutual teaching to collaborative 
working on complex projects. Whereas soft skills like the 
ability to work in teams and to communicate with group 
members are vital, they can be trained specifically by using 
collaborative learning principles. So, it seems promising to 
combine the concept of Serious Games with the concept of 
collaborative learning. Games, inherently offer many of the 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

features which are necessary for collaborative learning to be 
successful, like common goals, or the necessity to 
communicate with fellow users [21]. 
IV. 
REQUIREMENTS AN COLLABORATIVE ENVIRONMENT 
Making therapy sessions more fun is one of the factors 
that can contribute to patient compliance and improved 
rehabilitation outcomes. In this sense, a pleasant and focused 
environment in the area of therapy and the intended audience 
can complement the dynamics of the sessions. 
Patients are not passive receptacles but are active in their 
process of rehabilitation as they participate in discussions, 
search for information and exchange opinions. In the same 
sense, health professionals seek information and exchange 
opinions with their peers in the area of therapy techniques. 
Knowledge is co-created and shared among peers. A 
collaborative environment should be a place where health 
professionals can participate in interactive rehabilitation 
sessions with patients in different therapies, as well as with 
other health professionals from different areas where it is 
possible to share knowledge about topics of interest, so that 
they can be help in community and contribute to an 
evolution of the process of rehabilitation. 
After the study of several data, such as concepts and 
numbers associated with the rehabilitation process, a survey 
was conducted, with the collaboration of rehabilitation 
institutions and other professionals in this area of health, in 
Portugal, through a questionnaire distributed to people 
performing functions related to the rehabilitation process.  
We conducted a questionnaire centered on health 
professionals with a total of 35 participants of ages between 
22 and 46 years of both genders. At the same time, a series 
of meetings were held with health professionals in a total of 
9 interviews. In this case, it is important to point out the 
importance of these direct contacts and through electronic 
mail that allow a greater knowledge of the existing reality 
and in this way a relevant contribution to the creation of the 
environments. 
The purpose of the questionnaire is to characterize the 
type of needs currently in existence, to analyze opinions that 
health professionals, family members, patients and other 
elements related to this area. Through the study it is possible 
to check opinions and suggestions on existing applications 
and possible developments. The responses were translated 
into categories constructed based on the results obtained. 
The questions presented were related to the use of 
Multidisciplinary Collaborative Platforms for rehabilitation 
purposes. For each of the affirmations, the agreement was 
asked to evaluate the agreement from 1 to 5, where 1 
corresponds to "Strongly Disagree" and 5 to "Strongly 
Agree". If it was not known what to answer in any statement 
could indicate "I do not know". If the question does not 
apply you have been asked to check "Not applicable". 
In general, the known platforms present a pleasant and 
attractive environment for the elderly, with 57.9% with 
positive levels (3, 4 or 5), emphasizing the 11.8% of higher 
agreement (levels 4 and 5). 
They present good readability, clarity and consistency in 
an appropriate way to an elderly person, the opinion is 
shared by 42.1% of the respondents. This shows that there 
are still needs in presenting these types of environments and 
platforms for these resources. 
Regarding the navigability of the technological tools 
used, only 42.1% of the professionals interviewed affirm that 
they are intuitive, simple and efficient. Asked about this fact 
they suggested as possible improvements resources for 
environmental control, such as letter increase, color, sound 
volume, messages with vocabulary, simple and easy, to be 
understood, possibility to configure the desired level of 
difficulty, since some tools used are of general use and not 
specific for rehabilitation. 
In the opinion of these professionals, if the platforms 
used or known can arouse the attention of the elderly and 
maintain motivation throughout the use of the same, only 
36.9% agree, indicating that it is a very specific public and 
which requires differentiated attention and care. 
Only 26.3% of the participants in this questionnaire agree 
that the known environments are designed specifically for 
the elderly. However, 57.9% agree that platforms used or 
known contribute to the process of rehabilitation of the 
elderly. 
In this study, it was also possible to understand that in the 
opinion of health professionals interviewed, older people 
have little formal training on how to successfully interact or 
work with others and that the social milieu of online 
activities is quite different from in-person interactions, thus 
requiring new skills and behaviors. 
Table 1 displays the levels of agreement to the 
affirmations in the questionnaire described in this section. 
TABLE I.  
LEVELS OF AGREEMENT TO THE AFFIRMATIONS 
Questions 
 
In general, the known 
platforms present: 
1 / 2 
3/ 4 / 5 
Not know / 
Not 
applicable 
A pleasant and attractive 
environment for the elderly 
10,5% 
57,9% 
31,6% 
Present good readability, 
clarity and consistency 
26,3% 
42.1% 
31,6% 
They have intuitive, simple 
and efficient navigation 
26,3% 
42.1% 
31,6% 
They promote the attention 
and motivation of the 
elderly throughout their use 
26,2% 
36,9% 
36,9% 
Intended for the elderly 
36,9% 
26,3% 
36,8% 
They contribute to the 
process of rehabilitation of 
the elderly 
10,5% 
57,9% 
31.6% 
 
In addition to the questionnaire, we asked the participants 
to give feedback in form of critics or suggestions for 
improvement. The most frequently mentioned were: 
 
Exchange of opinions among specialists on the 
most appropriate forms and methods for the 
treatment of different pathologies (12 / 35) 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
Improvement of character control (10 / 35) 
 
Allow to adjust everything, for example, letter 
size, letter color, background color, visual 
contrast (10 / 35) 
 
Detailed information about each  icon (9 / 35) 
 
Visual information complemented with auditory 
information (9 /35) 
 
Specificities for the study population with 
games of their interest and difficulty regulation 
(8 / 35)  
 
New challenges for tools developed for this purpose, 
such as memory games, physical exercises for patients to do 
at home or in another place in a family environment, games 
that stimulate the sensitive and motor part of the patients, the 
latter ones that deserved more attention and comments. 
While collaborative environments and their resources 
offer much promise for improving therapies outcomes, it is 
necessary to understand and explore the perceptions of these 
technologies from the viewpoint of health professionals 
working in rehabilitation. Numerous factors may influence a 
professional's decision to adopt this type of intervention in 
therapeutic practice. An analysis of serious games in 
rehabilitation revealed a possible of barriers to adoption, 
including concerns about how to design effective, efficient 
and easy-to-learn systems, challenges with platform 
compatibility, immature engineering processes, ethical 
challenges, limited awareness and unrealistic expectations by 
therapists, and perceptions this use eliminates the need for 
therapists [22][23]. These concerns were also mentioned 
throughout the interviews for this study.  
Table 2 displays the concerns and favorable elements 
mentioned throughout the interviews. 
At the end of the interviews and in order to explore the 
therapists' perceptions, the author presents his ideas about 
potential technological tools in order to address their needs. 
TABLE II.  
CONCERNS AND FAVORABLE ELEMENTS  
Barriers 
Facilitators 
Increased complexity 
Motivation 
Older people have little 
formal training of online 
activities 
Different and customizable 
interactive sessions 
Platform compatibility 
New skills and behaviors 
Perceptions this use 
eliminates the need for 
therapists. 
Exchange of opinions among 
specialists 
 
To date, some research has examined these professionals' 
views and acceptance of available or rehabilitation-specific 
gaming technology as interventions [24][25]. Because heath 
professionals are instrumental in mediating patients’ use of 
technology for rehabilitation, it is pertinent to understand 
their perceptions. If their views are not understood or 
incorporated in the development of these technology-based 
interventions, use may be limited [22]. Thus, one of the 
purposes of this study were to health professionals 
perceptions of how use gaming technology in rehabilitation 
and to identify barriers to the use of these technologies in 
rehabilitation.  
According to Tatla et al. [22], therapists are the key 
stakeholders 
who 
determine 
the 
appropriateness 
of 
interventions, designing and implementing rehabilitation 
programs by combining their clinical reasoning with the 
needs and preferences of their clients. Through this process, 
they tailor interventions to meet the unique needs of each 
patient, modify the challenge and difficulty as the client’s 
abilities change, and respond flexibly to the patient's learning 
and performance needs [26]. These studies indicate the 
complexities of implementing new technologies in therapy. 
Despite reporting several challenges with serious games 
adoption, health professionals interviewed and questioned 
were open to helping shape the development of serious 
games and collaborative environments for rehabilitation. 
Moreover, as an advantage of these tools, they refer to the 
possibility of increasing adherence to exercise programs 
against traditional therapy programming. 
There is preliminary evidence to suggest positive effects 
of using a gaming environment compared to conventional 
therapy [27][28][29]. Several studies have explored the 
application of technology to promote rehabilitation outcomes 
[30][31][ 32]. 
The collaborative environment should function in such a 
way that a participant who uses it is aware of the presence of 
other participants. This puts special emphasis on how 
participants can contact each other through the use of the 
system, and how they can keep track of each other’s 
activities and comments and work. 
Rehabilitative therapy is usually very expensive and 
confined to specialized rehabilitation centers or hospitals, 
leading to slower recovery times for corresponding patients. 
Therefore, there is a high demand for the development of 
technology-based personalized solutions to guide and 
encourage patients towards performing online rehabilitation 
program that can help them live independently at home [33]. 
At the end of the interviews, a suggestion of a structure 
design for a collaborative platform of serious games applied 
to rehabilitation was presented for discussion, having as a 
concern its use in elderly people. This environment would be 
composed of several modules in order to provide a useful 
tool for its purpose. The "configuration module" of personal 
needs, such as color and size, was referred by some 
therapists as interesting and a possible starting point for 
customizing and motivating patients to their use. 
The "presentation module" contains global functions 
such as the personal area and areas of intervention. The 
"communication module" contains proximity tools such as 
email, forum and other relevant elements. It's a module made 
up of usage data. The "intervention area module" can be 
customized according to the needs of the patient and type of 
rehabilitation, cognitive or physical, with connection to the 
resources module that has adaptive tools such as serious 
games and exercises. The latter have aroused a greater 
interest in therapists because, in their opinion, they are 
possible complementary tools to the conventional treatment. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Table 3 displays a simple view to the suggestion of 
structure design for a collaborative platform of serious games 
applied to rehabilitation. 
TABLE III.  
SUGGESTION OF STRUCTURE DESIGN COLLABORATIVE 
(SIMPLE VIEW)  
Module 
Topics 
Configuration 
Personal Needs 
 Color 
 Size 
Presentation 
Global Functions 
 Personal Area 
 Areas of Intervention 
Communication 
Proximity Tools 
 Email 
 Forum 
 Others 
Data 
Data Base 
Intervention 
Cognitive Rehabilitation 
 Memory 
 
Physical Rehabilitation 
 Mobility 
Resources 
Adaptive Tools 
 Serious Games 
 Exercises 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Today's society is turning into a digital society, with the 
growing influence of the technology in our daily lives. It is 
present in so many places, sometimes without people 
realizing it, that being already frequent is considered natural. 
This society increasingly directs its attention to new 
technologies, fostering their development and reaching a 
closer approximation of knowledge, making it increasingly 
accessible to all. 
With this study we conducted an opinion survey through 
questionnaires and interviews with health professionals in 
this area, in order to verify opinions and suggestions about 
existing applications and possible developments. The 
research topic arises from the concern to understand and 
adapt the use of technologies for rehabilitation. There are 
some concerns that a collaborative environment must have to 
support the most relevant and attractive aspects of the elderly 
public. 
Future work aims to relate the rehabilitation process of 
the patient to the existing technological means and to 
investigate how that relationship can contribute to a more 
effective solution in the rehabilitation process, since there are 
a number of concerns, especially related to the patient's 
motivation, as well as enabling better communication 
throughout the process between health professionals and 
patients.  
Contributions that are using the new technologies, with 
emphasis on collaborative environments and serious games, 
aim to create added value and better understand the evolution 
of the process. Keeping healthy is another interest. We felt 
that offering technologies which would motivate exercising 
would be a big asset to the users of this group. 
The study and design of technologies continue to 
increasingly provide more specific tools. As a result, we are 
developing a prototype of a collaborative environment, using 
serious games that meet the needs, especially concerning the 
elderly, such as allowing patients to carry out the 
rehabilitation process in more familiar environments under 
the supervision of health professionals, but without the need 
to commute regularly to rehabilitation centers. The study of 
the prototype also aims to offer new contributions, such as 
multiple resources in adaptive environments, improve 
communication between patient and therapist, as well as 
being a facilitator of rehabilitation with evolution data and 
different exercises. Several studies have demonstrated that 
by offering virtual rehabilitation exercises as games, greater 
efficiency is obtained in the rehabilitation process, and the 
patients are motivated to perform the rehabilitation exercises 
and their adherence to the treatment is also greater. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Andrew, “Introduction to biomedical engineering: chapter 
5 - rehabilitation engineering and assistive technology”, 2nd 
ed., Elsevier, USA, 2011. 
[2] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, 
Population Division. World Population Ageing 2013. 
ST/ESA/SER.A/348, 2013. 
[3] H. Nguyena, et al., “Impact of Serious Games on Health and 
Well-being of Elderly: A Systematic Review”, Proceedings of 
the 50th Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, pp. 3695-3704, Waikoloa, Hawaii, 2017. 
[4] World Health Organization, “Concept paper: WHO guidelines 
on health-related rehabilitation (rehabilitation guidelines)”, 
Switzerland, 2014. 
[5] M. Minhua, A. Oikonomou and J. C. Lakhmi, “Serious games 
and entertainment applications”, Springer London, 2011. 
[6] D. R. Michael and S. Chen, Serious games: games that 
educate train and inform, Thomson Course Technology, 2006. 
[7] E. Flores, et al., “Improving patient motivation in game 
development for motor deficit rehabilitation”, ACE’08 
Proceedings of the 2008 International Conference on 
Advances, pp. 381-384, Japan, 2008. 
[8] N. Hocine, A. Gouaich, I. Loreto and L. Abrouk, “Techniques 
of adaptation in games playful and serious”, Revue 
d’Intelligence Artificielle, vol. 25 (2), pp. 253-280, France, 
2011. 
[9] N. Hocine and A. Gouaich, “Therapeutic games difficulty 
adaptation: an approach based on player’s ability and 
motivation”, 16th International Conference on Computer 
Games, pp. 257-261 Louisville, 2011. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

[10] A. Gouaich, N. Hocine, L. V. Dokkum and D. Mottet, 
“Digital-pheromone based difficulty adaptation in post-stroke 
therapeutic games”,  Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT 
International Health Informatics Symposium, pp. 5-12, 
Miami, 2012. 
[11] G. Stucki, J.D. Reinhardt and G. Grimby, “Organizing human 
functioning and rehabilitation research into distinct scientific 
fields, part II: conceptual descriptions and domains for 
research”, Journal of Rehabilitative Medicine, vol. 39 (4), pp. 
299-307, European Board of Physical and Rehabilitation 
Medicine, 2007. 
[12] A. Rauch, A. Cieza and G. Stucki, “How to apply the 
international classification of functioning disability and health 
(ICF) for rehabilitation management in clinical practice”, 
European Journal of Physical Rehabilitation Medicine, vol. 44 
(3), pp. 329-342,  2008. 
[13] E. J. Davies, “Exercise based rehabilitation for heart failure”, 
Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews, 2010. 
[14] J. Burke, M. Mcneill, et al., “Optimising engagement for 
stroke rehabilitation using serious games”, The Visual 
Computer, England, 2009. 
[15] C. Moritz, et al., “Neurogame therapy: neurogame therapy for 
improvement of movement coordination after brain injury - 
developing a wireless biosignal game therapy system”, 2011 
IEEE Global Humanitarian Technology Conference, pp. 72-
77 Seattle, 2011. 
[16] U. N. (United Nations), Department of Economic and Social 
Affairs, Population Division (2013). World Population 
Ageing 2013. 
[17] S. Cooper and M. Sahami, “Reflections on Stanford's 
MOOCs”, Communications of the ACM, vol. 56 (2), pp. 28-
30, 2013. 
[18] V. Wendel, M. Gutjahr, S. Gobel and R. Steinmetz, 
“Designing Collaborative Multiplayer Serious Games”, 
Education and Information Technologies, vol. 18, Issue 2, pp. 
287-308, Springer, June 2013.  
[19] K. 
Oksanen, 
“Serious 
Game 
Design: 
Supporting 
Collaborative 
Learning 
and 
Investigating 
Learners’ 
Experiences”, Finnish Institute for Educational Research, 
University of Jyväskylä, Finland, 2017. 
[20] C. Reuter, V. Wendel, S. Göbel and R. Steinmetz, 
“Multiplayer Adventures for Collaborative Learning With 
Serious Games”, Patrick Felicia: 6th European Conference on 
Games Based Learning, pp. 416-423, Academic Conferences 
Limited, October 2012. 
[21] V. Wendel et al., “Designing a Collaborative Serious Game 
for Team Building Using Minecraft”, Proceedings of the 7th 
European Conference on Games-Based Learning, vol. 2, 
pp.569-578, October 2013. 
[22] S. K. Tatla, et al., “Therapists’ Perceptions of Social Media 
and 
Video 
Game 
Technologies 
in 
Upper 
Limb 
Rehabilitation”, JMIR Serious Games, vol.3, Issue 1:e2, 2015.  
[23] A. Rizzo and G. J. Kim, “A SWOT Analysis of the Field of 
Virtual Reality Rehabilitation and Therapy”, Presence: 
Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 14, Issue 2, pp. 
119-146, April 2005. 
[24] S. M. N. Glegg, et al., “Factors influencing therapists' 
adoption of virtual reality for brain injury rehabilitation”, 
Cyberpsychol Behav Soc Netw, vol. 16, Issue 5, pp. 385-401, 
May 2013. 
[25] B. A. Walker, “Understanding the acceptance and use of 
virtual gaming as an intervention strategy with older adults in 
occupational therapy”, Dissertations & Theses – Gradworks, 
Indiana University, 2012. 
[26] D. E. Levac and J. Galvin, “When is virtual reality 
"therapy"?”, Arch Phys Med Rehabil, vol. 94 (4), pp.795-798, 
April 2013. 
[27] G. Saposnik and M. Levin, “Virtual reality in stroke 
rehabilitation: 
a 
meta-analysis 
and 
implications 
for 
clinicians”, Outcome Research Canada (SORCan) Working 
Group, Stroke, vol. 42 (5), pp. 1380-1386, May 2011.  
[28] K. Laver, et al., “Use of an interactive video gaming program 
compared with conventional physiotherapy for hospitalised 
older adults: a feasibility trial”, Journal Disability and 
Rehabilitation, vol. 34 (21), pp. 1802-1808, March 2012. 
[29] J. A. Gil-Gómez, R. Lloréns, M. Alcañiz and C. Colomer, 
“Effectiveness of a Wii balance board-based system (eBaViR) 
for balance rehabilitation: a pilot randomized clinical trial in 
patients 
with 
acquired 
brain 
injury”, 
Journal 
of 
NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation, vol. 8 (30), May 2011. 
[30] K. E. Laver, S. George, S. Thomas, J. E. Deutsch and M. 
Crotty, “Virtual reality for stroke rehabilitation, Cochrane 
Database Syst Rev, February 2015. 
[31] K. Lohse, N. Shirzad, A. Verster, N. Hodges and H. F. M. 
Van der Loos, “Video games and rehabilitation: using design 
principles to enhance engagement in physical therapy”, J 
Neurol Phys Ther, vol. 37 (4), pp. 166-175, December 2013. 
[32] J. H. Crosbie, et al., “Virtual reality in the rehabilitation of the 
arm after hemiplegic stroke: a randomized controlled pilot 
study”, Clinical Rehabilitation, vol. 26 (9), pp. 798-806, 
September 2012. 
[33] I. Afyouni, et al., “A therapy-driven gamification framework 
for hand rehabilitation”, User Model User-Adap Inter, vol. 27 
pp.215-265, 2017. 
[34] J. E. Brindley, C. Walti and L. M. Blaschke, “Creating 
Effective Collaborative Learning Groups in an Online 
Environment”, The International Review of Research in Open 
and Distributed Larning, vol. 10 (3), 2009.  
[35] M. J. Johnson, R. C. V. Loureiro and W. S. Harwin, 
“Collaborative tele-rehabilitation and robot-mediated therapy 
for stroke rehabilitation at home or clinic”Intel Serv Robotics, 
vol.1 pp.109-121, 2008. 
[36] H. Barbosa, H. Leal; A. C. Vieira and E. Carrapatoso, "Games 
and 
Exercises 
Applied 
to 
Rehabilitation 
Adaptable 
Environments for Mobility of Elderly People and/or People 
With Low Mobility", International Journal of Scientific and 
Engineering Research, vol.7 (10) pp.1172-1175, 2016. 
[37] H. Barbosa, A. C. Vieira and E. Carrapatoso, " Exercises and 
Serious Games Applied to the Rehabilitation for Older 
Adults", Proceedings of the Portuguese Association for 
Information Systems Conference, pp. 354-361, Guimarães, 
2017. 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

