 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Presented Ambiguous Images (Grey dots are introducing          
points to one of them.) 
Spatiotemporal Activities in Human Brain during Recognizing Ambiguous Figure 
 
Takahiro Yamanoi, 
 
Tomoko Yonemura, 
 Hisashi Toyoshima, 
Faculty of Engineering, 
Integrated Education Center, 
  
Sapporo Branch, 
Hokkai-Gakuen University, 
 
 
Meikai University, 
Japan Technical Software, 
Sapporo, Japan, 
Chiba, Japan, 
Sapporo, Japan, 
e-m ail: yamanoi@hgu.jp,   e-mail: yonemura@meikai.ac.jp,  e-mail: toyoshima@jtsnet.co.jp, 
 
Yahachiro Tsukamoto, 
Shin-ich Ohnishi 
Emeritus Professor, 
Faculty of Engineering 
Meijo University, 
Hokkai-Gakuen University 
Nagoya Japan, 
 
Sapporo, Japan 
e-mail: yytsukamoto@ac.auone-net.jp, e-mail: ohnishi@hgu.jp 
 
Abstract—To treat higher order brain dysfunction, it is neces- 
sary to identify the location of each function. In Japan, a super- 
aging society is progressing, and many dysfunctions such as cer- 
ebral infarction have occurred. The fMRI analysis is not enough 
to identify the position of dysfunction in detail. The authors had 
tried to elucidate higher order brain functions. In the paper, the 
authors have measured electroencephalograms (EEGs) from 
subjects (MK and RE) who were observing four images of 
ambiguous monochrome line pictures. The equivalent current 
dipole source localization (ECDL) method has been applied to 
those Event Related Potentials (ERPs): averaged EEGs by each 
figures and trials. The paper reports the comparison results of 
“Saxophone player and Girl’s face.” In the case of the 
Saxophone player, the process was done over a latency from 
400ms to 1000ms, however for the Girl’s face image, the 
corresponding process was completed relatively quickly and 
ended the latency around 800ms. Especially in the case of Girl’s 
face, ECDs were localized to the right and the left angular gyrus 
(AnG) around 370ms and to the right post central gyrus (PstCG) 
around 415ms, then by way of language areas, ECDs were 
localized again to the right and the left AnG around 520ms. It 
has been clarified in our previous study that activities on the 
angular gyrus (AnG) are important to discriminate the unusual 
shape of presented images. This fact is confirmed also in this 
work. 
 
Keywords-Electro-encephalogram; Electro-encephalogram; 
Equivalent Current Dipole Localization Method; Ambiguous 
Pictures; Brain Activity. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
To elucidate brain function, many instruments have been 
used nowadays, however, to detect activities in milli second 
order was nothing sufficient but using EEGs. The authors 
compare the results of an attempt to analyze EEG from two 
subjects M K and R E during recognizing an ambiguous 
image of a saxophone player and/or a girl’s face among four 
types of images. First, the authors compared each latency of 
EEGs between in cases of the saxophone player and the 
girl’s face. EEGs were averaged and summed by each 
19channel for each image and the event related potentials  
 
 
 
(ERPs) were obtained.  The authors analyzed spatiotemporal 
activities and pathways in the brain by using the equivalent 
current dipole localization (ECDL) method [1], as our 
previous EEGs experiments. To elucidate brain function, 
many instruments have been using nowadays, however, to 
detect activities in milli second order was not sufficient but 
using EEGs.  
Ambiguous figures are often used to elucidate the mecha- 
nism of perceptual alternation and attention (cf. [2]), which 
are concerned with the multi stable perceptual phenomena. 
Some of the present authors had tried an experiment by using 
the eye mark camera EMR-9 (NAC Co.), to see if imposing the 
introducing point in the figure is helpful to recognize each image. 
The insert of introducing point proved to be effective, because 
obtained results had differences in locus of each eye 
movement, however, that could not elucidate activities in the 
brain. The previous researches using fMRI to examine the 
brain information processing suggested that the activities on 
the frontal lobe [3] and the right parietal lobe [4] are largely 
involved in processing images. However, the results of eye 
mark camera were not able to point at the area. In this study, 
it is examined that the activity of the AnG can be seen where 
the previous research elucidated. In section II, procedure of 
the experiment and the analysis of EEG data are explained. 
In section III, the results of ECDL method are summarized. 
Section IV presents a discussion of the results and the future 
work. 
II. 
EEG MEARSUREMENT EXPERIMENT AND ANALYSIS 
Two subjects M. K. and R. E. are 22-year-old females and 
have normal visual acuity. They are right-handed. The sub- 
jects put on 19 active electrodes and watched the 21inch PC 
monitor screen 30 cm in front of them. Their heads were fixed 
on the table on a chin rest. 
Stimuli are simple monochrome figures of ambiguous 
picture (Figure 1). First, a fixation point was presented, then 
a stimulus was presented, both of them were during 3000ms 
(Figure 2). EEGs were measured on the multi-purpose porta- 
ble bio-amplifier recording device (Polymate AP1524, 
TEAC) by way of the electrodes and the frequency band is 
between 1.0Hz and 2000Hz. Outputs were transmitted to a 
recording PC. Each position of electrode was measured in the 
three dimensional coordinate on each experiment by the sub- 
jects. These electrode positions were used in applying ECDL 
method with MRI of the subject. 
By  use of the  equipment,  the  authors  have   measured 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

EEGs on each visual stimulus. So as to effectively execute 
the ECDL method, both data were summed and averaged ac- 
cording to each channel of EEGs, each type of figure, and each 
subject to get ERPs. Then, the ECDL method was applied to 
each ERPs. Because of the number of the recording 
electrodes was 19, theoretically, at most three ECDs could be 
estimated by use of the PC-based ECDL analysis software 
"SynaCenterPro [2]" (NEC Corpo- ration). Selected results of 
the goodness of fit (GOF) of ECDL were more than 99 %. 
Estimated EEGs were super im- posed on MRIs from the 
subject. 
The authors presented four types of monochrome images 
(Figure 1) to the subjects and measured EEGs during recog- 
nizing presented images. Among four images, the authors 
will report compared results between the saxophone player 
and the girl’s  face by  estimated latency. One  extra channel  
 
 
10μV 
 
 
 
 
-10μV 
 
 
10μV 
 
 
-10μV 
 
Figure 3 Example of ERPs (Upper: From Saxophone Player, Lower: Girl’s Face.) 
 
TABLE 1. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ESTIMATED ECD AND LATENCY IN 
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS FOR SAXIOPHONE PLAYER (SUBJECT: 
M. K.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ESTIMATED ECD AND LATENCY 
IN EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS FOR GIRL’S FACE (SUBJECT: M. K.) 
 
TABLE III. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ESTIMATED ECD AND LATENCY IN 
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS FOR SAXIOPHONE PLAYER (SUBJECT: R.E.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE IV. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN ESTIMATED ECD AND LATENCY IN 
EVENT RELATED POTENTIALS FOR GIRL’S FACE (SUBJECT: R. E.) 
 
Repeated from A to B almost 30 times 
Figure 2 Time Chart of Present Experiment (In Case of Girl’s Face) 
B: Visual Stimulus 
3000ms 
A: Presenting Fixation Point 
3000ms 
          
Brain Part 
L MFG 
L PrCG 
L ParaHip 
Latency 
336 
339 
406 
R FuG 
R PrCG 
Broca 
Wernicke 
446 
501 
586 
646 
R ITG 
R ParaHip 
R ITG 
Broca 
653 
672 
676 
687 
R ParaHip 
L AnG 
Broca 
 
771 
814 
890 
 
Brain Part 
L PrCG 
Wernicke 
R ParaHip 
Latency 
408 
417 
468 
Broca 
L AnG 
R PrCG 
L ParaHip 
473 
513 
519 
535 
Broca 
Wernicke 
R FuG 
L AnG 
560 
621 
690 
733 
Wernicke 
Broca 
L AnG 
 
737 
744 
762 
 
Brain Part 
L AnG 
R AnG 
L AnG 
Latency 
387 
388 
397 
R PstCG 
R SFG 
Broca 
L AnG 
416 
427 
433 
434 
L AnG 
R FuG 
R FuG 
R FuG 
439 
440 
455 
483 
L AnG 
R AnG 
R Hip 
 
514 
579 
587 
 
Brain Part 
L AnG 
R AnG 
R PstCG 
Latency 
362 
369 
415 
L SFG 
Wernicke 
R ParaHip 
R MFG 
424 
430 
457 
475 
R Hip 
R MFG 
R MFG 
L PrCG 
482 
489 
495 
517 
L AnG 
L AnG 
R Hip 
 
525 
527 
574 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

was used as trigger of the beginning of presentation of figure, 
and was recoded as a pulse. This pulse timing was used as a 
marking index, and summed by figure type and by 
recognizing result individually, to obtain ERPs. 
In the experiment, a gazing point was presented for 4 sec- 
onds at the center of the screen to the subjects, and this was 
used as the screen masking, after that, a visual stimulus was 
presented for 3 seconds at the center of the screen. The above 
cycle was repeated 40 times, and these were put together as 
one course, and the measurement of two courses were made 
into one set. The visual stimuli were presented at random. 
The authors applied the equivalent current dipole estima- 
tion (ECDL) method [1] as same as the previous researches. 
In general, ECDL method places ECD in the head model and 
calculates the theoretical value of electric potential distribu- 
tion on the scalp "forward problem" and optimizes the ECD 
parameter so that the error between theoretical value and 
measured value is minimized. To solve so called "inverse 
problem" analytically result in solving the defect optimization 
problem, and is solved using a numerical analysis method in 
which initial values are set at grid points. The head model was 
modeled as three layers of concentric spheres of different 
conductivity: scalp, skull and cortex. 
MRI of brain from each subject was used to set up the 
concentric sphere model of the head. In addition, the accuracy 
and reliability of the estimation results were evaluated by the 
values of Goodness of fit (GOF) and statistical confidence 
limits, respectively. The authors used PC version dipole 
estimation software (SynaCenterPro: NEC) for these 
analyses. Among the estimation results, the results with a 
GOF value of 99% or more and a 95% confidence limit of 
1mm or less were adopted. In the dipole estimation software 
SynCenterPro used by the authors, the dipole of the estimated 
result is superimposed and displayed on the subject's MRI. 
III. 
RESULTS OF ECDL ANALYSIS 
After the latency around 400 ms, the ECDs were localized 
to the right ParaHip (R ParaHip) (Figure 4), the right fusiform 
gyrus (FuG), the Broca’s area (Figure 5), the R ParaHip or Hip, 
the Broca’s area, and the right fusiform gyrus (FuG) (Tables). 
Above mentioned spatiotemporal pathway accords with so 
called the ventral pathway which is related with the primitive 
process of visual recognition. These areas are also related to 
the integrated process of visual recognition of picture and the 
recalling of word. Especially, the angular gyrus is said to in- 
tegrate information of some modalities, so there might have 
recalled a word already at this stage. On the right inferior tem- 
poral white matter, a process progresses from recognition of a 
picture to recalling of a word. 
These ventral and dorsal processes are done in series or in 
parallel. The relationship is resumed in Table II and III. More- 
over, there is a possibility that these areas are also the lan- 
guage areas because these subject’s dominant language areas 
were considered to be located in the right hemisphere from the 
precedent research. 
According to Table II, the authors found the spatiotem- 
poral pathway of the human brain activities as follows. The 
authors call a pathway A until the first activity on the Broca’s 
area and after the first activity on the Brocas’s area then again 
activity. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Presented figures are shown in Figure 1. An example of 
gray introducing point is placed on each image. Figure 3 
shows thee ERP of the subject M.K. In this result, the poten- 
tials so called as P300 and N400 could also be seen slightly. 
N400 is said to appear as a result of processing which involves 
semantic conflict. Although the presented images and their 
experimental situations are different, the authors analyzed the 
ECDs and compared the estimated latencies with the results 
from the precedent experiment on recalling of the fruit name 
[8]. It can be seen from Figure 2 that the response latency of 
the saxophone player's is slightly delayed from that of the 
girl’s face image, and the potential of saxophone shows a rel- 
atively high negative potential. 
As shown in Figure 3, P300 was faintly observed with sim- 
ilar latency. The same is true for N400. The para hippocam- 
pus (ParaHip) was estimated as the processing site at this la- 
tency. As for the whole process, in the case of the saxophone 
player, the process can be seen over a latency of 400ms to 
1000ms, but for female face images, it can be confirmed that 
the corresponding process is completed relatively quickly and 
the latency is around 800ms. 
As shown at the beginning, regarding the recognition of 
language, the path in the first half and the second half of pro- 
cessing is assumed. From this, in the subject MK, in the esti- 
mation from the ERP regarding to the saxophone player, a 
pathway obtained is: 
Figure 4 Spatiotemporal brain activity before R ParaHip. 
AnG 
AnG 
HipFuG 
PstCG 
SFG 
Broca 
Figure 5 Spatiotemporal brain activity after R ParaHip. 
AnG 
AnG 
PstCGHip 
ParaHip 
PreCG 
 
Wernicke 
MFG 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

L MFG → L PrCG → L ParaHip → R FuG → R PrCG → 
Broca → Wernicke →R ITG → R ParaHip → R ITG → 
Broca → R Hip →  L AnG → Broca , 
the processing route in the second half after L MFG was 
obtained and shown in Figure 5. 
It was relatively difficult to estimate the position due to 
the early response of the initial visual processing, 
however, result pathway, 
 L AnG → R AnG → L AnG → R Pst CG → R SFG 
→ Broca → L AnG → R FuG → L AnG → R AnG →R 
Hip  
was obtained. Furthermore, within a short latency, 
several loop responses have been observed. These results 
were shown in Figure 4 of the first half pathway and Figure 5 
of the second half. Although this result was roughly 
confirmed in the case of subject RE, it is considered that in 
addition to the comparison between the presented images, a 
detailed comparison and examination between the subjects is 
required 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTUREWORK 
From the results from previous studies on fruits and ani- 
mals [8], according to the difference between normal shapes 
(round ones) and non-normal shapes (long ones or angled 
ones), in the former case, no ECD was estimated on the right 
AnG. The presented figures in this study are ambiguous fig- 
ures, on considering these as well as the previous study, it is 
apparently not ordinary shape, so it is thought that ECD is 
estimated to R AnG. If processing in 700ms just before the 
high potential in Figure 2 was reaction from the FuG, the AnG, 
and the TE in the right hemisphere, the shape pro- cessing is 
clearly performed in that period. In particular, the right AnG 
is supposed to be the shape processing area, that has been 
clarified in the previous studies by Yamanoi et al. It is 
interesting that the ECD on this area was also estimated for the 
ambiguous figure. Furthermore, the authors would further 
investigate and clarify in more detail what role the N700 
component plays in shape processing, including the results of 
previous studies. The authors had recorded EEGs for the other 
ambiguous figures, so it will be hoped to continue analysis on 
the other cases and will compare the results each other. 
Although, the EEG experiment needs much time for prepara- 
tion and for measure, it will be necessary to increase the num- 
ber of subjects. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This research was partially supported by a grant from the 
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technol- 
ogy for the national project of the High-tech Research Center 
of Hokkai-Gakuen University ended in March 2013. And also, 
this work was partly supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant 
Number 16H02852. 
The experiment was approved by the ethical review 
board of Hokkaido University. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Yamazaki, K. Kamijo, and A. Kenmochi: “Accuracy of 
Multiple Equivalent Current Dipole Source Localization from 
EEG in Terms of Confidence Limits for Radial Distances”, 
Bio Medical Engineering，vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 336-341, 1999. 
[2] J. Brascamp, P. Sterzer, R. Blake, and T. Knapen: “Multistable 
Perception and the Role of the Frontoparietal Cortex in 
Perceptual Inference”, Annual Review of Psychology, vol.69, 
pp.77-103, 2018. 
[3] P. Sterzer and A. Kleinschmidt: “A neural basis for inference 
in perceptual ambiguity”, Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences, vol.104, pp.323-328, 2007. 
[4] R. Kanai, B. Bahrami, and G. Rees: “Human Parietal Cortex 
Structure Predicts Individual Differences in Perceptual 
Rivalry”, Current Biology, vol.20, pp.1626-1630, 2010. 
[5] T. Yamanoi, H. Toyoshima, J-L. Vercher, E. Sanchez, and M. 
Sugeno: “Dominance of recognition of words presented on 
right or left eye -Comparison of Kanji and Hiragana”, Modern 
Information Processing from Theory to Applications, pp. 407- 
416, Elsevier Science B.V., Oxford, 2006. 
[6] Y. Tanaka, T. Yamanoi, M. Otsuki, H. Toyoshima, S. Ohnishi, 
and T. Yamazaki: “Spatiotemporal Brain Activities on 
Recalling Body Names” (in Japanese), 22th Soft Science 
Workshop, pp.27-28, 2012. 
[7] H. Toyoshima, T. Yamanoi, T. Yamazaki, and S. Ohnishi: 
“Spatiotemporal Brain Activity during Hiragana Word 
Recognition Task”, Journal of Advanced Computational 
Intelligence and Intelligent Informatics, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 357- 
361, 2011. 
[8] K. Sugimoto, T. Yamanoi, H. Toyoshima, M. Otsuki, S. 
Ohnishi, and T. Yamazaki: “Spatiotemporal Human Brain 
Activities on Recalling Tetrapod and Fruit Names”, 
Engineering Research, Bullutin of Graduate School of 
Engineering, Hokkai-Gakuen University, pp. 45-50, 2017. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

