A Goal-Driven Framework for Individualised Self-Care for Early-Stage Dementia 
 
 
Jonathan Turner, Ciarán Nugent, Damon Berry, 
Dympna O’Sullivan 
Department of Computer Science 
Technological University Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
email: jonathan.turner@tudublin.ie, 
ciaran.nugent@tudublin.ie, damon.berry@tudublin.ie, 
dympna.osullivan@tudublin.ie  
Julie Doyle, Michael Wilson, Ann Marron 
NetwellCASALA 
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Dundalk, Ireland 
email: julie.doyle@dkit.ie, michael.wilson@dkit.ie, 
ann.marron@hse.ie  
 
 
Abstract— For people with early or moderate dementia, there 
are benefits to them continuing to live in their own homes for 
as long as possible, both in improved quality of life and 
associated measures such as increased social contact, increased 
physical activity and lower use of medication, and reduced 
costs and burden of care. Tools to help extend period of 
independent living, and to maintain quality of life in this 
period, are lacking. Systems exist to monitor individuals for 
problems, e.g. falls or wandering from the home, but there is 
scope for development of computerised support to help 
maintain activity in independent living. We aim to monitor 
achievement of activities, by app and by sensors, and provide 
recommendations on how to best maintain activities. 
Keywords- dementia; goal modelling; self-care; independent 
living. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Dementia is a set of symptoms that may include 
deterioration in memory and ability to focus attention, 
unpredictable behaviour and decline in the ability to perform 
routine activities of everyday living. It can be caused by a 
number of conditions, with Alzheimer’s disease being the 
most common cause of dementia [1]. Dementia symptoms 
are progressive and the disorder is incurable; Persons Living 
With Dementia (PLWD) require increasing care as their 
underlying disease progresses. Currently, it is estimated that 
about 50 million people worldwide suffer from a form of 
dementia, with this number projected to rise to more than 
131 million by 2050, reflecting aging populations around the 
world [2]. As well as the human cost of the disease, there is a 
societal financial burden, estimated to be over $1 trillion a 
year worldwide, with 80-85% due to paid social care 
services and unpaid informal family care [3]. For people with 
early or moderate dementia, there are benefits to them 
continuing to live in their own homes for as long as possible, 
both in improved quality of life and associated measures 
such as increased social contact, increased physical activity 
and lower use of medication, and reduced costs of care [4]. 
Lower physical function is associated with increased risk of 
admission to long-term care, and so it is beneficial to 
maintain physical function for as long as possible [4]. It 
should be noted that only a minority of PWLDs will move 
into a care home [5].  
The Smart Dementia Care project aims to develop a 
computerised toolkit to assist people with early-stage 
dementia to live independently in their own homes. This 
toolkit will support a PLWD and their family carer(s) in 
developing a personalised care plan, encourage each 
PLWD's compliance with their care plan, and will 
incorporate goal targets derived from care plans, existing 
models of daily activities, and activities defined by the 
individual PLWDs and their carers. The project is following 
a co-design methodology where the research team includes 
PLWDs as experts in their condition. Achievement of goals 
by a PLWD will be measured by a combination of self- (or 
carer-) reporting via an app, and automatic data collection 
from body-worn or static sensors.  The app and sensor data 
capture are under development in parallel. In this paper, we 
focus on the development of a computational goal 
framework to enable the specification of goals by PLWD and 
the capture and quantification of goal achievement data. 
 Persons with dementia should be at the centre of 
decision-making about their care including basic activities 
(e.g., feeding, dressing), advanced activities (e.g., finances, 
using transportation), and meaningful activities (e.g., social 
and recreational pastimes). However, there is limited 
involvement of people living with dementia in the design of 
technology to support their care. We describe the early 
development of a goal framework to enable personalisation 
of goals and tracking of goal achievement for persons with 
an early-stage dementing illness with the aim of promoting 
independent living at home. Goals are developed from 
existing measures of human ability and disability, from 
activities defined in care plans, and activities that individuals 
desire to maintain as pleasurable activities. We present an 
initial outline of our framework, that includes the capture of 
information pertaining to each goal in each individual’s 
personalised goal schedule, comparison of achievement with 
their personal target for included activities, and suggested 
actions to take in the case of under-achievement. The rest of 
this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the 
process of selection of activities to be monitored. Section III 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

describes the chosen activities. Section IV discusses possible 
burdens on PLWDs of this work. Section V gives 
conclusions and an akcnowlegement. 
II. 
METHOD 
We wish to encourage PLWD to achieve goals that will 
help maintain their ability to live independently in their own 
homes for as long as possible and which will help them 
retain those activities that will continue to benefit  quality of 
life for those who may move from their own home into 
residential care. 
In particular, we wish to encourage PWLDs to perform 
activities that fall into one of three groups:  
(i) Basic Activities of Daily Living (ADLs) and 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADLs). These 
activities are the most basic activities that allow individuals 
some degree of independence, which for ADLs include 
ability to bathe oneself, select clothes and dress oneself in 
the correct sequence, toileting, transfer, continence and 
feeding [6] and for IADL are the more sophisticated 
instrumental activities such as shopping, meal preparation, 
laundry and money management [7].  
(ii) Activities defined in their care plans. Care plans are 
agreed between health and care professionals, PLWD and 
their family carers. They are documents that record the care 
needs of a PLWD and their carers. Care plans may include 
information about accessing services, monitoring co-
morbidities, a named healthcare contact, and details of 
activities that the PLWD should aim to continue. The plan 
may include goals which may be related to performing 
specific activities. These care plans are relatively static, often 
paper-based and reviewed annually, not computerised or 
interactive, and so the degree of responsive personalisation 
for each PLWD is limited. 
(iii) Activities that bring pleasure or satisfaction to 
PLWD. Example sets of such pleasurable activities exist but 
it is unlikely that any one PLWD will wish to enjoy all 
activities in any one defined set, and they may have wishes 
to enjoy activities that are not in any existing sets of 
pleasurable activities. In proposing and selecting pleasurable 
activities, we take inspiration from work from such 
organisations as the NHS [8] 
In order to achieve our aims of extending the period 
spent in independent living and maintaining the quality of 
life in independent living, ADLs and IADLs will be standard 
for all PLWD, but other activities will be personalised using 
the care plans and wishes of each individual PLWD. 
Monitoring changes in goal achievement over time allows 
for a greater degree of personalisation for each PLWD. We 
reviewed the literature relating to basic activities of daily 
living, including scales used in determining the abilities and 
disabilities of PLWD and any goals for these basic activities. 
Similarly for pleasurable activities we reviewed the literature 
relating to measuring the frequency and degree of such 
activities and of related emotions. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Goal-oriented Cognitive Rehabilitation (CR) is a form of 
therapy which aims to address and manage functional 
disability and maximise social participation and engagement 
using a person-centred, goal-oriented and problem-solving 
approach [9]. It uses evidence-based rehabilitative methods 
and involves PLWDs and their carers or family members 
working together with a therapist to identify meaningful and 
personally relevant goals related to everyday activities [10]. 
Strategies are collaboratively devised and implemented; 
evaluation in terms of progress towards goal attainment is 
based 
on 
both 
participant 
and 
informant-reported 
information [9][11]. A multicentre randomized controlled 
trial by Clare et al [9] demonstrated that PLWDs were able 
to identify goals they felt were important and were motivated 
to address and attempt to attain. In addition, results from 
their trial suggest that an individualised and goal-oriented 
implementation of CR can lead to improvements in everyday 
functioning, and it can be an effective intervention for people 
with early-stage dementia. One of the fundamental strengths 
identified from Clare et al’s work was the possibility of 
transfer and generalisation, with the goals that were 
identified and worked towards being relevant and applicable 
to improved functioning in real-world situations. Moreover, 
the suggestion has been made that once delivered in a cost-
effective manner, CR could be integrated into care pathways 
with a view to developing strategies for living with dementia 
in the community [9].  
Phinney et al [12] identified four categories of goal, 
based on interviews with and observations of PLWDs: (1) 
leisure and recreation; (2) household chores; (3) social 
involvements; (4) work-related. Interview participants 
stressed the importance of being able to continue engaging in 
these activities and the willingness to employ new strategies 
to do so should this be required as the disease progresses. 
Related to this is the importance of identifying those 
activities that were valued and enjoyed before the onset of 
dementia since these are likely to be considered intrinsically 
meaningful in terms of everyday life and past experience 
[12]. 
The Goal Attainment Scale (GAS) [13] has been used to 
measure achievement of goals in dementia, but GAS itself is 
not specific for dementia and the particular goals used in any 
analysis are selected in cooperation with the PWLD. There 
are a number of scales used to measure individuals’ 
performance and disability, e.g., [14], but we found only two 
scales that were specific for PLWDs: The Pleasant Events 
Schedule for Alzheimer’s Disease (PES-AD) of Teri & 
Logsdon [15] and the Dementia Quality of Life (DEMQOL) 
questionnaire of Smith et al [16]. 
(i) Basic activities of daily living. The long-established 
ADL scale of Katz [6] and IADL scale of Lawton and Brody 
[7] measure the ability of individuals to perform basic 
activities of daily living. These scales were created to allow 
scoring of the degree of self-maintenance functions that 
individuals are able to perform for themselves, with the Katz 
scale measuring more basic functions than the Lawton-Brody 
scale. It is important for these activities to be maintained for 
as long as possible both for those with dementia and those 
without dementia, but for those with some forms of dementia 
(including Alzheimer’s), once the ability to perform an 
activity is lost, it cannot be regained. In Ireland, the Modified 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Winchester Disability Scale (MWDS) [17] dominates 
assessment of risk in the elderly. Additional to the ADL and 
IADL scales it includes mental and social activity. It should 
be noted that none of these scales are specific for PWLD. 
Example activities measured by these three scales include the 
ability to bathe oneself; ability to select clothes and dress 
oneself appropriately; the ability to make telephone calls; 
ability to shop for oneself; and mobility. 
(ii) Activities in individuals’ care plans. Formal Care 
Plans contain a variety of information useful to the PLWD 
and their family carers, and are usually drawn up in 
cooperation with health professionals. They can include such 
useful and essential information as medication and 
prescriptions 
details, 
emergency 
telephone 
numbers, 
allergies, etc. They can also include a set of activities that are 
essential and/or enjoyable to the PLWD, such as personal 
hygiene; going for a walk; preparing lunch; gardening. 
Examples of the possible content of a care plan can be found 
in [18]. Should such activities be present in a care plan they 
can be included in the toolkit.  
(iii) Enjoyable activities. The set of activities in this 
group will be tailored to each PLWD and are chosen because 
they bring pleasure to that person and/or have other benefits, 
such as the health benefits gained from an enjoyable walk, 
that can help maintain quality of life. Each PLWD, or their 
carer, will be asked to describe activities such as socialising, 
hobbies or exercising that the PLWD enjoys and wishes to 
maintain. From this list of activities, a set of activity goals 
will be agreed on and included in the individual's set of goals 
to be achieved. Additionally, a prepared set of activities, 
derived from our literature review and from co-design 
sessions attended by PLWD and their carers, will be 
presented to PLWD and their carers as prompts to ensure 
that they have not omitted any activities that they do enjoy 
but may not recall unprompted in interview. Two scales that 
measure pleasurable events or emotions in dementia were 
found: Teri and Logsdon’s PES-AD [15], a set of activities 
and events created to measure the quality of life of 
individuals with Alzheimer's Disease, and Smith et al’s 
DEMQOL [16]. Smith et al focused on recording changes in 
emotional states, whereas Teri & Logsdon focused on the 
accomplishment of actual events. Our list is based on the 
PES-AD scale. Example PES-AD activities include: Having 
friends visit; doing jigsaw puzzles; gardening; going to 
church. 
ADL, IADL and PES-AD activity sets were each drawn 
up several decades ago and some activities included, for 
example making a telephone call, need to be updated to 
allow for communication using mobile phones, email, or 
social media. Other activities may need to take into account 
restrictions due to the current COVID-19 pandemic, e.g., 
'going to church' may need to also allow for 'attending 
church services remotely'. Additional activities will be 
identified through co-design workshops attended by PLWDs 
and their family carers. 
We aim to determine goals for each of the established 
ADLs and IADLs, and to measure each PLWD’s 
achievement in reaching these goals. Further, for each 
PLWD, we take individualised goals from their care plans 
and from activities pleasurable to them, again measuring 
their achievement of these goals. Measurement of these goals 
will be either by PLWD or their family carer entering 
information directly into the toolkit interface, or by 
automated data collection by sensors. 
For each activity included, for example ‘ability to shop 
for oneself’ or ‘going to church’, a decision needs to be made 
on the appropriate metric to determine achievement of each 
goal, and how to measure achievement of the goal. We aim 
to establish baseline target goal levels based on the PLWD’s 
existing performance in order to maintain performance of 
activities and improve wellbeing. 
Existing scales of daily activities and pleasurable 
activities can be utilised to create a set of goals for 
individuals with dementia. Achievement of these goals by 
PLWDs can benefit their quality of life and help them 
maintain their ability to live independently. Achievement of 
these goals can be directly reported by PLWDs or their 
family carers via a computerised toolkit’s interface, or can be 
determined by data collected by sensors. Information 
recorded for each activity will include quantifiable 
information such as start time, end time, duration, 
achievement, comparison with goal target, and a measure of 
pleasure or satisfaction. For example, a PLWD may have had 
a daily walk starting at 10am and finishing at 10:45am, 
lasting 45 minutes, walking for 2.5 km and exceeding a 
target of 2 km. The measurable achievement score – in this 
case 45 minutes, 2 km – can be tracked over time, providing 
information to the PLWD and their carers about which areas 
of their daily life may require attention, potentially in the 
form of advice in improving achievement. 
Examples of some goals are shown in Table 1. Included 
in the table is information on each goal, illustrating how we 
intend to quantify the achievement of each goal. 
Each example in Table 1 shows a different type of goal. 
‘Preparing a meal’, an IADL, is a basic activity we wish to 
encourage the PLWD to maintain as essential for continued 
independent living. ‘Walking’ is often included in care plans 
 
TABLE 1. GOAL TARGETS AND THEIR MEASUREMENT 
 
Activity 
source: 
(I)ADL/ 
MWDS 
Care 
plan 
PLWD/ 
Carer 
Specific 
activity: 
Preparing a 
meal 
Walking 
outside 
Visiting a 
friend 
Optionality: 
Core 
Core 
Optional 
Frequency 
goal: 
Once a day 
Once a 
day 
Once a week 
Duration 
goal: 
20 minutes 
60 
minutes 
120 minutes 
Duration 
data source: 
Sensors/ 
app 
Sensor 
App 
Achievement 
goal: 
Successful 
preparation 
Walk 2.5 
km 
Visit friend 
Average 
frequency: 
5/week 
6/week 
0.8/week 
Average 
duration: 
24 minutes 
55 
minutes 
140 minutes 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
for the health benefits it brings. ‘Visiting a friend’ is a little 
different from the previous two activities, as it is included as 
being chosen by the PLWD as a pleasurable activity that 
helps maintain their quality of life. Each activity has several 
dimensions that can be quantified: duration of activity, 
frequency of activity, activity achievement (e.g., distance 
walked, completeness of meal preparation). Measurement of 
these dimensions can be recorded by sensors, by asking the 
PLWD or their family carer to enter information on goal 
achievement into an app, or by a combination of the two. 
Using this approach allows for finer granularity of 
information to be captured than the traditional paper-based 
recording of ADL performance, and allows for the 
information to be captured in real-time or near-real-time 
rather than the usually retrospective information capture 
necessitated when information is gathered by visiting 
healthcare professionals. 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In order to record achievement of activities, whether 
(I)ADLs or pleasurable activities, data on achievement of 
activities must be captured. This can be done by sensors, 
with little or no demand on the PLWD, or by active data 
entry by the PLWD. We believe that of the 13 ADL and 
IADL activities, 8 can be monitored by use of sensors (e.g. 
‘bathing’), leaving 5 that will require manual entry by the 
PLWD (e.g. ‘shopping’). The intention of the co-design 
methodology is that, by engaging with PLWDs at the app 
design stage, the app will be simple to use and be seen by 
the PLWD as a device of empowerment rather than a 
burden. By including activity reminders and goal targets it is 
intended that the app be a useful tool, and our early 
feedback from carers is that this will be the case. However, 
we await the outcome of the full co-design sessions and 
feedback on use of the developed app to confirm or 
otherwise that this is the case.  
There is some literature on behaviour change, such as 
the work of Fogg et al [19], Oinas-Kukkonon [20], Reimer 
et al [21] and Webb et al [22], which will inform our work 
on assisting PLWD to continue to maintain good 
behaviours. in particular, Fogg et al’s categorisation of new 
behaviours into ‘one-time’, ‘temporary’ or ‘permanent’. We 
take further inspiration from the transtheoretical model of 
health behavior change of Prochaska and Velicer [25], in 
particular because we are aiming at maintaining activities of 
PLWDs rather than changing them. 
Success of our system will be measured by recording 
period of independent living against existing times, rate of 
decline in performing activities, and adherence to self-
reporting of activity performance. Limitations on our work 
are the engagement of PLWDs and their carers, the 
technology challenges of tracking activities by sensors, and 
the appropriate selection of activities and activity 
achievements. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
A set of goals for PLWDs can be constructed from 
existing scales of performance and disability, including 
scales that are not specific for dementia and those that are, 
and from care plans. Additional goals can be included 
following discussion at co-design workshops and interviews 
with individual PLWD. Goal targets can be determined from 
care plans, from existing achievement levels of PLWD and 
achievement ambitions. The set of goals and goal targets can 
be used to construct a framework that will allow for 
computational models to determine goal achievement and 
suggestions to maintain or achieve goal targets. 
Future work will include developing methods of 
capturing goal achievement information with minimum 
burden to the PLWD, by using an app with a simple interface 
and/or capturing and processing data automatically from 
sensors; developing appropriate methods of prompting or 
encouraging PLWDs to achieve or repeat goals, and mapping 
relationships and dependencies between goals (for example, 
the ability to walk or drive a minimum distance, or the ability 
to use public transport, which may be necessary for the 
ability 
to perform independent 
shopping). 
A pilot 
implementation of the system in the homes of 6 PLWDs is 
planned, to include evaluation of activity achievement, and 
burden on the PLWDs and their carers. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This material is based upon works supported by the 
Science Foundation Ireland under Grant No. 19/FFP/6917. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Health Service Executive. Types of Dementia. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.understandtogether.ie/about-
dementia/what-is-dementia/types-of-dementia/ 
[retrieved: 
September, 2021] 
[2] M. Prince, A. Comas-Herrera, M. Knapp, M. Guerchet, and 
M. Karagiannidou, World Alzheimer report 2016: improving 
healthcare for people living with dementia: coverage, quality 
and costs now and in the future. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.alzint.org/u/WorldAlzheimerReport2016.pdf 
[retrieved: September, 2021] 
[3] M. Prince et al,  World Alzheimer Report 2015 - The Global 
Impact of Dementia: An analysis of prevalence, incidence, 
cost 
and 
trends. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.alzint.org/u/WorldAlzheimerReport2015.pdf 
[retrieved: September, 2021] 
[4] C. Olsen et al, “Differences in quality of life in home-
dwelling persons and nursing home residents with dementia - 
a cross-sectional study,” BMC Geriatr. 2016 Jul 11;16:137.  
[5] Department of Health. The Irish National Dementia Strategy . 
Department of Health: Dublin. [Online]. Available from:  
https://www.hse.ie/eng/about/who/healthwellbeing/healthy-
ireland/publications/irish-dementia-strategy-1-.pdf [retrieved: 
September, 2021] 
[6] S. Katz, A. B. Ford, R. W. Moskowitz, B. A. Jackson, and M. 
W. Jaffe, “Studies of illness in the aged. The Index of ADL: a 
standardized measure of biological and psychosocial 
function,” JAMA 185, pp:914-919, 1963 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

[7] M. P. Lawton and E. M. Brody, “Assessment of older people: 
Self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living,” 
The Gerontologist, 1969 9(3), pp:179-186. 
[8] NHS South East Clinical Delivery and Networks. Dementia 
Care and Support Planning Generic Toolkit. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.southeastclinicalnetworks.nhs.uk/dementia-
csplanning-toolkit/ [retrieved: September, 2021] 
[9] L. Clare  et al, “Individual goal-oriented cognitive 
rehabilitation to improve everyday functioning for people 
with early-stage dementia: A multicentre randomised 
controlled trial (the GREAT trial),” Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 
2019 May;34(5), pp: 709-721.  
[10] L. Clare, “Rehabilitation for people living with dementia: a 
practical framework of positive support,” PLoS Med. 
2017;14(3):e1002245. 
[11] L. Clare et al, “Goal-oriented cognitive rehabilitation in early-
stage dementia: study protocol for a multi-centre single-blind 
randomised controlled trial (GREAT),” Trials. 2013 May 
27;14, pp: 152-165.  
[12] A. Phinney, H. Chaudhury, and D. L. O'Connor, “Doing as 
much as I can do: the meaning of activity for people with 
dementia,” Aging Ment Health. 2007 Jul;11(4), pp: 384-93. 
[13] T. J. Kiresuk and R. E. Sherman, “Goal attainment scaling: A 
general method for evaluating comprehensive community 
mental health programs,” Community Ment Health J. 1968 
Dec;4(6), pp: 443-53.  
[14] F. Mahoney and D. Barthel, “Functional evaluation: the 
Barthel Index,” Md Med J. 1965;14, pp: 61–65.  
[15] L. Teri, and R. G. Logsdon, “Identifying pleasant activities 
for Alzheimer's disease patients: the pleasant events schedule-
AD,” Gerontologist. 1991 Feb;31(1), pp:124-7. 
[16] S. C. Smith et al, “Measurement of health-related quality of 
life for people with dementia: development of a new 
instrument (DEMQOL) and an evaluation of current 
methodology,” Health Technol Assess 2005;9(10). 
[17] I. P. Donald, "Development of a modified Winchester 
disability scale--the elderly at risk rating scale," J Epidemiol 
Community Health, 1997;51(5), pp:558-563. 
[18] Alzheimer’s Association. Daily Care Plan. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.alz.org/help-
support/caregiving/daily-care/daily-care-plan 
[retrieved: 
September, 2021] 
[19] B. Fogg and J. Hreha, “Behavior wizard: A method for 
matching target behaviors with solutions,” in: International 
Conference on Persuasive Technology, Springer, 2010, pp. 
117–131. 
[20] H. Oinas-Kukkonen, “Behavior change support systems: The 
next frontier for Web science,” In: Proceedings of the Second 
International Web Science Conference (WebSci 10), Raleigh, 
NC, US, April 26-27 2010. 
[21] U. Reimer, E. Maier and T. Ulmer, “A Self-Learning 
Application Framework for Behavioral Change Support,” In: 
C. Röcker, J. O’Donoghue, M. Ziefle, M. Helfert, W. Molloy 
(Eds.): Information and Communication Technologies for 
Ageing Well and e-Health. Second International Conference, 
ICT4AWE 2016, Revised Selected Papers. Springer, 2017, 
pp. 119-139. 
[22] T. L. Webb, J. Joseph, L. Yardley and S. Michie, “Using the 
internet to promote health behavior change: A systematic 
review and meta-analysis of the im- pact of theoretical basis, 
use of behavior change techniques, and mode of delivery on 
efficacy,” Journal of Medical Internet Research 12 (1) (2010) 
e4. 
[23] J. O. Prochaska, and W. F. Velicer, "The transtheoretical 
model of health behavior change," American Journal of 
Health Promotion, 1997;12(1), pp: 38–48. 
 
 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-916-4
HEALTHINFO 2021 : The Sixth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

