Dataset, Usability and Process - Developing an Interdisciplinary, Multi-modal Data 
Collection Tool and Platform for a Rare Disease 
 
Sinéad Impey, Jonathan Turner, Frances Gibbons, 
Anthony Bolger, Gaye Stephens, Lucy Hederman, 
Ciara O’Meara, Ferran De La Varga, John Kommala, 
Matthew Nicholson, Daniel Farrell, Emmet Morrin, 
Miriam Galvin 
ADAPT Centre  
Trinity College Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
e-mail: sinead.impey@adaptcentre.ie, 
jonathan.turner@adaptcentre.ie, 
frances.gibbons@adaptcentre.ie, 
anthony.bolger@adaptcentre.ie, gaye.stephens@tcd.ie, 
hederman@tcd.ie, ciara.omeara@adaptcentre.ie, 
ferran.delavarga@adaptcentre.ie, 
john.kommala@adaptcentre.ie, 
matthew.nicholson@adaptcentre.ie, 
daniel.farrell@adaptcentre.ie, 
emmet.morrin@adaptcentre.ie, galvinmi@tcd.ie  
 
 
Mark Heverin, Éanna Mac Domhnaill, Robert 
McFarlane, Dara Meldrum, Deirdre Murray, Orla 
Hardiman 
Academic Unit of Neurology 
Trinity College Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
e-mail: mark.heverin@tcd.ie, amacdomh@tcd.ie, 
macfarlro@tcd.ie, meldrumd@tcd.ie, dmurray1@tcd.ie, 
hardimao@tcd.ie 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—Large data sets are required to understand disease 
progression, investigate treatment options and discover 
potential cures in rare neurological conditions such as 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS). Generating large data 
sets for such rare neurological conditions requires the 
participation of multiple clinical sites. The Precision ALS 
project is a partnership between multiple clinical sites and 
industry partners across Europe that seeks to collect and 
analyse multi-modal data collected from participants with the 
disease. In this paper, we describe the development of a data 
collection tool that allows for the collection and integration of 
data collected at these multiple sites. We focus particularly on 
the requirements gathering method, which was divided into 
three pillars: Dataset, Usability and Process. The data 
collection tool runs on an Android tablet and is now in use 
enabling collection of data from across Europe for the 
Precision ALS project. 
Keywords-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; motor neurone 
disease; agile development process; requirements gathering; data 
integration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is an incurable 
progressive neurodegenerative disease responsible for up to 
10,000 deaths per year in Europe; it is the most common 
form of the motor neuron diseases [1][2]. Most (> 90%) 
cases of ALS have no known cause [3][4]; the remaining 
cases have a genetic cause [5][6]. Collaboration between 
clinicians and data scientists is required in the collection, 
curation and analysis, including by machine learning 
methods, of large multi-modal data set to understand the 
disease and its heterogeneity [7]. However, generating such 
large datasets for a rare disease like ALS can be challenging 
due to the low numbers of affected individuals. In response 
to this challenge, the Precision ALS (P-ALS) project [7][8] 
was initiated as a partnership between nine clinical sites, 
interested industry partners and technical researchers. The 
project aims to develop a data collection tool and an 
interdisciplinary data platform to gather, share and analyse 
multi-modal data. Following this introduction, the rest of this 
paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the 
methods used. Section III describes the early results from 
this work. Section IV discusses our conclusions and plans for 
future development.  The acknowledgement and references 
close the article. 
II. 
METHOD 
Development of the data collection tool was in two 
streams: requirements gathering and refinement, and 
application development and refinement. Requirements 
gathering focused on the needs of clinicians, data collectors 
and analysts; application development was the domain of the 
technical team. Refinement of requirements and of the 
developed application was dependent on effective two-way 
communication between the clinical and technical groups. 
To ensure effective communication during requirements 
gathering, visits from members of the clinical and 
development team to data collection sites took place, to meet 
with clinicians, researchers and data collectors at each site. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

A. Requirements gathering 
 
To ensure that the needs of the project stakeholders were 
met, a requirements process was developed which divided 
the requirements gathering for the data collection tool into 
three pillars as shown in Fig. 1. Pillar 1, “Dataset”, collected 
content requirements for the data collection tool, i.e., the 
fields to be collected. Pillar 2, “Usability”, focused on 
requirements for the workflow through the data collection 
tool to maximise data collection efficiency and accuracy. 
Pillar 3, “process”, investigated requirements relating to the 
flow of data into the collection tool from the various data 
sources that contribute to the final dataset. 
 
1) Pillar 1: dataset 
 
In Pillar 1 of the requirements gathering, fields to be used 
in the data collection were identified. Expert sources used for 
identification of these fields included clinicians specialising 
in ALS, data analysts, and individual partner sites who had 
been collecting data on ALS patients for some years. 
Following identification of fields needed, options within 
those fields were identified for inclusion on a paper 
worksheet. This worksheet was used as a prototype for the 
tool. For example, participants were to be questioned about 
their history of taking ALS symptomatic medications; a list 
of possible medications was included in the data collection 
tool as options from which the data collector could select 
appropriately. 
Figure 1. The three pillars of requirements gathering. 
 
2) Pillar 2: usability 
 
The data collection tool is intended to be used in a variety 
of settings, including face-to-face with participants and/or 
their carer(s), in telephone interviews, or for data entry from 
existing records. In each scenario, the tool must be usable 
efficiently and accurately by the data collector. With no 
existing data collection process in place, usability of the tool 
was focused on clear presentation of data items and ease of 
data entry.  
Representatives from each site, who were planning to use 
the tool for data collection, were given a complete 
walkthrough of the collection tool, at a single meeting 
involving all data collection sites. Users then had the 
opportunity to explore the tool independently, with members 
of the development team available to answer any questions 
and 
to 
capture 
verbal 
feedback. 
Following 
this 
familiarization process, a user survey was completed by each 
site member, 13 users in total, using version 3 of the Post-
Study System Usability Questionnaire (PSSUQ) [9]. It is 
intended that the tool will be further refined over the period 
of its development and use, with changes in usability 
measurabl-e by repeat use of the questionnaire. Results of the 
baseline PSSUQ are shown in Table 1. Possible scores range 
from 1 (best) to 7 (worst). 
 
TABLE I. RESULTS OF THE BASELINE PSSUQ. 
 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

3) Pillar 3: process 
 
The process pillar is concerned with understanding the 
current processes and associated actors, both human and 
technological involved in data collection. The purpose of this 
is to gain an understanding of how the proposed technology 
may impact the current processes or where changes are 
likely. This pillar ensures that the data collection process 
required by the tool does not impose inefficient or 
impractical working practices on the data collection sites. 
Existing data collection processes at data collection sites 
were examined for roles of actors involved in the collection 
process, in particular: the role of data collectors; registration 
of participants; clinical coding systems used; information 
systems used; and remote monitoring of participants. The 
collected data is personal and sensitive, and each collection 
site was required to follow their local processes for ethics 
approval, data protection impact assessment and to sign a 
data transfer agreement. It was for each site to ensure that 
they comply with their local data protection laws. Oversight 
of these processes was coordinated at the top level of the 
project via a team that included data protection experts. 
The three pillars, although discussed separately, in 
practice were reviewed together. To do this, two project 
researchers visited each site. This allowed the researchers to 
discuss and compare findings. Each site was encouraged to 
include as many stakeholders as they wished in these visits, 
but it was imperative that the data collectors were available. 
Initial discussion focused on the data collection process 
proposed by the site which included location of such data as 
medical records, current studies or discipline-specific 
databases.  
To understand the variables contained in the worksheet 
and the interface design, the data collector was asked to take 
part in a mock interview. For this interview, one researcher 
acted as the participant and the other researcher took notes. 
The data collector at the study site used the collection tool to 
capture participant responses and was encouraged to discuss 
their thoughts on the interpretation of the question, what 
type of answer they might expect and how the response 
could best be captured in the tool.  
Information gathered during the site visits was discussed 
between the researchers post interview and recorded. These 
were brought to the wider project group for a decision or 
further discussion. It is expected that some of these findings 
could be incorporated into standard operating procedures. 
. 
B. Application development 
 
Development of the data collection tool was carried out in-
house in the ADAPT Centre [10], with the development 
team based at Trinity College Dublin. This team met 
regularly with clinicians and data analysts to ensure that the 
developed tool met their needs. 
A tablet-based application approach was chosen to ensure 
portability and to enable operation without a working 
internet connection. It was decided that dedicated devices 
would be provided to the sites for data collection, which 
would be managed remotely This application is deployed 
via a mobile device management solution to minimise 
security and device management concerns. Using Android 
with Mobile Device Management software provides the 
mechanism to distribute private apps and client certificates, 
and allows for restricted and secure access to the server. 
Android provides a more open and accessible development 
platform than Apple and iOS, which does not provide a 
distribution mechanism for the small scale required. The 
application was developed by the in-house team using the 
Kotlin programming language [11] in Android Studio [12]. 
The data collection form structure is configured using a 
metadata driven approach, allowing easy updates without 
the need to modify the application code itself. Development 
followed a lightweight Agile [13] approach with regular 
prototype releases to project stakeholders. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Use of the three pillars for requirements gathering was 
successful. From Pillar 1, dataset, an agreed data set was 
identified. Pillar 2, usability, identified functions to improve 
engagement; results of the user survey are shown in Table 1. 
Pillar 3, process, identified the people and systems currently 
used at data collection sites and how these actors could be 
replicated in the collection tool. A sample data collection 
page is shown in Fig. 2. This also lists, on the left, the full set 
of pages available in the collection tool. The data collection 
tool contains 15 pages, each focusing on a particular division 
of data to be collected, for example ‘Smoking and Alcohol’ 
use, or ‘Socio-Economic Details’. This allows for some 
pages to be skipped when not appropriate, e.g., during a 
repeat data collection encounter when the focus of the data 
collector is on fields that may have changed since the last 
encounter, such as clinical progression or resource use.  
The developed version of the data collection tool was 
first used in a clinical setting in August 2023, at one site. 
Further sites started data collection in September 2023. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
A set of requirements for the development of a data 
collection tool can be constructed from the requirements of 
different groups of interested parties (clinicians, analysts, 
industry partners), with the success of the developed tool  
dependent on regular communication between these parties 
and the technical development team. The tool can 
incorporate requirements from existing data collection 
practices at individual partner sites and new requirements 
elicited as part of the requirements gathering process. 
Future work has three main strands. Development and 
refinement of the data collection tool will continue, with the 
knowledge and feedback gained from its use in the field 
informing this. Following the successful collection of data   
from 
participants 
in 
the 
P-ALS 
research 
project, 
development of the data platform infrastructure will 
commence using a similar development process, i.e., 
requirements gathering from clinicians, researchers, data 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Figure 2. An example page from the data collection tool. 
 
development team of the data platform structure required. 
Data platform infrastructure development will include 
ensuring that data from multiple modalities, e.g., medical 
imaging, wearable devices, can be imported into the platform 
and made available for analysis. Development of the 
platform will be described in future -publications. Finally, 
once data of sufficient quantity and quality is available, 
analyses can be performed on the data. Work is underway to 
ensure that academic analysts and industry partners have the 
opportunity at an early stage to describe questions that they 
may wish to answer, to ensure that the data platform enables 
the ability to answer these questions. These questions include 
the costs of the disease, both to society and to families; if 
incidence of ALS is higher for particular occupations; and 
whether time to disease progression events can be predicted 
from early information on an individual. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is funded by the Science Foundation Ireland 
grant SP20/SP/8953. OH’s work is also funded from grants 
16/RC/3948 and 13/RC/2106_P2. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Ryan, M. Heverin, M. A. Doherty, N. Davis, E. M. Corr, 
et al. “Determining the incidence of familiality in ALS: a 
study of temporal trends in Ireland from 1994 to 2016,” 
Neurology Genetics. 2018;4:e239. 
[2] C. A. Johnston, B. R. Stanton, M. R. Turner, R. Gray, A. H. 
Blunt, et al. “Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in an urban 
setting: a population-based study of inner city London”. 
Journal of Neurology. 2006;253:1642–3. 
[3] National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) Fact Sheet. [Online]. 
Available from: www.ninds.nih.gov [Accessed 2023.08.21]  
[4] ALS Association. Understanding ALS. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.als.org/understanding-als 
[Accessed 
2023.08.21] 
[5] S.A Goutman, O. Hardiman, A. Al-Chalabi, A. Chió, M. G. 
Savelieff, et al. "Recent advances in the diagnosis and 
prognosis of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis". The Lancet. 
Neurology. 21 (5): 480–493, May 2022, doi:10.1016/S1474-
4422(21)00465-8. PMC 9513753. PMID 35334233 
[6] MedlinePlus. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. [Online]. 
Available from: 
https://medlineplus.gov/genetics/condition/amyotrophic-
lateral-sclerosis [Accessed 2023.08.21] 
[7] R. McFarlane, M. Galvin, M. Heverin, É. Mac Domhnaill, D. 
Murray, et al, “PRECISION ALS—an integrated pan 
European patient data platform for ALS,” Amyotrophic 
Lateral Sclerosis and Frontotemporal Degeneration. 2023. 
24:5-6, 389-393, DOI: 10.1080/21678421.2023.2215838 
[8] Precision ALS. Precision ALS. [Online]. Available from: 
www.precisionals.ie [Accessed 2023.08.21] 
[9] J. 
R. 
Lewis. 
“IBM 
computer 
usability 
satisfaction 
questionnaires: Psychometric evaluation and instructions for 
use”. International Journal of Human–Computer Interaction. 
1995. 7:1, 57-78, DOI: 10.1080/10447319509526110 
[10] Adapt Research Centre. ADAPT: The Global Centre of 
Excellence for Digital Content and Media Innovation. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from 
https://www.adaptcentre.ie/ 
[Accessed 2023.08.31] 
[11] JetBrains. 
Kotlin. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://kotlinlang.org/ [Accessed 2023.08.21] 
[12] Google LLC. Android Studio. [Online]. Available from: 
https://developer.android.com/studio [Accessed 2023.08.21] 
[13] Agile Alliance. What is Agile? [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.agilealliance.org/agile101 [Accessed 2023.08.21] 
 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

