Building a Patient-Centered Blockchain Ecosystem for Caregivers: Diabetes Type II 
Case Study 
Shada Alsalamah1, Ghada Alsuwailem1, Fatima Alrajeh1, Samar Aharbi1, Salmah AlQahtani1, Razan 
AlArifi1, Shaden AlShargi1, and Shaikha AlOthman2. 
1 Information Systems Department, College of Computer and Information Sciences, King Saud University, Riyadh, 
KSA. e-mail: saalsalamah@ksu.edu.sa.  
2 MIT I-Corps, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, MA, USA.  
 
Abstract— Diabetes is one of the fastest-growing health 
problems in the world, and is now reaching epidemic 
proportions in some countries. With the globally increasing 
numbers of diabetic patients and their need for professional 
care, it is difficult and time-consuming to share patient-care 
information among caregivers in a traditional way, which adds 
financial and psychological burden on home caregivers. Recent 
developments in advanced technologies and mobile health 
(mHealth) applications fail to equip them with the right 
ecosystem for patient-centered information sharing to allow for 
informed care decisions. Therefore, motivated by the need for 
home caregivers’ empowerment to cope with the pressure, this 
paper studies the requirements for building an effective 
communication channel among caregivers and between them 
and their patients, and presents the potential benefits of 
mHealth applications and blockchain technology in achieving 
such requirements using a case study in Diabetes Type II 
patients in Saudi Arabia. Using interviews and questionnaires, 
this paper shows that there is the need for an ecosystem that 
supports diverse caregiving groups with multiple languages, 
distributes tasks between more than one caregiver to alleviate 
the burden on one caregiver, provides a treatment plan 
provision by a specialized care team to be viewed and followed 
by caregivers and patients, and alerts everyone in case of an 
emergency. Such requirements can be incorporated into an 
mHealth solution that builds a transparent blockchain-based 
patient-centered caregiving ecosystem. 
Keywords-Blockchain 
Technology; 
Diabetes 
Type 
II; 
mHealth; Patient-Centered care, Home caregiving. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
A caregiver, whether paid or unpaid, as a member of a 
person’s social network helps patients with their daily-life 
activities [1]. Caregiving is most commonly used to address 
impairments related to people who are aging and/or with 
disabilities, diseases, conditions, injuries, or mental disorders. 
Supporting caregivers is one of the most important issues that 
has been neglected around the world while there is a growing 
demand for their help. According to recently published data, 
25% of global population will be over 65 years old in the next 
5 to 7 years [2]. Furthermore, there are no hospitals or nursing 
homes that can accommodate this huge and increasing number 
of patients. There are many difficulties related to 
communication between caregivers themselves and the 
caregivers within the care team regarding the accurate 
timestamped order in which to share informed decisions 
regarding the diabetic patient. Moreover, the care team faces 
many difficulties in order to manage and control the large 
number of patients. On the other hand, the patients themselves 
face a lot of difficulties, such as waiting times, and needing to 
see more than one doctor on the same day in order to receive 
the full treatment. Therefore, when they have disabilities, this 
process becomes very stressful for them. This project sheds 
light on diabetic patients of Type II, which occurs in patients 
over 40 years old and it is the most prevalent type of diabetes 
in Saudi Arabia [3]. The reason for selecting this type of 
category is the increasing number of diabetic patients in Saudi 
Arabia, which, according to previously published data, shows 
that 25% of Saudis are suffering from diabetes; this means that 
4 million diabetic patients require 5.5 million consultations 
and follow-up visits each year [4]. Therefore, these numbers 
motivate us to do this project to help those people. Also, based 
on the interviews we conducted with diabetic patients [5] and 
diabetes caregivers [6], it is clear that there is a lack of Arabic 
speaking platforms that facilitate the caregiver’s connectivity 
with diabetic patients.  
A. Diabetes Statistics Globally Vs. Saudi Arabia 
Diabetes is one of the fastest-growing health problems in 
the world and is now reaching epidemic proportions in some 
countries. It is mainly as a consequence of life-style behaviors, 
such as lack of exercise, unhealthy diet, obesity and being 
overweight. Over the past four decades, major changes have 
occurred in Saudi Arabia. Growth, prosperity and modern 
technology have brought pronounced changes in the lifestyle 
of people. In particular, eating habits are less healthy and the 
level of physical activity has declined. According to the 
International Diabetes Federation (IDS) 2019 report [7], there 
are currently 463 million people worldwide living with 
diabetes, and this is estimated to rise to 700 million by 2045. 
Additionally, the report reveals evidence that in 2019 the 
number of deaths resulting from diabetes and its 
complications is estimated to be 4.2 million, and health 
expenditure on diabetes has reached at least USD 750 billion, 
which represents 10% of total spending on adults [7].  
Moreover, according to the IDS report, Saudi Arabia is 
ranked 9th in the top 10 countries with an estimated 2.5 
thousand incidents (new cases) of Type I in children and 
adolescents in the age group 0-14 [7], while it is ranked 5th 
among the top 10 countries in terms of incidence rates (per 
100,000 population per year) after Finland, Sweden, Kuwait, 
and Norway [7]. Therefore, Saudi Arabia is among the top 10 
countries in the world with the highest prevalence of diabetes 
[7]. In Saudi Arabia, the national healthcare burden resulting 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

from diabetes is likely to exceed $0.87 billion [8], but this 
neglects the indirect costs associated with diabetes, such as 
absenteeism, loss of productivity from disease-related 
complications, unemployment due to disability and early 
mortality due to disease [8]. On the other hand, the social 
costs, such as pain and suffering and care provided by 
caregivers, as well as healthcare system administrative costs, 
cost of medications, clinician training programs, and research 
and infrastructure development are also omitted from this 
research study. Further studies are needed to confirm the 
present findings and to improve our understanding of the 
economic costs of diabetes and its related complications [8]. 
Diabetes should be treated under close collaboration between 
patients and caregivers in order to prevent long-term 
complications, and diabetics must have ongoing and accurate 
daily care to avoid early death. 
B. Caregiving Ecosystem  
In caregiving, some patients require modern homecare, 
which provides the patient with the correct and complete care. 
They are licensed, professional caregivers who devote all of 
their time attending to all of the patient’s care needs [9]. 
mHealth is a general term for the use of mobile phones and 
other wireless technology in medical care [10]. It is also one 
of the most common applications for disease surveillance, 
treatment support, epidemic outbreak tracking and chronic 
disease management [10]. The scope of the patient-centered 
caregiving ecosystem for diabetic patients includes four 
aspects: diet monitored by a dietitian, physical training 
provided by a physical trainer, treatment plan implemented by 
a care team, and glucose level measured by the patient. Each 
and every aspect is managed by a specialist who collectively 
needs to collaborate for the implementation of patient-centric 
home caregiving. These aspects present the basic needs in 
diabetes caregiving ecosystems as illustrated in Figure 1 
below.  
 
Figure 1.  
Diabetes Caregiving Ecosystem  
This paper aims to, first, study the requirements for 
building an effective communication channel among 
caregivers as well as between caregivers and their patients. 
Second, the paper presents the potential benefits of mHealth 
applications and blockchain technology in achieving such 
requirements using a case study in Diabetes Type II patients 
in Saudi Arabia. The remainder of this paper is organized as 
follows. Section II presents a review of the literature of all 
related work supporting home caregivers, while the 
methodology is explained in Section III. Section IV presents 
an analysis of the results, and Section V provides an overview 
of the proposed system design. The conclusions close the 
article in Section VI.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Although there are some applications available in the 
literature to support home caregivers, they have some 
limitations that mean that the key challenges cannot be 
addressed. Thermo [11] application helps take care of the 
family’s health but it does not support diabetic patients. 
Furthermore, it is designed for management and maintains 
the record changes in temperature readings, displaying this in 
a timeline. However, it is only available in English, and does 
not provide services for Arabic-speaking caregivers. Caring 
[12] is designed for adding a person and making changes, 
adding notes and also sending reminders. This supports 
caregivers to connect, but there is a lack of necessary aspects 
relevant for a diabetic patient, such as setting an appropriate 
treatment plan for a diabetic patient and measuring blood 
sugar. Medisafe [13] solution could help in terms of 
remembering to take medication and it can select the shape 
and color of the pill for those who may not be able to read 
and it is also possible to invite a friend, but it is not permitted 
to add a caregiver. The mHealth application  ﺳـﻜﺮي [14] (i.e., 
Diabetes) is perfect to track blood sugar levels, meals and 
sports activities. It uses a medical doctor to monitor the 
patient’s state remotely. However, it does not support home-
caregivers and it is only available in the Arabic language. 
Carely [15] solution is a network connection between 
caregivers to share changes in caregiving and coordinate the 
responsibilities. However, it does not include important 
features, such as measuring blood sugar or sending an S.O.S 
alarm. Also, it is only available in the English language. 
Saleem [16] mHealth solution is mainly designed to connect 
patients with their medical doctors who can use it at their 
clinic to monitor vital signs remotely without the patient 
having to come to the clinic for each visit. It reduces the 
waiting time and therefore optimizes the hospital’s resources. 
However, it does not connect home caregivers. Fitbit [17] 
solution is an American company that has products for 
activity tracking. It uses wireless and wearable devices such 
as watches, and it can measure data, such as the number of 
steps walked, heart rate, quality of sleep and steps climbed. 
This, however, does not measure sugar levels, support 
caregivers, or cater to Arabic language speakers. The above 
applications reviewed fall short of providing caregiving 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

requirements for diabetic patients in Saudi Arabia. For 
instance, when care is provided to the patient, the doctor must 
establish the treatment plans for the patient, while caregivers 
must confirm that the patient is following this treatment plan. 
According to the survey, the need for the measurement of 
blood sugar for the patient is the most important function. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
Using a pragmatic approach, this project implements a 
mixture of quantitative and qualitative methods.  Initially, 
semi-structured interviews were conducted for primary data 
collection in order to identify challenges. Two interviews 
were conducted, the first with a consultant family physician 
[3] at the Ministry of Defense’s Medical Services Directorate 
Medical Administration-MSD. The aim of this interview was 
to clarify the difference between the three different types of 
diabetes. The second interview was with a diabetes Type II 
patient [5] and his caregiver [6], who is also his wife. The aim 
of the interview was to clarify some points raised while 
analyzing the requirements. The question lists for each 
targeted interviewee are listed in Table 1 below.  
TABLE I: INTERVIEWS WITH TARGETED 
INTERVIEWEE AND QUESTION LISTS. 
Targeted 
Interviewees 
Question Lists 
Patients  
• Age: 
• Gender: 
• Type of diabetes: 
• Who are your caregivers? 
• Caregiver’s age: 
• Caregiver’s gender: 
• How difficult is maintaining your care? 
• Have you ever visited a doctor in an 
emergency situation? 
• If yes, can you explain your experience? 
• Have you ever forgotten to write down your 
blood glucose measurements and show 
them to your doctor? 
• "I often forget to take medicine on time." 
Do you agree with this sentence? 
• Do you agree to have more than one 
caregiver to obtain good care continuity? 
• Do you agree with the idea of gathering 
your caregivers via a system to provide 
good care continuity for you? 
• Do you prefer to have a daily blood glucose 
measurements recorder? 
• What are the diseases associated with 
diabetes in your opinion? 
• What is your favorite application? 
• May you talk about the beginning of your 
disease? 
• What 
was 
frustrating 
about 
that 
experience? 
Caregivers  
• Age: 
• Gender: 
• What is the type of patient diabetes? 
• Who is the patient who is being cared for? 
• Patient's age: 
• Patient’s gender: 
• How difficult is maintaining your patient's 
care? 
• Have you ever had an emergency where 
you needed assistance on the spot? 
• If yes, can you describe that experience? 
• Have you ever thought about changing the 
way you help? 
• If yes, can you describe that experience? 
• Have you ever forgotten to write down the 
blood glucose measurements of your 
patient and show them to a doctor? 
• I often forget to give medicine to my patient 
on time." Do you agree with this sentence? 
• Do you agree to get help from other 
caregivers in order to provide good care 
continuity? 
• Do you agree that the idea of combining all 
caregivers in one system will save time and 
effort for communication? 
• What are the diseases associated with 
diabetes in your opinion? 
• What is your favorite application? 
• Can you talk about the beginning of your 
experience in caregiving? 
• What 
was 
frustrating 
about 
that 
experience? 
Furthermore, a questionnaire was designed to gather 
additional primary information regarding the proposed 
solution. The questionnaire targets caregivers and patients to 
reflect the opinion of a larger community of caregivers and 
patients for quantitative analysis. It was created using Google 
forms and classified into two categories, patient and 
caregiver. The patient’s questionnaire has 15 questions and 
the first 6 questions provide an overview about the patient 
and his/her caregiver. The questions are diverse, consisting 
of multiple-choice questions, linear scale questions, true/false 
questions and open questions. Meanwhile, the caregiver 
category consists of 15 questions, and there were also Likert-
type scale questions. Both questionnaires were distributed 
through social media and texting platforms, such as 
WhatsApp and Twitter.  
IV. 
SYSTEM ANALYSIS RESULTS 
This section presents all of the results and findings as 
follows. 
A. Qualitative Results 
Results from the interviews show that each of the three 
types of diabetes has different causes and care needs. 
Diabetes Type I patients are normally diagnosed from an 
early age due to different factors, such as hereditary and 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

endocrine diseases. Type II, which is the most prevalent, 
usually occurs after the age of 40 [3], while Type III is related 
to pregnancy diabetes. Furthermore, the care team in general 
face many difficulties in tracking the blood glucose test for 
patients, since most of the patients have more than one 
caregiver and there may be a lack of communication, which 
might cause difficulties when the doctor needs to know when 
the last time the blood test was high or low in a timely manner 
in order to decide on the appropriate treatment plan. 
Regarding the information the care team needs to check 
before deciding the treatment plan, the team normally needs 
to have the overall assessment for patients, such as job, 
residence, sports, name, weight and height. Moreover, they 
need to keep track of medical records for the patient as well 
as the history related to the patient’s family, such as allergies, 
social needs and medication. There are some emergencies 
that require immediate medical intervention for diabetic 
patients, and it is centered around two important aspects: the 
patient’s blood sugar drops, causing unconsciousness or 
blood sugar rises which causes the patient to be very stressed 
and might cause problems in vision. Therefore, there is a 
frequent need to change the treatment plan depending on the 
changes in current medical conditions and the patient’s diet, 
injections, medicine and sport activities. Finally, results 
reveal the need to improve communication between care 
team members and between the patient and the care team in 
the future.  
In regards to the patient’s needs, results reveal the 
patient’s difficulties in remembering treatment times and 
coordinating between medicines and food. Moreover, 
patients require continuous follow-up with a diet that is 
suitable with the health status. Also, the patient must visit the 
doctor periodically every three months in order for certain 
medical examinations to be conducted, such as “Dilated” eye 
exam, blood pressure and kidney function tests. In addition, 
diabetic patients require observation and care continuity by 
at least one caregiver. This includes measuring blood sugar, 
type of food and the provision of psychological comfort. 
Finally, findings show that the most important needs of both 
patients and caregivers, are mainly related to recording 
changes, confirming treatments and maintaining contact with 
the care team.  
B. Quantitative Results 
The total number of questionnaire responses was 68 
patients and 97 caregivers. Results show that 60.3% of 
patients were Type II, while 38.2% of the cases were Type I. 
Therefore, this study decided to target Type II. Furthermore, 
70.1% of patients want to have a daily blood glucose 
measurements recorder, while only 28.4% expressed they did 
not want that. This indicates that there is a need for a 
measurements’ 
recorder. 
Regarding 
the 
caregiver’s 
communication, 44.3 % strongly agree on the need for one 
platform to connect all caregivers, while 17.5% neither agree 
nor disagree, and only 9.3% disagree. This represents the 
need to address the aim of this study. Furthermore, results 
show that, firstly, there are interruptions in continuity of care. 
This is because of communication challenges within the 
caring ecosystem. This indicates the need to optimise 
patients’ quality of life in delivering the required care. 
Secondly, some caregivers needed to provide emergency 
assistance on the spot, and some stated that they were unable 
to provide such help due to unpreparedness, for example the 
lack of knowledge of first aid instructions. This highlights the 
need for an S.O.S alarm and some guidance when an 
emergency occurs.  
C. System Requirements  
The results above identify the fundamental system design 
requirements for building an ecosystem that coordinates tasks 
between all caregivers through the mHealth solution, rather 
than keeping the pressure on one caregiver. Furthermore, the 
proposed solution is a patient-centered one that involves the 
patient as a caregiver to engage in the decision-making 
process, increasing their satisfaction and ultimately 
improving health outcomes. The proposed system has three 
users: Care Team Member, Caregiver, and Patient. The 
functional requirements for each user are further explained 
below.  
1. Caregiver  
1. A Caregiver shall be able to register onto the system.  
2. A Caregiver shall be able to log in to the system.  
3. A Caregiver shall be able to view the patient's 
demographic information (caregiving history, work 
location and home location).  
4. A Caregiver shall be able to view a treatment plan.  
5. A Caregiver shall be able to create reminders to 
inform him/her when the time of treatment is.  
6. A Caregiver shall be able to record care changes 
about patient status.  
7. A Caregiver shall be able to add comments about the 
changes in the care timeline.  
8. A Caregiver shall receive an alarm to inform 
him/her of the time of treatment or patient's 
appointments.  
9. A Caregiver shall be able to confirm treatment.  
10. A Caregiver shall receive a notification to inform 
him/her that the treatment is confirmed from another 
caregiver/patient (or a Caregiver shall be able to 
view the confirmed treatment).  
11. A Caregiver shall be able to send an S.O.S alarm.  
12. A Caregiver shall receive an S.O.S alarm.  
13. A Caregiver shall be able to record measurements of 
blood sugar.  
14. A Caregiver shall be able to record care timeline.  
15. A Caregiver shall be able to view care timeline 
history.  
2. Patient  
1. A Patient shall be able to register onto the system.  
2. A Patient shall be able to log in to the system.  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

3. A Patient shall be able to view the demographic 
information (personal information, caregiving 
history, work location and home location).  
4. A Patient shall be able to add a new caregiver.  
5. A Patient shall be able to view a treatment plan.  
6. A Patient shall be able to create reminders to inform 
him/her of the time of treatment.  
7. A Patient shall be able to record care changes about 
his/her status.  
8. A Patient shall be able to add comments about 
changes in the care timeline.  
9. A Patient shall receive an alarm to inform him/her 
of the time of treatment or appointments.  
10. A Patient shall be able to confirm treatment.  
11. A Patient shall be able to send an S.O.S alarm.  
12. A Patient shall be able to record measurements of 
blood sugar.  
13. A Caregiver shall be able to record care timeline.  
14. A Patient shall be able to view care timeline history.  
3. Care Team Member 
1. A Patient shall be able to register onto the system.  
2. A Patient shall be able to log in to the system.  
3. A Care Team member shall be able to view the 
patient's demographic information (caregiving 
history, work location and home location).  
4. A Care Team member shall be able to add a 
treatment plan.  
5. A Care Team member shall receive an alarm when 
an emergency occurs to the patient.  
6. A Care Team member should be able to view current 
location when an SOS alarm is pressed.  
4. System  
1. The System shall be able to send an alarm to inform 
all caregivers of the time of treatment.  
2. The System shall be able to send notification after 
recording a change in care.  
D. Blockchain-Based Distributed Medical Record  
Interoperability of healthcare systems for data exchange 
has been a global issue for decades. This has been 
traditionally addressed using interoperability standardization 
[18]. The Fast Health Interoperability Resources (FHIR) has 
been one of the most recently and widely adopted 
interoperability standards in the healthcare sector, mainly due 
to its cost effectiveness [18]. However, with the first 
introduction of blockchain technology in the last decade, and 
after its recent developments beyond financial services and 
cryptocurrency applications, interoperability has been 
revolutionized 
with 
the 
applications 
of 
blockchain 
technology, which makes interoperability one of its mostly 
used use case applications of this new technology in most 
sectors even beyond healthcare [18][19]. Blockchain 
technology is considered a data structure that stores 
transactional records efficiently by supporting key features. 
Ultimately, this makes blockchain more capable in terms of 
solving existing healthcare interoperability problems more 
effectively, 
quickly 
and 
simply 
than 
traditional 
interoperability standardizations [18]. 
This project utilizes blockchain technology to provide 
effective support; this is because it is a digital ledger that 
allows caregivers to securely connect with each other, 
without the need for third-party middlemen [19]. 
Furthermore, blockchain technology creates an immutable, 
timestamped, trusted chain of components (changes in care 
continuity) that are distributed in a ledger among the network 
of caregivers and each caregiver has the same ledger [19]. 
There are four classes of accessibility and visibility in 
blockchain [20]: Permissionless private that provides access 
so that only specific people can visit, permissionless public 
that is accessible and visible to everyone, permission private 
is such that a specific person can access and visit and 
permission public provides visibility to anyone but only a 
specific person can access.  
Private permission is suitable for this project so that a 
specific care team can write and read, and only caregivers that 
the patient knows can access and view information about 
him/her. Therefore, this study builds a private permissioned 
blockchain solution to address connectivity and patient 
homecare continuity issues. This is achieved by designing a 
blockchain-based social network for a patient-centered 
family caregivers’ support system that can connect the 
patient's families, friends and neighbors to build an 
ecosystem of stakeholders to make shared, informed care 
decisions. Connected caregivers can exchange information 
about a patient, including, but not limited to, a patient's 
treatment, changes in vital signs readings, time of sleep, who 
is the last to care for the patient to ensure care continuity and 
they can also confirm taking treatments at specified times. In 
addition, the caregivers and the patient can add comments 
which increases the power of interaction and contact between 
the members of this system. Therefore, the blockchain ledger 
can be shared among all caregivers in this distributed 
network, and they will know who made the changes or added 
information in relation to patient care. Blockchain allows 
having multiple participants who need to view common 
information, or multiple participants’ actions must be 
recorded or verified so other participants can trust the validity 
of the noted actions. Blockchain has strong potential in 
providing a solution [18][21]. Since these mentioned 
conditions meet our project aims, blockchain is the best 
platform solution.  
V. 
SYSTEM DESIGN  
In this section the system design is fully presented as 
follows.  
A. Data Design 
The system has the following users: 
• 
Care Team Member includes medical doctors/healthcare 
practitioners who specialize in managing diabetes 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

patients. One of the specialist medical practitioners 
required by diabetic patients is an ophthalmologist who 
should check the retina annually, record when 
complications occur, and it is possible that the patient will 
require kidney and gangrene medical practitioners. 
Specialists, who could help the doctors in their job but are 
not certified as medical doctors, can provide the patient 
with the dietitian’s plan at the beginning of the disease, 
and it may be the case that the disease is advanced and 
the patient was unaware. There is also a diabetes educator 
or health educator who follows-up with the patient’s 
status at frequent intervals, measuring glucose, and 
providing instructions when there is low or high glucose. 
• 
Caregiver includes family, friends or neighbors who help 
to take care of their patients.  
• 
Patient is the person who needs to receive care. 
The proposed system use case diagram is illustrated in 
Figure 2 below.  
 
Figure 2.  
Proposed System Use Case Diagram. 
The designed system builds a network that connects more 
than one caregiver and their patient. Patients may be able to 
care for themselves so when we refer to a caregiver, this might 
indicate the normal caregiver or the patient. In this system, 
there are features (illustrated in Figure 2) that help to provide 
good care, namely, the ability to view a treatment plan, create 
reminders, add comments about changes in the care timeline, 
confirm treatment, send an S.O.S alarm and record 
measurements of blood sugar; all these features are available 
to a caregiver. Also, the patient can add a new caregiver. 
Furthermore, a care team member shall be able to add a 
treatment plan that would be seen by caregivers. Three of the 
key proposed system use cases in Figure 2 including, Add a 
New Caregiver/Care Team Member, Measuring Blood Sugar, 
and Performed Treatment are further explained in use case 
activity diagrams below and illustrated in Figures 3-5, 
respectively.  
 
Figure 3.  Add a New Caregive/ Care Team Member Activity Diagram. 
Figure 3 shows the interaction between Patient and System 
(i.e., the proposed one) when a new Caregiver joins the 
patient’s care team and so needs to be added to System to 
grant him/her all the needed rights. Therefore, only the 
Patient has the right to initiate this use case by requesting it 
from the System, which prompts for the new Caregiver 
details. Such information details can only be recorded by the 
Patient. Then System validates the details in terms of 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

completeness and accuracy for quality assurance purposes 
before it creates a new record for the new Caregiver. 
 
Figure 4.  
Performed Treatment Activity Diagram 
 
Figure 5.  
Measuring Blood Sugar Activity Diagram 
Furthermore, once the Patient undergoes any kind of 
treatment or have a new blood sugar measurement reading, 
the Caregiver must record it to be shared with the rest of the 
care team as a change in care. Such change in care is shown 
in both Performed Treatment activity diagram (see Figure 4), 
and Measuring Blood Sugar activity diagram (see Figure 5), 
respectively. As for new treatments, the System prompts for 
details including, the treatment type, description, even the 
time it was performed, and the Caregiver’s ID for 
authenticity. While in every new blood sugar measurement 
reading taken by a Caregiver, the System compares the latest 
reading with the previously recorded one to determine the 
blood sugar state. Finally, once the details are successfully 
recorded, for a new treatment or blood sugar measurement 
reading, the System notifies all registered Caregivers in the 
system earlier by the Patient. and notify the rest of the team 
about any changes in Patient’s care. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Caregiving is most commonly used to address impairments 
related to people who are aging and/or with disabilities, 
diseases, conditions, injuries, or mental disorders. Supporting 
caregivers is one of the most important issues that has been 
neglected around the world while there is a growing demand 
for their help. Moreover, diabetic patients, in particular, 
require home caregiving since there are no hospitals or 
nursing homes that can accommodate the huge and increasing 
numbers. Also, most of these diabetes patients are aged over 
45 years according to the questionnaire, which means that 
these diabetic patients present with Type II and therefore 
require special care. Therefore, this study aims to address key 
challenges home caregivers face to support their loved ones. 
Moreover, the increasing number of diabetic patients 
motivates us to develop this application to serve or help those 
people. Besides, there are many difficulties related to 
communication between caregivers themselves as well as 
between the caregivers and the care team in terms of 
providing an accurate, timestamped order to share informed 
decisions regarding diabetic patients. On the other hand, the 
patients themselves face significant difficulties, such as 
waiting times and needing to see more than one doctor on the 
same day to receive the full treatment. Therefore, when they 
have disabilities, this process becomes very stressful for 
them. Also, there is a lack of Arabic speaking platforms that 
help with caregivers’ connectivity for diabetic patients.  
This paper sheds light on the challenges faced by patients 
and caregivers. It identifies the requirements for building a 
blockchain-based social network ecosystem to facilitate 
patient-centered family caregiving to empower and connect 
those patients’ families, friends and neighbors to share 
patient-centered information with each other and make 
shared, informed care decisions. The proposed ecosystem 
design achieves this by allowing caregivers to track and 
record their patients’ care management changes, health status 
and psychological status on a 24/7 basis. It also provides the 
caregivers with the treatment plan for diabetes and associated 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

diseases for comorbid diabetic patients which are decided by 
the care team member. This would facilitate the process of 
increasing the caregiver’s connectivity in order to provide 
professional, timestamped care continuity for diabetic 
patients with Diabetes Type II in Saudi Arabia.  
Scalability should be considered for future work related to 
the application to include more languages, involving 
communities from Arab countries and the rest of the world, as 
well as other types of diabetes, including Diabetes Type I and 
III and other chronic diseases. Also, consideration should be 
given to incorporating more IoT devices and wearables to 
connect with caregivers’ and patients’ smart devices. The 
proposed system design has great impact on the caregiving 
process for diabetic patients by allowing the patient's family 
to have continuous patient-centered care to help them provide 
the best care while reducing the burden of caregiving. 
Furthermore, it has a significant impact on the field of 
Computer Science by allowing analysists, developers, and 
engineers to interact with health care professionals in order to 
provide a solution that serves the diabetic patients of Type II 
along with their caregivers. This is to provide full treatment 
plan for diabetic patients suffering from different types of 
diseases and conditions associated with diabetes. Finally, this 
solution has an ethical and legal impact on our society as it 
provides transparency among all caregivers. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. K. Hunt, “Concepts in caregiver Research”, 2003, [online]. 
Available 
at: 
https://sigmapubs.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1111/j.1
547-5069.2003.00027.x [retrieved: April, 2019] 
[2] United 
Nations Population 
Fund, “World 
Population 
Dashboard”, 
2019, 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.unfpa.org/data/world-population-dashboard 
[retrieved: January, 2019]. 
[3] A. AlGarzai, “Consultant family physician-Senior Trainer 
Quality management & patient safety specialist (GCI) Strategic 
Health management and leadership” (Interview), February 
2019. 
[4] International Medical Travel Journal, “Saudi Arabia Launches 
Healthcare Provitision Programme”, 2018, [online] Available 
at: 
 https://www.imtj.com/news/saudi-arabia-launches-
healthcare-privatisation-programme/. [retrieved:  March, 
2019] 
[5] F. 
Alharbi, 
“Diabetic 
Type 
II 
Patient. 
Personal 
Communication” (Interview), February 2019. 
[6] A. 
Alkhalaf, 
“Caregiver 
Personal 
Communication” 
(Interview), February 2019. 
[7] International Diabetes Federation, “The IDF Diabetes Atlas 
Ninth 
edition 
2019”, 
2019, 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://diabetesatlas.org/en/. [retrieved:  October, 2019] 
[8] A. K. Alhowaish, “Economic costs of diabetes in Saudi 
Arabia,” Journal of  Family & Community Medicine. 2013 Jan-
Apr; 20(1): 1–7. doi: 10.4103/2230-8229.108174. 
[9] L. Sarafan, “What is Home Care?” 2018, [online] Available at: 
https://homecareassistance.com/pdf/ [retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[10] pHealth, “pHealth 2017”, 2017, [online]  Available at: 
http://www.phealth2017.eu/ [retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[11] Apple Store, “Thermo”, 2019, [online] Available at : 
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/withings-
thermo/id1108420798. [retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[12] Apple Store, “Caring”, 2019, [online] Available at: 
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/caring/id1265929675?ls=1. 
[retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[13] Apple Store, 2019, “Medisafe”, 2019,  [online] Available at: 
https://www.medisafe.com/. [retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[14] Apple Store, 2019, “ﺳﻜﺮي”, 2019, [online] Available at: 
https://apps.apple.com/sa/app/id1125752054. 
[retrieved: 
April, 2019]. 
[15] Apple Store, 2019, “Caring”, 2019, [online] Available at: 
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/carely-family-caring-
app/id703761701. [retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[16] Apple Store, 2019, “Saleem”, 2019, [online] Available at: 
https://apps.apple.com/us/developer/saleem/id1400326537. 
[retrieved: April, 2019]. 
[17] Apple Store, 2019, “Fitbit”, 2019, [online] Available at: 
https://apps.apple.com/us/app/fitbit/id462638897. [retrieved: 
March, 2019] 
[18] I. Fish, and M. Barnard, “Blockchain vs FHIR: a showdown for 
healthcare integration?” IBM Healthcare & Life Sciences 
Industries 
Blog, 
2018, 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.ibm.com/blogs/insights-on-
business/healthcare/blockchain-vs-fhir-showdown-healthcare-
integration/. [retrieved: October, 2019] 
[19] ProQuest, “The Insurance Implications of Blockchain”, 2019, 
[online] 
Available 
at: 
https://search.proquest.com/docview/1881388609?pq-
origsite=gscholar.[retrieved: January, 2019] 
[20] S. Al-megren, S.  Alsalamah, L.  Altoaimy, H.  Alsalamah, and 
L. Soltanisehat, “Blockchain Use Cases in Digital Sectors: A 
Review of the Literature,” 2018 IEEE Confs on Internet of 
Things, Green Computing and Communications, Cyber, 
Physical and Social Computing, Smart Data, Blockchain, 
Computer and Information Technology, Congress on 
Cybermatics; 
IEEE. 
Halifax, 
2018, 
pp. 
1417–1424.  
doi:10.1109 
[21] M. Rouse, “mHealth (mobile health)”, 2018, [online] Available 
at: 
https://searchhealthit.techtarget.com/definition/mHealth. 
[retrieved:  April, 2019]
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

