A Review on XR in Home-based Nursing Education
Yan Hu
Department of Computer Science
Blekinge Institute of Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
e-mail: yan.hu@bth.se
Prashant Goswami
Department of Computer Science
Blekinge Institute of Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
e-mail: prashant.goswami@bth.se
Veronica Sundstedt
Department of Computer Science
Blekinge Institute of Technology
Karlskrona, Sweden
e-mail: veronica.sundstedt@bth.se
Abstract—Recent developments using extended reality (XR)
technologies have allowed for increased use in healthcare in the
last few years. This review paper explores how XR applications
are utilized in home-based nursing education, in particular,
to identify future challenges and opportunities. The systematic
literature review evaluates relevant extracted papers based on
publication information, XR technology used for education pur-
poses, target users, and study design and evaluation, including
sample size. The results show potential for using XR technologies
in home-based nursing education. In particular, Virtual Reality
(VR) has become quite popular and the most used to date.
However, Augmented Reality (AR) has also emerged as an
alternative for the future.
Index Terms—Extended Reality; Review; Home-based; Nurs-
ing
I. INTRODUCTION
Information and Communication Technology (ICT) has
consistently supported higher education with a wide range of
applications for decades. ICT has been proven to increase mo-
tivation and engagement in studying and enhance the collabo-
ration between educators and students [1]. Due to the Covid-19
pandemic, many universities have shifted (at least partially)
their education from campus-based to distance education.
Because of this shift, researchers and educators are exploring
new ways of applying ICT to support distance education.
However, programs such as nursing education which require
extensive on-site clinical training, may struggle to adopt ICT
into this shift in their curriculum. It requires an appropriate
design and application of the technologies. Otherwise, the
benefits can be limited.
Home-based healthcare is one such area in which ICT may
be adopted into nursing education and practice. According
to the World Health Organization (WHO), the percentage of
people aged 60 and over will double from 12% in 2015 to 22%
in 2025 [2]. In addition, 71% of global deaths are caused by
chronic diseases. The increasing aging population has already
heavily affected the healthcare systems worldwide. As a result,
there is a trend to shift traditional hospital-based healthcare to
home-based healthcare [3]. This trend also leads to changes
in nursing education, as more home-based nursing education
solutions are needed in the future. At the same time, the rapid
development of ICT also brings several new opportunities to
deliver a better education, even remotely.
Recently, as one of the most impactful ICT, Extended
Reality (XR) has been applied in higher education. XR is an
umbrella term for all the technologies that add virtual elements
to the real-world environment to any extent. It includes Virtual
Reality (VR), Augmented Reality (AR) and Mixed Reality
(MR), and anything in between [4]. VR is a 3-dimensional,
computer-simulated virtual environment that can be explored
and interacted with people in 360-degree [4]. AR is a real-
time use of digital elements in a real-world environment [5].
MR is an interactive environment that combines a computer-
simulated environment and a real-world environment [6].
The relationship among AR, MR, VR, and XR is shown in
Fig 1. On the one hand, XR has been applied to education
in different ways, with the benefits of improving students’
problem-solving skills [7]. On the other hand, XR has also
been widely used in healthcare, including disease prevention,
treatment, medical training, and education [8]. XR devices are
quickly becoming less expensive with the rapid development
of technology. Hence nursing education with the help of these
devices could play an essential role in increasing engagement,
reducing the stress of learning, and creating an immersive
experience with cutting cost and time efficiency [9]. This paper
aims to explore the current state-of-the-art on applying XR in
home-based nursing education and discover its future trends.
To achieve the research goal, a systematic literature review
will be performed. The research questions of this review are:
• RQ 1: How have XR applications been used in home-
based nursing education?
• RQ 2: What are the future challenges and opportunities to
apply XR technologies in home-based nursing education?
Applying XR technology in nursing and medical education
is a relatively new concept and has recently gained popularity.
Even though fewer works have explored the potential, the
technology holds tremendous possibilities in the cross-domain
linking XR and remote or onsite medical education. This has
been demonstrated successfully with the growing application
of VR, AR, and MR in pedagogy [7] [10] in several edu-
cational disciplines. This paper can help identify the initial
advantages and challenges of leveraging XR technology in
home-based nursing education.
II. RELATED WORK
VR has been applied in medical education since early
this century. Gallagher et al. proposed that VR could be
introduced as a tool for surgical training to improve surgical
technical skills in 2005 [11]. Since then, more VR-based
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Fig. 1. XR technologies, including augmented reality (AR), mixed reality (MR) and virtual reality (VR).
surgical simulation programs have been implemented and used
in different countries. A review of the use of VR in surgery
training revealed that four commercially available simulators
(dVSS, dV-Trainer, RoSS, SEP) had been demonstrated in
doctor and nursing education programs. Most medical students
who have used those four simulators have agreed that VR
training is an effective way to improve skills and is comparable
with the skills training in a lab [12].
Another review of XR game applications in healthcare noted
that medical education and training are one of the main aims
of applying XR into healthcare [8]. The training or education
includes clinical training, basic life support training, nursing
skills training, stress inoculation training, etc. [8]. Recently,
immersive VR has been reviewed in nursing education
[9].
This study indicated that immersive VR improved learning,
cognitive, and psychomotor performance. However, the chal-
lenges of motion sickness and lack of visual comfort were
also reported [9]. Existing review papers already clearly show
how XR applications could contribute to nursing education in
hospital-based healthcare. Considering the different require-
ments of home-based healthcare, unlike other reviews listed
above, this review focuses on the XR applications in home-
based nursing education.
III. METHOD
In order to answer the research questions, a systematic
literature review is conducted. A systematic literature review
provides a comprehensive and unbiased summary of current
literature relevant to research questions. To maximize the
coverage of our searched literature, we identified some of
the most used words/concepts and synonyms in the research
questions. We first conducted a manual search in computer
science, healthcare and education. The selected databases were
PubMed, Web of Science, ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore
and Scopus. The publication year was not limited since XR is
a recent emerging technology. In addition, the language of the
papers was limited to English. The search string listed below
was used to search in the selected databases:
• (“virtual reality” OR “VR”) AND (nurs*) AND (“edu-
cat*” OR ”teach*”) AND (home)
• (“augmented reality” OR ”AR”) AND (nurs*) AND
(”educat*” OR ”teach*”) AND (home)
• (“mixed reality” OR “MR”) AND (nurs*) AND (“edu-
cat*” OR ”teach*”) AND (home)
The search string is sometimes modified slightly to copy
the rules for search strings in different databases. The first
search by the search string in all the mentioned databases
produced 107 articles. The review processes are mainly based
on the guidelines for performing systematic literature reviews
in software engineering [13]. First, a primary evaluation was
conducted by reading the abstracts and conclusions of all
selected articles to explore the most relevant literature to our
research questions. Then the second round of full-text review
was conducted for the rest of the papers. The criteria applied
for the evaluation are described in Table I.
TABLE I
INCLUSION AND EXCLUSION CRITERIA.
Inclusion criteria
Exclusion criteria
Written in English
Studies that apply XR in home-based
nursing education
Have available full-text version
Journal articles, conference papers
and book chapters
Not written in English
Less than 5 pages
Review papers
Due to the small number after the two rounds of review,
the only quality assessment criteria we applied in this study
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Selected Databases
Search
N=107
Excluded: N=24
Inclusion/exclusion
criteria assessment
by full-texts reading
Total articles
N=15
Excluded: N=68
Duplicated
Inclusion/exclusion
criteria assessment
by abstract reading
Excluded: N=8
Total articles
N=83
N=7
Total articles
Excluded: N=0
Quality  assessment
by checking if the study
has user evaluation
Articles included in
ﬁnal review
N=7
Fig. 2. Flowchart showing processes and results of systematic review
was to check if the paper has a user evaluation. The reason
was the user evaluation results could be important inputs to
answer our RQ2 compared with the only conceptual designs.
After the inclusion/exclusion criteria assessment and quality
assessment, data extraction was performed to avoid the bias
of subjective preference. A method was applied in which
one researcher extracted the papers, and another checked the
extraction by reading the abstract of the selected documents.
In the end, seven articles were selected for our thorough study,
all included in the reference list. The flow chart of the stages
and results of the systematic review is shown in Figure 2.
IV. RESULTS
The following sections present the main results found in the
review.
A. Publication Information
The selected seven papers were published in the last five
years, starting from 2018 to 2022. Prior to 2018, few studies
specially applied XR technologies in home-based nursing
education. Figure 3 shows the number of papers for each
year. The first three years have one paper for each year, but
in 2021 and 2022, there were two publications. Among the
seven papers, the countries and regions that carried out the
studies are the USA (N=2), Spain (N=1), United Kingdom
(UK) (N=1), Japan (N=1), Taiwan (N=1), and Brazil (N=1). It
is a sign that applying XR in home-based nursing education is
considered for broader use worldwide. Six papers applied VR,
while one applied AR technology (See Table II). Other detailed
information on the selected papers is listed in Table III.
1
1
1
2
2
0
1
2
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
Year
Number of papers per year
Fig. 3. Number of papers published each year as identified in the review.
TABLE II
XR TECHNOLOGIES APPLIED IN THE STUDIES.
Technology
Number of papers
VR
6
AR
1
B. Education Purposes
All the studies aimed to transfer medical knowledge to
the targeted nursing students in their specific areas. Three
out of seven studies worked on care-skills training, such
as endotracheal suctioning [14], Nasogastric tube care-skill
training [15] and Neuroanatomy and Neurorehabilitation [16].
These skills training are not only for home-based healthcare
but also apply to hospital-based care. The remaining four
studies are more related to home-based healthcare scenarios,
with one on general home-based healthcare [17] [18], elderly
home-based care [18] and Parkinson’s disease and associated
disorders care [19].
C. Study Design and Evaluation
The study that applied AR technology [17] designed a
mobile AR-based game for nursing students to learn how to
deal with different situations when they visit the homes of
different groups of people. The combination of mobile and
game makes it easier to deliver distance education because of
the flexibility and low cost. The designed game could improve
the engagement of the students [17]. Most VR applications
employ immersive VR, which uses Head-Mounted Devices
(HMDs) to run the applications. Some were even assisted
with motion capture sensors for interaction with the VR
systems [14], [16]. One of the applications, namely Nursing
XR, is an integrated platform mainly based on immersive
VR technology [20]. The emphasis of the identified seven
studies is varied. Some of them highlight the design and
implementation of the XR-based education platform [14], [20].
Some others emphasize how the whole XR-based education
or training program is designed [16], [18], [19]. In contrast,
others are more focused on user evaluation [15], [17].
All seven studies include some user evaluation. Four of
them use surveys as the primary evaluation method [16]–[19].
The questions contain standard questionnaires, researchers-
self-defined questionnaires, and open-ended questions. The
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

standard questionnaires include the System Usability Scale
(SUS) [21], Gameful Experience (GAMEX) [22], QualCare
Scale
[23], etc. Those questions cover the XR systems’
usability and user experience, the system’s satisfaction, and the
quality of home care. Two studies choose face-to-face com-
munication methods like interviews [15] and workshops [20]
to get direct feedback from the users. The study by Komizunai
et al. [14] conducted a user experiment as the objective
evaluation method. The data collected from the experiment
is eye tracking data and motion of the whole body without
fingers [14]. All seven studies received positive results on
usability and user experiences from the evaluation results. The
improvement in learning outcomes is also reported. Notably,
the users from some studies pointed out the XR-based applica-
tions are fast to learn, free of learning stress, and enchanting
the interdisciplinary collaboration [15], [16], [19]. However,
the study by Chang and Lai [15] also mentioned that the
convenience of the practice needs adaptation.
V. DISCUSSION
Besides the traditional medical skills training, home-based
healthcare also needs education on the different case studies
in the home environment. It could help the home nurses to be
well prepared before they visit different kinds of care recip-
ients. Building up different home environments is unrealistic
due to potentially high costs and access limitations. In this
case, ICT-based simulations could play a significant role in it.
Previous studies [24], [25] indicated that case-simulation ed-
ucation could improve nursing students’ empathy, confidence,
and attitudes to dealing with healthcare recipients at home
and cooperation in teamwork. The results of this review have
similar findings with previous reviews only focused on XR
applications in education [26] or healthcare [8], which shows
that VR is the most applied technology in home-based nursing
education. With its immersive feature, we believe that VR
could significantly contribute to the home environment/case
simulations for home-based nursing education. 3D virtual
anatomical models and 360-degree videos are appropriate
options for such simulations.
From our results, we also find the potential for applying AR
technology in the future. Unlike VR, AR has its own feature of
easy assessment and is not so dependent on auxiliary or other
devices. In many cases, a smartphone is enough to run the
applications. AR could provide widespread solutions at a low
cost for home-based nursing education, which could benefit
developing countries. Gamified XR applications for nursing
education are another future trend to engage the students’ in-
volvement and improve the quality of education. Furthermore,
some applications could also be introduced to other people
who are involved in home-based care, in addition to the nurses.
For instance, to the family members of chronic disease patients
or elderly people who live at home, to develop a friendly and
supportive community for those care recipients [27].
As with all new applications of ICT, the acceptance of
technology in the home-nursing field also needs to be under
consideration. Our previous study showed that home-based
healthcare professionals could not easily adapt to the new
ICT [3]. In addition, VR applications using HMDs can poten-
tially induce motion sickness. This could be a challenge when
applying XR technologies in home-based nursing education
in the future. The time period of education, the level of
integration of the XR technology, and the way of interaction
with the systems are all aspects that need to be considered and
further discussed with users when applying XR technologies
in home-based nursing education.
Since this review only focuses on the XR applications in
home-based nursing education, which is quite a narrow scope.
The number of the included paper is only seven. It could affect
the generalizability of the results of this review.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
This study conducted a systematic literature review to
discover the current state-of-art XR applications applied in
home-based nursing education and their potential and chal-
lenges. Seven papers are selected and analyzed based on the
country or region, applied technology, education purposes,
target users, study design, and evaluation. The results show
that VR is the most used technology in this area for an
immersive home-environment simulation. It could meet the
empathy, confidence, and attitude education requirements for
home-based nurses. Additionally, with other sensors, medical
skills training could be performed outside the medical labs
through VR applications.
AR was also applied in one study, but there is a general
trend to develop more applications because of their low cost,
flexibility, and accessibility. How to effectively integrate the
XR technology smoothly in home-based nursing education and
increase the target users’ acceptance will be the challenge in
the future. It is also essential to evaluate such systems with
different target groups, such as patients, relatives, and medical
professionals, before use.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was funded partly by the Knowledge Foun-
dation, Sweden, through the Human-Centered Intelligent Re-
alities (HINTS) Profile Project (contract 20220068).
REFERENCES
[1] N. Dut¸˘a and O. Mart´ınez-Rivera, “Between theory and practice: the
importance of ict in higher education as a tool for collaborative learning,”
Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences, vol. 180, pp. 1466–1473,
2015.
[2] W. H. Organization. (2022, Oct.) Ageing and health. [Online]. Available:
https://www.who.int/news-room/fact-sheets/detail/ageing-and-health
[3] Y. Hu, G. Bai, S. Eriks´en, and J. Lundberg, “An iot cloud model for
diabetes home-based care: A case study for perceived future feasibility,”
Enhanced Telemedicine and e-Health: Advanced IoT Enabled Soft
Computing Framework, pp. 99–115, 2021.
[4] C. Hillmann, UX for XR: User Experience Design and Strategies for
Immersive Technologies.
Springer, 2021.
[5] M. Billinghurst, A. Clark, and G. Lee, “A survey of augmented reality,”
Foundations and Trends® in Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 8, no.
2-3, pp. 73–272, 2015.
[6] M. Speicher, B. D. Hall, and M. Nebeling, “What is mixed reality?” in
Proceedings of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing
systems, 2019, pp. 1–15.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE III
DETAILED INFORMATION OF THE IDENTIFIED PAPERS.
Study
Region
Technology
Educational purpose
Users
Sample size
Evaluation method
Pickering et al. [18]
USA
VR
Elder abuse and neglect
Nurses/social workers
36
Survey
Borges et al. [17]
Brazil
AR
Home visiting
Nursing students
135
Survey
Komizunai et al. [14]
Japan
VR
Endotracheal suctioning
Experienced
nurses
12
Experiment
Chang and Lai [15]
Taiwan
VR
Nasogastric tube care
skill
Nursing students
60
Interview
Obrero-Gaitan et al. [16]
Spain
VR
Neuroanatomy and
Neurorehabilitation
Nursing students
30
Survey
Gilardi et al. [20]
UK
VR
Decision Making
Nursing students/
lecturers
12
Workshop
Hess et al. [19]
USA
VR
Parkinson’s disease and
related disorders care
Home healthcare
professionals
52
Survey
[7] A. Alnagrat, R. C. Ismail, S. Z. S. Idrus, and R. M. A. Alfaqi, “A
review of extended reality (xr) technologies in the future of human
education: current trend and future opportunity,” Journal of Human
Centered Technology, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 81–96, 2022.
[8] Y. Fu, Y. Hu, and V. Sundstedt, “A systematic literature review of virtual,
augmented, and mixed reality game applications in healthcare,” ACM
Trans. Comput. Healthcare, vol. 3, no. 2, mar 2022.
[9] J. Choi, C. E. Thompson, J. Choi, C. B. Waddill, and S. Choi, “Ef-
fectiveness of immersive virtual reality in nursing education: systematic
review,” Nurse Educator, vol. 47, no. 3, pp. E57–E61, 2022.
[10] C. Ziker, B. Truman, and H. Dodds, “Cross reality (xr): Challenges and
opportunities across the spectrum,” Innovative learning environments
in STEM higher education: Opportunities, challenges, and looking
forward, pp. 55–77, 2021.
[11] A. G. Gallagher, E. M. Ritter, H. Champion, G. Higgins, M. P. Fried,
G. Moses, C. D. Smith, and R. M. Satava, “Virtual reality simulation
for the operating room: proficiency-based training as a paradigm shift
in surgical skills training,” Annals of surgery, vol. 241, no. 2, p. 364,
2005.
[12] J. D. Bric, D. C. Lumbard, M. J. Frelich, and J. C. Gould, “Current
state of virtual reality simulation in robotic surgery training: a review,”
Surgical endoscopy, vol. 30, pp. 2169–2178, 2016.
[13] B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing systematic
literature reviews in software engineering,” EBSE Technical Report
EBSE-2007-01, Tech. Rep., 2007.
[14] S. Komizunai, N. Colley, and A. Konno, “An immersive nursing educa-
tion system that provides experience of exemplary procedures from first
person viewpoint with haptic feedback on wrist,” in 2020 IEEE/SICE
International Symposium on System Integration (SII).
IEEE, 2020, pp.
311–316.
[15] Y. M. Chang and C. L. Lai, “Exploring the experiences of nursing
students in using immersive virtual reality to learn nursing skills,” Nurse
Education Today, vol. 97, p. 104670, 2021.
[16] E. Obrero-Gait´an, F. A. Nieto-Escamez, N. Zagalaz-Anula, and I. Cort´es-
P´erez, “An innovative approach for online neuroanatomy and neurorre-
habilitation teaching based on 3d virtual anatomical models using leap
motion controller during covid-19 pandemic,” Frontiers in Psychology,
vol. 12, p. 590196, 2021.
[17] F. R. Borges, L. C. S. da Costa, C. C. V. Avelino, L. A. de Freitas,
C. Kirner, and S. L. T. Goyat´a, “Evaluation of an educational tech-
nology using augmented reality for home visiting teaching,” Revista
Enfermagem UERJ, vol. 27, p. 37485, 2019.
[18] C. E. Pickering, K. Ridenour, Z. Salaysay, D. Reyes-Gastelum, and
S. J. Pierce, “Eati island–a virtual-reality-based elder abuse and neglect
educational intervention,” Gerontology & Geriatrics Education, vol. 39,
no. 4, pp. 445–463, 2018.
[19] S. P. Hess, M. Levin, F. Akram, K. Woo, L. Andersen, K. Trenkle,
P. Brown, B. Ouyang, and J. E. Fleisher, “The impact and feasibility of a
brief, virtual, educational intervention for home healthcare professionals
on parkinson’s disease and related disorders: pilot study of i see pd
home,” BMC Medical Education, vol. 22, no. 1, p. 506, 2022.
[20] M. Gilardi, S. Honnan, L. Sheerman, A. Cund, S. Rae, and U. Paisley,
“Nursing xr–a vr application to teach decision making to student nurses,”
in European Conference on Game Based Learning, 2022, pp. 244–252.
[21] J. Brooke et al., “Sus-a quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability
evaluation in industry, vol. 189, no. 194, pp. 4–7, 1996.
[22] R. Eppmann, M. Bekk, and K. Klein, “Gameful experience in gam-
ification: Construction and validation of a gameful experience scale
[gamex],” Journal of interactive marketing, vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 98–115,
2018.
[23] L. R. Phillips, E. F. Morrison, and Y. M. Chae, “The qualcare scale: De-
veloping an instrument to measure quality of home care,” International
Journal of Nursing Studies, vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 61–75, 1990.
[24] C. Tran, E. Toth-Pal, S. Ekblad, U. Fors, and H. Salminen, “A virtual
patient model for students’ interprofessional learning in primary health-
care,” Plos one, vol. 15, no. 9, p. e0238797, 2020.
[25] W. J. Hwang and J. Lee, “Effectiveness of the infectious disease (covid-
19) simulation module program on nursing students: disaster nursing
scenarios,” Journal of Korean Academy of Nursing, vol. 51, no. 6, pp.
648–660, 2021.
[26] L. Coyne, T. A. Merritt, B. L. Parmentier, R. A. Sharpton, and J. K.
Takemoto, “The past, present, and future of virtual reality in pharmacy
education,” American journal of pharmaceutical education, vol. 83,
no. 3, pp. 281–290, 2019.
[27] D. W. Sari, A. Igarashi, M. Takaoka, R. Yamahana, M. Noguchi-
Watanabe, C. Teramoto, and N. Yamamoto-Mitani, “Virtual reality pro-
gram to develop dementia-friendly communities in japan,” Australasian
Journal on Ageing, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. e352–e359, 2020.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-105-3
HEALTHINFO 2023 : The Eighth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

