Identifying Influential Factors of Patient Length of Stay in a Surgery Center: a 
Simulation Modelling Approach 
 
Chen Zhang, Hamza Hanchi, Sebastiaan Meijer 
School of Technology and Health, KTH Royal Institute of Technology 
Hälsovägen 11, 141 52 HuddingeHuddinge, Sweden 
Email: chen.zhang@sth.kth.se 
 
 
Abstract— Simulation is increasingly being used in the 
healthcare sector. The dynamic management of resources and 
patient levels requires a computational and evaluative 
approach for staff to examine their impacts on the 
performance of the system. In this paper, a sensitivity analysis 
via Monte Carlo Simulation is developed to identify influential 
factors of patient length of stay in a surgery center. The 
operation of a selected surgery center is re-created by a 
Discrete-Event Simulation model as a basis for the sensitivity 
analysis. We compute elasticity measurements for comparing 
relative influences of identified pertinent on the system output. 
Results suggest that the patient length of stay is more sensitive 
to capacity extractions than additions. The capacity of surgery 
slots is a rewarding option on increased patient level. We 
suggest healthcare planners are aware of dedicated surgery 
types and hospital fixtures due to effects on patient length of 
stay. 
Keywords-discrete-event simulation; monte-carlo simulation; 
logistics; healthcare 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
      Performances of surgery centers are determined by 
complex interactions of agents such as patients, health care 
staff and infrastructure. According to the Healthcare 
Financial Management Association, surgery centers are 
described as the most resource-intensive as well as profitable 
hospital departments [1], where measurements to gain new 
efficiencies and reduce costs are vital. To address hospital 
logistical problems, recent growing utilization of simulation 
techniques in the healthcare sector encourages its wider 
adoption by exploring resource options and system control 
strategies. The operational environment of surgery centers, 
configured by parameters of different resources, can be 
defined by healthcare planners and decision makers. In 
practice, the logistical issues of surgery centers are examined 
by means of optimizations [2], event-driven simulations or a 
hybrid model integrating the above techniques [3]. 
Optimization models could be suitable for engineering 
systems of low uncertainties. The health system is however a 
complex and multi-actor system. Simulation models could 
help project knowledge for networks of high uncertainties. 
The impacts of configurations on system outputs of surgery 
centers, important section of the hospital, could be obtained 
by calculating average length of stay or surgery throughputs. 
      Routine surgery center simulation models are primary 
decision-support systems comparing metrics of scenarios 
with pre-defined values of parameters. However, it is 
worthwhile to note that this endeavor has a restricted user’s 
capability to understand how the simulated system changes 
in the entire feasible area, the impacts of capacity uncertainty 
and demand profiles. Even though simulation models are 
used in the healthcare-related topics, previous researches on 
the performance of surgery centers failed to consider 
variation of resource parameters via sensitivity analyses. 
Very few studies extended departmental simulation models 
to a sensitivity analysis, which could hinder a holistic 
consideration of potential managerial solutions on logistical 
issues in surgery center operations.  
In order to fill this gap, this work presents a simulation 
framework combining Discrete-Event Simulation (DES) and 
Monte Carlo Simulation (MCS) for surgery center 
operations. It is expected that this method will re-create the 
flow of patient entities and solve the inconvenient endeavor 
without the ability to discover the most influential pertinent 
in a numerical way. This complies the positioning of MCS as 
the major simulation technique [4], pointed out by Mustafee 
and Taylor in their work with a retrospect of healthcare 
simulation. Different staffing configurations and demand 
scenarios are identified as the influencing factors for patient 
length of stay, together with governing rules and reference to 
the infrastructure layout. Elasticity measurements are also 
computed to uncover if additional resources are rewarding 
towards patient length of stay under increased demand. The 
method presented in this paper could be generalized to 
similar surgery centers that are dedicated to specific surgery 
types. The main contribution of this work is two-fold: 1) it 
provides a relatively novel method to explore managerial 
decisions and deal with resource constraints; 2) it aggregates 
computational results based on a large amount of simulations 
into the feasible area of the parameter.  
      The remainder of this article is arranged as follows: a 
literature review on MCS and sensitivity analysis in 
healthcare in general and in surgery-related topics in 
particular is performed in Section 2. Following this, Section 
3 presents its application into a real surgery center of a 
hospital in Jiangsu, China. A simulated environment is 
constructed for measuring the impact of the managerial 
decisions on the performance of the system, which is in the 
form of patient length of stay in this study.  A discussion and 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

conclusion on recommendations for continued researches is 
presented at the end of the paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
The construction of MCS models enables visualization 
and analysis purposes within various sectors, such as 
transportation, logistics, energy and healthcare. Banomyong 
and Sopadang provided a conceptual framework for 
emergency response logistics in which the MCS presented a 
range of possible results [5]. MCS has also been applied in 
healthcare economies and societal cost-benefit evaluations. 
Barton et al. stated that MCS can achieve the same effect of 
increasing states of systems to overcome homogeneous 
assumptions in Markov models [6]. Huang et al. framed a 
MCS model by simultaneous progression of diseases [7].  
      Besides above achievements, however, very few 
previous simulation applications were reported to address 
logistical related issues in surgery center operation. 
Logistical related issues in hospital departments revolve 
around scheduling, patient flow management and staffing 
configurations. A holistic query of all necessary keywords 
was used to search in title/abstract/keywords in the Web of 
Science Core Collection database from the year 1996 until 
present. Following this, collected publications were obtained 
after eliminating abstracts book reviews and papers without 
full access. The data collection was further defined by 
reading through the main texts and led to 14 reviled surgery-
related studies performed either through MCS for various 
purposes or by a sensitivity analysis by deterministic 
approaches. To authors’ knowledge, these papers have not 
addressed above mentioned logistical related issues. One 
previous study of surgery quality and patient output 
suggested that MCS was promising method for analyzing 
human factors [8]. Luangkesorn and Eren estimated the 
surgery duration by combining expert inputs and historical 
data in a Markov Chain Monte Carlo model [9]. 
Lymperopoulou et al. used MCS for improved treatment 
planning for the post-operative state [10]. Huberts et al. 
studied interval control between surgery and postoperative 
radiotherapy [11]. Computer-aided clinical practice enhanced 
by MCS or sensitivity analysis is the main focus in Cerveri et 
al.’s works [12].   
      In addition, several feasibility studies have compared 
MCS with other alternatives. Radioactive seed localization 
(RSL) was found to reduce health care costs for patients and 
transferred into increased facility margin [13]. Different beta 
minus detection strategies were compared by Gigliotti et al. 
with an emphasize on spatial resolution of medical images 
[14]. Instead of clinical practices, Stone et al. examined the 
implementation costs of an Enhanced Recovery after Surgery 
(ERAS) program with inputs of patient length of stay in the 
hospital and recommended investments into the ERAS to US 
hospitals [15]. 
      With the exception of Huberts, previous studies did not 
consider system-wide performance improvement through 
logistical activities but rather accounted for variations in 
clinical practices, human factors or individual health models.  
There were several limitations in simulation models: 1) none 
of existing simulation models fully investigates the 
uncertainty of logistical parameters and its effect on the 
operational level, leading to trade-offs identified based on a 
limited set of alternatives; 2) the information gained from 
studies of MCS or sensitivity analysis rarely consider patient 
length of stay in the center and potential improvements from 
managerial controls. Hence, the MCS method can 
complement this and allows for the evaluation of a wider 
range of design scenarios and strengthen the managerial 
insights by establishing connection between the health care 
planning phase and the operational variations. 3) very scarce 
examples considered staff workflows in researches on 
surgical center operations.   
      This paper utilized MCS to perform the sensitivity 
analysis for decision supports of managerial controls in the 
surgery center. Based on the positive results by [16] and a 
process simulation model of the same hospital [17], this 
study employs the same method, DES, to re-create flows of 
entities in a selected surgery center with real data of staffing 
boundaries, surgery types and movement rules for different 
participants. On top of this DES model, MCS is conducted 
by assigning a normal distribution to parameter values. A 
combined simulation modelling and analysis approach 
provides the following contributions: visualization of entity 
flows, convenient interventions to parameter settings, and 
prediction and comparison of outputs in a numerical manner. 
III. 
THE SIMULATION MODEL 
      The model proposed in this paper is a hybrid-simulation 
model of DES and MCS, developed to form the operational 
logistics. The operational logistics is detailed simulated using 
DES, whereas the MCS explores system outputs in response 
of parameter variations. AnyLogic, a dynamic simulation 
tool, is used for various recourse-related choices and the 
sensitivity analysis. The surgery types, operational logistics 
and staffing configurations are modelled in reference to the 
real physical settings of the department. The layout of the 
surgery center includes location-to-location information of 
paths, rooms and facilities. Staffing configurations and 
primary operation types are allowed to have independent 
options with the current default values. 
      The simulation model considers arrival schedules and 
add-ons, thus enabling the mixed nature of different 
urgencies, which is an important aspect in the real operation 
of a surgical center. Patients go through the care pathway 
and coerce resource sizes so that patient might have 
excessive waiting times for available rooms, physicians, 
nurses, beds, or a combination of them.  Care provision is 
event-driven and consists of patient-and material-centric 
logistics. These two aspects are elaborated in the next 
sections. Such a simulation model allows the visualization of 
concrete interactions between the supply-side factors, such as 
appointment, staff decision making and material supplies, 
with delays and waiting times at a cross-units level. Since the 
surgery center consumes approximately 40% of hospital 
expenditure, decisions upon adding more capacity or altering 
current control policies need to be wise. This question is to 
be answered by the sensitivity analysis quantifying the 
effects of existing resources. Based on this simulation model, 
a sensitivity analysis accompanied by MCS is conducted to 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Surgery physicians
Assistants
Cloths exchange
Walk through clean corridor
Hand wash
Surgery room
Store room
Supply room
Consumables
Devices
Wastes
Deperted
Patient arrival
Patient discharge
Preparation area
 
 
investigate the relative uncertainty of chosen parameters and 
their effects on the outcomes. Interventions are suggested for 
resources of which the parameters present higher degrees of 
responses. 
A. Operational Logistics 
      Located in the middle of the 5th floor, this surgery center 
receives requests from upstream diagnoses and emergency 
drop-ins. As a main hospital in the urban area, the surgery 
center is dedicated to elective patient types. With a capacity 
of 8 surgery slots, 14 dedicated beds, 8 surgery physicians 
and 16 nurses, the surgery center completes 10 missions on 
the daily basis. The high workload of surgery teams is one of 
the major problems in the Chinese healthcare sector. 
Although the center predominately serves elective patients, 
some dedicated beds and a separate preparation room closer 
to the entrance of the hospital are provided for non-elective 
requests. As long as the patient is at the front of the queue, 
he is able to seize required resources upon availability and 
start his scheduled session. A non-elective patient seizes the 
first available bed for preparation and is prioritized available 
for surgery. Since a surgery center both consumes 
considerable expenditure and generates a major port of 
revenue for the hospital, principle instructors might think 
about if there is any untouched potential of the current 
configuration to increase patient throughput, average length 
of stay or even reduce workload of health care staff. Since 
the main objective is to minimize patient length of stay, 
improved management for reducing work pressure and 
maximizing throughput are not discussed in this study. 
      We have combined patient and staff workflows in the 
conceptual model, as Fig. 1 shows. This conceptual model is 
established according to the feasibility study report for 
expanding the hospital complex and an interview of the 
project development team designing the units. In order to 
represent them adequately in the simulation model, empirical 
data of layouts, default staffing configurations, surgery types 
and agent movement rules are collected. The clinical 
pathway consists of functional rooms: Elective surgery 
arrival area (zone 1), non-elective surgery arrival area (zone 
2), preparation area (zone 3), nurse stations (zone 4), surgery 
slots (zone 5), store supply room (zone 6), cleaning corridor 
(zone 7) and surgeon offices (zone 8). 
      A simulation model is then constructed to model the 
patient flow from arrival to discharge. Elective and non-
elective patients arrive from upstream units and are sent to 
different surgery preparation rooms with bed capacities of 4 
and 2. In all cases of decided surgeries, each individual is 
allocated a surgery bed and gets prepared with the help from 
nurses. After preparation, the patient waits to be transported 
to the specific surgery slot for his session processed by the 
surgery team. The surgery types decide surgery time periods 
and material supplies.  
      There are two types of logistical activities carried out by 
the healthcare staff. These include the assignment of human 
resources and the provision of necessary materials. The 
healthcare staff has different levels in the organization and is 
associated with different movement rules in the center. 
Surgery physicians and assistants sit in offices and nurse 
stations during idle times. Upon request, they are obliged to 
go through several intermediate stages, such as exchanging 
clothes and a walk through the clean corridor, for 
contamination purposes. Meanwhile, consumables and 
facilities have to be ordered from the store and supply room. 
Demand for these materials is generally greater (with 2 units) 
for long-duration operations (type I and II) and become less 
(with 1 unit) for light operations (type III and IV). Each 
request is fulfilled with the stock and then proceeds to the 
patient. Approximately 2 times per day, the store room is 
checked for inventory sufficiency. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Operational logistics and layout of the surgery center 
B. Simulated Entities  
      Patient demand is represented by an arrival rate and types 
of surgeries according to historical data, the technical setting 
and function of this hospital in the regional healthcare 
network. There are 11 categories of patient entities in the 
model, one representing patients in need of long-duration 
surgeries and the other ten require relatively short-duration 
surgeries, as shown in Table 1. The surgery center 
predominantly addresses eleven kinds of surgeries varying 
from 30 minutes to 5 hours, including 4 categories of 
surgical incision. Each incision is fulfilled with a particular 
type of surgery slot. The surgery slot of special clean has the 
least pollution parcels in the air and is able to implement all 
incision categories, whereas the normal clean and clean can 
handle only forensic surgery, anorectal surgery and similar 
cases with relatively lower level of requirements of 
contaminations. Together these capture a majority of the 
total surgeries executed in this hospital since its dedication to 
type I and II. Time periods of surgical durations are 
modelled using uniform distributions. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE I.  
SURGICAL INCISION CATEGORY, SLOT REQUIREMENTS AND 
AVERAGE DURATIONS. 
Incision 
Category 
Type of 
Surgery Slot 
Notes on Suitable Types of 
Surgeries (Estimated durations in 
hours) 
I 
Special clean 
Joint replacement (1-2), transplant 
(2-3), aural surgery(4-5), cardiac 
surgery 
(3-5), 
glaucoma 
and 
dacrocystitis (0.6-2) ;  
II 
Special clean 
Pleural surgery (5), orthopedics(0.5-
0.6), urethra (15-25), liver pancreas 
(3-4), bone surgeries (1), forensic 
surgery (1) 
III 
Normal 
or 
Special clean 
Forensic surgery (excluding Surgical 
Incision 
CategoryⅠ),gynecology 
and obstetrics (1-2); 
IV 
All slots 
Anorectal surgery (1), pollution class 
(1) 
 
      The surgery center is controlled by FIFO policy in the 
simulation study. Routine elective patients are served on the 
FIFO basis since they are assigned the surgeries according to 
the admission date. Although both patient- and material-
centric logistics are incorporated, we put more details on 
simulating the patient flows and fewer efforts on the 
regulation of inventories. The simulation model calculates 
performance metrics such as the total length of stay, waiting 
times, resource utilizations and stock levels. When a mission 
finishes, the staff leave the surgery slot and returns to offices 
and nursing stations. We also consider the possibility of no-
shows. This occurs before the preparation phase with a given 
probability of 5%. The cancelled agents are immediately 
removed from the simulation model. 
C. Sensitivity Analysis via MCS  
      The purpose of sensitivity analysis is to identify 
influential factors governing patient length of stay. The 
length of stay in this study did not include the surgical 
duration since it is already determined by the surgery type of 
the patient and cannot be changed. In variations of 
assumptions and policies, it is important to discover 
parameters that highly affect the key outputs of the system. 
Although theoretically the supply is already at optimal value 
to accommodate forecasted health care demand at the 
feasible study phase, demand might increase or decrease in 
the operation phase, leading to potential redesign efforts. The 
feasibility of additional resources enables decision makers 
updated of the current state of the system. A comprehensive 
view of potential constraint factors of the system is therefore 
needed.  
      A sensitivity analysis through MCS makes up for the 
disadvantage of using deterministic sensitivity analysis. In 
the deterministic way, the replications occur with relative 
lower numbers and might result in analysis biases if the 
system is inherently stochastic. During a Monte Carlo 
simulation, values are sampled randomly from the input 
probability distributions. Each set of samples is operated 
within a simulation run, and the resulting outcomes from that 
sample are recorded with a great amount of replications. In 
this way, Monte Carlo simulation provides more freedom of 
configurations and is able to realize factors of greater 
impacts. 
      The MCS in this study uses the normal distributions with 
realistic boundaries to detect response to an uncertainty of 
parameter value by a number of replications. In the surgery 
center simulation model, the size of each resource along the 
care pathway is defined as a parameter, where the value can 
be potentially varied. This variation is useful to quantify 
magnitude of responses. To this end, a MCS study examines 
the performance of different managerial alternations with an 
experimental design consisting of six one-way estimations. 
20 replications starting from idle were conducted for each 
scenario to simulate a 7-day time span. The total running 
time for the 200 runs is around 4 minutes on a standard PC. 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
      Simulation showed that all the function blocks of the 
model achieved unhindered entity flows with the default 
staffing setting and historic admission rate. Fig. 2 illustrates 
the distribution of average length of stay and relative 
differences of performance metrics with empirical estimation 
from the interview. For the waiting time, the time period 
centralized between 50 to 60 minutes with an average of 
53.51 minutes, because the surgery team has not fully 
prepared yet, (e.g., due to the inability to seize the 
appropriate surgery slot, surgeon or materials) or because of 
the inability to start pre-surgery tasks (due to unavailable 
nurses busy on earlier patients). An interview with the 
project development team produced estimation of the 
average length of stay and the utilization of different 
resource types. Overnights did not occur because patients 
were transferred to downstream units for postoperative 
activities. The calculated average waiting time of 50 minutes 
from the simulation model is in line with practices (55 
minutes) in real; the consistency also applies to resource 
utilizations. Above all, the simulation model is considered to 
be validated for investigating parameter variations in staffing 
configurations, surgery types and patient levels. 
      To the author’s knowledge, this simulation model of 
specific procedures  is of high accuracy that uses the already 
defined staffing settings, such as the details of surgery slots, 
beds and human resources (i.e., sizing and movement rules), 
and explicitly incorporated 11 surgery types requiring 
specific slots and surgical case durations. This is of particular 
importance in sensitivity analysis since the already defined 
values can be employed as upper or lower boundaries used to 
detect outputs. 
Figure 2.  Outputs of simulation: a) scatter diagram of average length of 
stay; b) resource utilizations per category 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
 
      Studying the sequential responses of staffing variations 
can provide more insights on whether the efficiency of the 
presented patient flow management has potential to be 
improved, identify by which sources and directions it can be 
improved and detect lower capacity threshold. To this end, 
this paper identified parameters related to sizing of beds, 
nurses, surgery slots and materials by analyzing the average 
length of stays within each particular feasible interval. We 
explored potential parameter values by modifying the current 
setting with resource extractions or additions. The magnitude 
of extractions and additions are around 4-5 units for all 
resource types. A uniform distribution was used to assign 
parameter values the same probability of occurrence.  
      The simulations demonstrated the benefits and penalties 
of changeable capacities towards average length of stays. 
The parameters and corresponding length of stays identified 
are illustrated in Fig. 3. We implement both increases and 
decreases on resource sizing, attempting to cover the whole 
ranges of them. It could be seen that the average length of 
stay becomes longer with greater deviations as long as the 
capacities are decreased. Especially for surgery slots and 
preparation beds, the capacities are not recommended to be 
lower than 3 and 2 units since the average length of stays 
will tip up dramatically. The small change implied that the 
average length of stays is more sensitive to capacity 
reductions of current levels rather than additions.   
Figure 3.  Scatter diagrams of length of stays and frequencies under 
staffing configurations 
      While length of stays could be eliminated by a larger-
capacity staffing, analyzing focused types of surgeries enable 
further insights on impacts from demand scenarios. In 
contrast to previous attempts to implement resource changes, 
types of surgery also result with variations in average length 
of stays—as Fig. 4 shows, the noticeable longer length of 
stays were identified by a 30% demand increase of either of 
type I. On the other hand, there is a moderate increase from a 
30% demand increase of current type III and IV. This means 
that the stay duration tends to be more acceptable in case of 
increased type 3 and 4 surgeries. The surgery center or 
regional health system planners shall be aware of 
consequences of receiving additional type I and II (special 
clean) at this hospital. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Scatter diagrams of length of stays and frequencies under 
patient levels 
      In this study, the sizing of surgery slots and nurses as 
well as the share of type I cases in the global list are 
indicated as the most influential factors. Moreover, the 
corresponding demand profile (+40%) results in surgery slots 
as the most important source of affecting the patient length 
of stay with a mean elasticity over 80%. In contrast, nurse 
sizing is first the most important factor in the baseline 
scenario but ended in less influential compared to surgery 
slots. In practice, there is a shortage of nurses to complete 
pre-surgery tasks under the current demand profile of 75 
cases per week. Hence, effects of resources do not 
necessarily stay the same through all demand profiles as 
indicated by the proportional output on the total length of 
stay. Marginal differences presented by such a frontier [Fig. 
5] provide valuable information on magnitudes of changes 
that are not easily captured from the healthcare planners’ 
point of view. 
      The patient length of stay also depends on configuration 
of surgery types. This is identified with the current patient 
level in Fig. 5. As an example, the output is more sensitive to 
the amount of type I surgery received than type II, although 
they share surgery slots. However, this influence is smaller 
from type III and IV. We can conclude that type I affects the 
waiting time most. The effect of type I is almost 8 times than 
the one of type IV. The proper combination of surgery types 
need to consider various factors, amongst others case 
urgency, resource availability and accountability. In this 
study, the central point is the impact of category on patient 
waiting times. It remains as a research question for future 
studies to identify the exact combination of surgery types 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
associated with different surgical complexities and case 
durations when the system performance is to be improved. 
      The influences of candidate factors with the subject 
change were investigated by MCS. In line with the 
expectation, there was a correlation between amid resource 
levels and the performance of the system. Furthermore, there 
existed a noticeable difference for the average patient length 
of stay for increased demands of type I and II. The findings 
implied that the MCS method was able to alleviate the 
computational efforts than deterministic technique in 
sensitivity analysis of parameters under the described values. 
Given the current form, patients spent less waiting times with 
increased nurse level than they did with increased surgery 
slot level. However, it did appear that additional surgery 
slots were a rewarding option under increased demand 
scenario. 
Figure 5.  Scatter diagrams of length of stays and frequencies under 
demand scenarios 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
      In this paper, an event-driven simulation approach for 
sensitivity analysis was developed to a surgery center of a 
general 
hospital. 
Since 
implementation 
of 
staffing 
configuration changes and demand management strategies 
would be difficult in the use case, influential factors on 
patient length of stay are identified based on sensitivity 
analysis. This sensitivity analysis is conducted via MCS in 
which each parameter is assigned the same probability of 
occurrence. The results of the sensitivity indicate that effects 
of changing resource capacities might vary in different 
demand profiles. In addition, the patient length of stay in the 
surgery center is more vulnerable to capacity reductions 
rather than additions. The moderate reductions of patient 
length of stay by increasing capacities of corresponding 
resources indicate that adding more infrastructures might not 
be a feasible way of improved system performance.  
      The following conclusions are subject to the conditions 
and limitations of this study: 1) the MCS approach is more 
effective than the deterministic analysis in evaluating the 
sensitivity of resource- and demand-related parameters; 2) 
fluctuations with the type III and IV had limited effect on 
average patient length of stay compared to type I, and;  3) the 
magnitude of responses by the resource levels subjected to 
patient levels were not significantly consistent as long as 
given increased surgery assignments.  
      The elasticity measures defined in Section 2 are utilized 
for the purpose of identifying influential factors towards 
patient length of stays. In particular, three demand profiles 
are implemented to further recognize important resource 
candidate for future scenarios. It examines to what extent the 
patient length of stay respond to influences from different 
staffing configurations. This sensitivity analysis via a MCS 
and elasticity measurements enable understanding of the 
relation between design factors and system outputs and how 
well the latter can be determined and improved by design 
efforts especially in the planning phase.  
      A sensitivity analysis generates clues and references for 
effectiveness of controllable resources to improve patient 
length of stay. Follow-up researches shall enable modelling 
participants as agents, so that both master and decision rules 
of staffing relocations can be fully deployed to approximate 
the reality. Besides the lack of agent’s interactions, we admit 
that detailed scheduling has not been integrated into the 
current table. Apart from regulations, in what way the 
surgery scheduling is better engineered with above 
reinforcements is also worthwhile to tackle based on a 
simulation approach. In one of the studied patient levels, the 
amount of surgery slots was found to heavily affect the 
performance. It is therefore recommended that it may be 
beneficial for stay duration reductions to increase the 
provision of slots in case that the hospital is assigned more 
surgery missions. In what way to better design and distribute 
dedications considering tolerances of local surgery centers in 
the regional health care network constitutes another 
interesting research question in the future. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
      The authors would thank participants of project 
development team of use case for their assistances with data. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Achieving Operating Room Efficiency through Process Integration: 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12793445 
[2] B. Denton, J. Viapiano, and A. Vogl. “Optimization of Surgery 
Sequencing and Scheduling Decisions under Uncertainty,” Health 
Care Management Science, vol. 10, Nov. 2006, pp. 13–24, doi: 
10.1007/s10729-006-9005-4.  
[3] F. Liang, Y. Guo, and R. Fung, “Simulation-Based Optimization for 
Surgery Scheduling in Operation Theatre Management Using 
Response Surface Method,” Journal of Medical Systems, vol. 39, Sep. 
2015, pp. 1-11, doi: 10.1007/s10916-015-0349-5. 
[4] N. Mustafee, K. Katsaliaki, and S. Taylor, “Profiling Literature in 
Healthcare Simulation,” Simulation, vol. 86, Feb. 2010, pp. 543–558, 
doi: 10.1177/0037549709359090. 
[5] R. Banomyong and A. Sopadang, “Using Monte Carlo Simulation to 
Refine Emergency Logistics Response Models: A Case Study,” 
International 
Journal 
of 
Physical 
Distribution 
& 
Logistics 
Management, 
vol. 
40, 
Aug. 
2010, 
pp. 
709–721, 
doi: 
10.1108/09600031011079346. 
[6] P. Barton, S. Bryan, and S. Robinson, “Modelling in the Economic 
Evaluation of Health Care: Selecting the Appropriate Approach,” 
Journal of Health Services Research & Policy, vol. 9, Apr. 2004, pp. 
110–118, doi: 10.1258/135581904322987535.  
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

[7] E. Huang, Q. Zhang, S. Brown, M. Drum, D. Meltzer, and M. Chin, 
“The Cost-Effectiveness of Improving Diabetes Care in U.S. 
Federally Qualified Community Health Centers,” Health Services 
Research, vol. 42, May. 2007, pp. 2174–2193, doi: 10.1111/j.1475-
6773.2007.00734.x. 
[8] S. Schutte, J. Polling, F. Helm, and H. Simonsz, “Human Error in 
Strabismus Surgery: Quantification with a Sensitivity Analysis,” 
Graefe’s Archive for Clinical and Experimental Ophthalmology, vol. 
247, Oct. 2008, pp. 399-409, doi: 10.1007/s00417-008-0961-x. 
[9] K. Luangkesorn and Z. Eren-Dogu, “Markov Chain Monte Carlo 
Methods for Estimating Surgery Duration,” Journal of Statistical 
Computation and Simulation, vol. 86, May. 2014, pp. 262–278, doi: 
10.1080/00949655.2015.1004065. 
[10] G. Lymperopoulou, L. Petrokokkinos, P. Papagiannis, M. Steiner, V. 
Spevacek, J. Semnicka, P. Dvorak, and I. Seimenis, “Monte Carlo 
Simulations to Optimize Experimental Dosimetry of Narrow Beams 
Used in Gamma Knife Radio-Surgery,” Nuclear Instruments and 
Methods in Physics Research Section A: Accelerators, Spectrometers, 
Detectors and Associated Equipment, vol. 39, Sep. 2007, pp. 548-
551, doi: 10.1016/j.nima.2007.05.227. 
[11] W. Huberts, C. Jonge, W. Linden, M. Inda, J. Tordoir, F. Vosse, and 
E. Bosboom, “A Sensitivity Analysis of a Personalized Pulse Wave 
Propagation Model for Arteriovenous Fistula Surgery. Part A: 
Identification of Most Influential Model Parameters,” Medical 
Engineering & Physics, vol. 35, Jun. 2013, pp.810–826, doi: 
10.1016/j.medengphy.2012.08.012. 
[12] P. Cerveri, A. Manzotti, M. Marchente, N. Confalonieri, and G. 
Baroni, “Mean-Shifted Surface Curvature Algorithm for Automatic 
Bone Shape Segmentation in Orthopedic Surgery Planning: A 
Sensitivity Analysis,” Computer Aided Surgery, vol. 17, Apr. 2012, 
pp. 128–141, doi: 10.3109/10929088.2012.670667. 
[13] V. Loving, D. Edwards, K. Roche, J. Steele, S. Sapareto, S. Byrum, 
and D. Schomer, “Monte Carlo Simulation to Analyze the Cost-
Benefit of Radioactive Seed Localization Versus Wire Localization 
for Breast-Conserving Surgery in Fee-for-Service Health Care 
Systems 
Compared 
With 
Accountable 
Care 
Organizations,” 
American Journal of Roentgenology, vol. 202, Jun. 2014, pp. 1383–
1388, doi: 10.2214/AJR.13.11368. 
[14] C. Gigliotti, L. Altabella, F. Boschi, and A. Spinelli, “Monte Carlo 
Feasibility Study for Image Guided Surgery: From Direct Beta Minus 
Detection to Cerenkov Luminescence Imaging,” Journal of 
Instrumentation, 
vol. 
11, 
Jul. 
2016, 
doi: 
10.1088/1748-
0221/11/07/P07021. 
[15] A. Stone, M. Grant, C. Roda, D. Hobson, T. Pawlik, C. Wu, and E. 
Wick, “Implementation Costs of an Enhanced Recovery After 
Surgery Program in the United States: A Financial Model and 
Sensitivity Analysis Based on Experiences at a Quaternary Academic 
Medical Center,” Journal of the American College of Surgeons, vol. 
222, Jan. 2016, pp. 219–225, doi: 10.1016/j.jamcollsurg.2015.11.021. 
[16] R. Ferreira, F. Coelli, W. Pereira, and R. Almeida, “Optimizing 
Patient Flow in a Large Hospital Surgical Centre by Means of 
Discrete-Event Computer Simulation Models,” Journal of Evaluation 
in Clinical Practice, vol. 14, Nov. 2008, pp. 2127–2130, doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2753.2007.00939.x. 
[17] C. Zhang, H. Hanchi, S. Meijer, "Evaluating the Effect of Centralized 
Administration on Health Care Performances Using Discrete-Event 
Simulation,” Proc. IEEE 17th Portland International Conference on 
Management of Engineering and Technology, in press.  
 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

