Analysis of Medical Records Management in Brazilian Basic Healthcare Units:
A Qualitative Approach
Rodolfo Barriviera
Federal Institute of Paran´a State
Londrina, Brazil
Email: rodolfo.barriviera@ifpr.edu.br
Carlos Maziero
Federal University of Paran´a State
Curitiba, Brazil
Email: maziero@inf.ufpr.br
Celita Trelha
State University of Londrina
Londrina, Brazil
Email: celita@uel.br
Abstract—Researchers around the world have searched for ways
to control access of Electronic Medical Records (EMR) in the
healthcare environment, from primary to tertiary sectors. Each
country, state and city has particular means of controlling that
access. However, there are places where there is no digital control,
and this is the reality of several Brazilian regions. The objectives
of this work were to understand how Basic Healthcare Units
(BHU) control access to patients’ medical records, to verify the
existence of both paper and electronic medical records, and
to compare the situation in BHUs with the current legislation.
A qualitative research was conducted through semi-structured
interviews with 29 employees from BHUs in ﬁve regions of the city
of Londrina - Paran´a (Brazil). Afterwards, the content analysis
proposed by Bardin was carried out. The results show that the
healthcare environments studied in this research lack computeri-
zation and electronic control of patients’ medical records and they
still use paper medical records. This research makes it possible
to compare the reality practiced in the BHU with the current
legislation. The paper seeks an understanding of the requirements
of the healthcare servers to support future research into the im-
plementation of computational models in electronic records and
access control effectively applicable in the healthcare context. The
ﬁndings of this qualitative research provide deeper knowledge of
the reality of healthcare environments, the employees’ behavior,
patients behavior and the interaction between these elements and
the medical records.
Keywords–Electronic Medical Record; Qualitative Research;
Basic Healthcare Units; Cloud Computing.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A medical record can be deﬁned as the patient’s or
client’s organized and concise documentation, containing a
record of medical care provided, as well as all information,
examinations, procedures and any pertinent documents. The
medical record belongs to the patient, the records are under the
care and responsibility of the doctors and health institutions.
Therefore, it is an extremely relevant document mainly for the
healthcare system (containing an easy-to-handle chronological
evolutionary data, that allows a global view of the patient’s
clinical status, permitting communication among the different
healthcare professionals), education (being used to discuss
cases among teachers and students); scientiﬁc research (the
information contained in the medical record can serve as
secondary data for research), quality control (enabling the
management of medical and hospital activities), and for the
control of the costs that are dependent on the accuracy and
details of the information contained in the medical records.
The management of medical records has become easier in
the last decades through computational advances that allow
previously-known technologies to be improved and used in
different ways in computational environments. The advances
in technology and its increasing presence in the patient care
process, such as Electronic Health Record (EHR), Electronic
Medical Record (EMR) and Picture Archiving and Commu-
nication System (PACS), have increased the demand for the
collaborative sharing of patient clinical data among healthcare
professionals. However, the degree of technological devel-
opment of Brazilian health services is highly heterogeneous
and, in this context, the medical record is usually one of the
last to be computerized. This is mostly due to economic and
cultural problems related to the resistance to informatics by
the possible users, difﬁculties or lack of access to software,
and even presumed legal and/or ethical impediments.
Research on healthcare information systems in the cloud
has been intensiﬁed because of the need for technologies
that may be considered both attributes and characteristics of
the environmental context. Nonetheless, in general, studies in
this area are based barely on the information contained in
the current legislation and does not encompass observation
reports of the real healthcare environment. This makes it
difﬁcult to understand the actual needs of the users so that
the implemented solutions can be applied in an efﬁcient way.
Based on the above, the objective of this study was to
understand how the BHU controls access to patients’ medical
records, to verify the occurrence of the use of paper and digital
medical records, and to compare the reality with the current
legislation.
This paper is structured divided into six Sections. In Sec-
tion 1, the challenges of the healthcare environment regarding
medical records are presented. In Section 2, related studies are
presented. In Section 3, the concept of the patient’s electronic
medical record is presented. Section 4 describes the methods
used in this qualitative research. In Section 5, the results
obtained through the qualitative research are presented, and
ﬁnally, in Section 6, the work is concluded.
II.
RELATED WORK
The main objective of the research projects using quali-
tative research around the world is to understand the reality
from the point of view of the individuals involved in that
environment or situation.
The qualitative research with semi-structured interview
presented in this study identiﬁed, through the workers of the
basic healthcare units, the most important characteristics that
should exist in the control of access in a web system containing
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

the electronic medical records. The related works described
in this section are related to this work because they present
qualitative research methodologies that aim to know the reality
of the healthcare environments and the patients.
Miller [1] used the methodology of qualitative research
through the semi-structured interview and sought to evaluate
the acceptance of the use of health websites or portals contain-
ing the electronic medical records. The results of these studies
showed concerns about the consequences of improper access
such as alteration of medical records by unauthorized persons
and exclusion of treatments and medications prescribed by
physicians.
The results of Miller’s research can also be noticed in
this current study. The research demonstrated that the medical
records are exposed in inappropriate places where authorized
and non-authorized people constantly pass through to handle
the medical records. This concern about improper access was
also evidenced through the responses of some interviewees
indicating that many medical records are lost partially or
totally.
Web information system for access to electronic medical
records has been developed around the world. In his work, Shi-
mada [2] does a qualitative research with transversal analysis to
identify the patient’s adoption of the web platform containing
the electronic medical record.
The results of the study revealed that patients with life-
threatening condition and those in need of intensive treatment
are likely to adhere to the use of eletronic medical records on
the web. On the other hand, patients who are not critically ill
or patients who are only in a regular clinical follow-up are less
likely to use a web system containing their electronic medical
records.
These results were not evidenced in this study since the
electronic records in the observed BHU are not implemented
and patients do not have easy access to them. Patients need
to undergo bureaucratic authorization requests to access the
document, even if the current legislation ensures them the right
to obtain it.
Lester [3] conducted a literature review with the analysis
of 34 papers on the beneﬁt of personal health records or
electronic medical records. The results identiﬁed concerns
related to patients’ understanding of the medical records, legal
liability, response time of access providers, and the need for
the US health system to ensure the protection of information,
its usefulness and ease of access.
The results evidenced in this review corroborate with those
found in this study, since the same indications cited above were
listed as concerns of the health servers about the handling of
the paper medical record and indicated as possible beneﬁts of
the medical records computerization.
III.
ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORD (EMR)
The EMR was developed by physicians and nurses to
systematically as a way of remembering the clinical facts and
events of each patient.
The EMR represents the best means of communication
between the healthcare team members responsible for the
patient assistance. The EMR subsidises the continuity and the
veriﬁcation of the evolutionary state of the patient’s health
condition and in a more comprehensive perspective can also
be used to assess procedures and their results.
Over the evolution of the EMR, in 1997, the Institute of
Medicine deﬁned it as [4]:
An electronic record residing in a system speciﬁcally
designed to support users by providing access to
a complete set of accurate data, alerts, decision
support systems and other features such as links from
displayed information to pertinent literature.
As Patr´ıcio [4] states, efforts began in the 1990s in isolated
centres in Brazil for the development of electronic medical
records. Due to the need of standardization of the medical
record, the Ministry of Health proposed in 2002 the minimum
information about the patient that should be included in the
EMR and the entities that should supervise its ﬁlling.
According to article 5 of the Brazilian Federal Constitu-
tion [5], all Brazilians are ensured of the inviolability of the
right to the security of their information. The CFM (CFM,
Portuguese for “Federal Council of Medicine”), through the
CFM Resolution No. 1.331 / 89, Ordinances No. 1.638 / 2002
and No. 1.639 / 2002, informs how the temporality, custody
and handling of the medical records have to be processed,
as well as how the computerized systems have to be used.
These resolutions and ordinances ensure: authenticity, integrity,
conﬁdentiality, privacy and document storage.
Following the advance of the EMR, the Federal Council of
Medicine created the CFM Resolution No. 1.821 / 2007, which
approved the technical standards for documents digitization
and the use of computerized systems for the storage and
handling of patient records, authorizing the elimination of the
paper records.
After the resolution, all healthcare professionals can check
clinical information from patients, regardless the professional’s
location. Technology provides integration and cost savings.
However, the authentication and authorization process has
become a major challenge in these domains.
IV.
METHODS
In this study, a qualitative study was conducted with
a semi-structured interview at BHUs in Londrina - Paran´a
(Brazil). The information collected from the interviews can be
extrapolated to the other Brazilian locations, as Brazil does not
have any national uniﬁed system that meets the demands and
characteristics required for a computer access control system,
and also because there is no sharing of information between
BHU and Hospitals in Brazil. In order to carry out this study,
an authorization from the Municipal Health Department was
obtained and approved by the Ethics Committee of the Evan-
gelical Beneﬁcent Association of Londrina - AEBEL - (CAAE
51829215.5.0000.5696); This study is also in accordance with
the Resolution No. 466/12 of the National Health Council [6].
For data collection, a semi-structured interview schedule
was elaborated and submitted to content analysis by experi-
enced judges in the area, who analyzed the content of the
questions and whether they were adequate and coherent to
what was proposed. Then, three preliminary interviews were
carried out to calibrate the researcher and verify the application
of the questionnaires for the purpose of possible readjustment.
There was no need to readjust the interview schedule questions
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

and these preliminary interviews were discarded from the ﬁnal
results.
The ﬁnal script contained 17 questions, ﬁve of them related
to the characterization of the participants (age, occupation,
function in the BHU, time working in that function, length
of higher education course) and the others were related to
the medical record use (use of paper and electronic medical
records, purpose of medical records, frequency of use, required
information and registration, initial process of medical records,
difﬁculties in handling and interpretation of the recorded infor-
mation, transfer of medical records to other healthcare units
and homes, professionals who access these medical records,
document archiving and collection).
Next, one BHU from each region of the city - North, South,
East, West and Centre was drawn. For each selected BHU, the
respective coordinator was contacted in order to explain the
purpose of the research and to schedule interviews with the
professionals.
The interviews were conducted with healthcare profession-
als and administrative technicians who agreed to voluntarily
attend in this study and signed the free and clariﬁed consent
form.
The number of interviewed individuals depended on the
saturation of the interview. Individuals from different areas that
access the medical records in different ways were interviewed
until the answers began to repeat themselves, which occurred
after three to four interviews in each BHU, having been safely
extended to 5 to 6 interviews in each of them, with a 15
minutes average duration each, totalling 29 interviews.
Subsequently, the process of literal transcription of the
recordings of each interview began. After the transcriptions,
a content analysis was performed as proposed by Bardin [7].
The author describes the content analysis as “set of techniques
of communications analysis that uses systematic and objective
procedures to describe the content of messages, indicators
(quantitative or not) that allow the inference of knowledge
regarding the conditions of production/receipt (inferred vari-
ables) of these messages”.
After the literal transcription, the following categories
were established: 1) Medical records information, 2) Advan-
tages using of handwritten medical records, 3) Disadvantages
of handwritten records, 4) Sharing and transfer of medical
records, 5) Use of the medical records in home care, 6) Release
of medical records to the patient, 7) Collection of medical
records.
The observation was also made aiming a real participation
of the researcher in the researched community and through the
senses as seeing, hearing and examining facts or phenomena
to obtain certain aspects of reality. The observation technique
has the objective of observing the subjects’ environment and
describing it from the researcher’s perspective. In this work, the
unstructured observation was chosen for data collection. The
analysis included aspects as coverage area, address changes,
systems, paper medical records, eventual medical records, pa-
tient care, medical records room, lost medical records, medical
records exposure and exposure of BHU servers.
V.
RESULTS
The qualitative research presents a methodological rigor
that must be followed for its application. Among these rigors
are the semi-structured interview and the observation process
that is done by the researcher in the study environment of the
research.
The standard statistic for this type of research is the de-
scriptive one. 29 subjects aged 20 to 58 years were interviewed,
the average age being about 38 years. The occupation of the
interviewees were: interns - 1 (3.44%), administrative techni-
cian - 2 (6.89%), oral health technician - 1 (3.44%), nursing
auxiliary - 14 (48.27%), physician - 1 (3.44%), community
agent - 4 (13.79%), nurse - 5 (17.24%) and physiotherapist -
1 (3.44%). Working time in basic health units varied between 1
month and 30 years, the average time spent working in a BHU
was 8 years. The working time in the speciﬁc BHU varying
between 1 month and 27 years, the average time spent working
at that speciﬁc BHU was 5 years.
The employees in administrative positions, administrative
technician and accountant, had restricted access to the medical
records - they accessed only the patient’s registration data,
the other positions had full access to the medical records. All
employees use the medical records daily and for every single
patient. In this Section, the results found in the semi-structured
interview and on the observation are described.
A. Semi-structured interview
The categories resulting from the process of analysing
interviewees’ responses are described below. The quotations
displayed in quotation marks represent the words of the
interviewees, respecting the way of speaking of each one.
1 - Medical records information: In this category, the
interviewees’ statements about the notes contained in the
medical record and the difﬁculty with the lack of annotations
pertinent to the patient’s medical history are described: “All the
patient’s medical history is in the medical records, right? (...)
Ideally, each care or service should be reported. This does not
always happen. There are things that are abbreviated, others
are just not written (...)” (interviewee 4).
By these reports, it was possible to notice that many
important information to the medical record registration are
omitted. As a consequence, it puts the next heath care at risk.
It also can affect the search of the previous patient history
if this one presents a future disease, as well as hamper the
diagnosis of possible drug interactions that may interfere with
the patient’s health. Furthermore, vaccines reapplications can
occur if there is a missing registration of vaccinations or if a
new request has been made because no previous requests are
found.
These reports indicate not only that the patient health is at
risks but also the misuse of public money, since due to a lack
of information the patient may unnecessarily go through the
same vaccines or health unnecessary examinations [4].
2 - Advantages of using handwritten medical records: In
this category, the interviewees highlight the difﬁculties dealing
with poor and outdated electronic equipment and also indicate
that the fact that handwritten pleases some people [4]: “If the
medical record was electronic, under the conditions we have
today, it would be a bit complicated because there is no enough
computers, the system is very slow”(interviewee 5).
Regarding this topic, some individuals reported the precar-
iousness of the computer equipment, the difﬁculty in handling
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

the technology and the software, plus the shortage of equip-
ment that suit their needs. In general, there are little equipment
available and the ones available, according to the interviewees,
are in a state of dereliction and outdated and the people who
are supposed to use the system do not receive adequate training
for the use of the equipment and software.
3 - Disadvantages of handwritten records: There are
more reports in this session and they generally talk about
the spelling unintelligibility, the loss of documents, difﬁcult
handling the records and the storage insufﬁciency [4]. “But
sometimes we are looking for the result of an exam to know
if the physician has already seen it and the difﬁculty is huge.
The difﬁculty in searching, reading, interpreting.” (interviewee
1). “The patients do not know what medication they are taking,
so they come to the BHU to collect the medication, you take
a look at the previous prescription and sometimes it is unread-
able or there are some not listed medications” (interviewee 3),
“A major problem is the individual’s handwriting” (interviewee
29), “(...) besides the loss of document there are a lot of new
sheets so we kind of just clip them together(...)” (interviewee
1).
In this category, many different points are cited as dis-
advantages. The main concern among the interviews was the
fact that the colleagues’ spelling was sometimes unintelligible.
One of the interviewees reported, after the recorder was
disconnected, that in some cases when it is not possible to
understand the handwriting, the nurses search on “Google”
possible names of medicines used for that problem indicated
by the doctor. This practice results in a big risk to the health
of the patients who go through the proposed treatment without
knowing what is being given to them, trusting the service
and believing that the treatment is being given by competent
professionals.
Another issue mentioned is the difﬁculty in handling the
medical record due to the large number of pages attached to
it, this situation facilitates the loss of information and also
the detachment of parts of the medical record. Moreover,
the collection, more detailed in category 7, was indicated as
a disadvantage due to the difﬁculty in ﬁnding the medical
record and when not found it is necessary to open a new
medical record titled as “eventual”. The same patient may have
several “eventual” folders. The original medical record and the
eventual folders in some cases are attached to the same medical
record when it is found but in other cases this records are not
found.
4 - Sharing and transfer of medical records: In this
topic the interviewees report how information sharing occurs
between BHU and hospitals. “But here in Brazil it does not
exist. There is a different medical record to each place the
patient is assisted” (interviewee 19); “The city hall is not paired
with the hospitals of the region. We do not have access to their
medical records.” (interviewee 20).
The interviewed individuals report that there is no sharing
of information between BHUs or hospitals. An individual can
present a proof of address and register in several regions of
the city and in several hospitals using the same SUS (SUS -
Portuguese for “Brazil’s Uniﬁed Health System”) identiﬁcation
card and have a distinct medical record in each different health
environment. Likewise, even without a proof of address, this
individual, if necessary, may attend several BHUs who will
register their visit in an “eventual” folder and their complete
medical record would be in their original BHU.
In this aspect of the problem, it is important to point
out that the lack of adequate sharing between the BHU and
hospitals leads to a poor service provided, it offers risk to the
patients in a state of fragility. As an example, if a victim of an
accident arrives at a hospital incapable to report its previous
history, this person may suffer complications due to the lack
of important information provided for the maintenance of its
life. This may also facilitate fraud and inappropriate use of the
health system [8].
5 - Use of the medical records in home care: This
topic describes the management of medical records in external
use situations. “We write observations down. There is an
annotation notebook. When we come back to the BHU we
transfer the information to the medical records.” (interviewee
18), “We separate the medical record and carry it with us,
particularly during medical visits. In nursing and community
agents visits, they do not carry the records along” (interviewee
28).
In this category, two different situations are observed:
professionals who remove the medical records from the BHU,
leading to the risk of loss of the document, and those who just
write down the information when they return to the BHU, may
losing some relevant information.
6 - Release of medical records to the patient: This item
reports the procedure for the removal of the medical record
by the individual or family member. “The patient goes to
the administration department to ﬁll out a form requesting
the medical record. This request goes to the “Vila da Sa´ude”
(freely translated as “Health Village”), they run an evaluation
process and after the “Vila da Sa´ude” sends to the patient a
copy of its medical record” (interviewee 5), “The family does
not have access to medical records” (interviewee 6), “We only
provide a copy of it if there is a judicial request” (interviewee
9).
7 - Collection of medical records: Respondents reported
the use of a catalog system that can be confusing and bring the
system into disrepute. “When (...) the person ID, (...) is, for
example, 1505 (...) we know it ends in 5. So, we look for the
lowest number of 4 and ﬁnd the records. (...) Sometimes you
do not ﬁnd it though. (...) There are those records placed in the
visiting folder, because they are hospitalized (those lying on a
bed), and there are the pregnant women who have separated
records” (interviewee 24).
When the patients ﬁrst look for the health service, they
are registered in an internet system called e-SUS using their
personal data and address. The system generates a unique ID
number. From this ID a page header is generated and then
printed, giving rise to the medical record.
The medical record is stored from its ﬁnal number, 0 to 9,
which represents the quadrants of the physical shelves of the
storage room of each BHU. Within each quadrant the medical
records are organized manually from the lowest number to the
highest, which may vary from unit to thousand, for example:
at the end 5 there are the medical records with IDs 5, 15, 105,
1005, 10.015 and so on.
This arrangement can be even more complicated in the
separation of pregnant woman or a diabetic and hypertensive
person. For instance, a patient who is hypertensive and diabetic
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

would be registered in which part of the storage, among
diabetics or among hypertensive? This type of classiﬁcation
can hamper the management and searching of the medical
records.
B. Observation
In the course of the observation it was found that:
1 - Coverage area. Each BHU provides assistance to
a speciﬁc area deﬁned by the Uniﬁed Health System. This
coverage area corresponds to the boundaries of the neigh-
bourhoods surrounding the BHU. All patients residing within
this deﬁned area can be assisted and monitored through their
medical records kept at their speciﬁc BHU.
2 - Systems. The metropolitan region of Londrina possess
in digital format only the basic register of the citizens of
the region in the e-SUS web software (integrated with SUS)
and Sa´ude Web (software integrated to e-SUS and focused on
vaccines and some exams in the health area).
This register is restricted to the identiﬁcation number - ID,
name, date of birth, gender, National ID, marital status, city of
birth, telephone number, home address, zip code, other contact
numbers, name of the person responsible for supervision and
safety (if applicable), occupation, place of work and vaccine
registration.
3 - Paper medical records. When the patient is assisted in
the UBS for the ﬁrst time, its personal information available in
the e-SUS system is conﬁrmed with the patient or responsible
person, from that moment a proof of address is requested to
the patient to verify if it lives in the area of coverage of that
speciﬁc UBS.
After this veriﬁcation, the technician informs that within
24 hours he/she will personally go to the patient’s residence
to conﬁrm the address. Next, a form with the basic patient
data is printed and placed in a new envelop, this envelop
will have the patient’s ID manually written on the front of
it. From that moment on, every time this patient comes to the
BHU, a single sheet with the annotations of the appointment
is inserted in this envelope. These sheets have no header, they
are white A4 papers with lines. It is worth mentioning that the
patient’s data are only on the ﬁrst sheet, the one which starts
the medical record. The medical record, then, is formed by
this initial sheet with the basic data and the other single sheets
with the appointments’ information.
4 - Eventual medical record. In some situations the BHU
receives patients who do not reside in its area of coverage. As
BHUs are not allowed to deny assistance, a temporary medical
record is made. This type of document is called an eventual
medical record. The eventual medical record is a register with
the basic personal data of the patient and will also contain the
information about the service performed at BHU.
They are kept in the BHU. This record is transferred
to another BHU (the BHU in the patient’s area) only when
requested. It has been found that this medical record is most
often forgotten by patients and is not transferred.
5 - Home address change. When a family or patient
changes its home address beyond the BHU coverage area
(moves to another location), the patient must notify the other
BHU (the one that provides healthcare at their new address) to
request the transfer of their medical records. In this case, these
medical records are stored in speciﬁc boxes in the BHU that
provided this service. If there is no request for transfer this ﬁle
by the corresponding BHU of the patient’s region, this health
history will be lost.
6 - Services. It has been veriﬁed that during the operating
hours of the BHUs the medical records are exclusively man-
aged on paper. Each BHU receives an average of 400 to 1000
patients per day, depending on the period of health surveillance
or the absence of epidemics.
In order to provide care for each patient, the BHU applies
the following procedure: ﬁrst, the technician consults the
patient’s ID in the web system and conﬁrms the personal data.
Secondly, the server asks the patient to wait in the waiting
room while the technician goes to the room of the medical
records to retrieve the ﬁle with the respective ID and after
ﬁnding the medical records they proceed with the service.
Searching for the medical record can be quick if the last
person who handled it saved the ﬁle in the correct location.
If the patient resides outside the coverage area of this speciﬁc
BHU, he/she will be advised to go to another BHU, but if it
is an emergency the patient will be assisted in this BHU.
7 - Medical records room. The average size of the medical
records room in the BHU is approximately 15m2. There are
vertical and horizontal wood shelves forming ﬁxed squares
on the wall. These squares are called “quadrants” by BHU
ofﬁcials. The quadrants are sorted from digit 0 (zero) to 9
(nine), they are called “ﬁnals”. These ﬁnal numbers represent
the last ID number of each patient and they are used to organize
and store the medical records, for example: if the patient has
an ID 5, ID 1205, ID 1000005 or ID 15, it will be stored in
the quadrant of number 5. Inside each quadrant, the medical
records are ordered from the lowest number to the highest.
In most BHUs, the medical records of those who are
hospitalized (those lying on a bed) are placed in plastic or
cardboard boxes separated by numerical order and not by
ﬁnal number. In some BHU, patients with diabetes and high
blood pressure are also separated into boxes and are not in the
quadrants.
In the course of the everyday healthcare, the already used
medical records are placed in a box and at the end of the day
they are stored in their respective quadrants or speciﬁc boxes.
As veriﬁed each BHU has approximately 25,000 possible
patients in its coverage area, which generates an average of
10,000 to 20,000 medical records per BHU. Each medical
record has an average of 20 sheets. However, some medical
records have up to 200 sheets. As a result, the employees
reported that this type of organization is sometimes inefﬁcient
and many medical records are lost or damaged in this process.
8 - Loss of medical records. When the administrative
technician does not keep the medical record at the correct place
(quadrant or speciﬁc box) after a service or at the end of the
day, a serious problem is caused.
The probability of this medical record disappears is very
high. In cases of loss of medical records, the technician
normally takes an average of 15 minutes looking for it before
give up trying to ﬁnd it. In these cases, a new medical record
is made with the patient’s cadastral data.
Afterwards, during the service the technician seeks to
retrieve the most recent history of the previous visits, such
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

as: medical prescriptions, health problems and treatments. As
veriﬁed, the loss of medical records is constant, including those
older than 5 or 10 years.
9 - Exposure of medical records. There is a constant
patient ﬂow during BHU’s opening hours, especially in poor
neighbourhoods and epidemics periods.
What has been noticed during the BHU’s operation time is
the onerous and frequent search of medical records, besides its
exposure due to poor structural and organizational conditions
of the BHU.
In some BHUs it was observed that the medical records
already used were kept in desks, with no organization, in the
hall where patients transit before and after the appointments
or they were all placed in boxes by the hall and then stored at
the end of the day, after the working hours.
As stated previously, the medical records have a header
with identiﬁcation only on the ﬁrst page and the rest of it
is made by just white sheets with lines that do not identify
the patient, which facilitates the loss of part of the medical
record or the entire record itself. In other BHUs, there was a
technician allocated to work all day storing medical records, it
corresponds to at least one less employee treating the patients.
10 - Exposure to health risks for employees and
patients. The fact that medical records are on paper puts
the health of BHU workers at risk. As a consequence of the
constant patient ﬂow and the costly search/loss of medical
records, the health carers cannot invest much time in reading
the patient’s history. Likewise, there is no place in the medical
record highlighting the information with the highest level of
relevance.
The servers commonly retrieve only the latest information
about the patient, from the latest sheet. This fact exposes
them to situations of risk. As reported in an interview, the
nursing technician Maria (ﬁctitious name) was told by a nurse
friend that the patient she dealt with was diagnosed with HIV
infection only after she gave the patient an antibiotic injection.
This situation occurred because Maria did not look all over the
patient’s medical record, she looked over the last sheets only.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This article presented a qualitative research carried out in
the context of the Brazilian Basic Healthcare Units, aiming
to understand the reality of the manipulation processes of
patients’ medical information by health professionals.
This research rigorously followed all the necessary proce-
dures to apply the qualitative research to fulﬁl the objectives
of this work.
This study made it possible to experience the real envi-
ronment of BHUs health and as the control of access to the
patient’s medical records happens, verifying that the medical
records are exclusively in paper. On the other hand, the
identiﬁcation of the patient and some records of exams and
vaccines are recorded in Electronic format, but employees do
not always include these data in the system.
The research shows how the patient data is managed, who
can access/change them, how they are used and for what
purpose. The interviewees’ reports revealed situations that
reﬂect problems in the area of systems integration, access
control, privacy and information storage.
It was observed that the absence of a computerized health
system integrated between the BHUs and hospitals impairs the
patient care, increasing the waiting time for service, causes
the patient to need to report his previous history in each
appointment at different BHUs (and their veriﬁcation tests can
be accessed), generating a greater demand for time to each
service, unnecessary spending of public money for having to
redo exams that have already been carried out, which leads to
delays in general care, increasing queues and frustration with
the health system.
The BHU routine demonstrates the fragility of safety in
accessing the patient’s medical records. Due to the physical
conditions of the BHU there are no appropriate places for
the medical records. They are placed in makeshift halls,
inappropriate shelves, counters and in many improper places
in the BHU. There is a regulation that determines which
people can write down in the medical record and/or read its
information. However, there is no way to prevent undue access.
This research will serve as a subsidy for the elaboration
of computational models of electronic medical records and of
access control to the information that are close to users’ needs,
promoting greater consideration of the confrontation of the
reality found in the environment against the current legislation
in the country, as well as other countries that use electronic
medical records in their clinical-hospital practice.
REFERENCES
[1]
D. P. Miller Jr, C. Latulipe, K. A. Melius, S. A. Quandt, and T. A.
Arcury, “Primary care providers’views of patient portals: Interview
study of perceived beneﬁts and consequences,” Journal of Medical
Internet Research, vol. 18, no. 1, 01 2016, p. e8. [Online]. Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4733220/
[2]
S. L. Shimada, Brandt, and et al., “Personal health record reach in the
veterans health administration: A cross-sectional analysis,” Journal of
Medical Internet Research, vol. 16, no. 12, 2014-09, p. e272. [Online].
Available: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4275468/
[3]
M. Lester, S. Boateng, J. Studeny, and A. Coustasse, “Personal
health
records:
Beneﬁcial
or
burdensome
for
patients
and
healthcare providers?” Perspectives in Health Information Management,
vol.
13,
no.
Spring,
Spring
2016,
p.
1h.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC4832132/
[4]
C. M. Patricio, M. M. Maia, J. L. Machiavell, and M. d. A. Navaes, “O
prontu´ario eletrˆonico do paciente no sistema de sa´ude brasileiro: uma
realidade para os m´edicos,” Scientia Medica, vol. 21, no. 3, 2011, pp.
121–131.
[5]
Brasil,
“Constituic¸˜ao
da
rep´ublica
federativa
do
brasil
de
1988,”
1988,
acessado:
2017-09.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil 03/Constituicao/Constituicao.htm
[6]
N.
d.
S.
d.
B.
Conselho,
“Resoluc¸˜ao
n.
466,
de
12
de
dezembro de 2012,” 2012, acessado: 2017-09. [Online]. Available:
http://www.conselho.saude.gov.br/web comissoes/conep/index.html
[7]
L. Bardin, Analyse de contenu (L’), 2nd ed.
Presses Universitaires
France, 2007.
[8]
R. Zhang and L. Liu, “Security models and requirements for healthcare
application clouds,” in Proceedings of the 2010 IEEE 3rd International
Conference on Cloud Computing, ser. CLOUD ’10.
Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 268–275. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1109/CLOUD.2010.62
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-597-5
HEALTHINFO 2017 : The Second International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

