An EHR Platform for Realizing Precision Medicine  
in Emergency Care 
 
Vassiliki Koufi 
 
 
 
 
 
Flora Malamateniou 
 
Department of Digital Systems 
University of Piraeus 
Piraeus, Greece 
email: {vassok, flora, gvass}@unipi.gr 
George Vassilacopoulos 
 
 
 
Abstract— Precision medicine has emerged as a new field that 
facilitates the discovery of individualized diagnostic and 
treatment plans for patients based on the way their unique 
characteristics may dictate disease response or progression. 
Despite its potential, there are several settings where precision 
medicine remains more aspiration than reality. One such 
setting is emergency care where physicians are called upon 
initiating investigations and interventions to diagnose and/or 
treat patients in the acute phase and making decisions 
regarding a patient's need for hospital admission, observation, 
or discharge. In this effort, emergency physicians usually have 
little or no information at hand. The convergence of healthcare 
data with multi-omics and real-world data heralds a new era 
where an individualized approach to emergency care seems 
feasible. Especially, with the latest technological innovations, 
physicians can be provided with patient healthcare data and 
tools for the analysis of these data against the various 
genomically and phenotypically defined patients/citizens. This 
paper presents a cloud-based emergency care delivery 
platform that incorporates an Electronic Health Record (EHR) 
with the aforementioned features to meet the needs of 
emergency care practitioners. The platform aims at bridging 
the translational gap between bench and bedside and moving 
towards a realization of personalized and stratified medicine 
by discovering associations between disease and genetic, 
environmental or process measures. 
Keywords-EHR; 
precision 
medicine; 
emergency 
care; 
healthcare analytics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The explosion of precision medicine and genomics 
research over the last decade or more is expected to herald a 
rapid acceleration in the identification and development of 
next-generation prevention and therapeutic services [1][2]. 
Essentially, precision medicine constitutes a holistic 
approach to disease treatment and prevention that considers 
variability in people’s genes, environment, and lifestyle 
[3][4][5]. Under this paradigm, interventions can be tailored 
to individuals or groups, rather than using a one-size-fits-all 
approach in which everyone receives the same care. To this 
end, several tools need to be employed such as molecular 
diagnostics, imaging, and analytics [2][3]. However, there 
are certain challenges to clinical implementation of precision 
medicine which have been identified at multiple levels. This 
paper is concerned with the challenges related to the 
technologies that need to be employed in order for precision 
medicine goals to be met in emergency care environments.  
Nowadays, research and development directors in the life 
sciences are working with enormous, disparate data sets, 
which must be stored and analyzed accurately and quickly. 
These data may include genomic or proteomic data (large-
scale studies of organic proteins), socioeconomic data, 
patient medical history data, scientific texts, clinical studies 
and data from universities and laboratories, all in different 
formats and from various sources [1]. Thus, intelligent 
insights from that diverse, big amount of data is really hard 
to obtain. An Electronic Health Record (EHR) that will 
integrate all the above types of data and will be enhanced 
with decision support tools can lay the foundation for the 
realization of precision medicine by providing clinicians and 
patients with individualized information and preferences, 
intelligently filtered at the point of care. This is particularly 
useful in the emergency care where a patient’s life may hinge 
on the instant availability and accuracy of these pieces of 
information. In particular, in the case of patients already 
genotyped in an outpatient clinic, data stored in such an EHR 
system could be available when they present acutely ill to the 
Emergency Department (ED), while in the case of patients 
not previously genotyped, the tools provided by such an 
EHR system could assist in obtaining real-time results (i.e., 
in fewer than several hours) when these patients present to 
the ED. Thus, genome-guided decision making can be 
supported when it is mostly needed. 
This paper presents a cloud-based emergency care 
delivery platform that incorporates a next-generation EHR, 
which can serve as a supporting tool to the implementation 
of both population- and individual-level interventions in 
emergency care settings. Thus, health benefits can be 
maximized, harm can be minimized, and unnecessary 
healthcare costs can be avoided. The EHR proposed 
incorporates a broader data set, compared to data sets in 
legacy or existing EHRs, including: (a) patient information 
contained in Personal Health Records (PHRs), (b) health 
information from medical devices connected to patient such 
as from assistive telecare systems, (c) social care information 
retrieved on request from social care organizations, (d) 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

health information extracted from various healthcare systems 
such as primary and hospital care Electronic Medical 
Records (EMRs), (e) data regarding a person’s lifestyle 
obtained from social media like Facebook; and (f) genomics 
information such as genotype and sequence data extracted 
from biobanks and genetic databanks. The privacy concerns 
arisen in such an infrastructure due to its multi-owner and 
multi-user nature are met by a Health Insurance Portability 
and Accountability Act (HIPAA) compliant access control 
mechanism, whereby fine-grained access control is provided 
to users [6]. This mechanism draws from the Attribute-based 
Access Control (ABAC) paradigm and supports HIPAA 
“break the glass” access to data pulled together from all the 
data sources. Thus, access to the EHR of a patient is 
automatically granted to all physicians and nurses on duty in 
the ED upon patient arrival and revoked upon patient 
departure from the ED unless stated otherwise.  
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: 
Section 2 presents related work; Section 3 describes the 
scenario that motivated our research; Section 4 presents the 
architecture of the proposed EHR platform; Section 5 
describes the main issues related to the implementation of 
the proposed platform and Section 6 concludes the paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
The last few years have seen huge leaps in several 
research fields, such as molecular biology, genomics, and 
bioinformatics, which, in turn, led, among the rest, to the 
emergence and continued growth of precision medicine [7]. 
This paradigm shift in care delivery has been further 
expedited by converging trends of increased connectivity, 
through social media and mobile devices, and citizens’ 
growing desire to be active partners in their health and 
wellness management [7]. 
A key enabling factor for the realization of precision 
medicine in emergency care is the Information Technology 
(IT) infrastructure that will support it. The infrastructure 
envisaged here is a cloud-based emergency care delivery 
platform that incorporates an EHR which is enhanced with 
advanced analytics tools to provide the information required 
for producing useful insights regarding emergency care 
delivery. Hence, the infrastructure is meant to be 
incorporated into an Emergency Medical Service (EMS). 
The last few years, a number of approaches have been 
proposed according to which health records, either EHRs or 
PHRs, are stored on a Cloud and can be accessed via mobile 
devices. In particular, in [8], an integrated EMS cloud-based 
architecture is proposed that allows authorized users to 
access 
emergency 
case 
information 
in 
standardized 
document form, as proposed by the Integrating the 
Healthcare Enterprise (IHE) profile, uses the Organization 
for the Advancement of Structured Information Standards 
(OASIS) standard Emergency Data Exchange Language 
(EDXL) Hospital Availability Exchange (HAVE) for 
exchanging operational data with hospitals and incorporates 
an intelligent module that supports triaging and selecting the 
most appropriate ambulances and hospitals for each case. 
Moreover, Watson for Genomics is a cognitive system that 
integrates massive amounts of new omic data with the 
current body of knowledge to assist physicians in analyzing 
and acting on patient's genomic profiles [9]. In addition, N-
of-One platform assists in linking each patient’s unique 
profile to potential treatment strategies in context, supporting 
targeted clinical decisions [10]. Thus, clinicians are provided 
with 
concise, 
accurate 
and 
clinically 
meaningful 
interpretation of molecular test results [10]. The 2bPrecise 
platform captures and stores genomic data from a range of 
sources, harmonizes clinical knowledge and genomic 
research to identify relevant information, and then pushes the 
resulting insights to the point of care to enable action [11]. 
Finally, several approaches to EHR integration with PHRs 
and other information systems have been proposed 
throughout the last few years [12][13][14]. Compared to 
these approaches, the EHR-based platform proposed in this 
paper facilitates the integration of a wider range of 
information sources into the clinical workflow, thus enabling 
the derivation of deeper insights into several diseases. 
Moreover, the tools incorporated in it enables the analysis of 
the EHR data against the various genomically and 
phenotypically defined patients/citizens thus providing the 
ability for individualized emergency care. 
III. 
MOTIVATING SCENARIO 
The basic motivation for this research stems from our 
involvement in a recent project concerned with designing 
and implementing an EHR-based platform for the provision 
of medical data access at the point of care while fully 
protecting privacy. This involves providing access to the 
appropriate people, based on patient authorizations, but also 
granting access to the patient’s data in cases where his/her 
involvement in the authorization propagation process is not 
feasible. Moreover, it involves the analysis of these data in 
order to provide insights that will assist emergency 
physicians in diagnosing and/or treating patients in the acute 
Figure 1.  Patient Flow 
Patient from general Community, transfer from other 
hospital, ambulance
Patient Discharged
Emergency Department
Initial Assessment 
& Treatment
Triage
Inpatient
Transfer to 
ICU
Transfer to Clinical 
Department
Transfer to another 
Hospital
Hospital
Registration
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

phase. 
Suppose a healthcare delivery situation that takes place 
within a health district where an individual is transferred to a 
hospital’s ED (Figure 1). Upon arrival to the ED, the 
individual is registered as an emergency patient and 
undergoes a brief triage in order for the nature and severity 
of his/her illness to be determined. If his/her illness or injury 
is considered to be serious he/she is seen by a physician 
more rapidly than the patients with less severe symptoms or 
injuries. After initial assessment and treatment, the patient is 
either admitted to the hospital (e.g., to a clinical department 
or the Intensive Care Unit - ICU), stabilized and transferred 
to another hospital for various reasons, or discharged. 
As many ED visits are unplanned and urgent, there is a 
need to ensure that information regarding the longitudinal 
patient 
health 
condition 
(e.g., 
problems, 
allergies, 
medications, diagnoses, recent procedures, recent laboratory 
tests) is conveyed to ED physicians automatically upon 
registration of a patient to an ED. Thus, inefficiencies in 
care, in the form of redundant testing, care delays, and less-
effective treatments prescribed are eliminated and quality of 
care is enhanced. 
IV. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
Figure 2 illustrates a high-level architectural view of the 
proposed EHR-based platform. As illustrated, the proposed 
platform comprises three layers, i.e., the resources layer, the 
services layer and the presentation layer.  
The resources layer hosts the remote data resources 
providing the various chunks of data comprising a next-
generation EHR. These resources are heterogeneous and 
reside at different settings. The various parts of a next-
generation EHR are accessible by relevant web services, 
which hide away specific implementation details of each 
resource and provide a uniform and consistent interface to 
the operations in that resource. However, these resources are 
owned by different entities according to their specific 
security policy (e.g., owner of PHR and genomic data is the 
patient, while owner of the clinical/social data is the 
health/social provider where the patient has received care). 
Hence, each part of the EHR may be governed by different 
institutional or personal policies and practices with respect to 
confidentiality, 
security 
and release 
of information. 
However, as health and social care organizations constitute 
covered entities under the HIPAA Privacy Rule, they must 
comply with the Rule's requirements for safeguarding the 
privacy of protected health information. 
The information stored in the proposed next-generation 
EHR are segregated into three categories, i.e., medical, 
lifestyle and genomic information.  
Medical information may be obtained from: 
 
EHRs: They provide health information collected from 
healthcare providers where patients have received care 
in the past. As such, it is usually extracted from various 
healthcare systems such as primary and hospital care 
EMRs. 
 
PHRs: They provide patient health information 
contained in PHRs. This is mostly information from 
Figure 2. System Architecture 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

medical devices attached to patients and it is uploaded to 
the PHR through a special-purpose mobile application 
[15]. 
 
Social Care Records: They provide information 
collected by social care organizations which have 
provided their services to a patient. It is retrieved on 
request from social care organizations. 
For the purposes of this paper, it is assumed that PHR 
information is stored in a cloud-based PHR while EHR and 
social information is stored in data repositories of 
geographically distributed and organizationally disparate 
health and social care providers, respectively. Data regarding 
the patient’s condition are either collected by the ambulance 
staff or provided by the patient himself upon arrival at the 
ED of the hospital. These data are stored at the ED 
information system. 
Lifestyle information is obtained from (a) patients' PHRs, 
which, apart from the health information mentioned above, 
may include other types of information as well (e.g., exercise 
and dietary habits), and (b) patients' activity in social media 
(places they have visited, sleeping hours depending on the 
times they become active, etc.). 
Genomic information is assumed to be hosted in several 
research centers. It may contain genotype and sequence data 
extracted from biobanks and genetic databanks. As 
molecular phenotyping is a time-consuming procedure, it 
would be particularly useful if a patient has already had a 
complete genomic or other systematic molecular analysis 
performed prior to his visit at the ED of a hospital. Currently, 
there is a rising number of validated clinical applications for 
molecular phenotyping; this leads to more patients having 
such analyses available from their usual clinical care [3]. 
The services layer, as indicated by its name, hosts a 
number of services pertaining to information integration and 
analysis. This layer resides in a trusted cloud and it, 
currently, hosts the following two cloud-based services. 
Moreover, it is scalable in the sense that it can be further 
enhanced with additional tools as long as they are 
implemented in the form of cloud-based services and 
published in this layer so that they become instantly 
available. 
 
The Integration Service serves as a mediation gateway 
that handles interactions between users and data 
resource providers. Typically, it provides access to 
integrated patient EHR data while ensuring compliance 
to the relevant HIPAA and patient-defined policies by 
properly authorizing users of the system, i.e., medical 
doctors. In doing so, the Integration Service draws upon 
the ABAC paradigm, i.e., it mediates between 
requestors (e.g., healthcare professionals) and resources 
(EHR web services) to decide whether access of a given 
requestor to given resource should be permitted or 
denied by taking into account the attributes of the 
requestor, the resource, the action and the context 
holding at the time of the attempted access (operational, 
technical, or situational). However, in the case of an 
emergency, ED doctors gain access to a full set of a 
patient's information through a "break the glass" policy 
supported by the system. 
 
The Analytics Service constitutes a recommender 
system that utilizes the collaborative filtering technique 
in order to associate each patient arriving at the ED of a 
hospital with other patients who have sought emergency 
care in the past due to experiencing similar conditions. 
Patients
Genomics Information
Health and Social Data
Personal Health Record
Social Media Data
Selected 
Patient Features
Determine 
group of similar cases
Select top N cases
Similarity function
Personalized 
Recommendations
Resources Layer
Analytics Service
Figure 3. Analytics Service 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

To this end, certain features of patients are taken into 
consideration, which are retrieved from the next-
generation EHRs (e.g., shared diseases, symptoms, 
family histories, lab results, urban/rural residencies, 
occupation, demographics, etc.). Thus, a subset of 
patients is identified who appear to resemble the patient 
currently under treatment in the ED of a hospital. Based 
on these cases, personalized recommendations can be 
extracted regarding the optimal treatment of the current 
patient. These recommendations are based on the 
outcome of treatments which have been used in similar 
cases in the past and are provided to ED physicians. 
Figure 3 illustrates a high level view of the Analytics 
Service incorporated in the proposed system. 
The presentation layer provides the user interface 
whereby emergency physicians can gain full access to 
information included in next-generation patient EHRs. To 
this end, both a web portal and a mobile application have 
been developed. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES 
To illustrate the functionality of the proposed platform, a 
prototype system was implemented and deployed on a 
laboratory cloud computing infrastructure. Prototype system 
implementation was based on the Oracle 11g SOA [16]. In 
particular, the following components of this Suite have been 
used: (i) Integrated Service Environment (ISE) for 
developing the EHR web services and (ii) an enterprise 
portal for healthcare professionals, collaborating healthcare 
organizations and researchers to access content.  
The platform used for the generation of sample patient 
PHRs is Tolven ePHR as it has been considered sufficient 
for the purpose of our research [17]. With regard to health 
information from medical devices, weight, blood pressure 
and blood glucose measurements have been taken under 
consideration, which are uploaded in the patient’s PHR 
automatically via a relevant Android application [15]. Due to 
unavailability of actual health and social data, a sample 
database has been created in MySQL along with the relevant 
web services in order to simulate healthcare and social care 
providers’ systems [18]. The ABAC policies have been 
defined using eXtensible Access Control Markup Language 
(XACML) [19].  
The implementation of the Analytics Service was based 
on Hadoop Mahout framework, which features various 
scalable machine-learning algorithms [20]. In particular, a 
certain part of the larger Mahout framework has been used, 
namely Taste, which is a Java framework for providing 
personalized recommendations [21]. Taste was used in order 
to develop a customized recommender system which 
comprises (a) a DataModel containing the certain patient 
features mentioned in the previous section and (b) a 
similarity function which determines the subset of patients 
that appear to be similar with regard to the features 
incorporated in the data model (Figure 3).  
VI. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
The emerging field of precision medicine is speeding 
ahead, promising a paradigm shift in care delivery, one that 
removes the need for guesswork, variable diagnoses and 
treatment strategies based on generalized demographics. A 
key enabling factor for the realization of the precision 
medicine approach is the utilization of data leveraged from 
direct and indirect sources to provide a more holistic view of 
an individual patient. Although, it is increasingly viewed as 
mainstream treatment, especially in cancer research and 
diagnostics, precision medicine is far from being integrated 
in several healthcare settings, including the Emergency Care 
settings. This paper presents a platform for enabling 
precision medicine in emergency care delivery which is 
based upon a next-generation EHR enhanced with advanced 
analytics tools. Thus, it is envisaged that the platform 
provides an appropriate infrastructure for laying the 
foundation for precision medicine to bring its critical benefits 
in emergency care. The platform’s added value stems from 
the fact that it provides a rich set of data concerning a 
patient’s health, lifestyle and genes and a tool for 
determining personalized treatments according to a set of 
features he is carrying. By introducing such a platform in 
emergency care delivery and in clinical practice in general, 
clinicians can mitigate many of the inefficiencies that 
currently encumber care optimization. These inefficiencies 
may be false positives, false negatives, unnecessary 
treatments, over- or under-medication and all have financial 
and quality-of-care ramifications. System evaluation is a task 
to be undertaken in the near future aiming at determining the 
system usability. Thus, its potential weaknesses may be 
revealed suggesting alterations in the system design and 
directions for future work. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] “Precision 
Medicine: 
New 
Paradigms, 
Risks 
and 
Opportunities,” Knowledge@Wharton – SAP , 2016. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/precision-
medicine-new-paradigms-risks-opportunities/. [Accessed: 22-
Aug-2018]. 
[2] L. Timmerman, “What’s in a Name? A Lot, When It Comes 
to ‘Precision Medicine’ | Xconomy,” Xconomy, 2013. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.xconomy.com/national/2013/02/04/whats-in-a-
name-a-lot-when-it-comes-to-precision-medicine/. [Accessed: 
22-Aug-2018]. 
[3] A. T. Limkakeng et al., “Systematic Molecular Phenotyping: 
A Path Toward Precision Emergency Medicine?,” Acad. 
Emerg. Med., vol. 23, no. 10, pp. 1097–1106, Oct. 2016. 
[4] C. Shively, “Beyond the Genome and Pharmacogenetics: 
Precision Medicine - Ask Dr. S,” 2017. [Online]. Available: 
http://askdrs.org/pharmacy-successhttp://askdrs.org/beyond-
the-genome-and-pharmacogenetics-precision-
medicinehttp://askdrs.org/116.html. 
[Accessed: 
22-Aug-
2018]. 
[5] “Looking Beyond Genomics: A Holistic Approach to 
Precision Medicine,” Evolution Global. [Online]. Available: 
https://evobiotalent.com/news-analysis/looking-beyond-
genomics-a-holistic-approach-to-precision-medicine/. 
[Accessed: 22-Aug-2018]. 
[6] V. 
Koufi, 
F. 
Malamateniou, 
A. 
Tsohou, 
and 
G. 
Vassilacopoulos, “A framework for privacy-preserving access 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

to next-generation EHRs.,” Stud. Health Technol. Inform., 
vol. 205, pp. 740–4, 2014. 
[7] F. S. Collins and H. Varmus, “A New Initiative on Precision 
Medicine,” N. Engl. J. Med., vol. 372, no. 9, pp. 793–795, 
Feb. 2015. 
[8] M. 
Poulymenopoulou, 
F. 
Malamateniou, 
and 
G. 
Vassilacopoulos, “Emergency Healthcare Process Automation 
Using Mobile Computing and Cloud Services,” J. Med. Syst., 
vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 3233–3241, Oct. 2012. 
[9] K. Rhrissorrakrai, T. Koyama, and L. Parida, “Watson for 
Genomics: Moving Personalized Medicine Forward.,” Trends 
in cancer, vol. 2, no. 8, pp. 392–395, Aug. 2016. 
[10] “N-of-One.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://n-of-one.com/. 
[Accessed: 22-Aug-2018]. 
[11] “2bPrecise.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://2bprecisehealth.com/about-us/. [Accessed: 22-Aug-
2018]. 
[12] C. D. Meyerhoefer et al., “Provider and patient satisfaction 
with the integration of ambulatory and hospital EHR 
systems,” J. Am. Med. Informatics Assoc., vol. 25, no. 8, pp. 
1054–1063, Aug. 2018. 
[13] T. Heart, O. Ben-Assuli, and I. Shabtai, “A review of PHR, 
EMR and EHR integration: A more personalized healthcare 
and public health policy,” Heal. Policy Technol., vol. 6, no. 1, 
pp. 20–25, Mar. 2017. 
[14] F. Prasser, O. Kohlbacher, U. Mansmann, B. Bauer, and K. 
Kuhn, “Data Integration for Future Medicine (DIFUTURE),” 
Methods Inf. Med., vol. 57, no. S 01, pp. e57–e65, Jul. 2018. 
[15] V. Koufi, F. Malamateniou, and G. Vassilacopoulos, “An 
Android-enabled mobile framework for ensuring quality of 
life through patient-centric care.,” Stud. Health Technol. 
Inform., vol. 180, pp. 1040–4, 2012. 
[16] “SOA Suite for On-Premises Integration | Oracle,” Oracle. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.oracle.com/middleware/application-
integration/products/soa-suite.html. 
[Accessed: 
22-Aug-
2018]. 
[17] “Tolven ePHR,” Tolven Healthcare Innovations. [Online]. 
Available: http://www.tolven.org/ephr.html. [Accessed: 22-
Aug-2018]. 
[18] “MySQL.” [Online]. Available: https://www.mysql.com/. 
[Accessed: 22-Aug-2018]. 
[19] “OASIS eXtensible Access Control Markup Language 
(XACML) TC | OASIS,” OASIS. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.oasis-
open.org/committees/tc_home.php?wg_abbrev=xacml. 
[Accessed: 22-Aug-2018]. 
[20] “Apache Mahout: Scalable machine learning and data 
mining.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://mahout.apache.org/. 
[Accessed: 22-Aug-2018]. 
[21] “Apache 
Mahout 
- 
Taste 
Documentation.” 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://svn.apache.org/repos/asf/lucene/mahout/site/publish/tast
e.pdf?p=836600. [Accessed: 22-Aug-2018]. 
 
 
 
 
 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

