E-mergency 
Towards an Uberized Emergency Medical Service 
 
José Augusto de Oliveira Neto, Nadja Maria da Silva 
de Brito 
Center of Biologic and Applied Sciences 
Dentistry Department 
UEPB – State University of Paraíba 
João Pessoa, Paraíba, Brazil 
e-mail: zedeguga@gmail.com, nadjamso@gmail.com 
 
Luciano Barbosa de Oliveira, Renata de Souza Coelho 
Soares 
Post-Graduation Program on Healthcare and Technology   
UEPB – State University of Paraíba 
Campina Grande, Paraíba, Brazil 
e-mail: barbosa.lano@gmail.com, 
drarenatacoelho@gmail.com 
Abstract—This work presents E-mergency, a cloud-based 
software solution designed to respond most recurrent issues of 
Emergency Medical Services (EMS). The solution is being 
designed and used by means of cooperation with a public EMS 
responsible to answer emergency call from a one million 
inhabitants population and the first main functionalities have 
been deployed to use. 
Keywords-Emergency Medical Services (EMS); mobile 
application; uberized services; SAMU. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Medical Emergency Services (EMS), commonly referred 
to as Ambulance Service, date from the 19th century [1].  In 
this secular history, this service became part of day-by-day 
routine of people and healthcare professions in multiple 
countries and continents. During this time, considerable 
improvements have also been adopted applying innovative 
technologies and medical procedures to pursue higher 
effectiveness of the service, expressed in numbers of patient 
life 
savings 
and 
cost-effectiveness 
of 
the 
service 
provisioning. 
Despite the enormous differences from the first EMSs 
and the current high-technology vehicles and advanced 
trained healthcare team, some serious issues remain 
challenging healthcare managers and professionals to deliver 
a fast, efficient and cost-effective service to thousands, 
hundred thousand and some cases millions of requiring 
citizens. 
In this work, we focus on four of the most recurrent 
issues of EMS provisioning and propose an innovative 
technology–centered solution to address them. E-mergency 
is designed to re-engineer the current EMS classical 
provisioning model so as to overcome critical issues and 
improve its service cost-effectiveness. 
Section II presents a broad scenario of EMS in Brazil and 
the current technology resources in use. In Section III, the 
problem addressed in this work is stated, while in Section IV 
the proposed solution is detailed. In Section V the first 
results reached are discussed, followed by a brief conclusion 
and future works on them in Section VI. References can be 
found in the end of the paper.  
II. 
CONTEXT 
EMS in Brazil is named SAMU – Mobile Urgency 
Assistance Service - and is a public and free service, 
nationally funded by the Ministry of Healthcare and locally 
operated by thousands of municipalities all over the country.  
SAMU’s 
assistance 
follows 
well-known 
[2][3][4] 
international standards and medical protocols, in which an 
ambulance is required by a citizen to a call center, commonly 
by means of a phone call to a widely publicized phone 
number, where the assistance starts from the moment the 
operator answers the call and ends, in the worst case, when 
the patient is transferred to the attention of a hospital 
emergency team. 
In the last decade, the SAMU coverage has increased and 
most recent official data show that since 2017 the service is 
available to nearly 80% of Brazilian population [5] in their 
home municipality (see Table 1).  
TABLE I. EVOLUTION OF SAMU POPULATION COVERAGE 
Population Coverage 
Year 
Population 
Percentage 
2012 
135.703.665 
70.53% 
2013 
141.089.175 
72.73% 
2014 
150.487.160 
74.84% 
2015 
155.983.958 
76.91% 
2016 
157.299.697 
76.92% 
2017 
163.590.587 
79.36% 
 
According to Brazilian healthcare legal definition [6] the 
service is available when the following components are 
provided to the municipality inhabitants as depicted in Figure 
1: 
 
A call center to answer emergency healthcare 
assistance phone requisitions; 
 
Ambulance/s 
vehicle/s 
and 
healthcare 
professionals to answer the requisition; 
 
Hospital/s to receive the patients assisted by 
SAMU. 
 
 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
Figure 1. SAMU geographic coverage. 
The typical assistance flow goes through the three 
components above, and starts with call center answering an 
assistance requisition, to which an ambulance + healthcare 
team is assigned to assist. When a hospital intervention is 
needed, a hospital bed must be reserved to receive the patient 
during and after the emergency room assistance.  
Intense information production and exchange occurs 
during the assistance protocol. The mean, the time frame and 
the precision in which such critical information is generated, 
recorded and passed on can make great difference to both the 
patient wellbeing and the emergency service cost efficiency  
Currently, phone, radio devices, desktop computers and 
paper forms are the dominant instruments used by citizens 
and SAMU professionals to produce, to record and to 
exchange information throughout the assistance protocol. 
III. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Different studies [7][8][9] indicate that each step of the 
assistance protocol previously described faces difficulties to 
be properly executed. Some of these difficulties are 
expressive to Brazilian SAMU, some are equally found in 
emergency services from different countries and continents.   
Throughout the assistance protocol steps the following issues 
are highlights [10]: 
1. High rates of fake calls; 
2. Too long time interval from the emergency call 
to the care scene; 
3. Imprecision/incompleteness 
of 
patients’ 
healthcare records; 
4. Ill ambulance-hospital communication. 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) 
solutions have been placed in use to address the issues above 
[11][12]. Emergency support software systems have made 
important steps to reinforce the quality and agility of 
emergency services, such as EHR (Electronic Healthcare 
Record) data integration to access patient’s medical data 
during the assistance protocol [13]. 
Although existent ICT solutions that EMS have reached 
some consistent outcomes, they have not been enough to 
effectively address the issues 1-4 (section III) and, therefore, 
such services still lack of technology support to make the 
expected quality shift.  
In section IV, E-mergency is presented. An Uber-inspired 
ambulance ICT solution that aims to contribute to a new 
service model redesigned to best respond to current 
challenges of emergency healthcare services. 
IV. 
E-MERGENCY 
Emergency is a cloud-centered ICT solution, composed 
by three modules, plus a web service standard interface, 
which supports the different actors who require and provide 
EMS. wo of the component modules are mobile applications 
(apps), one to be used by the citizens, the other to be used by 
the ambulance team. The third and core module is in charge 
of service management and is operated in the local 
emergency healthcare service headquarter. Further details on 
each module are provided next (Figure 2).  
 
 
Figure 2. Emergency overview. 
A. The SAMU App 
 Instead of memorizing an emergency number, citizens 
are now supposed to have the SAMU app installed in their 
mobile devices so as to make an one touch call to an 
ambulance, in the presence of a critical situation.  
Through a simple interface (a single tap, a single button) 
as shown in Figure 3, the ambulance call is made and the 
user can then begin to interact with the emergency service.. 
Voice, audio messages, text and videoconference are 
available options to the citizen interact with the EMS call 
center. After this first contact, when an ambulance is 
assigned to the request, the same citizen can then interact 
with the ambulance team and forward precious information 
to the an agile response in the care scene. The citizen can 
also trace the ambulance path, which provides geographic 
position and expected time wait. 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

 
 
Figure 3. SAMU and Ambulance apps. 
 
When installing SAMU app the citizen is required do 
provide personal information, photo, a valid official 
document and telephone numbers. When calling an 
ambulance, the app informs the EMS the citizen’s GPS 
location. During the interaction citizen-ambulance team real 
time picture and video of the citizen can also be required. 
This set of identification and authentication functionalities 
addresses and is expected to strongly discourage fake calls to 
the emergency service (issue 1, section III). 
B. The Ambulance app 
The ambulance team makes use of an app to first respond 
to a broadcast or specific and directed request sent by the 
emergency service headquarter.   
From the moment the ambulance answers the request, the 
ambulance app access all the information related to the 
citizen call. The type of emergency, GPS positioning of the 
care scene and citizen contact (in case interaction is 
necessary) are made available to the ambulance team (Figure 
2). 
During and after the assistance in the care scene, the 
patient healthcare information is input by the ambulance 
team using the app.  This information will be transferred to 
the hospital emergency service, in the cases that the patient 
condition requires hospital assistance. Because the patient 
information is input in the app according to the assistance 
medical protocol and the healthcare professional mostly 
selects options in a clean app interface, instead of 
handwriting, the patient information records tend to be more 
detailed and precise (issue 3, section III).  
The app is also the contact link between the ambulance 
team and hospital emergency service. From the moment that 
the EMS decides that hospital assistance is required. 
C. The Core Module  
The core and most complex E-mergency module is a 
cloud accessed application that manages the ambulance and 
hospital resources so as to best respond the citizens’ 
ambulance request. 
Answering the citizens’ calls is the most use-intense 
function of the core module. This function puts the citizen in 
contact with an attendant and records all the information the 
citizen first provides on the emergency situation.   
Is by means of the core module that the EMS headquarter 
transmits a request to the ambulance/s in order to assign one 
of these vehicles to the citizen request. The transmission can 
be a one-to-one call directed to a specific ambulance selected 
by the emergency service by means of any rationale, such as 
location or equipment compliance. The transmission can also 
go broadcast to be answered by a group of ambulances in 
similar conditions to answer a request.  
The third and fundamental function of the core model is 
the interaction with hospital/s. When either the call center 
attendant in the first contact or later the ambulance team 
during local or remote assistance decides that the situation 
requires hospital care, the core model consults among the 
chain of hospitals associated to the EMS, which has the most 
appropriate condition to receive the patient currently assisted 
by the emergency service. Most appropriate here refers to the 
hospital medical capabilities and the estimated transfer time 
from the care scene to the hospital emergency room. 
Consults means an automated contact between the E-
mergency core model and the hospitals internal ICT solution 
used to offer and allocate hospital bed and medical teams. 
The combination of the SAMU app immediate contact 
with the emergency service, the Uber-similar mechanism to 
assign an ambulance to the citizen request and e prompt and 
automated interaction with the hospital is expected to 
efficiently respond to the (issue 2 and issue 4 , section III). 
D. The Hospital Interface  
E-mergency is designed to interact with hospitals in two 
moments. The first when a hospital bed and emergency team 
is allocated to receive the patient initially assisted by the 
emergency ambulance professionals. The second during the 
ambulance team assistance and patient transfer, when patient 
medical records are transmitted by the ambulance staff to the 
hospital. 
Both interactions mentioned above are meant to be 
automated and do not entail human communication. The 
information on hospital availability to receive the patient and 
the bed and team allocation is ‘negotiated’ between E-
mergency core module and a hospital software (ICT 
solution), while transmission of patient medical records to 
the hospital software is an interaction between the 
Ambulance app and the hospital software. 
To make automated communication between E-
mergency and hospital possible and scalable to a large 
number of hospitals and ambulances, one standard interface 
is defined by E-mergency. 
Each hospital is required to implement and make 
available the hospital-E-mergency interface in order to 
become associated to the EMS The interface is a set of 
functions that allows to the necessary data exchange and 
software interoperability involved during the automated 
interaction between the hospitals and the emergency service. 
  
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

V. 
FIRST RESULTS 
The design and implementation efforts to produce E-
mergency have great part of partnership articulation, to get in 
touch with end-users and management levels in the EMS and 
hospital. Currently it is established a solid cooperation 
involving 
E-mergency 
development 
team, 
the local 
emergency service, and one of the associated hospital. Such 
partnership has been critical to design the solution, to 
execute test scenarios and collect feedback on the modules 
deployed. 
The SAMU app, the ambulance app and some of the core 
module 
have 
been 
delivered, 
with 
the 
following 
functionalities 
The SAMU app 
 
Call function; 
 
Ambulance tracing; 
 
Text interaction with the ambulance. 
The Ambulance app 
 
Answer to an ambulance call; 
 
Text interaction with the citizen. 
The Core Module 
 
Answer to an emergency call; 
 
Ambulance 
requisition 
(one-to-one 
and 
broadcast) 
 
Hospital bed request. 
Hospital interface 
 
Fully defined; 
 
Answer to bed request implemented. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Ambulance/Emergency is a challenging healthcare 
service required and provided all over the world. Some 
classical issues remain unsolved despite the constant 
improvement through ICT use in different activities of the 
service. 
In this work an innovative approach and solution was 
presented aiming to apply well established technology and 
service provisioning model to address EMS recurrent issues.  
E-mergency has its first functionalities delivered and is 
expected to be in full operation in the first quarter of 2019 in 
a one million inhabitants real use scenario. The service will 
be put in experimental operation coexisting with the 
Campina Grande SAMU regular service, with the purpose to 
collect comparative data on the assistance provided by the 
different approaches. 
In the second round of development, a more innovative 
service model is proposed. An E-Mergency two modules 
only solution will be tested, in which there is no core Module 
in operation and the citizen SAMU request is captured 
directly by the ambulance located closer to the care scene. In 
this model the citizen SAMU App interacts directly to the 
Ambulance App (and team). The objective is to save costs of 
an EMS call center and the time to respond the request, while 
not jeopardizing the assistance quality standards. 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] New 
York 
Presbiterian 
Hospital, 
available 
at 
https://www.nyp.org/safety/emergency-medical-services/ambulance-
service-history. [retrieved: june, 2018]. 
[2] National Model EMS Clinical Guidelines, NAMSEMSO Medical 
Directory 
Concil, 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://www.nasemso.org/Projects/ModelEMSClinicalGuidelines/doc
uments/National-Model-EMS-Clinical-Guidelines-2017-Version2.1-
29June2018.pdf. . [retrieved: june, 2018]. 
[3] T. Krafft, et al. European emergency data project (eed project)—ems 
data-based health surveillance system 3-980-8099-5-1, Brandt GmbH, 
Köln (2006). 
[4] Ontario Provicial Ministry of Health and Long Term car, Ambulance 
Service Communicable Disease Standards, August 2015, [Online] 
available 
at: 
http://www.health.gov.on.ca/en/pro/programs/emergency_health/docs
/ehs_amb_srvc_comm_disease_standards_v2_en.pdf, 
. 
[retrieved: 
june, 2018]. 
[5] Brazil, M. of Healthcare d., 2017a. DATASUS Information 
Technology 
at 
the 
Service 
of 
SUS. 
[Online]  
Available 
at: 
http://tabnet.datasus.gov.br/cgi/tabcgi.exe?cnes/cnv/leiintbr.def 
[retrieved: august, 2017]. 
[6] Brazil, M. of Healthcare (MH). Instructive Handbook to the Chain of 
Urgecy and Emergency Assistence Services  in Braziliana Unified 
Healthcare Sistem (SUS). Brasília: Publisher MH. 
[7] S. Lee, “Role of parallelism in ambulance dispatching,” IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 44, 
no. 8, pp. 1113–1122, 2014.  
[8] C. S. Lim, R Mamat and T. Braunl, “Impact of ambulance dispatch 
policies on performance of emergency medical services,” IEEE 
Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 
624–632, 2011.  
[9] A. Rowlands, “An evaluation of pre-hospital communication between 
ambulances and an accident and emergency department,” Journal of 
Telemedicine and Telecare, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 35–37, 2003.  
[10] M.C. Reddy, S.A. Paul, J. Abraham, M. McNeese, C. DeFlitch and J. 
Yen, “Challenges to effective crisis management: Using information 
and communication technologies to coordinate emergency medical 
services and emergency department teams,” International Journal of 
Medical Informatics, vol. 78, no. 4, pp. 259–269, 1 abr. 2009. 
[11] Y. Shen, J. Lee, H. Jeong, J. Jeong, E. Lee, and D. H. C. Du, 
“SAINT+: 
Self-Adaptive 
Interactive 
Navigation 
Tool+ 
for 
Emergency Service Delivery Optimization,” IEEE Transactions on 
Intelligent Transportation Systems, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 1038–1053, 
2018. 
[12] J.L Wiler, C. Gentle, J.M Halfpenny, A. Heins , A. Mehrotra, M.G. 
Mikhail and D. Fite, “Optimizing Emergency Department Front-End 
Operations,” Annals of Emergency Medicine, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 142–
160.e1, 2010. 
[13] P. Wang, Z. Ding, C. Jiang and M. Zhou, “Design and 
implementation of a web-service-based public-oriented personalized 
health care platform,” IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and 
Cybernetics Part A:Systems and Humans, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 941–957, 
2013.  
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

