Monitoring Activities of Daily Living for Maintaining Independent Living in 
Dementia 
 
Jonathan Turner, Ciarán Nugent, Damon Berry, 
Dympna O’Sullivan 
Department of Computer Science 
Technological University Dublin 
Dublin, Ireland 
Emails: jonathan.turner@tudublin.ie, 
ciaran.nugent@tudublin.ie, damon.berry@tudublin.ie, 
dympna.osullivan@tudublin.ie 
Michael Wilson, Julie Doyle 
NetwellCASALA 
Dundalk Institute of Technology 
Dundalk, Ireland 
Emails: michael.wilson@dkit.ie, julie.doyle@dkit.ie
 
 
Abstract—Our ability to live independent meaningful lives 
depends on our ability to perform various activities and to 
maintain our cognitive functions. Maintaining independent 
living is important for persons with dementia; it increases self-
worth and allows to remain independent and in their own 
homes for longer. In this article, we describe the activities 
established as being important for the maintenance of 
independent living, and methods for monitoring these activities 
using technology. 
Keywords- dementia; self-monitoring; activities of daily 
living; independent living. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Our work is focused on the development of a tool to 
extend the period of independent living for Persons Living 
With Dementia (PLWD) and to enhance Quality of Life 
(QoL). An integral part of our proposed tool is monitoring of 
performance of basic activities and cognitive functions. In 
previous work, we have reviewed tools for monitoring 
activities for PLWD [1]. In this paper, we describe 
established measures of activity, together with the reasons 
for their adoption, with a focus on the importance of 
maintaining these for PLWDs. We also outine our proposed 
methods to measure achievement of activities by PLWD in 
the tool we are developing. Sections II and III give 
information on means of discovery of measures and how 
they are used in dementia care. Section IV discusses the use 
of these measures in our work. We conclude with a 
discussion in Section V.   
 
II. 
METHODS 
We conducted interviews and focus group with those 
with expertise in the field (specialist dementia care nurses, 
occupational therapists from an affiliated University 
hospital) and conducted a systematic literature review to 
determine 
which 
activities 
were 
important 
in 
the 
maintenance of independent living, and which activities were 
important in maintaining QoL. 
 
III. 
RESULTS 
Activities and functions required for independent living 
with QoL fell into several clear groups: basic activities 
necessary for survival; more sophisticated activities requiring 
a higher level of thought that are necessary for independent 
living; activities that bring pleasure; and mental abilities that 
underpin the activities already listed.  
 
A. Activities of Daily Living 
 
Basic survival skills were described by Katz [2] as 
‘Activities of Daily Living’ (ADL). These activities are the 
most basic activities required to ensure day-to-day survival 
but are not, in themselves, sufficient to allow for independent 
living or for a higher quality of life. The activities defined by 
Katz are shown in Table 1. This table also shows the 
methods by which we intend to track performance of these 
activities for PLWD. Where possible, non-invasive sensors 
are used to track activity; where necessary, PLWD will be 
asked at intervals about performance of activities via an app. 
TABLE I.  
KATZ’S ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING 
Activity name 
Activity description 
Tracking method 
Bathing 
assistance only out of bed 
independently in bathing a single 
part or bathes self completely 
Humidity sensor 
in bathroom 
Dressing 
gets clothes from closets and 
drawers; puts on clothes, outer 
garments, braces; manages 
fasteners; act of tying shoes is 
excluded 
Switch sensor 
on drawers 
and/or wardrobe 
doors 
Toileting 
gets to toilet; gets on and off 
toilet; arranges clothes; cleans 
organs of excretion 
Motion sensor 
in bathroom, 
flush sensor 
attached to 
toilet 
Transferring 
Moves in and out of bed 
independently and moves in and 
out of chair independently  
Pressure mat 
sensor on floor 
by bed/chair 
Continence 
urination and defecation entirely 
self-controlled 
App 
Feeding 
gets food from plate or its 
equivalent into mouth 
App 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-004-9
HEALTHINFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

B. Instrumental Activities of Daily Living 
 
The more sophisticated activities that allow an individual 
to continue living independently (albeit with some assistance 
if required) were described by Lawton and Brody [3] as 
‘Instrumental Activities of Daily Living’ (IADL). These are 
shown in Table 2. Note that the activity description shows 
the highest level of performance; for example, the 
Transportation activity allows for ‘Travels on public 
transportation when assisted or accompanied by another’ as 
achieving that IADL. More details on levels of performance 
for each IADL is given in [5]. We will track these activities 
by sensor where practical or by asking the PLWD to self-
report. Note some IADLs may not be appropriate for some 
individuals if they have never previously routinely 
performed an activity (e.g., preparing meals). 
 
TABLE II.  
INDEPENDENT ACTIVITIES OF DAILY LIVING 
Activity name 
Activity description 
Tracking 
method 
Telephone 
Operates telephone on own- , 
looks up and dials numbers  
Beacon sensor 
on handset 
Shopping 
Takes care of all shopping 
needs independently 
App 
Food 
Plans, prepares and serves 
adequate meals independently 
App 
Housekeeping 
Maintains house alone or with 
occasional assistance 
App 
Transportation 
Travels independently  -public 
transportation or drives car 
App 
Finances 
Manages financial matters 
independently 
App 
Laundry 
Does personal laundry  
App 
 
C. Meaningful Activities 
 
The Pleasurable Events Schedule [4] focuses particularly 
on PLWD; examples include ‘being outside’ or ‘friend 
visiting’. Note that an ADL or IADL may also be a 
Meaningful Activity (MA), for example ‘Food’ (i.e., 
preparing a meal) may bring a reward of meaning beyond 
that of the preparing a meal. In our work, we allow PLWD to 
define their own MAs. For each MA, we determine which 
IADLs and cognitive functions are required to be exercised. 
 
D. Cognitive Functions 
 
The ability to perform activities that fall in the above 
groups is underpinned by mental abilities. These have been 
described in [5] and are shown in Table 3. We do not plan to 
explicitly track performance of these functions, but instead 
we determine which IADLs and MAs implicitly exercise 
these functions and track the performance of these activities 
to ensure that essential cognitive functions are exercised. 
 
 
TABLE III.  
COGNITIVE FUNCTIONS 
Table Column Head 
Function name 
Function description 
Perceptual-Motor 
Combining sensory input with motor skills 
Learning and Memory 
Ability to record and retrieve information 
Complex Attention 
Ability to focus on multiple things 
Executive Function 
Sequencing, planning and organizing tasks 
Language 
Communicate and receive communication 
Social Cognition 
Controlling behavior, recognize social cues 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
There exist long-established sets of ADLs and IADLs. In 
our proposed tool, we will monitor, and encourage 
performance of these for PLWDs, and extend an existing set 
of dementia-specific MAs by allowing PLWDs to suggest 
their own MAs, to extend their period of independent living 
for as long as possible with as much QoL as possible. 
V. 
CONCLUSION  
Our work is focused on developing a tool to extend the 
period of independent living for PLWD. Following 
consultations with dementia specialists and a systematic 
literature review, we plan to incorporate ADLs, IADLs and 
MAs into a tool for PLWD. Monitoring performance of 
activities will be by sensors, where possible, or self-reported 
by app. Future work will focus on development of the 
combined app and activity detection via sensors.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This material is based on works supported by the Science 
Foundation Ireland under Grant No. 19/FFP/6917. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. Turner, C. Nugent, D. Berry, J. Doyle, M. Wilson, and D. 
O’Sullivan, 
Individualised 
Self-Care 
for 
Early-Stage 
Dementia: A Framework for Activity Attainment and 
Replacement. International Journal On Advances in Life 
Sciences, vol. 14, 2022 (in press).  
[2] S. Katz, A. B. Ford, R. W. Moskowitz, B. A. Jackson, and M. 
W. Jaffe, “Studies of illness in the aged. The Index of ADL: a 
standardized measure of biological and psychosocial 
function,” JAMA, vol. 185, pp. 914-919, Sep. 1963, 
doi:10.1001/jama.1963.03060120024016. 
[3] M. P. Lawton and E. M. Brody, “Assessment of older people: 
Self-maintaining and instrumental activities of daily living,” 
The 
Gerontologist, 
vol. 
9, 
pp. 
179-186, 
1969, 
doi:10.1093/geront/9.3_Part_1.179 
[4] L. Teri and R. G. Logsdon, “Identifying pleasant activities for 
Alzheimer's disease patients: the pleasant events schedule-
AD,” The Gerontologist, vol. 31, pp. 124-7, Feb. 1991, 
doi:10.1093/GERONT/31.1.124 
[5] American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fifth Edition (DSM-5), 
Arlington: American Psychiatric Association, 2013. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-004-9
HEALTHINFO 2022 : The Seventh International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

