Holistic Capability Model for Sustainable Evolution of Health Care Providers 
Michael Georg Grasser, Erich Sorantin 
Research Unit of Digital Information and Image Processing 
Medical University Graz 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: michael.grasser@medunigraz.at, 
erich.sorantin@medunigraz.at 
Viktoria Schlaipfer, Robert Priedl 
IT-Operations 
Hospitaller Order of Saint John of God 
Graz, Austria 
e-mail: viktoria.schlaipfer@bbito.at, robert.priedl@bbito.at
Abstract—Several factors have significantly influenced the 
digital evolution of health care providers worldwide. Existing 
consulting models and decision-making strategies are stretched 
to their limits. To derive sustainable decisions in a holistic 
manner an innovative digital capability model had to be 
developed and enforced. On that basis human beings, e.g., 
medical or nursing staff, are centered in the digital 
transformation. We have developed a holistic transformation 
model to successfully support the digital transformation 
processes of health care providers. 
Keywords-Holistic Capability Model; Human Based Digital 
Intelligence; Digital Transformation; Sustainable Decision-
Making for Health Care Providers. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the whole wide world, hospitals have to compete with 
each other regarding quality of treatment or exclusiveness of 
their facilities that patients decide for them. Efficient 
operation and furthermore sustainable evolution of health 
care providers like hospitals, retirement homes or care 
centers, will be influenced and challenged by many factors 
from their ecosystems. Digitalization is currently one of the 
biggest challenges, beside the cost cut in public funding or 
the implementation of the general data protection regulation. 
For health care providers, it is necessary to develop and 
optimize their organizations in a digital manner to 
strategically adapt existing business models. 
However, to make sustainable decisions in this fast 
changing and highly technological environment is difficult. 
This results in a great demand to use innovative and 
multifactorial decision-making methods. Our research 
focused on the development of a new holistic model to 
engage digital transformation processes. The results can be 
used as templates for several health care providers 
worldwide.  
In section II we discuss related work and dissociate 
several models from our approach. A detail explanation of 
our digital transformation model as well as a transition to a 
technology from aeronautics is done in section III. Further 
fields of research and a conclusion can be found in section 
VI. 
II.
RELATED WORK
Considerations in digitalization center primarily on 
technology. So is there any chance to make sustainable 
decisions just by looking at technology? Or, the opposite, 
can one do digitalization completely without technology? 
For health care providers, it is a fact that they need more 
efficient technology to support the clinical pathways. Is 
technology the magic bullet for sustainable evolution or are 
there other alternatives? In several papers we can see that 
also processes, culture, organizational structure need to be 
focused. 
Back et al. [1] illustrate an exemplifying model, which 
focuses on the topics mentioned above. This approach uses 
nine dimensions to measure the level of digitalization. A 
digital readiness score, which is used to see the companies 
score and a comparison to others, was published by Jahn and 
Pfeiffer [2]. Digitalization needs to be evolved from a 
technical perspective to a management one within the 
business engineering methodology. Business engineering 
describes the systematic transformation of organizations 
from the industrial age into the information age in [3]. This 
approach can also be derived and applied to healthcare 
providers. The framework of business engineering is 
appropriate for investigation of transformational effects and 
helps to gain a holistic view of necessary activities. The 
difference between classical and digital transformation is the 
outcome’s enrichment by appropriate products or services. 
Digital transformation is a conglomeration of different 
disciplines to realize digital evolution of organizations and 
can be described as a combination of adaptions in strategic 
management, business models, organizational structure, 
process and project management as well as corporate culture 
by use of digitalization. It is not an evolution that will 
automatically be done, but rather a gradual change that 
health care providers should actively force. Furthermore, it is 
not only a technical topic, but also a topic that concerns the 
whole company. There are some consulting companies or 
integrators that still focus on the usage of new information 
technology to transform health care providers in a digital 
perspective. 
Digital maturity models describe different capabilities in 
their scopes that are important in transformation. A maturity 
model was published in [4] by Forrester Research. A more 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

enhanced maturity model containing 8 dimensions and 5 
maturity levels was published in [5]. These skills have been 
subdivided into maturity criteria and the degree to which the 
organizations meet these abilities. 
In addition, the digital maturity models are used to 
visualize the status quo and to derive future transformation 
paths for executives and support their decisions. What the 
models cannot afford is to specify specific transformation 
instructions. 
There 
are 
no 
predefined 
paths 
for 
transformation that will follow the same patterns and 
similarly can be applied to different organizations. 
The International Data Corporation (IDC) published a 
model, called Digital MaturityScape, in which they see 
digital transformation as multifaceted. This model is 
illustrated in Fig. 1 and helps organizations to identify the 
status quo and their future progress in digital transformation. 
Azhari et al [5] suggested that transforming an organization 
needs to take place in five maturity dimensions: Leadership, 
Omni-Experience, Information, Operating Model and 
WorkSource. 
Figure 1. Digital Transformation MaturityScape [5] 
IDC already did intensive research and found that 30% of 
the organizations are at the digital explorer stage, which 
means that they are working on digital projects. The problem 
is that the projects are not repeatable and not scalable. 
Another third are at the digital player stage, which means 
that they are executing on a repeatable basis, but these digital 
initiatives are focused in silos. It is terrifying that just 14% of 
all organizations are at the stage of digital transformers. 
These numbers arise only from the industrial sector, which 
can be seen in [6]. 
Health care providers aspire to solve the following two 
problems, by use of digital transformation. First, due to 
limitations in public funding, there is a need to reduce 
internal costs. Second, to achieve a competitive advantage 
they have to focus more on their patients. This aspect is just 
external, 
but 
we 
have 
recognized 
that 
in 
digital 
transformation two dimensions seem relevant to the holistic 
view: 
• 
External: patients 
• 
Internal: employees 
In order to achieve excellence in the external dimension, 
a sustainable internal dimension must exist. Based on the 
considered maturity models, we have recognized the missing 
focus on the employees and taken into account in the 
development of our digital capability model. 
III.
DIGITAL TRANSFORMATION MODEL
Our digital capability model is derived from different 
transformation models, such as published in [7], and contains 
five scopes. The following four are well known: 
• 
Processes 
• 
Organization 
• 
Technology 
• 
Culture 
Figure 2. Holistic Transformation Model 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

The fifth scope is very important in particular, for health 
care providers: the humans, focused on employees. These 
human beings have great influence on the other four scopes 
of our model, which is illustrated in Fig. 2. Their digital 
intelligence needs to be measured in combination with each 
of the other scopes to achieve a holistic view. Digital 
intelligence, in this case, is defined as the ability of humans 
to naturally deal with technology based systems. 
To support decision-making methods it is necessary, to 
quantify the status quo and the future state of each scope. We 
have been inspired by radar technology to gain a 360° view 
and get a valid positioning on a predefined area. Radar is an 
abbreviation for radio detection and ranging and was 
patented in 1904. The ideas were based on the perceptions of 
Heinrich Hertz in 1888, when Hertz detected the polarization 
dependent reflection of electromagnetic waves, which can be 
seen in the patent by Christian Hülsmeyer [8]. 
The idea of Radar can be used for health care providers’ 
transformation paths. We propose the following three steps 
to derive a digital transformation path: 
• 
Detect 
• 
Position 
• 
Transform 
In the first step (detect), organizations have to identify 
the status quo - the current capability level of processes, 
organization, technology and culture. In the next step 
(position), they need to define the degree of capability they 
want to achieve with their organizations. Finally (transform), 
the distance between detection and positioning is the 
transformation path, which has to be realized by the 
organization. The second and the third step have a massive 
influence on the decision-making process, because their 
impact on the transformation paths’ activities and complexity 
is significant. 
The boundary condition of each decision needs to be 
focused, especially depending on the employees’ digital 
intelligence. Therefore, the focus on the humans is important 
in the decision making process, because it is the key success 
factor for sustainability. So these steps can be used for 
decision-support at management level with considerations in 
the scopes (processes, organization, technology and culture) 
of our holistic transformation model. 
Fig. 3 shows an example of our holistic capability model, 
called Social & Health Care (SHC) Radar. The current value 
(shown as a dark grey line) and the target value (shown as a 
light grey line), which are illustrated as percentage values, 
are gained for the four scopes (processes, organization, 
technology and culture). The transformation gap between 
these two values identifies the transformational needs of 
organizations. The cultural scope in an exemplary health care 
provider was currently evaluated with 25%. The organization 
is planning to reach 45% in that scope. Several methods have 
to be developed and applied by the organization to eliminate 
the calculated transformational gap of 20%. 
Figure 3. Holistic Capability Model 
Table I shows the evaluation of an exemplary health care 
provider. We recommend to prioritize digital transformation 
activities based on the amount of the gap. 
TABLE I. 
VALUES OF AN EXEMPLARY HEALTH CARE PROVIDER
Scope of 
SHC Radar 
Current 
value 
Target value 
Gap 
Processes 
50% 
65% 
15% 
Organization 
20% 
40% 
20% 
Technology 
10% 
50% 
40% 
Culture
25% 
45% 
20% 
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
Our research gains a valuable insight into different digital 
maturity models. Consequentially we have recognized the 
missing focus on the employees and taken this into account 
in the development of our holistic transformation model. We 
recommend health care providers to consider their 
employees’ digital intelligence in the decision-making 
process, because of the strong dependences to all scopes of 
our model. 
Innovative decision-making methods need measureable 
data. The status quo and future position have to be identified 
and illustrated in our SHC Radar. In ongoing studies, we 
define the four scopes more precisely to gain a better level in 
granularity. Moreover we extend our digital capability model 
by the fifth dimension: the humans. Our decision-support 
methodology can be applied for health care providers 
worldwide to benchmark their digital maturity level. 
Furthermore we are going to evaluate whether future 
technologies such as voice recognition, gesture recognition, 
artificial intelligence, and others will decrease the need for 
employees’ digital intelligence. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

REFERENCES
[1]
A. 
Back 
and 
S. 
Berghaus, 
“Digital 
Maturity 
& 
Transformation Report 2017”, Universität St. Gallen, St. 
Gallen, 2017 
[2]
B. Jahn and M. Pfeiffer, “The Digital Revolution - New 
business models take place (only) new communication”, 
Gabler Verlag, Wiesbaden, 2014. 
[3]
H. Österle and R. Winter, „Business Engineering“, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 2003. 
[4]
M. Gill et al, “The Digital Maturity Model 4.0”, Forrester 
Research, Inc., Cambridge, 2016. 
[5]
P. Azhari, N. Farby, A. Rossmann, B.Steimel and K. 
Wichmann, “Digital Transformation Maturity Model”, 
neuland & Research Center for Digital Business an der 
Hochschule Reutlingen, Cologne, 2014. 
[6]
S. Fitzgerald, “IDC MaturityScape Benchmark: Digital 
Transformation 
Worldwide 
2017”, 
International 
Data 
Corporation, Framingham, 2017. 
[7]
G. Westerman et al, “Digital Maturity Matrix”, MIT Center 
for Digital Business & Capgemini Consulting, Cambridge, 
2012. 
[8]
C. Hülsmeyer, “To report procedure removed metal objects 
by means of electric waves a watcher”, Imperial Patent 
Office, 
Patent 
Nr. 
165546, 
Berlin, 
1904
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-675-0
HEALTHINFO 2018 : The Third International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

