Motivation Enhancement in mHealth via Gamiﬁcation
Felix Kettner, Andr´e Langer, Kim Schmidt, and Martin Gaedke
Distributed and Self-organizing Systems
Chemnitz University of Technology
Chemnitz, Germany
Email: felix.kettner@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de
andre.langer@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de
kim.schmidt@mail.de
martin.gaedke@informatik.tu-chemnitz.de
Abstract—The lack of therapy compliance (adherence) is an
already well-studied phenomenon in the health sector. It is
known that numerous factors can inﬂuence regular medication
intake. A promising approach for increasing therapy compliance
are patient-related factors. In order to increase motivation,
Gamiﬁcation-based approaches have already been selectively
tested here. However, the number of mHealth applications using
the potential of Gamiﬁcation in this context in an effective
way is limited so far. Our research therefore focuses on game-
design-elements (GDE) that are particularly suitable to increase
motivation in the mHealth sector. This includes a well-founded
analysis of existing studies and applications with the identiﬁcation
of potential Gamiﬁcation approaches. A novelty here is the use
of comprehensive GDEs to increase motivation in the mHealth
area. The result is a classiﬁcation of GDEs according to their
effectiveness and a conceptual design on how to apply them
effectively, which is implemented prototypically in a progressive
WebApp. Finally, the suitability of our approach for generating
motivation was assessed through a user survey. The results show
a signiﬁcant inﬂuence on the use of GDEs on the development of
Flow, and thus on motivation. Differences in the isolated effect
of individual game design elements could not be proven.
Index Terms—Adherence; Gamiﬁcation; Motivation theory;
Medication; mHealth
I. INTRODUCTION
Digitization is a continuously advancing process affecting
almost all domains in the everyday life [1]. The number of
digital offers also increases in the health sector [2]. Already
in 2015, the number of mobile available applications exceeded
103,000 in the health and ﬁtness and medicine categories [3].
The spectrum ranges from simple, general reminder applica-
tions to apps that are highly specialized on certain diseases.
According to the world-health organization (WHO), only
50% of all patients comply with their agreed treatment plan
in industrialized nations [4]. In case of a lack of adherence,
those patients are often confronted with negative health conse-
quences. In addition to individual effects, such as the worsen-
ing of the disease, relapses, drug resistance and a concomitant
reduction in quality of life, there are also societal risks, such
as an increased risk of spreading contagious diseases and
economic costs [4].
According to Neckermann and Schink¨othe [5], an improve-
ment of adherence is especially in the domain of the patient-
and therapy-related factors indicated. Verbrugghe et al. [6] di-
vide the patient-related factors into conscious and unconscious
reasons for non-adherence. The conscious factors are those that
may have a negative impact on a patient’s motivation to take
medication, like the lack of motivation or information [7] and
are a promising starting point for increasing adherence [5].
Other studies indicate that the majority of younger citizens
already owns a smart-phone [8] and has a medium or high
interest in e-health [9]. Therefore, the use of digital health-
care applications can be one adequate way to get in touch
with patients and help them to build adherent habits.
However, there are hardly any studies on the efﬁcacy of
these applications [10]. Although the promising possibilities
of using digital applications for adherence enhancement are
discussed [5], [11], valid long-term studies are still pending.
So, while the effect of individual applications could hardly be
validated so far, a few application providers already started to
use a method for which studies are available: Gamiﬁcation.
It has already been shown that adherent behavior can be
signiﬁcantly increased with the help of game design elements
(GDEs) [12]–[14]. However, GDEs so far seem to be used
only isolated in applications for adherence enhancement, or
their usage is limited to an application for certain diseases.
This work discusses the potential of Gamiﬁcation in con-
junction with mobile health applications and examines the
research question, which principles can be used to design
and use GDEs in increase the patient’s motivation effectively
in order to contribute to a better adherence. We focus on
patient-related conscious factors in order to generate intrinsic
motivation through the incentive of extrinsic motivation and to
promote sustainable habitual education. Therefore, we present
the following results:
• a categorization to classify GDE according to their effec-
tiveness,
• a concept for the combined use of GDE in mHealth apps
in the ﬁeld of medication intake,
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

• evidence of the signiﬁcant suitability of GDE to support
patient compliance through a proof-of-concept based user
study.
The rest of the work is structured as follows: Section II
introduces the theoretical foundations of Gamiﬁcation and
the theory of motivation, self-determination and the concept
of Flow. Section III presents existing solutions in the same
problem area. Section IV deﬁnes requirements for GDE use
in mHealth and shows our concept for the effective use of
Gamiﬁcation An example implementation and the evaluation
are described in Section V. Section VI ﬁnally provides a
summary and outlook on further research.
II. GAMIFICATION FOR THERAPY COMPLIANCE
We focus on the deﬁnition of Sailer [14] for Gamiﬁcation:
“Gamiﬁcation is a process of playfully designing
activities in a non-game context through the use of
game design elements.”.
Gamiﬁcation can be used both to generate motivation and in
the mHealth area to achieve a more regular medication intake.
In general, the term motivation refers to those psychological
processes that serve to initiate, direct, and sustain mental and
physical activities [15].
A. Self-determination theory
The basis for this is the self-determination theory according
to Deci and Ryan [16]. They postulate three basic psycholog-
ical needs, which are innate, universal and pursuited by the
human psyche. These are:
• competence
• relatedness
• autonomy
According to this, every person strives to interact effectively
with their social environment and gain a sense of conﬁdence
and effectiveness in their own actions (competence), to feel
connected to a social structure and other people (relatedness),
as well as acting to their own interests and values (autonomy)
[16]. Furthermore, Deci and Ryan [17] distinguish between
intrinsic and extrinsic motivation. Intrinsic motivation refers
to the performance of an activity on the basis of its own inher-
ent satisfaction, while extrinsic motivation requires behavior
directed towards a result that is separable from it.
B. Flow
Regarding the maintenance of motivation, supplements from
the Flow theory according to Csikszentmihalyi et al. [18]
are considered as an extension. They provide a psychological
explanatory model for behavior that is repeatedly demonstrated
and maintained despite the lack of extrinsic rewards, and thus
corresponds to intrinsically motivated behavior according to
Deci and Ryan [17]. Flow describes a subjective state in which
an individual is engrossed in an activity and forgets about
time, fatigue, and everything else apart from the activity itself
[18]. The central elements of Flow are [19]: merging of action
and awareness, centering of attention, loss of reﬂective self-
consciousness, sense of control over action and environment,
demands for action and clear feedback and autotelic nature of
action.
In order to effectively use Gamiﬁcation to increase moti-
vation, it must meet the requirements of self-determination
theory according to Deci and Ryan [16] and allow Flow
[20]. Thus, through the proper use of GDEs, which generates
Flow, the basic needs for autonomy, competence, and social
inclusion can be satisﬁed and intrinsic motivation generated.
C. Review of game design elements
In the following, we examined various GDEs for their
suitability for generating Flow. A rating was done in ﬁve
different gradations. The criteria used for this are derived from
the central elements of Flow in Section II-B. Elements, which
contribute without restriction to the generation of Flow are
marked as “conducive”. Once certain prerequisites have to
be fulﬁlled for an element to be supportive, it is considered
“conditionally conducive”. Elements that have no inﬂuence
on the respective Flow aspect, are rated with “no effect”.
Elements representing an obstacle under certain conditions
are considered as “conditionally obstructive”, and elements
that generally have a negative effect on Flow are marked as
“obstructive”. Figure 1 shows a summary of the review.
Fig. 1. Assignment of GDEs to central Flow criteria.
D. Categorization and Summary
Figure 1 shows that GDEs are well suited to generate and
maintain Flow, but not all equally and easily. The rating in the
previous section allows to classify different GDEs into three
categories, as shown in Table I.
GDEs, which can be used in principle for all areas of
Flow and have no negative effects on motivation, even in
an implementation not focusing on ﬂow, are grouped into
category I and are thus to be used preferentially.
If certain GDEs do not expect a positive effect on individual
Flow aspects and, at the same time, have no negative effect,
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

TABLE I. CATEGORIES OF GAME DESIGN ELEMENTS
Category
Description
Game design elements
I
for all aspects of Flow
avatar, badges,
(conditionally) conducive
levels, points
II
for no aspect of Flow
progression,
(conditionally) obstructive
performance graph,
but also not for all aspects
missions,
(conditionally) conducive
team leaderboards
III
for a minimum of one
leaderboards
aspect of Flow
(conditionally) obstructive
they are assigned to category II. A use of these elements is
nothing to oppose.
Category III includes those GDEs that can negatively affect
at least one area of Flow. In motivational applications, the use
of such elements should be avoided whenever possible.
In addition to the right balance between the skills of the user
and the requirements of the application, a sensory overload has
to be avoided and a clear set of rules has to be implemented.
GDEs should not only be used for their own sake, but always
with regard to the intended effect on the user and taking Flow
and self-determination theory into account.
III. RELATED WORK
Various papers provide an overview of existing applications
for increasing adherence and their effectiveness. A good ﬁrst
overview in this area offers [11]. But there is no focus on
Gamiﬁcation. Other work shows the use of Gamiﬁcation for
increasing motivation [14], [21] without considering the use
for increasing adherence.
The most advanced approaches are the use of Gamiﬁcation
with single diseases, such as diabetes [12], [13] with the
disadvantage of a very small target group. So, in lack of a
broad scientiﬁc basis the following analysis refers to existing
applications.
Prerequisite for the selection of an application for closer
examination are the support with medical adherence and the
use of GDEs. Thereby 11 applications where found within
the categories reminder applications, applications for building
habits, to convey information and for life-logging. Out of these
only 4 where to be considered. This is because to the fact that
the others where not longer available or at least not available
in Europe. The remaining 4 applications are Asthma Action
Hero, Habitica, Mango Health and MySugr.
Asthma Action Hero and MySugr are specialized to certain
diseases and Habitica is not designed for medical purposes
but highly gamiﬁed and customizable enough for the intended
use. Figure 2 shows the results of the analysis using the
requirements introduced in Section IV-A.
The advantage of the introduced concept in this work is the
full consideration of all needed aspects to increase medical
adherence by using Gamiﬁcation with a wide target group. So
the providing of disease related information, a scientiﬁcally
founded approach for generating and maintaining motivation
and also functional requirements are taken into account.
Fig. 2. Rating of Existing Applications.
IV. CONCEPT
Patients-related, conscious factors for non-adherence are a
promising starting points for improving adherence to therapy.
By adequately communicating facts, the lack of information
can be reduced as a motivation obstacle. Furthermore, gen-
erated and already existing motivation must be sustainably
maintained.
The requirements to be met derive from the foundations of
self-determination theory according to Deci and Ryan [16],
Flow according to Csikzentmihalyi et al. [18] and the study
of GDE in Section II.
A. Requirements
Below is a list of requirements for an mHealth application
that uses Gamiﬁcation to generate motivation and Flow to
improve adherence.
A-1: Mediation of disease-related information
A-2: Generating motivation
A-2.1: Faciliating Flow
A-2.1.1: Centering of attention is made possible
A-2.1.2: Loss of reﬂective self-consciousness is
made possible
A-2.1.3: Sense of control over action and
environment is made possible
A-2.1.4: Demands for action are generated
A-2.1.5: Clear and direct feedback is given
A-2.1.6: Autotelic use is made possible
A-2.2: Principles of self-determination theory are
considered
A-2.2.1: Feeling of competence is made possible
A-2.2.2: Feeling of autonomy is made possible
A-2.2.3: Feeling of relatedness is made possible
A-3: Functional requirements
A-3.1: Individual medication input possible
A-3.2: Reminder function available
B. System components
This results in three essential services that must be taken
into account when designing an application concept:
• Fulﬁllment of functional requirements,
• Generation of motivation and
• Education and information transfer.
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

Fig. 3. Application Modules as a Complete System with Layers of the MVC Pattern.
This allows a modularization and thus separation of respon-
sibilities based on the Model-View-Cotroller pattern (MVC).
The range of functional requirements may still be further di-
vided into the subcategories of the individual medication input
and the reminder function. Figure 3 provides an overview of
the application modules as a complete system. The following
describes the functionality of each component.
1) Reminder module: The reminder module at the pre-
sentation layer level consists of the reminder administration
view for entering the reminders and a reminder component for
notifying the user of the due date of a scheduled medication
and a demurring stock of medicine. The user inputs and
reminders are processed by the control layer of the module.
It also contains interfaces for storing and querying medication
times in the data model layer, as well as for communicating
with the controller of the GDEs.
2) Motivation module: The motivational module includes
the presentation of the GDEs, their processing in the control
layer, and the management of the GDEs in the data model
layer. The controller of the GDEs has interfaces for communi-
cation with the controller parts of the reminder and information
module in order to be able to process information about (non-
) compliance with the deadlines and the information already
presented. Application usage history data, such as obtained
points or levels, is stored in the management part and retrieved
from the control layer as needed.
3) Information module: The information module is respon-
sible for the storage, selection and presentation of disease-
related information. The drug-speciﬁc information on the
interactions and side effects of the drugs entered are read from
the control section of the module for individual drug input via
the network from a corresponding database. Subsequently, this
data is stored locally in the data memory of the information
module. Furthermore, the module has an interface to the
control layer of the motivation module at the level of the
control layer. The content of the information module is divided
into a learning part and a quiz part. In the learning part,
the information is presented, while in the quiz section, this
information is consolidated with the support of GDEs.
4) Individual medication module: In the presentation layer,
a user interface is provided for individual drug input, alterna-
tively, a barcode scan allows direct reading of the medication.
The control layer of the module realizes the remote access to
the drug catalog and the storage of the data at the level of the
data model layer in the information module.
5) Cross-module content: To facilitate the use of the ap-
plication, an optional tutorial is helpful. As an introduction to
the functionalities and operation of the app, this must cover all
modules in terms of content. The usage of tooltips is encour-
aged, which appear next to the corresponding buttons when
ﬁrst used. Overall, the design of the application should also
take into account the guidelines of ISO 9142-10 “Principles
of Dialog Design”.
C. Selection of Game Design Elements
Not all GDEs are equally suitable for all purposes. Fur-
thermore, the combination of certain GDEs may result in
a more immersive user experience as they complement and
support each other. The use of points makes it easy to see
a level progress, badges can easily be used hand in hand
with a progress bar and for visualizing missions. There are
multiple possibilities in the design and the combination of the
individual GDEs.
Due to their particular suitability, all GDEs from category
I are selected for use in the proof-of-concept (points, badges,
levels, avatars). In addition, to improve and expand the
interaction of the GDEs, from category II progress bar and
performance graph are used.
The overall concept is based on the targeted use of the GDEs
to generate Flow, taking account of the self-determination
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

theory. A novelty here is the use of comprehensive GDEs to
increase motivation in the mHealth area.
V. EVALUATION
To evaluate the fulﬁllment of the requirements from Section
IV, an empirical analysis was carried out as a user survey with
non-experts and an online questionnaire with explicit research
questions, including a demonstrator.
The main component of the demonstrator is the implemen-
tation of the motivational module to test the interaction of the
various GDEs to generate Flow. The implementation of the
special functional requirements of reminders and medication
input has been put into the background. Likewise, the module
of information transfer is implemented only to the extent
necessary to clarify the interaction with the motivation module.
The implementation is based upon React + Bootstrap and
was done as a progressive web app and single-page applica-
tion. A working version of the demonstrator can be found here
(July 2019): https://www.purl.org/net/vsr/gamiﬁcation.
A. Hypotheses
The following falsiﬁable hypotheses served as basis for the
operationalization:
• Hypothesis I: All GDEs used in the demonstrator are
equally suitable for generating Flow.
• Hypothesis II: The development of Flow is not possible
with the GDEs used in the demonstrator.
Variables and indicators were deﬁned and questions were
formulated for the survey to prove these hypotheses. The most
relevant questions from the survey are listed in Table II.
TABLE II. SELECTION OF SURVEY QUESTIONS
No.
Question
5
How concentrated did you feel during application usage?
6
Did you think of anything else than the application
during application usage?
7
How understandable did you ﬁnd the context of the application?
8
How strong was your feeling in controlling the application?
9
How well did the application respond to your input?
10
How intuitive did you ﬁnd the application control?
11
How motivating did you ﬁnd the following items when using
the application?
12
How necessary do you consider the following application
elements to motivate you to take your medication?
13
How much did you feel motivated by the following elements
to try the application further?
B. Results
In total, 91 people participated in the online survey over a
14-day period. Of these, 53 completed the questionnaire. The
age range of the participants was between 18 and 75 years,
focusing on the age group 26 to 35 years. The proportion of
female participants was 69.81% (37 people), the male gender
was 28.30% (15 people), and one person did not specify their
sex. Of the 53 participants, 43 (81.13%) stated that they had
already taken medication or did so regularly.
When testing for Flow, the mean of all answers to each
question is above the expected mean (p < 0.01) as shown in
Table III. This shows that the GDEs used in the demonstrator
are able to produce Flow. Thus, Hypothesis II is refuted and
the premise for Hypothesis I is met.
TABLE III. PEARSON CHI-SQUARE-TEST OF THE FLOW RELATED
QUESTIONS
Question number
µ
σ
χ2
α
5
3,68
1,09
47,14
0,001
6
1,89
0,32
31,72
0,001
7
3,47
1,01
17,24
0,01
8
3,53
1,01
23,49
0,001
9
3,85
1,05
75,93
0,001
10
3,72
1,03
47,93
0,001
TABLE IV. FRIEDMAN-TEST FOR THE GAME DESIGN ELEMENT
RELATED QUESTIONS
No.
GDE
µ
σ
χ2
F
α
11
Avatar
3,28
1,24
Points
3,23
1,15
Badges
3,38
1,20
Performance graph
3,32
1,12
3,86
> 0, 05
12
Avatar
3,02
1,38
Points
3,16
1,23
Badges
3,19
1,48
Performance graph
3,57
1,34
6,48
> 0, 05
13
Avatar
3,15
1,34
Points
3,00
1,27
Badges
3,28
1,34
Performance graph
3,13
1,23
0,46
> 0, 05
Further questions served to examine differences in the effect
size of the individual GDEs in the generation of motivation.
However, the Friedman used showed no signiﬁcant difference
in the evaluation of the individual GDEs by the subjects (p >
0.05) as depicted in Table IV.
With the help of the user survey could be shown that through
the use of the tested GDEs, as provided in the draft concept,
Flow is enabled. From this, the usability of GDEs to increase
motivation in medication adherence was derived. Hypothesis
II could be falsiﬁed with the results of the survey, Hypothesis
I on the other hand not.
However, the assumption of the different effects of the
GDEs has not been conﬁrmed. A possible explanation for this
is that the effect on motivation is signiﬁcantly dependent on the
combination of the GDEs and their interaction in the ﬁeld of
dynamics, rather than on the individual elements. From this, it
can be deduced that GDEs should not be used in isolation, but
rather develop their effect in interaction with other GDEs. An
afﬁrmation of this thesis would also support the requirements
created in Section IV.
One last question was aimed at the general acceptance of
the demonstrator by the respondents. Of the 53 respondents,
34 (64.15%) stated, they would consider using a full version
of the demonstrator when taking their own medication. The
Pearson Chi-Square-Test shows a signiﬁcant deviation (p <
0.05) of the actual distribution towards the readiness for use
with an expected equal distribution.
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The task and objective of this work was the analysis and
testing of which GDEs are particularly suitable for increasing
motivation in the mHealth domain. The focus was on increas-
ing medical adherence.
First of all, a rating scheme for GDEs was designed,
followed by categories for classifying GDEs and application
concept requirements. Appropriate GDEs were considered to
be points, badges, levels, progress indicators, avatars, and
performance graphs. As a result, a WebApp was implemented
as a proof-of-concept, including the conceptual motivational
module. This demonstrator was tested by a user survey.
We found that using GDEs enables Flow. From this, the
usability of the tested GDEs can be derived to increase
motivation in the use of medication intake. However, the
various GDEs studied are not signiﬁcantly different in their
individual effect on user motivation.
Further future research is indicated. In this work, we fo-
cused on the motivation module. For a more comprehensive
evaluation and assessment of the concept, the implementation
of a full-featured prototype, including an information module
and other functional requirements, would be expedient. As part
of the user survey, no impression of the duration of effect on
the user motivation could be obtained. However, medications
often have to be taken over a longer period of at least several
days. To evaluate the long-term motivation, a study over a
longer period would be necessary. To improve the long-term
motivation, an extension with additional GDEs like missions
or a narrative could be useful.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Kemp, “Digital in 2018: Essential insights into internet, social
media,
mobile,
and
ecommerce
use
around
the
world,”
2018,
2019.09.24. [Online]. Available: https://digitalreport.wearesocial.com/
report download
[2] Statista, “Volumen des eHealth-Marktes weltweit in den Jahren von
2013 bis 2020 (in Milliarden US-Dollar) (global ehealth market
volume from 2013 to 2020 (in billions of dollars)),” 2019, 2019.09.24.
[Online]. Available: https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/712698/
umfrage/volumen-des-ehealth-marktes-weltweit/
[3] “Chances
and
Risks
of
Mobile
Health
Apps
(CHARISMHA),”
2016, 2019.09.24. [Online]. Available: https://publikationsserver.tu-
braunschweig.de/receive/dbbs mods 00060000
[4] E. Sabat´e, Adherence to long-term therapies: evidence for action. World
Health Organization, 2003.
[5] K. Neckermann and T. Schink¨othe, “Adh¨arenz: Fehlende therapietreue
und m¨oglichkeiten der steigerung (adherence: Lack of adherence and
potential for enhancement),” Forum, vol. 33, pp. 140 – 142, Apr 2018.
[6] M. Verbrugghe, S. T. L. Verhaeghe, K. Lauwaert, D. Beeckman, and
A. Van Hecke, “Determinants and associated factors inﬂuencing medi-
cation adherence and persistence to oral anticancer drugs: A systematic
review,” Cancer treatment reviews, vol. 39, pp. 610 – 621, 2013.
[7] P. Behner, A. Klink, S. Visser, J. B¨ocken, and S. Etgeton, Effekte
einer gesteigerten Therapietreue: Bessere Gesundheit und h¨ohere Ar-
beitsproduktivit¨at durch nachhaltige ¨Anderung des Patientenverhaltens
(Effects of increased adherence: better health and higher productivity
by sustained change of patients behavior). Bertelsmann Stiftung, 2012.
[8] M. Haas, “Smartphone-Markt: Konjunktur und Trends (smartphone
market:
business
cycle
and
trends),”
Bitkom
-
Bundesverband
Informationswirtschaft, Telekommunikation und neue Medien e.V.,
2018, 2019.09.24. [Online]. Available: https://www.bitkom.org/Presse/
Presseinformation/30-Milliarden-Markt-rund-um-das-Smartphone.html
[9] Statista,
“Wie
hoch
ist
Ihr
generelles
Interesse
am
Thema
E-Health? (what is your general interest in e-health?),” In Statista
-
Das
Statistik-Portal,
2017,
2019.09.24.
[Online].
Available:
https://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/698066/umfrage/umfrage-
zum-interesse-am-thema-e-health-in-deutschland-nach-geschlecht/
[10] I. Ahmed, N. S. Ahmad, S. Ali, S. Ali, A. George, H. Saleem Danish,
E. Uppal, J. Soo, M. H. Mobasheri, D. King, B. Cox, and A. Darzi,
“Medication adherence apps: Review and content analysis,” JMIR
Mhealth Uhealth, vol. 6, no. 3, p. e62, Mar 2018.
[11] A. Choi, A. W. Lovett, J. Kang, K. Lee, and L. Choi, “Mobile
applications to improve medication adherence: Existing apps, quality of
life and future directions,” Advances in Pharmacology and Pharmacy,
vol. 3, pp. 64 – 74, 2015.
[12] J. A. Cafazzo, M. Casselman, N. Hamming, D. K. Katzman, and P. M.
R., “Design of an mHealth App for the Self-management of Adolescent
Type 1 Diabetes: A Pilot Study,” JMIR, vol. 14, p. e70, 2012.
[13] K. J. Rose, M. K¨onig, and F. Wiesbauer, “Evaluating success for
behavioral change in diabetes via mhealth and gamiﬁcation: Mysugr’s
keys to retention and patient engagement,” Diabetes Technology &
Therapeutics, vol. 15, p. A114, 2013.
[14] M. Sailer, Die Wirkung von Gamiﬁcation auf Motivation und Leistung;
Empirische Studien im Kontext manueller Arbeitsprozesse (The effect of
gamiﬁcation on motivation and performance; Empirical studies in the
context of manual work processes).
Springer Fachmedien Wiesbaden,
2016.
[15] R. J. Gerrig, Psychologie (Psychology).
Pearson, 2015.
[16] E. L. Deci and R. M. Ryan, Handbook of Self-Determination Research.
The University of Rochester Press, 2002.
[17] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Intrinsic and extrinsic motivations: Classic
deﬁnitions and new directions,” Contemporary Educational Psychology,
vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 54–67, 2000.
[18] M. Csikszentmihalyi, S. Abuhamdeh, and J. Nakamura, Flow. Springer
Netherlands, 2014, pp. 227–238.
[19] M. Csikszentmihalyi, “Play and intrinsic rewards,” in Flow and the
foundations of positive psychology.
Springer, 2014, pp. 135–153.
[20] Z. Fitz-Walter, Introduction to Gamiﬁcation: 4 quick quests to get you
started with gamiﬁcation.
Gamiﬁcation Geek, 2018.
[21] S. Nicholson, “A recipe for meaningful gamiﬁcation,” in Gamiﬁcation
in education and business.
Springer, 2015, pp. 1–20.
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-759-7
HEALTHINFO 2019 : The Fourth International Conference on Informatics and Assistive Technologies for Health-Care, Medical Support and Wellbeing

