 
Digital Practices and Uses in Secondary Schools 
Achieving Digital Literacy 
 
Christian Bourret 
DICEN IDF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée - France 
E-mail : christian.bourret@univ-eiffel.fr 
Hafida Hammadi 
DICEN IDF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée -France  
Email : hafi_12@yahoo.fr 
 
Abstract— In the Georges Seurat Middle School in 
Courbevoie (Ile-de-France region), our study focuses on the 
description and analysis of students’ and teachers’ digital 
activities in the classroom and online, as well as the digital 
content offered in the school environment (OZE92) in face-to-
face, distance learning, and hybrid courses.  
 
Keywords- digital literacy, digital workspace, digital practices, 
digital education, media literacy. 
 
 
                   I.  INTRODUCTION 
 
This work presents qualitative research conducted with 
both students and teachers. We intend to complete this 
component and begin the quantitative study's reflection 
phase. The results show that group work motivation, digital 
knowledge, and abilities are actively being acquired. Hence, 
is it possible to enhance and deepen digital literacy in 
secondary schools.  
      The objective of our study is to assess how secondary 
school students and teachers interact with and use 
technology, teach digital literacy to students (digital 
citizens), how to instruct students in digital literacy, 
improve and upgrade professional teaching methods and 
contribute to the development of the professor's digital 
teaching strategies for secondary schools. 
 
         II.  SCIENTIFIC POSITIONING 
 
Our project is based on the interdisciplinary field of 
information, communication, and education sciences, as 
well as the position illustrated by F. Bernard regarding the 
articulation of the four dimensions of the link, meaning, 
knowledge, and action [1]. We shall employ the concepts of 
the situation (particularly learning and observation) and 
socio-technical devices or mediating artifacts. We shall 
begin with A. Mucchielli's " Dynamic situational 
contextualization method" and the various contexts that he 
proposes for a situation [2]. Then, we move on to A. 
Mucchielli's "Situation and Communication" (2010), where 
he discusses the "genesis of meanings" using a semiotic 
method based on "contextualization." [3].  Based on the 
socio-constructive approach, we shall examine social 
interactions in training [4].         
We also analyze group interactions in the frame of the 
Adaptive Structuration Theory (AST) as Scott Poole argues 
that group members intentionally adopt rules and resources 
to achieve goals. Poole holds that group members have an 
impact on outcomes. In the seven necessary pieces of 
knowledge known for future education, we can refer to 
Edgar Morin [5]. 
 
                 III.  METHODOLOGY 
 
Our research applies a mixed methodology:   
A.  Qualitative approach (observations, interviews, and 
content analysis) and 
B.  Quantitative approach (based on questionnaires). 
      Alex 
Mucchielli's 
"Constructivist 
approach 
to 
communications" includes a qualitative study. It is a random 
sample of 397 students from various classes. This study is 
preliminary and based on 219 hours of observations in the 
classroom. The goal of qualitative research is to understand, 
analyze, and quantify the barriers to the growth of digital 
uses, practices, contents, devices, and so on in the context of 
schools.  
        This study relied on several digital projects that were 
carried out in different classes including media class, 
WebTv, Green delegate project, “O Lab Citizen”, Mediatiks 
competitions (online newspaper, photo-reportage), and 
others. 
 
IV. RESULTS 
3.1.  Students  
The observations of our first study in the Digital 
Collaborative Space (DCS) are as follows: learners are more 
confident in DCS after observing digital practices. The 
enjoyable aspects of DCS encourage frequent participation. 
Online collaboration makes group work easier. Students are 
provided with the necessary homework tools, allowing them 
to complete their assignments in an optimal and efficient 
manner. Students can use the chat to ask questions and 
receive personalized responses. DCS allows teachers to 
engage 
students 
in 
personalized 
and 
differentiated 
instruction. All of the DCS's tools promote communication 
between students and teachers as well as between peers. The 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
teacher's role has changed; he or she now supervises and 
facilitates the students' learning. Students learn to work 
independently as well as in groups.  
      Students having trouble are assisted by the pair in the 
construction of knowledge within the framework of the 
DCS, which produces motivation and the desire to make an 
effort to complete the task. 
 
3.1.1.  DCS’s difficulties 
 
      Progressive digital training constitutes one of the hardest 
subjects in the curriculum for students. There are differences 
in how students are trained because some academic subjects 
do not employ common digital technology. Also, the 
learner's level of digital literacy is influenced by the 
environment in which they live. 
 
 3.2.   Teachers  
      In a setting where knowledge is created collaboratively 
within a group under the guidance of the teacher, the latter's 
role is modified, and he/she positions themselves as a 
facilitator and guide. The teacher is no longer the exclusive 
source of knowledge. Conversation and exchanges are 
encouraged through various communication technologies 
such as synchronous documents, chat, commenting, email, 
and so on. Within the parameters of the synchronous 
document, the teacher may adopt the immediate correction. 
This enables the student to receive individualized 
remediation. Students are encouraged to work both 
independently and in groups in a flipped classroom. By 
adapting objectives and content to the abilities and 
challenges of each student, the teacher in DCS can 
implement differentiated instruction. The teacher has access 
to the student's work at the same time. As a result, the 
student is encouraged to participate in the project and to 
demonstrate his or her involvement by name. All the tools 
required to complete the project are provided in the 
collaborative space where it is set up online (resources, 
etc.). In DCS, teachers can implement competency-based 
instruction by focusing on specific skills such as online 
information validation. Students are taught how to use the 
"OZE92" digital workspace's resources and services (ENT). 
They are also given information-documentary training 
(online research methodology, legal aspects of information, 
validation of online information, etc.). Students work 
exclusively on digital material during this experiment; paper 
copies are not necessary. 
  
 
 
3.2.1 
Teacher interviews – Results 
 
Six teachers of mathematics, French, arts, sciences, 
history, and languages were questioned on the difficulties 
associated with the use of digital technology in classrooms.  
 
                                      V. CONCLUSION 
As a preliminary conclusion, we have found out that 
both individual and group work on the DCS is highly 
effective. The projects are progressing rapidly, and the 
objectives are being met.  Also, we trust that the adoption of 
progressive digital citizen training should be applied in 
compulsory education.  The equipment of schools and the 
training of teachers would be essential elements to 
guarantee the success of this process. It is worth mentioning 
that the school’s director confirmed that digital technology 
represents one of the school’s pillars of policy and its 
priority.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] F. Bernard, "Information and communication sciences is a 
decentralized and open field of study", in BOUZON (Arlette) 
under the dir. de, Debatable organizational communication. 
Domains, concepts, and perspectives, Paris, L’Harmattan, 
2006, pp. 33 – 46. 
[2] A. Mucchielli and C. Noy, "Communication studies: 
Constructivist approaches", Collection U, Ed. Armand Colin, 
2005, p. 240, chap. 6, p. 113-124. 
[3] A. Mucchielli, "Situation and communication", Ed. Ovadia, 
Nice, 2010, pp. 170.  
[4] L. Begue, O. Desrichard, "Social psychology treatise. The 
study of interpersonal interactions", Brussels, De Boeck, 
2013, pp. 849. 
[5] E Morin, The seven pieces of knowledge known for future 
education, Ed. Seuill- UNESCO 1999, p. 71. 
 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

