Shifting Trends of COVID-19 Tweet Sentiment with Respect to Voting Preferences in 
the 2020 Election Year of the United States  
           Megan Doman                     Jacob Motley                      Hong Qin                  Mengjun Xie                    Li Yang                    
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, College of Engineering and Computer Science  
University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, Chattanooga, Tennessee, U.S.A. 
Emails: syn472@mocs.utc.edu  yqs872@mocs.utc.edu      hong-qin@utc.edu      mengjun-xie@utc.edu       li-yang@utc.edu 
 
Abstract—COVID-19 
related 
policies 
were 
extensively 
politicized during the 2020 election year of the United States, 
resulting in polarizing viewpoints.  Twitter users were particularly 
engaged during the 2020 election year. Here, we investigated 
whether COVID-19 related tweets were associated with the overall 
election results at the state level during the period leading up to 
the election day. We observed weak correlations between the 
average sentiment of COVID-19 related tweets and popular votes 
in two-week intervals, and the trends gradually become opposite 
for Democratic and Republican voting preferences. We then 
compared the average sentiments of COVID-19 related tweets 
between states called in favor of the Republican (red states) or 
Democratic parties (blue states). We found that at the beginning 
of lockdowns COVID-19 tweet sentiments in the blue states were 
much more positive than those in the red states. However, COVID-
19 tweet sentiments in the red states gradually become more 
positive during the summer of 2020 and persisted until the election 
day.   
Keywords—COVID-19; Election; Twitter; Sentiment Analysis. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The year 2020 saw a wide variety of government-issued 
responses to the outbreak of the SARS-CoV-2 pandemic in the 
United States. It has been acknowledged by researchers that 
these measures were quickly politicized and highly partisan. For 
example, Gusmano et al. reported the disparity between 
measures taken by Democrat state leaders, suggesting that these 
tended to be more immediate based on suggestions by federal 
health organizations, as opposed to Republican state leaders, 
who it is said were likely to take less restrictive measures based 
on the cues of the Republican sitting president at the time [1]. 
Though it is evident that politics played a significant role in the 
implementation and adherence to measures regarding public 
health and safety, there are other factors to consider that would 
play into how these issues were discussed throughout the year 
leading up to the presidential elections in November. For 
example, Harvey discussed the effect of lockdown fatigue, or 
the role of stress involved in the isolation and uprooting of daily 
life because of COVID-19 lockdown measures, which led to 
discontent and reduced adherence to isolation measures as time 
went on [2].  This would suggest the expectation of changing 
trends in sentiment as people became more uncomfortable with 
the lockdown measures. Particularly in a discussion of Twitter 
discourse during the pandemic, it has been observed that social 
media overuse during lockdown may have contributed to this 
fatigue, such as the negative effect that the constant stream of 
information had on the generation Z age cohort [3]. This means 
that the data gathered from social media can be particularly 
valuable as it was not just a reflection of users’ views but also 
that it impacted the users who read it during this period, thereby 
exerting influence on the wider population. This is important as 
it ties into the spread of misinformation, which has also been a 
widely documented issue in politics, especially during the 
pandemic. Social media, such as Twitter, has been a hotspot for 
the quick spread of misinformation, such that many websites 
were set up to fact-check many posts related to COVID-19 [4].  
This indicates that Twitter has been accepted as a source of 
political information by many of its users, making more evident 
the value of social media analysis as a line of inquiry regarding 
politics and the pandemic. 
For the United States, the red and blue states refer to states 
whose voters predominantly choose the candidates from the 
Republican Party or Democratic Party, respectively [5]. Here, 
we wanted to investigate if it is possible that analyzing the 
COVID-19 tweet sentiment in online discussion of the 
politicized issues in different areas of the country would give 
insight into the local political leanings when it came time to vote 
in the 2020 presidential election. Our goal is that the information 
gathered here can have applications in politics, allowing for the 
ongoing analysis of the online discourse of issues as a more 
efficient and less selective method of gauging constituent 
interest rather than polling individuals and that these results can 
potentially be used to understand and hopefully reevaluate the 
role of politics as it is leveraged even in the face of a major 
emergency such as a global pandemic of COVID-19.  
Twitter sentiment analysis has previously been used to track 
public opinion over an election cycle, such as the tracking of 
responses to individual events in the 2012 presidential races [6].   
Our research focuses particularly on the effect of pandemics on 
a time of emergency, which is a significant source of intrigue in 
the social sciences for how they expedite change and magnify 
issues. This means that the political issues of the election would 
have been much more pressing than in a year of less hardship 
for the general populace. Our comparison of these polarizing 
issues will contribute to the existing literature on the study of 
sociological and political impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.  
Below, we will describe our data sets and methods in Section 
II, present our results in Section III, followed by discussion in 
Section IV and conclusion in Section V.  
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS  
This study used publicly available popular voting data 
broken down by state and party and published location-tagged 
daily Twitter sentiment data. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

A. Twitter Data 
We parsed 472,288 geotagged tweets from a dataset of 
COVID-19 tweets collected based on a selection of key terms 
related to the pandemic [7]. The collection of this dataset started 
on March 20, 2020, just at the beginning of states issuing stay-
at-home orders and lockdown procedures [8]. We ended our 
analysis on the date of the general elections, November 4, 2020. 
We partition the geotagged tweets to each state in the U.S. and 
then proceed with average daily sentiment analysis.  
B. Voting Data of the 2020 U.S. Election 
Popular voting data arranged by state was obtained from a 
public online nonpartisan source [9]. This data set was imported 
and indexed by state abbreviation. For this study, we parsed out 
only the quantitative popular voting data and which party was 
called for each state. 
C. Tweet Sentiment Analysis 
Tweet sentiment analysis was performed using VADER 
Sentiment Analysis, a tool designed with social media posts in 
mind in order to better attune the expected input [10]. VADER 
utilizes Natural Language Processing (NLP), machine learning 
methods, and five generalizable heuristic rules to assign each 
text a sentiment score between -1 and 1, representing perfectly 
negative and perfectly positive sentiment intensity, respectively.  
Retweets and duplicated tweets were excluded from sentiment 
estimation. We estimated the daily average COVID-19 tweet 
sentiment intensity for each state in the United States, which 
then was imported to Jupyter Notebook using the pandas 
package. The dates were parsed as indices to generate the data 
frames. A few example of the COVID-19 related tweets and 
their estimated sentiment values (S) are presented in Table 1. 
We presented two positive, one negative, and two neural 
examples.  
TABLE 1. SAMPLE TWEETS WITH ESTIMATED SENTIMENTS (S) 
Sample Tweets 
Date, Location 
S 
Dinner tonight is a B.L.T. and a corona. Sponsored by 
Covid-19 @ Miami Beach, 
Florida https://t.co/GyznR8Yqed 
2020-04-11 
Miami Beach, FL 
 
  0 
Bare shelves: the time of #corona @ South Burlington, 
Vermont https://t.co/idfYhEOFfV 
2020-04-11  
South Burlington, 
VT 
 
  0 
EMBRACE THE SUCK: In spirituality, contrasting 
experiences refers to the ones we’d really rather not have. 
Maybe it’s seasonal chronic illness woes (🙋\u200d♀), 
perhaps it’s various elements of Corona chaos, or it could 
https://t.co/upvcbRBAZS 
 
2020-04-10  
Long Beach, CA 
 
-0.87 
The best alone time I can have. Wanted to share 
🙏\n#stayhome #staysafe #socialdistancing 
#stayhomestaysafe #inspiring #fun #creative #art #collab 
#teamwork #newmusic #newalbum #cancel #corona 
#solo #guitar #life https://t.co/edpaPmXrHa 
 
2020-04-10  
Los Angeles, CA 
 
0.91 
This quarantine turning me into Joe Jackson 
🤦😂😂😂\n.\n.\n.\n#llfruge #tallformyheight 
#mvpofnochildleftbehind #quarantinedad #jacksons 
#beyonce #Brooklyn #corona #corona #covid 
#fatherdaughter #florida @ Fleming 
https://t.co/xmAhSg39hZ 
 
2020-04-11  
Fleming 
Island, FL 
 
 
0.83 
D. Data Processing 
We removed any locations that were not shared between 
both datasets and transposed the sentiment dataset such that the 
indices are the state abbreviations, allowing for the 
concatenation of these data frames by row. Of the voting data, 
we removed every column except for the state abbreviation 
indices, the qualitative data of which party won that state, and 
the percentage of the vote for Democrats, Republicans, and 
others. We combined the data frames by index, and the state 
abbreviation, and turned the percentages into decimals such that 
the voting data is now on a similar scale to the sentiment data 
(Figure 1).  
 
Figure 1. Sample of the combined data frame. The average COVID-19 tweet 
sentiment for each state is estimated daily.   
E. Correlation and Heatmap 
Pearson correlation was performed using Python pandas.corr 
function,  and the correlation coefficient matrix was visualized 
with Python Package Seaborn [11] to generate the heatmaps to 
compare the correlation between national popular vote 
percentages by party and average COVID-19 tweet sentiment 
during the corresponding time periods. We trimmed this data 
frame to dates along the y-axis and percentages along the x-axis 
for ease of viewing and comprehension. 
F. Sliding-time-window analysis 
Daily averages of tweet sentiment are highly noisy. We, 
therefore, applied a 14-day sliding window to estimate the two-
week trend. In order to compare the tweet sentiment intensity 
between blue and red states, we estimate a ratio between the 
average sentiment for Democrat-called versus Republican-
called states in the sliding time windows.  
III. RESULTS 
A. Shifting correlations of COVID-19 tweet sentiment with 
voting preferences 
In order to examine the potential association of COVID-19 
tweets with voting preferences, we performed a two-week 
sliding window analysis. In each two-week window, we 
estimate the correlation coefficient between the average 
COVID-19 tweet sentiment intensity and the percentage of votes 
for Democratic, Republican, and other parties.  
We visualize these two-week sliding window correlation 
results in a heatmap (Figure 2). A Positive correlation is 
represented by the intensity of the red color, whereas a negative 
correlation is represented by the intensity of the blue color. The 
center of the color representation is near gray color, 
corresponding to a coefficient of zero.  
Because votes for the other parties at 1.8% are an extremely 
small fraction, we expect that Democratic and Republican votes 
would correlate with average COVID-19 tweet sentiment in 
opposite ways. For example, in each row of Figure 2, a red cell 
in the column of Democratic voting percentage often correspond 
to a blue cell in the column of Republican voting percentage.  
When examining the correlation results from March to 
November (Figure 2), we can observe a shift that is occurring 
from mid-April to late May of 2020. Before mid-April, there are 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

generally weak positive correlations between average tweet 
sentiment with Democratic voting percentages. After May, there 
are generally weak negative correlations between average tweet 
sentiment with Democratic voting percentages.  This shift can 
be verified in the column for the Republican voting percentage, 
except that the color pattern changes in the opposite direction 
(Figure 2).  
Overall, we can observe that positive correlations between 
COVID-19 tweet sentiments and Republican voting percentages 
occurred more often from June to October before the election. It 
is noteworthy that the incumbent presidential candidate was 
from the Republican party during the 2020 election.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Shifting correlations of average sentiment intensities of COVID-19 
tweets with the percentages of votes for Democratic (dem_percent) and 
Republican (rep_percent) parties. Vote for other party is represented by 
other_percent.  
B. Switching of relative sentiment of COVID-19 tweets in 
blue and red states over time 
To further investigate the possible association of COVID-19 
tweets with the 2020 voting results, we compared the trend of 
COVID-19 tweet sentiment in blue and red states overtime 
during the 2020 election year (Figure 3). The blue states are the 
states where the Democratic presidential candidate was declared 
the winner based on a simple majority, and the red states are 
those where the Republican presidential candidate was declared 
the winner. No state was won by other parties other than the 
Democratic or Republican parties.  
In order to discern the trend over time, we chose to use a 
sliding window technique to mitigate the daily fluctuating noises 
of tweet sentiment. We estimated the average sentiments of 
COVID-19 tweets in a two-week sliding window from March to 
November 2020, in blue and red states, respectively.  
In order to highlight the relative change over time between 
the blue and red states, we estimate the ratio of average COVID-
19 tweet sentiment intensity in the blue states versus that in the 
red states in each sliding window, plotted as dashed line in green 
(Figure 3). To illustrate the difference between blue and red 
states, we add a gray horizontal line corresponding to a ratio of 
1 in Figure 3. It can be observed that, from March to May, the 
average sentiment intensities of COVID-19 tweets were 
generally more positive in the blue states than in the red states. 
The ratio of blue versus red state sentiment intensities has a 
declining pattern during the summer of 2020, and generally 
stays below the gray horizontal line of 1 from the summer to the 
election day.  
 
 
Figure 3. Shifting trend of relative sentiment intensities of COVID-19 tweets 
in blue and red states over time.  
 
Hence, the changing pattern of the blue-versus-red ratio in 
Figure 3 is consistent with the correlation heatmap in Figure 2. 
Both figures show that COVID-19 tweet sentiments were 
initially more positively associated with Democratic voting 
preference at the beginning of the pandemic, but this correlation 
declined after May 2020.  Gradually, the positive intensity of 
COVID-19 tweets associated with Republican voting preference 
slightly overtook that with Democratic voting preference.  
IV. DISCUSSION 
We are aware of some limitations to the present work. 
Location-tagged tweets are a small subset of the overall tweets. 
Twitter users are not a fair representation of the general 
population of the United States [12]. The COVID-19 related 
lexicon is a changing definition on its own, and a variety of 
topics are politicized and polarized. The sentiment analysis also 
has its limits. For example, we expect similar sentiment scores 
for negative tweets about mask requirements and negative 
tweets about anti-mask behaviors. It is also known that slang, 
sarcasm, and other cultural language particularities may be 
challenging for accurate sentiment intensity estimation. There is 
likely an interwind of COVID-19 tweets with other social and 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

political events. For example, the Black Life Matters movement 
intensified in May 2020. We are also aware that the partition of 
the states into two categories of blue and red ones is over-
simplified.  
One point of intrigue in this work is the evident negative 
correlation between Twitter sentiment and the popular vote for 
either of the major parties for prolonged periods of 2020. There 
did appear on the heatmap to be a slightly greater correlation 
between the sentiments and popular vote for the Republican 
party, which would be understandable given that it was the party 
in power during this time, suggesting that people who publicly 
voiced approval for the state of the country at the time would 
vote in a way to keep it the same.  
Looking at both the heatmap and time series charts, there are 
also two points in which the sentiment shows a much greater 
correlation with Democrat voters, so it could be valuable to look 
closer at the data from the beginning of the pandemic to find out 
what caused such a significant drop off as well as what caused 
the spike in May. The first drop may be attributable to lockdown 
fatigue, which would make it interesting to analyze the possible 
correlation between the sentiments in that time period to the 
adherence to stay-at-home orders or social distancing.  
V. CONCLUSION  
We observed weak correlations between the average 
sentiment of COVID-19 related tweets and popular votes in the 
2020 election in the United States. We observed that COVID-19 
tweets were more positive in blue states than in red state during 
the beginning of the pandemics. We found that sentiments in the 
red states gradually become more positive during the summer of 
2020 and persisted until the election day. We observed this 
shifting trend using both a heatmap and a ratio-based 
comparative analysis. Future work will be required to 
investigate the possible sources of these changes and their 
overall implications for the role of social media and the SARS-
CoV-2 pandemic in the politics of the United States.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the support of awards SFS #1663105, BD Spoke 
#1761839, REU #1852042 and #2149956 from the National 
Science Foundation (NSF), support from the Office of Vice 
Chancellor of Research and a CEACSE award from the 
University of Tennessee at Chattanooga, and a capacity building 
project from the Department of Defense Cyber Scholarship 
program (DoD CySP) of the United States.  
REFERENCES 
[1] M. K. Gusmano, E. A. Miller, P. Nadash, and E. J. Simpson, 
"Partisanship in initial state responses to the COVID ‐ 19 
pandemic," World Medical & Health Policy, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 
380-389, 2020. 
[2] N. Harvey, "Behavioral fatigue: Real phenomenon, naïve 
construct, or policy contrivance?," Frontiers in Psychology, p. 
2960, 2020. 
[3] H. Liu, W. Liu, V. Yoganathan, and V.-S. Osburg, "COVID-19 
information overload and generation Z's social media 
discontinuance intention during the pandemic lockdown," 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, vol. 166, p. 
120600, 2021. 
[4] G. Burel, T. Farrell, and H. Alani, "Demographics and topics 
impact on the co-spread of COVID-19 misinformation and fact-
checks on Twitter," Information Processing & Management, vol. 
58, no. 6, p. 102732, 2021. 
[5] S. Battaglio, "When red meant Democratic and blue was 
Republican. A brief history of TV electoral maps.," in Los 
Angeles Times, ed, 2016. 
[6] H. Wang, D. Can, A. Kazemzadeh, F. Bar, and S. Narayanan, "A 
system for real-time twitter sentiment analysis of 2012 us 
presidential election cycle," in Proceedings of the ACL 2012 
system demonstrations, 2012, pp. 115-120.  
[7] R. Lamsal, "Design and analysis of a large-scale COVID-19 
tweets dataset," Applied Intelligence, vol. 51, no. 5, pp. 2790-
2804, 2021. 
[8] A. Staff, "A Timeline of COVID-19 Developments in 2020," 
American Journal of Managed Care, vol. 1, 2021. 
[9] D. Wasserman, S. Andrews, L. Saenger, L. Cohen, A. Flinn, and 
G. Tatarsky, "2020 Popular Vote Tracker," Cook Political, 2021.  
[10] C. Hutto and E. Gilbert, "Vader: A parsimonious rule-based 
model for sentiment analysis of social media text," in 
Proceedings of the international AAAI conference on web and 
social media, 2014, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 216-225.  
[11] M. L. Waskom, "seaborn: statistical data visualization," Journal 
of Open Source Software, vol. 6, no. 60, p. 3021, 2021, doi: 
10.21105/joss.03021. 
[12] A. Mislove, S. Lehmann, Y.-Y. Ahn, J.-P. Onnela, and J. 
Rosenquist, "Understanding the Demographics of Twitter Users," 
Proceedings of the International AAAI Conference on Web and 
Social Media, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 554-557, 08/03 2021. [Online]. 
Available: 
https://ojs.aaai.org/index.php/ICWSM/article/view/14168. 
 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

