An Investigation of One Sided Follow Relations between Twitter Users
Concerned with Tweets Disclosing Submitters’ Personal Information
Yasuhiko Watanabe, Toshiki Nakano, Hiromu Nishimura, and Yoshihiro Okada
Ryukoku University
Seta, Otsu, Shiga, Japan
Email: watanabe@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp, t180450@mail.ryukoku.ac.jp,
t160405@mail.ryukoku.ac.jp, okada@rins.ryukoku.ac.jp
Abstract—Nowadays, many people use a Social Networking Ser-
vice (SNS). Most SNS users are careful in protecting the privacy
of personal information: name, age, gender, address, telephone
number, birthday, etc. However, some SNS users disclose their
personal information that can threaten their privacy and security
even if they use unreal name accounts. In this study, we inves-
tigated Twitter users who gave likes to tweets disclosing submit-
ters’ personal information that potentially threatened submitters’
privacy and security. We collected 318 tweets promising to
disclose submitters’ personal information. Then, we investigated
the one sided follow relations between the submitters of these
318 tweets and users who gave likes to them. The results of our
survey showed that giving likes to tweets promising to disclose
submitter’s personal information is not a sufﬁcient trigger to get
to follow users. Submitters were careful to follow unfamiliar users
even if the users followed them and gave likes to their tweets.
Also, users were careful to follow unfamiliar users even if the
users followed them and gave likes to the same tweets.
Keywords–personal information; Twitter; SNS; privacy risk; one
sided follows; unreal name account user.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, many people use a Social Networking Service
(SNS) to communicate with each other and try to enlarge their
circle of friends. SNS users are generally concerned about
potential privacy risks. To be speciﬁc, they are afraid that
unwanted audiences will obtain information about them or
their families, such as where they live, work, and play. As
a result, SNS users are generally careful in disclosing their
personal information. They disclose their personal information
only when they think the beneﬁts of doing so are greater
than the potential privacy risks. However, some SNS users,
especially young users, disclose their personal information on
their proﬁles, for example, real full name, gender, hometown
and full date of birth, which can potentially be used to
identify details of their real life, such as their social security
numbers. In order to discuss the reasons why some SNS users
disclose their personal information willingly, it is important
to investigate who their intended readers are. However, it is
difﬁcult to ask them who their intended readers are. To solve
this problem, it is important to investigate who gave responses
to their SNS messages disclosing their personal information.
This is because, if submitters felt unwanted audiences read
and gave responses to their SNS messages disclosing their
personal information, they would delete them. In order to
investigate who gave responses to SNS messages disclosing
submitters’ personal information, we investigate Twitter users
who gave likes to tweets disclosing submitters’ personal infor-
mation. Furthermore, we investigate follow relations between
users concerned with a tweet disclosing submitter’s personal
information. In other words, we investigate
•
whether a submitter followed users who gave likes to
his/her tweets disclosing his/her personal information,
•
whether users who gave likes to submitter’s tweet
disclosing his/her personal information followed the
submitter, and
•
whether each user who gave a like to a tweet disclos-
ing submitter’s personal information followed every
other user who gave a like to the same tweet.
In our previous work, we reported mutual follow relations
and no follow relations between users concerned with a tweet
disclosing submitter’s personal information [1]. In this study,
we investigate one sided follow relations between them. It is
important to investigate one sided follow relations between
users because they are bound to happen in the process of
acquaintance between users who do not follow each other. By
using the results of the investigation, we discuss the groups
of submitters and users who gave likes to tweets disclosing
submitters’ personal information.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Section
II, we survey the related works. In Section III, we show
how to collect tweets where submitters seemingly disclosed
their personal information honestly and detect users who gave
likes to them. In Section IV, we investigate one sided follow
relations between users concerned with a tweet disclosing
submitter’s personal information and discuss the groups of
submitters and users who gave likes to tweets disclosing
submitters’ personal information. Finally, in Section V, we
present our conclusions.
II.
RELATED WORK
Personally identiﬁable information is deﬁned as informa-
tion which can be used to distinguish or trace an individual’s
identity such as social security number, biometric records,
etc. alone, or when combined with other information that
is linkable to a speciﬁc individual, such as date and place
of birth, mother’s maiden name, etc. [2] [3]. Internet users
are generally concerned about unwanted audiences obtaining
personal information. Fox et al. reported that 86% of Internet
users are concerned that unwanted audiences will obtain in-
formation about them or their families [4]. Also, Acquisti and
Gross reported that students expressed high levels of concern
for general privacy issues on Facebook, such as a stranger
ﬁnding out where they live and the location and schedule of
their classes, and a stranger learning their sexual orientation,
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 1. An unreal name account user, Suzuse, disclosed her personal
proﬁle items in her tweets.
name of their current partner, and their political afﬁliations
[5]. However, Internet users, especially young users, tend to
disclose personal information on their proﬁles, for example,
real full name, gender, hometown and full date of birth, which
can potentially be used to identify details of their real life,
such as their social security numbers. As a result, many
researchers discussed the reasons why young users willingly
disclose personal information on their SNS proﬁles. Barnes
argues that Internet users, especially teenagers, are not aware
of the nature of the Internet and SNSs [6]. Barth et al.
highly questioned whether privacy as a concept is already
implanted in SNS users’ perception and social representation
[7]. Obar and Oeldorf-Hirsch reported that individuals often
ignore privacy and terms of service policies for SNSs [8].
Viseu et al. reported that many online users believe the beneﬁts
of disclosing personal information in order to use an Internet
site are greater than the potential privacy risks [9]. On the
other hand, Acquisti and Gross explain this phenomenon as a
disconnection between the users’ desire to protect their privacy
and their actual behavior [5]. Also, Livingstone points out that
teenagers’ conception of privacy does not match the privacy
settings of most SNSs [10]. Alshaikh et al. reported that SNS
users were worried about their individual information security
especially when SNS organizations changed their privacy terms
[11]. Joinson et al. reported that trust and perceived privacy had
a strong affect on individuals’ willingness to disclose personal
information to a website [12]. Also, Tufekci found that concern
about unwanted audiences had an impact on whether or not
students revealed their real names and religious afﬁliation
on MySpace and Facebook [13]. The authors also think that
most students are seriously concerned about their privacy and
security. However, they often underestimate the risk of their
online messages and submit them. For example, Watanabe et
al. focused on unreal name Twitter users who promised to
disclose their personal proﬁle items, analyzed the details of
their personal proﬁle items disclosed by themselves, especially
their ages, genders, and heights, and showed that most of the
Figure 2. A tweet promising to disclose the same number of submitter’s
personal proﬁle items as likes to it.
submitters disclosed their ages, genders, and heights honestly
[14].
III.
A COLLECTION OF TWEETS DISCLOSING
SUBMITTERS’ PERSONAL INFORMATION
It is difﬁcult to collect tweets disclosing submitters’ per-
sonal information, such as tweets in Figure 1, directly. To
solve this problem, we focused on tweets where submitters
promised their audiences to disclose the same number of their
own personal proﬁle items as likes to their tweets. Figure 2
shows a tweet submitted by Suzuse on January 6, 2022. Both
in Figure 1 and Figure 2, her screen name is redacted for
privacy. Figure 2 shows that Suzuse promised her audiences
to disclose the same number of her personal proﬁle items as
likes to her tweet. Actually, as shown in Figure 1, Suzuse
submitted four replies disclosing her four personal proﬁle items
to her tweet shown in Figure 2 on January 6, 2022. Watanabe
et al. reported that Twitter users seemingly disclosed their
personal information honestly when they promised to do it,
such as Suzuse’s tweet in Figure 2 [14]. As a result, it is
easy to collect tweets disclosing submitters’ personal proﬁle
items when we collect tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal proﬁle items. Furthermore, they often used the same
sentence in their tweets, like a game password, as shown in
Figure 2, # I will show the same number of my proﬁle items
as your likes. In order to collect tweets promising to disclose
submitters’ personal proﬁle items, we used the shared sentence
as key to collect them. To be speciﬁc, we collected these tweets
by using Twitter API v2 [15]. Twitter API v2 helps us to collect
tweets where the given sentence is used. Also, Twitter API v2
helps us to collect user accounts who submitted a speciﬁc tweet
and who gave likes to it. Furthermore, it helps us to collect
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 3. The histogram of the number of likes given to the 318 tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal information.
user accounts who are followed by a speciﬁc user. Every 10
PM, we tried to collect user accounts and their tweets
•
that contained # I will show the same number of my
proﬁle items as your likes
•
that were submitted in the past 24 hours, and
•
that were given one or more likes.
After we obtained the tweets promising to disclose submitters’
personal proﬁle items, we tried to collect
•
user accounts who gave likes to the obtained tweets
and
•
user accounts followed by the submitters of the ob-
tained tweets and the users who gave likes to them
once daily for a week. Finally, we collected 318 Japanese
tweets promising to disclose submitters’ personal information.
These 318 tweets were submitted from December 30, 2021
to January 31, 2022 by 317 users. One out of the 317
users submitted two tweets promising to disclose his personal
information on January 12 and 17, 2022. These 318 tweets
were given 7060 likes by 6325 users within a week after
they were submitted. Figure 3 shows the histogram of the
number of likes given to the obtained 318 tweets promising to
disclose submitters’ personal information. Figure 4 shows the
daily number of likes given to the obtained 318 tweets in the
investigation period. Day N in Figure 4 means that N days
have passed since the obtained tweet was submitted and our
investigation started. Day 6 was the last day of the investigation
period. Figure 4 shows that 77 % of likes were given on Day
0. 30 tweets out of the 318 tweets were deleted within a week
after they were submitted.
IV.
ONE SIDED FOLLOW RELATIONS BETWEEN USERS
CONCERNED WITH TWEETS DISCLOSING SUBMITTERS’
PERSONAL INFORMATION
In this section, we investigate one sided follow relations
between users who communicated through tweets disclosing
submitters’ personal information. To be speciﬁc, we survey
•
Twitter users who submitted tweets promising to dis-
close the same number of their own personal proﬁle
items as likes and
Figure 4. The daily number of likes given to the obtained 318 tweets since
the tweets were submitted.
•
Twitter users who gave likes to these tweets
and investigate
•
whether an user who submitted tweets promising to
disclose his/her personal information followed users
who gave likes to his/her tweets,
•
whether users who gave likes to tweets promising to
disclose submitter’s personal information followed the
submitter, and
•
whether users who gave likes to a tweet promising
to disclose submitter’s personal information followed
each other.
After collecting user accounts of submitters and users who
gave likes to submitters’ tweets, we analyze the relations
between them. The relations between a submitter and an user
who gave a like to submitter’s tweet can be classiﬁed into four
types:
•
mutual follow relation: the submitter and the user
mutually followed each other.
•
one sided follow relation (from the submitter): the
submitter followed the user, however, the user did not
follow the submitter.
•
one sided follow relation (to the submitter): the user
followed the submitter, however, the submitter did not
follow the user.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 5. The daily number of likes given by users who did not follow
submitters but were followed by the submitters in the investigation period.
•
no follow relation: the submitter and the user did not
follow each other.
Figure 5 shows the daily number of likes given by users
who did not follow submitters but were followed by the
submitters in the investigation period. On the other hand,
Figure 6 shows the daily number of likes given by users who
followed submitters but were not followed by the submitters
in the investigation period. Figure 5 and Figure 6 show that
users who did not follow submitters but were followed by the
submitters gave less likes than those who followed submitters
but were not followed by the submitters. Furthermore, we
analyze the relations among users who gave likes to submitter’s
tweet. They can also be classiﬁed into three types: mutual
follow relation, on sided follow relation, or no follow relation.
Let us consider one example. As shown in Figure 2, a
Twitter user, Suzuse, submitted a tweet promising her audi-
ences to disclose the same number of her own personal proﬁle
items as likes on January 6, 2022 at 2:23 PM. We detected
her tweet on the same day at 10:00 PM, and then, recorded
that she received ten likes and submitted ten replies disclosing
her ten personal proﬁle items on January 6, 2022. After that,
every 10 PM, we tried to check whether someone gave likes
to her tweet and analyzed the relations between Suzuse and
users who gave likes to her tweet by the day. For example,
on January 7, 2022, we detected one more user gave a like
to her tweet and recorded that Suzuse received eleven likes
from eleven users by the day. Then, we analyzed the relations
between Suzuse and each of the eleven users and conﬁrmed
that each of the eleven users followed Suzuse and she followed
seven of them. As a result, the relations between Suzuse and the
seven users were mutual follow relations. On the other hand,
the relations between Suzuse and the other four users were
one sided follow relations: these four users followed Suzuse
but she did not follow them. Furthermore, we analyzed the
relations among the eleven users who gave likes to her tweet
by January 7, 2022. There were 55 cases to choose two out of
the eleven users. In three cases out of the 55 cases, two users
followed each other. On the other hand, in the other 52 cases,
two users did not follow each other. As a result, the relation
of three cases were mutual follow relations and the relations
of the other 52 cases were no follow relations. On January 12,
2022, we conﬁrmed that eleven users gave eleven likes to her
tweet on January 6, 2022, as shown in Figure 2, and ﬁnished
the investigation on her tweet.
Figure 6. The daily number of likes given by users who followed submitters
but were not followed by the submitters in the investigation period.
A. One Sided Follow relations between submitters and users
who gave likes to submitters’ tweets
At ﬁrst, we discuss the cases where submitters followed
users who gave likes to their tweets, but the users did not
follow the submitters. We call the follow relations between
these submitters and users one sided follow relations (from
submitters). In order to discuss this type of follow relation,
we introduce the ratio of one sided follow relations (from
submitters) between a submitter and users who gave likes to
his/her tweet. Suppose that the number of users who gave likes
to tweet t is n and m of them do not follow the submitter of
tweet t but are followed by him/her. Then, the ratio of one
sided follow relations (from submitters) between the submitter
of tweet t and the users who gave likes to it, POSF fromS(t),
is deﬁned as follows:
POSF fromS(t) = m
n
Figure 7 shows the distribution of the ratio of one sided
follow relations (from submitters) between the submitters of
the obtained 318 tweets and the users who gave likes to them.
Furthermore, Figures 7 (a) and (b) shows the distribution of
them investigated on the Day 0 and Day 6, respectively. As
shown in Figure 7, the ratio in each case was less than 0.2.
There were few cases where two or more users who had one
sided follow relations (from submitters) with a submitter gave
likes to his/her tweet promising to disclose his/her personal
information.
Next, we discuss the cases where submitters did not follow
users who gave likes to submitters’ tweets, but the users
followed the submitters. We call the follow relations between
these submitters and users one sided follow relations (to
submitters). In order to discuss this type of follow relation, we
introduce the ratio of one sided follow relations (to submitters)
between a submitter and users who gave likes to his/her tweet.
Suppose that the number of users who gave likes to tweet
t is n and m of them follow the submitter of tweet t but
are not followed by him/her. Then, the ratio of one sided
follow relations (to submitters) between the submitter of tweet
t and the users who gave likes to it, POSF toS(t), is deﬁned as
follows:
POSF toS(t) = m
n
Figure 8 shows the distribution of the ratio of one sided follow
relations (to submitters) between the submitters of the obtained
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) the last day (Day 6)
Figure 7. The histograms of the ratio of one sided follow relations (from submitters) between the submitters of the obtained 318 tweets and the users who
gave likes to them on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and the last day (Day 6) of the investigation period.
(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) the last day (Day 6)
Figure 8. The histograms of the ratio of one sided follow relations (to submitters) between the submitters of the obtained 318 tweets and the users who gave
likes to them on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and the last day (Day 6) of the investigation period.
318 tweets and the users who gave likes to them. In most cases,
the ratio was less than 0.2. However, we found 14 cases where
the ratio was more than 0.6. In one case of them, we found
that 20 users gave likes to a single tweet promising to disclose
submitter’s personal information and all of them had one sided
follow relations (to submitters) with the submitter. Figure 8
shows that the number of users who had one sided follow
relations (to submitters) with submitters did not decrease. It
is probable that submitters were careful to follow unfamiliar
users even if the users followed them and gave likes to their
tweets.
B. One Sided Follow relations among users who gave likes to
submitters’ tweets
We discuss the one sided follow relations among users who
gave likes to tweets disclosing submitters’ personal informa-
tion. In order to discuss this problem, we introduce the ratio
of one sided follow relations among users who gave likes to
a tweet. Suppose that the number of users who gave likes to
tweet t is n and there are m cases where one user of them
follows another user but is not followed by the user. Then, the
ratio of one sided follow relations among the users who gave
likes to tweet t, POSF amongU(t), is deﬁned as follows:
POSF amongU(t) =
m
n(n − 1)/2
Figure 9 shows the distribution of the ratio of one sided follow
relations among the users who gave likes to the obtained 318
tweets. In most cases, the ratio was less than 0.1. Figure 9
shows that the number of users who had one sided follow
relations with other users did not decrease. It is probable that
users were careful to follow unfamiliar users even if the users
followed them and gave likes to the same tweets.
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(a) the ﬁrst day (Day 0)
(b) the last day (Day 6)
Figure 9. The histograms of the ratio of one sided follow relations among the users who gave likes to the obtained 318 tweets on the ﬁrst day (Day 0) and the
last day (Day 6) of the investigation period.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the one sided relations
between submitters and users who gave likes to submitters’
tweets promising to disclose their personal information. The
results of our investigation show that giving likes to tweets
promising to disclose submitter’s personal information is not a
sufﬁcient trigger to get to follow users. Submitters were careful
to follow unfamiliar users even if the users followed them and
gave likes to their tweets. Also, users were careful to follow
unfamiliar users even if the users followed them and gave likes
to the same tweets.
REFERENCES
[1]
Y.
Watanabe,
T.
Nakano,
H.
Nishimura,
and
Y.
Okada,
“An
Investigation
of
Twitter
Users
Who
Gave
Likes
to
Tweets
Disclosing
Submitters’
Personal
Information,”
in
Proceedings
of
the
Eighth
International
Conference
on
Human
and
Social
Analytics (HUSO 2022), May 2022, pp. 10–15. [Online]. Available:
https://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=huso 2022
1 30 80026 [accessed: 2023-02-14]
[2]
C.
Johnson
III,
Safeguarding
against
and
responding
to
the
breach
of
personally
identiﬁable
information,
Ofﬁce
of
Management
and
Budget
Memorandum,
2007.
[Online].
Available: https://obamawhitehouse.archives.gov/sites/default/ﬁles/omb/
assets/omb/memoranda/fy2007/m07-16.pdf [accessed: 2023-02-14]
[3]
B. Krishnamurthy and C. E. Wills, “On the leakage of personally
identiﬁable
information
via
online
social
networks,”
Computer
Communication Review, vol. 40, no. 1, 2010, pp. 112–117. [Online].
Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/1672308.1672328 [accessed: 2023-
02-14]
[4]
S. Fox et al., Trust and Privacy Online: Why Americans Want to
Rewrite the Rules, The Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2000.
[Online]. Available: http://www.pewinternet.org/2000/08/20/trust-and-
privacy-online/ [accessed: 2023-02-14]
[5]
A. Acquisti and R. Gross, “Imagined communities: Awareness,
information sharing, and privacy on the facebook,” in Proceedings of
the 6th International Conference on Privacy Enhancing Technologies,
ser. PET’06.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2006, pp. 36–
58. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/11957454 3 [accessed:
2023-02-14]
[6]
S. B. Barnes, “A privacy paradox: Social networking in the United
States.” First Monday, vol. 11, no. 9, 2006. [Online]. Available:
http://ﬁrstmonday.org/article/view/1394/1312 [accessed: 2023-02-14]
[7]
S. Barth, M. D. de Jong, M. Junger, P. H. Hartel, and J. C. Roppelt,
“Putting the privacy paradox to the test: Online privacy and security
behaviors among users with technical knowledge, privacy awareness,
and ﬁnancial resources,” Telematics and Informatics, vol. 41, 2019, pp.
55–69. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2019.03.003
[accessed: 2023-02-14]
[8]
J.
A.
Obar
and
A.
Oeldorf-Hirsch,
“The
biggest
lie
on
the
Internet: ignoring the privacy policies and terms of service policies
of
social
networking
services,”
Information,
Communication
&
Society, vol. 23, no. 1, 2020, pp. 128–147. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118X.2018.1486870 [accessed: 2023-02-
14]
[9]
A.
Viseu,
A.
Clement,
and
J.
Aspinall,
“Situating
privacy
online: Complex perception and everyday practices,” Information,
Communication & Society, 2004, pp. 92–114. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/1369118042000208924 [accessed: 2023-02-14]
[10]
S. Livingstone, “Taking risky opportunities in youthful content creation:
teenagers’ use of social networking sites for intimacy, privacy and
self-expression.” New Media & Society, vol. 10, no. 3, 2008, pp. 393–
411. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444808089415
[accessed: 2023-02-14]
[11]
M. Alshaikh, M. Zohdy, R. Olawoyin, D. Debnath, Z. Gwarzo, and
J. Alowibdi, “Social network analysis and mining: Privacy and security
on twitter,” in 10th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop
and Conference (CCWC), 2020, pp. 0712–0718. [Online]. Available:
https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/9031147 [accessed: 2023-02-14]
[12]
A.
N.
Joinson,
U.-D.
Reips,
T.
Buchanan,
and
C.
B.
P.
Schoﬁeld, “Privacy, trust, and self-disclosure online.” Human-Computer
Interaction, vol. 25, no. 1, 2010, pp. 1–24. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/07370020903586662 [ac-
cessed: 2023-02-14]
[13]
Z. Tufekci, “Can You See Me Now? Audience and Disclosure
Regulation in Online Social Network Sites,” Bulletin of Science,
Technology & Society, vol. 28, no. 1, 2008, pp. 20–36. [Online]. Avail-
able: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0270467607311484
[accessed: 2023-02-14]
[14]
Y.
Watanabe,
H.
Nishimura,
Y.
Chikuki,
K.
Nakajima,
and
Y. Okada, “An investigation of twitter users who disclosed their
personal proﬁle items in their tweets honestly,” in Proceedings
of
the
Sixth
International
Conference
on
Human
and
Social
Analytics (HUSO 2020), Oct 2020, pp. 20–25. [Online]. Available:
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=huso 2020
1 40 80035 [accessed: 2023-02-14]
[15]
Twitter,
Inc.
Twitter
API.
[Online].
Available:
https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs/twitter-api [accessed: 2023-02-14]
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
HUSO 2023 : The Ninth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

