What Does the Bird Say?
Exploring the Link Between Personality and Language Use in Dutch Tweets
Soﬁe Vandenhoven and Orph´ee De Clercq
LT3, Language and Translation Technology Team
Ghent University
Ghent, Belgium
Email: firstname.lastname@ugent.be
Abstract—The aim of this paper is to ascertain whether the use
of language in Dutch tweets can offer researchers insight into
the personality of the user posting those tweets. A database was
created, containing the tweets of twenty Belgian, Dutch-speaking
Twitter users with an equal representation of both genders. All
subjects ﬁlled in a personality test based on the Big Five Model
of personality and two linguistic analyses were performed on the
Dutch tweets. In a ﬁrst analysis, a more abstract representation of
the language was created by means of Part-of-Speech tagging. For
the second analysis, typical sentiment and personality-charged
words were derived from the tweets based on well-known lexicons.
Though our database is rather limited, we were able to ﬁnd
some interesting correlations between certain personality traits
and language use.
Keywords–Personality; Big Five; Sentiment analysis.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social media are an important aspect of modern-day com-
munication, which is proven by the rising number of monthly
active users. This high number of users has logically drawn the
attention of researchers, since people share a lot of information
about themselves online: how they perceive the world, what
they think of current events and how they react on other people
are only a few examples. Even more, social media might
also offer a deeper insight into their personality, by revealing
speciﬁc character traits.
Consequently, different sorts of sociolinguistic research on
social media have already been conducted: personality, gender
and age [1], the use of social media among teens and young
adults [2], even the motivation of older adolescents to use
social network platforms [3] and also the language used on
these social media [4], [5].
The focus of this paper is on personality research. The
main objective, however, is not to study the explicit content of
messages in order to ﬁnd out what people talk about online,
but to investigate what kind of language is used and whether
this language use can reveal something about the personality
of the person behind a social media proﬁle. To this purpose, a
dataset comprising tweets from twenty respondents -ten males
and ten females- was collected. All subjects were asked to ﬁll
in a personality test and their tweets were processed using
techniques from Natural Language Processing, after which
correlations between speciﬁc language use and personality
were investigated.
The personality model used throughout this paper is
known as the Big Five Model [6]. This is one of the most
well-researched measures of personality structure of the last
decades [4] and it “provides an integrative descriptive model
for personality research” [7, p1222]. The personality model
contains ﬁve traits, marked with the anagram OCEAN or
CANOE. Each trait equals a category which is labelled with
one substantive. However, the category itself represents a broad
range of meaning, captured within this one substantive [7]. For
example, the O stands for Openness, which includes among
others intellect and independence. The different categories are
brieﬂy listed in Table 1.
TABLE I. OVERVIEW OF THE BIG FIVE PERSONALITY TRAITS
Trait
Characteristic
O for Openness
intellectual, polished, independent, open-minded
C for Conscientiousness
orderly, responsible, dependable
E for Extraversion
talkative, assertive, energetic
A for Agreeableness
good-natured, cooperative, trustful
N for Neuroticism
not calm, neurotic, easily upset
In the remainder of this paper, we will ﬁrst discuss how the
relation between personality and social media has been studied
in the past (Section 2). Next, we will explain how Twitter data
has been collected and processed from twenty respondents who
all ﬁlled in an online personality test based on the Big Five
(Section 3). In Section 4, we discuss the results, after which
this paper is concluded and prospects for future research are
offered in Section 5.
II.
RELATED WORK
Four main reasons make social media interesting for
research. The increasing popularity of social media in the
last decade has created an enormous database of personal
information [8]. The content in this database, which is widely
available through public proﬁles, is user-generated [9]. The
language used on these social media, which ﬂuctuates between
spoken and written language but really is neither of them, is
a new form of communication [10] and the messages often
contain very personal and emotional content [11]. It is highly
possible that those four elements caused or at least coincided
with a surge in research regarding the Big Five and social
media.
However, an often heard criticism is that online proﬁles
might also depict a false and better image of a user, making
personality research on social media useless. In the Facebook
study presented in [12], no evidence was found to support this
presumption. On the contrary, the results show that “people are
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

not using their social network proﬁles to promote an idealized
virtual identity”. This would mean that the personality traits
displayed online should correspond to the actual personality
of the user.
There has been research on which personalities are mainly
drawn to social media. Hamburger and Ben-Artzi [13] found
that users of social media are in general introverted and
neurotic. Moreover, they also showed a signiﬁcant difference
between genders: female users of social services are generally
introverted and highly neurotic, whereas men are quite the
opposite. Gender differences were not considered in the study
by Ross [14], where almost 90% of the subjects were female.
The most important conclusion drawn from this study is
that Openness positively correlates with the general use of
Facebook. A more extended study on social media use [15]
concluded that it is more easily used by people scoring higher
on Openness and Extraversion, whereas it is less used by peo-
ple who are emotionally stable. For the network site Twitter,
Hughes [16] found out that it is more appealing to users scoring
higher on Openness and lower on Conscientiousness when
used for social contacts. People using Twitter for information
were found to be more introverted and more conscientious.
However, most of these studies take more than only lin-
guistic features into account, or they study anything but the
language used on social media. Golbeck et. al. claim to be
the ﬁrst to test whether all information displayed on a proﬁle
could predict one’s personality. They conducted two studies,
one on Facebook [4] and another on Twitter [5]. Since our
paper focuses on Twitter, we will only discuss those ﬁndings.
For this research not only the tweets as such were collected,
but also public account data such as followers, mentions and
so on. However, a linguistic analysis of the tweets formed the
major part of the study. Some intuitively logical correlations
between the tweets and the Big Five were discovered using the
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count tool (LIWC) [17]. They
found that Conscientiousness was negatively correlated with
words about death (e.g., bury, cofﬁn, kill), meaning that the
more conscientious a user is, the less he or she will refer to
death. Moreover, the same trait was also negatively correlated
with negative emotions and sadness. Hence, both ﬁndings
suggest that highly conscientious people abandon unhappy
subjects. Another ﬁnding concerning that personality trait
revealed a more frequent usage of the pronoun you, indicating
that highly conscientious people talk more about others. Also,
scoring high in Agreeableness indicated a signiﬁcant use of the
pronoun you and those users were also less likely to talk about
the LIWC categories achievements and money. When trying to
predict personality, the linguistic features contributed most to
the task.
In more recent years much research has been performed
trying to predict personality based on language, such as [18]
and [19]. Though personality prediction is beyond the scope
of this paper, we believe that the dataset that was collected
for this research will be of use for future research in that
direction. Important to note is that most previous research has
been conducted on English, whereas we want to know whether
Dutch language use without any other proﬁle information, can
reveal something about someone’s personality. And if this is
the case, we want to ﬁnd out which aspects of language are
important to take into consideration.
III.
DATA COLLECTION AND PROCESSING
We convinced twenty Dutch-speaking, Flemish persons
to participate in our research. All participants were highly
active on Twitter and tweeted mostly in Dutch. Relying on
the statistics presented in Fig. 1, originally posted by the
Belgian Country lead at Twitter, we made sure that half of
our respondents belonged to the ﬁrst age category (ages 16
to 24) and the other half to the second category (ages 25 to
34). Since there is no consensus on whether gender inﬂuences
personality [13], [20], both genders were equally represented
in our database: ten males and ten females.
Figure 1. Twitter statistics about the Belgian twitter user proﬁle according to
age category in 2015
In order to measure the personality of our respondents,
a general Big Five personality test with 46 questions was
chosen. The chosen questionnaire uses a Likert-scale from 1
(strongly disagree) to 7 (strongly agree) and had to be ﬁlled
in online [21]. By agreeing to participate in the research all
subjects also agreed to donate their tweets, which were crawled
with the Twitter API. After these tweets had been downloaded
we made sure that only tweets written in Dutch were retained.
In total, our dataset amounted to 8,759 female and 8,780 male
tweets.
For this research we ﬁrst studied whether it is possible to
draw a general image of a social media user based on the
personality scores that were obtained by our subjects. Next,
two linguistic analyses were conducted on the tweets. For both
analyses the same two steps were performed. First, a more
qualitative analysis was performed by comparing the lowest
and highest male and female scorers per personality trait with
the outcomes of the linguistic analyses. This more intuitive
analysis was followed by measuring Pearson correlations in a
second step.
For the ﬁrst linguistic analysis, we rely on the frequencies
of the different word forms or Parts-of-Speech (PoS) used in
the tweets of our test subjects, in order to derive whether
personality can be connected to particular grammatical choices.
To this purpose all tweets were tagged with the LeTs Prepro-
cessing Toolkit [22], the PoS module of this tool automatically
assigns morphosyntactic labels to each token. Since LeTs is
normally used to process standard text material, the output
of the tool was adapted in order to deal with Twitter-speciﬁc
tokens such as hashtags, mentions, emoji’s, etc.
The second linguistic analysis performed on the Twitter
data focuses more on the occurrence of words that are known
to be charged with a certain sentiment or personality on the ba-
sis of lexicons. As sentiment lexicons, we made use of the only
two existing sentiment lexicons for Dutch, namely the Duoman
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

lexicon [23] and the Pattern lexicon [24]. The Duoman lexicon
comprises nouns, adjectives, verbs and adverbs that have been
manually labelled by two human annotators as either positive,
negative or neutral. The Pattern lexicon is a list of adjectives
that were manually assigned a polarity value between -1
(negative) and +1 (positive). In order to perform the analysis all
tokenized tweets were processed and all positive and negative
lexicon matches retained. As personality lexicon we used
LIWC [17], which was also used in previous research [4],
[5]. An analysis with the LIWC results in a categorisation of
all words used into lexical dimensions, accompanied by their
relative percentages. Examples of those dimensions are negemo
for negative emotions, future for future tenses and cogmech
for cognitive processes. This analysis could reveal that people
scoring particularly high or low on a personality trait might be
recognized by the use of some lexical dimensions.
IV.
RESULTS
A. General Social Media Image
The results of the online personality test ﬁlled in by our
respondents, should be interpreted as follows: scoring above
50% is considered as scoring high on a particular trait and
scoring lower than 50% as low. The general averages assigned
to each personality trait of our twenty subjects and the average
male and female scores are presented in Fig. 2 below.
Figure 2. Bar charts representing the general, female and male averages of
the Big Five scores from our twenty subjects.
As was said in previous research by [13], [14] and [15],
people scoring high on Extraversion, Openness and Neuroti-
cism are the individuals more easily drawn to social media
in general. It has to be said that the general averages of our
database are not quite convincing to either conﬁrm or deny
these results. In general, the twenty subjects do score high on
Extraversion: 61% on average. They score neither high nor
low on Openness with an average of 50%. The same is true
for Neuroticism: on average, the subjects score 49%.
When zooming in on the gender differences, we see that
both genders score almost the same for all traits except for
Extraversion and Neuroticism. In both instances, the female
subjects score higher and for the trait Neuroticism the average
of 70% is 2.5 times higher than the male average. These
ﬁndings are in line with some previous research [20] though it
should be kept in mind that the database used for this research
is very limited and, as a consequence, no generalizations can
be made.
B. Part-of-Speech Analysis
Though our idea was to analyse the frequencies of the PoS-
tags, some preliminary analyses convinced us to narrow down
our research to the category of pronouns, which have also
proven indicative of personality in previous research [5], [25].
In general, we found that our male and female subjects
talk more about themselves and the groups they belong to,
in other words, they use more ﬁrst person pronouns, both
singular and plural. This can easily be explained by Twitter
being a microblogging website: it is very logical to talk more
about one’s own opinions and comments. In a next step,
we checked whether there are any correlations that might
indicate a relation between personality traits and the use of
certain pronouns. We could not ﬁnd a correlation between
a high use of the pronoun jij (you) by people scoring high
in Agreeableness and Openess, as found in [5]. The highest
correlations we found were with the trait Neuroticism: the use
of the possessive pronoun hun (their) is negatively correlated
(-0.54), this correlation, however, is not statistically signiﬁcant
(p-value of 0.09). Other positive correlations between pronouns
and Neuroticism were found with the pronouns zij, haar and hij
(she, her and he), i.e., 0.38 and with ﬁrst person possessives,
0.36. For the other personality traits no speciﬁc ﬁndings can
be reported.
C. Lexicon-Based Analyses
Three different lexicon look-ups were performed: we relied
on two Dutch sentiment lexicons and one well-known lexicon
for personality research.
Both the Pattern [24] and Duoman [23] sentiment lexicons
allowed us to have a closer look at the number of positive and
negative words used by our subjects. We found that almost
all respondents use more positive than negative words, with
the exception of one male subject. However, no links between
this ﬁnding and the personality traits of our subjects could be
discovered.
When processing the data with the LIWC lexicon [17],
the outcome is a table listing all LIWC categories that were
found in the data, accompanied by a relative percentage.
We ﬁrst performed a more qualitative analysis for which a
general overview of the retrieved percentages was created. The
highest and lowest percentages per gender were highlighted
and compared to each other.
Most of the qualitative results found in our database do
make intuitive sense, such as introverted people talking more
about death (e.g., bury, cofﬁn, kill), sadness (crying, grief) and
more about negative emotions in general (hurt, ugly, nasty).
People scoring low on Neuroticism, and therefore calmer peo-
ple, talk more about friends (buddy, friend, neighbour), time
(end, until, season) and certainties (always, never), whereas
they also talk more about themselves. In our database, we also
discovered that highly conscientious people, talk more about
their physical appearance in general: they talk about eating,
food and dieting, about physical states and grooming. Since
these ﬁndings are rather intuitive, we referred to calculating
Pearson correlations in a next phase.
In Table 2, we present only the correlations of 0.5 or more
that were discovered between a certain personality trait and an
LIWC dimension. In our database, we found eight LIWC such
categories, correlated mostly with the trait Openness: social
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

processes (social, e.g., mate, talk, they, child), humans (hu-
mans, e.g., baby, adult, boy), sensory and perpetual processes
(senses, e.g., see, touch, hear), hearing (hear, e.g., listening,
hearing), present tenses (present) and communication (comm).
For the trait Conscientiousness, talking about physical states
(physical) was found to correlate positively and we also saw
that people scoring higher on Neuroticism tend to talk more
about inhibitions (inhib, e.g., block, constrain, stop). Never-
theless, only two of these higher correlations were actually
statistically relevant, namely the positive correlation between
Openness and the mentioning of social processes (social) such
as mate, talk, they, child; and the positive correlation of that
same personality trait with the description of sensory and
perceptual processes (senses) such as see, touch or listen. This
is surprising because our database is only built on the data
of twenty people. It is thus deﬁnitely worthwhile to conduct
a more elaborate study and see whether the highly correlated
items will also return in an experiment with a larger database.
TABLE II. CORRELATIONS BETWEEN PERSONALITY AND LIWC
DIMENSIONS
Trait
LIWC dimension
Correlation
p-value
Openness
social
0.6193
0.0497
humans
0.5254
0.1112
senses
0.6242
0.0473
hear
0.5042
0.1296
present
0.5227
0.1134
communication
0.5284
0.1087
Conscientiousness
physical
0.5088
0.1254
Neuroticism
inhib
0.5237
0.1226
Compared to previous research [5], our ﬁndings do not
support previous results: people scoring high on Conscien-
tiousness in our database did not necessarily have a high
negative correlation with words about death (death; -0.0341),
a high positive correlation with negative emotions (negemo;
0.1080) or words about sadness (sad; 0.0438).
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The goal of this research was to investigate whether the
language used by a speciﬁc person on Twitter can reveal some-
thing about this person’s personality. And if this is the case,
we wanted to ﬁnd out which aspects of language are important
to take into consideration. In order to answer this question we
ﬁrst brieﬂy discussed the Big Five and how it has been used
to measure the relation between personality and social media
in the past. Next, we explained how twenty respondents, ten
male and ten female persons, were persuaded to participate in
our research. These subjects ﬁlled in a personality test and
gave their consent to have their Dutch tweets downloaded
and analysed. On these tweets, two linguistic analyses were
then performed: a more abstract analysis by means of Part-
of-Speech tagging and a lexicon-based analysis based on two
Dutch sentiment lexicons and one personality lexicon. A close
analysis of all available data led to some interesting results.
Firstly, since the results of the Big Five personality test of
all twenty subjects were available, our ﬁndings were compared
with previous research on the link between personality and
social media. We tried to answer the question whether it is
possible to draw a general image of a social media or Twitter
user. When it comes to the Big Five and social media in
general, which was researched by [13], [14] and [15], one trait
corresponds completely, namely scoring high on Extraversion.
For the traits Openness and Neuroticism, however, our database
might have been too small: the numbers ﬂuctuate around 50%,
which makes it impossible to say whether scoring high on
both traits is something frequent on social media. What is
remarkable is that both the social media and Twitter user are
said to score high in Openness, which is not supported by our
database: our subjects score on average 50% on this trait.
Secondly, based on the Part-of-Speech analysis of the
tweets, we found that the use of pronouns in general did not
seem to reveal any correlation with a particular trait; therefore,
a deeper research was conducted on the use of personal and
possessive pronouns. This more thorough analysis did not
reveal any particular link with personality. Both male and
female users do talk more about themselves and groups they
belong to, in other words, they use more ﬁrst person pronouns,
both singular and plural.
Thirdly, based on the lexicon analyses no clear results were
conveyed with two Dutch sentiment lexicons. None of the
personality traits had a speciﬁcally high or low use of positive
and negative words. Moreover, all but one respondent used
more positive than negative words. Since that one respondent
did not score particularly high or low on a trait, we can
only guess about the origins of this difference. The analysis
with the Dutch LIWC lexicon, however, did provide us with
some interesting ﬁndings on how often certain dimensions
of words are used with a particular personality trait. These
were achieved after ﬁrst performing an intuitive qualitative
research, after which Pearson correlations were measured. In
our database, we found eight LIWC dimensions to be highly
correlated, six with the trait Openness and one each with the
traits Conscientiousness and Neuroticism.
A great challenge lied in working with such a limited
database. However, much to our surprise, we did discover
two statistically signiﬁcant correlations. The trait Openness
is positively correlated with social terms, such as family and
friends and also with sensory and perceptual processes such as
see, touch or listen. This ﬁnding is a great stimulus to continue
this research on a larger database: the high correlations could
even be more outspoken if only they were researched on more
data. In future research, it is thus deﬁnitely recommended to
collect more data: this will help in deﬁning more concretely
the general image of a social media user and, of course, in
discovering which language items are typical for speciﬁc Big
Five personality traits. Our database deﬁnitely forms a valuable
gold standard to conduct research on personality prediction in
the near future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank all twenty Twitter users
who agreed to participate in this research by ﬁlling in a
personality test and donating their tweets.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Schwartz, J. Eichstaedt, M. Kern, L. Dziurzynski, S. Ramones, and
M. Agrawal, “Personality, Gender, and Age in the Language of Social
Media: The Open-Vocabulary Approach,” PLoS ONE, vol. 8, 2013, pp.
1–16.
[2]
A. Lenhart, K. Purcell, A. Smith, and K. Zickuhr, “Social Media &
Mobile Internet Use among Teens and Young Adults. Millennials.”
2010.
[3]
V. Barker, “Older Adolescents’ Motivations for Social Network Site
Use: The Inﬂuence of Gender, Group Identity, and Collective Self-
Esteem,” Cyberpsychology & Behaviour, vol. 12, 2009, pp. 209–213.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[4]
J. Golbeck, C. Robles, and K. Turner, “Predicting personality with social
media,” in CHI ’11 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, ser. CHI EA ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011, pp.
253–262.
[5]
J. Golbeck, C. Robles, M. Edmondson, and K. Turner, “Predicting
personality with Twitter,” in Privacy, Security, 2011 IEEE Third In-
ternational Conference on Privacy, Security, Risk and Trust, and IEEE
International Conference on Social Computing (SocialCom), 2011, pp.
149–156.
[6]
L. Goldberg, “An alternative “description of personality”: the big-ﬁve
factor structure,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, vol. 59,
1990, pp. 1216–1229.
[7]
O. John and S. Srivastava, The Big-Five Trait Taxonomy: History,
Measurement and Theoretical Perspectives.
Guilford, 1999.
[8]
A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! the chal-
lenges and opportunities of social media,” Business Horizons, vol. 53,
no. 1, 2010, pp. 59 – 68.
[9]
M.-F. Moens, J. Li, and T.-S. Chua, Eds., Mining user generated content.
Chapman and Hall/CRC, 2014.
[10]
W. G. Mangold and D. J. Faulds, “Social media: The new hybrid
element of the promotion mix,” Business Horizons, vol. 52, no. 4, 2009,
pp. 357 – 365.
[11]
B. Pang and L. Lee, “Opinion mining and sentiment analysis,” Foun-
dations and Trends in Information Retrieval., vol. 2, no. 1-2, 2008, pp.
1–135.
[12]
M. Back, J. Stopfer, S. Vazire, S. Gaddis, S. Schmuckle, and B. Egloff,
“Facebook Proﬁles Reﬂect Actul Personality, Not Self-Idealization,”
Psychological Science, vol. 21, 2010, pp. 372–374.
[13]
Y. Hamburger and E. Ben-Artzi, “The relationship between extraversion
and neuroticism and the different uses of the Internet,” Computers in
Human Behavior, vol. 16, 2000, pp. 441–449.
[14]
C. Ross, E. Orr, M. Sisic, J. Arseneault, M. Simmering, and R. Orr,
“Personality and motivations associated with Facebook use,” Computers
in Human Behavior, vol. 25, 2009, pp. 578–586.
[15]
T. Correa, A. Hinsley, and H. Gil de Z´uniga, “Who interacts on the
Web?: The intersection of users’ personality and social media use,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 26, 2010, pp. 247–253.
[16]
D. Hughes, M. Rowe, M. Batey, and A. Lee, “A tale of two sites,
Twitter vs. Facebook and the personality predictors of social media
usage,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 28, 2012, pp. 561–569.
[17]
J. Pennebaker, M. Francis, and R. Booth, “Linguistic Inquiry and Word
Count (LIWC): LIWC2001,” 2001.
[18]
G. Park, H. Schwartz, J. Eichstaedt, M. Kern, M. Kosinski, D. Stillwell,
L. Ungar, and M. Seligman, “Automatic personality assessment through
social media language,” J. Pers. Soc. Psychol., vol. 108, no. 6, 2015,
pp. 9–34.
[19]
G. Farnadi, G. Sitaraman, S. Sushmita, F. Celli, M. Kosinski, D. Still-
well, S. Davalos, M.-F. Moens, and M. De Cock, “Computational
personality recognition in social media,” User Modeling and User-
Adapted Interaction, vol. 26, no. 2, 2016, pp. 109–142.
[20]
M. Vianello, K. Schnabel, N. Sriram, and B. Nosek, “Gender differences
in implicit and explicit personality traits,” Personality and Individual
differences, vol. 26, 2013, pp. 994–999.
[21]
“The
Big
Five
Project
Personality
Test,”
2016,
URL:
http://www.outofservice.com/bigﬁve/ [accessed: 2016-10-02].
[22]
M. Van de Kauter, G. Coorman, E. Lefever, B. Desmet, L. Macken, and
V. Hoste, “LeTs Preprocess: The multilingual LT3 linguistic prepro-
cessing toolkit.” Computational Linguistics in the Netherlands Journal,
vol. 3, 2013, pp. 103–120.
[23]
V. Jijkoun and K. Hofmann, “Generating a non-English subjectivity
lexicon: Relations that matter,” in Proceedings of the 12th Conference of
the European Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(EACL-2009), 2009, pp. 398–405.
[24]
T. De Smedt and W. Daelemans, “Vreselijk mooi! Terribly beautiful:
a subjectivity lexicon for Dutch adjectives,” in Proceedings of the
8th International Conference on Language Resources and Evaluation
(LREC-2012), 2012, pp. 3568–3572.
[25]
J. Pennebaker, M. Mehl, and K. Niederhoffer, “ Psychological aspects
of natural language use: our words, our selves,” Annual review of
psychology, vol. 54, 2003, pp. 547–577.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

