Rebuilding Trust to Develop the Resilience of Weakened Territories in France 
Elements for a New Approach to Territorial Intelligence concerning Information and Communication 
Stakes in a Context of Digital Transformation and Globalization
Christian Bourret  
Dicen-IdF Research Team 
Université Gustave Eiffel (Paris Est Marne- la-Vallée) 
Serris, France 
christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
Abstract—In an international context of globalization and 
digital transformation, social ties are in crisis, particularly in 
France. In an approach to Territorial Intelligence concerning 
information and communication stakes, we propose some ways 
to try to (re)build trust to promote resilience and sustainable 
development of weakened territories in France. This rebuilding 
of trust can be achieved through projects to develop a 
collective 
representation 
for 
shared 
understanding 
in 
communities of knowledge, associating all the actors and with a 
new role in public services. We will put forward an application 
of this approach in three sectors of activity: cultural tourism, 
local businesses, healthcare and social protection. We will 
consider the application of this approach to a specific territory 
(the ‘Couserans’), in the heart of the French Pyrenees, whose 
specificities and opportunities of resilience we will present. 
Keywords - Information; Communication; Transformation; 
Society; Trust; Weakened Territories; France. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Twenty years ago, A. Giddens outlined our « Runaway 
world » or « how globalization is reshaping our lives » [1]. 
This transformation is provoking increasingly strong 
reactions from those who feel they are victims of the 
changes.  
In France, these consequences are very important in the 
weakened territories. The main topic of this paper is to show 
how rebuilding trust may help to develop the resilience of 
weakened territories in France, especially with cooperations 
through 
knowledge 
sharing 
to 
promote 
collective 
intelligence.  
The issue of inequalities between territories is an old 
problem in France. It has taken on a new dimension with the 
crisis of social ties, in a global context of globalization and 
digital transformation [2][3]. In an approach to Territorial 
Intelligence centered on information and communication 
stakes, we propose some ways to promote the sustainable 
development of weakened territories insisting on a dynamic 
of trust based on shared projects, to (re) make society.  
After an introduction, first of all, we will present the 
context of this work, specifying our approach to weakened 
territories. In a second step, we will present our scientific 
positioning and our research methodology in the French 
interdisciplinary field of information and communication 
sciences and our new approach to territorial intelligence in a 
constructivist approach with the aim of building knowledge 
communities to promote the attractiveness and sustainable 
development of these territories. Third, we will focus our 
approach on three sectors (local companies, cultural tourism, 
healthcare and social protection) and we will apply it to the 
‘Couserans’ territory (French Pyrenees). Fourth, we will 
specify our territorial intelligence approach, based on 
interactions with and between all the inhabitants and actors. 
Furthermore, we will propose elements to develop a 
contributory intelligence around a synergy of projects. In 
addition, we will advocate for a new role of public services: 
State, local authorities and social protection organizations. 
We will end with a conclusion. 
II.
PURPOSE OF RESEARCH – SCIENTIFIC POSITIONING –
METHODOLOGY
In this section, we first present our purpose of research 
about the specificities of weakened territories in France, 
then our scientific positioning and our methodology.  
A.
Weakened Territories in France 
The issue of territorial inequalities is a long-standing one 
in France. In 1947, Gravier, in a book of great resonance, 
spoke of "Paris and the French desert" [2]. From a 
voluntarist 
perspective, 
the 
DATAR 
(Délégation 
à 
l'Aménagement du Territoire et à l'Action Régionale) was 
created in 1963, under De Gaulle’s presidence. 
The problem of weakened territories suddenly became 
apparent to the general public in France with the riots in the 
suburbs of large cities in the autumn of 2005. It reappeared 
two years ago with the Yellow Vests (Gilets Jaunes) revolt, 
in autumn 2018, this time principally concerning small towns 
or rural areas, described by Guilluy [3] as "peripheral 
France". It reflects a rupture between areas, very often 
affected by deindustrialization and unemployment, compared 
to areas where urban elites of power and wealth live, and 
between those who consider themselves to be the victims of 
globalization against those they consider to be the 
beneficiaries. According to Paugam [4], it is therefore a 
crisis of social bonds with a strong sense of abandonment or 
injustice accentuated by the isolation and withdrawal of 
public services. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

This feeling to be despised and forgotten by the power of 
the State (Paris) and by the European Union (Brussels), has 
progressively become a crisis of society [3]. This crisis of 
society is also a crisis of trust. According to Le Cardinal: 
"trust is at the foundation of society" [5]. It is built at 
different levels that interact with each other: trust in oneself, 
in others, in the future [6]. 
B.
Scientific Positioning – Methodology 
We position in a constructivist perspective (the 
construction of social reality by all actors) insisting on issues 
of meaning, interactions and social representations. We are 
part of a Research Team, DICEN IdF in a French University, 
associating 
the 
interdisciplinary 
Information 
and 
Communication Sciences that means information (data) 
perspectives with communication (links, interactions) 
perspectives. We present an approach named ICOE: 
Information and Communication Organizing Ecosystems. 
Ecosystems can be companies, organizations, social groups, 
and, of course, territories. We have an Action Research 
position (producing knowledge for action), with field 
observations and interviews with the main actors in the 
territories. 
According to Bernard [7], we stress the importance of the 
researcher's commitment and communication to understand 
change as Carayol [8]. In the constructivist perspective 
explained, we attach great importance to creativity and 
innovation in territories like Godet [9]. 
We will insist on project dynamics to build trust between 
all the actors. The aim is to produce a collective intelligence 
and to learn how to better work together. To begin with, it is 
a question of exchanging ideas to build a collective 
representation of a shared future, then, to bring together all 
the relevant skills. The trust dimension is essential, both in 
the people and in the tools used.   
We emphasize the fundamental notion of resilience. It 
originally concerned the Physical Sciences to define how a 
material could return to its original form after a shock. It was 
then used by psychology to explain how an individual could 
react to hard difficulties and get out of them. It has gradually 
taken on a collective dimension for social groups, 
organizations and also territories.   
We particularly refer to the Situational and Interactionist 
Semiotics proposed by Mucchielli [10]. This method helps 
us to understand the meaning for actors in a specific 
situation. Mucchielli proposes to divide this situation serving 
as an interpretative background in different "frames": the 
intentions and the stakes of the actors, the culture and their 
norms of reference, their positions compared to other actors, 
the quality of relationships maintained, the historical and 
temporal frame, the sensory "frame", etc. 
For us, communication may help to (re)create bonds, 
which are essential in these weakened territories. Data and its 
transformation into knowledge is also essential, with the 
issues of Big (by relying on the voluntary sector – secteur 
associatif) and Open data (institutional data) with GDPR 
(General Data Protection Regulation) challenges, with the 
new profession of Data scientist, applied to sustainable 
development and territorial marketing. But above all, it is a 
question 
of 
giving 
meaning 
to 
the 
data 
through 
intermediation tools in interface situations. According to  
Nesvijevskaia and Chartron [11], we insist on mediation 
between humans and data through interface tools.  
Therefore, we consider the importance of socio-technical 
devices: Web sites and social networks as levers of resilience 
for these weakened territories. According to Ellul [12], we 
are aware of the ambivalence of technology and particularly 
of digitalization: it cannot do everything, but can make 
possible useful changes that create economic and cooperative 
values for sustainable development.  
We focus on visibility issues (especially on social 
networks) to promote the attractiveness of these weakened 
territories, with e-reputation and territorial marketing issues. 
And additionally, with the importance of watching activities 
[13] in a Competitive Intelligence approach to anticipate and 
benchmark success stories developed in other territories.  
After a mobilization of the existing literature, the 
proposed work is based on situations of participant 
observation. The author of this communication participates 
in the activities of local associations that serve as supports of 
this work. His membership in these associations has 
facilitated interviews, particularly with their leaders or 
essential actors and access to their documentation. 
III.
AN APPROACH FOCUSING ON THREE SECTORS 
(LOCAL COMPANIES, TOURISM, HEALTHCARE AND SOCIAL 
PROTECTION) APPLIED TO ‘COUSERANS’ (FRENCH 
PYRENEES) 
In this section, we propose a Territorial Intelligence 
approach focusing on three main sectors of analysis (local 
companies, tourism and cultural heritage, healthcare and 
social protection) and its application to the Couserans area 
in the heart of Central Pyrenees.  
A.
Three Sectors of Analysis: Local Companies, 
Cultural Tourism, Healthcare and Social Protection 
Particularly interested in the territories of "la France 
profonde” or provincial France, often having a strong 
identity and worried about their future, we focus on three 
complementary converging sectors of analysis: one for 
economic development (local companies) and another for 
cultural activity and tourism, healthcare and social 
protection, with the main challenge of social and territorial 
inequalities, important for social cohesion and also for 
sustainable development. 
First of all, we are interested in the sustainable economic 
development of these territories, through local companies, 
often focusing on authenticity and home-grown products 
(gastronomy), or on technological or specific product niches, 
employing local labor, with an innovative and creative 
dimension [9]. We must also mention the little-known role of 
the National Gendarmerie (Gendarmerie Nationale) in 
protecting both their physical (buildings) and their intangible 
(knowledge) assets. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

We focus next on Tourism based on culture heritage and 
nature resources as a lever for the resilience of these 
weakened territories. We outline the prospects of "slow 
tourism", focusing on authenticity, valuing cultural heritage, 
in interaction with nature and gastronomy. The use of social 
networks can be a lever, as for "geocaching" for treasure 
hunting activities, with the example of Terra Aventura in the 
New Aquitaine Region. Also, with the enhancement of 
different “routes”: long-distance hiking trails (GR), the 
different Compostela paths, the paths of the Cathars (heretic 
people in the south of France during the Middle Ages) 
Stevenson's or Jacques Coeur's “routes” etc.  
Healthcare and social protection issues (like education) 
are essential to maintain populations and attract newcomers 
(social link). We study them in a more global perspective of 
social and territorial inequalities in health: inequalities, both 
individual (poverty and isolation) and collective (remote 
territories): the question of medical deserts. We must also 
tackle the challenge of the “walls” dividing the hospital 
sector from the primary care sector [14]. New approaches 
with the development of interface organizations in healthcare 
(health networks or multi-professional healthcare houses, 
etc.), and the implementation of territorial support platforms 
for doctors in weakened territories with the construction of 
new "territorial health professional communities" can 
constitute interesting ways, particularly when they are based 
on local telemedicine projects and socio-technical devices 
(services platforms for doctors, EHR: Electronic Health 
Records, etc.). Safeguarding healthcare, as well as education 
structures (maintaining local hospitals, schools and high 
schools), implies preserving public services with a new 
approach (more in networks and with service platforms) to 
their activity. It implies also keeping public and private 
public transport to fight against the isolation of the poorest 
and most vulnerable people. 
B.
The Case of Couserans (Ariège / Pyrenees) 
Our approach is applied to Couserans, corresponding to 
the district of Saint-Girons, in the department of Ariège in 
the heart of the French Pyrenees. This territory has a very 
strong identity that the daily newspaper La Croix has 
described as "an island in the Pyrenees" [15], with a strong 
tradition of dissent that is reflected in the importance of the 
Yellow Vests (Gilets Jaunes) movement in this area. This 
territory has been heavily affected by the rural exodus: 
95,000 inhabitants in 1850 and 29,000 in 2015. Its “capital”, 
the small town (sub-prefecture) of Saint-Girons (6300 
inhabitants) has lost most of its industries (paper mills) since 
1975. 
Couserans lost its passenger railway connection to 
Toulouse as soon as 1969 and its hospital has been 
threatening to close for several years. Classes and schools are 
closing in many villages. Live shows (spectacles vivants) 
such as Autrefois le Couseran at the beginning of August 
(more than 800 volunteers and 30.000 spectators) or that of 
the Consorani association keep the nostalgia of an idealized 
past and the pride of local traditions alive. This cultural 
dimension can be a lever for development with the 
repositioning of the tourist offices and the enhancement of 
cultural heritage, nature resources (mountain hikes, rivers), 
the Pyrenean Piedmont Compostela Way, etc. These live 
shows feed the dynamics of the voluntary sector 
(associations), constituting an essential asset. During the 
summer of 2020, most of the shows mentioned above, as 
well as a large number of local celebrations with their festive 
meals, important elements of identity and interaction 
between local inhabitants and tourists, were cancelled. 
Local companies, particularly in the food sector (pork 
products, cheese dairies, cakes, jams, ice creams, etc.), 
focusing on authenticity and local products, with planned 
marketing on the Internet, constitute another important lever 
for sustainable development and local employment, also with 
competitive companies with niches and product strategies in 
industrial fields.  
In the healthcare sector, interface organizations: Echo 
Healthcare Network, Home Hospitalization, MAIA for 
Alzheimer's patients, are now integrated into a CPTS 
(Territorial Professional Health Community) with the local 
hospital  (CHAC or Hospital Community Ariege Couserans - 
Centre Hospitalier Ariège Couserans). After those existing 
in Prat-Bonrepaux, Castillon, Seix, Massat and La-Bastide-
de-Sérou, a new multi-professional healthcare home (MSP) 
is under construction in Saint-Girons and will be operational 
in a few months. Training and education are also important 
assets. Saint-Girons has three high schools or lycées (one 
general and two vocational). 
Since 2017, the 8 Communities of Communes of 
Couserans and two intercommunities unions have merged to 
create the Community of Communes "Couserans-Pyrénées" 
or "Com-Com". This now concerns 94 communes, with a 
population of around 30,000 inhabitants. It is concerned with 
a great number of sectors of local life: environment, waste, 
health, education, cultural life, healthcare, economic 
development, tourism, etc. It constitutes a major and 
federating actor for any territorial intelligence project and we 
are in contact with its main actors.  
With its isolated and heavily depopulated high valleys, 
the Couserans is nevertheless only an hour and a half away 
from Toulouse and also has other assets that its inhabitants 
insist on:  a quality of life and a rather preserved nature. 
IV.
FOR A TERRITORIAL INTELLIGENCE APPROACH IN 
INTERACTIONS WITH AND BETWEEN INHABITANTS
In this section, we propose some ways for a Territorial 
Intelligence approach focusing on interactions with and 
between all the inhabitants, all actors of these weakened 
territories, with of importance of rebuilding trust and the 
communication (relationship) and the use of data as possible 
levers. 
A.
The Importance of Territorial Intelligence 
During a seminar of the French research network Org & 
Co – Organizations and Communication (2012) devoted to 
Territorial Intelligence, Le Moënne proposed a definition to 
which we subscribe: "Territorial intelligence is a form of 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

collective intelligence developed on and around a territory in 
order to think and act there". Zara specified this notion of 
collective intelligence.  For him, "it is the intelligence of the 
link, of the relation" [16].  
We propose to insist on the dimension of cooperation, by 
involving all the actors even more. With this in mind, we 
meet 
Bernard 
and 
her 
approach 
to 
"engaging 
communication" [7], after having defined Information and 
Communication 
Sciences as 
interdisciplinary 
at the 
convergence of the four questions about creating links 
(interactions), meaning, knowledge and action [17].  Carayol 
[8] considered communication as a lever for change. We can 
also draw inspiration from Japan's "strategic knowledge 
communities", studied by Fayard and Moinet [18]. 
Bertacchini [19] considered "the territory as a collective 
intelligence enterprise to be organized towards the formation 
of local formal capital", promoting a culture of participation 
and project to federate all skills". We have considered [20] 
that the territory can be (re)constructed through a synergy of 
projects. 
B.
To Rebuild Trust 
Girardot [21] within the international network of 
territorial intelligence INTI proposed the Catalyse method to 
make emerge and federate the initiatives of the actors of the 
territories, in particular of the inhabitants, with the use of the 
existing data and the production of new ones, with the 
possibility of creating territorial observatories.   
The Catalyse method is based on many existing tools or 
tools 
to 
be 
built: 
information 
systems, 
especially 
geographical, with a strong territorial dimension, quantitative 
statistical methods or qualitative data analysis, project 
management and evaluation methods. Based on a diagnosis 
of needs and existing resources, its vocation is to build a 
territorial information system for decision support (proposal 
of indicators) of the main actors (local authorities, State 
services, associations, etc.) that can lead to the setting up of 
an observatory of the territory concerned. 
The aim is to build solutions for and with the inhabitants. 
It proposes to articulate the needs of the territories and the 
available resources around a project dynamics federating the 
maximum number of actors, relying on the citizens' initiative 
and producing data to support their actions. This method has 
already been applied in different territories: Besançon 
(France), Liège (Belgium), Huelva (Spain), Salerno (Italy), 
in Quebec, Argentina, etc.   
This method can be articulated with the FAcT - Mirror 
approach (Fears-Attractions-Temptations in Mirror method), 
proposed by Le Cardinal and his team [22], in particular to 
remove fears and develop trust around complex projects, but 
also in weakened territories such as the area of Belarus still 
affected by the Chernobyl disaster (1986) twenty years after 
the nuclear catastrophe [5]. Their challenge was to rebuild 
trust that had disappeared, as the populations had lost trust in 
the authorities, science, doctors and also in themselves. 
Rather than trusting only the experts (those who said they  
know or think they know), Le Cardinal and his team went 
directly to the inhabitants, living with them for three years. 
They listened to their needs and hopes. Trust is time: it is 
built in the quality of relationships.  Around the FAcT-
Mirror method, this building of trust, constituting an 
accumulated capital, is based on a relationship ethic focusing 
on respect, loyalty and mutual commitment. 
C.
With Communication (relationship) and New Uses 
of Data as Levers? 
Communication (relationships and co-operations) and 
new uses of data may constitute important levers of 
sustainable development of territories. “Living Labs" have 
been developed in this perspective. They insist on the project 
dimension, such as Brie Nov (Seine-et-Marne North), which 
proposes a PPPP approach (public-private partnerships and 
population), in particular to bring together and help work 
together native inhabitants and newcomers [23].   
Data can be an important support for territorial 
development. With the creation and use of data, we enter the 
vast fashionable subject of smart cities, which, in the case of 
the Couserans, or other weakened territories, we prefer to 
approach through the notion of smart villages. Like Stiegler, 
we favor the dimension of human interactions. Faced with 
the risks of data use drift ("datacracy"), we prefer his 
"contributory learning territory" approach [24]. Insisting on 
the changes induced by massive data in human activities, 
Nesvijevskaia and Chartron underlined the stakes of the 
human/data interface. For us, this aspect is essential for the 
visibility and the development of the attractiveness of the 
territories [11]. 
But, for us, the uses of data and digital devices are not an 
end in themselves. They are not a miracle solution, but they 
can be an important lever for "resilience" and territorial 
development by promoting "reliance": development of 
interactions and social links between all stakeholders to 
promote innovation and creativity in the territories, as 
recommended by the Godet and al. report [9]. The aim is 
thus to produce data for action, in particular to promote 
collaborative innovations, which are promoted by Zacklad 
[25], by also making remote areas more visible thanks to 
digital technology.  
These elements of reflection outline a cooperative and 
contributory intelligence approach that should be based on a 
synergy of local projects. 
V.
TRYING TO DEVELOP A CONTRIBUTORY 
INTELLIGENCE AROUND A SYNERGY OF PROJECTS
In this section, we propose some ways to try to develop a 
contributory intelligence around a synergy of projects, with 
narrative shared experiences to build a form of Wise 
Territory. We analyze then the impact of the Covid 
pandemic in these territories. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

A.
The Importance of the Appropriation of the 
Territory through the Narration of Experiences and 
Projects 
Following on from previous work [20], and in a socio-
constructivist approach, we consider that the territory can be 
(re)constructed through a synergy of projects, including the 
sharing of knowledge to develop intangible territorial social 
capital [19]. Of course, we know how to take advantage of 
all the potentialities of new uses of data and digital socio-
technical devices. The aim would be to foster a form of 
"resilience" of these territories, based on their assets of 
authenticity and identity around a new collective project of 
territorial dynamics, involving as many local and external 
actors as possible. In a way, "reliance" (network interactions) 
may help with "resilience", by making this territory more 
visible in the age of social networks and globalization and 
more attractive to newcomers: people and above all, 
companies. 
We believe that, as in the Catalyse method, this project 
dynamics must begin with an appropriation of the territory 
by putting experiences and projects into narratives, 
combining memory and pride in the past (traditions) with 
future prospects, as D'Almeida [26] pointed out, as 
organizations 
always 
develop between 
projects 
and 
narratives. We think it may be the same possibility for these 
weakened territories in sharing experiences to build 
collective meaning and social representations. 
B.
Which Devices for Which Projects? 
The Couserans Pyrenees Community of Communes or 
Com-Com and the Regional Natural Park of the Ariège 
Pyrenees including the Couserans and the various tourist 
offices that are in the process of merging may constitute 
interesting entry points. 
The Web can also be an important element in making 
territories visible and contributing to their resilience. The 
University of Teramo, in Abruzzo (Italy), is thus trying to 
boost a new dynamic for the L'Aquila area, victim of an 
earthquake a few years ago, by relying on a Wikimedia 
project to give visibility to this territory by promoting the 
sharing of knowledge to foster its resilience, using open data 
in particular [27]. 
C.
 A Smart or rather Wise Territory ? 
The Couserans could thus position itself as a "smart 
territory", with, by banking on the quality of life and the 
relative proximity of Toulouse, the possibility of "rural 
coworking" combining aspects of a break from the hectic life 
of today and remote work, as proposed for example by 
Mutinerie Village in the Perche (in the West France, in the 
south of Normandy), with, once again, the question of relays 
as levers for development and outreach, Mutinerie Village 
having also developed a network from Paris. This network 
operation, both internal and open to the outside world, can be 
an asset, drawing in particular on the dynamics of social 
networks.  
This also raises the whole question of the role of the 
attractiveness agencies and the repositioning of the 
Couserans tourist offices, which, like the communities of 
communes a few years ago, are in the process of being 
grouped together. We are certainly moving towards a 
hybridization of their activities, with a platform dimension 
for an offer of services (with a strong interactive dimension) 
that are increasingly personalized.  
Geocaching, which is increasingly practiced in other 
territories, can be an interesting asset if it is integrated as a 
form of tourist entertainment to help people discover local 
heritage, for example as a treasure hunt. Geocaching could 
be coupled with "slow tourism". A form of tourism, where 
one knows how to take one's time, insisting on contacts with 
nature, culture and gastronomy, favoring non-polluting 
transport (bicycles, etc.), in a sustainable development 
perspective, which seems particularly well adapted to the 
Couserans. These projects could be based on other, more 
important ones, to relay and legitimize them, such as, for 
example, giving a cross-border dimension to the ski resort of 
Guzet-Neige with a pass road relationship with the Catalan 
valleys, thus recovering old traditional relationships. 
Tourism is not the only thing, even if it can be a key 
lever for development. The local hospital or CHAC, has long 
been banking on telemedicine activities, including with 
Spain, and on a new range of networked services: Echo 
Santé Health Network, home hospitalization, etc. The 
coupling of their activities with the development of multi-
professional healthcare houses in the various valleys and 
under construction for Saint-Girons area, is essential for 
improving healthcare in Couserans. 
Rather than "Smart Territory", this term in relation to 
"Smart City", having a strong technical dimension, we prefer 
to speak of "Wise Territories", mobilizing the notion of 
"Wisdom", linked to that of experience with a strong 
collective intelligence approach associating all the actors to 
take their destiny into their own hands.  It is a question of 
(re)building trust for the resilience of these vulnerable 
territories based on a new collective dynamics (trust and 
reliance for resilience).  
D.
 The Impact of the Covid Pandemic Crisis 
The Covid pandemic crisis and in particular the long 
period of containment (confinement) in France (two months 
from mid-March to mid-May), followed by numerous 
restrictive health measures (wearing masks) and the fear of 
new waves in the months or years to come, are leading the 
inhabitants of large cities to take a different look at these 
economically vulnerable territories, from which they often 
come and where they quite often have second homes. 
As the pandemic is often carried by populations coming 
from other areas or the proximity of major airports for large 
cities, their relative isolation becomes an essential asset. 
Their quality of life can be coupled with distance working 
(teleworking) for new attractiveness in our services society, 
with the added advantage of renewed contact with nature and 
the rather low price of housing.    
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

But there is one major prerequisite for developing these 
new projects: breaking the isolation of the Couserans. 
Isolation on two levels: transport and also digital. The 
development of broadband, including in remote valleys, is 
essential to promote activities with a strong intangible 
dimension. This is one of the major objectives of the new 
president of the Ariège Departmental Council. 
VI.
WITH A NEW ROLE FOR PUBLIC SERVICES: THE 
STATE, LOCAL AUTHORITIES AND SOCIAL PROTECTION 
ORGANIZATIONS
Algan’s point of view in relation to the Yellow Vests 
revolt [28] is that the feeling of unease amongst weakened 
territories (and for us particularly in Couserans) is very 
noticeable, "wounded relationships with others", both at the 
individual and collective level, on one hand with social and 
territorial inequalities in health, and on the other, the 
individual and more collective dimension with territorial 
specificities. Moreover, with reference to Algan, it is a 
question of "creating links and trust in the territories", this 
idea of rebuilding trust which is the guiding thread of our 
work.   
The official discourse since the beginning of the Yellow 
Vests revolt is to promote new forms of public action in 
territories, especially vulnerable ones. A new National 
Agency for Territorial Cohesion (ANCT) was created in 
November 2019, bringing together former organizations, 
including the DATAR. Its coordination in the various 
departments should be ensured by the prefects (whose role is 
also 
strongly 
questioned 
by 
digital 
transformation), 
responsible for the State's deconcentrated services in the 
departments. Is this a new way of redefining the national 
State as a platform for services, particularly digital services 
(e-administration)? Is it simply a change of name? Making 
new out of old? Only time will tell us...  
This new role of the State, local and regional authorities 
and public services, particularly in the areas of healthcare 
and social protection, is essential for restoring the trust of 
local players and "rebuilding society", in a dynamic of 
animation and partnerships, by making the most of existing 
data and producing new data together, in the service of 
collective projects. 
The National Gendarmerie may also play an important 
role in protecting their buildings but also the data and 
immaterial capital of these companies, which are often 
vulnerable in terms of cybersecurity. 
Data is essential in healthcare and social protection. More 
than 20 years after Rosanvallon [29], we believe that it is no 
longer a question of rethinking the Welfare State, but rather, 
in an even more difficult way, in the current context 
(mistrust, budgetary constraints, etc.) to rebuild it, especially 
in vulnerable territories, so long forgotten. The digital 
transformation can help, as it can also aggravate the social 
disruption, by continuing to maintain them as "digital 
deserts".  
The question of infrastructures to stop isolation is 
fundamental at two levels: transport and digital. Here again, 
the role of public services (State, Occitania region, Ariège 
department, even Europe) must be essential.  
Like progress or technology [12], data can be ambivalent: 
they can help rebuild social ties and improve or enable new 
services for inhabitants, just as they can derive into 
"datacracy" [24]. Like all our society, weakened territories 
are at a crossroads ... 
VII.
CONCLUSION
This paper corresponds to a work in progress in a whole 
context of globalization, of digital transformation and 
ecological transition that involves societal disruptions but 
can also help the resilience of weakened territories 
(ambivalence of technology and progress). In this context, 
we try to propose some ways to an approach of Territorial 
Intelligence in interaction with the inhabitants to develop a 
collective intelligence around a synergy of projects to build a 
shared future and give hope to these weakened territories.  
We insist for a renewal of public services with new forms 
of presence and action in territories to be invented. It is thus 
a question of federating and creating new links to develop 
the resilience’s capacity of these weakened territories by 
associating all the actors. First of all, by making them better 
known in order to build a shared project, by focusing in 
particular on the wealth of the associative sector in these 
territories. To make them more attractive, it is also a question 
of making these territories more visible on social networks 
(websites of local authorities, such as local companies) and 
thus promoting their e-reputation in a territorial marketing 
approach.  
We try to open new ways to develop a value chain 
process of attractiveness by having all the actors working 
together to build a shared future as proposed by Le Cardinal 
with trust as a key lever [5], [6]. At the end of this work 
devoted to the resilience of weakened territories in France, 
we must come back to its main thread with the essential 
dimension of trust: in oneself, in others, in the future, 
apprehended in a constructivist approach of information - 
communication. 
We insisted on the importance of communication to 
create links and then trust in a collective intelligence 
dynamic [16] by producing new knowledge (importance of 
data) in a contributory perspective that can be part of 
strategic knowledge communities [18]. The State and public 
services of region and department have a major role to play, 
in particular with Social Security organizations, to create 
social links [4] around new forms of solidarity, by listening 
to and being at the service of all the inhabitants, by 
encouraging the emergence of situations in which trust can 
be (re)built. It is our manner, according to E. Morin [30] to 
try to build a new future. 
This work is the first step. We must now try to act in 
interactive research with decision-makers actors and with the 
inhabitants in local situations, as for example in Couserans, 
or in other weakened territories.  
Its originality and main goal is to propose to try to 
articulate new initiatives of public or private authorities and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

citizen initiatives to create a new dynamics of resilience 
rebuilding trust around a collective intelligence for shared 
projects. The affirmation of new territorial actors in France 
with a federative vocation, such as communities of 
communes, can be an important opportunity. This is 
particularly the case of that of Couserans - Pyrenees, with 
whom we are going to work over the next few months to 
improve the visibility and attractiveness of this territory with 
a strong identity and trying to mobilize as many actors as 
possible to build a shared project together: newcomers, or 
probably more easily, native people who may now, with the 
Covid crisis, want to come back to work remotely, and 
people already living and working in these territories. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Giddens, "Runaway World. How Globalisation is Reshaping 
our Lives". London: Profile Books, 2002. 
[2]
J.-F. Gravier, "Paris and the French Desert" / "Paris et le 
désert français", Paris, Flammarion, 1947.
[3]
C. Guilluy, "Peripheral France. How the Working Classes 
were Sacrificed" / "La France périphérique. Comment on a 
sacrifié les classes populaires". Paris: Champs – Flammarion, 
2015. 
[4]
S. Paugam, "The Social Link" / "Le lien social", Paris: PUF, 
2010. 
[5]
G. Le Cardinal,  " Trust in the Foundation of Society " / " La 
confiance au fondement de la société ", Ceras - Projet n°293, 
Juillet 
2006. 
Available 
on: 
http://www.ceras-
projet.com/index.php?id=983.  
[6]
G. Le Cardinal, " Built Trust is always Fruitful " / "Une 
confiance construite est toujours féconde". Paris : La Croix, 
28 – 29 décembre, p. 9.  
[7]
F. Bernard,   " For an Engaging Communication, towards 
sustainable development  "  / "  Pour une communication 
engageante, 
vers 
un 
développement 
durable », 
In 
S. Tremblay, 
N. 
D'Almeida, 
T. 
Libaert, 
Sustainable 
development. 
Communication 
that 
stands 
out 
/ 
Développement 
durable. 
Une 
communication 
qui 
se 
démarque. Québec, Canada: Presses de l'Université du 
Québec, 2018 : 215 - 232. 
[8]
V. Carayol, "Organizational Communication. An Allagmatic 
Perspective"/"Communication 
organisationnelle. 
Une 
perspective allagmatique", Paris : L’Harmattan, 2004. 
[9]
M. Godet, P. Durance, M. Mousli,  "Unleashing Innovation in 
the Territories" /  "Libérer l’innovation dans les territoire". 
Paris : Conseil d'Analyse Economique - La documentation 
Française, 2010. 
[10] A. Mucchielli, "Situation and Communication" / "Situation et 
communication", Nice : Les éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[11] A. Nesvijevskaia, "Big Data Phenomenon in Companies: 
Project Process, Value Generation and Human Mediation – 
Data" / "Phénomène Big Data en entreprise : processus projet, 
génération de valeur et Médiation Homme– Données", Ph D 
in Information and Communication Sciences / Doctorat en 
Sciences de l’Information et de la Communication, G. 
Chartron dir., Paris: CNAM, 2019. 
[12] J. Ellul, "The Technique or Challenge of the Century / "La 
technique ou l’enjeu du siècle", Paris: Economica, 1990. 
[13] H. Dou and S. D. Manullang, Competitive Intelligence, 
Technology Watch and Regional Development. Indonesia: 
MUC Publishing,2004.  
[14] C. Bourret, "Tackle the Challenge of Social and Territorial 
Inequalities in Health (ISTS) by Meeting Interface and 
Telehealth Organizations in a "Digital Humanism" Approach 
to Health? "/ "Relever le défi des Inégalités Sociales et 
Territoriales en Santé (ISTS) par la rencontre des 
organisations d’interface et de la télésanté dans une approche 
d’« humanisme numérique » en santé ? ", Contemporary 
Trends in Organizational Communication / Tendances 
contemporaines en communication organisationnelle, in S. 
Alemanno, C. Le Moënne, and G. Gramaccia, dir., Revue 
Française 
des 
Sciences 
de 
l’Information 
et 
de 
la 
Communication 
[En 
ligne], 
9 | 2016, 
available 
on : 
http://rfsic.revues.org/2013 ; DOI : 10.4000/rfsic 
[15] La Croix, " The Couserans, an island in the Pyrenees "/ "Le 
Couserans, une île dans les Pyrénées". 2017. Available on : 
http://www.la-croix.com/France/Le-Couserans-une-ile-dans-
les-Pyrenees-2017-01-30-1200821036# 
[16] O. Zara, The management of collective intelligence. Towards 
a new Governance / Le management de l’intelligence 
collective. Vers une nouvelle gouvernance, Paris: M21 
Editions, 2008. 
[17] F. Bernard, "Information and Communication Sciences (ICS) 
as a Discipline of Openness and Decompartmentalization"/ 
"Les 
SIC 
une 
discipline 
de 
l’ouverture 
et 
du 
décloisonnement" », in A. Bouzon dir., Organizational 
Communication in Debate. Fields, concepts, perspectives / La 
communication organisationnelle en débat. Champs, concepts, 
perspectives, Paris : L’Harmattan, 2006, pp. 33 – 46. 
[18] N. Moinet, " Territorial Intelligence between Communication 
and Strategic Kowledge Community: the example of the 
Poitou-Charentes Regional System " /  "L’intelligence 
territoriale entre communication  et communauté stratégique 
de connaissance : l’exemple du dispositif régional Poitou-
Charentes", Revue internationale d’intelligence économique, 
2009 /1, pp. 30-38. 
[19] Y. Bertacchini,  " The Territory, a Collective Intelligence 
Enterprise to be Organized towards the Formation of Local 
Formal Capital /  " Le territoire, une entreprise d’intelligence 
collective à organiser vers la formation du capital formel 
local", / Communication and Organization / Communication 
et 
Organisation. 
n° 
25, 
2004, 
Available 
on : 
http://journals.openedition.org/communicationorganisation/29
48 
[20] C. Bourret, " Elements for an Approach of Territorial 
Intelligence as a Synergy of Local Projects to Develop a 
Collective Identity " / " Eléments pour une approche de 
l’intelligence 
territoriale 
comme 
synergie 
de 
projets 
locaux pour développer une identité collective ", International 
Journal of Projectics, n° 1,  Brussels: De Boeck, 2008, pp. 79-
92. 
[21] J.-J. Girardot, " Concepts, Principles and Tools of the 
Catalysis Method " / "Concepts, principes et outils de la 
méthode Catalyse ", Proceedings o/ European Territorial 
Intelligence Network (INTI), Liège, 2005, pp. 133-137. 
Available 
on: 
mti.univ-
fcomte.fr/reit/REITDoc/docs/GirardotLiege2005.pdf – 
[22] G. Le Cardinal, J. F. Guyonnet, B. Pouzoullic, and J. Rigby, 
"Intervention Methodology for complex problems: The FAcT-
Mirror method", European Journal of Operational Research, 
Elsevier, n° 132, 2001, pp. 694-702.  
[23] I. Fasshauer, " The Living Lab, a Device to Promote the 
Resilience of Territories "/  "Le Living Lab, un dispositif pour 
favoriser la résilience de territoires ? ", Research Workshop 
DICEN IdF, Paris, Val d’Europe, 2019, June 27th.  
[24] B. Stiegler, "The philosopher Bernard Stiegler prefers 
"contributory learning territories" to "smart cities" /  " Le 
philosophe 
Bernard 
Stiegler 
préfère 
les 
"Territoires 
apprenants 
contributifs" 
aux 
"smart 
cities", 
Paris : 
iNNovaPresse, 
2018. 
Available 
on  
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

https://innovapresse.com/acteurs/36375-le-philosophe-
bernard-stiegler-prefere-les-territoires-apprenants-
contributifs-aux-smart-cities.html 
[25] M. Zacklad,  "The Economics of User-Friendliness in 
Information and Service Societies" / "Les économies de la 
convivialité dans les sociétés de l’information et des 
services", Inaugural Lesson / Leçon inaugurale, Paris: 
CNAM, 2009, June 17th. 
[26] N. D’Almeida, "Organisations between Projects and Stories" / 
"Les organisations entre projets et récits", in A. Bouzon, dir., 
Organizational Communication in Debate. Fields, concepts 
and perspectives / La communication organisationnelle en 
débat. Champs, concepts et perspectives, Paris: L’Harmattan, 
2006, pp. 145 – 158.   
[27] C. Colombati and P. Valocchi, “Multifaceted Interactions 
between Local Resources and Wikimedia Ecosystem to Boost 
Abruzzo. Territory and Tourism Promotion”, Research 
Workshop DICEN IdF, Paris, Val d’Europe, 2019, June 27th. 
[28] Y. Algan, “Creating Links and Trust in the Territories to 
Reduce Populism” / “Créer des liens et de la confiance dans 
les territoires pour faire reculer les populismes”/ Public 
Actors / Acteurs publics, 2019, November 26 th. Available on 
https : //www.acteurspublics.fr/webtv/emissions/semaine-de-
linnovation-publique/yann-algan-creer-des-liens-et-de-la-
confiance-dans-les-territoires-pour-faire-reculer-les-
populismes 
[29] P. Rosanvallon, “The new social question : rethinking the 
Welfare State” / “La nouvelle question sociale : repenser 
l’Etat providence”, Paris: Le Seuil, 1998. 
[30] E. Morin, Seven complex lessons in education for the future. 
Paris: UNESCO, 1999. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

