Effectiveness of Analysis with NIRS for Japanese EFL Learners  
 
Rumi Tobita  
Life Systemics  
Ashikaga Institute of Technology  
Tochigi, Japan 
email : rtobita@ashitech.ac.jp 
 
 
 
Abstract—This study examined the effectiveness of analysis 
with near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) for English as a 
foreign language (EFL) training from the viewpoint of brain 
science. The experiment presented in this paper analyzed the 
amount of blood flow in the brain while learners were training 
to improve their English conversation skills. The experiment 
attempts to clarify the preferable combinations of learners’ 
characteristics when teaching English conversation 
by 
examining relationships between the brain activities of learners 
and the different types of training materials. The data 
suggested that the analysis using NIRS enabled to propose an 
effective course design for EFL learners. 
 
Keywords-NIRS; brain activities; EFL; English conversation 
skill; ATI. 
I.    INTRODUCTION 
In the light of the ever increasing globalization and 
internationalization of our society, the development of 
English communication skills is considered crucial in Japan. 
However, it has been noted Japanese students’ English skills 
were declining [1]. Therefore, designing and developing an 
effective course design to meet ELF goals for acquiring 
English communication skills has been a critical need. To 
solve this concern, the present study examined the 
effectiveness of analysis using NIRS for EFL listening 
training from the perspective of brain science to propose a 
well-matched combination of leaners’ characteristics and 
listening training to create an effective course design for EFL 
learners.  
II.   INSTRUCTIONAL STRATEGY 
In the field of educational technology, Aptitude-
Treatment Interaction (ATI) is an important element in 
planning to develop an effective course design. As ATI’s 
concept and theoretical framework suggest that instructional 
strategies’ effectiveness for individuals depends upon their 
specific abilities and optimal learning is achieved when the 
course design matches the learner’s aptitude [2].  More 
suitable training needs to be applied to the less motivated 
EFL learners [3]. Although the effectiveness of various 
teaching methods and materials has improved, an assessment 
based on traditional paper and pencil tests has revealed its 
limitations [4]. Recently, brain activity has become subject to 
monitoring by technologically innovative instruments [5]. 
These technologies provide data that reveals the results of 
teaching and learning; therefore, these data can be utilized to 
assess the effectiveness of EFL teaching in Japan.  
 
III.   APPLYING NIRS TO COURSE DESIGN 
The present study uses NIRS to analyze the amount of 
blood flow in the brain while learners were learning English. 
It then examined the relationship between brain activities 
and learning outcomes to identify the most effective 
combinations of learners’ characteristics and English 
conversational skills teaching materials.  
NIRS is widely recognized as a practical non-invasive 
optical technique to detect the hemoglobin density dynamics 
response during functional activation of the cerebral cortex, 
as shown in Figure 1 (a). The primary application of NIRS 
to the human body uses the fact that the transmission and 
absorption of NIR light in human body tissues contains 
information about changes in hemoglobin concentration. 
When a specific area of the brain is activated, the localized 
blood volume in that area quickly changes [6].  
 
   
  
(a)                          (b) 
Figure 1. (a) Route of near-infrared (modified from Shimadzu ) 
and  (b) Detected Channels : specific area of the brain 
 
The greater the amount of blood flow, the greater the 
hemoglobin oxygenation increases; measuring the amount 
of blood can thus indicate the state of brain activation 
caused by differences among teaching materials, as shown 
in Figure 1 (b). This experimental technique indicated the 
well-matched combination of listening materials and 
training for EFL learners.  
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

IV. ATI  BASED EXPEIRMENT USING NIRS 
The purpose of this study is to examine the effectiveness 
of analysis with NIRS by comparing the cerebral parts’ 
activities for the effective course design for EFL learners by 
proposing the well-matched combination of EFL learners’ 
characteristics and English conversation trainings. To 
resolve this purpose, ATI based experiment was planned 
examining the interaction of learners’ aptitudes, materials 
and tasks as Figure 2.  
 
Session 1         (interval: one week)      Session 2 
         
         
 
 
 
  
  
 
Figure 2    Experimental Protocol 
 
Twelve participants of this experiment were divided into 
two groups; group A as higher level of proficiency (5 males) 
and group B as lower level of proficiency (7 males) assessed 
by Test of English for International Communication 
(TOEIC) scores. Each participant took part in two 
sessions and they were given different listening materials 
and tasks in each session. 
 
V.  RESULTS AND CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Comparing the average amount of change per second 
of Deoxy-Hemoglobin and Oxy-Hemoglobin in each 
channel during the training (see Figure 3), several 
significant interactions between learners’ characteristics and 
trainings were found, as shown in TABLE I. 
 
TABLE I.  SIGNIFICANT RESULTS 
Aptitude: 
Proficiency 
Treatment: 
Speed of 
Material 
Brain 
Activation  
 
Average 
of Quiz 
Score(/15) 
Group A: 
Higher 
 
Faster  
 
Slower  
 
Activate 
 
Moderate or 
None 
     6 
    
12 
Group B: 
Lower 
 
Faster  
 
Slower  
 
Moderate or 
None 
Moderate 
 
      1 
      
5 
 
In Group A, regardless of their high score of the quiz results, 
if the material was too easy or not interesting to them, the 
brain activity was moderate during their listening activity, as 
shown in Figure 3(a). In contrast, if the material was rather 
difficult for them, active brain activity was detected, as 
shown in Figure 3 (b). In Group B, if the task was too 
difficult, brain activity was similar to Figure 3 (a).  
 
   
   
 
(a)                                                             (b) 
 
Figure 3. Brain Activities : (a) Moderate Activity (b) Active  Activiry 
 
These results showed that teachers’ ideals are not always 
enough to create effective training program, and it could be 
said that using analysis of NIRS for effective course design 
could be a very useful method. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific 
Research (C) (No. 26370672), from 2014 to 2016. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and 
Technology, Japan. Survey on the  Five Proposals and 
Specific Measures for Developing Proficiency in English for 
International Communication. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.mext.go.jp/english/elsec/1319701.htm 2015.08.30 
[2] L. J. Cronbach and R. E. Snow, “Aptitudes and Instructional 
Methods: A Handbook for Research in Interactions”. John 
Wiley & Sons Inc, New Jersey, 1977. 
[3] D. Perani and J. Abutalebi, “The neural basis of first and 
second 
language 
processing,” 
Current 
Opinion 
in 
Neurobiology, 15, 2, pp. 202-206, 2005. 
[4] R. Tobita, “An Experimental Study on the Use of 
Metacognitive 
Learning 
Strategies 
of 
Reading 
Comprehension in English Learning,”  Bulletin of Saitama 
Women’s Junior College. 13, pp. 207-234,  2002. 
[5] T. Shimura ed., “Prefrontal Lobe Measurement Using Near 
Infraraed Spectroscopy – Evaluation of Early Detection 
Methods and Rehabilitation Methods of Dementia － ”, 
CORONA Publishing. 2009. 
[6] Shimadzu. 
LABNIRS. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.an.shimadzu.co.jp/bio/nirs/nirs2.htm 2015.08.30 
Rest（１min.）      
Listening Training: 
using faster speed 
material (4 min.）          
COMPREHENSION 
QUESTION & 
QURSTIONAR  
Rest（１min.）      
Rest（１min.）      
Listening Training: 
using slower speed 
material （4 min.）          
COMPREHENSION 
QUESTION& 
QUESTIONAR 
Rest（１min.）      
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

