Identities, Motivations, Social Representations in Information and Communication
Situations and Digital Society
The case of Santiago de Compostela Trippers
Christian Bourret and Joumana Boustany
DICEN IDF
University Paris East (UPEM)
Marne-la-Vallée - France
e-mails: {christian.bourret, joumana.boustany}@u-pem.fr
Abstract— Compostela Ways constitute a highly publicised
phenomenon of our ultra-modern society corresponding to a
long
tradition.
In
an
information
and
communication
approach insisting on meaning and interactions, we propose to
analyse identities, motivations and social representations of the
trippers. We focus on the digital aspects of the Compostela
Ways, especially identity, traces and interactions on social
networks as a new approach of this social phenomenon,
analyzing their importance for the trippers as a specific
manner to interact and give meaning to their trip in our
individualist and consumerist society.
Keywords - identities; social representations; digital society;
social media; Santiago de Compostela.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Santiago de Compostela Pilgrim Way is a highly
publicised phenomenon and it is part of a long tradition that
goes back to the XIIth century [1]. After a long period of
lethargy, for more than three centuries (1650 – 1980), the
interest increased for the past forty years. In 1982, John
Paul II was the first Pope to go to Santiago de Compostela.
Since this visit, the number of people who obtained the
“compostela” increased significantly: from 2491 trippers or
hikers in 1985 to 7274 in 1991, 277,854 in 2016 and
301,036 in 2017 from 146 countries. The Compostela is an
official certificate given by Santiago’s archbishopric for
pilgrims who did at least the last 100 km on foot or
horseback, or the last 200 km by bicycle. For this purpose,
pilgrims have to collect the stamps on the “Credencial del
Peregrino” from the places they pass through to certify that
they have been there. We use the words trippers or hikers,
rather than pilgrims, which has a religious connotation.
These hikers come from Spain (44.01%) Italy (16.06%),
Germany (13.78%), USA (10.40%), Portugal (7.68%),
France (5.24%), etc. [2]. As shown in the last available
statistics, Santiago de Compostela is currently trendy all
over the world. In addition to the growth rate of visitors and
trippers, this interest is also shown by the number of
publications: books, films, newspapers, etc. in various
countries and languages.
With the ascent of social media, the community of
Santiago de Compostela trippers adopted this mediation
tools: Facebook, Twitter, Instagram, etc. as it was the case
previously with websites.
In this paper, which is the first step in a larger project,
we will focus on the digital identity of trippers and the issue
of the “trace man”, a concept defined by B. Galinon-
Mélenec: “the ‘trace man’ would identify the Human of the
21st century, leaving everywhere traces of his passage and
activities, likely tracked by merchants, watched to the detail
by observers of all kinds, punished for any deviation to the
norm... risking to raise legitimate concerns about the respect
of privacy, the respect of individual freedoms and of the
ethics” [3]. The virtual community of Compostela hikers, by
communicating on Facebook, keep traces related to their
experience, but also about their life. These traces allow
creating the digital identity of the members of this
community. Since the invention of the Internet, this issue
has been subject to many publications. For Stutzman “the
social network community fosters a more subjective and
holistic disclosure of identity information” [4] even though
it has been demonstrated that “In cyberspace the economies
of
interaction,
communication,
and
coordination
are
different than when people meet face-to-face” [5].
In this paper, we study the presence of this community
on Facebook. We address this issue in a multidisciplinary
approach with a focus on the social representation theory. In
fact “social representations provide criteria for evaluating
the
social
environment
that
enable
determination,
justification or legitimization of certain behaviors” [6].
Social representations specifie a number of communicative
mechanisms explaining how ideas are communicated and
transformed into what is perceived as common sense and
allows the understanding and interpretation of the digital
identity of the Facebook Compostela Pilgrim.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this paper, we focused our study only on francophone
Facebook pages considered as a public space. We excluded
personal accounts as they belong to the private space as well
as Facebook Groups that belong to both private and public
spaces with closed and public groups. Our choice is also
motivated by the characteristic of a Facebook page. It lets
the page owner engage with people on Facebook as anyone
can follow a page to get the public updates, even those who
are not friends on Facebook.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

To
find
relevant
pages,
we
used
the
keyword
“Compostelle”. We have identified 78 Facebook pages
related to our topic, the oldest one dating back to 2008 and
being still active.
To be able to evaluate the activity of the selected pages,
we used the online tool Likealyzer developed by Meltwater
that measure 5 criteria:

Frontpage
which
gives
the
first
impression
concerning the Facebook page.

About page, which should contain milestones that
give context of the page and contact information.

Activity which gives the information type (text,
photos, or videos), the number of posts per day,
events, etc.

Response
which
measures
the
interaction
with
visitors.

Engagement which related to people talking or liking
the page.
We will consider the “Compostela phenomenon” in a
double perspective: search of meanings and analysis of the
interactions between actors: “trippers”, inhabitants and the
role of information and communication technologies and
social networks in the new sociability of the Compostela
Ways. We also have a position of “engaged” or committed
researchers [7] because one of the authors accomplished the
Santiago de Compostela walk in 2011 and continues his
observations and discussions with other walkers, interviews
with Tourism Office members, with people in charge of
Compostela Walkers’ Associations, by specific documentary
resources and by Websites and social media networks.
III. A PUBLICISED PHENOMENON ILLUSTRATING THE
CONTRADICTIONS OF OUR SOCIETY
A. A privileged field to capture social representations and
identity
Compostela Ways constitute a privileged field to clarify
two key concepts in human sciences: social representations
and identities. As defined by D. Jodelet [8], “social
representations constitute an ‘ordinary knowledge’. They
describe, explain and recommend. They provide a method to
interpret the reality, controlling our environment and driving
us in society”. For J.-C. Ruano-Borbalan [9], “we interpret
the world continuously in the form of representations that the
brain accumulates… they constitute reference mind systems
to understand the world around us. The social representations
constitute a key concept for Human Sciences that allow the
interpretation of the mechanism of intelligence, the ideologies
and mentalities.”
B. The modern individualism crisis: a multiple and burst
identity and questioning the sense of existence
Modernity, which has gradually been affirmed since the
beginning of the sixteenth century in the West, has largely
corresponded to the development of individualism to the
detriment of collective institutions and traditions.
Having become an actor of his life in a secularized
society, man has become responsible for his successes, as
well as his failures [10]. In a “communicating society, but
where people meet less and less” [11] the individual of social
networks corresponds to a “connected individualism” [12],
but where the ultra-connection does not prevent loneliness. It
is in this context of a crisis of meaning, of “tiredness of
being oneself” and of “connected individualism”, that has
developed, progressively since the 1980s, the “Compostela
phenomenon”, with a lot of ambivalence. This ambivalence
corresponds to those of contemporary individualism that we
are studying in our work.
IV. DIFFERENT MOTIVATIONS AND SOCIAL REPRESENTATIONS
FOR DIFFERENT TYPOLOGIES OF TRIPPERS
According to Santiago’s Archbishopric (2017), the
motivations of the hikers obtaining the “Compostela” were
religious 130,831 (43.46%), religious and cultural 142,662
(47.39%), only cultural 27,543 (9.15%). The majority of
hikers are mainly “cultural hikers” more than pilgrims in the
strict sense of the term, that is to say, with mixed religious
and cultural motivations and, often the challenge of a
personal
experience
to
better
understand
oneself
in
interaction with others.
The motivations may be extremely diverse. It is often a
willingness to review a turning point in life: divorce,
bereavement, retirement or entering the active life for
younger adults, especially Spanish. There are also various
dimensions of a group trip or an individual trip: to be able to
meet others and oneself, walking on a known and valued
road linked with past, traditions and cultural heritage.
More generally, motivation is above all a search for
meaning, in the ambient materialism of the consumer
society.
In
addition,
the
motivation
is
a
search
for
authenticity. We can cite the overworked executive director
who forsakes his role, his social and hierarchical positioning
for a period. Some may do the Way in response to a wish or
for a sick person (intention).
There may also be cultural motivations: the Compostela
Ways are a magnificent book of art history: Romanesque,
Renaissance (Spanish “Plateresque”) or Baroque, discovery
of
diverse
landscapes,
contact
with
nature,
etc.
Alternatively, there are also historical and traditional
motivations: to walk the routes of thousands of pilgrims
who have travelled these paths for more than a millennium.
Up to a certain point, Compostela Ways put the hikers,
regardless of their social standing, on an equal footing,
dealing with the challenges of a long-distance walk.
However, some clues can be significantly revealing. There
are those who sleep in the overcrowded refuges, those who
prefer private inns and monasteries (more expensive but
more comfortable), the various categories of hotels, those
who carry all their necessities in their bags, those who have
support cars (“coches de apoyo” in Spanish) from family’s
support or have received the services of transport companies
step by step, etc.
The values of shared meaning and the quality of the
relationships that fostered the rise of Christianity twenty
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

centuries ago are reflected in the success of the Compostela
Ways. They create shared meaning and a certain solidarity,
often underlined, of people who do not know other people
help each other and learn to walk together towards the same
goal and sometimes stay together (couples form on the Ways).
The quality of relationships depends on the search for a
certain authenticity. The language barrier is often easily
overcome, as English has become the common language for
the majority of trippers. For P. Nadal [13], “The Way... is
not a simple walking way... (it is) an initiatory journey to
the interior of oneself that would change the perception of
many things... the disconnection with the superfluous, the
communion of the body with nature... The pilgrimage can
then be assimilated to a “semiotic machine” for the
construction of a meaning to its existence.
V. SOME TRACKS FOR INTERACTIONS AND DIGITAL IDENTITY
ON SOCIAL NETWORKS
The Compostela Ways may both favor a collective
approach or a search of loneliness but also often connected
to a certain extent and especially with the development of
mobile Internet. Like brotherhoods and chapels in the past,
then websites, social media allows hikers to give advice,
provide addresses, express feelings and emotions, and to
surround themselves with their impressions and pictures.
We found 78 francophone pages on Facebook, the first one
dating back to 2008. Since then, the number of pages has
grown every year (See Figure 1.)
Figure 1. Number of page created per year.
TABLE I. TYPE OF FACEBOOK PAGES
Type
Number
Non-profit organisations (NPO)
7
Websites & blogs
14
Communities
44
Travel agencies, Guides
6
Others (Books, Films, Sports, Events, etc.)
7
Compared to similar religious phenomena like Ladies of
Fatima in Portugal or Lourdes devotees in France, the
presence of Compostela hikers is significant on Facebook,
but compared to the number of francophone hikers, it is not.
Less than 1% of the hikers have a Facebook page for the
year 2017. We found 25 Facebook pages for 8,835 hikers.
These pages have been classified by the creator as shown in
Table I.
The Camino de Santiago – the Way of St. James – has
always been an identity phenomenon. In the Middle Ages,
pilgrims were belonging to various religious brotherhoods,
benefiting
from
their
assistance
system
(such
as
organization of groups to avoid the high level of insecurity
of the ways) or a chapel in the parish church. Communities
on Facebook reflect these two dimensions that we can
measure by the number of likes in each page. These virtual
communities vary between 27,775 for the largest one, which
is defined as a community, and 8 persons for the smallest
one, which is a Non-Profit Organization (NPO). These
figures have been updated on February 15, 2018. The
difference could not be explained by the longevity of the
page. The oldest one, RadioCamino [14], has been created
on August 28, 2008 and capitalizes 3 563 likes and the
newest one, Mon chemin à Compostelle [15] has been
created on December 29, 2018, and capitalize 44 likes. The
aims of both pages are quite similar. For the largest
community, we can read on the About section: “All the
information to enjoy the experience of Compostela Ways:
advantages of each way from France, where to stay,
monuments, landscapes…” and the aim of the smallest one
is to help those who make the way to Santiago de
Compostela
in
“Touraine”.
As
these
figures
show,
brotherhoods and chapels can also be found on Facebook.
Today motivations have become secularized. NPOs and
communities replaced brotherhoods of the past. Interactivity
is the magic word. This is done in two ways, by
commenting on a post or by posting a message on the page
if this function is available. This was the case for 69 pages
from the selected corpus and 45 had a response rate higher
than 90% that may reflect the desire to share with others. In
general, hikers share their feelings, thoughts, progression,
experience, photos, video, etc. and the community reacts,
reassures or encourages. Sometimes they thank hikers for
the shared information. NPOs provide assistance and advice.
Today, social networks have become essential to gather
information
for
Compostela
Ways
and
for
sharing
information and provide assistance, as the objectives of the
pages suggest. Commercial Facebook pages (around 8%)
have the same weaknesses as personal pages: contact
information is missing and there are not many followers
(There are 2,163 followers for the oldest page created in
2012 [16]. The analysis of these pages shows an obvious
lack of professionalism: Pages are not very active (less than
30% of interaction), the About page is not really enticing. If
this weakness is permissible with a personal page, it is less
acceptable from a professional one.
To be successful, the communication on FB pages
should be optimized in order to increase user engagement.
Posting too little or too much information can damage
engagement and interaction with followers. The Compostela
hikers post less than one message per day except for three
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

pages that have an average of 6.6 [17], 2.7 [18] and 2 [19]
posts per day.
Facebook pages is a part of the identity of Compostela
hikers. All of them have a Frontpage in accordance with the
standards. However, most of them do not depict the full
context that helps to engage people, and they do not give
information about their identity, even though, trippers leave
enough traces to be able to capture some traits of their
identity.
The privileged means of communication remains the
text, with the photo being widely used as well and the video,
but to a lesser extent. Around 50% of the pages do not use
photos, and 73% do not use videos.
Many hikers (22%) did not post any information on their
pages. Often, the page FB accompanies the walker on
his/her journey and dies shortly after the end of the
adventure.
Numerous pilgrim walkers exchange on Facebook about
preparation or keep in contact after the trip on the Ways.
Most of the associations linked to Compostela (Saint-Jean-
Pied-de-Port, Pyrenean Piedmont, etc.), as well as the more
official institutions (Archbishopric of Compostela) have
their own Facebook page, sometimes in several languages.
They provide above all information, statistics, advice,
addresses. In the past, their forums were not, in our opinion,
very interactive; today, with Facebook, this is no longer the
case. Nevertheless, this digital dimension of the pilgrimage
becomes more and more important, especially the social
network.
C. Bourret [1] proposed a typology of the people met on
the Compostela Ways that may be extended to users of
social networks:

Authentic
pilgrims
(with
main
religious
motivations),

Semi-pilgrims
or
walkers
pilgrims
in
different
groups
including
those
called
by
Spanish,
“turistigrinos”, a mix of tourists and pilgrims,

Hiker-pilgrims, above all for the pleasure of the walk
and its interactions,

Sportsmen or sportswomen, often walkers but also
cyclists or riders, in search of physical experience
and exceeding their limits.

Cultural walkers, cyclists or riders very interested by
various monuments and cultural heritage,

Minimalists, only walking a few kilometers to
collect the precious stamp on the “credential” to
finally obtain the precious “Compostela” as the
others.

Strictly tourists.
There are always different degrees of involvement and
participation: from a few days (with special organized trips,
particularly in May) to more than 2 months, but almost
always in one direction, rarely going back by the same
Ways, but using cars, coaches, trains or planes to return
home.
VI. CONCLUSION
For us, interactions, identities and representations on the
Compostela Ways are very revealing ambivalences and
questionings of all our society.
The proposed paper constitutes a first step of a work in
progress.
We always return transformed by our participation in the
Compostela Ways and by our interactions with other people
but also by finding. In future works, we would like to try to
consider the evolution of the representations and the
identities of voluntary “pilgrims”, at the beginning and at
the end of the “pilgrimage” and thus the changes produced
by their experience.
The Compostela Ways are a particularly favorable
ground for meetings others but also finding oneself,
constitutive of the widened “thought,” central in the new
humanism advocated by L. Ferry [20], who tries to answer
the question of the sense of the existence, which is at the
heart of the crisis of contemporary individualism.
The
Compostela
phenomenon
is
a
good
way
to
investigate one's identity, and more specifically the digital
identity, with all the traces left on social media. Through the
queries of the “trace man”, we go back to the eternal
question of the meaning of life and of our presence on
Earth. Humans do not escape their fate, which is to try to
understand (or not) the meaning of their lives, regardless of
the communication medium or device they use. The identity
and existence questions remain as is.
REFERENCES
[1]
C.
Bourret,
“Cultural
Heritage,
Tourism,
Identity
and
Sustainable Development of Territories: the case of the
Compostela Ways,” in SGEM Vienna 2017, Conference
Proceedings, Book 6 Science and Arts, Hofburg Congress
Center Vienna, Mar. 2017, pp. 3–14.
[2]
Oficina
del
Peregrino
[Pilgrims
Office]
,
“Informe
estadistico,” [Statistical Report], 2016. [Online] Available:
https://oficinadelperegrino.com/wp-
content/uploads/2016/02/peregrinaciones2016.pdf.
[3]
B. Galinon-Mélénec, “L’“Homme trace”, arguments,” [The
trace man, arguments] in L’Homme trace: Perspectives
anthropologiques des traces contemporaines [The trace man :
Anthropological Perspectives of contemporary traces], B.
Galinon-Mélénec, Ed., Paris: CNRS, 2011.
[4]
F. Stutzman, “An evaluation of identity-sharing behavior in
social
network
communities,”
International
Journal
of
Performance Arts and Digital Media, vol. 3, no. 1, 2006.
[5]
M.
A.
Smith
and
P.
Kollock,
Eds.,
Communities
in
cyberspace. London, New York: Routledge, 1999.
[6]
P. Rateau, P. Moliner, and J.-C. Abric, “Social Representation
Theory,” Handbook of Theories of Social Psychology, 2012,
pp. 477–497, 2012.
[7]
F. Bernard, “Organiser la communication d’action et d’utilité
sociétales. Le paradigme de la communication engageante,”
[Organize
the
communication
of
action
and
societal
usefulness. The paradigm of the engaging communication],
Communication et organisation, no. 29, pp. 64–83, 2012.
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[8]
D. Jodelet, “Les représentations sociales: Regard sur la
connaissance ordinaire,” [The Social Representations: Issue
on the ordinary knowledge], Sciences humaines, no. 27, pp.
22–24, 1993.
[9]
J.-C. Ruano-Borbalan, “La représentation: une notion clef des
sciences humaines,” [The representation: a key concept of
humanities and social sciences], Sciences humaines, no. 27,
pp. 16–18, 1993.
[10] M. Gauchet, Le désenchantement du monde: Une histoire
politique de la religion [The World disenchantment: A
Political History of Religion]. Paris: Gallimard, 1985.
[11] P. Breton, L'utopie de la communication: Le mythe du village
planétaire [The communication utopia: the myth of the global
village]. Paris: Editions La Découverte, 1997.
[12] P.
Flichy,
“La
société
de
communication,”
[The
communication society], Cahiers français, vol. Comprendre
la société, no. 326, pp. 65–69, 2005.
[13] P. Nadal, El Camino de Santiago a pie [The Camino de
Santiago Walk]. Madrid: El País, 2008.
[14] RadioCamino: Les chemins vers Compostelle [RadioCamino:
ways
to
Compostela].
[Online]
Available:
https://www.facebook.com/radiocamino/. Accessed on: Feb.
15 2018.
[15] Mon chemin à Compostelle [My way to Compostela].
[Online] Available:
https://www.facebook.com/m.et.m.compostelle/.
Accessed
on: Feb. 15 2018.
[16] Randonnées St Jacques de Compostelle [Hiking Santiago de
Compostela].
[Online]
Available:
https://www.facebook.com/RandonneesCompostelle/.
Accessed on: Feb. 15 2018.
[17] Compostelle 40
[Compostela
40]. [Online] Available:
https://www.facebook.com/compostelle40/.
Accessed
on:
Feb. 15 2018.
[18] Chemin Saint-Jacques de Compostelle (Camino de Santiago)
[Way
to
Santiago
de
Compostela].
[Online] Available:
https://www.facebook.com/CheminSaintJacquesdeCompostell
e/. Accessed on: Feb. 15 2018.
[19] Chemin de Compostelle [Way of Compostela]. [Online]
Available:
https://www.facebook.com/Chemin-de-
Compostelle-801524849973655/.
[20]
L.
Ferry,
Apprendre
à
vivre
[Learn
to
live],
Paris:
Flammarion, 2015.
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

