Loneliness and Relational Biography  
Affective communication 
Treton Cécile and Bourret Christian 
DICEN IDF/ – UPEM (Paris East University Marne-la-Vallée) 
Paris, France 
e-mail: cecile.treton@paris.fr 
e-mail: christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
 
 
 
Abstract - This paper addresses the problem of loneliness in the 
increasing elderly community. This can be considered as a 
health and social problem. The objective of this research is to 
identify the relational patterns of the elderly in order to help 
them recreate a network of relationships suited to their unique 
needs. The research method examines the dynamics of 
relationships, which include interactions such alliances and 
breaks, commonalities and affinities, meeting places, including 
the use of social networks on the web. Our work is integrated 
in the field of affective communication as defined by F. Martin-
Juchat. The proposed work will rely on observation methods 
and interviews with elderly and on the notion of situation, 
described by A. Mucchielli. We want to create a model of 
intervention which uses narrative methods to understand how 
a person builds his social network.  
Keywords - loneliness; strategy of relations; emotional social 
network; age; friendly. 
I. 
BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE  
 
The medico-social sector is subject to numerous changes 
and problems. In this context, there are two aspects that we 
wish to explore and connect, even though they seem un-
related at first. On one hand, the health sector, led by the 
goals of streamlining services to the population, explores the 
development of individualized and modeled benefits, 
provided remotely through digital technologies in the 
context of the e-health.  On the other hand, the social sector 
whose demand is increasing in terms of compliance with 
standards of hygiene, safety and care, is moved by the 
increasing 
isolation 
situations 
that 
mainly 
affect 
marginalized people, because of their health status, their 
age, or their social status. It appears that the infrastructure 
that offers many opportunities for communication and 
security cannot resolve the appearance of a feeling of 
loneliness for a growing part of the population. The 
paradoxical aspect of this situation raises issues pertaining 
to the humanities. It seems conducive to questions that fall 
within the field of social innovation in terms of 
communication sciences. The suffering caused by loneliness 
disturbs. It emerges in a society characterized by the 
diversity of its technological possibilities of communication: 
mobile phones, digital social networking, mails, Web 2.0, 
etc. 
It challenges the institutions. Indeed, E. Durkheim [1] 
demonstrated the consequences of the transition from a 
traditional to a modern society. In traditional society, the 
family ensures the protection of individual. In modern 
society, the concept of family disappears and the State 
supports the vulnerable individual's protection according to 
common standards. According to S. Paugam [2], the 
institutions contribute in reality to the emergence of this 
loneliness. They use intervention models that tend to 
dehumanize the relational practices perceived only as 
"services". 
Our question is how resolve this deficiency of systems 
and technologies which seems unable to find a solution to 
those needs expressed through this feeling of loneliness? 
Our research is based on three questions. 
With the first question we have attempted to 
theoretically clarify how individuals build their relational 
environment? For this, we favored specific approaches 
belonging to sociology, including structural sociology. 
Our second question concerns the meaning that the 
person gives to its communication activities. Indeed, we 
consider the person as the driving element of the relation 
that is established. To answer this question, we borrowed 
our intellectual support from philosophy and from 
psychology but also from neurobiology which is very active 
in the field of emotion and cognition. 
Our third question deals with the transformation and is 
particularly relevant with regard to our subject. The question 
is to identify if there are possibilities of reorganization of 
the relational environment of a person and, if there are, how 
these changes of relation can be developed? This third 
question is nourished by our tools of investigations applied 
to the qualitative inquiries which we led, but also by the 
constructivist and phenomenological approaches, belonging 
to the sciences of communication and to the sciences of 
education. 
 
 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

II. 
METHODOLOGICAL FRAMEWORK 
 
In this sense, our work is integrated in the field of 
affective communication as defined by F. Martin-Juchat [3], 
who perceives the emotional body as "moved by the 
emotion” F. Martin-Juchat [3], highlights the lack of studies 
on this emotional dimension, in the field of science of 
information and communication which is shared between 
two conceptual approaches. The first concerns the question 
of the interpersonal relationship and considers the body in 
terms of signs verbal and nonverbal (gestures). This 
approach refers to the work of F. Saussure and of the 
Invisible College of Palo Alto. The second highlights the 
manipulative attempts of mass media. In both cases, the 
receiver is not considered in its ability to act as if he had not 
feelings. According F. Martin-Juchat, [3], the receiver's 
action must be considered as a media. She proposes to put 
the "emotional body" in the heart of the communication 
device like a media. This approach requires paradigm shifts 
on two levels. First, as part of our subject, it needs to change 
the 
perception 
of 
social 
actors 
involved 
in 
the 
implementation of services, particularly those integrate 
technologies. Moreover, it is dependent on a change in 
posture of the person himself who becomes actor in the 
established communication system. By an action research, 
our goal is to bring the people who suffer of a feeling of 
loneliness to change their behavior. This transformation 
process must change the perceptions of actors in their 
relational environment and modify the perception of the 
way of seeing the technological communication supports. 
Our approach takes as reference the paradigm of "engaging 
communication" to the meaning of F. Bernard [4]. The 
concept of commitment is used to demonstrate the link 
between the action and the meaning given to action. The 
commitment depends on the situation. The "engaging 
communication" is based on the action as a mean of change. 
The identification is integrated in the processing of change 
through the action. The role of a mediator is to create 
situations conducive to changing actions. 
III. 
RELATIONSHIP IN THE CONTEXT OF AGING 
 
Our work integrates knowledge available in social 
psychology. The main causes of the sense of loneliness are 
related to a need for security and a lack of recognition. S. 
Paugam[2] believes that the feeling of vulnerability 
expresses a research of security. A. Honneth [5], N. Elias 
[6], D.W. Winnicott [7] highlight the need of recognition of 
individuals. They are shared between the desire to affirm its 
uniqueness and to be socially approved. The ageing is a 
stage of life that seems to reactivate these needs. Building 
on the contributions of sociologists and gerontologists, we 
find that the old age - estimated at the retirement age - is a 
period marked by many transitions and changes. V. Caradec 
[8] and P. Pitaud [9] observe that the elderly person is faced 
with a multiplicity of events and ruptures. These changes 
are due to recurrent affective losses, changes in material and 
economic living conditions, a decline in physical abilities, 
often affecting motor skills and the initial conditions of life. 
The old age is a particularly intense period of identity 
recomposition. The life changes impact the modes of 
socialization of the person. C. Bidart [10] emphasizes 
socialization change with age with a tendency to build 
proximity links and to keep more distance in the relation. 
She notes the need to more moments of intimacy. For 
gerontologist M. Billé [11], these times of intimacy and 
relational distancing correspond to the need for "interior 
narrative work." The elderly need to remember the past to 
ensure a temporal continuity at their life and preserve a 
consistent and positive image of their life. 
IV. 
RELATIONAL INVESTIGATIONS AND BIOGRAPHIES 
      
From this theoretical knowledges,we studied the 
relational dynamics of the elderly in order to highlight their 
mode of action, the uniqueness of their subjective 
experience and confirm temporal and spatial changes. We 
chose to proceed by biographical interviews for two reasons. 
The biographical interview allows the collection of data 
revealing the subjectivity of relational experience. It can be 
used as a means to train the person to take action. As stated 
by C. Delory-Momberger[12], the biography enables a work 
on the self images which precede action. We agree with this 
approach that considers the individual as an agent of his 
own socialization by the action. This method of data 
collection takes into account the "emotional body". C. 
Delory-Momberger notes that it is the place of biographical 
investment.  
We conducted fifteen qualitative interviews with women 
and men, aged 65 to 99 years, on the theme of friendship. 
To analyze the biographies we used categorization method 
proposed by A. Mucchielli [13] through situational 
semiotics. A. Mucchielli raises the question of social 
identification. He writes: "Identify the other is a judgement 
for define him in a specific context. Identify others is a 
means to give a meaning to my "being" situated also in a 
context." This method allowed us to establish a frame of 
reference from a categorization that we have defined. These 
categories form "interpretive frameworks' of intentions and 
needs of the actor, its reference standards, its positioning in 
relation to other actors, the quality of relationships in a 
historic, temporal and sensory setting. The meaning is 
defined in a constructivist perspective and shows a 
schematic representation of the operation of the phenomena 
studied.  
The following table shows an extract of the 
interpretative grid. Our goal is to highlight three aspects 
common to all the interviews. We find that relational 
environment evolves according to life events. Relationships 
are always built on the same pattern. This pattern is 
established from emotional factors related to values and 
beliefs. It shows the specific needs of each person and his 
way of composing relations through the choice of 
communication spaces and rhythms of interactions. 
 
 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Table:  study of  biographies 
 
Categorizations 
 
Biographical 
frame 
 
characterization of the 
relationship  
 
Methods 
activation  
 
D. 
Boarding school  
Work 
Marriage  
Death  
 
 
Compensatory mode 
and selective  
strongly linked to the 
stages of change and 
emotional traumas  
 
favors the 
communal 
group activity  
 
A. 
Childhood 
Studies 
Work 
Travels 
Marriage 
Death 
 
Adaptive mode and 
links marked by 
complicity siituational  
Links with family 
friends  
Friendship is a family 
value  
 
friend and 
ritualized 
moments : 
New Year's 
Day / birthday 
/ holiday  
 
N. 
War/Childhood 
(holocaust) 
Marriage 
Accident 
(vision 
loss) 
 
Selective mode 
marked by mistrust, 
emotional distancing, 
sharing the difficulty,  
Classification of 
friends by period  
 
search for 
help, support, 
taking account 
of disability  
 
 
The study of intentions of people and their recurrent 
pattern of actions show that there is a proper relationship 
strategy for each.  
V. 
CHARACTERISTICS  OF THE STRATEGY OF 
RELATIONSHIP 
 
This work from the interpretations of the actors in their 
friendly relations helped to highlight the dependence 
between the events of life and the appearance of new 
relationships. The person makes a classification and tells for 
example: "my friends from before." There is therefore a 
relational biography. Each phase change appears to activate 
a clean relationship strategy to each person and built on 
perennial patterns. This strategy is established on the basis 
of affective elements through values such as the value 
placed on friendship, beliefs and expectations. They direct 
the sympathies or antipathies. They provide data on the 
image that the person has of itself in an idealized form. The 
relational choices appear homogeneous, standardized, 
selective based on distinguishing elements of social status, 
age, etc. These emotional factors determine the level of 
commitment in the relationship ex. "When they suffer, I 
suffer." They compose an imaginary of the relationship: "I 
wanted to have news from him because it was my first 
love". The person creates, in this case, an ideal relational 
environment that is considered like a game. This is 
particularly noticeable when the person uses digital 
communication media. "I am in relation to a community of 
artists". The relationship strategy takes the form of 
ritualized 
interactions 
whose 
rhythm 
varies 
among 
individuals: annual exchange of holidays wishes, weekly 
meal, evening conversations on Skype, etc. They take 
singular forms appropriate to the needs of the person such as 
sharing of activities or friendly moments, or its values: "to 
give is my life ..." etc. The interactions are located in social 
contexts and spaces that have a symbolic value as: schools, 
companies, unions, associations of hikers, etc. They 
reinforce the value of belonging. These spaces increase 
connectivity levels cited by G. Simmel [14] and structural 
sociology (circles, networks). The aging is mentioned 
systematically in the relational biography. It concerns the 
disappearance of friendships: "of my generation has 
disappeared ...", "we were ten friends... we are no more than 
two". It expresses itself by the regret of the bonds of the past 
by comparison with those present: "Yes I have had really 
good friends, it was great ... today, it is different." It 
indicates a feeling of loneliness evoked on the mode of a 
battle to fight, "for not to be alone, you have to go out! “ 
The information collected shows activation of affects in the 
implementation of the social network and the importance of  
biographical and identity work that is developed. The 
experience through the implementation of the relationship 
strategy own to everyone appears as the essential element of 
identity’s recomposition.  
The role of emotions in action and the impact on the self-
image of phases of changes were the subject of many 
studies in the field of neurosciences and the social sciences 
more broadly. The psychiatrist L. Ciompi [15] states that 
pure thought does not exist. Cognition is defined "as part of 
the emotional logic". It defines the affect as "a psycho-
physical condition, with quality, duration and varying 
degrees of consciousness" and insists on "the energy aspect 
of affects." For the neurobiologist A. Damasio [16], the 
affects enable an adaptive learning. The process triggered by 
the emotion at the level of the body and brain, with the 
manner whose appears the feeling and his awareness, create 
new emotional dispositions. He concludes that "emotions 
are part of bioregulators devices with which we are 
equipped to survive." Emotion is generated through our 
experiences. According to P. Ricoeur [17], it allows man to 
recompose his understanding of his environment through a 
phenomenology of desire. P. Ricoeur distinguishes a 
permanent form of personality, "selfhood", around which 
are developed changing identities. Researches of A. 
Damasio confirm this hypothesis and distinguish in the 
constitution of personality a "central self" of an 
"autobiographical self." P. Ricoeur emphasizes man's 
anxiety in front of these continual identity changes. He 
needs to reassure himself by searching for clues of 
permanence. According to P. Ricoeur, friendship is "a 
promise in time of a self-preservation." 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
 
The theories and works highlighted reveal two crucial 
needs for the human being related to safety and self-
awareness. 
These 
needs 
are 
expressed 
through 
communication with the external environment composed of 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

other people. This constitutes the means for a person to 
validate their existence through recognition and to 
strengthen their feeling of protection. The relation which 
takes shape in the form of mutual identical projections is 
transformed into attachment when the reliable feeling 
(implicit protection) evolves and strengthens. This reliable 
feeling comes along with the certainty of a common cultural 
belonging which expresses itself through shared activities 
and symbolic exchanges. This process consolidates the 
commitment in the relationship. 
In this selective configuration, the relation contributes to 
strengthen a positive self-awareness based on the mutual 
identification. The aspects of identity are expressed through 
emotions and feelings. The self-awareness answers a desire 
of self-idealization through values which direct the 
emotions. The feelings are the mainspring of the 
composition of the relational environment because they play 
beforehand a role in the choice of selected people. 
The relation evolves during the relational process 
between the people and is transformed. It constitutes a story 
made up of events of which the meeting with the person is a 
part, and is characterized by the importance of the moments 
and shared activities. From this point of view, the story of 
the relation can be the object of a biography characterized 
by the ascendancy of its emotional contents. 
In conclusion, the relationship strategy composed of the 
elements highlighted in our study in progress shows the 
importance of the building of the relationship as a sensitive 
experience. It reveals a space essential to the individual and 
which seems to correspond to what F. Guattari [18] calls 
"weaving" about the friendship relation. D.W. Winnicott 
[19] considers that "the experience of the body" goes 
through a third space, next to the inner space and the 
emotional environment of the individual, which he called 
"cultic area". It offers a creative space game. The condition 
for the individual to invest in this space depends on his 
confidence level. The feeling of loneliness that we prefer to 
call "relational vulnerability" in the sense of insecurity and 
lack of assertiveness, could come from a relational model 
unsuitable strategy. Our work opens other perspectives. It 
seems that the question of the relation of elderly to digital 
communication tools can be studied through the experience 
felt.  These are the tracks that remain to be explored. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] E. Durkheim, “The division and labour in society”, PUF 
1930, Paris 2012, p. 124, new collection « Quadrige ». 
[2] S. Paugam, “The social bond”, PUF, Paris, 2013, pp. 7-103.  
[3] F. Martin-Juchat, “Think the emotional body as a media, 
anthropology of affective communication”, Revue Le corps 
n°4, Paris, 2008, pp. 85-92. 
[4] F. Bernard and R. V. Joule, “Link, meaning  and action : 
Towards an engaging communication” Communication and 
organization, online, URL : 
http://communicationorganisation.revues.org/2918, mars 2012 
[retrieved : August, 2015]. 
[5] A. Honneth, “The struggle for recognition”, Folio essais 
(n° 576), Gallimard, Paris, 2013, pp. 114-235. 
[6]  N. Elias, “Society of individuals”, Fayard, Paris, 1991, pp. 
208-301. 
[7] D. W. Winnicott, “Capacity to be alone”, Payot-Rivages, 
Paris, 2012, pp. 46-108. 
[8] V. Caradec, “Sociology of the elderly and aging”, Armand 
Colin, Paris, 2012, pp. 87-103. 
[9] P. Pitaud., “Loneliness and isolation of the elderly”, Editions 
Erès, Toulouse, 2010, pp. 25-103.  
[10] C. Bidart, “Studying networks, contributions and prospects 
for social sciences”, Informations sociales n° 147, 2008, pp. 
100-259. 
[11] M. Billé and J. Pollard, “Manifesto for age and life, reenchant 
old age”, Editions Erès, Paris, 2012, pp. 63-112.   
[12] C. Delory-Momberger, “The biographical condition. Essai on 
self-narrative in the advanced modernity”, Teraèdre, Paris, 
2010, pp. 61-75. 
[13] A. Mucchielli, “Situation and Communication”, Ed. Ovadia : 
Nice, 2010. 
[14] G. Simmel, “Studies on forms of socialization”, PUF, trad., 
1999. 
[15] L. Ciompi, “Emotions, affects, and affective logic, their 
places in our understanding of the world”, Picus, Juillet 2004. 
[16]  A. Damasio, “The feeling of what happens, body, emotions, 
conscience”, édition Odile Jacob,: Paris, 2002, pp. 110-299. 
[17] P. Ricoeur, “Oneself as another”, édition du Seuil, Paris, 
1990,  pp. 73-197. 
[18] F. Guattari, “Chaosmose”, Revue Chimères, N°77, éditions 
érès, Paris, 2012, pp. 17-107. 
[19] D. W. Winnicott, “Playing and reality”, Gallimard 1971, 
traduction française 1975, Paris, pp. 17-107. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

