An Analysis of the Collaborative Network Mechanism  
Based on the Dynamic Network 
Hyejin Lee, Seok-Hyoung Lee, Kwang-Young Kim 
Dept. of Information Convergence Research 
Korea Institute of S&T Information 
Daejeon, Rep. of Korea 
E-mail: hyejin@kisti.re.kr, skyi@kisti.re.kr, glorykim@kisti.re.kr 
Abstract—This ongoing research aims to explore factors 
contributing to collaboration in various time intervals using 
the Stochastic Actor-Oriented Model (SAOM), a dynamic 
network analysis method. This model can be used to measure 
correlations between the consequences of an individual’s 
choice and the network structure in a time series, thereby 
permitting simultaneous observations of a network at the 
micro-level and macro-level. To accomplish the research 
purpose, three mechanisms related to collaboration were 
established as hypotheses based on the literature review: 
reciprocity, hierarchy, and similarity. These mechanisms were 
combined cumulatively to determine whether they were 
significant for collaboration. Accordingly, the results of a pilot 
experiment showed that reciprocity and similarity did not have 
significant effects individually across time intervals, but their 
explanatory power about collaborative relations increased 
when these two variables were used in combination.  
Keywords-Social Network Analysist; Dynamic Network; Co-
author Network; Stochastic Actor-Oriented Model 
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the context of this study, collaboration is interaction 
between researchers and a long-standing scientific practice 
for advances associated with a discipline. Interaction 
between researchers is recognized as a part of the research 
process in which the research community effectively 
communicates and shares information about various 
investigations [1].  
Researchers benefit from the following effects of 
collaboration. During the process of exchanging ideas and 
tacit knowledge about a research topic and reaching an 
agreement regarding anticipated findings and analytical 
methods, they can share research equipment or engage in 
formal/informal communications. In addition, continuous 
collaboration in research activities permits access to a wider 
range of information sources, new knowledge, and an 
increased pace for dissemination of research findings based 
on the various backgrounds of participating researchers. 
Further, collaboration reduces research expenses through the 
shared use of large-scale equipment or facilities and helps 
expand research activity opportunities [1] [2]. 
Researcher collaboration carries it own important 
meaning, but it also has many intrinsic values from a 
metrology-based data analysis perspective. Not only can 
researcher collaboration produce material for data analysis, 
but the meaning of collaboration can also be interpreted in 
many ways. The most frequently used metrology-based 
collaboration analysis method is the co-author network 
analysis method, which refers to social networks. It is 
applicable to researcher collaboration because the data can 
measure the scope of a collaboration easily by utilizing co-
authors’ unique features; additionally, it is objective, 
demonstrable, and stable over time [3].  
Scientific 
findings 
are 
the 
product 
of 
massive 
collaborations; in other words, papers having multiple co-
authors could be produced in massive numbers [4]. The 
latest research trends in “big science” and “data science” 
have allowed the number of collaboration-based, co-authored 
papers to increase explosively. For instance, the Thomson 
Reuters’s Web of Science (WoS) indicates that—as they 
relate to physics—120 papers with more than 1,000 co-
authors and 44 papers with more than 3,000 co-authors were 
published in 2011[5].  
With the consistent growth in publication of co-authored 
papers, the co-author network continues to change 
dynamically, repeatedly evolving and differentiating into 
various forms. For this reason, a scientific network is often 
categorized as a dynamic network [6]. Accordingly, an 
analysis of the co-author network from the perspective of a 
dynamic network is needed [7]. The Stochastic Actor-
Oriented Model (SAOM), one of the dynamic network 
analysis methods, is made according to processes of 
individual choice [8]. Also, the individual choice affects the 
overall collaborative network structure. This is why we 
adopted the SAOM in this study. 
This research defines a co-author network as a 
dynamically changing network and tracks network changes 
over time based on the longitudinal analysis of a co-author 
network. The aim of this research is to identify empirically a 
relationship between individual factors and the network 
structure for significant factors used by individual 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

researchers to select their co-authors and establish a 
collaboration network.  
II.
STOCHASTIC ACTOR-ORIENTED MODEL(SAOM) 
To verify the research hypotheses, the SAOM—a social 
network analysis method—was adopted. Social network 
analysis focuses on a social entity—a relationship between 
an actor and entity—to not only identify a relationship 
between two individuals but also expand and explain a social 
relationship between individual entities. The SAOM is a 
computational model focused on the actor(s). It initiates a 
complex system based on a small virtual world consisting of 
many interacting actors. This virtual world is made up of the 
actor, the system in which the actor acts and interacts, and 
the external environment that affects the system. This model 
can be used to research the interactions between various 
actors and better reflect and analyze the actual world in 
which the characteristics or choices of an actor (an 
individual) could affect another individual. It is especially 
effective in research explaining how micro-level interaction, 
such as a personal relationship, affects macro-level 
interaction.  
Research using this model in information science is still 
in an early stage, and no research reflecting various 
characteristics of the actor has been conducted to date. 
Kronegger et al. [9] conducted research on the community of 
Slovenian scientists using the SAOM, examining changes in 
the collaboration network structure for each time interval in 
four scientific fields. Ferligoj et al. [10] also applied the 
SAOM to Slovenian scientists in seven disciplines and 
explained factors changing the domestic and overseas 
collaboration network based on the cumulative performance 
expectation mechanism. Zinilli [8] used this model and 
investigated researcher collaboration in the Projects of 
National Interest (PRIN) performed in Italy. The research 
traced changes in network links based on four academic 
disciplines and used the h-index as an independent variable 
for choosing a partner.  
III.
RESEARCH DESIGN
To achieve the research purposes, the following four 
steps describe the research process: 1) establish the 
hypotheses, 2) select data, 3) extract data, and 4) analyze and 
verify. 
A.
Research Process 
First, the hypotheses address factors for collaboration 
based on a literature review of existing research papers. By 
grouping research findings suggested by the papers, the 
researchers defined the top mechanisms for the formation of 
collaborations.  
Second, data were selected to choose research subjects in 
the nanoscience field and set time intervals to measure 
networks. Subjects included both key researchers and co-
authors in the field. Time intervals were set to range from 
2001—the year when the National Nanotechnology Initiative 
was established—to 2015. To select specific fields of 
nanoscience and measured time intervals, researchers 
focused the analysis on nanoscience-related policy and used 
WoS and InCites databases to select data.  
Third, the researchers are extracted data to generate 
attribute information and co-author relationship information 
about the research subjects. Accordingly, foundational data 
for data extraction came from WoS. Attribute information 
was based on individual characteristics derived from the 
hypotheses 
as 
collaboration 
factors, 
and 
co-author 
relationship information was based on the co-author 
relationships for published papers.  
Fourth, this research incorporated a longitudinal analysis, 
which applied the SAOM to the extracted data and verified 
the hypotheses. An analysis of the overall co-author network 
structure and a pattern analysis of each measured time 
interval were performed. An analysis of factors pertaining to 
individual or network structure and affecting the formation 
of a co-author relationship was also conducted. Though 
NetMiner 
4.0—which 
specializes 
in 
analyzing 
and 
visualizing overall structure and pattern—was used for the 
former, RSiena was used for the latter, as it specializes in 
longitudinal analyses of networks.  
B.
Research Hypothesis 
First, research collaboration establishes a network 
based on interrelationships and trust. 
Maglaughlin and Sonnenwald [11] regard trust in 
researchers’ research capabilities, values, and academic 
knowledge as important factors in choosing collaboration 
partners. Hara et al. [12] interpreted the reason researchers 
choose partners based on prior collaborative relationships as 
the decreased chances for failure with research outcomes. 
Intimacy with collaboration partners could also enhance 
collaboration efficiency, and the collaboration process is 
easier when a researcher partners with others he or she 
personally knows [13].  
H1: Researchers’ academic friendship and trust 
(whether they co-authored in the previous year or research 
career) would affect the formation of an academic 
collaborative network. 
Second, researchers tend to forge collaborative 
relationships with partners who are characterized as more 
esteemed. As actors whose cumulative performance is 
expected to be high have more connections in a network 
structure [14], nodes are concentrated on the nodes with 
high levels of centrality. Abbasi et al. [15] demonstrated that 
degree centrality, eigenvector centrality, average strength, 
and network efficiency were independent variables affecting 
the g-index, which indicates an individual researcher’s 
research performance.  
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

H2: Researcher hierarchy (organizational reputation) 
would affect the formation of an academic collaborative 
network. 
Third, the similarity mechanism is known as 
homophily; it means that similar characteristics and qualities 
between actors promote intimacy and bonds, with a high 
likelihood for the formation of a network structure. Various 
research papers have cited results for homophily in 
researcher collaboration. Maglaughlin and Sonnenwald [11] 
viewed the research topic as an important factor when 
researchers collaborated with other researchers. Kronegger 
et al. [9] stated that a network was formed depending on 
similarities between individual researchers’ organizations.  
H3: Similarities between researchers (organizations) 
would affect the formation of an academic, collaborative 
network.. 
IV.
DATA ANALYSIS AND PILOT TEST RESULTS
In order to achieve the purpose of this research, data 
analysis was carried out as follows and the results of the 
research were derived. 
A.
Data Analysis Process 
To extract authors and co-authors in nanobiotechnology 
fields as data, papers in the fields were collected by subject 
area through WoS and its methodology. Initially, NT papers 
in Korea from 2001 to 2015 were used in the first subject 
search scope in accordance with the WoS search rule, and 
the scope of subjects were reduced to BT based on the search 
results. As a result, the total number of collected papers was 
1,704. From the collected papers, five authors who 
consistently published papers within the designated time 
interval(s) and who also had high h-indexes were selected; 
then, their co-authors were extracted.  
Table I shows the results from the collection of papers 
via WoS for the five authors (applying time intervals). Data 
extracted included numbers of co-authors and co-author 
relationships. The total number of identified authors was 
1,154, and the number of authors identified in the last time 
interval was 644. 
As a next step, the researchers are extracted co-authors 
for Time Interval 3 (2011–2016) based on the publication 
year and established a collaborative network. Based on the 
same authors in Time Interval 3, collaborative networks were 
established in the same manner for Time Interval 1 (2001–
2005) and Time Interval 2 (2006 – 2010). Because the 
population of each network should remain the same to 
identify objectively the factors that cause a collaborative 
network to look a certain way in a given time interval, the 
number of nodes in Time Intervals 1 to 3 were made 
consistent at 644; then, experimental data were generated.  
TABLE I. STATISTICS OF THE COLLECTION OF PAPERS
Number of 
papers 
Number of 
authors in papers 
Average number 
of authors per 
paper 
Number of 
identified authors 
597 
3,224 
5.49 
1,154 
B.
Results of Pilot Test Analysis 
1) Network Structure Analysis for Each Time Interval 
The network structure analysis results showed that the 
average degree or the average number of edges, which 
represents the number of collaborative relationships per 
researcher, increased as time passed. 
Density gets closer to 1 when all researchers are linked to 
one another, but in this research, it decreased over time, most 
likely because of the rapid growth of edges.  
The level of fragmentation rose gradually over time. 
Decreasing density means that, even though subgroups were 
established, their internal density was low and there were 
few excessive disconnects between subgroups.  
Clustering represents a subgroup’s level of separation, 
and fragmented subgroups seem to be the result of 
segmentation of the subject area, differentiation of the key 
researcher, and convergence with other fields.  
TABLE II. RESULTS OF NETWORK STRUCTURE FOR EACH TIME INTERVAL
Observance 
Time Interval 
Degree 
Mean of 
Degree 
Density 
Clustering 
2001-2005 
52 
1.529 
0.093 
0.781 
2006-2010 
538 
3.183 
0.038 
0.84 
2011-2015 
3,591 
5.567 
0.017 
0.861 
Figure 1 shows the co-authors' network by time interval. 
The network structure for each time interval is composed of 
three components.
2)
Network Structure Analysis for Each Time Interval 
This section longitudinally analyzes factors that influence 
collaborations between nanobiotechnology researchers in 
Korea. To examine the effect of each factor, this research 
will identify collaboration factors for individual independent 
variables as the first step and combine them phase by phase 
to examine the extent of increased explanatory power from 
each combination of variables based on changes of the 
random variable as the second step.  
Therefore, network data 1, 2, and 3 (the N by N 
adjacency matrix) were used as dependent variables for each 
of the three intervals and dependent variables’ changes in 
accordance with 4 independent variables in each time 
interval were confirmed using RSiena. 
In the pilot test to analyze the collaboration mechanism 
involving network changes using RSiena, whether a network 
establishment factor was significant in the overall interval 
was examined. The overall maximum convergence ratio is an 
index for identifying whether a network establishment factor 
is significant in the overall interval; when the ratio is 0.25 or 
less, the factor is considered significant. Two out of five 
researchers and their co-authors were analyzed, and the 
results showed that the combination of two independent 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

variables—“whether researchers co-authored in the previous 
year” and “whether researchers belonged to the same 
organization”—were interpreted to have a significant effect 
on the dependent variables, as described in the Table Ⅲ. 
V.
FUTURE RESEARCH DESCRIPTION AND EXPECTED 
OUTCOMES
Research is now in progress to analyze significant 
factors regarding the five researchers’ selections of co-
authors for each time interval and the structural 
characteristics affecting their individual choices. This 
research holds academic significance for its analysis of a co-
author network phenomenon from a new angle based on 
application of the SAOM, a social network theory, to 
information science. More notably, the method that 
combined a dynamic network structure analysis and the 
probability theory is meaningful in expanding the traditional 
static 
network-based 
macro-level 
co-author 
analysis 
methodology and connecting the macro-level (structure) and 
the micro-level (actor) in a dynamic way for analysis. 
Moreover, the results of the analysis are worth using for 
service planning (e.g., information service recommendations 
or predictions).
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Lee, and B. Bozeman, “The impact of research collaboration on 
scientific productivity,” Social studies of science, vol. 35, number5, 
2005, pp. 673-702. 
[2]
G. Abramo, C. A. D ’ Angelo, and F. Di Costa, “Research 
collaboration and productivity: is there correlation? ”  Higher 
Education, vol. 57, no.2, 2009, pp. 155-171. 
[3]
DH. Lee, IW. Seo, HC. Choe, and HD. Kim, “Collaboration network 
patterns and research performance: the case of Korean public research 
institutions,” Scientomerics, vol. 91, 2012, pp.925-942. 
[4]
G. Melin, “Pragmatism and self-organization Research collaboration 
on the individual level,” Research Policy,  vol. 29,  2000, pp.31-40. 
[5]
J. 
Adams, 
“Collaborations: 
The 
rise 
of 
research 
networks,” Nature, vol. 490,  no. 7420, 2012, pp.335-336. 
[6]
J.S. Katz, and B.R. Martin, “ What is research collaboration?”
Research Policy, vol. 26, no.1, 1997, pp.1-18. 
[7]
A. Perianes-Rodriguez, L. Waltman, and N. J. van Eck, “Constructing 
bibliometric networks: A comparison between full and fractional 
counting,”  Journal of Informetrics, vol. 10, no. 4, 2016, pp.1178-
1195. 
[8]
A. Zinilli, “Competitive project funding and dynamic complex 
networks: evidence from Projects of National Interest(PRIN), ”
Scientometrics, vol. 108, 2016, pp. 633-652. 
[9]
L. Kronegger, F. Mali, A. Ferligoj, and P. Doreian, “Collaboration 
structures in Slovenian scientific communities,” Scientometircs, vol. 
90, 2012, pp.631-647. 
[10] A. Ferligoj, L. Kronegger, F. Mali, T. A. Snijders, and P. Doreian,  “
Scientific collaboration dynamics in a national scientific system,”
Scientometrics, vol. 104, 2015, pp.985-1012. 
[11] K. L. Maglaughlin, and D.H. Sonnenwald, "Factors that impact 
interdisciplinary natural science research collaboration in academia," 
10th International Conference of the International Society for 
Scientometrics and Informetrics, Jul. 2005, pp. 499-508. Stockholm. 
[12] N. Hara, P. Solomon, S. L. Kim, and D. H. Sonnenwald, “An 
emerging view of scientific collaboration: Scientists' perspectives on 
collaboration and factors that impact collaboration,” Journal of the 
American Society for Information science and Technology, vol. 54, 
no. 10, 2003, pp.952-965. 
[13] D. Stokols, S. Misra, R. P. Moser, K. L. Hall, and B. K. Taylor, “
The ecology of team science: Understanding contextual influences on 
transdisciplinary collaboration,”  American Journal of Preventive 
Medicine, vol. 35, no. 2, 2008, pp.S96-S115. 
[14] M. Ruef, H.E. Aldrich, and N.M. Carter, “The Structure of Founding 
Teams: Homophily, Strong Ties, and Isolation Among U.S. 
Entrepreneurs, ”  American Sociological Review, vol. 68, no. 2, 
2003, pp. 195-222. 
[15] A. Abbasi, J. Altmann, and L. Hossain, “Identifying the effects of co-
authorship networks on the performance of scholars: A correlation 
and regressionanalysis of performance measures and social network 
analysis measures,” Journal of Informetrics, vol. 5, no. 4, 2011, pp. 
594–607.
Figure 1. Results of network structure for each time interval 
TABLE III. RESULTS OF SAMPLE TEST
Variable 
Measurement Method 
Researcher A 
t-conv.max value 
(N=234) 
Researcher B 
t-conv.max value 
(N=154) 
Researcher friendship  
Whether researchers co-authored in the previous year 
0.6888** 
0.1161* 
Researcher career 
Researcher’s research career in the measured time interval 
1.7564 
1.8215 
Organization reputation 
The organization’s contributions to the field 
 (number of papers published) 
0.9429** 
0.9920** 
The same organization 
Whether researchers belonged to the same organization 
0.8954** 
0.1108* 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Researcher friendship + the same 
organization 
Whether researchers co-authored in the previous year + whether 
researchers belonged to the same organization  
0.1953* 
0.1002* 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

