Automatic Emotion Detection in Social Media for on the fly  
Organizational Crisis Communication 
 
Karolien Poels 
Department of Communication Studies  
University of Antwerp  
Antwerp, Belgium 
email: karolien.poels@uantwerpen.be 
 
Veronique Hoste 
LT3 Language and Translation Technology Team 
Ghent University 
Ghent, Belgium 
email: veronique.hoste@ugent.be 
 
Abstract—We present early stage research ideas on 
automatic emotion detection on social media (Twitter) 
during an organizational crisis and how this can be used 
for 
rapid 
and 
effective 
organizational 
crisis 
communication. 
Keywords—emotion detection; social media; natural language 
processing; organisational crisis; crisis communication. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many profit and non-profit organizations use social media 
like Facebook and Twitter for two-way communication with 
their stakeholders [1]. It is obvious that social media play an 
increasing role in organizational crisis communication [2] [3]. 
A crisis is “the perception of an unpredictable event that 
threatens important expectancies of stakeholders and can 
seriously impact an organization’s performance and generate 
negative outcomes” [3]. Examples are product failures, or 
unethical practices. Effective crisis communication includes 
identifying stakeholders (i.e., a person or a group that is 
affected by or can affect an organization – e.g., customers, 
shareholders, journalists, the general public) and entering in 
discussion with them [3]. Social media present unique 
opportunities for crisis communication, such as the absence of 
journalistic gatekeepers, by which an organization can 
communicate its own, unbiased account [4]. Also, social 
media enable informing stakeholders more frequently and 
faster than traditional media. At the same time, stakeholders 
respond more directly, open and rapidly and do also expect an 
evenly fast response from organizations. It is thus utmost 
important that organizations know how their different 
stakeholders are feeling when a crisis is unfolding in order to 
respond efficiently and avoid (further) reputational harm.  
In times of crises, stakeholders typically experience various 
emotions (e.g., anger, fear, worry, relief). Jin et al. [5] have 
recently 
classified 
publics’ 
emotions 
in 
response 
to 
organizational crises depending on how (much) crisis 
responsibility is attributed to the organization. An important 
challenge is that, given the large share of comments posted by 
stakeholders during a crisis, it is impossible to manually 
monitor all these posts. A fine-grained automated detection 
method to tap into emotions communicated through social 
media on the fly is needed, but currently still underdeveloped.   
Our goal is to study how emotions are experienced and 
expressed through social media in times of crises and how 
these emotions can be detected automatically with the 
ultimate aim to adapt corporate crisis response strategies in a 
rapid and efficient way. This research endeavor requires an 
interdisciplinary approach. There will be close cooperation 
between two disciplines: communication sciences (CS), 
integrating emotion theory and social media dynamics in crisis 
communication models, and natural language processing 
(NLP) for text mining of emotions in social media 
communication. We focus mainly on Twitter as one of the 
most 
important 
social 
media, 
especially 
for 
crisis 
communication [2].   
In the Section 2 of this ideas paper, we discuss the two core 
objectives that need to be tackled to realize the future 
development of automatic emotion detection in organizational 
crises on social media. 
 
II. 
RESEARCH OBJECTIVES 
A. Objective 1: The Nature of Stakeholder Emotions in 
Social Media Crisis Communication 
There is consensus that emotions expressed by the 
stakeholders during crises are a crucial component to consider 
in crisis communication [5]. However, there is reason to 
assume that some emotions will be more easily expressed 
through social media than others. Apart from some fragmented 
studies, a solid integration of emotion theory in social media 
crisis communication models is still lacking.  
Several new steps need to be taken. Emotions are complex 
and multifaceted phenomena. Therefore, when studying how 
emotions are expressed through social media in crisis 
situations, it is crucial to first have an accurate view on what 
emotions are, why they are triggered in response to 
organizational crises, and subsequently why, when and how 
they are most likely to be expressed through social media. 
This critical evaluation of emotion theory and the dynamics 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

of social media communication and Twitter more concretely 
is needed to build a conceptual model integrating emotions 
in social media crisis communication.  
 
B. Objective 2: Automatic Detection of Crisis Related 
Emotions in Tweets 
Until now, most work on subjectivity analysis in the 
domain of NLP has concentrated on discovering whether a 
review, tweet, sentence, or specific “object” (person, product, 
organization, etc.) is regarded in a positive or negative manner 
by a specific “source”. This task has been given many names, 
from opinion mining, to sentiment analysis, review mining, 
attitude analysis, appraisal extraction, etc., and exists in 
different granularities ranging from coarse-grained sentiment 
analysis at the text level to fine-grained aspect-based 
sentiment analysis. From a methodological point of view, it is 
generally assumed that the semantic properties of words are 
good predictors of the semantic characteristics of the phrase or 
text that contain them. As a result, a lot of effort has been 
invested in the manual and (semi-)automatic development of 
lists of words indicative of sentiment [6] [7], and in the 
development of systems which both exploit these external 
lexicons and the lexical information present in the data (e.g., 
unigrams, bigrams, etc.) to determine for a given text, 
sentence or phrase whether it is positive, negative or neutral 
see [8] [9] for an overview. A similar methodology relying on 
external lexicons, e.g. [10], and automatically derived lexical 
knowledge has also been used in the more fine-grained 
approaches aiming at the automatic detection in text of 
emotions, in most cases restricted to a discrete set of emotions 
such as the 6 “universal” emotions distinguished by Ekman 
[11]: anger, disgust, fear, sadness, joy and surprise [12] [13] or 
the 12 emotions selected in the context of a shared task on 
emotion classification in suicide notes [14]. The basic Ekman 
emotions have also recently been investigated in tweets related 
to natural disasters such as Hurricanes [15].   
Fine-grained emotion detection, however, remains a largely 
understudied research area in the NLP domain. Furthermore, 
there are no approaches modeling emotions related to 
organizational crisis in tweets more specifically. In order to 
move beyond superficial emotion modeling and to find a 
machine learnable operationalization of the types of 
emotions that are most diagnostic for an organizational 
crisis, an interdisciplinary approach is required.  
III. 
RESEARCH CHALLENGES 
The integration of emotion theory in social media crisis 
communication models is crucial to the development of a 
supervised machine-learning model that can detect crisis-
related emotions in tweets. Key to the success of these models 
is 1) to determine relevant crisis emotions and how they are 
expressed in social media, 2) to define the optimal set of text 
features (e.g., detecting words indicative of a given emotion, 
modeling modality, modeling sarcasm, etc.) for the detection 
of a given emotion. Important research questions to be 
investigated are: How well defined are the different emotions 
or do they represent a continuum? How learnable are the 
annotated emotions? How to include time series information? 
Should we weigh twitter users differently depending on their 
role as a stakeholder (e.g., affected customers, journalists, 
random twitter users)? How should we handle retweets? How 
generic are the learned models?, etc. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] J. N. Sutton, “Social media monitoring and the 
democratic national convention: New tasks and 
emergent processes,” J. of Hom. Sec. and Em. Man., 
6(1), 2009, pp. 1-20. 
[2] F. Schultz, S. Utz, and A. Göritz, “Is the medium the 
message? Perceptions of and reactions to crisis 
communication via twitter, blogs and traditional media,” 
Public Rel. Rev., 37, 2011, pp. 20-27. 
[3] T. W. Coombs, “Ongoing crisis communication: 
planning, managing and responding (4th edition),” 
Thousand Oaks, California: Sage publications, 2015. 
[4] Y. Jin, B. F. Liu, and L. L. Austin, „Examining the role 
of social media in effective crisis management: the 
effects of crisis origin, information form, and source on 
public’s crisis responses,” Comm. Res., 2011, pp. 1-21.  
[5] Y. Jin, B. F. Liu, D. Anagondahalli, and L. L. Austin, 
“Scale development for measuring publics’ emotions in 
organizational crises,” Public Relations Review, 40, 
2014, pp. 509-518,.  
[6] J. Wiebe, M. Bruce, F. Rebecca, and T. O’Hara, 
“Development and use of a gold standard data set for 
subjectivity classifications,” Proc. of ACL-99, 1999, pp. 
246-253. 
[7] V. Jijkoun and K. Hofmann, “Generating a non-English 
subjectivity lexicon: relations that matter,” Proc. of 
EACL-2009, 2009, pp. 398-405. 
[8] A. Balahur, “Methods and Resources for Sentiment 
Analysis in Multilingual Documents of Different Text 
Types”, PhD thesis, Univ. of Alicante, unpublished, 
2011.  
[9] B. Liu, “Sentiment Analysis and Opinion Mining,” 
Morgan & Claypool Publishers, 2012.  
[10] J. Staiano and M. Guerini, “DepecheMood: a Lexicon 
for Emotion Analysis from Crowd-Annotated News,” 
Proc. of ACL-2014, 2014, pp. 427-433.  
[11] P. Ekman, “An argument for basic emotions,” Cognition 
and emotion, 6(3/4), 1992, pp.169-200.  
[12] C. Strapparava and R. Mihalcea, SemEval-2007 Task 
14: Affective Text. Proc. of SemEval-2007, 2007, 
pp.70–74.  
[13] J. Bellegarda, “Emotion Analysis Uting Latent Affective 
Folding and Embedding,” Proc. of the NAACL HLT 
2010 Worksh. on Computational Approaches to 
Analysis and Generation of Emotion in Text, 2007, pp. 
1-9.  
[14] B. Desmet and V. Hoste, “Emotion Detection in Suicide 
Notes,” Expert Systems with Applications, 40 (16), 
2004, pp. 6351-6358. 
[15] J. Brynielsson, F. Johansson, and A. Westling, A, 
“Learning to Classify Emotional Content in Crisis-
Related Tweets,” ISI 2013.   
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

