A Survey on Studying the Social Networks of Students
Akrati Saxena
Department of Computer Science, School of Computing
National University of Singapore, Singapore
Email: akrati@comp.nus.edu.sg
Harita Reddy
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
National Institute of Technology Karnataka, India
Pratishtha Saxena
Department of Computer Science and Engineering
Center for Advanced Studies, Lucknow, India
Ralucca Gera
Department of Applied Mathematics,
Associate Provost for Graduate Education,
Teaching and Learning Commons
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA
Email: rgera@nps.edu
Abstract—Do studies show that physical and online students’
social networks support education? Analyzing interactions be-
tween students in schools and universities can provide a wealth
of information. Studies on students’ social networks can help us
understand their behavioral dynamics, the correlation between
their friendships and academic performance, community and
group formation, information diffusion, and so on. Educational
goals and holistic development of students with various academic
abilities and backgrounds can be achieved by incorporating
the ﬁndings attained by the studies in terms of knowledge
propagation in classroom and spread of delinquent behaviors.
Moreover, we use Social Network Analysis (SNA) to identify
isolated students, ascertain the group study culture, analyze the
spreading of various habits like smoking, drinking, and so on.
In this paper, we present a review of the research showing how
analysis of students’ social networks can help us identify how
improved educational methods can be used to make learning
more inclusive at both school and university levels and achieve
holistic development of students through expansion of their social
networks, as well as control the spread of delinquent behaviors.
Keywords–Students’ Social Networks; Education; Team Work;
Collaborative Learning; Adolescent Behavior
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social networks of students, both physical and online,
have been used to understand various phenomena, such as
the correlation between the social network position of stu-
dents and their academic performance, information diffusion
in a classroom, collaborative learning and teamwork among
students and the emergence of homophily in classrooms [1].
Through the analysis of such students’ networks, there can be a
progress in the understanding of effectiveness of collaborative
learning environments to achieve pedagogical goals [2] [3] [4],
[5]. Existing research studies the relationship between net-
work dynamics and students’ academic and social behaviors.
Educators can use this research to ascertain whether enough
collaborative learning among students exists, whether there are
isolated students who are deprived of help from their peers,
and whether there is an effective information ﬂow among the
students in a classroom [6] [7].
Identifying central students in educational social networks
helps in discovering the inﬂuential students who spread the
information across the network [8]. Using homophily and
community detection in such networks, we may also iden-
tify the tightly-knit groups of the students that support each
other [7] [9] [10]. Dynamic network models explain the
evolution of social networks and aid in understanding students’
changing behaviors as a social network’s links can lead to
the development of positive and negative behaviors among the
students [11]. These studies help in understanding the spread
of various habits such as smoking, drinking and drugs among
students [12] [13] [14].
For the analysis of learning environments, a commonly
used method to actively create social network datasets is asking
students to nominate their friends, gurus (students from whom
they seek help), and adversaries, through ﬁlling out question-
naires [15]. Also, passive data collection tools like Moodle [16]
and other collaborative learning systems [2] [3] are used, where
connections are discovered through students’ interactions on
online platforms. In both methods, various types of students’
social networks can be created, including friendship networks,
collaboration networks (where the interaction between the
students constitute the collaboration), help-seeking networks
(where the students have links with peers whom they ask for
academic help), and so on.
With these collection methods in mind, several software
programs are currently used for analyzing social networks.
UCINET [17] supports various network analysis techniques
including transformation, connectivity measurement, centrality
and subgroup identiﬁcation. The R Package RSiena imple-
ments the SIENA method [18] and is popularly used to study
the relationship between the network and behavior dynamics
through stochastic actor based models. The SNAPP tool [6] is
used to view the real time social network of students based on
their online interactions, helping instructors identify the com-
munity structures, as well as students who are isolated from
others. Gephi [19] is another popular open source software
that uses 3D rendering for real-time complex networks and
50
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

supports multi-task modeling. NetworkX [20] is an easy to use
Python package that supports a number of graph algorithms.
Having outlined the most commonly used software pro-
grams for SNA, we now present a structured review of studies
that have used such tools to analyze ofﬂine and online social
networks of students. The motivations behind the survey are:
•
Educators are moving away from the traditional teach-
ing methods and are introducing innovative ways to
improve learning experience. A good understanding of
students’ social network structure can help designing
effective educational techniques for inclusive learning.
•
A comprehensive review of the existing methods that
use SNA to evaluate students’ learning and behavior
can provide a thorough understanding of the state-of-
the-art in the ﬁeld of networks and education.
Our key contributions through this survey include the
systematic partitioning of the work in the area of networks and
education into six key ﬁelds, highlighting certain limitations
in the existing work and suggesting areas for future research.
Section II reviews the existing work under six subsections
discussing the use of SNA to study the (A) effectiveness of
collaborative learning methods employed by educators, (B)
teamwork among student groups, (C) relationship between
individual student performance and network structure, (D)
extent of knowledge dissemination among students and de-
velopment of networks for peer support, (E) existence of ho-
mophily and communities among students and (F) relationship
between network structure, and student habits like smoking and
drinking. Section III concludes the survey along with outlining
the limitations of existing work and various future directions.
II.
ANALYSIS OF STUDENT SOCIAL NETWORKS
Social Network Analysis (SNA) can be a good tool in
studying the relationships between students forming a col-
laborative network, between groups of students, as well as
individuals themselves as part of a larger network. Analyz-
ing the network structure indicates not only the extent of
learner’s beneﬁt from the interactions among the students, but
also shows the importance of a particular actor or group in
supporting learning in the learning environments modeled by
networks. We now discuss the six main aspects related to
education that the analysis of students’ networks highlights.
A. The Effectiveness of Collaborative Learning Environments
Early research applying SNA to the ﬁeld of education
studied the interactions in a learning environment furnished by
Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL). These
CSCL environments are learning environments that leverage
technology to facilitate learning through computer supported
interactions between students such as online discussion forums
and collaborative writing. Analyzing these students’ networks
helps in evaluating the students’ participation in learning
achieved through CSCL. For example, university CSCL log
ﬁles have been used to determine whether each student plays
an effective role in the process of learning [2]. Researchers also
created a network structure in which edges capture the number
of sent and received messages between pairs of students on the
learning platform. Through the study of betweenness centrality
and Stephenson-Zelen information measure [17], it can be
determined if the communication in the CSCL environment
is centralized only around the instructor [2]. By evaluating
whether the interactions in a CSCL environment are instructor-
centric, one can perform timely intervention to achieve the
goal of more student-student interactions. This evaluation is
achieved by measuring (1) the level of activity based on
nodes’ degree, (2) the position of students in information
exchange network through betweenness and closeness cen-
trality measures, and (3) identiﬁcation of roles of university
students [5] [21]. Having fewer student-student interactions
implies a poor collaborative environment, and an intervention
helps in the emergence of certain students with high between-
ness centrality who relay information between the students
across the network [5].
Students are a part of different types of networks based
on different collaborative activities such as discussion, doubt
solving and information sharing. The usage of Basic Support
for Co-operative Work (BSCW) software [22] for CSCL shows
that doubt solving is the most decentralized activity, whereas
the network based on sharing of information has few actors
with very high centrality thus implying that information shar-
ing depends a lot on few highly active participants [3]. It is
also of interest to researchers to understand if the formation of
collaborative networks in a CSCL community depends on the
already existing friendship ties. Formation of such ties can be
studied using change propensity and degree centrality [4]. The
change propensity measures the extent to which an individual
adds more links in her ego network. Students with high cen-
trality in the network of pre-existing ties have a low change in
propensity in the CSCL network, whereas peripheral students
in the CSCL network tend to show a greater willingness to
form connections over time [4].
An important aspect to understand is whether students start
playing a major role in sharing knowledge with the progress of
a CSCL based course. The More Knowledgeable Other (MKO)
in a CSCL learning environment is the actor with highest
knowledge that everyone engages with for guidance [23].
Initially, only the instructor starts as an MKO [24]. Later, the
students start becoming more inﬂuential in sharing information
with their peers. As expected, such an emergence of peer
MKOs happens due to increase in the knowledge of the
students as the course proceeds and knowledge spreads.
Online Threaded Discussions (OTDs) are often used to
enhance peer interactions in university courses. Threads en-
able students to post their comments asynchronously on a
particular topic of discussion and respond to other students’
comments. Such discussions can be modeled through directed
networks. As expected, high achieving students tend to be
the bridges across these discussion groups [25]. Proper usage
of OTDs leads to an increase in the number of students
joining the interactions, increase in the number of connections,
and a decrease in the average of the closeness centrality
of all the students [26]. Decrease in the average closeness
centrality indicates lesser delay in information sharing in the
network. Meerkat-ED helps to dynamically view students’
interactions and identify the central students in each topic’s
discussion [27] [28].
Apart from the above discussed collaborative learning
methods, researchers have studied the effectiveness of several
other online collaborative learning environments, such as Co-
operative Open Learning (COOL) [29], Peer Assisted Learning
(PAL) [30], online blogging groups [31], and so on. The
51
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

use of collaborative learning methods like OTDs successfully
increases student interactions. However, it is possible that the
students show high participation only when such learning
methodologies are introduced for the ﬁrst time, and may
lose interest with repeated usage. Also, the success of such
collaborative environments not only depends on characteris-
tics of the social network but also on the motivation and
academic abilities of individual students. This is shown in
one particular higher education scenario in which even after
the adoption of PALs, an individual’s academic performance
was observed to be comparatively more dependent upon the
individual’s previous performance than the characteristics of
the social network [30], highlighting that the usage of PALs
may not have been effective in beneﬁting students through
social interactions.
We have discussed how SNA is used to check if col-
laborative learning methods are able to achieve signiﬁcant
participation of students in the process of learning. More
participation implies students ask questions, get their doubts
clariﬁed, explain their views and understand other students’
views about the topic [32]. We now discuss how the study of
network structure helps us evaluate teamwork among students.
B. Studies on the Teamwork Among Students
Teamwork is essential among students for performing
various activities like group projects, group discussions, or
just for sport. Moreover, teams help building long-term con-
nections to possibly support life-long learning. Friendship and
communication networks of university students are mostly
formed within their teams and high levels of communication
within the teams are positively correlated with the team
effectiveness, measured by positive outcome [15]. Apart from
high levels of communication, good team results also depend
on balanced communication within a team, measured on the
basis of contribution index of each team member, where the
contribution index is an indicator of balance in the number of
sent and received emails for each individual student within
the team [33] [34]. As expected, adversarial relationships
within teams are the cause for lesser team satisfaction. One
unexpected observation indicates that more workload sharing
in a team results in lesser grades. This observation may be
explained by the intuition that many successful teams often
have a few bright and hard working students who take up
most of the workload [15].
Measures such as cohesion (ratio of the number of mutually
positive relationships to the total number of possible relation-
ships), group conﬂict (ratio of mutually negative relationships
to the total number of possible relationships), and degree
centrality have been used to understand students’ interactions
in networks. In particular, based on four types of relationships
– advice, leadership, social and obligation – research shows
that cohesion and centrality are the most important predicting
factors for team performance [35]. The edges in the above
constructed networks are weighted, with +1 indicating a
positive relationship and −1 indicating a negative one – it is
challenging to capture negative relationships as students may
not be willing to reveal such information. To resolve this, the
students were presented a questionnaire with only positively
stated questions, in which they were just asked to rank their
teammates. The lowest ranked student was considered to be
having a negative relationship.
The teaching behavior and course structure also impact
the evolution of groups and social network formation among
students. Based on a study on two sections of undergraduate
engineering classes, a less structured class leads to connected
groups and some students who are disconnected from oth-
ers, whereas a more structured class creates a more even
distribution of interactions [36]. Disconnected students do
not interact with their classmates even when teamwork is
required. Based on SNA’s signiﬁcance in identifying connected
and disconnected groups of students, the instructors can use
these results to identify the disconnected students, in order to
encourage them to participate in teamwork and to improve the
inclusiveness in the projects.
Working in teams helps students in accomplishing course
tasks, getting doubts clariﬁed and involving in discussions,
thus achieving deeper level of understanding that individual
students cannot achieve alone just by attending the course [37].
Teams should have students who play the role of a broker
to transfer knowledge between various groups, thus giving
the teams access to new and different ideas, information and
opinions. An SNA based methodology for forming teams
dynamically on Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) for
achieving tasks assigned in the courses helps in enhancing
students’ participation, thus reducing attrition from MOOCs
through active engagement of students [37].
Thus, the level and balance of communication within
team, team cohesion, presence of brokers, and absence of
disconnected students helps in determining teams’ success,
both in terms of team grades and the student engagement
achieved within the team. In the next section, we change
the granularity level to discuss the relationship between an
individuals’ academic performance and their position in the
social network.
C. Academic Performance versus Social Networks
Analyzing the correlation between students’ academic per-
formance and their position in the social network provides
interesting insights into the social aspects that make high
achieving students different from others. Researchers have
focused on studying the relationship of a student’s centrality
in the network with her academic performance. The cen-
trality in communication networks is a positive indicator of
the academic performance of engineering and management
students compared to friendship or behavioral networks, and
centrality in adversarial networks is negatively correlated with
student satisfaction [15] [38]. Advice networks created using
data obtained from graduate students in a management course
suggest that centrality in advice networks is also a strong
indicator of students’ academic performance [39]. More ﬁne-
grained dimensions like the exchange of learning materials,
informal communication, and formal study teamwork show
that students’ centrality in the study environment in university
affects both their learning and employability [40].
A factor that has to be considered while analyzing whether
a particular network metric predicts students’ academic status
is the reciprocal effect, i.e., it is possible that a student with
good academics might participate more actively in the network,
thus obtaining high centrality values. Hence, it is important to
understand the changes in time-varying networks as analyzing
a static network may lead to misleading conclusions. The
impact of a students’ performance on the social network
52
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

dynamics has been studied through both cross-sectional and
temporal networks [41] [42]. High-performing college students
tend to establish persistent ties from the beginning of the
course itself with other highly performing students. This often
leads to the formation of a ’rich’ or ’high academic perfor-
mance’ club due to their willingness to collaborate and learn.
Thus, academic achievements are a good predictor of the social
ties among students having similar academic performance.
Also, the students taking advanced coursework often have large
ego networks and more interactions in the network [43].
These days, Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) are
becoming popular and useful resources for education. Such
platforms also enable students enrolled in a course to inter-
act via collaborative discussions. Correlation and regression
analysis to study the relationships between various social
characteristics and the students’ online course performance
indicate that Eigenvector centrality is one of the most useful
predictors for academic achievement, with high-performing
students taking up central positions in the network [44]. The
studied social characteristics include degree centrality, close-
ness centrality, betweenness centrality, Eigenvector centrality,
PageRank, clustering and hubs.
Spectral clustering on network created on the basis of stu-
dent participation on university Moodle suggests that similarity
in students’ behavior is positively correlated with similarity in
grades but surprisingly, fails to support the hypothesis that
higher centrality causes better performance [16]. Analysis of
triads and transitivity in student social networks recorded at
different times in an introductory biology course, i.e., the
network created during their ﬁrst exam and the network during
the second exam showed that the overall number of complete
triads indicated the build-up of more study groups in the
classroom and increase in the density of the network [45].
Apart from this, there is a signiﬁcant correlation between
performance in the second exam and the students’ betweenness
and degree centralities. Existing methods can be used to
estimate the centrality rank of a student in a class without
computing the centrality value of all students [46] [47] [48].
Students are a part of both ofﬂine and online social
networks, though these networks are often overlapping. Online
communication includes communication through mobile and
messenger texting, and emails. There is a signiﬁcant relation
between the closeness centrality of the online and ofﬂine
networks. The ofﬂine closeness centrality is signiﬁcantly cor-
related with the students’ academic performance; however,
the correlation is not much in the case of online closeness
centrality [49]. The study of online social networks comes with
its limitations as the structure and properties of online social
networking data are different from the ofﬂine collected data,
and a rigorous analysis of the data is required while applying
the metrics proposed by sociologists and anthropologists [50].
Hence, these studies show that high-achieving students tend
to have central position in the network and establish persistent
ties with their classmates. Next, we discuss the role of social
network in knowledge dissemination and providing peer help
to students.
D. Knowledge Dissemination and Peer Support
Knowledge diffusion is the process by which knowledge
spreads over a network. Knowledge can be effectively dif-
fused in students’ networks when there is (1) good presence
of leaders, (2) optimal network density and (3) existence
of subgroups with adequate inter-subgroup connections in a
classroom [8]. Degree and betweenness centrality in networks
based on emotional, counseling and intelligence relationships
between students are used to determine the presence of leaders,
and cohesion is used to identify the extent of inter-group
diffusion in a university cohort [8]. Bridge students, i.e., the
students that constitute the connecting nodes between different
groups in a classroom should take up more active roles to
improve the diffusion between different groups. As expected,
the bridge students are found to be academically outstanding
students [8].
Giving collaboration-demanding assignments to students
can lead to the development of an information network that is
useful for them throughout their studies. It results in increasing
network density, decreasing average geodesic distance, and in-
creasing average degree centrality of students with the progress
of a university course [51]. The use of student activities requir-
ing intense collaboration also improves information diffusion
efﬁciency and network inclusiveness. The risk of collapse of
the collaborative network is also alleviated due to the absence
of cutpoint in the evolved network [51].
Seeking help from peers is often a good way to learn and
clarify doubts, especially in advanced courses at the university
level. Students who are central in the network constructed
on the basis of getting information from peers beneﬁt and
learn the most due to gaining of knowledge from others [52].
An important question is who the students consult for any
help among their peers- their close friends or high-performing
students. Though the formation of project groups by university
students is highly dependant on the students’ pre-existing
friendships, among the members of a particular group most
students connect to peers who have good knowledge about that
subject for help [53]. Implementation of an online discussion
forum makes it easier for graduate students to seek help
by strengthening their social networks. Apart from fueling
students’ participation in solving problems, such a forum also
leads to the expansion of the ego networks of students [54].
The relationships between students change due to some
special events, but they are stabilized over time [55]. Similar
behavior is observed on Twitter microblogging scenario where
the rate of development of connections stabilizes as students
start exhibiting more selectivity in forming ties with other
students [56]. Application of Stochastic Actor-Based Models
(SABMs) for probabilistic analysis shows that high-achieving
students obtain more incoming connections with the passage of
time implying that high-scoring students gain more attention
from their peers, possibly due to the need to seek help in
studies.
In this section, we have discussed how the network struc-
ture plays an important role in determining the dissemination
of knowledge and making it easier to seek help, and how such
ideal networks can evolve through collaborative activities. In
the next section, we will discuss how SNA is used to study the
subcultures in a classroom and the existence of homophily.
E. Study on Subcultures and Homophily Among Students
The tendency of humans to form relationships with people
having similar traits is known as homophily [1]. There is an
existence of homophilic connections among high school stu-
dents, with denser connections among students having similar
53
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

attributes, such as academic performance, gender, and if they
also work while studying [7]. Several other longitudinal net-
work data analysis on academic and friendship networks have
shown that students mostly form connections with the similarly
achieving and same-gender students both for friendship and
academic consultation, thus indicating a strong academic and
gender-based homophily [10].
Do students adapt to the academic performance of their
friend circle or try to seek out similarly achieving friends?
The observed similarity in academics of friends can be a
result of either selection or due to adaptation. Students tend
to reorganize their ego networks and form friendships with
students having similar academic performance rather than
changing their academic performance based on their current
set of friends, thus indicating the development of strong ho-
mophily. This observation is made through the use of Pearson
correlation measure between students’ GPA and the average of
their direct friends’ GPA [9]. Girls exhibit more selection phe-
nomenon, which can be explained by the general observation
that girls tend to form groups for study far more than boys,
thus making academic achievement a major predictor in their
friendships [57].
Students can be similar in terms of more than one at-
tribute. However, most studies evaluate different dimensions
(of similarities like gender, race, etc.) in a disjoint fashion.
For a complete understanding of the impact of homophily
on the evolution of the network or other way around, the
studies should be performed using multidimensional attributes.
A multidimensional homophily study on adolescent networks
shows that the connections between individuals having more
than one similar attribute might not evolve further [58]. This
is explained with the idea that students may usually try to
make friends with people who have different thoughts and
knowledge, thus seeking variety in their friends’ circle.
How does SNA help in identifying the sense of commu-
nity in students? Degree and closeness centrality are positive
indicators of the sense of community in a student whereas
betweenness centrality shows a negative correlation. This
conclusion is obtained from the evaluation of relationships in
evolving students’ social networks and the feeling of commu-
nity (social and learning) in those students using Classroom
Community Scale (CCS) [59] [60]. However, this study only
considers communication through online discussions.
Homophily based groups are helpful for students to feel in-
clusiveness, but at the same time, they have several drawbacks.
The poorly performing students might form groups among
them and it may lead to an inverse effect on their academic
performance, therefore institutions and teachers should focus
on the disruption of such groups and formation of more
versatile groups. Strong homophily in a classroom is also an
indicator of segregation based on racial or ethnic terms; devel-
opment of inter-group ties can help develop better inter-racial
and ethnic relations among students [61]. Research shows
that strong homophily in a classroom can be overcome by
creating more connections between separated groups based on
performance or legislation. For example, one study has shown
that minority groups can have better inter-ethnic relations by
performing better in academics. That is because by performing
well the minority students tend to get more attention and
therefore more friends and lesser adversaries from the majority
groups [61]. SNA has also been used to study the impact
of afﬁrmative actions, such as reserving seats for underrepre-
sented community students, motivating more women to study
sciences and technologies, organizing events to bridge the gap
of two communities, etc [62]. A mathematical analysis of the
seat reservation system for backward class students in Indian
academic system showed that such afﬁrmative actions reduce
the gap of backward and upper-class students with time [62].
This work is based on a very basic mathematical modeling
of the network and needs to be extended by considering
more real-life parameters. The survey included in the research
also showed that the opinion of upper class students changes
about backward class students once they meet more of such
students [62].
In this section, we discussed how SNA is helpful in
studying the community, groups, and subculture formation
among students based on similar attributes like race and
gender. Another important factor that inﬂuences the evolution
of ties is similar habits. In the next section, we will discuss the
impact of the behavior of friends on a person and friendship
formation based on behavioral attributes.
F. Studies on Adolescent Behavior
Friendships can inﬂuence a student’s behavior in several
ways, ranging from improving academic performance to get-
ting an antisocial behavior. Students tend to have connec-
tions with peers having similar behavior, including aggressive
behavior [63]. For the majority of adolescents, increase in
individual importance in the social network leads to increased
aggression, except for very highly central students who do
not need to resort to aggression to improve their social stand-
ing, with the social standing measured through betweenness
centrality [64]. A rise in the average aggression of friends
also leads to a rise in the aggression of an adolescent [64].
There is a signiﬁcant impact of friends’ delinquent behavior
on an adolescent and this impact is beyond that of the impact
of school involvement. Study of structural characteristics of
the network and behavioral dynamics model explains such a
correlation between changing behaviors of adolescent students
and their changing network connections [11].
Students acquire several habits and behaviors through the
inﬂuence of their friends. Such relationships between network
dynamics and behavioral changes are often studied through
SABMs [69]. Students modify their smoking habits to match
their friends, thus corroborating that inﬂuence from their
network increases smoking among youth. This is observed
through the study of dynamic networks based on three mea-
sures: smoking alter, smoking ego, and smoking similarity
among students [13]. Similar methods are used to study the
impact of social networks on alcohol consumption by the
youth. Adolescents often select friends with similar drinking
behavior and start consuming alcohol if a large number of
friends already have the habit of consuming alcohol; alcohol
onset can be seen as a diffusion process in the students’
network [14] [65]. Moreover, adolescents often get attracted
to drinkers and try to be friends with them due to the teenage
culture of giving high status to drinkers as shown through the
SABMs analysis [66]. The selection of friends is also heavily
inﬂuenced by levels of marijuana use based on the study
performed in two schools [70]. However, the phenomenon of
non-users trying marijuana for the ﬁrst time because of their
friends’ inﬂuence is observed only in one of the schools. Such
54
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE I. COMMONLY USED NETWORK SCIENCE CONCEPTS TO ANALYZE STUDENTS’ NETWORKS
Network Concept
Applications
Degree Centrality
Find centrally positioned high performing students [39] [45], willingness of students to add more ties in CSCL environment [4]
team performance [35], development of information network [51], sense of community in students [59]
Closeness Centrality
Find students with good academic performance [49], delay in information sharing in network [26], sense of community in students [59]
Betweenness Centrality
Determine if the communication is centralized around the instructor in a CSCL environment [2], students who relay information across
the network [5], students who perform well in exams [45], the presence of leaders [8], increase in aggression [64]
Stephenson and
Find centrally positioned high performing students in communication networks [15], determine if the communication
Zelen Centrality
is centralized around the instructor in a CSCL environment [2]
Eigenvector Centrality
Find centrally positioned high-performing students [44]
Cohesion
Predict performance of student teams [35], ﬁnd the extent of inter-group information diffusion [8]
Network Density
Find if knowledge is effectively diffused in classroom [8], development of information network due to collaborative assignments [45] [51]
Strongly Connected
Study the improved ﬂow of information due to decrease in the number of components through the use of threaded discussions [26]
Components
Triads
Study the formation of study groups in a classroom [45]
Bridges
Find students who can play an important role in improving information diffusion in classroom, and are usually academically outstanding [8]
Geodesic Distance
Study the development of information network and how information diffusion improves [8]
Stochastic Actor
Study the phenomenon of inﬂuence and selection of friends in terms of smoking [13] and drinking [14] [65] [66] habits,
Based Model
physical activity levels [67], academic achievements [42] and junk food consumption [68] among students
Homophily
Evaluate the tendency of students with similar attributes forming friendship ties with each other [7] [10] [58],
racial and ethnic segregation in classroom [61]
analyses can help in identifying schools where youth drug
interventions are required to prevent potential marijuana use.
In understanding adolescents’ health, students gradually
adjust to obtain a Body Mass Index (BMI) and physical
activity levels similar to that of their friends, as shown by
SABMs in a study of the relationship between longitudinal
adolescent friendship networks and their physical activity [67].
The converse is also true, i.e., there is a tendency of students
to connect with students having similar BMI and physical
activity levels, based on homophily as discussed in the previous
section. Moreover, apart from a few personal attributes, an
adolescent’s junk food consumption is also largely inﬂuenced
by her friendship network [68]. Such SABM based studies can
be used to understand student behavior and intervene in case of
disorders faced by them. Based on these ﬁndings, educational
institutions may design appropriate policies and activities to
overcome these patterns, making the students aware of this
data and motivating a better decision while choosing friends.
Another research problem is the correlation between stu-
dents’ networks and the prevalence of cheating. Empirical evi-
dence suggests that formation of tightly knit groups or cliques
among students, and weak ties with the faculty is positively
correlated with the adoption of unethical behavior [71] [72].
Friendship networks can be used to design effective seating ar-
rangement strategies for exams to prevent cheating. Optimized
solutions for lattice-based student placement layouts, with less
lattice links matching with actual friendship network links can
be obtained through the use of genetic algorithms [73].
The section elaborated on the relationship between dy-
namics of network ties and adolescent behavior including
aggression, smoking, and consumption of alcohol, marijuana
and junk food. We now conclude our review and elucidate the
possible directions of research in future.
III.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
Analysis of networks of students constructed on the ba-
sis of different types of relationships helps us understand
students’ behavior, information diffusion, and acquisition of
various habits like smoking and drinking based on network
structure. Research shows the correlation between the aca-
demic performance of the students and their position in the
network. These observations can be used to design correcting
behaviour, alternate teaching methods, group activities, and
policies that impact students. A limitation of the studies carried
out on students’ networks is that generalization drawn from
the observations on small groups of students may not always
be correct. Another issue is that self-reporting on adversarial
relationships, and habits like smoking and drinking may not
give accurate information as it is subject to students’ bias and
hesitation. There is also a need to increase the frequency of
evaluation of students’ networks using the different frame-
works. Evaluation should also be done a signiﬁcant amount
of time after the introduction of new learning methodologies
to check if students’ participation remains persistent.
Currently, there is little research that studies combined
teacher-student social networks. These mixed networks may
provide more information than what only students’ or teachers’
social networks provide individually. Such combined networks
can be explored for studying the long-lasting teachers’ impact
on the students, and their inﬂuence in the formation of groups
among students. We can also determine students who are not
well-connected to the faculty and encourage them to interact
more. Also, real-life scenario based case studies need to be
conducted to evaluate teacher-student networks in terms of
prevalence of unethical practices among students like cheating.
Student segregation based on racial, ethnic or class ho-
mophily is detrimental in nature. Future research can compare
the changes in homophily in students’ networks over time at
different universities that have different amount of diversity
and that have different or no programs for encouraging inter-
mingling. This can help in identifying the best methods for
disrupting segregation in higher education.
Another network science based learning tool is CHUNK
learning methodology that takes into consideration the different
learning abilities and skills of students, and uses network-based
approach to represent content and suggest learning modules to
students [74]. Such tools can complement existing collabo-
rative learning techniques to furnish a personalized learning
experience and enable all students to participate proactively in
learning.
Analysis methods should be easy to implement in real life
scenarios, with lesser time spent by students like in ﬁlling
55
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

questionnaires. Certain studies use rigorous questionnaires and
surveys which are time-taking to implement on a regular
basis in universities or schools. We suggest that future re-
search should focus on automatic data collection using online
platforms like Moodle and discussion forums, which have
already been utilized by some studies, along with integration
of student ties on online social networking sites. Software
should be developed to analyze networks constructed from the
data to examine student participation and identify disconnected
students so that the faculty can identify appropriate corrective
steps. We believe that teachers should be able to use the SNA
tools easily to continuously monitor the students’ social net-
works to bring awareness to possible appropriate interventions
that improve the interactions and knowledge diffusion in a
classroom. We promote social network analysis as a tool to
complement easily observable behavior, but not to replace
the observations captured through human teacher-student or
student-student interactions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Ralucca Gera would like to thank the DoD for partially
funding this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. McPherson, L. Smith-Lovin, and J. M. Cook, “Birds of a feather:
Homophily in social networks,” Annual review of sociology, vol. 27,
no. 1, 2001, pp. 415–444.
[2]
K. Nurmela, E. Lehtinen, and T. Palonen, “Evaluating cscl log ﬁles
by social network analysis,” in Proceedings of the 1999 conference on
Computer support for collaborative learning.
International Society of
the Learning Sciences, 1999, p. 54.
[3]
A. Martınez, Y. Dimitriadis, B. Rubia, E. G´omez, and P. De La Fuente,
“Combining qualitative evaluation and social network analysis for
the study of classroom social interactions,” Computers & Education,
vol. 41, no. 4, 2003, pp. 353–368.
[4]
H. Cho, G. Gay, B. Davidson, and A. Ingraffea, “Social networks,
communication styles, and learning performance in a cscl community,”
Computers & education, vol. 49, no. 2, 2007, pp. 309–329.
[5]
M. Saqr, U. Fors, M. Tedre, and J. Nouri, “How social network analysis
can be used to monitor online collaborative learning and guide an
informed intervention,” PloS one, vol. 13, no. 3, 2018, p. e0194777.
[6]
S. Dawson, A. Bakharia, and E. Heathcote, “Snapp: Realising the
affordances of real-time sna within networked learning environments,”
in Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Networked
Learning.
Lancaster University, 2010, pp. 125–133.
[7]
M. G. R. Ortiz, J. R. C. Hoyos, and M. G. R. L´opez, “The social
networks of academic performance in a student context of poverty in
mexico,” Social networks, vol. 26, no. 2, 2004, pp. 175–188.
[8]
H. Xia, R. Wang, and S. Hu, “Social networks analysis of the knowledge
diffusion among university students,” in 2009 Second International
Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling, vol. 2, Nov 2009,
pp. 343–346.
[9]
I. Smirnov and S. Thurner, “Formation of homophily in academic
performance: students prefer to change their friends rather than per-
formance,” PLOS ONE, vol. 12, no. 8, 2016.
[10]
J. Brouwer, A. Flache, E. Jansen, A. Hofman, and C. Steglich,
“Emergent achievement segregation in freshmen learning community
networks,” Higher Education, vol. 76, no. 3, 2018, pp. 483–500.
[11]
W. Burk, M. Kerr, and H. Stattin, “The co-evolution of early adolescent
friendship networks, school involvement, and delinquent behaviors,”
Revue franaise de sociologie, vol. 49(3), 2008, pp. 499–522.
[12]
C. Steglich, T. A. Snijders, and P. West, “Applying siena,” Methodology,
vol. 2, no. 1, 2006, pp. 48–56.
[13]
C. M. Lakon, C. Wang, C. T. Butts, R. Jose, D. S. Timberlake, and J. R.
Hipp, “A dynamic model of adolescent friendship networks, parental
inﬂuences, and smoking,” Journal of youth and adolescence, vol. 44,
no. 9, 2015, pp. 1767–1786.
[14]
W. Burk, H. van der Vorst, M. Kerr, and H. Stattin, “Alcohol use and
friendship dynamics: Selection and socialization in early-, middle-, and
late-adolescent peer networks,” Journal of studies on alcohol and drugs,
vol. 73, 01 2012, pp. 89–98.
[15]
T. Baldwin, M. Bedell, and J. Johnson, “The social fabric of a
team-based mba program: Network effects on student satisfaction and
performance,” The Academy of Management Journal, vol. 40, 12 1997,
pp. 1369–1397.
[16]
G. Obadi, P. Dr´azdilov´a, J. Martinovic, K. Slaninov´a, and V. Sn´asel,
“Finding patterns of students’ behavior in synthetic social networks,”
in Proceedings of the International Conference on Advances in Social
Networks Analysis and Mining.
IEEE/ACM, 2010, pp. 411–413.
[17]
S. P. Borgatti, M. G. Everett, and L. C. Freeman, “Ucinet,” Encyclopedia
of Social Network Analysis and Mining, 2014, pp. 2261–2267.
[18]
R. Ruth, T. A. Snijders, Z. Boda, A. Vrs, and P. Preciado, Manual for
SIENA version 4.0.
Oxford: University of Oxford, Department of
Statistics, 2017.
[19]
M. Bastian, S. Heymann, and M. Jacomy, “Gephi: an open source
software for exploring and manipulating networks,” in Proceedings
of the Third International Conference on Weblogs and Social Media.
AAAI, 2009, pp. 361–362.
[20]
A. Hagberg, P. Swart, and D. S Chult, “Exploring network struc-
ture, dynamics, and function using networkx,” Los Alamos National
Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States), Tech. Rep., 2008.
[21]
J.-A. Marcos-Garc´ıa, A. Mart´ınez-Mon´es, and Y. Dimitriadis, “Despro:
A method based on roles to provide collaboration analysis support
adapted to the participants in cscl situations,” Computers & Education,
vol. 82, 2015, pp. 335–353.
[22]
GMD-FIT.
Basic
support
for
cooperative
work
3.3.1.
[Online].
Available: http://bscw.gmd.de
[23]
L. S. Vygotsky, Mind in society: The development of higher psycho-
logical processes.
Harvard University Press, 1980.
[24]
B. Sundararajan, “Emergence of the most knowledgeable other (mko):
Social network analysis of chat and bulletin board conversations in a
cscl system,” Electronic Journal of E-Learning, vol. 8, no. 2, 2010, pp.
191–208.
[25]
J.-H. Kang, J. Kim, and E. Shaw, “A network analysis of student groups
in threaded discussions,” in International Conference on Intelligent
Tutoring Systems.
Springer, 2010, pp. 359–361.
[26]
R. C. Rodrguez-Hidalgo, C. Zhu, F. Questier, and A. M. Torres Alfonso,
“Using social network analysis for analysing online threaded discus-
sions,” International Journal of Learning, Teaching and Educational
Research, vol. 10, 04 2015, pp. 128–146.
[27]
R.
Rabbany.
Meerkat-ed.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.reirab.com/MeerkatED/index.html
[28]
R. Rabbany, M. Takaffoli, and O. Zaane, “Social network analysis
and mining to support the assessment of on-line student participation,”
Sigkdd Explorations, vol. 13, 05 2012, pp. 20–29.
[29]
C. Helm, “Effects of social learning networks on student academic
achievement and pro-social behavior in accounting,” Journal of Edu-
cational Research, vol. 9, 01 2017, pp. 52–76.
[30]
M. AbdelSalam, M. El Tantawi, A. Al-Ansari, A. AlAgl, and F. Al-
Harbi, “Informal peer-assisted learning groups did not lead to better
performance of saudi dental students,” Medical Principles and Practice,
vol. 26, no. 4, 2017, pp. 337–342.
[31]
A. Jimoyiannis, P. Tsiotakis, and D. Roussinos, “Social network analysis
of students participation and presence in a community of educational
blogging,” ITSE, vol. 10, 02 2013, pp. 15–30.
[32]
A. Soller, A. Lesgold, F. Linton, and B. Goodman, “What makes peer
interaction effective? modeling effective communication in an intelli-
gent cscl,” in In the Proceedings of the fall symposium: Psychological
models of communication in collaborative systems.
AAAI, 1999, pp.
116–123.
[33]
P. A. Gloor, M. Paasivaara, D. Schoder, and P. Willems, “Finding
collaborative innovation networks through correlating performance with
social network structure,” International Journal of Production Research,
vol. 46, no. 5, 2008, pp. 1357–1371.
[34]
P. A. Gloor, R. Laubacher, S. B. Dynes, and Y. Zhao, “Visualization of
communication patterns in collaborative innovation networks-analysis
56
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

of some w3c working groups,” in Proceedings of the twelfth interna-
tional conference on Information and knowledge management.
ACM,
2003, pp. 56–60.
[35]
H.-L. Yang and J.-H. Tang, “Team structure and team performance in
is development: a social network perspective,” Information & manage-
ment, vol. 41, no. 3, 2004, pp. 335–349.
[36]
A. Hernandez and V. Uddameri, “Heard it through the grapevine - social
network analysis of a hydrology class,” Journal of Contemporary Water
Research & Education, vol. 158, 08 2016, pp. 85–97.
[37]
T. Sinha, “Together we stand, together we fall, together we win:
Dynamic team formation in massive open online courses,” in The Fifth
International Conference on the Applications of Digital Information and
Web Technologies (ICADIWT 2014).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 107–112.
[38]
Y. Mastoory, S. Rajaee Harandi, and N. Abdolvand, “The effects
of communication networks on students academic performance: The
synthetic approach of social network analysis and data mining for ed-
ucation,” International Journal on Integrating Technology in Education,
vol. 5, 12 2016, pp. 23–34.
[39]
H.-L. Yang and J.-H. Tang, “Effects of social network on students’
performance: a web-based forum study in taiwan,” Journal of Asyn-
chronous Learning Networks, vol. 7, no. 3, 2003, pp. 93–107.
[40]
B. Divjak and P. Peharda, “Social network analysis of study environ-
ment,” Journal of information and organizational sciences, vol. 34, no. 1,
2010, pp. 67–80.
[41]
L. M. Vaquero and M. Cebrian, “The rich club phenomenon in the
classroom,” Scientiﬁc reports, vol. 3, 2013, p. 1174.
[42]
J. Flashman, “Academic achievement and its impact on friend dynam-
ics,” Sociology of Education, vol. 85, 01 2012, pp. 61–80.
[43]
C. Barber and J. W. Wasson, “A comparison of adolescents friendship
networks by advanced coursework participation status,” Gifted Child
Quarterly, vol. 59, no. 1, 2015, pp. 23–37.
[44]
Z. Liu, L. Kang, Z. Su, S. Liu, and J. Sun, “Investigate the relationship
between learners social characteristics and academic achievements,”
in Journal of Physics: Conference Series, vol. 1113, no. 1.
IOP
Publishing, 2018, p. 012021.
[45]
D. Z. Grunspan, B. L. Wiggins, and S. M. Goodreau, “Understanding
classrooms through social network analysis: A primer for social network
analysis in education research,” CBE Life Sciences Education, vol. 13,
no. 2, 2014, pp. 167–178.
[46]
A. Saxena, R. Gera, and S. Iyengar, “Observe locally rank globally,”
in Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE/ACM International Conference on
Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 2017. ACM, 2017,
pp. 139–144.
[47]
A. Saxena and S. Iyengar, “Global rank estimation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1710.11341, 2017.
[48]
A. Saxena, R. Gera, and S. Iyengar, “Fast estimation of closeness
centrality ranking,” in Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE/ACM International
Conference on Advances in Social Networks Analysis and Mining 2017.
ACM, 2017, pp. 80–85.
[49]
X. Zhang, V. Venkatesh, and B.-y. Huang, “Students interactions and
course performance: Impacts of online and ofﬂine networks,” in In the
Proceedings of International Conference on Information Systems. AIS,
2008, p. 215.
[50]
J. Howison, A. Wiggins, and K. Crowston, “Validity issues in the use
of social network analysis for the study of online communities,” Journal
of the Association for Information Systems, vol. 12, no. 12, 2011, pp.
767–797.
[51]
G. Han, O. McCubbins, and T. Paulsen, “Using social network analysis
to measure student collaboration in an undergraduate capstone course,”
NACTA Journal, vol. 60, no. 2, 2016, pp. 176–182.
[52]
J. Hommes, B. Rienties, W. de Grave, G. Bos, L. Schuwirth, and
A. Scherpbier, “Visualising the invisible: a network approach to reveal
the informal social side of student learning,” Advances in Health
Sciences Education, vol. 17, no. 5, 2012, pp. 743–757.
[53]
M. Nurminen, P. Heino, and P. Ihantola, “Friends and gurus: do students
ask for help from those they know or those who would know,” in
Proceedings of the 17th Koli Calling International Conference on
Computing Education Research.
ACM, 2017, pp. 80–87.
[54]
P.-Y. Chao, K. R. Lai, C.-C. Liu, and H.-M. Lin, “Strengthening social
networks in online discussion forums to facilitate help seeking for
solving problems,” Educational Technology & Society, vol. 21, 2018,
pp. 39–50.
[55]
Y. Imamverdiyev, H. Z. Asl, N. Janani, S. Siami, N. Babapoor,
S. Nezhadseiﬁ, B. Sami, S. Faraji, D. Pilevar, M. Bazel et al., “A
longitudinal study on degree centrality changes in a group of students,”
in In the Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Application of
Information and Communication Technologies.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–3.
[56]
K. Stepanyan, K. Borau, and C. Ullrich, “A social network analysis
perspective on student interaction within the twitter microblogging
environment,” in 2010 10th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
Learning Technologies, July 2010, pp. 70–72.
[57]
D. Kretschmer, L. Leszczensky, and S. Pink, “Selection and inﬂuence
processes in academic achievementmore pronounced for girls?” Social
Networks, vol. 52, 2018, pp. 251–260.
[58]
P. Block and T. Grund, “Multidimensional homophily in friendship
networks,” Network science, (Cambridge University Press), vol. 2, 08
2014, pp. 189–212.
[59]
S. Dawson, “A study of the relationship between student social networks
and sense of community.” Educational Technology & Society, vol. 11,
no. 3, 2008, pp. 224–238.
[60]
A. P. Rovai, “Building sense of community at a distance,” International
Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, vol. 4, no. 1, 2002,
pp. 1–9.
[61]
T. Hajdu, G. Kertesi, and G. K´ezdi, “High-achieving minority students
can have more friends and fewer adversaries - evidence from hungary,”
Budapest Working Papers on the Labour Market BWP, 2015.
[62]
A. Saxena, J. Singh Saini, Y. Gupta, A. Parasuram, S. Iyengar et al.,
“Social network analysis of the caste-based reservation system in india,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03184, 2015.
[63]
R. B. Cairns, B. D. Cairns, H. J. Neckerman, S. Gest, and J.-L.
Gariepy, “Social networks and aggressive behavior: Peer support or peer
rejection?” Developmental Psychology, vol. 24, 11 1988, pp. 815–823.
[64]
R. Faris and D. Felmlee, “Status struggles: Network centrality and
gender segregation in same-and cross-gender aggression,” American
Sociological Review, vol. 76, no. 1, 2011, pp. 48–73.
[65]
J. M. Light, C. C. Greenan, J. C. Rusby, K. M. Nies, and T. A. B.
Snijders, “Onset to ﬁrst alcohol use in early adolescence: A network
diffusion model.” Journal of research on adolescence : the ofﬁcial
journal of the Society for Research on Adolescence, vol. 23, no. 3,
2013, pp. 487–499.
[66]
D. Osgood, D. T Ragan, L. Wallace, S. Gest, M. Feinberg, and
J. Moody, “Peers and the emergence of alcohol use: Inﬂuence and
selection processes in adolescent friendship networks,” Journal of
Research on Adolescence, vol. 23, no. 3, 2013, pp. 500–512.
[67]
S. D. Simpkins, D. R. Schaefer, C. D. Price, and A. E. Vest, “Adolescent
friendships, bmi, and physical activity: untangling selection and inﬂu-
ence through longitudinal social network analysis,” Journal of Research
on Adolescence, vol. 23, no. 3, 2013, pp. 537–549.
[68]
K. de la Haye, G. Robins, P. Mohr, and C. Wilson, “Adolescents’ intake
of junk food: Processes and mechanisms driving consumption similari-
ties among friends,” Journal of Research on Adolescence, vol. 23, no. 3,
2013, pp. 524–536.
[69]
T. A. Snijders, G. G. Van de Bunt, and C. E. Steglich, “Introduction to
stochastic actor-based models for network dynamics,” Social networks,
vol. 32, no. 1, 2010, pp. 44–60.
[70]
K. de la Haye, H. D Green, D. Kennedy, M. Pollard, and J. Tucker,
“Selection and inﬂuence mechanisms associated with marijuana initi-
ation and use in adolescent friendship networks,” Journal of Research
on Adolescence, vol. 23, no. 3, 2013, pp. 474–486.
[71]
D. J. Brass, K. D. Butterﬁeld, and B. C. Skaggs, “Relationships
and unethical behavior: A social network perspective,” Academy of
management review, vol. 23, no. 1, 1998, pp. 14–31.
[72]
P. A. Hutton, “Understanding student cheating and what educators can
do about it,” College Teaching, vol. 54, no. 1, 2006, pp. 171–176.
[73]
A. Topˆırceanu, “Breaking up friendships in exams: A case study for
minimizing student cheating in higher education using social network
analysis,” Computers & Education, vol. 115, 2017, pp. 171–187.
[74]
R. Gera, M. Isenhour, D. Bartolf, and S. Tick, “CHUNK:Curated
Heuristic Using a Network of Knowledge,” in The Fifth International
Conference on Human and Social Analytics.
HUSO, July 2019.
57
Copyright (c) The Government of DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

