Community Works: Predicting Changes in Community Resilience 
Alexandra Trani, C.J. Hutto, Dennis Folds, and Tom McDermott, 
Georgia Tech Research Institute 
Atlanta, Georgia 
e-mail: Alexandra.Trani@gtri.gatech.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Community resilience is a multidimensional 
concept that would be difficult if not impossible to measure with 
a single assessment. To capture this system-of-systems nature of 
community resilience, we argue that considerations of human 
and social capital must be included because humans are both the 
source of community resilience and the beneficiaries of it. We 
build on a data transformation method proposed by Hutto and 
colleagues [7] allowing researchers to create comprehensive 
measures of community resilience and its underlying social 
constructs (i.e., subjective well-being and objective standard of 
living). Using a combination of data simulation via probability 
sampling and confirmatory factor analysis, we demonstrate the 
impact of some future (conjectured) proposed legislation—e.g., 
governmentally provided self-driving cars as a public 
transportation alternative—on community resilience for three 
demographically defined communities: the elderly, the disabled, 
and all Americans of legal driving age (i.e., 16+) for each of the 
geographically bounded communities consisting of the 50 United 
States and the District of Columbia. 
Keywords-human capital modeling, social capital modeling, 
prediction, human capital investments, social capital investments, 
disability, self-driving cars, mass transit 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Community resiliency refers to a community’s ability to 
respond to threats and challenges, successfully adapt to 
changes, and prevent, mitigate, or recover from disasters [1]-
[4]. Rather than being a static construct, community 
resiliency emerges from the harmonic interaction of the 
quality of existing built infrastructure, the adequacy and 
efficiency of community emergency response services, and 
the human and social capital of residents [5][6]. Despite 
being vital to the measurement and prediction of community 
resilience, human capital—that is, the knowledge, skills, and 
attributes of residents that provide value to a community 
[8]—has been frequently overlooked by community 
resilience researchers and is often excluded from models of 
community resilience [8]. For models to capture the 
multidimensional system-of-systems nature of community 
resilience, we argue that human and social capital must be 
included because communities would simply not exist 
without human residents. 
An immediate obstacle preventing researchers from 
successfully integrating human and social capital into models 
of community resilience is the lack of a single, 
comprehensive measure of human and social capital that 
addresses all the necessary variables required to visualize and 
quantify the human and social side of resilience. It is unlikely 
that any single measure will ever be comprehensive enough 
to sufficiently capture human and social capital in a resiliency 
context [7]. Instead, we propose a data transformation 
technique that allows researchers and policy makers the 
option to transform and combine existing data from multiple 
sources into a single dataset that objectively assesses existing 
community resilience in a comprehensive and mutable way. 
We use this technique in the present paper to characterize 
existing community resilience as well as to predict the impact 
of future (conjectured) legislation—the availability of self-
driving cars—on different communities. Our technique 
allows researchers to reliably create extremely representative 
samples of a population quickly using as many variables as 
necessary to address important questions about human and 
social capital in a community resilience context. Because our 
technique does not rely on any one data source for 
information, researchers and policy makers can update 
models to include the most time-relevant population statistics 
with relatively little effort.  
We will briefly define the factors of human and social 
capital modeled in the present paper. Additionally, we will 
explain our data transformation technique so that researchers 
may begin immediately employing our method to improve 
models of community resilience. Finally, we will provide a 
hypothetical use-case about the impact of proposed 
legislation—the availability of governmentally provided self-
driving cars—on different communities in the United States.  
A. Crucial Factors of Human and Social Capital 
The most important first step of any community-based 
model is the definition of a community of interest. 
Communities can be defined by geographic identity such as 
geolocation or an attributed external border including town 
limits or people living within a common flood area. 
Communities can also be defined by the demographic 
attributes of their residents using personal identity (e.g., age, 
gender, ethnicity) and cultural identity (e.g., political and 
religious affiliation) to draw community boundaries.  
Once a community of interest is identified, researchers 
and policy makers must consider the general political climate 
(i.e., the extent that residents of a community trust and feel 
satisfied and secure with the government, and believe civil 
liberties are protected), the general economic climate (i.e., 
unemployment rates, economic growth, inflation, and gross 
domestic product per capita), and determine the variables 
important for measuring human capital for the present time 
[3]. Human and social capital variables can be split into two 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

main factors: subjective well-being and objective standard of 
living [2]. When included in the same model, subjective 
beliefs about quality of life can be assessed in relation to 
objective measures of standard of living illuminating resident 
biases and assessing the extent to which residents understand 
their present economic health [17]-[19].  
Subjective well-being is a latent factor representing the 
beliefs, emotions, and attitudes a resident maintains in 
regards to their life [9-10]. Subjective well-being can be 
further split into four separate sub-factors [2][11][12]: 
affective experiences, cognitive appraisals, global life 
judgments, and domain specific satisfaction. Variables 
related to affective experiences capture a resident’s trait 
affect regarding quality of life as well as personal factors 
including marital happiness. Variables related to cognitive 
appraisal capture resident opinions about their present 
socioeconomic status with respect to their ability to achieve 
life goals compared to other societal groups. Variables related 
to global life judgements capture the extent a person believes 
life is exciting as well as general beliefs about human nature. 
Finally, variables related to domain specific satisfaction 
capture the extent residents feel fulfilled and satisfied with 
life aspects such as career goals, family, and friendships. 
Building upon the data transformation techniques described 
in [7], we move beyond overly simplified measures of mood 
or satisfaction and assess subjective well-being as a 
multifaceted and complex construct.  
Standard of living is a latent factor assessing a resident’s 
objective access to present wealth, happiness, comfort, and 
material goods. At the national level, standard of living is 
frequently operationalized as gross domestic product (GDP) 
per capita. At the level of the resident or individual, standard 
of living can be split into two distinct sub-factors: quality of 
life and material wealth. Variables related to quality of life 
capture life expectancy, crime rates, environmental quality 
and living conditions, and resident’s access to goods and 
services. Variables capturing material wealth assess 
resident’s wages and income, net worth, cost of living, and 
wealth relative to neighbors. As standard of living increases, 
so too does subjective well-being [13]-[16].  
We extend Hutto et al.’s [7] model to include community 
engagement and social capital as further indicators of 
community resilience. Community engagement is a latent 
factor representing the extent that residents participate in 
activities, groups, and relationships within their community 
and with broader society [20][21]. People who are more 
engaged within the community tend to measure higher in 
subjective and objective health and well-being [22]. Social 
capital is a latent factor representing the frequency of 
interactions requiring trust and cooperation that occur within 
a community. These interactions are done for a common, 
public good rather than simple personal gain [23]-[26] and 
are typically operationalized through volunteer and charity 
work (e.g., the amount donated to charity organizations) as 
well as acts of social trust and kindness (e.g., giving up a seat 
on a bus for a stranger). Resilient communities tend to be 
higher in social capital because it allows for a willingness to 
help residents in emergency contexts [25] as well as a 
readiness for a community to adapt to change [22]. 
In combination, these social community resilience 
factors (e.g., human capital via subjective well-being and 
standard of living, 
social capital, and community 
engagement) provide extensive information about the 
socioeconomic context within which a community exists. 
The ability to comprehensively measure each of these factors 
provides policy makers and researchers with a better 
understanding of not only how aspects of a resident’s social 
and economic life impact community resilience but also the 
degree to which proposed changes in any given social 
variable will impact community health overall.  
B.  Our Community Data Simulation Technique 
Our community data simulation technique uses 
probability sampling to create a representative community of 
interest. Using this method, researchers can obtain and 
combine data from multiple relevant data sources to create 
the comprehensive and complex factors necessary to model 
community resilience. Upon creating a dataset consisting of 
both a representative sample and enough variables to 
adequately model the relevant community resilience factors, 
researchers are advised to test their assumptions using 
confirmatory factor analysis or structural equation modeling. 
Using these confirmatory methods, researchers will then be 
provided with factor loadings that can be used to create a 
series of weighted sums easily quantifying total community 
resilience. Once item and factor weights have been 
established for each variable and factor of interest, 
researchers 
can 
transform 
variables 
using 
criterion 
determined by suggested community changes. A new 
weighted sum would be created using the previously 
established item and factor weights as well as a combination 
of the unchanged variables and the transformed variables of 
interest. This new quantification of community resilience can 
be compared with previous community resilience to 
determine if suggested changes yielded meaningful increases 
in community resilience. Additionally, these results are 
readily transformed into visual aids to help researchers and 
policy makers communicate results. We will use the rest of 
the methods section to break down each step of this process. 
For more information on suggested factor creation, we 
encourage researchers to read Hutto et al.’s presentation for a 
complex and comprehensive structural equation model of 
community resilience [7].  
C. A hypothetical use-case for our data transformation 
technique 
To illustrate and motivate this research, we propose a 
hypothetical example of a government deciding whether to 
provide self-driving cars as an aid to national public transit 
services for people ages 16+. In the first scenario, self-driving 
cars would only be made available to people with disabilities. 
In the second scenario, self-driving cars would be provided 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

to both seniors—with and without disabilities—and people 
with disabilities. In scenario three, self-driving cars would be 
made publicly available to anyone aged 16+ regardless of 
disability status. As such, for the purpose of this paper, the 
communities of interest are defined in two ways: by specific 
demographic attributes (i.e., age and disability status), and by 
geographic boundaries (i.e., the 50 U.S. states and the District 
of Columbia). For the present paper, we focus on how 
proposed changes would impact community resilience as 
influenced by human and social capital specifically (rather 
than community resilience).  
II. METHODS 
We next decompose our community data simulation 
technique, step-by-step.  
Step 1. Identifying data sources and variables 
In the previous section, we defined the characteristics of 
communities of interest and proposed changes to the existing 
community structure. We now identify data sources 
containing either raw response data (i.e., the number of 
people who responded to a specific response option for a 
given variable) or probability data (i.e., the percent of people 
who fit within a certain socioeconomic criterion or who 
maintain a specific belief). To create the present dataset, we 
turned to polling sources including Pew and Gallup, the U.S. 
Census Bureau and American Fact Finder, and the General 
Social Survey.  
During this step, researchers may be tempted to exclude 
variables that aren’t directly relevant to proposed changes. 
We caution against this behavior. The only way that factors 
of interest can meet our criterion of being comprehensive, 
multidimensional, and representative is if they include the 
variables that adequately capture the construct of interest. Not 
all items may be related to proposed changes, however, all 
items should adequately, uniquely, and comprehensively 
represent their underlying factor. In this way, researchers can 
be more comfortable in assuming factors were not created in 
a way to bias findings to support or refute proposed changes.  
Step 2. Create a dataset using probability sampling 
Using the probabilities obtained in step 1, we next create 
a dataset of any size and with any number of potential 
variables by simulating data using probability sampling. 
Here, we select a variable (e.g., disability status), determine 
the categories of interest (e.g., disabled, not disabled), and 
use existing (verified) population percentages to set the 
probabilities that a person of a specific sociocultural criterion 
(e.g., race, sex, age, income, etc.) would be in a specific 
category. Using statistical software such as R’s “sample 
function”, this type of sampling can be performed with near 
infinite repetitions to generate a population sample of 
substantial size and extremely representative variability.  
 Step 3. Determining Factor Loadings for items and sub-
factors of interest 
With an adequate simulated community dataset in place, 
we next obtain item and factor loadings via confirmatory 
factor analysis or structural equation modeling. This is 
accomplished for all data items relevant to an underlying sub-
factor, and for all sub-factors related to a given higher-order 
factor. To complete this, categorical variables will need to be 
transformed into continuous variables using the method 
described by Hutto and colleagues [7]. The relationship 
between items and factors should be determined using 
theory—we used a proposed model of community resilience 
to guide our item/factor relationships [7].  
Step 4. Create weighted sums of sub-factors 
Because factor loadings represent the degree of 
association between items and their underlying factors, factor 
loadings represent an item or sub-factor’s weight in a 
weighted sum or factor score. While factor loadings will not 
be identical across datasets, similar communities should yield 
similar factor loadings if samples were created from accurate 
and representative statistics—especially if created using the 
same probabilities. Using factor loadings as item weights, we 
next create a series of weighted sums that, when combined, 
represent a quantification of community resilience—or 
human and social capital in the present paper. For example, 
we can now create a weighted sum using the factor loadings 
for items representing material wealth and quality of life 
separately. Using factor loadings for the material wealth and 
quality of life sub-factors, a weighted sum of standard of 
living can be obtained. Using factor loadings for standard of 
living and subjective well-being, a weighted sum of human 
and social capital can be obtained that will accurately 
represent underlying human and social capital for any given 
community. Factor loadings are obtained by performing a 
series of confirmatory factor analyses as described in step 3. 
Step 5. Create new variables representing changes in human 
and social capital  
Once item and factor weights are established, relevant 
variables can now be recoded per the criterion determined by 
our hypothetically proposed self-driving car legislation. For 
example, the availability of governmentally provided self-
driving cars in rural areas may allow disabled peoples without 
access to public transportation services the ability to obtain 
reliable and affordable transportation, and thus, seek and 
obtain job opportunities and healthcare services previously 
unobtainable due to distance. Thus, researchers can assume 
unemployment rates and commute times among disabled 
peoples may decrease while general health, income, and 
social group participation among disabled peoples may 
increase simply because adequate transportation has been 
made available.  
At this point, researchers may become concerned that 
transformations may over-exaggerate the impact of proposed 
changes in legislation. This is a valid fear. We suggest two 
methods to address this fear. First, researchers should use 
existing research as well as sound logic to guide assumptions 
made a-priori about the variables selected for transformation 
and change criterion while avoiding the temptation to change 
all variables or to alter change criterion after the fact. This 
helps to ensure that only relevant variables are transformed 
to be both reliable and objective. Second, researchers should 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

test for the impact of multiple scenarios with different change 
criterion established a-priori to account for small, medium, 
and large effects. For example, the present paper accounts for 
small changes in commute times (commute times for people 
taking public transit reduced by ten minutes), medium 
changes in commute times (commute times for people taking 
public transit reduced by 20 minutes) and large changes in 
commute times (commute times for people taking public 
transit reduced by 30 minutes) to create better models for how 
communities may change assuming different goals are met.  
Step 6. Test that changes in human and social capital are 
significant and then model the changes 
We next apply statistical techniques to test the extent that 
proposed changes have a significant and meaningful impact 
on community resilience—or, in our case, human and social 
capital. This method allows results to be readily represented 
by visual aids for easy communication to any audience. For 
communities defined in terms of geographic boundaries, we 
use choropleth maps to visualize changes in data values using 
easy-to-see differences in color across a region of interest.  
A. Present study 
For each state in the United States and the District of 
Columbia, using a deterministic draw of 1000 females and 
1000 males, we simulate an age, ethnicity, and disability 
representative community. Extending the model developed 
by Hutto and colleagues [7], we next incorporate more than 
100 variables thought to represent community resilience, 
including variables related to human and social capital. These 
variables are drawn from myriad data sources as previously 
described, and constrained to the years 2000-2016 (for the 
General Social Survey and Census data), or the most recent 
published public dataset available. 
We hypothesized that impacts of government-subsidized 
self-driving cars on social aspects of community resilience 
may be small, average, or widespread. For demonstration 
purposes we apply deterministic “what-if” modeling and 
simulation using single-point estimates – based on a 
combination of inductive reasoning and empirically informed 
heuristics – for each level of impact. Small impacts were 
operationalized in our model by a single unit of increase for 
directly relevant variables – that is, for example, people may 
move from “Very Dissatisfied” to merely “Dissatisfied” with 
their present commute times. In the average impact scenario, 
variables directly related to transit (e.g., commute 
time/satisfaction and group attendance) would increase by 
two units while other, more indirect measures that may 
increase because of readily available and easily accessible 
transit (e.g., the confidence that a person could find a job as 
good as the one they presently have) would increase by a 
single unit. In the widespread impact condition, variables 
directly related to transportation were increased by three units 
(or until a person hit maximum satisfaction), variables that 
improve as an indirect result of the availability of new forms 
of mass transit were increased by two units, and general 
measures of satisfaction were increased by a single unit.  
To investigate the effect on broader community 
resilience via impacts to human and social capital, these 
simulated impacts were applied to each scenario of interest—
e.g., providing government-subsidized transportation using 
self-driving cars to either 1) the disabled community alone, 
2) the combined communities of disabled and elderly, or 3) 
to all Americans age 16 and above. If, when compared to no 
change in mass transit availability, the impact was 
significantly different, then proposed legislation would be 
considered “effective”.  
III. RESULTS AND LIMITATIONS 
In the first scenario, we wanted to see the impact of 
governmentally provided self-driving cars on disabled people 
in America. To accomplish this, we selected variables related 
to the social aspects of community resilience that were likely 
to be influenced when disabled people are suddenly able to 
travel greater distances in areas where public transportation 
or cost effective methods of transit were not previously 
available. Fig. 1 demonstrates predicted changes in 
community resilience for each projection. Specifically, we 
show projected changes in community resilience for three 
populations (disabled, disabled and older adults, all drivers) 
in three different scenarios (small, average, and widespread 
change). Maps demonstrate linear transformations as 
projected community resilience increases within population 
for each scenario. All nine projections significantly improved 
community resilience from baseline predicted values. 
Governmentally provided self-driving cars improved 
community resilience in disabled populations compared to 
the baseline predicted value of 107.21 (S.D.=3.04). Small 
scenarios improved community resilience by 17.03 points 
(t(50)=40.5, p < 0.05). Average scenarios improved 
community resilience by 51.03 points (t(50)=121.34, p < 
0.05). Widespread scenarios improved community resilience 
by 91.03 points (t(50)=216.45, p < 0.05). 
In the second scenario, we wanted to see the impact of 
governmentally provided cars on both disabled as well as 
elderly adult populations across America. There was a 
significant improvement in community resilience compared 
to baseline. Small scenarios improved community resilience 
by 14.76 points (t(50)=34.47, p < 0.05). Average scenarios 
improved 
community 
resilience 
by 
40.76 
points 
(t(50)=95.19, p < 0.05). Widespread scenarios improved 
community resilience by 75.76 points (t(50)=176.93, p < 
0.05).  
In the third scenario, we wanted to predict the change in 
community resilience associated with all Americans of legal 
driving age (i.e., 16+) having access to self-driving cars as a 
mass-transit alternative. The availability of this form of mass 
transportation had sweeping positive impacts on community 
resilience even in the small change conditions when 
compared to baseline. Small scenarios improved community 
resilience by 18 points (t(50)=42.35, p < 0.05). Average 
scenarios improved community resilience by 51 points 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(t(50)=119.98, p < 0.05). Widespread scenarios improved 
community resilience by 92 points (t(50)=216.43, p < 0.05). 
We did not weigh the sample size drawn from each state, 
thus, sparsely populated states like Alaska had the same 
number of people in our sample as densely populated states 
such as California because we did not weight the number of 
people selected from each state based on state population. 
Despite this, our sample was created to be as representative 
as possible and was rather large (2000 people per state) so we 
do not believe that weighting our sample size would influence 
our findings beyond the point of relevancy.  
This method presents a viable series of predictions of 
what could happen when public policy aimed at improving 
community resilience is implemented into a given 
community. The next logical step in our research is to attempt 
to validate our prediction models and improve our data 
simulations and transformations using real-world data. For 
this to happen, researchers must coordinate with policy 
makers to predict the impact of proposed changes before they 
are implemented and, once implemented, compare prediction 
to real-world changes in community resilience. This is a 
crucial step in advancing community resilience research and 
it is one that, to our knowledge, has yet to be attempted. In 
the interim, we encourage researchers to set multiple a-priori 
criterion levels (e.g., small, average, and widespread impact 
predictions) to account for a range of possible outcomes. We 
caution researchers against including only those variables in 
a prediction model that would change based on proposed 
policy, and instead, argue for including a wide range of 
variables that best represent their underlying factor. We also 
emphasize that decisions to alter variables should be based on 
experience and supporting evidence in the literature. 
Adopting this approach should improve predictions and help 
to keep objectivity while the present method is tested.  
IV. CONCLUSION 
Community resilience is a multidimensional process that 
emerges from the successful interaction of multiple systems 
including built infrastructure, community services, and 
human and social capital. We present a data transformation 
technique that allows researchers to combine information 
from multiple data sources into a single, comprehensive 
measure of community resilience (or any system from which 
community resilience arises).  
Our data transformation method involves simulating 
data through probability sampling, creating weighted sums, 
and testing for change values. Using three hypothetical 
scenarios, we demonstrate the efficacy of our method by 
demonstrating the impact of governmentally provided self-
driving cars on human and social capital within communities 
across America. Results can be readily transformed into 
visual aids including choropleth maps.  
Our method addresses many concerns about the sparsity 
of survey data and the lack of a cohesive measure of 
community resilience and its underlying systems using 
perfectly representative population samples with extremely 
large Ns. Additionally, our method is inexpensive and 
expedient, allowing for researchers and policy makers to 
quickly test the impact of proposed legislation on 
communities of interest without the administration of a 
separate measure or survey. Finally, our method is mutable 
allowing models of community resilience to rapidly change 
in response to changes in socioeconomic climates. Together, 
we believe this method represents the first step in next 
generation prediction of community resilience and its 
underlying systems. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R.S. Burt, Structural holes: The social structure of competition. 
Harvard university press, 2009. 
[2] D. J. Folds, “A notional model of creation, maintenance, and 
enrichment of human capital,” Presented at the 6th International 
Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics (AHFE), 
2015. 
[3] D.J. Folds and V.M. Thompson, "Engineering human capital: A 
system of systems modeling approach." System of Systems 
Engineering (SoSE), 2013 8th International Conference on. IEEE, 
2013. 
[4] G. Windle, "What is resilience? A review and concept analysis." 
Reviews in Clinical Gerontology 21.02 (2011): 152-169. 
[5] T. McDermott et al., "A human-focused, holistic model of 
community resilience." INSIGHT 19.4 (2016): 66-69. 
[6] G. S. Becker, Human capital revisited. In Human Capital: A 
Theoretical and Empirical Analysis with Special Reference to 
Education (3rd Edition) (pp. 15-28). The University of Chicago 
Press, 1994 
[7] C.J. Hutto, A. Trani, E. Williams, H.S. Shim, D.J. Folds, T. 
Mcdermott, and M. Nadolski, “The social side of community 
resilience”. HUSO, 2017. 
[8] J. Mincer, "The distribution of labor incomes: a survey with 
special reference to the human capital approach." Journal of 
Economic Literature 8.1 (1970): 1-26. 
[9] F.M. Andrews and J. P. Robinson, "Measures of subjective well-
being." Measures of personality and social psychological attitudes 
1 (1991): 61-114. 
[10] E. Diener, S. Oishi, and R. E. Lucas, "Personality, culture, and 
subjective well-being: Emotional and cognitive evaluations of life." 
Annual review of psychology 54.1 (2003): 403-425. 
[11] E. Diener, "Assessing subjective well-being: Progress and 
opportunities." Social indicators research 31.2 (1994): 103-157. 
[12] E. Diener, S. Oishi, and R. E. Lucas. "Subjective well-being: 
The science of happiness and life satisfaction." Oxford handbook of 
positive psychology 2 (2009): 187-194. 
[13] M. Blaxter, Health and lifestyles. Routledge, 2003. 
[14] D.G. Blazer et al, "The prevalence and distribution of major 
depression in a national community sample: the National 
Comorbidity Survey." (1994). 
[15] S. Weich, G. Lewis, and S. P. Jenkins, "Income inequality and 
the prevalence of common mental disorders in Britain." The British 
Journal of Psychiatry 178.3 (2001): 222-227. 
[16] D. P. Goldberg, and P. Huxley, Common mental disorders: a 
bio-social model. Tavistock/Routledge, 1992. 
[17] E. Angner, "The politics of happiness: subjective vs. economic 
measures as measures of social well-being." (2008). 
[18] E. Diener and M.EP Seligman, "Very happy people." 
Psychological science 13.1 (2002): 81-84. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[19] D. Kahneman et al, "Toward national well-being accounts." 
The American Economic Review 94.2 (2004): 429-434. 
[20] B. A. Pescosolido, J. D. McLeod, and W. R. Avison. "Through 
the looking glass: the fortunes of the sociology of mental health." 
Mental health, social mirror. Springer US, 2007. 3-32. 
[21] T. R. Prohaska, L. A. Anderson, and R. H. Binstock. Public 
health for an aging society. JHU Press, 2012. 
[22] W.N. Adger, "Social capital, collective action, and adaptation 
to climate change." Economic geography 79.4 (2003): 387-404. 
[23] J. S. Coleman, (1994). Foundations of social theory. Belknap 
Press of Harvard University Press. 
[23] R. R. Dynes, “Social Capital: Dealing With Community 
Emergencies,” Homeland Security Affairs, 2(3), 2006 
[24] Y. Nakagawa, and R. Shaw, “Social Capital: A Missing Link 
to Disaster Recovery,” International Journal of Mass Emergencies 
and Disasters, 22(1), 5–34, 2004 
[25] B. Wellman and S. Wortley, “Different Strokes from Different 
Folks: Community Ties and Social Support.” American Journal of 
Sociology, 96(3), 558–588, 1990 
[26] C.J. Hutto, “Blending quantitative, qualitative, geospatial, and 
temporal data: Progressing towards the next generation of human 
social analytics”. HUSO, 2016.  
 
 
Figure 1. Predicted changes in community resilience:   
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

