The Lightweight Smart City and Biases in Repurposed Big Data  
Christian Voigt  
Technology & Knowledge   
Centre for Social Innovation  
Vienna, Austria 
voigt@zsi.at 
Jonathan Bright 
Oxford Internet Institute 
University of Oxford 
Oxford, UK 
jonathan.bright@oii.ox.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract— This paper addresses the implications of 'big data' 
on the smart city paradigm. In addition to grids of sensors to 
track traffic flows or monitor service delivery, urban govern-
ments around the world are starting to experiment with re-
purposing stores of data collected by third parties: using mo-
bile phone data to track movement or social media to identify 
failing services. The use of this type of data has considerable 
potential to both augment the existing smart city vision and to 
spread it out to small and medium sized cities that are unable 
to afford investment in sensor grids, creating what we call a 
“lightweight” version of the smart city. However, it also im-
plies a number of problems which previously smart cities were 
less prone to. After defining the lightweight smart city this 
paper reviews these challenges, mainly in the area of interpre-
tation biases, before offering pointers to potential remedies and 
solutions.   
Keywords- Smart City; Big Data; Interpretation Biases. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Urban policymakers and planners are increasingly chal-
lenged by the scarcity of relevant and intelligible data,  
available in the policymaking contexts, particularly with the 
increased interest in accountability and transparency. The 
movement towards “smart cities” has often been presented as 
a way of fixing these problems. The smart city vision sees, as 
Kitchin puts it, “pervasive and ubiquitous computing and 
digitally instrumented devices built into the very fabric of 
urban environments” [1]. These devices promise a step 
change in the amount of data available to policymakers, and 
their corresponding ability to both create policy and respond 
to changing situations.  
However, the smart city movement has been recently at-
tracting more skepticism, for a variety of reasons. Some re-
ports have highlighted the high up-front costs of installing 
large sensor grids, which in many cases seem to have been 
allied to relatively low returns [2]. These costs have also 
meant that, rather than spreading throughout the world, smart 
city technology is largely limited to a few urban megacities 
and one off projects, such as Songdo in South Korea and 
Masdar in Abu Dhabi. Furthermore, smart cities have been 
strongly criticized for promoting technological lock-in, by 
encouraging cities to sign large scale contracts with the IT 
services firms providing the infrastructure [1] [3], another 
factor which discourages investment on the part of govern-
ments. Finally, a variety of reports have critiqued the under-
lying focus of smart cities on business and enterprise, at the 
expense of other more progressive goals [4]. In this context, 
it is interesting to note the growing enthusiasm for “big data” 
within the smart cities movement. Big data is a concept 
which has attracted a variety of definitions [5], but for our 
purposes the key characteristic is that at least part of the def-
inition involves a move to creatively repurpose large stores 
of data which have been created as a by-product of another 
social activity; for example, the use of Google query patterns 
to detect flu outbreaks [6], or Wikipedia search data to pre-
dict electoral outcomes [7] [8]. Big data are being drawn into 
a huge variety of fields and being used for a wide variety of 
different purposes. However, their use in the field of smart 
cities is particularly interesting: by offering the promise of 
relatively cheap, already collected data, they seem to provide 
a possibility for the smart city vision to break through some 
of the financial and technological barriers which currently 
impede it, and start being implemented around the world.  
Our paper assumes a distinct social science perspective, 
as we focus on the societal implications that come with such 
a fundamental change in urban governance as the use of big 
data. Big data is effectively hailed as a game changer, turn-
ing classic hypothetico-deductive research into inductive 
analyses of big data [9]. Such grandiose statements try to 
establish a market for big data technologies from public, 
private-sector companies, such as IBM, Google, Facebook or 
Twitter. What is needed though, and increasingly delivered 
[10] [11], is a critical reflection on the inclusiveness of 'smart 
city' benefits, as well as a discussion of possible unintended 
effects, such as future dependencies in terms of data or tech-
nology lock-ins. It is useful to remember that cities have 
been trying to be 'data smart' before, e.g., using predictive 
computational models to address complex problems includ-
ing city safety and public health in the 1960s [12].  But, as 
pointed out by Shelton et al. [11], "the fact that similar dis-
courses are uncritically recycled by contemporary propo-
nents of the smart city is troubling". The main aim of this 
article is to remedy this deficit, by discussing the potential 
implications of using repurposed big data in terms of infor-
mation quality and potential interpretation biases. Its struc-
ture is guided by the following questions and thoughts: 
• 
What difference could big data make in addressing 
some of the barriers to smart city adoption?  We se-
lect prominent examples of smart city technologies 
and examine their potential from a social science 
perspective. On the basis of this discussion, we de-
velop the concept of the “lightweight” smart city.  
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

• 
What challenges might come with repurposed 'big 
data'? To avoid the trap of replacing old problems 
with new ones, we discuss some of the inherent chal-
lenges of governing cities by 'big data'.  
• 
We conclude by opening up the discussion, suggest-
ing a number of supportive activities, which make 
smart city services more accessible to an increasing 
number of cities and citizens.   
The paper is organized as follows: section 2 introduces 
possible application scenarios for big data in smart cities. 
Then, section 3 gives an overview of known interpretation 
biases and their implications for lightweight smart cities. 
Finally, section 4 concludes with a discussion of measures 
to remedy distorting effects of interpretation biases and  
additional research needed.  
II. 
HOW REPURPOSED BIG DATA AFFECTS THE SMART 
CITY VISION 
As we describe above, using big data to drive smart cities 
involves enriching the vision (as described in [1]) of urban 
government using data provided by ubiquitous computing 
and sensor grids with the option of urban government mak-
ing use of repurposed data coming from third parties, such as 
mobile phone companies and social media outlets [55]. In 
this section, we discuss the principal benefits of this move.  
The discussion is divided into three sections. First, we look 
at areas where repurposed big data can replace data generat-
ed by sensor grids. Second, we look at the use of big data to 
augment smart city technology (rather than replacing it), by 
optimizing the deployment of scarce resources and by 
providing new types of information. We conclude by arguing 
that big data offers the potential to provide a “lightweight” 
version of the smart city, which could potentially open up the 
smart city movement to a far greater range of cities, being 
less of a burden to already strained city budgets. 
A. Sidestepping smart city sensor grids 
The first way in which big data can support the smart city 
vision is in providing the potential for cheap data collection 
which does not require the installation of large scale sensor 
grids. Co-opting data from companies with stores of big data, 
such as mobile phone operators and social media providers is 
of course not cost free: license fees may need to be pur-
chased, computing infrastructure may need to be set up to 
host the data, and skilled staff may be required to collect and 
process it.  An example of this is provided by a recently 
completed collaborative study between Google and tw Neth-
erlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Researchin Am-
sterdam [13]. They analyzed the extent to which anonymized 
urban mobility data from their Android mobile phone plat-
form could be used to replace traffic sensor data on a 10 kil-
ometer long stretch of highway. The results showed that the 
mobile phone data could duplicate the data provided by the 
sensors with high accuracy, “potentially saving €50,000 Euro 
per year [on that 10 km stretch of road alone] if the redun-
dant sensors were removed”. The potentially cheaper nature 
of data collection is allied to a second benefit, which is po-
tential ease of implementation. To give an example of this, 
consider two different approaches to automatic failure detec-
tion in street lights, one found in Los Angeles and the other 
in the small town of Jun in Spain (which has just a few thou-
sand inhabitants). Los Angeles has recently started rolling 
out smart LED street lighting along 4,500 miles of roads 
[14]. These lights communicate automatically with the bu-
reau of street lighting, letting them know in particular if they 
are broken. This could be considered a classic implementa-
tion of part of the “smart city” vision: elements of the city 
themselves are able to communicate with government. The 
town of Jun, by contrast, has no such smart street lighting. 
However, what they have instead is a centralized effort to 
place the entire town on Twitter: everyone in city govern-
ment and the vast majority of the residents have a Twitter 
account, and citizens are encouraged to interact with the 
government through this platform. The Huffington post gives 
an example of the way this works in practice [15], highlight-
ing a case where a citizen noticed a streetlight had gone out, 
and sent a tweet to the mayor about the issue. The mayor 
responded that it will be fixed, with the Twitter handle of the 
engineer responsible also included, who himself tweeted the 
day after to notify that the streetlight had been fixed. Jun, in 
other words, have a kind of crowdsourced “smart” streetlight 
system [16] [17], with very rapid notification coming from 
citizens themselves.  
B. Augmenting smart cities by optimizing resources and 
providing new data 
Of course, there are many areas where repurposed big da-
ta will not be complete enough or accurate enough to fully 
replace smart city technology (or indeed parts of already 
existing government). However, in these cases, big data 
might still have a role to play in terms of optimising re-
sources. For example, TomTom has recently started co-
operating with Dutch police authorities, selling information 
about driver velocity from its Global Positioning System 
(GPS) tracking devices [18]. This information could not be 
used to directly convict people of speeding, both because it 
likely does not have the required degree of accuracy and also 
because of the concern TomTom itself would have to protect 
the privacy of its consumers. However, the authorities made 
use of the aggregate data to find the areas where speeding 
was most likely to occur, and then placed their mobile traffic 
cameras at these locations. In this case, big data does not 
replace the sensor grid, but rather augments it. Another ex-
ample of this comes from the Mayor’s Office of Data Ana-
lytics in New York [19]. One of the early successful projects 
this office worked on was a way to target restaurants which 
were illegally disposing of cooking oil into the city’s sewers, 
something which was responsible for a considerable amount 
of blockages in the sewer system. The office compared data 
on restaurants which did not have an official oil disposal 
system with geographic information on sewer locations and 
blockages, in order to identify likely suspects of illegal 
dumping. These suspects were then visited by inspectors. 
Again, what this example shows is that this kind of big data 
technique does not replace existing information capture 
techniques used by cities. Rather, it augments them, allowing 
them to be directed more accurately and efficiently. Fur-
thermore, there are also areas where big data driven smart 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

cities go beyond its sensor driven counterpart. To character-
ize broadly, automatic sensors can be roughly classified into 
one of two types [20]–[22]. First there are sensors, which 
measure and report on characteristics of the physical envi-
ronment, such as heat, light, the composition of the atmos-
phere, or the presence of physical objects. These types of 
sensors could, in a smart city context, provide real time indi-
cations of pollution, or measure water levels to check for 
flooding risks, automatically detect faults in lighting net-
works, etc. Second, there are sensors which not only report 
on the environment but try and capture data on the character-
istics or behavior of people. However, there are still a great 
deal of policy relevant pieces of information smart city sen-
sors cannot collect (i.e., which fall outside of these two types 
of sensor). This is where repurposed big data offers a chance 
to go further. For example, health problems are a key area of 
concern for policy makers. As is by now well known, 
Google has shown that it is capable of characterizing the size 
and duration of flu outbreaks from its search data [23], a 
result which has recently been extended to Wikipedia [24]; 
as well as other types of disease, such as dengue fever [25]. 
Another example would be the opinions and thoughts of citi-
zens themselves on policy relevant topics, which a number 
of recent reports have flagged up as a potential source of 
information on policy specific topics, such as changes to a 
city's public transport system or opening a new shopping 
center [26] [27]. These examples demonstrate that big data 
offers a potential window into types of data which sensor 
driven smart cities could never hope to provide. 
C. Towards a lightweight smart city? 
In the terms that we have described them above, repur-
posed big data offers the potential for the implementation of 
a kind of “lightweight” version of the smart city. A light-
weight smart city, based on repurposed big data, is like 
lightweight software in many respects. It is relatively cheap 
and easy to get going, requiring little special technological 
infrastructure to start up. Lightweight software is developed 
in order to increase the potential user base of the software: 
by making it easier to install and use, more people may take 
it up. Lightweight smart cities have similar potential conse-
quences, potentially dramatically expanding the number of 
cities which can engage in “smart” programs. Thus far, al-
most all examples of smart city work come from large and 
economically powerful cities: in the UAE, in Singapore, in 
the US, in South Korea. These cities possess an obvious ad-
vantage for smart city work, which is that they have consid-
erable budgets which can be put in to the creation of sensor 
grids. Small and medium scale cities are effectively shut out 
of the process. However, while offering much potential 
promise, the lightweight city also has an inherent potential 
challenge: the data being used within the city is no longer 
created or even owned by the city itself.  
III. 
POTENTIAL BIASES IN BIG DATA FOR LIGHTWEIGHT 
SMART CITIES 
 In this section, we will move on to consider some of the 
challenges that a big data driven smart city faces, framed 
around the concept of bias. First off, we need to 
acknowledge that there is no agreed canon of terms and 
technologies, which constitute the 'smart cities' label. Hence, 
many criticisms to smart cities could possibly be discarded 
with reference to a different understanding of 'big' or 'smart' 
[9]. Smart city proponents claim that being empowered by 
new technologies (sensor enabled cars and streets, metered 
energy and water supply or people always connected and 
always tracked), governance is revolutionized, becoming 
more inclusive, performative and efficient [28]. Underlying 
these claims is a new paradigm of data-driven transparency 
or as New York's mayor Bloomberg is quoted "In God we 
trust. Everyone else, bring data." [29].  Although big data is 
probably as fuzzy a concept as smart city; the five Vs includ-
ing volume, variety, velocity, veracity and value commonly 
describe big data [30]. Initially, there were only 3 Vs (vol-
ume, variety, velocity) and when the primarily technological 
challenges were solved, veracity and value was needed to 
justify the substantial investments made by smart cities [31]. 
However, we will argue that interpreting big data correctly 
and extracting value might be less straightforward than what 
we think. Biasing effects are a known phenomenon in infor-
mation systems research, see [32] for a systematic overview. 
In general cognitive biases are not inherently detrimental to 
human judgment and decision making. Information filters, 
i.e., biasing the available information by not paying equal 
attention to all sources, are necessary mechanisms to deal 
with the constant influx of potentially useful data urban deci-
sion makers experience on a daily basis. Yet, Kahneman and 
Tversky showed that these filters are not always applied on a 
consistent and rational basis [33]. Depending on its presenta-
tion, the same data is perceived important or not (framing 
bias); similarly, data that is linked to recent events is more 
likely to influence people's decision making than data which 
is known to be important but has not had any recent appear-
ance (recency bias). Hence, even though big data applica-
tions are meant to process vast amounts of heterogeneous 
data, this does not mean that biasing effects in designing and 
interpreting big data analyses would disappear. Jagadish [30] 
addresses a number of myths about big data including the 
misconception that big data automatically produces deep 
insights, without a need for theories. Multiple decisions are 
made, before big data analyses produce results. Following 
the big data life-cycle [30], these decisions concern acquisi-
tion, cleaning, aggregation, modeling and interpretation of 
data, decisions which in turn influence content, consistency 
and comprehensiveness of big data. However, the degree of 
comprehensiveness or consistency that can be realistically 
expected, depends on the problems big data analyses are 
applied to [34].  The following sections explore some exam-
ples of interpretation biases of mostly social media related 
big data. 
A. Selection bias: How inclusive are the data sources?      
Even though big data is generally said to be on the raise, 
access to big data might still hamper widespread analysis and 
research. Hence, the type of data cities might repurpose for 
their own uses can be limited. For example, control over the 
use of available data from most social media websites is re-
stricted by service providers' business models, wherefore 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

accessing large quantities tends to be either impossible or 
costly. An exception is Twitter, which allows users to access 
large parts of their historical data. Depending on the Twitter 
API (e.g., Twitter's freely available search or streaming 
APIs, or Twitter's commercial Firehose service) and the type 
of information requested, different amounts of Tweets can be 
acquired, ranging from tenth of thousand to several millions 
of tweets [35]. The availability of Twitter data has led to a 
number of studies investigating the use of Twitter as proxy 
for urban life or events impacting urban life. Nonetheless, 
prominent examples of Twitter's influence, such as the Arab 
Spring, the Obama elections or the Occupy Wall-street 
Movement, are often criticized due to a lack of systematic 
and more nuanced research [36]. Being aware of selection 
biases, we need to ask what a given set of big data is repre-
senting or suppressing, and whether our inferential claims 
are justified. For example, Arribas-Bel et al. [37] monitored 
geo-located Twitter activities (on average 1% of all tweets 
are geo-tagged) in order to understand activity levels in spe-
cific neighborhoods. The authors could show that activities 
in the virtual world of Tweets reflected expected behaviors 
as suggested by land use specifications (office space, resi-
dential area, tourism and leisure). In this instance, non-
probabilistic sampling had been applied without drawing 
mistaken conclusions. However, there are questions about 
the inclusiveness of smart city data and their ability to repre-
sent elderly and economically isolated citizens [38]. Of-
fenhuber reminds us that what citizens expect from smart 
cities is likely to be different depending on citizens' socio-
economic status [39]. Citing the example of Boston where 
less affluent neighborhoods reported significantly less city 
maintenance issues through digital channels than areas that 
were better off. Offenhuber showed that there was not a lack 
of needs that prevented citizens from reporting more mainte-
nance issues, but a mix of digital divide effect as well as a 
discomfort with calling on those who are accountable for city 
maintenance.  
B. Attentional bias: Are causations claimed where there 
are none?  
Whereas the neighborhoods analysis above discussed the 
issue of social media's representativeness of groups and ac-
tivities in the physical city, Tufekci [40] highlights another 
issue which concerns the validity of conclusions drawn. 
Tufekci was observing social media used around Turkey's 
Gezi Park protests, exemplified by the use of the #jan25 
hashtag. A frequency count over time showed a significant 
decline of the hashtag's use during June 2013. Concluding 
that the actual protest was declining in June, however, would 
have been far from correct, the topic became just so domi-
nant that the hashtag was almost superfluous and was used 
less. This example is to illustrate that any data driven analy-
sis might have blind spots, wherefore a theory is still needed, 
even though some big data proponents predict the end of 
theory as correlation supersedes causation [41]. The issue is 
magnified since with ever larger data sets, the likelihood of 
getting statistically significant results increases, leading to a 
proliferation of claims based on data patterns unrelated to the 
real world [42], also known as clustering illusion or the Tex-
as sharpshooter fallacy [43]. 
C. Framing bias: Does data interpretation reflect data 
collection? 
There is often an unstated assumption that 'hard' data is 
objective. Yet the matter of data is a matter of interpretation. 
Wilson [44] differentiates between the factual, representative 
side of data and its imaginative, urban-political side. In fact, 
as shown by the author, data can be used for diametrically 
opposed purposes. For example, citizens geo-mapped urban 
aspects, such as potholes or graffiti, which were simultane-
ously used to inform city officials about needed repairs as 
well as feeding into a 'desirable cities ranking' [44]. Clearly, 
whereas very active mapping would potentially lead to im-
provements of the build environment, it could also negative-
ly impact the city's ranking and consequently the city's at-
tractiveness for investors or a neighborhood’s development 
prospects. Framing biases are also closely related to our as-
sumptions about the nature of urban governance problems 
and the role scientific management and smart technologies 
can play. Criticism of prevalent  'Command-and-control' 
structures of   IT-aided urban management in the 60s, high-
lighted already the inadequacy of cybernetic  feedback loops, 
based on sensors, change actuators and controllers [45].  
Goodspeed provides the example of urban renewal and free-
way constructions and describes the situation as a wicked 
problem, one that has multiple, competing descriptions and 
where the solution requires value judgment and taking sides 
(i.e., land use decisions might create jobs and displace people 
at the same time) [45]. Clearly, there is no overriding single 
value that can be evoked in order to consent on the best deci-
sion. Hence, in such situations hard collective decisions need 
to precede the use of big data. The consideration of complex 
second and third order consequences cannot be delegated to 
big data if transparent decision making is a firm objective of 
smart cities. 
D. Information bias: Are some data more convenient than 
others?  
Information bias refers to the unwarranted over-
interpretation of data; either through the way we classify, 
match and display data [46] or through including irrelevant 
data into their decision making  and gain confidence where 
caution might be in order [33]. The classic example for the 
latter is Tversky and Kahneman's experiment of people as-
cribing jobs or study results to descriptions of people, con-
taining little or no relevant information with regards to the 
question. The authors found that stereotypes, such as the 
clothing of librarians or a high degree of internal consistency 
of an in other ways completely irrelevant description of a 
person influenced people's confidence in their judgment con-
siderably. Information bias can become a serious issue, when 
we think about predictive policing and the use of big data in 
law enforcement.  New York City alone has 3,000 public 
surveillance cameras, 200 automatic license plate readers, 
2,000 belt-mounted radiation sensors and diverse police da-
tabases [47]. This sensor driven city is then analyzed to iden-
tify high risk areas based on past crimes, but also circum-
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

stantial factors, such as text-mined tweets or Facebook post-
ings related to specific areas [47]. As a consequence, these 
areas receive more police attention. Could big crime data 
replace human judgment in determining situations of reason-
able suspicion, which would then lead to further investiga-
tions? Predicting citizens' behavior based on big data might 
represent a new privacy challenge, but as commented in [42], 
observational data are mostly generated and analyzed with-
out citizens' knowledge and in public or open online spaces, 
where there is no right to be let alone.  While privacy advo-
cates call for a proper due process that ensures the right to be 
informed about how big data adjudicated a given course of 
action (police, land use permission, etc.) [48], others demand 
a more equitable distribution of riches made from user-
generated content [42]. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION  
The smart city debate used to be about performance and 
competitiveness. Now we can arguably see a more inclusive 
debate emerge, addressing the reality of many small and me-
dium-sized cities not being able to offer broadband in all city 
areas (let alone installing expensive sensor networks moni-
toring street lightening). Repurposed big data provides the 
potential for these cities to also innovate in the smart city 
debate. However, as shown in the previous section on biases, 
the lightweight smart city does not become automatically 
more inclusive by relying on smartphones and social media, 
mainly because these technologies are not equally distributed 
or used across all social groups. Still we think the benefits of 
the lightweight smart city outweigh the risks of biased inter-
pretations. Being aware of the difference between data pur-
posefully collected for urban management and repurposed, 
often social media-driven 'big data' is a first step to mitigate 
harmful effects of interpretation biases. Possibly biased  data 
were also used prior to the raise of 'big data'. Simplified 
models of complex socio-economic systems can be as mis-
guiding as uncritically following big data analyses. What is 
needed are dynamic interpretation and sense-making pro-
cesses, that can supplement - rather than replace - urban 
management relying on traditional data sources, such as sur-
veys, neighborhood meetings or purposeful observations. For 
repurposed 'big data' to be integrated successfully, urban 
management processes need to adhere to the proven princi-
ples of transparency and stakeholder participation.  
Transparency. Early examples of master-planned cities 
have mostly reflected normative assumptions about 'good 
citizenship' [49], when in fact a substantial body of literature 
suggests that cities thrive on spontaneous encounters be-
tween people from all walks of life generating a collective 
creativity, which might get lost if people feel trapped in a 
virtual panopticon. Hence, cities need to be transparent about 
the data they collect and in what sense this data is repur-
posed. Even though reducing the opaqueness big data analyt-
ics (e.g., through required consultation and approval steps) 
can undo the efficiency gains also pursued by big data ana-
lytics [50]. Yet, more important than efficiency is the fair-
ness of decisions - with or without the use of 'big data' -, 
wherefore citizens need a due process to question big data 
logic and, if necessary, police any unfair discrimination [51].   
Participation. Greenfield smart city projects have shown 
that cities cannot be designed with technologies alone, smart 
cities understood as socio-technical challenges need socially 
rich innovation system, that enable learning, iterative exper-
imentation and progressive social embedding of new tech-
nologies with existing stakeholders [49].  
Limitations and future work. So far the paper has not 
covered a number of trends, such as the decreasing cost of 
sensors and wireless networking which avoids costly cabling 
[52]. Also, the emerging 'maker movement' might well ena-
ble cities to crowdsource data from citizens' sensors. Future 
research needs to explore the extend to which social media 
can support smaller cities if they do not have such a strong 
usage pattern as the Italian city of Jun or if privacy concerns 
motivate citizens to disable location tracking on their smart 
devices, so that it becomes increasingly difficult to geo-
locate social media data. In the end, the question will be 
whether the lightweight smart city is better equipped than 
current variations of smart cities to address issues of eco-
nomic growth as well as social inequalities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The  UrbanData2Decide  project  is  funded  under  the  
Joint  Programming  Initiative  Urban Europe (2014 -2016). 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Kitchin, “The real-time city? Big data and smart urba-
nism”, GeoJournal, vol. 79, no. 1, pp. 1–14, 2014. 
[2] 
T. Saunders and P. Baeck, “Rethinking Smart Cities From 
The Ground Up | Nesta”, 2015. 
[3] 
G. Graham, “Too-smart cities? Why these visions of utopia 
need an urgent reality check”, The Guardian, 13-Mar-2014. 
[4] 
R. G. Hollands, “Will the real smart city please stand up?”, 
City, vol.12, no.3, pp. 303-320, 2008. 
[5] 
V. Mayer-Schönberger and K. Cukier, Big Data: A Revoluti-
on that Will Transform how We Live, Work, and Think. 
Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013. 
[6] 
D. Lazer, R. Kennedy, G. King, and A. Vespignani, “The 
Parable of Google Flu: Traps in Big Data Analysis”, Science, 
vol. 343, no. 6167, pp. 1203–1205, 2014. 
[7] 
T. Yasseri and J. Bright, “Predicting elections from online 
information flows: towards theoretically informed models”, 
[Available from: http://arxiv.org/abs/1505.01818] 
[8] 
T. Yasseri and J. Bright, “Can electoral popularity be predic-
ted using socially generated big data?”, it - Information Tech-
nology, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 246–253, 2014. 
[9] 
C. Rabari and M. Storper, “The digital skin of cities: urban 
theory and research in the age of the sensored and metered ci-
ty, ubiquitous computing and big data”, Cambridge Journal of 
Regions, Economy and Society, vol. 8, pp.27-42, 2014. 
[10] S. Abiteboul et al., “The elephant in the room: getting value 
from Big Data”, in Proceedings of the 18th International 
Workshop on Web and Databases, pp. 1–5, 2015. 
[11] T. Shelton, M. Zook, and A. Wiig, “The 'actually existing 
smart city'”, Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and 
Society, vol.8, pp. 13-25, 2014. 
[12] A. Townsend, “Cities of Data: Examining the New Urban 
Science”, Public Culture, vol. 27, no. 2 76, pp. 201–212, 
2015. 
[13] A. Eland, “Google Europe Blog: Tackling Urban Mobility 
with 
Technology”, 
2015. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://googlepolicyeurope.blogspot.co.uk/2015/11/tackling-
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

urban-mobility-with-technology.html?m=1. [Accessed: 15-
Mar-2016]. 
[14] A. Rogers, “8 Cities That Show You What the Future Will 
Look 
Like”, 
Wired 
Magazine, 
Available 
from: 
https://www.wired.com/2015/09/design-issue-future-of-
cities/, [Accessed: 15-Mar-2016].  
[15] W. Powers and D. Roy, “The Incredible Jun: A Town that 
Runs on Social Media”, Huffington Post, 20-Apr-2015. 
[16] D. C. Brabham, Crowdsourcing, London: MIT Press, 2013. 
[17] V. Lehdonvirta and J. Bright, “Crowdsourcing for Public 
Policy and Government”, Policy & Internet, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 
263–267, Sep. 2015. 
[18] B. Waterfield, “Tom Tom sold driver”s GPS details to be 
used by police for speed traps”, The Telegraph, 28-Apr-2011. 
[19] E. Copeland, “Big Data in the Big Apple: The lessons London 
can learn from New York's data-driven approach to smart ci-
ties”, Available from: http://capitalcityfoundation.london/ 
wp-content/uploads/2015/06/Big-Data-in-the-Big-Apple.pdf, 
[Accessed: 15-Mar-2016]. 
[20] S. Tilak, N. B. Abu-Ghazaleh, and W. Heinzelman, “A taxo-
nomy of wireless micro-sensor network models”, ACM 
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Re-
view, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 28–36, Apr. 2002. 
[21] I. F. Akyildiz, Y. Sankarasubramaniam, and E. Cayirci, “A 
survey on sensor networks”, IEEE Communications Magazi-
ne, vol. 40, no. 8, pp. 102–114, Aug. 2002. 
[22] N. Xu, “A Survey of Sensor Network Applications”, IEEE 
Communications Magazine, pp.1-9, 2002 
[23] J. Ginsberg et al., “Detecting influenza epidemics using se-
arch engine query data”, Nature, vol. 457, no. 7232, pp. 
1012–1014, Feb. 2009. 
[24] K. S. Hickmann et al., “Forecasting the 2013-2014 Influenza 
Season using Wikipedia”, vol.5, no.2, pp.1-15, 2015. 
[25] N. Generous, G. Fairchild, A. Deshpande, S. Y. Del Valle, 
and R. Priedhorsky, “Global disease monitoring and forecas-
ting with Wikipedia”, PLOS Computational Biology, vol.10, 
no.11, pp.1-16, 2014. 
[26] “Social Media and Public Policy, September 2013 | The Alli-
ance 
for 
Useful 
Evidence”. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.alliance4usefulevidence.org/publication/social-
media/. [Accessed: 29-Feb-2016]. 
[27] “Use of social media for research and analysis - Publications - 
GOV.UK”. [Online]. Available: https://www.gov.uk/govern 
ment/publications/use-of-social-media-for-research-and-
analysis. [Accessed: 29-Feb-2016]. 
[28] C. Harrison et al., “Foundations for smarter cities”, IBM 
Journal of Research and Development, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1–
16, 2010. 
[29] L. Hoffmann, “Data mining meets city hall”, Communica-
tions of the ACM, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 19–21, 2012. 
[30] H. V. Jagadish, “Big data and science: Myths and reality”, 
Big Data Research, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 49–52, 2015. 
[31] E. Pinkerton and D. N. Edwards, “The elephant in the room: 
the hidden costs of leasing individual transferable fishing 
quotas”, Marine Policy, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 707–713, 2009. 
[32] P. J. Kirs, K. Pflughoeft, and G. Kroeck, “A process model 
cognitive biasing effects in information systems development 
and usage”, Information & Management, vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 
153–165, 2001. 
[33] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman, “Judgment under Uncertainty: 
Heuristics and Biases”, Science, vol. 185, no. 4157, pp. 1124–
1131, 1974. 
[34] R. Clarke, “Big data, big risks”, Information Systems Journal, 
vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 77–90, 2016. 
[35] F. Morstatter, J. Pfeffer, H. Liu, and K. M. Carley, “Is the 
sample good enough? comparing data from Twitter”s 
streaming api with Twitter”s firehose”, arXiv preprint ar-
Xiv:1306.5204, 2013. 
[36] Z. Tufekci and D. Freelon, “Introduction to the special issue 
on new media and social unrest”, American Behavioral Scien-
tist, vol. 57, no.7, pp. 843-847, 2013. 
[37] D. Arribas-Bel, K. Kourtit, P. Nijkamp, and J. Steenbruggen, 
“Cyber Cities: Social Media as a Tool for Understanding Ci-
ties”, Applied Spatial Analysis and Policy, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 
231–247, 2015. 
[38] A. Glasmeier and S. Christopherson, “Thinking about smart 
cities”, Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, 
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 3–12, 2015. 
[39] D. Offenhuber, “Infrastructure legibility—a comparative 
analysis of open311-based citizen feedback systems”, 
Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and Society, vol.8, 
no.1, pp. 93-112, 2015. 
[40] Z. Tufekci, “Big questions for social media big data: Re-
presentativeness, validity and other methodological pitfalls”, 
arXiv preprint arXiv:1403.7400, 2014. 
[41] C. Anderson, The end of theory: The data deluge makes the 
scientific method obsolete. Available: https://www.wired.com 
/2008/06/pb-theory/, 2008 [Accessed: Sept. 2016]. 
[42] H. Ekbia et al., “Big data, bigger dilemmas: A critical re-
view”, Journal of the Association for Information Science and 
Technology, vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 1523–1545, 2015. 
[43] H. D. Shane, Standard Deviations: Flawed Assumptions, 
Tortured Data, and Other Ways To Lie with Statistics, The 
Overlook Press: London, 2014. 
[44] M. W. Wilson, “Data matter (s): legitimacy, coding, and qua-
lifications-of-life”, Environment and Planning D: Society and 
Space, vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 857–872, 2011. 
[45] R. Goodspeed, “Smart cities: moving beyond urban cyber-
netics to tackle wicked problems”, Cambridge Journal of Re-
gions, Economy and Society, vol.8, pp. 79-92, 2014. 
[46] P. Brey, “Values in Technology and Disclosive Computer 
Ethics”, in The Cambridge Handbook of Information and 
Computer Ethics, pp. 41–58, 2010. 
[47] E. E. Joh, “Policing by Numbers: Big Data and the Fourth 
Amendment”, Washing. Law Review, vol.89, pp.35-68. 2014. 
[48] K. Crawford and J. Schultz, “Big data and due process: To-
ward a framework to redress predictive privacy harms”, BCL 
Rev., vol. 55, p. 93, 2014. 
[49] L. Carvalho, “Smart cities from scratch? A socio-technical 
perspective”, Cambridge Journal of Regions, Economy and 
Society, vol.8, no.1, pp. 43-60, 2014. 
[50] T. Zarsky, “The Trouble with Algorithmic Decisions An Ana-
lytic Road Map to Examine Efficiency and Fairness in Auto-
mated and Opaque Decision Making”, Science, Technology 
& Human Values, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 118–132, 2016. 
[51] D. K. Citron and F. A. Pasquale, “The scored society: due 
process for automated predictions”, Washington Law Review, 
vol. 89, no.1, pp.1-33, 2014. 
[52] G. P. Hancke and G. P. Hancke Jr, “The role of advanced 
sensing in smart cities”, Sensors, vol.13, no.1, pp. 393–425, 
2012.
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

