Emoji as Sentiment Indicators: An Investigative Case Study in Arabic Text
Shatha Ali A. Hakami
School of & Dept. of Computer Science
University of Birmingham &
Jazan University
Birmingham, UK / Jazan, Saudi Arabia
e-mails: sah624@cs.bham.ac.uk
sahakami@jazanu.edu.sa
Robert Hendley
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK
e-mail: r.j.hendley@cs.bham.ac.uk
Phillip Smith
School of Computer Science
University of Birmingham
Birmingham, UK
e-mail: p.smith.7@cs.bham.ac.uk
Abstract—With the explosion of social media usage, re-
searchers have become interested in understanding and analysing
the sentiment of the language used in textual digital commu-
nications. One particular feature is the use of emoji. These
are pictographs that are used to augment the text. They might
represent facial expressions, body language, emotional intentions
or other things. Despite the frequency with which they are used,
research on the interpretation of emoji in languages other than
English, such as Arabic, is still in its infancy. This paper analyses
the use of emoji in Arabic social media datasets to build a better
understanding of sentiment indicators in textual contents. Seven
benchmark Arabic datasets containing emoji were manually
and automatically annotated for sentiment value. A quantitative
analysis of the results shows that emoji are sometimes used
as true/direct sentiment indicators. However, the analysis also
reveals that, for some emoji and in some contexts, the role of
emoji is more complex. They may not act as sentiment indicators,
they may act as modiﬁers of the sentiment expressed in the text
or, in some cases, their role may be context dependent. It is
important to understand the role of emoji in order to build
sentiment analysis systems that are more accurate and robust.
Keywords—Emoji; Social Media; Arabic; NLP; Sentiment Anal-
ysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Natural human communication involves both verbal (natural
language) and nonverbal channels. In face-to-face communica-
tion, nonverbal cues are often the meta-messages that instruct
receivers on how to interpret verbal messages. These cues
can be either visual/mimogestual (the use of the body), like
head nodding, facial expressions, posture, mime, gaze, and
eye contact [1]; or oral/prosodic (the use of the voice), like
pitch contour, tone, stress, pause, rhythm, tempo and vocal
intonation [2]. Ambady et al. [3] also consider these nonverbal
cues as reliable indicators for attributes of the speaker, such
as gender, personality, abilities, and sexual orientation. The
main feature of nonverbal cues, however, is their “ability
to convey emotions and attitude” as well as to “emphasize,
contradict, substitute or regulate verbal communication” [4].
From a Psycholinguistic perspective, Mehrabian [5] argues that
93% of human communication takes place non-verbally.
In text-based communication, it has been argued that many
of these nonverbal cues are missed, which potentially makes
the communication ambiguous and inefﬁcient and can lead
to misunderstandings [6]. To address this issue, people often
use many kinds of text-based surrogates, such as nonstan-
dard/multiple punctuation (e.g., ‘...’, or ‘!!!’), lexical surro-
gates (e.g., ‘hmmm’, or ‘yummm’); asterisks (e.g., ‘*hug*’
or ‘*grin*’), emoticons (e.g., ‘:)’ or ‘:(’), and emoji (e.g.,
‘
’ and ‘
’). Carey [7] categorized these nonverbal cues
into ﬁve types: vocal spelling, lexical surrogates, spatial arrays
(e.g., using the textual layout to aid understanding or provide
emphasis), manipulation of grammatical markers, and minus
features. Emoticons, and later emoji, are sometimes considered
as examples of spatial arrays that are used to convey emotion
or sentiment. Sentiment analysis can be deﬁned as a process
that analyses text and builds an interpretation of the sentiment
that it is intended to convey. Usually, this is a one dimensional
measure from negative to positive and often it is quantized
to just three values: negative, neutral or positive. Sentiment
analysis has become an important tool in classifying and
interpreting text. It has important applications in social media
analysis, consultation systems, text classiﬁcation and many
other areas.
Generally, there are two broad approaches to analyzing
sentiment in text: a machine learning approach and a lexicon-
based approach. The conventional automated sentiment anal-
ysis, that takes account of emoji, especially in the Arabic
language, works as follows: the text is analysed to calculate
a value representing the sentiment of the text, any emoji are
analysed to derive their sentiment values, and then the two
values are combined to build an overall interpretation of the
sentiment of the whole text.
This conventional assumption might not always be correct.
Emoji do not always just indicate additional emotional content.
It has been noticed in [8]–[11] that emoji often play sentiment
roles other than as a direct indication. For instance, a negative
emoji (e.g., broken-heart
) can disambiguate an ambiguous
sentiment in a text (i.e., add negativity to neutral sentiment
texts), it can also complement it in a relatively positive text.
Kunneman et al. [11] discussed a similar duality of sentiment
role in the use of emotional hashtags such as #nice and #lame.
Since this information is not explicit, we assume that the role
of emoji as a sentiment signal needs to be examined using
various approaches and in different contexts, in order to build
a better understanding.
In this work, we seek to investigate the interpretation of the
sentiment expressed in informal Arabic texts, which contain
emoji and are drawn from a Twitter dataset. This is done
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

by trying to answer, from a broad perspective, the following
questions:
Q1: When is it appropriate, in sentiment analysis,
to use the conventional techniques for interpreting
emoji (i.e., when are they a true sentiment indicator
within the text)?
Q2: What are the other, unconventional, cases of
emoji in sentiment analysis, and when do they
apply?
To answer these questions, we borrow from [8] the argument
that each emoji has three different norms of sentiment within
itself. These are positivity, neutrality, and negativity. Thus, we
cannot merely consider a single emoji to be a representative
or an indicator of one absolute sentiment (positive, negative,
or neutral) unless we examine its sentiment state within that
related context. Indeed, arguably, within a textual context,
some emoji can mislead the sentiment analysis process.
Here, we propose an investigation that uses a comparison
between the sentiment of text with and without emojis as well
as of the sentiment of the emoji on its own. We apply this
approach with 496 different emojis that are used in a corpus of
5204 Arabic texts, annotated with sentiment labels. As a result,
we identify four cases for the roles of emoji as sentiment
indicators. These cases are as: true sentiment indicators, multi-
sentiment indicators, ambiguous sentiment indicators, and not
sentiment indicators.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
reviews related work upon which we build; Section III presents
the study’s design; Section IV presents the results, analysis and
discussion. Finally, in Section V we draw conclusions from
this work along with its weaknesses and limitations as well as
some recommendations for future work.
II. RELATED WORK
Previous studies on emoji within texts have attempted
to explore their roles as nonverbal cues and as sentiment
indicators.
A. Emoji as Textual Nonverbal Cues
Emoticons are a sequence of keyboard characters (ASCII
characters) that represent nonverbal behaviors, such as facial
expressions. Emojis are, in many ways, a successor to emoti-
cons with more sophisticated rendering and a wider repertoire
but they often play a similar role. In practice, emoji are actual
icons that appear on physical or virtual keyboards and can
be used across various platforms, such as WhatsApp, Twitter,
Facebook, Instagram, and others. These icons can represent
facial expressions, body language, food, animals, places, and
natural objects like ﬂowers and trees. As discussed by Denis
[12] and Zwaan and Singe [13], the human brain instantly
analyzes image elements whilst it processes language linearly.
That is to say: the human brain processes visual elements
faster than written text. Many major technology companies,
like Apple and Microsoft, have realized this importance of
emoji and have taken considerable strides towards developing
them in their systems.
Dresner and Herring [14] and Skovholt et al. [15] have
observed that including emoticons, as well as emojis, in
text not only helps the receivers to infer some contextual
information, but it also eases understanding of the expressed
sentiment. Therefore, it has become necessary to integrate the
analysis of textual content and emoji in order to properly
undertake sentiment analysis. Accordingly, Evans [16] deﬁned
emoji as a form of developed punctuation (the way of encoding
nonverbal prosody cues in writing systems) that supplements
written language to facilitate the writers articulating their
emotions in text-based communication.
Also, Miller et al. [17] considered the use of emoji to be
understood as ”visible acts of meaning”. As deﬁned by Bavelas
and Chovil [18], visible acts of meanings are analogically
encoded symbols that are sensitive to a sender-receiver rela-
tionship, and they are fully integrated with the accompanying
words. Indeed, the sender-receiver cultural background is one
of the essential contextualization aspects that might affect
emoji-text sentiment analysis. For that, Gao and VanderLaan
[19] presented a study suggesting that Eastern and Western
cultures are different in their use of mouth versus eye cues
when interpreting emotions. According to the study, the norm
in Western cultures is to display the overt emotion while in
Eastern cultures, the norm is to present more subtle emotion to
other people. Westerners interpret facial emotional expressions
through the mouth region. Conversely, Eastern cultures focus
more on the eyes. The researchers of the study also found that
such differences extend to written paralinguistic signals such
as emojis and, consequently, this has implications for digital
communication.
B. Emoji as Textual Sentiment Indicators
Studies on emoji within textual context mainly focus on
three directions: the usages of emoji, their meaning and the
sentiment they convey. Researchers have found that emoji can
be used to disambiguate the intended sense [20], manipulate
the original meaning [21][22], or add sentiment to a message
[23].
Regarding sentiment analysis, some studies’ ﬁndings sug-
gest that the level of sentiment perceived from a text increases
with the inclusion of facial-emojis [8][23][24] and [25]. More-
over, Rathan et al. [26] considered facial-emoji as a direct
sentiment indicator. In their approach, they used emoji as a
sentiment source to evaluate social media messages containing
particular brands’ names. Furthermore, Riordan [20] found
that even non-facial emoji can increase the sentiment and
improve the clarity of texts.
Going a step further, many studies have assumed emoji to
be a reliable ground truth for the sentiment. For example,
researchers in the work [27]–[29] followed the same approach
by constructing datasets for sentiment prediction and using a
set of emoji to label their datasets automatically. Despite its in-
tuitiveness, this assumption seems insufﬁcient since it ignores
that the emoji-text sentiment correlation is context-sensitive.
Therefore, approaches relying on such an assumption might
yield arbitrary and inaccurate sentiment annotation. Besides, it
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 1. Examples of the Most Representative Emoji for Each Sentiment in Emoji-Text Dataset. The Percentage (%) Shows the Relative Frequency of the
Sentiment Class of the Text within Which Each Emoji Occurs.
has been shown that the sentiments of surrogates for nonverbal
cues (like emoji) and verbal messages (the accompanying text)
are not isolated, and they should be integrated as a whole
forming a context with a particular sentiment [30][31].
In line with this hypothesis, Novak et al. [8] conducted
a study, which considers context-sensitivity when analyzing
the sentiment of emoji and texts. In the study, the researchers
annotated a collection of tweets containing at least one emoji,
with sentiment labels (negative, neutral, positive). From that
textual content, the researchers computed and presented senti-
ment ranking scores for 751 emoji. Their work illustrated that
while some emoji have very high sentiment scores with little
variance, others were often used to denote both positive and
negative sentiment. These observations suggest that treating
emoji as a direct sentiment signal is misleading because
they are often full of nuanced details that are highly context
dependent.
Overall, it is clear that the conventional approach of per-
forming separate sentiment analysis of text and emoji and then
combining the two to generate an overall value, is inadequate.
Sometimes this approach will work. However, often and in
particular with some frequently used emoji and in some critical
cases, this approach fails. Furthermore, in some language such
as Arabic, there is little research and also there is evidence that
emoji play an especially strong sentiment indication role. The
aim of this research is to close that gap.
III. STUDY DESIGN
We argue that each emoji can have a different sentiment ef-
fect on a text, depending upon the context in which it appears.
This is a micro-level linguistic phenomenon so, along with
the standard natural language processing approach (sentiment
analysis), we also used a technique from computer-mediated
discourse analysis: “Coding and Counting” [32]–[34]. This is
deﬁned by Herring et al. [35] as consisting of three phases:
observe, code, and count. It starts with purely qualitative
observation and ends with a set of relative frequencies.
A. Data for Observation
To observe how emoji behave as a sentiment indicator for
a text, content with speciﬁc criteria is needed. The content
should be from a social media platform, written in the Arabic
language, multi-dialect, multi-aspect, and, more importantly,
should contain emoji. Therefore, the main focus of our obser-
vation was on 5402 texts (tweets from the Twitter platform),
each with at least one emoji. These were extracted from seven
different public datasets of Arabic social media [36]–[43]. We
refer to this as the Emoji-Text dataset.
Then, we extracted all of the emoji from the Emoji-Text
dataset to form a collection of 496 unique emoji. We refer to
this as the Emoji-only dataset.
Lastly, a third dataset was constructed, which consists of all
the texts in the Emoji-Text dataset, with the emoji removed.
We refer to this dataset as the Plain-Text dataset.
B. Coding with Sentiment
In order to understand the way in which the emoji affects the
interpretation of the sentiment of each text, we need to have
a sentiment annotation for each item in each of the datasets.
All of the texts in the Emoji-Text dataset were human
annotated with either sentiment labels (negative, positive, or
neutral), or emotional labels (angry, sadness, or joy). For
simplicity, we uniﬁed all the labels to be in the sentiment label
form. The negative emotional labels ‘angry’ and ‘sadness’
were labelled as negative, and the positive emotional label
‘joy’ as positive.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE I. THE TOP 5 EMOJI IN EMOJI-ONLY DATASET WITH SENTIMENT FREQUENCY (Fr.) AND RELATIVE FREQUENCY (RelFr.).
Emojis
Name
Class
Sentiment
Total
W/ Negative Texts
W/ Neutral Texts
W/ Positive Texts
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Face with Tears of Joy
Facial Expression
Positive
2,270
1,229 (54.14%)
92 (4.05%)
949 (41.80%)
Red Heart
Heart
Positive
765
45 (5.88%)
20 (2.61%)
700 (91.50%)
Saudi Arabia
Flag
Positive
733
89 (12.14%)
29 (3.95%)
615 (83.90%)
Smiling Face with Heart-Eyes
Facial Expression
Positive
426
21 (4.93%)
15 (3.52%)
390 (91.55%)
Broken Heart
Heart
Negative
410
286 (69.75%)
16 (3.90%)
108 (26.34%)
TABLE II. THE FREQUENCY (Fr.) AND RELATIVE FREQUENCY
(RelFr.) OF SENTIMENTS IN THE PLAIN-TEXT, EMOJI-TEXT AND
EMOJI-ONLY DATASETS.
Sentiment
Plain-text
Emoji-text
Emoji-only
Label
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Negative
2045 (39%)
1885 (36%)
4016 (31%)
Neutral
1119 (22%)
965 (19%)
2547 (20%)
Positive
2040 (39%)
2354 (45%)
6244 (49%)
Total
5,204
5,204
12,807
For the emoji, each emoji in the Emoji-only dataset was
manually annotated. This was done independently by three
native Arabic speaking annotators, two females and one male.
To test the reliability of this coding process, we used the inter-
rater Fleiss’ Kappa agreement test [44]. The test resulted in k =
0.85, which is interpreted as a general high agreement among
the three annotators. In cases where two annotators disagreed
on a speciﬁc sentiment, the annotation from the third annotator
was considered to determine the decision.
Lastly, for the text only, we labelled each text in the Plain-
text dataset with sentiment. An automatic sentiment annotation
process was applied using the Python based Arabic sentiment
analysis model, Mazajak [45].
C. Frequency and Relative Frequency Counting
To understand how each emoji is associated with each
sentiment class, we undertook a frequency analysis of the
Emoji-Text dataset. This identiﬁes the frequency with which
each emoji is associated with (human annotated) text labelled
as negative, neutral and positive. We calculate two measures,
the frequency (Fr), which is the absolute number of times that
that emoji occurred within text of that sentiment class and
also the relative frequency (RelFr), which is the proportion of
the occurrences of that emoji that fall into that class. Table I
shows the results for the 5 most common emojis in our data.
A similar process was repeated for each of the datasets
Emoji-Text, Plain-Text and Emoji-only, in order to understand
how the distribution of the sentiment annotation varied be-
tween the three sentiment classes. The results are shown in
Table II.
TABLE III. THE FREQUENCY (Fr.) AND RELATIVE FREQUENCY
(RelFr.) OF SENTIMENTS IN THE EMOJI-TEXT DATASET WITH
DIFFERENT EMOJI LOAD.
Emoji
Total Text
Neg. Text
Neut. Text
Pos. Text
Load
Fr(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
Fr.(RelFr.)
1
2283 (44%)
908 (40%)
436 (19%)
939 (41%)
2
1358 (26%)
467 (34%)
233 (17%)
658 (48%)
3
652 (12%)
261 (40%)
77 (12%)
314 (48%)
4
393 (8%)
112 (28%)
94 (24%)
187 (48%)
5 or more
518 (10%)
137 (26%)
125 (24%)
256 (49%)
Finally, the number of emoji occurring in each text is
counted. This is referred to as the “emoji load” of that text.
The Fr and RelFr distributions of each emoji load for each of
the three sentiment norms is then calculated to explore how
sentiment varies with emoji load. This is shown in Table III.
IV. RESULTS ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSION
Table II shows the results of counting the frequency of texts
in each sentiment class, both with and without emoji, besides
the counting of the emoji only. The results show that for the
negative and neutral classes there was a decrease in frequency
of 3% when the emoji were included in the text. However,
the number of texts classiﬁed as positive was increased by
6% when the emoji were included. In Table III, we show the
emoji load across all texts and broken down by sentiment class.
It is clear that the most usual usage is to include just one or
sometimes two emoji in a text. The number of texts in the
dataset with three or more emoji is much lower. It is also
clear that, as the number of emoji in a text increases, the
balance between the sentiment classes changes signiﬁcantly.
The proportion of negative texts is much lower when there
are 3 or more emoji than when there are just 1 or 2. Similarly,
the proportion of neutral or positive texts increases. This may
reﬂect that, for negative texts, it is sufﬁcient to use one emoji
to signal the negative sentiment in Arabic. Whereas, for a
positive sentiment, additional emoji are used to provide more
emphasis.
Based on this quantitative observation, we analyzed the
emoji textual behavior as sentiment indicators and noticed the
following signiﬁcant cases.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE IV. EXAMPLES FROM EMOJI-TEXT DATASET (1).
A. True Sentiment Indication
In Figure 1, the analysis shows the relationship between
particular emoji and the sentiment of the text. The table uses
the most representative examples of each sentiment class for
illustration. It is clear that some emoji are overwhelmingly
negative indicators, for instance:
,
,
and
. Others
are mostly positive indicators, like
,
,
and
. With
this kind of emoji, the indicated sentiment is usually explicit
and clear, for two reasons:
First, the messages delivered within the text are, themselves,
clear and unambiguous. So, these messages do not express
irony, sarcasm or other more complex phenomena. Moreover,
most of the cases in our dataset where these emoji occur,
include sentiment words or phrases, like the words: “love”,
“hate”, or the phrases: “I agree with” or “I am against”. We
ﬁnd that Arabic speakers (perhaps, like others) usually use
these emoji to directly articulate their feelings of sadness
or anger (example 1) or love, cheerfulness, and satisfaction
(example 2) in Table IV.
The second reason is that these emoji often co-occur with
other emoji from the same sentiment class (i.e., positive with
positive and negative with negative). Thus, the combination
of these emoji works together to strengthen the sentiment
indication (examples 3, and 4) in Table IV.
TABLE V. EXAMPLES FROM EMOJI-TEXT DATASET (2).
Note that, in examples 1 and 3, the sentiments of the text-
only, the emoji-only, and the text with emoji (i.e., the tweet)
are identical, and they all are negative. The same occurs in
examples 2 and 4, but with positive sentiment. This means that
when all the components of a tweet (i.e., text and each emoji)
share the same sentiment class, they will end up reinforcing
the effect and so the result will, clearly, belong to that same
sentiment class. Therefore, in this condition, emoji can be
considered as direct (true) sentiment indicators for a tweet.
B. No-Sentiment Indication
For some of the emoji in our dataset, they do not appear to
convey any sentiment indication. This is the case for examples
5 and 6 in Table IV. This may be because, in our examples,
the sentiment of the text (i.e., the sentiment of the words) or
of the other emoji in the same text dominates.
However, often these emoji are used randomly with some
other emoji in a way that is not intended to convey any
sentiment. For instance, they may be used as ’decoration’
rather than to serve any real purpose. Example 7 in Table
IV, which uses the emoji
, is an example.
C. Multi-Sentiment Indication
In Figure 1, there are examples of emoji that we classify
as ”Mixed Sentiment”. We considered emoji, like
,
,
,
and
as multi-sentiment indicators.
These emoji can be considered as being true sentiment
indicators, but with cases with two opposite sentiments, ex-
empliﬁed in Table V. As positive indicators, these emoji
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

have been found playing a signiﬁcant role in cases similar
to example 8 where the
emoji indicates being funny. In
example 9, the
emoji indicates being proud, and example
10 where the
emoji indicates being a positive adviser.
In other cases, the same emoji as in examples 8, 9 and 10
are found playing the opposite sentiment role (i.e., a negative
sentiment). This can be seen, in Table V, in example 11 where
the
emoji indicates being a mocker, example 12 where the
emoji indicates being arrogant, and example 13 where the
emoji indicates embedded threatening advice.
D. Ambiguous Sentiment Indication
Beyond the cases mentioned above, there can also be an
ambiguous sentiment indication for a text arising where an
emoji exists, not only as a single, stand-alone emoji, but
also in combination with emoji with different sentiments. For
instance, in example 14 in Table V, human annotators agreed
on annotating this tweet with negative sentiment. However,
when re-reading the tweet, it could also be interpreted as a
positive tweet, depending on context.
This confusion in judging the tweet sentiment is because
of the complexity of the sentiment of the text itself. In this
example, the sentence “Hey girl, I am already scared” is
negative, while the following sentence, “Good night and say hi
to the one behind you”, is positive. Besides, the combination
of the negative emoji (i.e.,
), the positive emoji (i.e.,
),
and the multi/mixed-sentiments emoji (i.e.,
) increase the
complexity of deciding the sentiment of the tweet as a whole.
Hence, none of the involved emoji can be considered the
true/direct sentiment indicator for this tweet.
V. CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS, AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we have undertaken an empirical investigation
of the phenomenon of emoji as a sentiment indicator within
text. We have applied this in a study of an Arabic, social media
corpus using the “Coding and Counting” approach.
Emoji can be a true sentiment indicator, which is the
conventional assumption of existing sentiment analysis ap-
proaches with emoji. This is the approach used by most of
the existing work and implementations of software to perform
sentiment analysis of text with embedded emoji. There are
many cases in our data where this interpretation is the correct
one.
However, some of the most frequently used emoji also
occur in many other, unconventional, cases. They may either
act as multi-sentiment indicators or as ambiguous sentiment
indicators. This is because, according to the context, emoji
sometimes are very negative, and sometimes are very positive.
Besides, in some cases, our investigation identiﬁed examples
where the sentiment of an emoji can be neglected within a
text. They may be dominated by the sentiment of the text
or be dominated by the sentiment of the other emoji in that
text. In this case, we considered such emoji as No-sentiment
indicators.
It is worth mentioning that the emoji sentiment indications
stated above have been found within the dataset that we
collected and sampled for this investigation. We are aware
that the sentiment behavior of emoji is context-sensitive. This
means that in a different context, (for instance, in a different
country or in a different social group), the emoji sentiment
might reﬂect the sentiment or usage of that context. Therefore,
one of the weaknesses of this work is that, if the same
investigative approach was applied on a different dataset, from
a different context, then these emoji may be found to behave
differently as sentiment indicators.
What is clear, is that the sentiment role of emoji in Arabic
social media is complex. Our analysis shows that the con-
ventional approach is sometimes appropriate. However, it also
shows that (especially for some of the most frequently used
emoji) the conventional approaches are inadequate and that a
more sophisticated technique is needed.
Another constraint of this work is the source of the text
that was analysed. Whilst Twitter provides a useful source for
data, there may be differences between different social media
platforms. Furthermore, different classes of conversation (e.g.,
purely social, political, business and so on), may have an
inﬂuence upon how emoji are used. Again, further research
is required to investigate this.
In conclusion, using emoji solely, as a feature of sentiment
indication for text is not a reliable approach, and it might yield
arbitrary, noisy, and incorrect sentiment annotation. For that,
we need to understand, in detail, the different sentiment states
in which emoji can occur, and also the associated sentiment
roles that emoji can play within different textual and social
contexts.
In the future, our work will expand upon the analysis
presented here, develop a model based upon this understanding
and then evaluate it, empirically, against human annotated
text, and compare the performance of this approach against
existing methods. Also, the focus of the work presented here
has been on the interpretation of the sentiment effect of emoji
in Arabic text. We would expect that similar phenomena would
be found in other languages. However, there are likely to be
some differences with language and culture. Further work is
necessary to conﬁrm whether this is true.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Kendon, “Gesticulation and speech: Two aspects of the”, The
relationship of verbal and nonverbal communication, no. 25, p. 207,
1980.
[2]
B. Altenberg, Prosodic patterns in spoken English: Studies in the cor-
relation between prosody and grammar for text-to-speech conversion.
Lund University Press Lund, 1987, vol. 76.
[3]
N. Ambady, F. J. Bernieri, and J. A. Richeson, “Toward a histology of
social behavior: Judgmental accuracy from thin slices of the behavioral
stream”, in Advances in experimental social psychology, vol. 32,
Elsevier, 2000, pp. 201–271.
[4]
A. Chen Yuet Wei, “Emoticons and the non-verbal communication:
With reference to facebook”, PhD thesis, Christ University, 2012.
[5]
A. Mehrabian, Silent messages, 152. Wadsworth Belmont, CA, 1971,
vol. 8.
[6]
S. Kiesler, J. Siegel, and T. W. McGuire, “Social psychological as-
pects of computer-mediated communication.”, American psychologist,
vol. 39, no. 10, p. 1123, 1984.
[7]
J. Carey, “Paralanguage in computer mediated communication”, in
18th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics,
1980, pp. 67–69.
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[8]
P. K. Novak, J. Smailovi´c, B. Sluban, and I. Mozetiˇc, “Sentiment of
emojis”, PloS one, vol. 10, no. 12, 2015.
[9]
L. Rezabek and J. Cochenour, “Visual cues in computer-mediated
communication: Supplementing text with emoticons”, Journal of Visual
Literacy, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 201–215, 1998.
[10]
E. Braumann, O. Preveden, S. Saleem, Y. Xu, and S. T. Koeszegi, “The
effect of emoticons in synchronous and asynchronous e-negotiations”,
in Proceedings of the 11th Group Decision & Negotiation Conference
(GDN 2010), 2010, pp. 113–115.
[11]
F. Kunneman, C. Liebrecht, and A. van den Bosch, “The (un) pre-
dictability of emotional hashtags in twitter”, 2014.
[12]
M. Denis, “Imaging while reading text: A study of individual differ-
ences”, Memory & Cognition, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 540–545, 1982.
[13]
R. A. Zwaan and M. Singer, “Text comprehension”, in Handbook of
discourse processes, Routledge, 2003, pp. 89–127.
[14]
E. Dresner and S. C. Herring, “Functions of the nonverbal in cmc:
Emoticons and illocutionary force”, Communication theory, vol. 20,
no. 3, pp. 249–268, 2010.
[15]
K. Skovholt, A. Grønning, and A. Kankaanranta, “The communicative
functions of emoticons in workplace e-mails::-”, Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 780–797, 2014.
[16]
V. Evans, The emoji code: The linguistics behind smiley faces and
scaredy cats. Picador USA, 2017.
[17]
H. Miller, D. Kluver, J. Thebault-Spieker, L. Terveen, and B. Hecht,
“Understanding emoji ambiguity in context: The role of text in emoji-
related miscommunication”, in Eleventh International AAAI Confer-
ence on Web and Social Media, 2017.
[18]
J. B. Bavelas and N. Chovil, “Visible acts of meaning: An integrated
message model of language in face-to-face dialogue”, Journal of
Language and social Psychology, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 163–194, 2000.
[19]
B. Gao and D. P. VanderLaan, “Cultural inﬂuences on perceptions of
emotions depicted in emojis”, Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 2020.
[20]
M. A. Riordan, “The communicative role of non-face emojis: Affect
and disambiguation”, Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 76, pp. 75–
86, 2017.
[21]
G. Donato and P. Paggio, “Investigating redundancy in emoji use:
Study on a twitter based corpus”, in Proceedings of the 8th Workshop
on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, Sentiment and Social
Media Analysis, 2017, pp. 118–126.
[22]
K. Njenga, “Social media information security threats: Anthropomor-
phic emoji analysis on social engineering”, in IT Convergence and
Security 2017, Springer, 2018, pp. 185–192.
[23]
M. Shiha and S. Ayvaz, “The effects of emoji in sentiment analysis”,
Int. J. Comput. Electr. Eng.(IJCEE.), vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 360–369, 2017.
[24]
N. Na’aman, H. Provenza, and O. Montoya, “Varying linguistic pur-
poses of emoji in (twitter) context”, in Proceedings of ACL 2017,
Student Research Workshop, 2017, pp. 136–141.
[25]
D. Rodrigues, D. Lopes, M. Prada, D. Thompson, and M. V. Garrido,
“A frown emoji can be worth a thousand words: Perceptions of emoji
use in text messages exchanged between romantic partners”, Telematics
and Informatics, vol. 34, no. 8, pp. 1532–1543, 2017.
[26]
M. Rathan, V. R. Hulipalled, K. Venugopal, and L. Patnaik, “Consumer
insight mining: Aspect based twitter opinion mining of mobile phone
reviews”, Applied Soft Computing, vol. 68, pp. 765–773, 2018.
[27]
B. Guthier, K. Ho, and A. El Saddik, “Language-independent data set
annotation for machine learning-based sentiment analysis”, in 2017
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics
(SMC), IEEE, 2017, pp. 2105–2110.
[28]
H. Abdellaoui and M. Zrigui, “Using tweets and emojis to build tead:
An arabic dataset for sentiment analysis”, Computaci´on y Sistemas,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 777–786, 2018.
[29]
W. A. Hussien, Y. M. Tashtoush, M. Al-Ayyoub, and M. N. Al-Kabi,
“Are emoticons good enough to train emotion classiﬁers of arabic
tweets?”, in 2016 7th International Conference on Computer Science
and Information Technology (CSIT), IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–6.
[30]
J. B. Walther and K. P. D’addario, “The impacts of emoticons on
message interpretation in computer-mediated communication”, Social
science computer review, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 324–347, 2001.
[31]
D. Derks, A. E. Bos, and J. Von Grumbkow, “Emoticons and social in-
teraction on the internet: The importance of social context”, Computers
in human behavior, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 842–849, 2007.
[32]
M. T. Chi, “Quantifying qualitative analyses of verbal data: A practical
guide”, The journal of the learning sciences, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 271–315,
1997.
[33]
D. W. Shaffer, Quantitative ethnography. Lulu. com, 2017.
[34]
J.-W. Strijbos, R. L. Martens, F. J. Prins, and W. M. Jochems, “Content
analysis: What are they talking about?”, Computers & education,
vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 29–48, 2006.
[35]
S. C. Herring, S. Barab, R. Kling, and J. Gray, “An approach to
researching online behavior”, Designing for virtual communities in the
service of learning, vol. 338, pp. 338–376, 2004.
[36]
M. Salameh, S. Mohammad, and S. Kiritchenko, “Sentiment after
translation: A case-study on arabic social media posts”, in Proceedings
of the 2015 conference of the North American chapter of the asso-
ciation for computational linguistics: Human language technologies,
2015, pp. 767–777.
[37]
S. Rosenthal, N. Farra, and P. Nakov, “Semeval-2017 task 4: Sentiment
analysis in twitter”, in Proceedings of the 11th international workshop
on semantic evaluation (SemEval-2017), 2017, pp. 502–518.
[38]
S. Mohammad, F. Bravo-Marquez, M. Salameh, and S. Kiritchenko,
“Semeval-2018 task 1: Affect in tweets”, in Proceedings of the 12th
international workshop on semantic evaluation, 2018, pp. 1–17.
[39]
F. Barbieri et al., “Semeval 2018 task 2: Multilingual emoji prediction”,
in Proceedings of The 12th International Workshop on Semantic
Evaluation, 2018, pp. 24–33.
[40]
R. Baly, A. Khaddaj, H. Hajj, W. El-Hajj, and K. B. Shaban, “Arsentd-
lev: A multi-topic corpus for target-based sentiment analysis in arabic
levantine tweets”, arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.01830, 2019.
[41]
H. Mulki, H. Haddad, C. B. Ali, and H. Alshabani, “L-hsab: A
levantine twitter dataset for hate speech and abusive language”, in
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Abusive Language Online, 2019,
pp. 111–118.
[42]
S. N. Alyami and S. O. Olatunji, “Application of support vector
machine for arabic sentiment classiﬁcation using twitter-based dataset”,
Journal of Information & Knowledge Management, vol. 19, no. 01,
p. 2 040 018, 2020.
[43]
A. Elmadany, H. Mubarak, and W. Magdy, “Arsas: An arabic speech-
act and sentiment corpus of tweets”, OSACT, vol. 3, p. 20, 2018.
[44]
J. L. Fleiss et al., “The measurement of interrater agreement”, Statisti-
cal methods for rates and proportions, vol. 2, no. 212-236, pp. 22–23,
1981.
[45]
I. A. Farha and W. Magdy, “Mazajak: An online arabic sentiment
analyser”, in Proceedings of the Fourth Arabic Natural Language
Processing Workshop, 2019, pp. 192–198.
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

