Tracks to Analyze Emotions around Mediator Artifacts to Improve Training and 
Business Creation for Unemployed People in French Universities 
Christian BOURRET 
Research Team DICEN IDF (Information and Communication Devices in the Digital Era) 
University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
e-mail: christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
Abstract - In France, with the economic crisis and the huge rate 
of unemployment, the role of Universities has changed in the 
recent years. They try to promote the creation of new economic 
activities to attract new people, especially coming from 
disadvantaged areas in great town suburbs, particularly 
unemployed young people. We present the experiment of 
Creators of Activities University Degrees (DUCA) around 
cooperative devices or Creators’ Groups (GC). These DUCA / 
GC correspond to an individual project, part of a global 
dynamics in a collective approach. In a perspective of helping 
disadvantaged people to rebuild their life in a project dynamics 
of 
creation 
of 
economic 
activity, 
information 
and 
communication issues are central. We propose some tracks to 
analyze these cooperative devices through two Mediator 
Artifacts developed in the DUCA / GC areas of cooperation: 
the business plan of the activities’ creators and the training 
serious game “Solutia”. They help to better master the 
emotions and feelings of activities’ creators to develop their 
self-confidence and their entrepreneurship skills. 
Keywords - unemployed people; economic activities creation; 
entrepreneurship ;  disadvantadged areas; mediator artifacts. 
I.
INTRODUCTION / BACKGROUND
In a period of social crisis and of huge unemployment 
(3.58 million people in full unemployment in France in 
September 2016), particularly for non-graduated young 
people in disadvantaged areas, Paugam pointed the 
importance of “social links” [1] and of solidarity. In this 
context, in the recent years, the role of University has 
changed. It is no longer just only to build and transfer 
knowledge, but also to welcome new people and promote 
their vocational integration, including the creation of new 
economic activities. We speak of Social Responsibility of 
Universities (RSU). There is also the new position of 
“entrepreneur student” [2]. These evolutions correspond to 
the need of repositioning the Universities but also other 
organizations with public service missions, such as Missions 
Locales (ML) or Centre for Information and Orientation 
(CIO). 
According to Azoulay [3], “there are talents in the 
suburbs but they need to be discovered and developed in 
different manners”. We must give confidence to potential 
activities’ creators and enable their talents to flourish, and 
also to promote “innovation in everyday life” [4] and 
especially social innovation.  
The University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée or UPEM, 
through its component University Institute of Technology 
(IUT) has managed since 2006 several groups of Creators of 
Activities University Degrees (DUCA), supported by 
training partnerships devices, the Creators’ Groups (GC). 
These GC are federated in a national association: National 
Association of Creators’ Groups (ANGC). 
In this paper, we first present the researcher’s position 
and the methodology used.  Then we explain the specificity 
of the DUCA – GC devices, pointing particularly on their 
Information and Communication issues and the question of 
emotions. We present two emotions’ Mediator Artifacts: first 
a training “serious game” (Solutia) and a second, the 
Business Plan used as the framework of the economic 
activity project. Finally, we give some examples of success 
stories of activities creation before a conclusion insisting on 
future works.  
II.
RESEARCHER’S POSITION AND METHODOLOGY
The author of this paper manages DUCAs in the IUT / 
UPEM and is also member of GC Coordination 
Committees. His analysis corresponds to a research position 
described 
by 
Bernard 
et 
al. 
[5] 
as 
“engaging 
communication”. These researchers outline the dimensions 
of “engaging position” and that of projects, which is the 
case for DUCA-GC.  
According to D'Almeida [6], organizations move 
“between projects and stories.” The projects correspond to 
two types of devices: first is the organizational one, and the 
second she calls “symbolic narrative” part where “stories” 
(symbolic 
devices) 
are 
essential. 
Organizations 
or 
organizational devices build their own imaginary stories. To 
take an example in a presentation’s leaflet of Val de Marne 
Creators’ Group: “Creators’ Groups help to switch from 
dream to reality.” They are based on two core values: 
“everyone is an asset for the territory”, “everyone 
expressing the desire to create an activity is heard”. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

From a methodological perspective, the author of this 
article belongs to the French University’s interdisciplinary 
field of Information and Communication Sciences, in 
agreement with the approach proposed by Bernard [7] with 
the convergence of four aspects:  meaning, link 
(relationships, interactions), knowledge and action. He 
positions in a research action perspective mixing theory and 
practice to build knowledge for action.  
In this work, we meet several concepts. The first concept 
met is that of “device” (in French, “dispositif”), that we 
consider, according to Foucault [8], with all its socio-
technical dimensions.  For him, “What I'm trying to identify 
with that name, is first a decidedly mixed space, with 
speeches, institutions, architectural arrangements, regulatory 
decisions, 
laws, 
administrative 
measures, 
scientific 
statements, philosophical propositions, moral, philanthropic, 
in short: the words, as well as the unspoken, are mere 
elements of the device. The device in itself is the network 
that can be established between all these elements. 
Secondly, that I would identify in the device, is precisely the 
nature of the relationship that may exist between these 
heterogeneous elements.” 
In a socio-constructivist perspective, we also rely on the 
concept of “mediator artifact”: “the tools provided by the 
environment do not only play a role of mediator but also of 
artifact in that they organize (or reorganize) cognitive 
functioning” [9] with all the importance of project dynamics 
[10] [11]. We also rely on the concepts of situations and 
interactions [12], defined by Zacklad as a logic of 
“cooperative transactions” [13]. 
III.
THE DUCA – GC AS SOCIO-TECHNICAL DEVICES
In this section, we will show how DUCA-GC 
corresponds to socio-technical devices as interactions’ areas 
with important Information and Communication Issues.    
A.
DUCA and GC as interactions‘ areas  
According to ANGC, “The Creators Groups seek 
autonomy and professional integration of unemployed 
people, including school leavers, based on their desires to 
undertake as a catalyst”. The main goal of the GC / DUCA 
devices is to restore confidence, especially for young school 
leavers by leveraging their creativity in a project approach 
from an individual project based on training (DUCA), 
developed in training and group work, but also with an 
individual coaching. So this is an individual project, part of 
global dynamics, in a collective approach (Creators’ 
Groups). 
Since 2006, UPEM / IUT proposed several DUCAs in 
partnership with different Creators Groups: Val de Marne 
Department (94), Val Maubuée (Torcy, 77) and, during three 
years, with the GC Paris 20th. 
We will analyze how a new kind of training (DUCA) is 
based on cooperative processes and may be regarded as a 
“device” or an “organizational form” created by all the 
interactions between all the actors, to develop new 
opportunities for job seekers coming from disadvantaged 
areas, especially young school leavers. This process creates a 
new dynamics among all the actors, combining the 
individual dimension of each project with a collective 
dynamics. 
A DUCA / GC device brings together partners including: 
1) A federative structure (Mission Locale, Local Plan for 
Economic Insertion (PLIE), House of Employment (Pôle 
Emploi), other associations, etc.), 2) a University, often 
through an IUT, 3) a consultancy team in business creation 
(management shop or boutique de gestion, cooperative, 
industry and trade chamber, etc.). 
B.
Importance of Information and Communication Issues 
In a perspective of helping people to rebuild their life 
[14] in a project dynamics, information collect and 
communication issues are central. Their analysis will 
constitute a main part of our grid to consider awareness and 
management of emotions and feelings as levers of creating 
economic activities. And so their management included in 
these activities’ creation may help people in difficult 
situations to rebuild their life. 
Firstly, candidates to DUCA / GC are searching in 
leaflets on business and crafts, books and numerous 
documents offered by the Local Missions and Centre for 
Information and Orientation (CIO), specialized websites, 
etc., information to better formalize their projects. They are 
helped in their information and documentation work by 
members of ML or of CIO. 
The personal reconstruction of the learner / creator is 
based on an innovative process of creating an activity that is 
formalized in an oral mid-term and an end-of-year 
presentation. This process involves many exchanges and a 
strong research activity for information and documentation 
with the help of people resources. It is driven by Mediator 
Artifact such as Business Plan of each student or meetings 
around a training “serious game”. 
This paper corresponds to a complementarity of views: 
DUCA teachers, GC leaders, trainers, facilitators from Local 
Missions, members of boutiques de gestion, psychologists, 
and, of course, students-learners, and potential creators of 
their economic activity. 
We propose some tracks to begin to try to analyze 
emotions and feelings of these actors, especially of young 
people creating activities around two Mediator Artifacts: a 
training serious game (Solutia) and the business plan of each 
activity’s creator. 
IV.
TWO EMOTIONS’ MEDIATOR ARTIFACTS
DUCA / GC devices correspond to societal innovative 
areas to promote interactions. Two Mediator Artifacts may 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

act to reveal emotions and feelings and so help to improve 
activities creators’ skills and their creativity. 
A.
A training “Serious Game” (Solutia) as first Mediator 
Artifact to develop ludic interactions 
  The main goal of DUCA / GC is to help increase 
creativity spirit and skills of creators of potential economic 
activity and especially young people. The DUCA-GC 
training teams try to invent new ways to interest the 
potential activities’ creators in being involved and so 
changing their life. One specific way consists in a training 
game: SOLUTIA. It is actually a form of “serious game”, 
but not developed on Internet interactions but on real 
exchanges in face-to-face situations between some creators 
(five to eight) with the help (a form of coaching) of a ML 
member.  
This game constitutes a Mediator Artifact to develop 
ludic interactions to improve interest for cooperation and 
project dynamics. This training “serious game” may also 
help converge the representations and develop confidence by 
creating collective dynamics and some form of pride around 
a personal project which may be also that of a whole family 
and, sometimes, of a larger community. 
First, this game has been thought and created by Marie 
Beauvais – Chevalier, member of ML of Marne-la-Vallée / 
Torcy, coordinator of the GC in Val Maubuée. Solutia’s 
game corresponds to a sort of Monopoly and Game of the 
Goose (Jeu de l’Oie) for learning how to manage company’s 
creation and its traps and opportunities.  
In a second step, Solutia has been developed and 
marketed by a student of UPEM University with the creation 
of a new enterprise through a new device “Students poles for 
Innovation, Transfer and Entrepreneurship” (PEPITE) [15].  
This business creation by a student around Solutia’s 
serious game illustrates the important evolution of the French 
Universities, and especially UPEM University. UPEM 
University tries to develop a new spirit of entrepreneurship 
through various devices and especially with times of 
exchanges and interactions between teachers and students 
such as the “All Creative Day, Tous Créatifs” (this year on 
June 22 th). 
B.
A second Mediator Artifact: the Business Plan of the 
creators’ projects 
We have also observed the emotions and feelings of the 
actors of DUCA / GC Devices around another Mediator 
Artifact, the Business Plan of each creator of potential 
economic activity. The business plan is the main framework 
of the entire process of monitoring the development of the 
economic activity of the potential creator. It is a crystallizer 
of interactions from the beginning of the process (emergence 
phase) to the final presentation of the project. 
The emergence phase allows the potential activity 
creators to better define their ideas and formalize them. It 
includes four steps: 1) better knowing their potentiality as 
project’s leaders, 2) better defining the main idea of activity 
to develop, 3) discover the environment of the project, 4) 
define the suitability of their personality to the project and its 
environment. After this phase, the future creator formalized a 
file, which is the basis for presentation and defending before 
a jury for admission to the DUCA degree. The interview is 
always conducted sympathetically to give confidence to the 
future creator and validate his idea. 
The training phase (DUCA) allows future creators to 
receive specific knowledge to develop skills necessary to 
manage 
any 
activity 
(company, 
association, 
etc.): 
management, information and communication, legal and tax 
information, sales management, market survey, project 
management, etc., and to check the feasibility of the 
proposed project, specifying the business plan (market 
survey, financing, cost calculations, etc.). The “case” is 
finalized and presented before a jury. Pedagogy emphasizes 
the collective dimension and the practical application of the 
teachings around creative projects. 
V.
INTERACTIONS ANALYSIS AROUND MEDIATOR 
ARTIFACTS INTEGRATING EMOTIONAL DIMENSIONS
The two presented Mediator Artifacts enable us to 
observe the emotions and feelings expressed in particular by 
young potential entrepreneurs: a phase of interactions 
between them in a playful position (Solutia Game) and also 
with interactions with the teaching team: the Business Plan. 
Both Mediator Artifacts converge to help to build an 
individual project in a collective dynamics. 
Finally, our findings highlight an analysis process with 
the transition from the initial and spontaneous emotions of 
the actors, especially young creators of economic activity, to 
more lasting feelings, attitudes and behaviors over a long 
period, in relation with their personality. 
We promote a dynamic dimension of integration 
(integrative approach) of changing emotions and feelings in 
the situation analysis and interactional approach proposed by 
Mucchielli (Situational and Interactionist Semiotics) [16] for 
economic activity creativity, apprehended in a grid of 
informational and communicational integration of actors’ 
views. For us, it is also the challenge of development of a 
dynamics (process) around control of emotions and feelings 
on a rather long term process.  
The DUCA / GC devices are also a space for converging 
management of project approaches [10] and quality 
approaches. We propose to consider this convergence 
through three types of processes that exists in any 
organization or project: the objective to compliance 
(control), the desire to implement changes and so the 
commitment to promote creativity and innovation [17]. For 
us, DUCA / GC devices constitute interesting areas of 
cooperation to observe this convergence. 
The emotional skills of young creators are the central 
element of an emotional intelligence, in our opinion, not 
sufficiently taken into account. The human body is both the 
mediator from which the individual can sensitize his affects 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

and constitutes a communication support of them, according 
to Martin-Juchat [18].  
By helping to set the individual project of business 
creation in a collective dynamics, the two studied Mediator 
Artifacts may help to favor a first awareness among activity 
creators; they are never completely alone and there are 
levers, networks that they must know how to use to get the 
right information at the right time and in the right place 
(informational and communicational skills). This awareness 
may help activities’ creators to restore their confidence and 
to overcome their shyness. The serious game Solutia also 
promotes situational skills: it allows students to discover a 
number of problem situations they can find in their creative 
activity and so help to overpass them. 
The goal of the Mediator Artifacts, particularly Solutia 
serious game is to (re) give confidence, to raise awareness 
that everyone has met difficulties in his entrepreneurship’s 
pathway and that they can be overcome. It is good to know 
how to go beyond emotions such as: fear of failure, 
withdrawal, frustration, anger, etc. Understanding and better 
managing emotions by relativizing them may help to recreate 
a positive dynamics of trust. It is also important to train the 
activities’ creators to be aware of their emotions and 
feelings, so they are not paralyzed by them, and, therefore, to 
better manage them and to succeed in their creation of 
activity process. 
We think that learning to better manage the emotions can 
become a collective goal to develop cooperation and 
improve skills. It is on this aspect that we propose to the 
other partners of the GC - DUCA to insist with a view of 
continuous improvement of existing devices. 
Social sharing of emotions is also important for 
encouraging awareness of group membership [12]. This 
group is essential to promote the personal development of 
each potential creator. This integration of emotions and 
feelings can help to better integrate an individual project of 
creation of activities in a collective dynamics of exchange of 
experiences and feelings (Group of Creators) to better 
understand and support in times of doubt and (re) motivate 
them. We wish to analyze their mechanisms to best promote 
these periods of interactions and information sharing for 
improvement of their projects. 
Our observations lead us to propose a broadening of 
perspectives of Situational and Interactionist Semiotics 
defined by Mucchielli with the integration of the experiences 
of the actors and their emotions and feelings [19], 
particularly for creators of activity. 
Another approach to consider is the Sociology of Actor-
Network (SAR) [20], even if the business plan and the 
serious game Solutia are not technical devices, but rather 
social and managerial devices. The idea that the collective 
activity (“acting elements”) can be considered as a “black 
box” (“boîte noire”) seems to match our approach of the 
business plan as the idea of “hybrid reality composed of 
successive translations” and the fact that the SAR “has been 
designed to follow the collective in their making process”, 
which is the case of GC – DUCA devices. 
We can then consider a dynamic relational semiotics 
approach to a certain length: global (approach by the 
complexity theory in a constructivist way), based on the 
search for meaning in the interactions’ situations between all 
the actors (including socio-technical artifacts), and of course 
also including emotions, feelings, experiences of all the 
actors in a dynamic approach (convergence of the 
management of project approaches and the process 
approaches of quality management) to create a dynamic of 
change, creativity and innovation, mixing individual and 
collective dimensions. 
VI.
A SUCCESS TO BETTER SOCIALLY INTEGRATE PEOPLE 
BY CREATING NEW ECONOMIC ACTIVITIES  
Since 2006, 305 activity creators and, especially, young 
people, have been trained in the IUT of UPEM and 157 
graduated, that is to say more than 50%, which is considered 
as a very positive result by the Ile-de-France Regional 
Council (CRIF), the main public collectivity giving funds to 
the GC / DUCA devices.  
More globally, nearly 500 people, especially young 
people, have been sensitized to business creation and reality 
of the economic constraints of companies. Nearly 35% of the 
graduated students have created their business or taken over 
an existing activity; others have been inserted as employees 
in existing companies (often trade or food activities). 
Activities creations successes particularly concern the 
services sector in very different aspects. First, we have food 
activities such as gluten free bakeries, food to all tastes and 
cuisines possible, particularly Afro-Asian. Secondly, we 
have clothes manufacturing companies corresponding to 
different countries (Japan and Asia fashion, North Africa, 
etc.) and shops of different types of clothes. We have also 
organic cleaning companies, communication companies to 
organize special events (marriage, etc), production of video 
games, jewelry creations, home automation company, etc. 
We have also more usual activities such as: nurseries, 
gardening, public writers, different ways of home help, 
beauticians, hairdressers, sometimes with itinerant projects. 
But also, with the reform of school times, we have 
animation’s projects to provide stimulating activities or 
sports for children after school time, etc. 
A great satisfaction during the graduation ceremony for 
the DUCAs in December 2015 was to see some graduated of 
previous years come to offer jobs to those who had just come 
into training. 
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work in progress, we propose tracks to analyze 
emotions and feelings around two Mediator Artifacts to 
improve training and business creation for specific people in 
the French Universities. 
Since 2006, with DUCA / GC devices, UPEM / IUT, in 
cooperation with federated partners in the GC, has trained 
over than 500 students in the creation of activity, including a 
majority of school leavers. The challenge is now finding 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

additional funding to the specific aid the Regional Council of 
Ile-de-France. We hope in European subsidies. 
In the cooperation areas developed around DUCA / GC 
devices, the position of “committed researcher” has really, 
for us, taken all its meaning and corresponds to a personal 
approach to the RSU, revisited as “social responsibility of 
the researcher.” We have gradually become convinced that 
the future can be built from micro actions on the territories 
and on daily innovative practices. 
For us, beyond the figures and examples of activities 
successes creations in various sectors (gardening, personal 
computers, clothing, cleaning, food, restaurants, personal 
services, etc.), the more important part  is to have renewed 
hope through a project dynamics  to allow potential creators 
of economic activities, especially school young leavers, to 
take charge of their destiny, in taking the risk of action for 
hope to promote a new business vision, resolutely different 
from “destructive innovation” discussed by Ferry [21], with 
the disasters of the financial and speculative capitalism. We 
insist on a first goal, that people dare to do the first step and 
also meeting the words of Mallory starting to climb to 
Everest Mountain (1924): “Where there is a will, there is 
always a way.” 
This 
approach 
focuses 
on 
the 
integration 
and 
management of emotions and feelings of all the actors of 
DUCA / GC devices, particularly those of the potential 
creators of economic activities. It also incorporates the 
concepts of “resilience” (ability to move again in a crisis 
situation), both with individual and collective aspects, of 
“sustainable development” of territories. Territories are then 
considered as built by a synergy of local projects, both 
individual and collective [22] in order to create a collective 
dynamics and give capacity for innovation and creativity 
[23]. 
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Paugam., The social link / Le lien social, Paris: PUF, 2010. 
[2]
Available 
on : 
http://www.enseignementsup-
recherche.gouv.fr/cid79926/statut-national-etudiant-
entrepreneur.html. Retrieved 2016, June 26th. 
[3]
H. Azoulay, "Social Intelligence. The case of suburbs : use 
networks to go gout crisis / L’intelligence sociale. Le cas des 
banlieues : utiliser les réseaux pour sortir de la crise",  in M.-
A.Duval dir., New territories of Business Intelligence / Les 
nouveaux territoires de l’Intelligence Economique, Paris: 
ACFCI – IFIE Ed., pp. 119-146, 2008. 
[4]
N. Alter,  Ordinary Innovation / L’innovation ordinaire, Paris: 
PUF, Coll. Quadrige, 2005. 
[5]
F. Bernard., S. Halimi-Falkowicz. and D. Courbet, 
"Experimentation 
and 
Environmental 
Communication: 
Instituting and Engaging Communication / Expérimentation et 
communication 
environnementale 
: 
la 
communication 
engageante et instituante", in D. Courbet dir., Communication 
and Expérimentation, Paris : Ed. Hermès Lavoisier, vol. 2, pp. 
71-113, 2010. 
[6]
N. D’Almeida, "Organizations between projects and stories / 
Les organisations entre projets et récits", in A. Bouzon dir., 
Organizational Communication in debates. Fields, Concepts 
and Prospects / La communication organisationnelle en 
débats. 
Champs, 
concepts 
et 
perspectives, 
Paris : 
L’Harmattan,  p. 145 – 158, 2006.   
[7]
F. Bernard, "The SIC, a Disciplinary of Openness and 
Decompartmentalization /  Les SIC, une discipline de 
l’ouverture et du décloisonnement ", in A. Bouzon dir., op. 
cit., Paris : L’Harmattan,  pp. 33 – 46, 2006. 
[8]
" The game of Michel Foucault / Le jeu de Michel Foucault" 
(interview), Ornicar ?, n° 10, July, pp. 62-93, 1977.  
[9]
Available 
on : 
http://www.edu-tice.org/approche-
th%C3%A9orique/glossaire/concepts-5/. 
Retrieved 
2016,  
June 26th.  
[10] J.-P. Boutinet, Psychology of Project Conducts / Psychologie 
des conduites à projet, Paris: PUF, 1999. 
[11] G. Gramaccia, “Quality, Project, Digital : three symbolic 
variations of Managerial Effectiveness / Qualité, projet, 
numérique : trois variations symboliques de l’efficacité 
gestionnaire”, 
in 
C. 
Batazzi 
dir., 
Communication, 
organisation, 
symboles, 
Revue 
MEI, 
n° 
29, 
Paris : 
L’Harmattan, pp. 55-67, 2008.   
[12] L. Bègue and O. Desrichard dir., Treaty of Social Psychology. 
Science of Human Interactions / Traité de psychologie 
sociale. La science des interactions humaines, Bruxelles: De 
Boeck, 2013. 
[13] M. Zacklad, "Economies of Conviviality in Information and 
Services Societies / Les économies de la convivialité dans les 
sociétés de l’information et des services", Inaugural Lecture / 
Leçon inaugurale, Paris: CNAM, 2009 June 17 th.  
[14]  G. Lefebvre, Identitary Reconstruction and Insertion / 
Reconstruction identitaire et insertion, Paris: L’Harmattan, 
1998. 
[15] Available 
on : 
http://www.enseignementsup-
recherche.gouv.fr/cid79223/pepite-poles-etudiants-pour-
innovation-transfert-entrepreneuriat.html. 
Retrieved 
2016, 
June 26th. 
[16] A. Mucchielli, Situation and Communication, Nice : Les 
éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[17]  J.-P. Caliste and C. Bourret, "Contribution to a Typological 
Analysis of Processes : From Conformity to Agility / 
Contribution à une analyse typologique des processus : de la 
conformité à l’agilité", UTC Quality Notebooks / Les Cahiers 
de la Qualité de l’UTC, Vol 2, G. Farges and al.., Lexitis 
éditions,  pp. 113-116, 2015. 
[18] F. Martin-Juchat, The body and the media. The flesh 
experienced by the media and social spaces / Le corps et les 
médias. La chair éprouvée par les médias et les espaces 
sociaux, Bruxelles: De Boeck, 2008. 
[19] D. 
Goleman, 
Working 
with 
Emotional 
Intelligence, 
Bloomsbury: London, 1998. 
[20] M. Callon,  " Sociology of the Network Actor / Sociologie de 
l’Acteur Réseau", in M. Akrich, M. Callon and B.  Latour.,  
Sociology of the Translation :  Founding Texts / Sociologie de 
la Traduction : Textes fondateurs, Presses de l’Ecole des 
Mines de Paris, pp. 267-276, 2006.  
[21] L. Ferry,  Destructive Innovation / L’innovation destructrice, 
Paris: Plon, 2014. 
[22] C. Bourret,  " Elements for an Approach of Territorial 
Intelligence as a Synergy of Local Projects to Develop a 
Collective Identity /  Eléments pour une approche de 
l’intelligence territoriale comme synergie de projets locaux 
pour développer une identité collective", International Journal 
of Projectics, n° 1, Bruxelles: De Boeck, pp. 79-92, 2008. 
[23] M. Godet, P. Durance and M. Mousli, Unleashing innovation 
in the territories / Libérer l’innovation dans les territoires,
Paris : Conseil d'Analyse Economique - La documentation 
Française, 2010. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

