Understanding Societal Well-Being Through the
Eyes of the News World Media
Vasiliki Voukelatou
Scuola Normale Superiore and
Institute of Information Science and
Technologies (ISTI)-CNR
56126-56127, Pisa, Italy
Email: vasiliki.voukelatou@sns.it
Luca Pappalardo
Institute of Information Science and
Technologies (ISTI)-CNR
56127, Pisa, Italy
Email: luca.pappalardo@isti.cnr.it
Fosca Giannotti
Institute of Information Science and
Technologies (ISTI)-CNR
56127, Pisa, Italy
Email: fosca.giannotti@isti.cnr.it
Abstract—Societal well-being is an important value for people’s
lives and it contributes considerably to the societal progress. It
has been traditionally captured with surveys and during the
last decades innovative approaches have been applied for its
measurement. Global Peace Index is an indicator, which measures
well-being in terms of peace and safety. This study suggests the
potential measurement of this index through a novel automatic
methodology.
Keywords–GDELT; Well-being; Global Peace Index; Big Data
I.
INTRODUCTION
Deﬁning well-being has been always considered a chal-
lenge. Therefore, researchers have expressed its nature by
focusing on the dimensions of well-being, rather than on
deﬁnition[1]. In fact, well-being encompasses a set of health,
socio-economic (such as unemployment) and political dimen-
sions (such as peace and safety) [2], [3], [4]. Therefore,
monitoring it is one of the main concerns of policy-makers.
In fact, when a new policy is applied or an unexpected event
occurs, what policy-makers focus on is eventual consequences
on humans’ well-being.
Researchers have traditionally considered Gross Domestic
Product (GDP) as a good indicator of well-being in society.
The reason for which it has been considered as a suitable
indicator for measuring well-being is that it is strongly linked
with the standard of living indicators [5]. However, GDP
has been criticized as a weak indicator of well-being and
therefore a misleading tool for public policies [6]. In fact,
Stiglitz Commission [7] in 2009 observed that there could be
used other statistical tools, complementary to GDP, for the
well-being measurement. Following this direction, researchers
have created various indexes, for the measurement of well-
being, for many purposes and for capturing a variety of its
dimensions [6]. Some important examples are the Human
Development Index (HDI), created by the United Nations
Development Programme (UNDP) [8], the Better Life Index
(BLI), created by the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) [4] and the Sustainable Well-Being
Index (Benessere Equo Sostenibile-BES), created by Italian
National Statistics Istitute (ISTAT) [9].
Traditionally, well-being and territorial socio-economic de-
velopment are measured through surveys of household income
and consumption [10]. Nevertheless, surveys are usually very
costly, making it difﬁcult for many developing countries to
update their estimates frequently. During the last decades, with
the proliferation of technology, researchers are inclined to use
more innovative and cost-effective approaches complementing
the traditional measurement of well-being. In fact, over the
last years, researchers have frequently used Big Data sources,
which seem to offer new opportunities to study the well-being
dimensions and to circumvent the limitations carried from
traditional methodologies. For this research purpose, several
data sources have been used, with the most important ones
being Twitter (see e.g. [11], [12]), Call Detail Record data
(CDRs) (see e.g. [13], [14], GPS and transportation data (see
e.g. [15], [16], [17]), and a variety of approaches have been
applied, such as sentiment analysis, face recognition, network
analysis and others.
II.
METHODOLOGY AND RESULTS
For the purposes of the current study, nowcasting well-
being is the main task to be realized. In particular, well-being
is explored in terms of safety, which is one of the well-being
dimensions, as deﬁned by OECD [4], and in terms of peace,
which is one of the sustainable development goals, as deﬁned
by United Nations [18]. Global Peace Index (GPI) [19],
created by the Institute for Economics and Peace, captures the
peacefulness of continents and ranks 163 independent states
and territories . GPI is traditionally measured by institutional
surveys and governmental data. Therefore, an innovative data
source is suggested, which could capture the GPI score auto-
matically, complementing the traditional methodology.
GDELT[20], yet a barely explored data source, is validated
whether it could satisfy the aforementioned needs. It is a
publicly available event database supported by Google Jigsaw.
contains data based on international English-language news,
such as AfricaNews, Agence France Presse, Associated Press,
Associated Press Online, Associated Press Worldstream, BBC
Monitoring, Christian Science Monitor, Facts on File, Foreign
Broadcast Information Service, The New York Times, United
Press International and The Washington Post etc. In particular,
Tabari system extracts the events from each article and stores
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

them in an expanded version of the dyadic CAMEO format,
a conﬂict and mediation event taxonomy [21]. Examples of
identiﬁed events are protests, conﬂicts, peace appeals, terrorist
attacks, violence, etc. Additional software identiﬁes the lo-
cation of each event, with a similar approach used to map
wikipedia [22], and the tone, using the tonal algorithm from
Shook et al. [23]). Multiple references to the same event across
one or more articles from the same newswire are collapsed
into a single event record, but are not deduplicated across
newswires. Data are updated daily and historical data, since
1979, are also provided (see Leetaru et al. [24] for more details
on GDELT).
the study presented here, the measurement of GPI is by the
creation of new variables extracted from 0 GDELT event . In
particular, ofﬁcial GPI variables are recreated by mapping them
with GDELT data, which provide similar information. For
instance, “Number of jailed population per 100,000 people”
ofﬁcial GPI variable is recreated by “Arrest, detain; legal
or extrajudicial arrests, detentions, or imprisonments” and
“Threaten with repression” GDELT event categories and is
simply called “jailed” for convenience. After a careful map-
ping, 9 new variables are extracted from the GDELT event
database, as a count of events associated with at a country
and year level, normalized to the total number of events, at a
country and year level.
order to evaluate the new variables on their relationship
with the GPI ofﬁcial score, correlation analysis is conducted.
Preliminary analysis is done without distinguishing between
countries and years. Results show noticeable correlations
between the created GDELT variables and the ofﬁcial GPI
score. particular, the simply called “conventional weapons”
variable and GPI, as well as “impact of terrorism” variable
and GPI show Pearson’s correlation coefﬁcients r=0.41 and
r=0.35 respectively.
III.
DISCUSSION AND FUTURE STEPS
The next step of the study is the creation of odel, that given
the variables created, will nowcast/predict the ofﬁcial GPI
score a country and year level. The model will be built with
the new variables and, potentially, with the Scale ranking data
provided by GDELT, capturing the potential impact each event
might have on the stability of a country. model is expected to
provide a GPI trend pattern similar to the one provided by the
ofﬁcial model. Such a result would contribute to the ofﬁcial
GPI yearly study, since GDELT data are updated daily, making
it possible to provide policy researchers with GPI variations
throughout the year. In addition, in case of a new instability
in a country, such a model could provide predictions for the
variations of the GPI score of the country for the upcoming
year.
REFERENCES
[1]
R. Dodge, A. P. Daly, J. Huyton, and L. D. Sanders, “The challenge
of deﬁning wellbeing,” International journal of wellbeing, vol. 2, no. 3,
2012.
[2]
B. Rapporto, “Il benessere equo e sostenibile in italia,” 2015.
[3]
W. H. Organization, World health statistics 2016: monitoring health for
the SDGs sustainable development goals.
World Health Organization,
2016.
[4]
O. for Economic Co-operation and Development, How’s life?: measur-
ing well-being.
Oecd Paris, 2011.
[5]
C. M. Reinhart and V. R. Reinhart, “After the fall,” National Bureau of
Economic Research, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[6]
M. Fleurbaey, “Beyond gdp: The quest for a measure of social welfare,”
Journal of Economic literature, vol. 47, no. 4, 2009, pp. 1029–75.
[7]
J. E. Stiglitz, A. Sen, and J.-P. Fitoussi, “Report by the commission on
the measurement of economic performance and social progress,” 2017.
[8]
S. Anand and A. Sen, “Human development index: Methodology and
measurement.” 1994.
[9]
C. Istat, “Il benessere equo e sostenibile in italia,” Roma, Istat, 2013.
[10]
A. Deaton, The analysis of household surveys: a microeconometric
approach to development policy.
The World Bank, 1997.
[11]
J. C. Eichstaedt, H. A. Schwartz, M. L. Kern, G. Park, D. R. Labarthe,
R. M. Merchant, S. Jha, M. Agrawal, L. A. Dziurzynski, M. Sap et al.,
“Psychological language on twitter predicts county-level heart disease
mortality,” Psychological science, vol. 26, no. 2, 2015, pp. 159–169.
[12]
L. Dong, S. Chen, Y. Cheng, Z. Wu, C. Li, and H. Wu, “Measuring
economic activity in china with mobile big data,” EPJ Data Science,
vol. 6, no. 1, 2017, p. 29.
[13]
P. Sundsøy, J. Bjelland, B.-A. Reme, E. Jahani, E. Wetter, and L. Bengts-
son, “Towards real-time prediction of unemployment and profession,”
in International Conference on Social Informatics.
Springer, 2017, pp.
14–23.
[14]
F. Finger, T. Genolet, L. Mari, G. C. de Magny, N. M. Manga,
A. Rinaldo, and E. Bertuzzo, “Mobile phone data highlights the role of
mass gatherings in the spreading of cholera outbreaks,” Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences, vol. 113, no. 23, 2016, pp. 6421–
6426.
[15]
C. Smith, D. Quercia, and L. Capra, “Finger on the pulse: identifying
deprivation using transit ﬂow analysis,” in Proceedings of the 2013
conference on Computer supported cooperative work.
ACM, 2013,
pp. 683–692.
[16]
A. I. Robinson, F. Carnes, and N. M. Oreskovic, “Spatial analysis of
crime incidence and adolescent physical activity,” Preventive medicine,
vol. 85, 2016, pp. 74–77.
[17]
B. Ariel and H. Partridge, “Predictable policing: Measuring the crime
control beneﬁts of hotspots policing at bus stops,” Journal of Quantita-
tive Criminology, vol. 33, no. 4, 2017, pp. 809–833.
[18]
G. Assembly, “Sustainable development goals,” SDGs), Transforming
our world: the, vol. 2030, 2015.
[19]
The Institute for Economics and Peace, “VISION of HUMANITY,”
http://visionofhumanity.org//, 2017, (Online; accessed 05-June-2010).
[20]
Kalev Leetaru, “The GDELT Project,” https://www.gdeltproject.org/,
2013, (Online; accessed 05-June-2010).
[21]
D. J. Gerner, P. A. Schrodt, O. Yilmaz, and R. Abu-Jabr, “Conﬂict and
mediation event observations (cameo): A new event data framework
for the analysis of foreign policy interactions,” International Studies
Association, New Orleans, 2002.
[22]
D.-L. Magazine, “Fulltext geocoding versus spatial metadata for large
text archives: Towards a geographically enriched wikipedia,” D-Lib
Magazine, vol. 18, no. 9/10, 2012.
[23]
E. Shook, K. Leetaru, G. Cao, A. Padmanabhan, and S. Wang, “Happy
or not: Generating topic-based emotional heatmaps for culturomics
using cybergis,” in 2012 IEEE 8th International Conference on E-
Science.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 1–6.
[24]
K. Leetaru and P. A. Schrodt, “Gdelt: Global data on events, location,
and tone, 1979–2012,” in ISA annual convention, vol. 2, no. 4. Citeseer,
2013, pp. 1–49.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

