Using Adaptive Immersive Environments to Stimulate Emotional Expression and 
Connection in Dementia Care 
Insights from User Perspectives towards SENSE-GARDEN 
Gemma Goodall1, Ileana Ciobanu2, Ronny Broekx3, Jon Sørgaard1, Iulian Anghelache4, Catalina 
Anghelache-Tutulan4, Mara Diaconu4, Sigrid Mæland5, Therese Borve5, Audun Digranes Dagestad5, Piet 
Bormans6, Marleen Custers6, Katrin Losleben7, Rita Valadas8, Alda Matias8, Andreea Marin2, Kristin Taraldsen1, 
Walter Maetzler9, Mihai Berteanu2, J. Artur Serrano1,10 
1Department of Neuromedicine and Movement Science, Faculty of Medicine and Health, Norwegian University of Science 
and Technology 
2University of Medicine and Pharmacy Carol Davila, Bucharest, ELIAS University Hospital, Romania 
3Innovation Department, ePoint, Belgium 
4 Research & Development Department, Compexin SA, Romania 
5Odda Municipality 
6Aan de Beverdijk, Vulpia Vlaanderen 
7Kvinnforsk, University Hospital of North Norway 
8Santa Casa da Misericórdia de Lisboa 
9Department of Neurology, Christian-Albrechts-University, Kiel, Germany 
10Norwegian Centre for eHealth Research, University Hospital of North Norway 
 
Email: gemma.goodall@ntnu.no, ileanacuk@yahoo.co.uk, ronny.broekx@gmail.com, jon.sorgaard@ntnu.no,  
a.iulian@compexin.ro, catalina.anghelache@compexin.ro, mara.manailescu@compexin.ro, 
sigrid.meland@odda.kommune.no, therese.borve@odda.kommune.no, audun.digranes.dagestad@odda.kommune.no, 
piet.bormans@beverdijk.be, marleen.custers@beverdijk.be, katrin@losleben.eu, rita.valadas@scml.pt, alda.matias@scml.pt, 
andreea.budrica@gmail.com, kristin.taraldsen@ntnu.no, 
w.maetzler@neurologie.uni-kiel.de, mberteanu@gmail.com, artur.serrano@ntnu.no  
 
Abstract— This paper presents early stage research on the 
development of an immersive, multisensory room for people 
living with dementia. Dementia is considered to be a public 
health priority on a global level. Our research addresses the 
challenge of meeting individual needs in dementia care, 
particularly in relation to social and emotional wellbeing. We 
draw upon findings from 52 interviews with users, including 
people with mild cognitive impairment, professional caregivers, 
and informal caregivers.  These interviews were conducted to 
explore initial responses towards a multisensory room called 
SENSE-GARDEN. Findings indicate that users view the 
immersive environment as a space in which a person with 
dementia’s sense of self can be supported and expressed with 
others. SENSE-GARDEN was considered to be a tool for 
creating emotional environments in which users can explore 
their life stories together with loved ones. Technology’s role in 
fostering emotional spaces is discussed in terms of a 
transactional relationship between the person with dementia, 
the caregiver, and the immersive environment. This research 
provides rationale for the study of emotional engagement and 
interaction not only in the SENSE-GARDEN project, but also 
in the wider context of welfare technology as a whole.  
Keywords-dementia; 
virtual 
environments; 
immersive 
technology; emotions; interpersonal relationships 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Dementia is an umbrella term for a variety of 
neurodegenerative diseases that most often affect memory, 
behaviour, and communicative abilities [1].  There are 
approximately 47 million people living with dementia 
worldwide [2]. With this number set to increase to 131 
million by 2050, it is of the utmost importance to tackle 
dementia’s progressive impact on the wellbeing of people 
living with a diagnosis.  
The World Health Organization has called for action on 
dementia, presenting it as a public health priority at a global 
level [1]. This action includes a call for research to identify 
ways of supporting the needs of people living with dementia, 
their caregivers, and the needs of society in the context of 
costs, understanding, and awareness. 
In recent years, studies have identified numerous 
complex needs of people with dementia living in long-term 
care. These include management of challenging behaviours, 
maintenance of social relationships, involvement of people 
with cognitive deficits in meaningful activities, and 
supporting the emotional needs of all [3][4].    
Emotion-oriented approaches to care have been shown 
to be cost-effective ways of improving psychological 
wellbeing and social behaviour amongst people with 
dementia [5][6]. These nonpharmacological approaches are 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

often person-centred, focusing on the social and emotional 
needs of the individual. Reminiscence rooms, virtual gardens 
and virtual reality forests are examples of how immersive 
technologies have been integrated in emotion-oriented 
approaches designed to create effective interventions for 
people with dementia [7][8].  
However, this area of study has called for further 
research in determining what works best for the individual 
[9]. It has recently been suggested that an individualized 
multisensory environment for people with dementia would be 
a highly beneficial intervention, especially if family members 
are included in the selection of stimuli [10]. Our research 
builds on this suggestion, creating not only a personalized 
multisensory intervention, but one which also incorporates 
immersive technology, all with the inclusion of family 
members, friends, and professional care staff. 
This paper presents early stage research on a 
multisensory room, SENSE-GARDEN, that is currently 
being developed as an adaptive, immersive environment 
integrating technology and multisensory stimulation for 
reminiscence in people living with dementia. We will first 
provide a brief overview of the project (Section II), followed 
by the description of the methodology used in research and 
development (Section III). We will then discuss the results of 
the interviews in terms of self-identity (Section IV) and 
shared emotional experiences (Section V). In Section VI, 
these results are summarised and discussed in the theoretical 
frame of a transactional relationship between users and the 
immersive environment. Finally, in Section VII, we conclude 
with final remarks, the next steps for SENSE-GARDEN, and 
suggestions for future research.  
II. 
SENSE-GARDEN: AN OVERVIEW  
SENSE-GARDEN is a psychosocial intervention that is 
being developed to create individualized reminiscence 
sessions for people living with dementia in residential care. 
The intervention combines the use of technology for 
reminiscence and multisensory stimulation, with human-to-
human informational and emotional communication. 
Prototypes of the SENSE-GARDEN room are currently 
being built across Belgium, Norway, Portugal and Romania. 
These rooms are filled with individualized stimuli such as 
familiar music, imagery, films and scents in order to stimulate 
memory and encourage active participation of the person 
with dementia in reminiscing activities. Particular emphasis 
is placed on using autobiographical content such as family 
photographs, music from childhood, and films of life events.  
The use of large projection screens, scent dispensers, and 
surround sound systems will integrate the various multimedia 
of the room, creating an immersive environment. For 
example, high-definition imagery of a forest could be 
accompanied with the smell of pine trees and the sound of 
birds.  
SENSE-GARDEN will expand on currently established 
sensory rooms, which are also known as ‘Snoezelen’ rooms. 
Deriving from the Dutch terms for ‘sniffing’ and ‘dozing’, 
Snoezelen was originally developed in the Netherlands as a 
therapy for individuals with learning difficulties [11].  
SENSE-GARDEN presents an innovative approach to 
sensory rooms by utilising smart technologies that enable the 
space to adapt to individual preferences and needs of the 
person with dementia. Radio frequency identification (RFID) 
will be used to allow the SENSE-GARDEN system to 
identify the user. Upon entering the room, the system will 
automatically project autobiographical multimedia from the 
person with dementia’s user profile. 
The room is designed to be used by two main categories 
of users. The first is the person with dementia (PwD), who is 
also considered the primary user. The second is the caregiver, 
who will either be informal (family/friend) or formal 
(professional care staff). It is anticipated that together, the 
PwD-caregiver dyad will interact with the immersive 
environment to stimulate memory, conversation, sharing and 
engagement.  
III. 
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH  
SENSE-GARDEN is a 
multidisciplinary 
project 
involving partners in Belgium, Norway, Portugal, and 
Romania. The consortium 
brings 
together 
multiple 
professions 
and 
competencies 
including 
technology 
development, architecture, care home management, health 
sciences and research.   
There have been numerous calls to involve people with 
dementia in the process of designing assistive technologies 
[12][13]. Their contributions are thought to be of crucial 
importance, along with input from their caregivers [14]. More 
recently, user-centred design has been recommended for the 
development 
and 
implementation 
of 
psychosocial 
interventions [15].  
The SENSE-GARDEN project embraces a user-centred 
design and is working co-creatively with user groups 
throughout all its phases. The aim of this preliminary research 
was to explore initial responses from user groups, so that their 
ideas and feedback may be integrated into the development 
of SENSE-GARDEN.  
 Thus far, 52 qualitative semi-structured interviews have 
been conducted with user groups across Belgium, Norway, 
Portugal, and Romania. The aims of these interviews were to 
collect responses and attitudes towards the SENSE-
GARDEN room concept, and to identify challenges that may 
arise during the course of the project.  
The specific research questions for this study were as 
follows: (1) What are the users’ attitudes towards the concept 
of SENSE-GARDEN? (2) What benefits, if any, do users 
think SENSE-GARDEN could provide in the care of people 
living with dementia? In order to answer these research 
questions, the interview was designed in a way that allowed 
for in-depth exploration of the users’ beliefs surrounding 
SENSE-GARDEN. The interviews were semi-structured 
with open-ended questions, and lasted for approximately 30 
minutes. Interview questions focused on the overall concept 
of SENSE-GARDEN, the individual components of the                      
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE I.  RESPONDENT INFORMATION
 
 
intervention, and potential benefits. 
The respondents included 16 people living with a 
diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), 19 informal 
caregivers, and 17 professional caregivers. In this study, 
informal caregivers are defined as individuals who are the 
spouse, relative, or close friend of a person living with 
dementia or MCI. Professional caregivers are individuals 
working within environments that administer care for people 
living with dementia.  
Table 1 gives an overview of the respondent information. 
Despite the relatively small sample size, a diversity of age 
groups are represented. There is a visible age difference 
across the three user groups, with almost 20 years in between 
each. The majority of the respondents were women, 
especially within the two caregiving groups. 
In order to conduct an in-depth exploration of the ideas 
and perspectives given by the users, data was analysed using 
thematic analysis. Thematic analysis is a qualitative method 
in which prevalent patterns of ideas and responses are 
identified amongst data. The analysis procedure for this study 
undertook the following phases, given by Braun and Clarke 
[16]: 
1) Familiarisation with the data: All the data was   
thoroughly read and re-read, along with notating initial ideas 
and interpretations of the dataset  
2) Coding: The ideas were used to generate codes, 
which identify interesting features across the data. In this 
study, data was manually coded in an inductive manner, 
meaning that the codes and themes were developed directly 
from the content of the data, rather than being developed by 
pre-existing ideas.  
3) Searching for themes: The codes were used to 
search for themes, which represent patterned responses or 
meanings across the data.  
4) Reviewing themes: The themes were reviewed to 
ensure that they accurately represent the views of the users 
and the view from the entire dataset.  
5) Defining and naming themes: The essence of each 
theme was identified, along with its relevance to the research 
questions.  
 
 
 
6)  Producing the report: Finally, the themes are 
considered in their relationship to one another, and a narrative 
about the dataset is created. This narrative is supported by 
direct quotes from the dataset. 
In order to stay true to the ‘voice’ of the users, codes and 
themes were constantly checked back against the original 
data. Braun and Clarke [16] emphasize the importance of the 
flexibility in thematic analysis and identify the process as one 
of continuous reflection on the reading, shaping, and 
checking of data and themes.  
Six themes were generated from analysis: (1) benefits for 
all, (2) past and present, (3) focus on the individual, (4) 
shared experiences, (5) emotional stimulation, and (6) 
challenges to consider. Given its strong prevalence and 
common occurrence across all themes, this short paper will 
focus on user feedback regarding emotion. Results will be 
discussed in terms of recovering self-identity and expressing 
and sharing emotional experiences.  
The full dataset from the interviews has been made 
available online, along with the interview guide, and coding 
from thematic analysis [17].  
IV. 
RECOVERING SELF-IDENTITY  
Dementia’s 
impact 
on 
memory, 
behaviour 
and 
communicative abilities can have detrimental implications 
for a person’s identity. However, there is evidence to suggest 
that individuals may preserve a sense of self to some extent, 
even in more severe stages of dementia [18][19]. In 
discussing the benefits of SENSE-GARDEN, all respondents 
believed that the individualized nature of the virtual 
environment could trigger autobiographical memories.  This 
was linked by the respondents to helping people with 
dementia connect with their past: “Just only three notes will 
bring back that special moment”…, “Personal videos and 
photos are important. You resonate with your past.”  
Respondents considered interaction with the past as an 
activity for strengthening self-identity in the present moment: 
“Nowadays we forget who we are. SENSE-GARDEN will 
help us all relive forgotten events and identities”…, 
“Awareness of time passing by associating the child in the 
past with today the adult.” This strengthening of selfhood was 
Country 
People with Mild Cognitive Impairment 
Informal Caregivers 
Formal Caregivers 
N 
Mean Age 
Gender 
N 
Mean Age 
Gender 
N 
Mean Age 
Gender 
Male 
Female 
 
 
Male 
Female 
 
 
Male 
Female 
Belgium 
3 
89.6 
2 
1 
6 
57 
1 
5 
4 
31.5 
1 
3 
Norway 
4 
84 
0 
4 
4 
59.3 
0 
4 
4 
38.8 
1 
3 
Portugal 
3 
79.7 
0 
3 
3 
55.7 
0 
3 
3 
44.3 
0 
3 
Romania 
6 
67.2 
3 
3 
6 
50.7 
0 
6 
6 
42.7 
2 
4 
Total 
16 
77.9 
5 
11 
19 
55.3 
1 
18 
17 
39.4 
4 
13 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

also considered to ‘bring back’ the person with dementia, as 
if a separate identity existed prior to the onset of the disease: 
“Family and friends can be with the patient as they were 
before”.  
This symbiotic relationship between past and present has 
been much discussed in regards to selfhood. Surr [18] adopts 
a socio-biographical approach to explain how people with 
dementia use their past in the context of telling their life story 
to others, in order to maintain a sense of self in the present.  
Along with allowing family members to be reconnected 
with their loved one, there was an impression that 
professional caregivers would also be able to view the person 
with dementia in a modified perspective, after sharing life 
story experiences: “Good for the staff to see the person with 
dementia in another way”. Digital storytelling, an activity in 
which technology is used to create innovative forms of 
narrative, has been shown to educate nursing home staff [20].  
The role of others should not be underestimated in 
maintaining the identity of the person with dementia. In 
discussing the needs of people with dementia, Kitwood [21] 
stresses the importance of others in the maintenance of 
personhood. Westius, Kallenberg, and Norburg [22] present 
the notion of ‘intertwined narrative’, in which the life story 
of the person with dementia is integrated with the narrative 
of their family carer. Thus, if the person with dementia should 
become unable to independently recall their story, the 
intertwined narrative of the caring relationship may provide 
opportunity for maintenance of self.   
Earlier literature presents similar ideas. Mills [23] suggests 
that people with dementia bestow their life stories to another, 
therefore continuing their sense of identity. Mills states that 
in this sense, the narrative of the individual never disappears, 
regardless of the inevitable fading of the person’s memory.  
SENSE-GARDEN could potentially offer a method for 
assisting family and friends in preserving the life story of the 
person with dementia. Additionally, SENSE-GARDEN 
offers the opportunity for individuals to explore their life 
story in a new and innovative way (through the use of 
interactive touchscreens, immersive film and sound): “We 
can explore old and new places”..., “My mother wants to see 
her old street again but we can’t do it, with this she can visit 
it again” 
V. 
EXPRESSING AND SHARING EMOTIONAL 
EXPERIENCES  
The users’ value for sharing experiences together 
resonated across all of the interviews. Respondents saw 
SENSE-GARDEN as a means to alleviating communicative 
issues in the caring relationship: “It’s hard being a relative, 
so little competence, dialogue is difficult. This is a great tool 
for having a nice time together”…, “If I visit, there are always 
dead moments. This will help get the life back into the 
conversations”. SENSE-GARDEN’s perceived ability to 
revive communication suggests technology may act as a 
catalyst for emotional connection. This was echoed in other 
responses regarding relationships: “It improves relationships 
with others”…, “Sharing the experience is the most important 
for reconnecting”.  
SENSE-GARDEN was also considered as a potentially 
helpful tool for stimulating nonverbal communication and 
expression. There was a particular emphasis on the ability to 
express oneself through the use of imagery and music: “Being 
able to tell stories, if one has lost the language, pictures and 
movies can tell things”…, “Some people stop talking, but 
they can sing.” 
Individuals living with the disease are capable of 
experiencing and expressing a wide range of emotions, even 
in later stages of dementia [5][24]. Incorporating creative 
activity into the immersive environment has the potential to 
elicit positive expressions of emotion and of self.  
However, one respondent with mild cognitive impairment 
brought an important consideration to light in stating that the 
facilitation from the caregiver is vital for the success of the 
intervention: “The therapist is very important and can instil 
peace and wellbeing. A special emotional environment must 
be created for SENSE-GARDEN to work.” This concept of 
creating a ‘special emotional environment’ goes to suggest 
that it is not the intervention alone that can benefit the caring 
relationship, but also the individuals present who can shape 
the experience of SENSE-GARDEN.  
This idea is supported by respondents’ concepts of ‘space’ 
as something more than just a physical environment: 
“SENSE-GARDEN is an intermediary space, between 
memories and the here and now, a space we can all access 
and we can remember how to feel, by one’s self and together, 
without shame or fear.”  
The above quote, given by an informal caregiver, 
encapsulates the essence of what SENSE-GARDEN is 
aiming to achieve. By adopting a holistic approach to the 
environment, the individuals within it, and the relationships 
that take place, the project aims to create an intervention that 
can facilitate connection and wellbeing for all users.  
VI. 
DISCUSSION  
These findings highlight users’ values for emotional and 
social benefits in SENSE-GARDEN. There was an overall 
sense of the immersive environment being able to stimulate 
autobiographical memory, which was valued as important for 
preserving a sense of identity. The perspectives of 
respondents are in agreement with previous research on 
virtual environments for people with dementia. Siraraya and 
Ang [25] describe the virtual world as a ‘memory sanctuary’, 
in which selfhood and relationships are maintained.   
The respondents were persistent in their beliefs that the 
environment, the facilitation of the intervention, and the 
stimuli all need to be tailored to the specific traits of the 
person with dementia visiting the SENSE-GARDEN. It 
should be acknowledged that the task of individualization is 
not an easy feat. As human beings, we are all individualistic 
by nature, with different tastes, preferences, and desires. 
Adding the constantly fluctuating progression of dementia to 
this individuality makes for a difficult task in designing 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

technology for these users [26][27]. This is something that 
the SENSE-GARDEN project will have to tackle through 
rigorous work and collaboration with users, technology 
developers, and researchers of various disciplines.  
Respondents also emphasized the importance of 
interaction between the SENSE-GARDEN stimuli, the 
person with dementia, and the caregiver. The way in which 
an environment simultaneously influences behaviour of 
individuals and interpersonal relationships, and yet is shaped 
by those persons, can be referred to as the transactional 
relationship.  
The notion of ‘transaction’ was firstly used in this context 
by the philosopher John Dewey, who asserted “Everything 
that exists in far as it is known and knowable is in interaction 
with other things. It is associated, as well as solitary, single.” 
[28]. In the context of SENSE-GARDEN, it could be said that 
a transactional relationship exists between the various 
technologies (the immersive environment), the person with 
dementia, and the caregiver.  
This transactional relationship is conceptualized visually 
in Figure 1. The figure shows how numerous interactions 
may take place between each user and SENSE-GARDEN to 
form an overall relationship. The SENSE-GARDEN system 
is influenced by the users, but, at the same time, the users’ 
emotions and interpersonal interaction with each other are 
shaped by the immersive environment that SENSE-
GARDEN creates. 
Later literature on emotion echoes Dewey’s view, 
suggesting a need to study the complex relationship between 
person and environment, 
for emotions 
cannot 
be 
comprehended by one or the other alone [29]. These ideas can 
be linked to current thought on the nature of technology 
design, which has been described as ‘deeply contextual’ [27]. 
Therefore, incorporating the study of context, environment 
and relationships seems appropriate for both dementia studies 
and technology development. 
Figure 1.  Conceptual model of the transactional relationship that takes 
place within the SENSE-GARDEN intervention  
 
Understanding the interaction between environment and 
the people within it is vital. How does SENSE-GARDEN, 
and technology as a whole, fit into this interaction? What role 
does it play? Going forward, research should adopt a holistic 
approach to evaluating technology, considering the wider 
context in which the technology is situated. 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
The user interviews yielded valuable insights for the 
progression of the SENSE-GARDEN project, with findings 
demonstrating the importance that users hold for emotional 
and social wellbeing. This paper has demonstrated the value 
and usefulness of including user groups in the development 
of not only immersive spaces, but also of interventions for 
care.    
Finally, the social and emotional aspects of virtual 
environments should not be underestimated. The results 
highlight the significance users find in fostering relationships 
through means of self-identity and emotional relationships. A 
focus on social and emotional interactions between 
technology, users, and interpersonal relationships could 
provide very fruitful results in the context of dementia care. 
This research provides rationale for the study of emotional 
engagement and interaction not only in the SENSE-
GARDEN project, but also in the wider context of welfare 
technology studies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was performed in the frame of the EU project 
SENSE-GARDEN 
(AAL/Call2016/054-b/2017, 
with 
implementation period June 2017 - May 2020) funded by 
AAL Programme, co-funded by the European Commission 
and National Funding Authorities of Norway, Belgium, 
Romania, and Portugal. 
We would like to thank all participants in the study. 
REFERENCES 
[1] World Health Organization, "Global action plan on the public 
health response to dementia 2017-2025." Geneva: World 
Health Organization, 2017. 
[2] M. Prince, "World Alzheimer Report 2015: the global impact 
of dementia: an analysis of prevalence, incidence, costs and 
trends.", Alzheimer's Disease International, 2015.  
[3] M. Cadieux, L. Garcia, and J. Patrick, "Needs of People With 
Dementia in Long-Term Care", American Journal of 
Alzheimer's Disease & Other Dementias, vol. 28, no. 8, pp. 
723-733, Sep. 2013, doi: 10.1177/1533317513500840 
[4] R. Milte et al., "Quality in residential care from the perspective 
of people living with dementia: The importance of 
personhood", Archives of Gerontology and Geriatrics, vol. 63, 
pp. 9-17, Mar-Apr, 2016. 
[5] K. Lee, D. Algase, and E. McConnell, "Daytime Observed 
Emotional Expressions of People With Dementia", Nursing 
Research, vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 218-225, Jul-Aug. 2013, doi: 
10.1097/NNR.0b013e31829999d7 
[6] E. Finnema, R. Dröes, M. Ribbe, and W. Van Tilburg, "The 
effects of emotion-oriented approaches in the care for persons 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

suffering from dementia: a review of the literature", 
International Journal of Geriatric Psychiatry, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 
141-161, 2000. 
[7] G. Gowans et al., “Designing a multimedia conversation aid for 
reminiscence therapy in dementia care environments” in CHI 
‘04 Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems (CHI EA ‘04), ACM, April. 2004, pp. 825-836, ISBN: 
1-58113-703-6. 
[8] W. Moyle, C. Jones, T. Dwan, and T. Petrovich, "Effectiveness 
of a Virtual Reality Forest on People With Dementia: A Mixed 
Methods Pilot Study", The Gerontologist, vol. 00, no. 00, pp. 
1-10, Mar. 2017, doi: 10.1093/geront/gnw270 
[9] D. Smit, J. de Lange, B. Willemse, J. Twisk, and A. Pot, 
"Activity involvement and quality of life of people at different 
stages of dementia in long term care facilities", Aging & 
Mental Health, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 100-109, Jun. 2015, doi: 
10.1080/13607863.2015.1049116 
[10] Y. Cui, M. Shen, Y. Ma, and S. Wen, "Senses make sense: An 
individualized multisensory stimulation for dementia", 
Medical Hypotheses, vol. 98, pp. 11-14, Jan. 2017. 
[11] J. Hulsegge and A. Verheul, “Snoezelen: Another World”, 
Chestefield, UK: Rompa, 2005  
[12] R. Orpwood, "Involving People with Dementia in the Design 
Process- Examples of Iterative Design", in Dementia, Design 
and Technology, P. Topo and B. Östlund, Ed. IOS Press, 2009, 
pp. 79-95.  
[13] M. Span, M. Hettinga, M. Vernooij-Dassen, J. Eefsting, and C. 
Smits, "Involving people with dementia in the development of 
supportive IT applications: A systematic review", Ageing 
Research Reviews, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 535-551, Mar. 2013, doi: 
10.1016/j.arr.2013.01.002 
[14] M. Marshall, “The Needs of People with Dementia and Their 
Carers and the Potential Role of Design and Technology”, in 
Dementia, Design and Technology, P. Topo and B. Östlund, 
Ed. IOS Press, 2009, pp. 3-8. 
[15] A. Lyon and K. Koerner, "User-Centered Design for 
Psychosocial Intervention Development and Implementation", 
Clinical Psychology: Science and Practice, vol. 23, no. 2, pp. 
180-200, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1111/cpsp.12154 
[16] V. Braun and V. Clarke, "Using thematic analysis in 
psychology", Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, no. 2, 
pp. 77-101, 2006. 
[17] G. Goodall et al., “Dataset for “Using Adaptive Immersive 
Environments to Stimulate Emotional Expression and 
Connection in Dementia Care: Insights from User Perspectives 
towards 
SENSE-GARDEN” 
[Data 
set]. 
Zenodo. 
doi:10.5281/zenodo.1232156 
[18] C. Surr, "Preservation of self in people with dementia living in 
residential care: A socio-biographical approach", Social 
Science & Medicine, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1720-1730, 2006  
[19] L. Caddell and L. Clare, "The impact of dementia on self and 
identity: A systematic review", Clinical Psychology Review, 
vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 113-126, Feb. 2010.  
[20] R. Stenhouse, J. Tait, P. Hardy, and T. Sumner, "Dangling 
conversations: reflections on the process of creating digital 
stories during a workshop with people with early-stage 
dementia", Journal of Psychiatric and Mental Health Nursing, 
vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 134-141, Mar. 2012, doi: 10.1111/j.1365-
2850.2012.01900.x 
[21] T. Kitwood, "The experience of dementia", Aging & Mental 
Health, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 13-22, 1997. 
[22] A. Westius, K. Kallenberg, and A. Norberg, "Views of life and 
sense of identity in people with Alzheimer's disease", Ageing 
and Society, vol. 30, no. 07, pp. 1257-1278, Jul. 2010, doi: 
10.1017/S0144686X10000309 
[23] M. Mills, "Narrative Identity and Dementia: a Study of 
Emotion and Narrative in Older People with Dementia", 
Ageing and Society, vol. 17, no. 6, pp. 673-698, Nov. 1997. 
[24] R. Woods, "Discovering the person with Alzheimer's disease: 
Cognitive, emotional and behavioural aspects", Aging & 
Mental Health, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 7-16, 2001. 
[25] P. Siriaraya and C. S. Ang, “Recreating living experiences 
from past memories through virtual worlds for people with 
dementia”, in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems, ACM, April 2014, pp. 
3977-3986 
[26] L. Nygård, “Living with Dementia and the Challenges of 
Domestic Technology”, in Dementia, Design and Technology, 
P. Topo and B. Östlund, Ed. IOS Press, 2009, pp. 9-25 
[27] T. Jiancaro, S. Jaglal, and A. Mihailidis, "Technology, design 
and dementia: an exploratory survey of developers", Disability 
and Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 
573-584, Jun. 2016, doi: 10.1080/17483107.2016.1187671 
[28] J. Dewey, Experience and Nature. Courier Corporation, 1958. 
[29] R. Lazarus and S. Folkman, "Transactional theory and research 
on emotions and coping", European Journal of Personality, vol. 
1, no. 3, pp. 141-169, Sep. 1987, doi: 10.1002/per.2410010304 
 
 
 
 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

