Aircraft in Your Head:
How Air Trafﬁc Controllers Mentally Organize Air Trafﬁc
Linda Pfeiffer, Georg Valtin, Nicholas Hugo M¨uller and Paul Rosenthal
Technische Universit¨at Chemnitz, Visual Computing Laboratory and Institute for Media Research
Chemnitz, Germany
Email: {georg.valtin, nicholas.mueller}@phil.tu-chemnitz.de,
{linda.pfeiffer, paul.rosenthal}@cs.tu-chemnitz.de
Abstract—The StayCentered Project at Technische Universit¨at
Chemnitz aims for assisting air trafﬁc controllers in stressful
trafﬁc situations. Therefore we are seeking to comprehend air
trafﬁc controllers’ principles of operation within the dyadic team
structure. First exploratory research revealed insights into air
trafﬁc controllers’ practices, their information processing (mental
models), potential stressors, and related emotional effects. This
paper discusses the results and the implications for air trafﬁc
controllers’ work in general and the StayCentered project in
particular.
Keywords–Air trafﬁc control; HCI; Decision Support; Mental
Models
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the state of normal operation, a dyad of two air trafﬁc
controllers is responsible for any given airspace. Both have
access to task relevant information, such as radar data, weather
reports, and ﬂight schedules. An impression of a German air
trafﬁc controller’s workplace is shown in Figure 1. Within
the dyad, the air trafﬁc controllers take different roles: one
(executive) is responsible for the communication with the
pilots using spoken trafﬁc commands over the radio, while the
other one (planner) is coordinating the acceptance or handover
of ﬂights from or to other sectors. This is necessary, since
each sector has its individual operation of ﬂight-levels and
is generally only accepting ﬂights within a certain ﬂight-level
threshold in order to keep a smooth vertical alignment between
adjacent ﬂights. While arranging the handovers, the planner
is also responsible to verify the communication between
the executive and the pilots and to intervene, if necessary.
Therefore, the division of responsibilities is depending on a
good internal communication as well as a transparent work
situation. Expediting and maintaining orderly trafﬁc ﬂows can
be characterized as the main goal of air trafﬁc controllers’
work. However, the adherence to strict separation standards for
safety reasons sets nonnegotiable rules that act as constraints
[1, p 341]. The combination of these two characteristics results
in a demanding work, especially because air trafﬁc controllers
have to make most of their decisions in a narrow time frame
[2][3]. Due to the characteristics of their work and the general
limitations of the human ability to process information, air
trafﬁc controllers often experience time pressure [1, p 339] that
can lead to a stress response. A stress response is the activation
of several physiological systems on the affective, cognitive,
neural, endocrinal, and muscular level [4] when individuals are
facing a stress inducing stimulus (stressor). However, stress
is not per se a negative state, since the evaluation of the
stressor depends on the interplay of the situational demands
Figure 1. An air trafﬁc controller dyad at the German air trafﬁc control
center in Munich (Source: DFS Deutsche Flugsicherung GmbH).
and the abilities of the individual to cope with the situation [5].
Since time pressure is a situational characteristic in the daily
work of air trafﬁc controllers, the occurrence of negative stress
and its emotional and psychological consequences (short term:
anxiety, despondence, anger, cognitive impairments; long term:
fatigue, health issues, depression) is likely (see for instance
[6][7]). Therefore, the reduction or rather avoidance of stress
inducing situations is an important goal in the daily work of
air trafﬁc controllers.
Within this paper we will introduce the StayCentered
project context that motivates our research. Section III outlines
the methods used to gain the ﬁndings that will be discussed
in Section IV. The following sections relate ﬁndings to the
project context in terms of the future mental and emotional
model as well as future interfaces. Section VII summarizes
and concludes the paper.
II.
THE STAYCENTERED PROJECT
Typically, the work of an air trafﬁc controller involves man-
aging various ﬂight routes, aircraft, and altitude as well as air
speed differences. Additionally, meteorological circumstances,
technical maintenance activities or, in rare circumstances,
emergencies can occur at any given moment and require swift
and correct reactions by the controller. As air trafﬁc controllers
often work in dyads, in order to have an inherent corrective
at all time and to provide redundancies, the StayCentered
project at Technische Universit¨at Chemnitz aims for enhancing
the already high security standards of air trafﬁc controllers,
and for identifying as well as for offering assistance within
cognitive stressful ﬂight situations. Therefore, the dyadic team
structure has to be analyzed comprehensively: both their voiced
interactions between themselves and with the pilots within
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

their controlled airspace. The goal is to be able to identify
human error potential in voicing commands, interpreting vi-
sual data representations and to identify limits in cognitive
processing capabilities. The resulting model of a working
controller dyad is then used to simulate the emotional and
cognitive state of the dyad in regards to upcoming air trafﬁc
some hours in advance. For example, planned but delayed
ﬂights (e.g., a sandstorm in Dubai and a thunderstorm in
Moscow) will lead to an increased number of aircraft in
their destination sector. Flight control management would then
be able to split sectors and to call in additional controllers
in order to keep the workload at a comfortable level. In
addition, the controller stations themselves already offer the
possibility for the controllers to signal an increased workload.
However, the implementation of the projects biophysiological
measurements would allow for an objective and immediate
feedback to the controllers about their current cognitive state
and troubleshooting capabilities [8], as well as for a workload
regulation [9]. Therefore, the galvanic skin response, facial
action coding, body posture, vocal properties, eye movements
and pupil dilation are recorded and used to infer an emotion
valence, arousal level, and cognitive load [10].
III.
METHODOLOGY
To assess whether or not an air trafﬁc controller experiences
stress and the associated negative emotions, it is necessary to
fully understand how the controller is receiving and processing
the crucial information and how this is converted into practical
actions. Since it is not possible to gain insight into the informa-
tion processing objectively from the outside, it is necessary that
the air trafﬁc controllers verbalize their cognitive processes.
For this purpose, we used semi-structured interviews outside
the work situation to gather general information about how air
trafﬁc controllers experience work-related stress and how they
cope with it. Among others, we let them describe exceptional
situations which were especially demanding, how they solved
them, and how they felt afterwards. Furthermore, we used the
thinking-aloud approach in interviews to get a basic under-
standing on how air trafﬁc controllers process information.
We confronted them with a typical radar screen printout.
The sector and scenario were unknown to the participants. It
described a situation containing 8 aircraft, a mid term conﬂict
of two aircraft with same heading and differing speed and
a lateral conﬂict of two aircraft with opposite heading, but
vertically divided. We asked them to evaluate the given ﬂight
situation regarding the salience of important information as
well as the order in which critical data are perceived and
processed. Additionally, we observed the air trafﬁc controllers
during their work at the level of moderate participation,
allowing us to ask speciﬁc questions. Here, we also used the
thinking-aloud approach to get information and explanations
about certain actions and events. The observation under real
working conditions is especially important since cognitive
and emotional reactions are known to be a combination of
person and situation, and thus only the inclusion of the given
situational characteristics allows for a meaningful interpreta-
tion of the data gathered in the interviews. We decided to
use this combination of methods in an exploratory approach
in order to get the information of the air trafﬁc controllers
as authentic and natural as possible. Expressing thoughts,
ideas and considerations in their own words in an actual
work situation as well as in the reﬂecting, meta-cognitive
form of an interview appears to be the adequate methodical
approach for this kind of research problem. The data was
collected between February and April 2015 at the facilities
of the Deutsche Flugsicherung (DFS) in Langen and Munich.
To assure a sufﬁcient variability in the data, we interviewed
and observed experienced and novice air trafﬁc controllers
likewise. Altogether, we collected data of N=21 air trafﬁc
controllers (age: 18 to 57). Since the evaluation of the air trafﬁc
controllers’ work requires a basic level of expertise regarding
the work station, work processes and air trafﬁc, all researchers
received an introduction to the air trafﬁc controller’s work by
an expert of the DFS before data collection. Since recording
audiovisual material is problematic due to security reasons,
all interviews and observations were recorded by pen and
paper. For the purpose of the analysis, all data was coded
and categorized. Due to the exploratory nature of the research,
we did not follow a standardized coding scheme. Instead, we
tried to identify all relevant factors regarding the cognitive
and emotional constitution and experiences of the air trafﬁc
controllers in relation so the given work situation.
IV.
FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION
By fulﬁlling their daily tasks, air trafﬁc controllers face
highly demanding situations. They need to process plenty
pieces of information simultaneously that are arriving on
multimodal channels (primarily auditive and visual). Based on
this information, controllers have to make quick and reliable
decisions to ensure safety of the aircraft, and thus people, under
their control. When thinking of the air trafﬁc controllers task,
we ﬁrst thought about the controller sitting in front of the radar
screen and scanning the actual ﬂight situation for potential
conﬂicts all along. But according to our data, the radar screen
is most of the time rather a secondary tool that is used to check
whether every aircraft behaves the way it should. Usually, the
air trafﬁc controller is creating an internal representation of the
current ﬂight situation reaching about three minutes into the
future. This picture is mainly build upon ﬂight plan data that
can be accessed via the (digital) ﬂight strips, the controller’s
experience, and internalized knowledge about standard routes
and so forth. A schematic diagram of the air trafﬁc controllers’
mental situation is depicted in Figure 2. According to Mogford
[11], such a picture consists of situation awareness that is
based upon the controller’s mental models. While in literature
mental models of air trafﬁc controllers are often described as
somewhat three dimensional models [11][12], our controllers
explicitly stated that they do not build up a three dimensional
model of the situation. They described it as a two dimensional
model, similar to the radar display that is expanded by a
variable indicating vertical layers. Other studies revealed that
air trafﬁc controllers [13] and already controller students [14]
do not necessarily build up a three dimensional mental model.
They develop an individual mental structure to represent the
three dimensional data over time. In standard situations, when
a ﬂight strip is appearing on the controller’s screen representing
an airplane that is about to enter the sector soon, he is ﬁrst
looking for the route it is tending to take and at which ﬂight
level. For ﬁrst conﬂict detection, the controller is checking
overﬂight times at the ﬁxes. If overﬂight times are overlapping
ten minutes to the ones of another ﬂight he marks a potential
conﬂict. When the involved aircraft appears on the radar
screen, the controller is checking a second time for the conﬂict
and then improving gradually the quality of his prediction
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 2. Schematic diagram of the air trafﬁc controllers mental situation
representation and its sources.
about a possible problem. First, he is estimating vertical and
horizontal separations according to his experience (rule of
thumb). He can use distance measuring tools provided by the
system on the radar screen, but he is also able to do exact
calculations using mental arithmetics, if necessary.
However, there are still situations requiring the air trafﬁc
controller to construct the current situation from ﬂight strips
and radar screen (e.g., during a hand over, the controller gets
a description on the situation while scanning the radar and the
strips). The ﬁrst variable controllers focus on, while scanning
the radar display, is altitude information and whether an aircraft
is climbing or descending. After this, aicraft’s heading and
position are considered and lastly, ground speed gives a hint on
the existence of a potential conﬂict. Rantanen et al. identiﬁed
in their experiments [1] altitude as the information that is
processed ﬁrst for conﬂict detection. Furthermore, Mogford
et al. emphasized altitude and heading as the most important
information for air trafﬁc controllers’ situation awareness [11]
During interviews the air trafﬁc controllers mentioned three
main stressors:
High Trafﬁc Load
The crucial factor for trafﬁc load is the number
of aircraft under control. However, the resulting
workload goes beyond the sheer number. The
structure of the airspace and standard routes as
well as directions of the aircraft have an impact
on perceived complexity. Plenty of vertical move-
ments, as in approach sectors and sectors in the
lower airspace, and lots of crossing trajectories
increase the probability for potential conﬂicts.
Unexpected Events in the Airspace
Since air trafﬁc controllers tend to have a detailed
picture of upcoming events, unconsidered events
may cause additional load, since they often require
a swift reaction while simultaneously adding a
unknown variable to their calculations. Usually,
these are events that are neither listed in nor
logical consequences of ﬂight plan data. Initially,
we considered emergency ﬂights as unexpected
things causing stress because air trafﬁc controllers
have to clear the way for them. However, most
of the emergencies will already be marked in the
actualized ﬂight plan by the pilots. Thus, they can
be regarded as expected trafﬁc, just with a higher
priority, making them just another variable in the
air trafﬁc controller’s mental model. Even closures
of single airports aren’t surprising, because every
ﬂight has an alternative destination stated in its
ﬂight plan. However, an unplanned aircraft calling
in or ﬂights within their sector boundaries, which
are not under their control, are stress inducing
factors. Hence, a pilot who forgot next sectors
frequency, just asking for it once again, may
cause more confusion than emergencies, because
the controller already deleted the associated ﬂight
strip and thus also removed the ﬂight and callsign
already from his mental model.
Malfunction of Equipment
Generally, the air trafﬁc controller is dependent
on his equipment. Without radar display the con-
troller has to rely on the pilots following his
instructions without any misapprehensions. With-
out ﬂight plan data, the controller would loose
the ability to proactively regulate air trafﬁc. Still,
air trafﬁc controllers emphasized especially mal-
function of the radio as problematic. Without
the ability to communicate with the pilots the
air trafﬁc controllers are completely incapable of
action. They don’t know about pilots’ plans and
aren’t able to forewarn them of an upcoming
danger.
Other Things Indirectly Being Relevant
For efﬁciently building their picture, air trafﬁc
controllers rely mostly on their experiences and
internalized information, such as standard routes
and sector borders. If controllers are returning
after a period of absence (e.g., illness or holidays),
they perceive their work as more demanding, due
to changes in standard routes, sector boundaries,
or agreements. Also, other impact factors like gen-
eral well-being, mood, private problems etc. were
mentioned by air trafﬁc controllers to inﬂuence
the work performance. Therefore, personal factors
often change the perceived demands. According
to the air trafﬁc controllers’ experience, the same
workload can be experienced differently.
These results on potential stressors align with the ﬁve most
stressful items found by Brink [15]. South African air trafﬁc
controllers rated the number of aircraft, extraneous trafﬁc,
unforeseeable events, peek hour trafﬁc and limitations, and
reliability of the equipment to be most stressful factors out of
a questionnaire with 20 items.
Let’s have a closer look at the term ’team’. When we
initially used the word ’team’ within the context of air trafﬁc
controllers, we had the air trafﬁc controller dyad in mind.
However, the air trafﬁc controller’s understanding of ’team’
covers more than initially assumed. On the one hand, they
used the term when speaking about all the air trafﬁc controllers
responsible for German airspace and adjacent sectors. When
recognizing a potential conﬂict situation that would happen
in the neighboring sector, but could be prevented or already
solved within their own sector, they would do so. When
recognizing a conﬂict situation within an other sector, they
would warn the responsible controller. When recognizing that
controllers responsible for an adjacent sector have high trafﬁc
load and they are stressed, they try to keep further trafﬁc
away from that sector or try to avoid more stress for their
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

colleagues by organizing the ﬂights in their own sector in a
way that makes them easy to handle in the next one. This
understanding of a team is also supported by the fact that air
trafﬁc controllers are on a ﬁrst-name basis with each other. On
the other hand, the term ’team’ was used while talking about
the air trafﬁc controller’s organizational entity. In German air
trafﬁc control centers, there are groups of air trafﬁc controllers
that are responsible for several neighboring sectors. These
sectors share borders and in times of low trafﬁc load they
can be combined. Each controller out of this group has the
admission to work on every position within these sectors. Thus,
each of the controllers will somewhen constitute a dyad with
every other controller out of this group.
However, good communications and collaboration with the
air trafﬁc controller’s colleagues, his supervisor, and the pilots
is critical to safety and efﬁciency in air trafﬁc. We deter-
mined the following typical forms of communication. Short-
term collaboration with pilots consists of speech over radio
using predeﬁned terms and routines in order to minimize the
number of misunderstandings. The supervisor communicates
to the controllers through the display of a duty roster. Change
requests, rapid updates, and the like encourage both to move
to and talk to each other, although telephone connection is
available. Most of the communication is happening within
the dyad responsible for a sector. Both, the executive and the
planner have to build up a shared picture of the situation. In
order to do so and to solve potential conﬂicts, they commu-
nicate using gestures (pointing gestures to guide the others
attention onto the screen, sometimes they are also using the
other one’s mouse), and the ﬂagging of (digital) ﬂight strips
(to highlight potential conﬂicts), but also in this case is speech
the dominant communication channel. In times of high trafﬁc
load, controllers are sitting up straight, speaking concisely
about trafﬁc concerns. In times of low trafﬁc load they are
more relaxed and they are chatting with each other and the
surrounding controllers. Usually, the planner is talking to other
dyads via telephone, except for the ones sitting spatially near to
him. Another tool for controller to controller communications
is the so called ”‘Geneva trafﬁc light”’. In German control
centers there is a display assigning a color (green, yellow, red)
to each sector with green being the default color for normal
trafﬁc load. By setting this color, controllers can communicate
their actual workload to other controllers and the supervisor.
However, if there is really high trafﬁc load controllers are
so focused on their work that they often don’t think about
changing the color.
Emotional aspects within the air trafﬁc controller’s work
include awareness of own sentiments and awareness of the
emotional state of others. Generally, controllers stated that
there are no crucial emotional situations. Sometimes private
problems cause the controller to “concentrate a little more”
but usually they know how to act out of them. After a critical
situation at work they are in need of someone to talk to. Often
they prefer talking to their colleagues about it. During follow-
up discussions some other situations were identiﬁed. Air trafﬁc
controllers said they are feeling proud, after managing a tricky
situation smoothly. They have a sense of delight, when pilots
thank them for satisfying their wishes (e.g., a direct). During
long periods of low trafﬁc the predominant sense is boredom.
The most important indicator for the others emotional state is
the sound of their voice and their choice of words, especially
during communication using telephone or radio. Succinct an-
swers indicate elevated concentration. During communication
with their spatial neighbors, gestures and poses can be accessed
additionally for emotional awareness.
V.
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE MENTAL AND EMOTIONAL
MODEL
From a psychological point of view, it is not surprising that
the mental and emotional states of air trafﬁc controllers are
inﬂuenced by personal as well as situational characteristics.
However, without a detailed analysis of the air controllers
work, it is impossible to specify the relevant variables and
their parameter values. Based on the collected data we are now
able to consider precise variables in our model. Regarding the
situational aspects, the number of aircraft as well as their ﬂight
characteristics are the main aspects for potential workload, and
of course the available time is also relevant. Further research is
necessary to identify the concrete relationship between those
variables. However, it is already clear that there is limit on
how many interactions can take place between the air trafﬁc
controller and pilots, because every interaction takes several
seconds. Considering the well-known relationship between
arousal and performance on difﬁcult tasks [16], such as the
work of an air trafﬁc controller, we assume that the optimal
efﬁciency lies far below the physical limit of interactions.
It has still to be determined how to express the comfort
zone of air controllers by an index. One potential solution
is the indication of interactions per minute with the option to
weight interactions depending on the situation’s complexity.
The model requires two kinds of critical values for the index
that signals a possible overload: One is relating to situational
peaks which can be understood as episodes of high workload in
a rather short time frame. The other one is applying to longer
periods of time with an increased workload that is higher
than the optimum but lower than the situational peak. Both
kinds of overload can result in mistakes, incorrect decisions
or just slower reactions and must be prevented. Even though
German air trafﬁc controllers can be considered a homogenous
group of specialists who are able to work under pressure,
the critical values must be personalized due to differences in
personality related factors. Our data suggest that many typical
personality variables affect the work of air trafﬁc controllers,
such as mood, alertness, work experience, private problems,
absence due to vacation, or sickness, etc. The main problem
for the consideration of those variables is their problematic
measurement: Many of them are only available to the air
controllers themselves, and even they are not always able to
fully specify all factors that might inﬂuence their performance
or to quantify them. Furthermore, many of those variables
are changing on a daily basis, even though they should not
ﬂuctuate that much. The personality factors can therefore be
used to improve the index based on the situational variables.
Simply put: The critical values can be adjusted depending
on how an air trafﬁc controller feels - if this information is
available - or based on objective information like the absence
of a controller for several weeks which lets him experience
the work as more demanding during the ﬁrst days of his
work. For a short-term evaluation of the air controllers state,
additional diagnostics will further improve the determination
of the personality variables inﬂuence. Additionally, a cross-
validation and combination, respectively, with psychophysio-
logical parameters, eye-tracking, voice characteristics, facial
emotion expression as well as poses and gestures will also
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

help to classify ﬂight situation regarding their complexity. For
instance, a more complex problem will result in longer times of
ﬁxation on the involved ﬂights, an increased skin conductance,
shorter voice-commands, a straighter body position and a stern
facial expression. Our model must therefore take many vari-
ables into account, some global and some situational. Things
become even more complicated, since the air trafﬁc controllers
are usually working together as a dyad. The model has to
take into consideration not only the individual parameters, but
also the speciﬁcs of the team. The same ﬂight situation in
a sector might result in excessive demands for one dyad but
present an acceptable challenge to a team of veterans. This
additional set of team related variables complicated the model,
since questions about the structures and relationships between
all the variables contained in the model are not fully answered
yet.
VI.
IMPLICATIONS FOR THE USER INTERFACES
One of the main goals of the StayCentered project is
to identify and to offer assistance within cognitive stressful
ﬂight situations. Current interfaces have to be rethought in
order to give access to the identiﬁed and simulated mental
and emotional states. The StayCentered interfaces will be
designed to give decision support to the supervisor, to facilitate
cooperation, and to adapt with respect to the controller’s
current state. At the moment the supervisor’s decision upon
splitting up a sector is done by consulting workload predic-
tions, mainly based on the expected number of aircraft, and
controllers demands. The StayCentered supervisor interface
will present the simulation’s forecasts. Anticipated stressful
situations should be visible at a glance and supporting decision
making on resolving these situations. As described above,
cooperation and communication are crucial elements of the air
trafﬁc controllers daily work. These communicative situations
shall be supported by the interfaces. There should be adequate
ways of communication so that controllers don’t have to leave
their position for consulting their supervisor. The controllers
workspace should be designed in such a way that the actions
of one controller are clearly visible to his partner in the
dyad. Thus, we are expecting to support the creation of a
shared mental model and enhancing communication. The most
obvious advantage of the StayCentered system is that the men-
tioned ”Geneva trafﬁc light” can change its color automatically.
However, also it’s presentation could be enhanced. Currently,
each sector is represented by a colored button (green-yellow-
red) on a secondary screen. Additional short textual remarks
for the sectors in stressful situations are available. A graphical
integration of this information into the radar screen would
make it accessible at a glance. The interface adaption with
respect to the controller’s state applies to the interfaces at the
controllers workspace. Currently, German air trafﬁc controllers
get their information via a plan-view radar screen (aircraft
related data), a digital strip board (ﬂight plan data), and several
secondary screens (additional information like weather data or
the ”Geneva trafﬁc light”). For a more detailed description of
the controllers workspace see [17]. The information presen-
tation is independent of the emotional state of the controller,
the workload, and the complexity of the actual ﬂight situation.
However, the importance of information objects differs from
situation to situation. StayCentered controller interfaces will
consider the identiﬁed emotional state of the controller as an
indicator for the chosen representation. And it is not just about
assisting the controller in stressful situations. In times of low
trafﬁc load, controllers often feel bored. Since boredom has a
negative impact on their attention, we want to consider these
situations within the design of the adaptive interface as well.
Good user interfaces support the user’s mental models. Recent
research on air trafﬁc controllers’ interfaces often considers
three-dimensional radar displays (for an overview on current
research see [17]). According to our data, the controller’s
mental model of a ﬂight situation is not necessarily three-
dimensional. Therefore we would prefer a two-dimensional
representation and allow for stepwise adaption to required
accuracy. Nevertheless, the aircraft’s altitude is still extremely
important for detecting potential conﬂicts and should con-
sequently be considered with high priority within the radar
visualization.
VII.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Within this paper we described the StayCentered project
at Technische Universit¨at Chemnitz that aims for assisting air
trafﬁc controllers’ work by identifying and simulating the air
trafﬁc controller dyad’s mental and emotional states. Within
this context we presented the results of our preliminary study
and discussed its implications for the mental and emotional
models as well as for the user interfaces. We identiﬁed high
trafﬁc load with plenty of vertical movements, unexpected
events and a malfunction of the equipment as the most relevant
stressors in air trafﬁc control. Furthermore, stress level is
inﬂuenced by personal factors. Surprisingly, the controllers
stated not to create a three-dimensional mental representation
of ﬂight situations. The information used to create the mental
representation consists of internal knowledge about the sectors
characteristics and standard routes, their experience and ﬂight
plan data. For checking the current situation, information
is processed in the following order: altitude, climb/descent,
horizontal position, heading, and speed on ground.
The order of information processing should be reﬂected
within the user interfaces, as well as the structure of the air
controllers mental model. Identiﬁed forms of communication
should be supported. The automatic recognition of the air
trafﬁc controller’s workload and emotional state allows for
further improvement in the workﬂow.
Our ﬁndings suggest that sufﬁciently modeling the cogni-
tive and emotional states of air trafﬁc controllers requires the
inclusion of many variables regarding the individual controllers
as well as the dyad and the current workload. The next steps
in the process of model building are the identiﬁcation of other
relevant variables and generally their measurement and further
processing. Even though we already know that cognitive and
emotional states can be recognized using our multidimensional
approach, the relationships between the variables still needs
further research. Possible methodological approaches include
the recording of actual or simulated work sessions in com-
bination with post-hoc interviews in order to identify critical
or demanding situations. By comparing the measurement data
with the information given by the controller, we can identify
typical patterns that signal stressful episodes which can be used
in our model.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. M. Rantanen and A. Nunes, “Hierarchical conﬂict detection in air
trafﬁc control.” International Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 15,
no. 4, 2005, pp. 339 – 362.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[2]
V. D. Hopkin, Human Factors in air trafﬁc control.
Taylor & Francis,
1995.
[3]
R. J. Roske-Hofstrand and E. D. Murphy, “Human information pro-
cessing in air trafﬁc control,” in Human Factors in Air Trafﬁc Control,
M. W. Smolensky and E. S. Stein, Eds.
Academic Press, 1998, ch.
Human information processing in air trafﬁc control, pp. 65–114.
[4]
J. Siegrist, “Stress am arbeitsplatz [stress at the workplace],” in Gesund-
heitspsychologie [Health Psychology], R. Schwarzer, Ed.
G¨ottingen:
Hogrefe, 2006, pp. 303–318.
[5]
R. S. Lazarus, Emotion and Adaptation.
Oxford University Press,
1991.
[6]
B. McEwen and J. Morrison, “The brain on stress: Vulnerability and
plasticity of the prefrontal cortex over the life course,” Neuron, vol. 79,
no. 1, 2013, pp. 16 – 29.
[7]
D. N. Khansari, A. J. Murgo, and R. E. Faith, “Effects of stress on the
immune system,” Immunology Today, vol. 11, 1990, pp. 170 – 175.
[8]
T. Van Gog, F. Paas, and J. J. G. Van Merri¨enboer, “Uncovering
expertise-related differences in troubleshooting performance: combining
eye movement and concurrent verbal protocol data,” Applied Cognitive
Psychology, vol. 19, no. 2, 2005, pp. 205–221.
[9]
S. Crevits, I.and Debernard and P. Denecker, “Model building for air-
trafﬁc controllers’ workload regulation,” European Journal of Opera-
tional Research, vol. 136, 2002, pp. 324–332.
[10]
H.-C. She and Y.-Z. Chen, “The impact of multimedia effect on science
learning: Evidence from eye movements,” Computers & Education,
vol. 53, no. 4, 2009, pp. 1297–1307.
[11]
R. H. Mogford, “Mental models and situation awareness in air trafﬁc
control,” The International Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 7, no. 4,
1997, pp. 331–341.
[12]
S. T. Shorrock and A. Isaac, “Mental imagery in air trafﬁc control.”
International Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 20, no. 4, 2010, pp.
309 – 324.
[13]
B. Kirwan, L. Donohoe, T. Atkinson, H. MacKendrick, T. Lamoureux,
and A. Phillips, “Getting the picture-investigating the mental picture
of the air trafﬁc controller,” in Contemporary ergonomics 1998, M. A.
Hanson, Ed.
TAYLOR AND FRANCIS, 1998, pp. 404–408.
[14]
M. Tavanti and M. Cooper, “Looking for the 3d picture: The spatio-
temporal realm of student controllers,” in Human Centered Design, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, M. Kurosu, Ed.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 5619, pp. 1070–1079.
[15]
E. Brink, “The relationship between occupational stress, emotional
intelligence and coping strategies in air trafﬁc controllers,” Master’s
thesis, University of Stellenbosch, 2009.
[16]
R. M. Yerkes and J. D. Dodson, “The relation of strength of stimulus
to rapidity of habit-formation,” Journal of Comparative Neurology and
Psychology, vol. 18, no. 5, 1908, pp. 459–482.
[17]
L. Pfeiffer, N. H. M¨uller, and P. Rosenthal, “A survey of visual
and interactive methods for air trafﬁc control data,” in Information
Visualisation (IV), 2015 19th International Conference on, 2015, pp.
574–577.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

