Towards a Psychologically Grounded Emotion Dictionary for Russian
Polina Panicheva
National Research University Higher School of Economics
16 Soyuza Pechatnikov st.,
St. Petersburg, 190121, Russian Federation
Voronezh State Pedagogical University
86 Lenina st., Voronezh, 394043, Russian Federation
Email: ppanicheva@hse.ru
Olga Bogolyubova
Department of Psychology, Faculty for Social Wellbeing
University of Malta
Tal-Qroqq, Msida, MSD 2080, Malta
Email: olga.bogolyubova@um.edu.mt
Abstract—In Natural Language Processing, there is currently a
trend towards analyzing subjective language, one of the important
topics being emotion detection from text. There have been a
number of successful attempts of developing emotion dictionaries
in the English language based on emotion theories well established
in psychology. However, such resources in Russian are lacking.
In the current work, we propose a roadmap for developing a
psychologically grounded emotion dictionary in Russian. Based
on the related work overview, we propose an emotion classi-
ﬁcation theory by Carroll Izard including ten basic emotions
as a framework for building emotion dictionary. We outline a
number of lexical resources for compiling word candidates for
the dictionary. Finally, we describe the annotation procedure by
volunteers and experts, and psychometric evaluation to measure
internal consistency and external validity of the dictionary. The
dictionary will be used in emotion detection tasks, compared to
other available lexical resources, and supplemented with context-
dependent statistical algorithms.
Keywords–Emotion dictionary; Russian language; affective lan-
guage; subjectivity analysis; basic emotions.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In recent Natural Language Processing (NLP) applications
subjectivity analysis, e.g., identiﬁcation and interpretation of
information related to personal private states, has become
extremely popular. Resources and algorithms of subjectivity,
sentiment and emotion detection in text are numerous. They
are applied to analyze the ever-growing body of texts in the
World Wide Web, including social networks, news, political
debates and product reviews.
The ﬁrst line of research in this ﬁeld stems from psychol-
ogy, with the seminal work by authors of Linguistic inquiry
and Word Count [1]. This body of research adheres to the
framework of psychological science, with lexicons compiled
and annotated manually in a top-down manner, and dictionary
categories originating from well-established research on psy-
chology of emotions and appraisal [2]. Moreover, the resulting
dictionaries are thoroughly tested in terms of their psychomet-
ric properties. The other research line is linguistically oriented:
a word is supposed to fall into a sentiment or emotion category
if there holds a certain formal relation between the word mean-
ing and the category. Sometimes, the word should include a
certain emotion or sentiment in its connotation [3][4], or imply
an affective response as a result of common-sense logical
operations [5]. Such linguistically motivated dictionaries are
often developed (semi-)automatically by analyzing word usage
in context [4], or rely on existing world knowledge thesauri
[6][7].
Although there exist a number of sentiment and emo-
tion dictionaries in Russian, they are mostly linguistically
grounded. Some attempts have been made to translate English
psychologically grounded emotion dictionaries to Russian,
however, with no psychometric evaluation. In the current work,
we set out to ﬁll this gap by creating a psychologically
grounded emotion dictionary of Russian. The psychological
orientation of the dictionary implies the following:
•
The dictionary categories are based on emotion cate-
gorization well established in the literature;
•
The words belonging to emotion categories explicitly
and objectively mean the expression of emotion in
question, e.g.,
неожиданность - surprise, шоки-
рованный - shocked, удивлять - to amaze, чудес-
но - wonderful, ruling out the connotation-based,
context-dependent and common-sense-derived lexica,
e.g., война - war, ужасно - awfully, ложь - lie;
•
The dictionary must be evaluated for internal consis-
tency and external validity.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, existing
emotion dictionaries in Russian are described, and their limi-
tations are discussed. In Section 3, a framework for building
a psychologically grounded emotion dictionary in Russian is
presented. Section 4 contains our conclusions and future work
on annotation and experimental validation of the suggested
dictionary.
II.
RELATED APPROACHES TO EMOTION DICTIONARIES
IN RUSSIAN
A. Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count
The ﬁrst widely known linguistic approach to representing
emotions is Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (LIWC) [1].
Work on this tool has been going on since 1993, with the latest
version released in 2015. The original idea behind LIWC was
to compile a dictionary of words denoting basic emotional and
cognitive dimensions, which are often studied in sociology and
psychology.
Originally, the LIWC dictionary is compiled for English.
The latest version includes around 90 variables, covering
almost 6,400 words. The LIWC dictionary is organized hier-
archically and contains, among other dimensions, 21 linguistic
categories (mostly parts of speech) and 41 categories tapping
psychological constructs. The former include, for example,
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

function words, pronouns, typed personal pronouns, articles,
prepositions, auxiliary, common verbs, etc. The latter include
affective, social, cognitive, perceptual, biological processes,
time orientations, relativity, personal concerns and informal
language. The affective processes contain positive and negative
emotions, the latter being divided into anxiety, anger and
sadness. Unfortunately, other emotions are not included in
LIWC, and the choice of these emotions is not grounded by
the authors. Probably, the reason for this is that LIWC is not
speciﬁcally aimed at covering emotion vocabulary. The dic-
tionary has been composed following an elaborate procedure
involving 2-8 judges and recourse to common emotion rating
scales and English dictionaries. Thereafter, internal consistency
and external validity have been assessed for every category.
Internal consistency of a word category is a measure of all
the words belonging to a category actually meaning the same
thing psychologically. It is calculated with the Cronbach’s
alpha [8], showing to what degree words of the same category
tend to co-occur in the same texts.External validity of a
word category shows how much the words in question are
actually related to the undelying psychological phenomena. It
is measured by correlating word usage with manual ratings by
judges on the underlying dimensions [1].
The 2007-version dictionary was translated in Russian [9].
The Russian dictionary includes 61 categories and around
5,900 words organized in a ﬂat category structure. The cate-
gories include positive and negative affects, as well as anxiety,
anger and sadness. The Russian LIWC dictionary has never
been validated for internal consistency or external validity.
However, Russian LIWC has been used in a few recent studies
[10][11], where some dictionary categories were additionally
populated.
B. Emotive Lexicon
In Russian language studies, an attempt to categorize emo-
tional lexica was made as early as 1989 [3]. The key feature
of the resulting dictionary is a purely linguistic approach to its
development: the author draws a distinction between emotion
words, emotional words and emotive lexica, with the dictionary
capturing the latter. Emotive meaning refers to a meaning
containing an emotive seme, whether in it’s lexical, connotative
or logical meaning.
The main idea behind the Emotive Lexicon is to identify
words which contain a reference to emotion in their descrip-
tion in a standard Russian dictionary, e.g., рай - paradise,
баловать - to indulge. Thus, around 8,500 words were in-
cluded in the lexicon, divided into 37 categories correspond-
ing to basic emotive meanings identiﬁed in the dictionary,
e.g., беспокойство - anxiety, вдохновение - inspiration,
вера - faith, надежда - hope, недовольство - discontent,
неприязнь - dislike, одиночество - loneliness, одобрение
- approval, протест - protest, радость - joy,страх - fear,
удивление - surprise. Every category was further divided
into 6 functional classes: emotional state, state development,
inﬂuence, attitude, expression, characterization; for example,
category стыд - shame includes the following words: конфуз
- embarrassment, смутиться - to be embarrassed, клевета
- slander, закраснеться - to blush, застенчивый - shy, со-
вестливость - conscientiousness, respectively.
C. WordNet Affect
WordNet Affect was developed as an extension of WordNet
Domains in [6]. It is based entirely on the WordNet original
structure, with one or more affective labels assigned to some
synsets. The core of Word-Net Affect was developed manually
with the help of dictionaries. Then it was further expanded
using WordNet relations. The original WordNet Affect contains
2,874 synsets and 4,787 words, annotated with a complex hier-
archy of mental states and other affect-related phenomena. The
affective label hierarchy provides a reference to one or more
of the three main kinds of theories on emotion representation:
discrete theories (based on the concept of cognitive evaluation),
basic emotion theories and dimensional theories; see [12] for
discussion.
A successful attempt at translating WordNet Affect into
Russian and Romanian is described in [7]. It is based on
the part of WordNet Affect annotation capturing 6 basic
emotions: joy, fear, anger, sadness, disgust, surprise [13]. First,
all the words in the English synsets denoting one of the six
emotions were automatically translated in Romanian and Rus-
sian with an electronic English-Romanian and English-Russian
dictionary. Second, irrelevant and duplicate translations were
removed manually. Finally, the Russian and Romanian synsets
were formed manually by three independent translators using
Russian and Romanian thesauri and bilingual dictionaries. In
the absence of Russian WordNet, the synsets in Russian were
handcrafted so as to closely resemble the meaning of the orig-
inal English synsets, based on the glosses of the latter. Some
words were added to or deleted from the Russian synsets at
this stage. The ﬁnal dictionary contains 2,199 Russian affective
words. The average pairwise inter-translator agreement for the
Russian synsets ranged between 0.57 and 0.61, with the three-
translator agreement reaching 0.29.
The Russian WordNet Affect was used in dataset ﬁltering
for sentiment analysis in [14]. However, no evaluation or
validation of the resource has been performed to date.
D. RuSentiLex
RuSentiLex is a recently created sentiment lexicon in
Russian [4]. It was created in three stages. First, sentiment
words were extracted and manually ﬁltered from a list of
domain-speciﬁc sentiment words. Second, 55 lexico-syntactic
patterns were applied to a text collection of 2 million news
articles, to extract words with sentiment connotations. Finally,
a supervised model of sentiment word extraction was applied
to 1 million Tweets to infer Twitter-speciﬁc sentiment words.
The
resulting
database
contains
information
on
the
sentiment orientation (positive, negative, neutral, or posi-
tive/negative, the latter meaning highly context-dependent) and
the source of the sentiment. The source of the sentiment can
be explicit opinion, negative or positive connotation (fact) or
feeling (private state). The current version contains sentiment
ratings for over 12,000 words and expressions. It has been
successfully used in a number of NLP applications [15][16].
E. Limitations of the Existing Emotion Dictionaries in Russian
There has been a number of emotion lexicons developed for
Russian, or sentiment lexicons containing additional useful in-
formation. There have also been reports on translating English-
based emotion lexicons [15][17]. However, the translated parts
only contain sentiment ratings for Russian words.
These are the main reasons why we have rejected the
existing available Russian lexicons in our work:
•
Most of the lexicons are based on purely linguistic,
rather than psychological, grounds:
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

◦
Sentiment scores instead of emotion ratings.
◦
The emotive lexicon is based on emotive lexica
concept, appealing to the semantic structure of
words.
•
WordNet Affect and some other resources are a direct
translation of an English dictionary, preserving the
English-based structure.
•
None of the emotion lexicons in Russian have been
validated for internal consistency or external validity.
Some examples of the listed issues are the following:
•
Russian LIWC linguistic categories only contain parts
of speech and a few pronoun types. However, the
rich morphology in Russian allows to identify other
grammatical categories, such as tense, voice, gender,
number, etc. These are commonly identiﬁed with
morphological parsers [18][19].
•
In LIWC, lemmatization is accounted for by only
listing word stems in the dictionary. Morphological
parsing allows to lemmatize words more accurately.
•
The
Emotive
Lexicon
contains
37
linguistically
grounded emotive categories. Some of them are hard
to differentiate from the psychological point of view.
For example, there are two distinct categories for
грусть - sadness and горе - grief, which are hardly
distinguishable psychologically.
•
The concepts of emotive, affective and sentiment
lexicons clearly include words which do not express
emotion explicitly, e.g.:
◦
жар - heat, жить - to live, чувство - feeling
(Emotive Lexicon, love category);
◦
застенчивый - shy, скромный - modest,
бесчувственный - heartless (Russian Word-
Net Affect, fear category);
◦
уверовать - to believe, увлекаться - to be
fond of (RuSentiLex, positive, feeling cate-
gory).
As a result, application of the existing emotion resources for
Russian appears ineffective from the linguistic point of view
and difﬁcult to interpret psychologically.
III.
EMOTION DICTIONARY IN RUSSIAN
A. Framework
The goal of the current work is to create a psychologically
motivated dictionary of emotion words in Russian.
In psychology, numerous theories have been proposed to
explain and describe emotions. Discrete emotions theories are
a subgroup of these theories postulating that there are several
basic emotions, which are distinct from one another, and that
these core emotions reﬂect biologically determined affective
responses, observable across cultures. The number of these
basic emotions varies from 6 to 10, depending on the particular
theory of discrete emotions. The most well-known discrete
emotions theories were proposed by Ekman [20], Plutchik
[21], and Izard [22]. While discrete emotions approach has
been criticized, it remains the most popular and intuitively
clear approach to classifying emotions. In Human-Computer
Interaction research (HCI) and NLP it has been widely used
for constructing emotion lexicons [6][7][2].
The ﬁrst step in creating an emotion lexicon that ﬁts within
the framework of psychological science is the selection of a
theoretical model of emotion classiﬁcation. Within the general
framework of discrete emotions theories and their existing
applications to NLP and HCI, we will follow the classiﬁcation
of emotions proposed by Carroll Izard, which includes anger,
contempt, disgust, fear, guilt, interest, joy, sadness, shame, and
surprise [22]. We have chosen this classiﬁcation, because it
includes shame and guilt, which we ﬁnd essential for further
research.
We will be focusing on overt expression of emotions only.
Ascribing emotional meaning to words and phrases outside of
explicit expression of emotion is wrought with difﬁculties, as
it is highly subjective and context-dependent. At the current
stage, we aim at building the core of emotional expression
words in Russian, which is fully motivated psychologically.
However, the following steps will include identifying various
linguistic ways of emotional expression, including connotation
and neutral facts in view of common-sense knowledge.
For this reason, we are only concerned with lexical infor-
mation, containing words and multi-word expressions. Inter-
action with context, including negation, is an essential step in
subjective language analysis, which will be addressed in our
future work.
B. Development
1) Dictionary Sources: The next step would be to identify
the sources of words and phrases to annotate. Sources of
words and expressions for annotation include existing Russian
thesauri.
1)
Words in the Russian LIWC dictionary [9] tapping
the following psychological constructs:
•
Affective processes;
•
Informal language.
2)
Russian WordNet Affect words [7] in the emotion
category.
3)
RuSentiLex words with the feeling source [4].
4)
Emotional expressions in the Russian phraseology
dictionary [23].
The resulting list of words will be ﬁltered by frequency
[24]: very infrequent words will be excluded from the annota-
tion process. Thus, a set of around 5,000 words and expressions
is expected to be compiled from the above thesauri.
An important question is whether to take slang words
into consideration. On the one hand, slang is often related
to expressing emotions. On the other hand, there are no dic-
tionaries of emotional slang available. Also, existing Russian
slang dictionaries contain over 30,000 words and expressions
[25], which is a too large number to annotate manually.
2) Annotation: We will employ a two-step manual annota-
tion by lay volunteers and experts.
1)
A large group of volunteers will manually annotate
the set of words and expressions pulled from the
existing resources. The annotation procedure will be
carried out using the Yandex.Toloka service [26]
(a Russian counterpart of Mechanical Turk). Yan-
dex.Toloka has been effectively used for crowdsourc-
ing annotation of various semantic tasks in Russian
[27][28]. The annotators will ﬁrst be provided with
the deﬁnitions of ten basic emotions by Izard [29].
Then, they will answer questions on whether a partic-
ular word denotes expression of every basic emotion,
similar to [30]. Every word-emotion pair should be
annotated by at least three annotators.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

2)
A small group of experts will review the annotation
results, decide on the points of contradictions and
make corrections, where necessary.
3) Psychometric Evaluation: As pointed out by Pennebaker
et al. [1], reliability and validity testing of natural language
instruments poses a number of challenges. In line with the
procedures described by these authors, we will test reliabil-
ity of the dictionary categories by representing each word
within the category as a percentage score (words per text in
selected corpora, such as blog posts, online forum entries, etc.)
and conducting Cronbach’s alpha calculations with Spearman-
Brown prediction formula correction [1]. Validity testing will
be achieved by correlating data from self-report questionnaire,
targeted emotional writing tasks, and dictionary-based auto-
mated analysis in a series of studies.
IV.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have outlined a framework for developing a psycho-
logically grounded Russian emotion dictionary. First, existing
approaches to emotion and sentiment dictionaries in Russian
have been reviewed, and their limitations discussed. Second,
we have identiﬁed the basic emotion classiﬁcation by Izard,
which will be used to deﬁne the dictionary categories. We have
chosen a number of existing lexical resources to compile word
candidates for emotion annotation. Finally, we have outlined
the annotation procedure for volunteers and experts to classify
words into emotion categories.
Our immediate future work includes carrying out the anno-
tation experiment and evaluating the consistency and validity
of the resulting word categories.
More distant future work will focus on real-world emotion
expression in texts: narratives and social network posts will
be analyzed in terms of the dictionary words attested against
the ground truth provided by human judgments. The developed
emotion dictionary will be compared to other emotion lexicons
in Russian. Context-dependent features, such as negation and
implicit emotion, will be added in order to develop a statistical
emotion identiﬁcation algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1]
J. W. Pennebaker, R. L. Boyd, K. Jordan, and K. Blackburn, “The
development and psychometric properties of liwc2015,” Austin, TX:
University of Texas at Austin, 2015.
[2]
M. D. Sykora, T. Jackson, A. O’Brien, and S. Elayan, “Emotive ontol-
ogy: Extracting ﬁne-grained emotions from terse, informal messages,”
International Journal on Computer Science & Information Systems,
vol. 8, no. 2, 2013, pp. 106–118.
[3]
L. G. Babenko, Lexical means of designation of emotions in the Russian
language: monograph [In Russian: Leksicheskie sredstva oboznacheniia
emotsii v russkom iazyke: monogr.].
Izd-vo Ural. un-ta, 1989.
[4]
N. V. Loukachevitch and A. Levchik, “Creating a general Russian sen-
timent lexicon,” in Proceedings of the Tenth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation LREC.
European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), 2016, pp. 1171–1176.
[5]
A. Balahur, J. M. Hermida, A. Montoyo, and R. Mu˜noz, “Detecting
implicit expressions of affect in text using emotinet and its extensions,”
Data Knowl. Eng., vol. 88, 2013, pp. 113–125.
[6]
C. Strapparava and A. Valitutti, “WordNet Affect: an affective extension
of WordNet,” in Proceedings of the Fourth International Conference
on Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC.
European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), 2004, pp. 1083–1086.
[7]
V. Bobicev, V. Maxim, T. Prodan, N. Burciu, and V. Anghelus, “Emo-
tions in words: Developing a multilingual wordnet-affect,” in Compu-
tational Linguistics and Intelligent Text Processing, 11th International
Conference, CICLing, 2010, pp. 375–384.
[8]
L. J. Cronbach, “Coefﬁcient alpha and the internal structure of tests,”
Psychometrika, vol. 16, no. 3, 1951, pp. 297–334.
[9]
A. Kailer and C. K. Chung, “The Russian LIWC2007 dictionary,”
LIWC.net, Tech. Rep., 2011.
[10]
T. Litvinova, O. Litvinova, and P. Seredin, “Dynamics of an idiostyle
of a Russian suicidal blogger,” in Proceedings of the Fifth Workshop on
Computational Linguistics and Clinical Psychology: From Keyboard to
Clinic. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2018, pp. 158–167.
[11]
T.
Litvinova,
P.
Seredin,
O.
Litvinova,
T.
Dankova,
and
O. Zagorovskaya, “On the stability of some idiolectal features,”
in Speech and Computer.
Springer, 2018, pp. 331–336.
[12]
G. L. Clore, A. Ortony, and M. A. Foss, “The psychological foundations
of the affective lexicon,” Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
vol. 53, no. 4, 1987, pp. 751–766.
[13]
C. Strapparava, A. Valitutti, and O. Stock, “The affective weight
of lexicon,” in Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on
Language Resources and Evaluation, LREC.
European Language
Resources Association (ELRA), 2006, pp. 423–426.
[14]
O. Kanishcheva and V. Bobicev, “Good news vs. bad news: What are
they talking about?” in Proceedings of the International Conference
Recent Advances in Natural Language Processing, RANLP, 2017, pp.
325–333.
[15]
E. Kotelnikov, T. Peskisheva, A. Kotelnikova, and E. Razova, “A
comparative study of publicly available Russian sentiment lexicons,”
in Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Natural Language, AINL,
2018, pp. 139–151.
[16]
D. Pisarevskaya, T. Litvinova, and O. Litvinova, “Deception detection
for the Russian language: Lexical and syntactic parameters,” in Proceed-
ings of the Workshop Natural Language Processing and Information
Retrieval, 2017, pp. 1–10.
[17]
S. Shaikh et al., “ANEW+: automatic expansion and validation of
affective norms of words lexicons in multiple languages,” in Proceed-
ings of the Tenth International Conference on Language Resources
and Evaluation LREC.
European Language Resources Association
(ELRA), 2016, pp. 1127–1132.
[18]
M. Korobov, “Morphological analyzer and generator for Russian and
Ukrainian languages,” in Analysis of Images, Social Networks and
Texts.
Springer, 2015, pp. 320–332.
[19]
I. Segalovich, “A fast morphological algorithm with unknown word
guessing induced by a dictionary for a web search engine,” in Proceed-
ings of the International Conference on Machine Learning; Models,
Technologies and Applications.
CSREA Press, 2003, pp. 273–280.
[20]
P. Ekman, “Basic emotions,” in Handbook of Cognition and Emotion.
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, 2005, pp. 45–60.
[21]
R. Plutchik, “A general psychoevolutionary theory of emotion,” in
Theories of Emotion.
Elsevier, 1980, pp. 3–33.
[22]
C. E. Izard, Human Emotions.
Springer US, 1977.
[23]
R. I. Yaranzev, Russian phraseology: dictionary: around 1,500 phraseol-
ogisms [In Russian: Russkaya fraseologiya: slovar’-spravochnik: okolo
1,500 fraseologismov].
Russian language, 1997.
[24]
O. N. Lyashevskaya and S. A. Sharoff, Modern Russian frequency dic-
tionary [In Russian: Chastotnyi slovar’sovremennogo russkogo yazyka].
Azbukovnik, 2009.
[25]
V. M. Mokienko and T. G. Nikitina, Big Dictionary of the Russian
Slang: 25,000 words, 7,000 expressions [In Russian: Bolshoy slo-
var’russkogo zhargona: 25,000 slov, 7,000 ustoychevyh sochetanij].
Norint Publ, 2000.
[26]
“Yandex Toloka,” 2019, URL: http://www.somewebpage.org/ [accessed:
2019-03-06].
[27]
D. Ustalov, “Expanding hierarchical contexts for constructing a seman-
tic word network,” in Dialogue, vol. 16, 2017, pp. 369–381.
[28]
A. Panchenko et al., “RUSSE’2018: A shared task on word sense induc-
tion for the Russian language,” in Proceedings of the 24rd International
Conference on Computational Linguistics and Intellectual Technologies
(Dialogue’2018), vol. 17, 2018, pp. 547–564.
[29]
C. E. Izard, The Psychology of Emotions.
Springer US, 1991.
[30]
S. Mohammad and P. D. Turney, “Crowdsourcing a word-emotion
association lexicon,” Computational Intelligence, vol. 29, no. 3, 2013,
pp. 436–465.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

