Human Systems-of-Systems, a Methodology and Measurement Framework for 
Community Resilience 
Tom McDermott 
Stevens Intitute of Technology, Systems Engineering Research Center 
Hoboken, New Jersey, USA 
Email: tamcdermott42@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— Community resilience, which focuses in on 
combined social and technical measures of resilience, continues 
to receive a great deal of attention in literature. A large number 
of frameworks have been developed that attempt to combine 
physical measures of place with measures reflecting social 
interaction as the basis for predictive measurement of the 
resilience of a community, including one from the authors. 
These frameworks form the basis for development of human 
analytics, particularly to help understand community resilience 
in the mitigation and preparation phases prior to disruptive 
events. However, very few examples of actual measurement 
programs are in place, and even fewer that use dynamic 
measures of human and social resilience. This paper builds on a 
methodology for characterizing human communities as 
Systems-of-Systems (SoS), and proposes the development of 
active community resilience analytics that track the continuing 
resilience of a community. This is a multi-scale problem, and the 
SoS framework is critical to development of a measurement 
architecture that reflects both long-term and short-term human 
resilience measures. 
Keywords-community resilience; resilience measurement; 
human analytics; systems-of-systems; sociotechnical systems. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
This work investigates human social analytics from a 
Systems-of-Systems (SoS) viewpoint using the context of 
community resilience. A SoS is a set of systems that interact 
together to produce outcomes no single system can 
accomplish on their own. Examples are electrical grids, rail 
networks, networked sensors, etc. In the resilience context, the 
combined community social systems, the built environment, 
and infrastructure systems create a large complex SoS. 
 Key defining features of SoS are the independence of 
each constituent system and the emergence of new outcomes 
that are unique to the whole of the SoS and not present in any 
individual constituent system. SoS Engineering is a discipline 
and methodology that seeks to define and optimize networks 
of interacting systems (old and new) toward common purpose 
and requirements [1].  
This paper discusses methods and tools for “Human SoS,” 
which addresses the interaction between networks of human 
and engineered systems. Understanding and classifying both 
the social and technical aspects of large complex systems 
forms the starting point for analyses of any SoS behavior. The 
focus on Human SoS suggests a human-centered or 
participatory approach to understanding and designing SoS 
evolutions. Human SoS methods combine aspects of Complex 
Systems Engineering (CSE), SoS Engineering (SoSE), and 
traditional Systems Engineering (SE). These present series of 
methods to structure and manage a set of interacting 
constituent systems toward a specific set of goals or purposes 
[2][3]. Modeling the specifically human interactions is a key 
to successful SoS development, but is often ignored or 
oversimplified in SoS design, which is why an explicit focus 
on Human SoS is useful.  
The interaction between human community development 
and city infrastructure renewal in urban communities is an 
example context. An urban community is a shared human and 
engineered architecture comprised of a complex set of 
constituent systems. One would hope the human systems and 
engineered systems that support the human communities 
would be designed toward common outcomes and measures. 
In practice this seldom occurs, particularly with urban 
infrastructure. While the need for efficiency and scale drive 
city infrastructure development, the inherent vulnerability, 
resilience, and sustainability of human communities allows 
the city to withstand and recover from shocks. The disciplines 
of engineering and the social sciences rarely come together to 
address these equally, except on occasion to address natural 
disasters. Shocks to urban communities can be disaster events, 
but also equally damaging economic, communication, and 
demographic changes.  
Metrics and models do exist to evaluate resilience of both 
infrastructure and human well-being, but very few research 
efforts consider their dynamic performance and function 
working together. This is an area where human social 
analytics are sorely needed. In this context, SoS principles are 
most useful to structure representative analytical measures. 
This paper will not present a survey of community resilience 
frameworks, as multiple other authors have done that. This 
paper will use the community resilience framework 
previously reported by the author and past co-authors [4]-[7] 
to discuss the SoS principles and associated human social 
analytics of community resilience. 
Section II of the paper introduces the Human SoS concept. 
Section III briefly discusses the community resilience 
framework. Section IV uses the Human SoS concept and the 
community resilience problem to briefly discuss model 
development. Section V provides an example of the analytics 
needed.  
II. 
THE SYSTEMS OF SYSTEMS VIEW 
Social Systems are the patterns formed by the 
interrelationships 
between 
individuals, 
groups, 
and 
institutions that together form a whole. Sociotechnical 
Systems are technology-driven systems that involve 
significant human and social participation, and that 
participation in turn influences the architecture and design of 
the technical system. In such systems both the human/social 
participation and the engineered system co-adapt over time 
[8]. Human SoS relates to the intentional design of the social 
systems in conjunction with the design of a larger 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

sociotechnical 
SoS. 
Examples 
are 
infrastructures, 
organizations, political systems, and large product/service 
platforms. 
Human SoS demonstrate several consistent patterns that 
have been studied by a number of authors. These can be 
generalized into an analysis process to accelerate the 
stakeholder’s and system designer’s learning in the domain of 
Human SoS architecture. The process highlights the SoS 
characteristics of a complex system architecture and causes 
the architect to directly experience them in participatory 
sessions with stakeholders. Table 1 lists the process. 
TABLE 1. ARCHITECTURAL ANALYSIS OF A HUMAN  SOS. 
SoS 
Perspectives 
The tension between perceptions and facts often 
form the best starting place to understand the 
behaviors in a Human SoS. Understanding 
perspectives is a stakeholder research process best 
informed by talking to stakeholders. 
SoS Definition 
A process to identify context, SoS boundaries, 
appropriate scales and constructs, and enablers or 
barriers that might exist in the context of interest. 
Multi-layer 
Abstractions 
Identifying all of the actors at each societal layer 
and “what they bring with them” - what abstractions 
would represent primary performance measures of 
the current SoS and the desired evolution. 
SoS Outcomes 
Modeling dimensions of the SoS considering system 
outputs, outcomes (or goals), and the interactions 
that cause them. 
SoS 
Communication 
Identifying information flows that are relevant to 
decision making in the SoS. This should include 
transparency (availability to all parts of the system), 
timeliness (to make decisions), accuracy, and trust. 
SoS 
Implementation 
Human SoS have no single mechanisms of control. 
Behaviors arise from leadership and incentives 
instead of authority and control. The architect must 
design interventions that influence change in the 
SoS. 
 
The process has proven to be particularly useful in 
understanding and designing the human characteristics of 
SoS, which we call Human SoS. This is a structured method 
that walks the participants through selected stakeholder 
perspectives, 
helping 
to 
define 
the 
SoS, 
building 
representative abstractions at different layers of the SoS, 
agreeing on outcomes, understanding flows, and finally 
designing alternative implementations of the SoS. A defining 
analysis process in Human SoS is the determination of multi-
layer abstractions. Human communities and enterprises are 
organized into layers, such as individual/group/society 
structures 
or 
enterprise 
people/process/organizational 
structures. This is important when designing a Human SoS – 
success measures often differ at different layers and the 
relationships between different constructs or abstractions is 
often a complex model.  
 
III. HUMAN SOS: URBAN COMMUNITY RESILIENCE 
Figure 1 represents a conceptual model of human 
community resilience represented at multiple scales – the 
lowest being a human capital construct that describes the 
human components of standard of living (SoL) and subjective 
well-being (SWB) critical to community populations. The 
human capital model was derived in the context of urban 
communities and their built environment and further in the 
domain of a city with its infrastructure and environment. 
Previous research developed a complex structured equation 
model that relates over 130 human capital development 
measures to measures of critical infrastructure redevelopment 
[6]. This model is a representative framework to describe most 
large urban settings in the United States, other contexts would 
need adjustments to the model. 
Human communities and city infrastructure are strongly 
coupled interdependent SoS, and they cannot successfully be 
designed using simple indices or optimization of individual 
components. There is a need to model these systems using 
complex 
representations 
of 
human 
and 
community 
development, participatory methods that address system 
complexity to engage communities and planners, and next 
generation social analytics tools to evaluate predicted, short-
term, and long-term effects of resilience building. 
A recent National Institute of Standards and Technology 
report from a workshop on community resilience evaluated 
seventeen different approaches to measuring community 
resilience. They found that none of the frameworks could 
answer two basic questions: “1. How can community leaders 
know how resilient their community is?” and “2. How can 
they know if their decisions and investments to improve 
resilience are making a significant difference?” They also 
found that a single set of prescriptive measures or indices was 
unlikely to support neither all types of communities nor all 
contexts for planning. The subsequent goals were to develop 
“community resilience metrics or tools that will reliably 
predict the physical, economic, and social implications (either 
positive or negative) of community decisions (either active or 
passive) made with respect to planning, siting, design, 
construction, operation, protection, maintenance, repair, and 
restoration of the built environment.” [9] 
Community leaders need new decisional analysis methods 
and tools that directly address these two basic questions. 
These methods and tools must blend the disciplines of 
participatory design and development with psychology, 
engineering, and computer science. In order to effectively 
model community resilience, one must be able to generalize 
approaches to the context of local community-specific factors. 
The definition of appropriate context is a stakeholder 
agreement process. Current state of community development 
practice recommends reduction into a few simple to 
understand (by stakeholders) measures. As a result, the 
 
Figure 1. Complex Model of Resilience to Account for Human 
Capital. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

complexity of the environment is lost and the effectiveness of 
the intervention becomes a debate. In today's era of big data 
analytics and social network analysis, much richer measures 
and deeper understanding of results are possible.  
Models and measures are needed for optimization of the 
Human SoS in scenarios and dynamic models that represent 
both development and collapse of community infrastructure 
and social constructs (Figure 2). In development scenarios, 
planners use infrastructure renewal projects and community 
development to reduce inherent vulnerabilities and build 
inherent resilience capacity. In disruptive times, crisis 
response is a reaction to events, development of coping 
responses is a reinforcement against collapse, and inherent 
resilience (or sustainability) could be viewed as an attempt to 
prevent future collapse. The relationship between human 
capital and shocks are most often represented as a set of 
capitals that support the coping response of the community 
[10]-[12]. Example disruptive scenarios are not just natural 
disasters, they include community gentrification, economic 
shocks, infrastructure or information collapse, and disaster 
events. Measures of inherent resilience must address all cases. 
 
IV. HUMAN SOS AND HUMAN ANALYTICS MODEL 
Models of the Human SoS and associated analytics 
support development of decision analysis tools and a 
multidisciplinary view of community resilience, focused on 
factors that are known to affect resilience of human 
populations in areas that are highly dependent on shared 
infrastructure. Such a toolset would provide a means to 
integrate often-competing views of infrastructure and 
community development programs into common outcome 
measures focused on human community development.  
A Human SoS model of resilience must include the social 
dimensions and the built environment/infrastructure of a 
community, the constructs that link these together and to 
long-term community goals, and the plan for both resilience 
development activities and disaster response. In the SoS 
context, achievement of resilience is often how well the 
constituent systems either interact together or fail to do so. 
Effective gap analysis and understanding of the short and 
long-term interactions between community and infrastructure 
development goals, is critical to this process. Measures and 
models that effectively capture community learning and 
likely resilience building outcomes are needed. There is a 
further need for locally scaled data to be used consistently 
and appropriately in conjunction with nationally scaled 
measures supporting national preparedness goals. This is a 
challenge: finding a consistent set of measurement indicators 
that are usable by community leaders, but also are valid at 
local to national scales. Predictive models of community 
resilience require a much richer selection of qualitative 
indices and also integration of dynamic models that reflect 
flows of resources and flows of information. 
The conceptualization of a Human SoS modeling and 
decision support platform would address all of the domains 
of Figure 3 - conceptual models that reflect model-based 
analysis of the enterprises under study; data models and 
datasets that capture both current and future trends; complex 
system models and simulations to create predictive analyses; 
and custom visual analytics that allow researchers and policy 
makers to interact with the data and simulation. The point of 
Figure 3 is that simple selection and presentation of data does 
not represent the definition of a Human SoS and an 
appropriate level of complexity. Human SoS are enterprises 
and the data must be represented in an appropriate enterprise 
model that reflect the relationships between data sets and 
their interdependencies. A second point of Figure 3 is that the 
collection and curation of data is becoming more prevalent in 
human settings and the relationship between the enterprise 
model and the data must be explicit and explanatory. A third 
point of Figure 3 is that predictive analysis of the data must 
be incorporated into the appropriate type of computational 
complex system model based on the purpose of the analysis. 
This model must use the curated data appropriately. The final 
point of the Figure is that the communication of the data and 
the analysis must be in an appropriate visualization form so 
that the human reviewer can discern the intended patterns. 
The Human SoS framework helps to consider all of these 
factors.  
We envision the development of such a platform in a 
community resilience setting as a multidisciplinary activity 
 
Figure 2: The Dynamic Process of Community Resilience. 
 
Figure 3: Convergence of Facilitation, Modeling, & Data Analytics 
Using Modern Software Tools and Methods. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

that brings together: 1) Participatory Model Development to 
engage community stakeholders using a Human SoS 
architecting methodology, 2) a Complex Model of Human 
Capital integrated as a decision analysis tool, and 3) a 
Dynamic Modeling Framework simulating resilience 
scenarios for predictive analysis and validation using 
community measured data. 
The participatory model development engages with local 
communities and planners to in a participatory setting using 
the Human SoS analysis framework of Table 1. The SoS 
Engineering process would proceed as follows: 1) SoS 
Perspectives 
involves 
stakeholder 
interviews 
and 
a 
conceptual modeling process to identify stakeholders and 
incentives, the critical interactions in the system that could be 
used as levers for change, and the measures at different 
abstraction levels that inform the computational models. 2) 
The SoS Definition is the communities and infrastructure of a 
city. Models, data, and evaluation research would be bounded 
to focus specific neighborhoods in the city based on their 
differing physical characteristics, demographics and social 
characteristics, and planned development goals and 
timelines. 3) Multi-Layer Abstractions are collected as a set 
of measurements at representative local and broader scales. 
4) SoS Outcomes are the respective purpose, goals, and 
strategies of the systems as envisioned by the stakeholders. 
These represent intents when embarking on programs to 
change the systems. 5) SoS Communication models the 
relationships and flows across the defined city resilience 
model. In this model, the dynamic process of resilience is 
placed into a model that could capture the representative 
process relationships and identify measurement points. 6) 
SoS Implementation is a representative model of the 
technical, economic, and social factors representing the SoS. 
These factors come together in a set of complex decision 
models. It is unlikely that a single model will be able to 
represent the full complexity of an urban community, but 
capturing the correct set of dependencies as an SoS model 
will help to identify emergence (intended or unintended) that 
arises from combinations of change programs. Over time, this 
work envisions a tool that policy makers can use that will 
quickly reveal how changes in funding or resources may 
impact community resiliency. Such a tool would have an 
easy-to-use graphical user interface allowing policy holders - 
regardless of their statistical or programming backgrounds - 
to understand trends in human capital and community 
resiliency in an effort to better predict how changes in 
community resources will impact communities as a whole. 
Such a tool should include an explorable model of the Human 
SoS constructs so users can see for themselves the underlying 
structure of community resiliency. It should also generate 
trending measures and maps revealing community resiliency 
at a local and national level. The tool should provide users 
with valuable information about the statistical and analytical 
procedures used to create the models in an effort to make the 
models as transparent and easily communicable as possible. 
Ideally, policy makers will be able to use this tool in order to 
make more informed decisions about how to allocate funding 
or improve communities in a resiliency context. 
 
V. HUMAN SOCIAL ANALYTICS EXAMPLE 
Hollnagel describes resilience in systems as being able to 
respond appropriately to both disturbances and opportunities. 
He further defines resilience not just as properties of a 
system, but as its resulting performance [13]. Programs that 
attempt renewal of infrastructure or community assets should 
address these as opportunities to increase the resilience of the 
community as defined by the activities and services provided 
by and to the human occupants of the community. Figure 4 
shows the complex relationships between the objects and 
processes that define a city. One might consider the input to 
be the city infrastructure networks that provide services 
supporting the livelihood of the communities, and the output 
to be the development of human capital that provides for 
sustainable and resilient livelihoods of the cities occupants. 
A complex model might consider the regentrification of a 
set of neighborhoods via investment in new city 
infrastructure and built environment. This development 
would include support to vulnerable populations with 
improvements to assisted living for the aging and disabled as 
well as improved overall community access to healthcare. 
Tables 2 and 3 list several factors associated with 
infrastructure, built environment, and human capital that 
should 
be 
considered 
when 
addressing 
community 
healthcare. Table 2 lists the viewpoints of the city planners, 
while Table 3 identifies the related human capital 
components. 
TABLE 2. URBAN SOS MODEL OF HEALTH AND ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE. 
Model Component 
Factor 
Housing for 
Vulnerable Groups 
Public shelter capacity 
Age of structures (year built/building codes) 
Housing burden (housing cost/income) 
Energy Services 
Availabilty (average down times) 
Energy burden (total cost of energy/income) 
Health Management 
Medical facilities and practitioners 
Accessibility 
Access to transportation 
Access to communications 
Land Use 
Parks and recreational facilities 
 
 
Figure 4: Architecture of a City Representing the Relationships 
Between Infrastructure, Built Environment, and Community 
Populations. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE 3. HUMAN SOS MODEL OF HEALTH AND ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE. 
Model Component 
Factor 
Standard of Living 
Physical health condition 
Need for public transit vs. access  
Income 
Subjective Wellbeing 
Subjective satisfaction with physical health 
Subjective satisfaction with city 
Security Climate 
Afraid to walk in neighborhood at night 
Political Climate 
Opinion of gov’t spending on healthcare 
Opinion of gov’t spending on mass transit 
Demographics 
Size of city 
 
In the human social analytics domain, monitoring of 
individuals health condition, as well as their access to 
healthcare and medical facilities is possible. Poor health is a 
social vulnerability that will impact the resilience of the 
human community to shocks. The model above identifies a 
number of areas of monitoring: access to housing and energy, 
actual health condition, satisfaction with health, ability to get 
to medical treatment facilities, and assessment of the city in 
terms of ability to gain exercise. 
Measurements of the built environment and infrastructure 
are long-term and medium term indicators that would be 
reflected in a city planning dataset that is maintained year-to-
year and adjusted based on the age of the neighborhoods and 
changing land use patterns. Medium term measures like 
housing and energy burdens reflect economic conditions that 
should be tracked regularly and fed into planning activities. 
The primary challenges with these measures are collection 
and maintenance of the data at city scales. 
Likewise, satisfaction with health and city as well as 
political climate are factors that should be surveyed and 
monitored in the medium to long-term at individual and 
community scales. For the other factors, the availability of 
social media data, wearables, mobile location data, and other 
community sensors provide opportunity for near real-time 
analysis of community patterns. These would include 
individual monitoring of health vulnerabilities, patterns of 
mobility, and routine use of wellness opportunities such as 
parks and recreation. Neighborhoods with lower health 
indices can be targeted for improvement as well as monitored 
in response situations. 
Putting together a monitoring system that tracks near real-
time resilience indices for communities that have varying 
human capital concerns is possible given priorities and a 
well-constructed human SoS architecture. It is critical that 
such a model be defined so that the effectiveness and long-
term validation of health capital development programs can 
be tracked. The complexity of this model should also not be 
underestimated, but the future of human social analytics 
needs to be placed in a framework that adequately reflects the 
complexity of these Human SoS. This paper discusses a 
framework for development of these models. 
 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
The exploration of the human characteristics of SoS over 
time led to the development of a framework for SoS analysis 
that captures purely human outcomes. We call this Human 
SoS. Key to the analysis is a set of six processes that 
encourage systems thinking and model development with 
respect to the human communities that use these systems. 
These are SoS Perspectives, SoS Definition, Multi-layer 
Abstractions, SoS Outcomes, SoS Communication, and SoS 
Implementation. We have evaluated and tested these 
processes in a number of studies, primarily focused on 
community resilience, but also in other contexts such as 
organizational skill retention and political corruption. 
The complexity and social adaptation represented in 
collaborative SoS make the decision space nearly impossible 
to navigate without a combination of participatory 
stakeholder driven analysis tools and extensive modeling and 
simulation. The hope is that the engineering communities, 
social science communities, and design communities will 
eventually come together to find common model-based 
conceptual design approaches that bridge current gaps across 
disciplines. At this point the community should focus on 
methods to sense and capture the human analytics that 
continuously evaluate these metrics. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Systems Engineering Body of Knowledge (SEBOK), 
“Systems of Systems (SoS), SEBoK v.1.9, 2017. 
http://www.sebokwiki.org/wiki/Systems_of_Systems_(SoS) 
[retrieved: March 2018]. 
[2] J. H. Holland, "Studying complex adaptive systems," Journal 
of Systems Science & Complexity, vol.19, no.1, pp. 1–8, 2006. 
[3] B. E. White, “On a maturity model for complexity, complex 
systems, and complex systems engineering,” Int. J. of Design 
& Nature and Ecodynamics, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 532–542, 2016. 
[4] T. McDermott, D. Folds, C. J. Hutto, and M. Nadolski, “A 
human-focused, holistic model of community resilience,” 
INCOSE Insight, vol. 16, no. 4, December 2016. 
[5] C. J. Hutto, “Blending quantitative, qualitative, geospatial, and 
temporal data: progressing towards the next generation of 
human social analytics,” The Second International Conference 
on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO 2016), IARIA, Nov. 
2016,  pp. 48-54, ISBN: 978-1-61208-519-7.  
[6] C. J. Hutto, A.a Trani, E. Williams, H. S. Shim, T. McDermott, 
D. Folds, and M. Nadolski, “The social side of community 
resilience: human capital modeling,” The Third International 
Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO 2017), 
IARIA, July 2017,  pp. 45-50, ISBN: 978-1-61208-578-4. 
[7] T. McDermott and M. Nadolski, “Integrated community 
resilience, a model based systems engineering approach,” 
INCOSE International Symposium vol. 26, pp. 205-219, 2016. 
[8] M. Maier, “Architecting principles for systems of systems,” 
Proceedings of the Sixth Annual International Symposium, 
INCOSE International Symposium vol. 6, pp. 567-574, 1996. 
[9] National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST GCR 
15-993, Community Resilience Workshop, February 2015. 
[10] S. Cutter, L. Barnes, M. Berry, C. Burton, E. Evans, E. Tate, 
and J. Webb, “A place-based model for understanding 
community 
resilience 
to 
natural 
disasters,” 
Global 
Environmental Change, vol. 18, pp. 598-606, 2008. 
[11] ARUP & Rockefeller Foundation, City Resilience Index, 
Research Report Vol. 1, Ove Arup & Partners International 
Limited, 2014. 
[12] United Nations (UNODC), Sustainable Livelihoods: A 
Broader Vision, Discussion Paper, 2011. 
[13] E. Hollnagel, “Resilience engineering,” 
http://erikhollnagel.com/ideas/resilience-engineering.html, 
[retrieved: April 2018]. 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

