Smart Territories 
Advocating for Smart Basic Entity (SBE) and the digital clone approach 
 
Pierre Fournié, Pr Christian Bourret 
Laboratoire Dicen-Idf 
Université Gustave Eiffel Paris Est Marne la Vallée 
Paris, France 
pierre.fournie@u-pem.fr christian.bourret@u-pem.fr  
Pr  Jean-Pierre Caliste 
Université de Technologie de Compiègne 
Compiègne, France 
jean-pierre.caliste@utc.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Smart cities (SC) became, for a few years, a regular 
topic in the scientific literature, and both political and 
economic agendas. Indeed, the connection between urban 
development 
and 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies (ICT) represents a large market. It is presented 
as a multi-dimension tool to face the challenges of the 21st 
century. We intend here to demonstrate that developing such a 
concept only on cities may reinforce the already existing 
fracture between rural and urban territories. The opportunity 
exists to bring smart technologies to a lower level, that we call 
the Smart Basic Entity (SBE). We advocate that, to do so, it 
could be wise, to experiment a Digital Clone Approach.  
Keywords; Territorial Intelligence, Smart City, Smart Basic 
Entity, Digital Clone, Rural Territories, Ariège, Angola 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2009, the number of people in urban areas surpassed 
the number of people living in rural areas. Although, we 
shall keep in mind that national definition of what is “urban” 
is not uniform across the World. For the World Bank, the 
rural population registered a sharp decline during the 1960-
2018 period, from 66.4% to 44.7%. Such a figure hides huge 
disparities between regions and continents. In France, the 
rural population amounts only at 19.56% in 2018 (divided by 
2 since 1960 (38.2%)) whereas it remains at 34.49% in 
Angola (from 89.6% 58 years earlier) and at 44.68% in 
Indonesia (85.41% in 1960) [1] .The interpretation of such a 
worldwide trend shall take into accounts local and regional 
specificities [2] .  
Cities offer multiple advantages: access to electricity, 
sanitation, water, health and education. Incomes are also 
higher even they shall be related to living costs. Supported 
by infrastructures of transportation and communication, high 
density of individuals and businesses, the city is a territory 
for serendipity. Urban areas also tempt individuals fleeing 
war or environment disasters. The attractivity of towns, 
urban centres or urban clusters, do also impact the structure 
of employment as there is a shift from agriculture towards 
manufacturing or services.  
Therefore, showing disinterest for the rural population 
may, on the medium-long term, result in dramatic social, 
economic and political consequences. At the same time, an 
opportunity exists, by customizing SC concepts, to create a 
smart rural development model. We will illustrate the issues 
and solutions, we currently work at, by taking the examples 
of France, China and Angola. 
After an introduction, we present, in section II, the Smart 
cities as a dominant model. The long term debate about 
urban concentration and growth will follow (III). In a fourth 
step we will consider what makes the cities so unique before 
identifying the risks associated with abandoning the rural 
areas (V). We will study in section VI the case of Ariège 
before exploring government strategies to transform rural 
areas into attractive territories (VII). We will, by presenting 
our model, indicate how technology could support such a 
move (VIII) and develop further the digital clone approach 
(IX). Before concluding (XI), we will illustrate by our 
Angola and China experiments, the current status of our 
researchs (X). 
II. 
SMART CITIES: A DOMINANT MODEL 
Smart Data, Smart People, Smart Technology and Smart 
Governance represent the four pillars of the Smart City. SC 
has become the dominant model of development for towns in 
the 21st century. Without any restriction related to traditions, 
culture and religion, almost all aspects of urban inhabitants' 
life do enter in the SC scope.  
All over the world, political leaders need to answer to the 
combination of significant issues, namely the explosion of 
demography and the revolt of Earth. By 2025, the level of 
urbanization will reach 58.20% (4.7 Bn people) from 44.70% 
(2.57 Bn), twenty years earlier. The projections show that the 
two-third of humanity will live in an urban environment by 
2050. 
The explosion of demography and the high concentration 
of human beings into cities may have devastating effects. 
Pollution, security concerns, mental and health disorders, 
increased and concentrated needs for energy and resources 
are the most intensively documented.  Such a massive trend 
always requires more substantial storage capacities and 
efficient distribution networks. It also increases the 
vulnerability of human centres to natural (volcanoes, 
earthquakes, floods, sea elevation, high tide) and health 
disasters as well as to terrorist and cyber-attacks.  
The revolt of Earth takes multiple forms from climate 
changes to disappearance of fauna and flora species, from 
freshwater scarcity to pest invasions. It profoundly affects, 
together 
with 
human-generated 
conflicts, 
the 
living 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

conditions 
worldwide 
and 
creates 
mutations 
and 
transformations at many levels as well as migrations and 
destruction of human settlements.  In such a tense 
environment, Smart City appears as an “easy to sell” political 
tool. Expandable and flexible, it is a kind of “swiss knife 
urban concept” able to resolve all issues mentioned above.  
The political discourse is supported mainly by the 
revolution of ICT (Information and Communication 
Technologies), the one of IoT (Internet of Things) and more 
recently the fast development of AI (Artificial Intelligence). 
They allow managing ever-increasing volumes of data that 
shall grow from 33 Zettabytes (ZB) in 2018 to 175 ZB by 
2025 [3].   
For a large share of the population, those signs of 
progress are synonym of job destructions and highly tricky 
adaptation. Political discourses attempt to calm fears. Thanks 
to technology, the city would become the place where, 
through monitoring, air and water purity would remain 
unchallenged, traffic and transports efficiency would be 
enhanced, garbage would be invisible and immediately 
recycled. Criminality and terrorist risks would be assessed, 
and new services would regularly appear. A smart city is also 
a place where available jobs would be managed and fulfilled. 
Still, most of all, its development would require a high 
number of qualified technicians to support every day 
appearing positions. 
Whatever is the type of decision process (centralized or 
decentralized) used to drive the development of the Smart 
City, all insist on people empowerment. Many suggest the 
promotion of platforms 
for bottom-up participatory 
governance [4]. Then, through the access to data, the 
contribution by forwarding ideas, the development of 
software and applications by its inhabitants or local 
companies, the city of the future may appear as a new place 
for democracy. At least in the political discourse and 
notwithstanding the increased pressure and control that smart 
data and IoT may allow on the citizens. By becoming smart, 
the city will anticipate and satisfy all needs as defined by the 
Maslow Pyramid from physiological to self-actualization: 
“Cities can be the source of solutions to, rather than the 
cause of, the challenges that our world is facing today” [5]. 
III. 
URBAN CONCENTRATION AND GROWTH: A LONG-
TERM DEBATE 
Does urban concentration support growth? The question 
remains a place for fierce debates. Jane Jacobs, the well-
known author of The death and life of great American cities,  
appeared as a pathfinder when she claimed that “the 
understanding of cities, and also of economic development 
generally, has been distorted by the “dogma of agricultural 
primacy.” From initially being primary organs of cultural 
development, cities have become primary economic organs 
[6] and as such a centre of growth. As places of innovation 
and industrial production, cities offer to the rurality the 
services and products required to increase the output, to 
upgrade raw into transformed goods with added value. 
Polese [7] studies the pro and cons of such a theory 
extensively. He identifies the laudators of cities whether 
considering the relationships between per capita income and 
urbanization levels, the contribution of urban areas to 
national income and product, the definite link between 
productivity and the agglomeration of economic activities in 
cities. But he rejects a direct causal relationship as 
scientifically impossible to demonstrate. Tolley and Thomas 
conclude that “Urbanization as such is neither the source nor 
the enemy of development” [8] 
IV. 
WHAT MAKES CITIES SO UNIQUE ? 
Urbanization mainly concerns the rural-urban shift. The 
denomination is also used when population growth is 
predominantly urban. As indicated earlier, agricultural 
productivity 
directly 
impacts 
urbanization 
pressure. 
Reversely effectiveness of agriculture may lower or slower 
urban growth. Urbanization, part of the farm workforce 
becoming free, constitutes an inferred-effect of the 
agricultural revolution [9]. Castells-Quintana and Royuela 
[10] edulcorate such a proposal by stressing,that rural 
population are often expelled from the rural areas.  
The genuine attraction for cities shall be analyzed. Cities 
are the mothers of human progress [11] and, no development 
may take place without towns [12]. Often the change in 
status (from city to capital as it was the case for Jakarta in 
1961-1964); the efforts from government or municipality; 
the 
development 
of 
the 
hinterland, 
accelerate 
the 
urbanization process. Thanks to the concentration of capital 
and means, the city offers a place for innovation. [13] “The 
city promotes the monetization of the economy, facilitates 
social mobility and the adequacy between offer and demand 
for qualified manpower, expands the markets for industrial 
and agricultural productions” [14]. Even a specific size shall 
be reached to boost technological progress [15], dense and 
marge populations constitute a fertile ground able to 
welcome the exchange of ideas [16]. City diversity supports 
employment growth [17]. By limiting the distance, offering 
efficient transportation and communication networks, they 
reduce the cost of transmitting information and increase 
efficiency and productivity. [18] [19] Unsurprisingly the 
patterns have changed with time also in the 90’s “Cities with 
high levels of human capital did well, and cities with large 
numbers of the poor did poorly” [20] Environmental 
concerns also require adaptative and innovative means of 
transportation. Intermodal platforms aim at improving 
efficiency. [21] 
Cities are intricated into a complex system: the system of 
cities. For Pumain [22], cities also have an intrinsic quality to 
transform 
themselves: 
an 
evolutive 
capacity 
or 
(re)organization. Remembering the “General systems of 
cities” conceptualized by J.Reynaud in 1841; the works of 
Berry [23] and its famous “cities as systems within systems 
of cities” and the ones of Pred [24]; using analogies with 
physical systems and synergetics; Pumain compares cities 
systems to dynamic systems governed by an auto-regulation. 
She goes even further by defining an evolutional theory 
centred on the notion of “system of cities”; thus, ending the 
supremacy of a static vision of cities. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

V. 
THE RISK OF ABANDONING RURAL AREAS AND “THE 
CATASTROPHE SCENARIO” 
Could any government decently abandon 60 to 20% of its 
population? The “yellow vest” movement in France, initiated 
in October 2018 and still active as of March 2020 in some 
rural areas, constitutes, for any government, a fierce 
reminder. The images of violence in Champs Elysees, the 
groups of rioters spreading in the capital and main cities, 
made people forget that many Yellow Vest were leaving in 
rural areas and were protesting against decisions taken by the 
central government that directly impacted their living 
conditions. 
France is presented regularly as an heir of Jacobinism. 
Despite some tentative of decentralization, regionalism is 
refrained, and decisions centres are often far from the 
countryside.  
Conscious that a balance shall exist across the entire 
national territory, President Charles de Gaulle created in 
1963 the Délégation à l’Aménagement du Territoire et à 
l’Action Régionale (DATAR). Under the Prime Minister, 
such a structure had to impulse, coordinate, reequilibrate the 
actions of the state whereas in developing rural areas, 
reinforcing transportation networks, meshing the country. By 
using DATAR, the state aimed at organizing and 
modernizing France; at preserving cohesion, at making 
territories more attractive. 
On 
2014, 
DATAR 
merged 
with 
the 
Comité 
Interministériel des Villes and l’Agence Nationale pour la 
Cohesion Sociale et l’Egalité des Chances into CGET, le 
Commissariat à l’Egalité des Territoires. Such a combination 
of agencies was lately replaced by the Agence Nationale 
pour la Cohésion des Territoires (ANCT) under the ministry 
of Cohesion of Territories and Relationships with Territorial 
Collectivities.  
Terminology matters here: cohesion, equality constitute 
the fertile soil of a territory that any disorder may spoil 
forever.  
In the 1970s, DATAR prepared a prospective study 
forecasting what will be France by the end of the 20th 
century. One of the output, referred to as the “Catastrophe 
scenario”, concentrating all developments into large 
metropoles and consequently creating desertification of rural 
areas had to be avoided. Dou and Fournié [29] have shown 
that, notwithstanding expert’s advice, France has been 
developed under such a configuration. The sizeable 
interstitial space created suffers from insufficient means, 
infrastructures and is dramatically abandoned by its 
population.  
The state agency France Strategy proposed that national 
investments be channelled to the 15 largest French cities 
through metropolitan pacts of innovation. Such a policy, 
justified by a lack of resources, may lead in territories 
located at the fringe, to the reinforcement of inequalities as 
regards as public services, access to medical services, 
connectivity between others.  
France suffers from a triple fracture: a Territorial 
Fracture, a Technological Fracture and “Data-consciousness” 
fracture.  
France is not the sole country to face problems with its 
rurality. The phenomena concerns almost all countries of the 
continent. The European Union, now aware of the situation, 
initiated some action process with the Cork declaration, 
Ireland, 2016; the UE Action Plan for Smart Villages 
(11/04/2017) that aims at « investing in the viability and 
vitality of rural areas »; the Bled declaration, Slovenia, 2018. 
VI. 
THE CASE OF ARIEGE  
Separated from Spain by the Pyrenees mountains, Ariège 
is one of the 13 departments composing the Occitanie region, 
second largest province in France (72 724 sq/km). With 5.8 
million inhabitants, organized around 18 urban poles, two 
large metropoles (Toulouse and Montpellier), the region 
shelters a strong industry recognized at international level 
(aeronautics, spatial, in-vehicle systems, agro-industries, 
biotech) supported by 15 poles of competitivity and several 
large universities. 
Ariège is a department limited in size, home of 152 724 
inhabitants of which 46.04% are over 50 years old compared 
to 33.08 % in the neighbour department of Haute Garonne 
(central city: Toulouse). Largest cities in 2017 were Pamiers 
(15675 habs), Foix (9 532 habs), Saint Girons (6 383 habs) 
and Lavelanet (6 137 habs). Only 31.1% of Ariege’s 
inhabitants have a graduate-level, far from the 50.8% of 
Haute Garonne and 97% of the companies have less than 50 
employees. 
The territory, called in some media the anti-startup nation 
[25],  has suffered from the closure of few large factories (in 
particular of paper, an industry-supported by hydroelectric 
capacities and forests) and mines in the 90’s, of “green 
tourism” being impacted by fierce competition with other 
regions and international destinations since the year 2000, 
and more recently of “white tourism” being affected by 
climatic change.  
Still, Ariège benefits of several assets. A vast cultural and 
historical heritage (between others Cathar castles), an 
immaculate nature with 55 000 ha of regional Natura 2000 
park that welcomes bears and wolves, high peaks over 3000 
m, thermalism are only parts of them.  
In this French department the disappearing of state 
presence, mass transportations and private services alter the 
living conditions and destroy the efforts to promote tourism 
On the long term, they might be the synonym of exode and 
increased poverty. A feeling of exclusion may prevail that 
could be transformed into social unrest and affect social and 
national cohesion. State presence disappearance takes 
multiple forms: the closing of taxation and perception 
offices, of classes in schools and colleges, of tribunals and 
legal offices, the reorganization of beds in hospitals or health 
services. In parallel, traditional shops are impacted by slow 
local and touristic activities. Low traffic and profitability 
condemn branches of banks and post offices. Bank 
Automated Distributors are suppressed. As in many rural 
regions, people have to drive 20 to 40 km to access essential 
services. Not the least, doctors and specialists abandon those 
areas, and there is a lack of professionals in both private 
sector (-26% between 2014 and 2018) and hospitals (-16% 
for the same period). 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Moreover, new regulations made possible the absence of 
controllers in the trains creating tense situations as regards as 
security and law enforcement in transports. On many lines, 
tickets cannot be sold into trains whereas at the same time 
commercial offices are being suppressed or opened during a 
short period of the day. Automatic machines are destroyed if 
located outside of the station and remain not accessible out 
of office hours or during weekends. The law referred to as 
LOM (Loi d’Organisation des Mobilités) signed December 
24th, 2019, creates a right to mobility. It may also, despite 
allowing through open data the access to information on 
transports and reinforcing the role of region, broadly impact 
rural territories.  
As regards as communication networks, 48.3% of 
housing have access to a high-speed network whereas over 
10% still have connection problems. At the same time, only 
22.6% are eligible to optic fibre. [26] 
Thus, at the same time authorities are pushing for more 
eco-friendly 
means 
of 
transportation 
and 
numeric 
transformation, an ageing population, suffering from a lack 
of knowledge and adaptative capacities, has difficulties in 
adapting to tools not fully available and to which it has not 
been trained. Besides the rupture of equality between 
territories, such a situation may endanger- this a guess that 
shall be assessed on the field- on a large scale, mental health, 
create deep feelings of exclusion and increase the 
vulnerability of rural populations. 
VII. COULD RURAL AREAS BECOME ATTRACTIVE AGAIN? 
Could rural areas become attractive again? Or in other 
words could we, create in those regions, at a time 
environmental concerns become a priority, the conditions to 
make the soil fertile again for living, to invert the rural-urban 
shift, to attract capital and means, to transform rural areas 
into places of innovation and serendipity.  
The report of Cour des Comptes dated March 2019 and 
entitled Accessing public services in rural territories 
concludes that, despite multiple initiatives, rural areas have 
required a long-term effort and remain a permanent failure of 
the central state. Multiplication of policies, overlapping of 
competences, and lousy coordination represent only a few 
aspects of the problem. Several laws have been voted with 
little positive impact: the legislation « Montagne » 
(Mountain) of 1985; the law for the Orientation and 
Development of Territories dated 04/02/1995; the bill for the 
Development of Rural Territories (23/02/2005). Circular 
letters addressed to the prefects by the Prime Minister and 
interministerial committees for rurality took place between 
2015 and 2016 defining a set of 104 measures to promote 
rural areas and ensure local development. Were considered 
as priorities: the access to health and the fight against « 
medical desert »;  the access to services through Maisons de 
Services Publics (MSP) (Public Services Office); « Nomade 
» Public; and « mobile » Postmen Services; the fight against 
school 
weaknesses; 
the 
numeric 
coverage 
and 
implementation of networks in rural areas; the execution of « 
Contracts of Rurality ». Those committees were replaced by 
CGET soon to merge into ANCT as mentioned earlier.  
The strategy of President Macron government for rurality 
should be read in the continuation of previous initiatives. 
Still 18% of the total French population live in medical 
deserts [27], a figure to compare to the 19.56% representing 
the total rural population. The same remedies have been 
proposed over the years without success. Rural territories 
continue to see their young population disappearing, the 
closure of public and private services and the constant 
degradation of their images in a never-ending vicious circle. 
VIII. A NEW STRATEGY SUPPORTED BY TECHNOLOGY 
Boosting the attractivity of rural territories is related to 
both a change in image, the development of light 
infrastructures 
of 
utilities 
and 
communications, 
the 
development of inner innovation capacities and value, the 
acceptation of the challenge by local people. Technology 
could be a fantastic chance to invert such an ineluctable 
destiny. Whatever we call it “Smart Village” or “Smart Basic 
Entity” (SBE), we advocate that a new frame of organization 
and development shall be studied. It may become a potential 
area of growth and allow the inversion of the concentration 
process into cities. The SBE model shall, of course, and 
provided customization, benefit of the technical innovations 
and successful realizations that would be implemented in 
Smart Cities. SBE and SC models shall not be competing 
with each other, but live side by side, completing each other 
through exchanges on data, technologies and experiences, 
through existing or to be developed networks. 
What we foresee today is nothing else than a downsizing 
process; to go from mainframe (the state or the region) to a 
connected smart unit, the SBE. Such a reorganization of the 
territory underpins, on the medium term, a global rethinking 
of administrative and political organization.The SBE  could 
be defined as an evolutive and complex system, without 
exact physical limit but characterized by a logic of flows 
(persons, assets and information) always looking for 
efficiency improvement. By analogy to the system of cities; 
SBE will be connected through them as a network: the 
system of SBEs. Flows exchanges will exist within the SBE 
and with the exterior. 
A way to define Smart Cities is by using a tangible 
(Hard)/ intangible (Soft) domains approach [28]. By 
customizing such an approach, we may consider two axes:  
• 
Tangible/Hard: 
Water, 
Energy, 
Land 
and 
Environment 
Resources 
(Forests, 
Mines, 
Parks…), 
Transportation, Buildings (including health care and 
education) infrastructures, Security systems  
• 
Intangible/Soft: Governance, Education, Health, 
Economy, Culture systems and data 
And seven related applications: Utility management, 
Land and Environment Ressources management, Mobility, 
Buildings, Economy, Security, People (Cultural, social, 
education and health) 
New technology facilitates communication, remote 
financial operations, distance learning, online medicine. As a 
consequence, cities are on the way to lose most of their 
competitive advantages. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

IX. 
THE SMART DIGITAL CLONE APPROACH 
By collecting data related to the 2 axes, we shall be able 
to create a digital clone of the SBE. It shall represent its 
tangible and intangible assets and allow to analyse flows 
within the SBE as well as exchanges with outside, mainly, 
within the system of SBE. Such an approach that we call 
SMART 
(for 
Systemic 
Modeling 
and 
Advance 
Reengineering of Territory) shall facilitate improvements, 
reinforce governance efficiency 
The digital clone would allow, by simulating any 
structural or logical change, to evaluate it. It shall promote, 
as well, the definition and implementation of contingency 
plans; and make possible dynamic stress tests on all tangible 
and intangible dimensions. It appears mandatory to respect 
when implementing such an approach, several rules that we 
summarized as the HAWKS principles. H: Holistic: the 
digital clone covers all aspects and enlightens even shadow 
areas A: Accepted: by the population  W: Wise K: Creative 
S: Secured 
The digital clone terminology is used by analogy with 
recent development in medical technology. If a digital clone 
can be created to save or cure a human patient, why not 
applying the same to study, monitor, optimize the living 
conditions in a rural SBE? 
X. 
ANGOLA AND CHINA CASES 
In Southern Africa and more specifically in Angola, the 
question of the economic development based on a systemic 
(system and system of systems) approach is crucial. The 
problem is multidimensional from two different points of 
view. Multidimensional, according to the aspects which 
constitute the domains where solutions must be designed, 
developed, implemented and evaluated:  production and 
consumption of energy, wastes treatments, water control 
(drinking 
and 
wastewater), 
forest 
preservation 
and 
agriculture development, artisanal (handmade) and industrial 
activities, mobility … . Multidimensional, because at the 
same time, cultural, societal, technological, collective and 
individual. 
Under the umbrella of the DNDTI (National Direction 
for the Development of Technology and Innovation) of the 
MESCTI (Ministry for Higher Education, Sciences, 
Technology and Innovation) of Angola a “SMART Villages” 
project is close to being launched. The question is how new 
technologies can be used for assuring a real, sustainable 
development of a small city (village)? How could a global 
approach be defined and implemented? As we noticed at the 
beginning, the project aims to consider each field of 
challenge (energy, wastes, water …) as a system and to 
consider the global interactions between all these systems. 
The objective is not only to solve problems; it is more the 
optimization of different solutions under a set of balanced 
criteria (economic development, alphabetisation rate, safety 
and security …).  
This pilot project will consist of two main parallel parts. 
The first will be focused on scientific and technological 
studies to propose and implement selected solutions, for 
example, about production and consumption of energy. But 
the most original part could be the second one. This part will 
consist of developing a “digital ghost” (or digital clone) of 
the small city (village) based on the capture of data 
concerning all the aspects to take into account even the 
feelings and the opinions of the citizens, visitors tourists…. 
Also if at the origin the ”digital ghost” will be more a 
database than a real digital representation of the city, each 
development will be the occasion to reinforce the amount of 
data (information) creating step by step a new digital 
structure able to facilitate original representations of the city 
based on the selection of data according to specific criteria 
(as mobility by example).  
On the other hand, to be able to assess the project itself 
and its results, a model of excellence, as the EFQM model 
used for evaluating the efficiency of enterprises or public 
organizations will be used. This approach will allow to 
assure or to analyze the results for different stakeholders. 
According to this last point, it will be interesting to compare 
the evolutions (transformations) of the “digital ghost” of the 
city with variations of the stakeholder’s opinions reinforcing 
by this way the capacity to understand better how a SMART 
integrated development impacts positively or negatively the 
citizens’ lives.  
Another exploratory work was carried out in the city of 
Shanghai (China). In partnership with the company Mobike 
(free bicycle), students worked on the development of an 
onboard pollution capture system (integrated into the bike 
frame). The aim was to transmit this information to a 
platform to advise cyclists on "greener" alternative routes. 
XI. 
CONCLUSION 
There is no inevitable future for rural territories. We 
firmly believe that the rural-urban shift is not a fatality and 
could be inverted provided rural areas modify their image 
and become land of innovation and investment. Thanks to 
technology, distance is no more a concern as regards as 
accessing information, finance and education. Environmental 
and security issues could reinforce the position of territories 
towards cities that have lost part of their competitive 
advantages. Such a revolution could take place at the SBE 
level and that the development of SMART Digital Clones 
constitutes a significant leap into the future for rural 
territories. Its application has no frontier from China to 
Angola, from rural territories of France to the ones of 
Indonesia. And the current ongoing pandemy of Corona 
virus, that constitutes a real stress test for the economy and 
states structures at the international level may question the 
future of megapoles. Isn’t it time to invest in rural territories, 
therefore keeping in mind that their specificities and 
environment shall be preserved ? 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] https://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SP.RUR.TOTL.ZS 
[2] M.Pesaresi et al., “Atlas for the Human Planet 2016: Mapping 
human presence on Earth with the Global Human Settlement 
Layer”, European Commission, 2016 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[3] D.Reinsel, J.Gantz and J.Rydning, “The Digitization of the 
World: From Edge to Core”, An IDC White Paper 
#US44413318, 2018. 
[4] UN Economic and Social Council, Smart cities and 
infrastructures. Geneva, 2016.E/CN.16/2016/2. 
[5] New Urban Agenda - Habitat III. United Nations. Quito, 
Ecuador, 2016. ISBN: 978-92-1-132731-1. 
[6] J. Jacobs, “The economy of the cities”, New York, Vintage 
Books, 1969. 
[7] M.Polèse, “Cities and National Economic Growth: A 
Reappraisal”, Urban Studies, Vol. 42, 8, pp. 1429-1451, July 
2005. 
[8] G.S.Tolley and V. Thomas, “The economics of urbanization 
and urban policies in developing countries”, The World 
Bank,1987, p. 185. 
[9] J.Véron, “Enjeux économiques, sociaux et environnementaux 
de l'urbanisation du monde”, Mondes en développement, Vol. 
2008/2, 142, 2008, pp. 39-52. 
[10] D.Castells-Quintana and V. Royuela, “Malthus living in a 
slum:Urban concentration, infrastructures and economic 
growth”, St. Petersburg, Russia : European Regional Science 
Association (ERSA), Louvain-la-Neuve, 26-29 August 2014. 
[11] P.Bairoch, “De Jéricho à Mexico, Villes et économie dans 
l’histoire”, Paris, Gallimard, 1985. 
[12] N.Keyfitz, “International Migration and Urbanization”, in  P. 
Demeny and M.F. Perutz, Resources and Population, 
Clarendon Press, 1996,  pp. 269-285. 
[13] K.F.Sokoloff, “Inventive Activity in Early Industrial 
America: Evidence From Patent Records, 1790–1846”, The 
Journal of Economic History, Vol. 48, 04, 1998, pp. 813-850. 
[14] P.Bairoch, P. “Cinq millénaires de croissance urbaine” in I. 
Sachs. Quelles villes, pour quel développement ?, Paris,  PUF, 
1996, pp. 17-60. 
[15] J.Henrich, “Demography and cultural evolution: How 
adaptive cultural processes can produce maladaptive losses-
The Tasmanian case”, American Antiquity, Vol. 69, 2, 2004, 
pp. 197-214. 
[16] P.M. Romer, “Endogenous Technological Change”, The 
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, 5 Part 2, October 199., 
pp. S71-S102. 
[17] E.L.Glaeser et al., "Growth in Cities”, Journal of Political 
Economy, Vol. 100, 6, 1992, pp. 1126-1152. 
[18] A.Marshall, “Principles of Economics”, Macmillan and Co, 
New York, 1890. 
[19] G.Duranton 
and 
M.A. 
Turner, 
“Urban 
growth 
and 
transportation”, The review of economic studies, Vol. 79, 4, 
October 2012, pp. 1407-1440. 
[20] E.L. Glaeser and J.Shapiro, “Is there a new urbanism ? The 
growth of the US cities in the 1990's”, Cambridge, MA,  
National Bureau of Economic Search, 2001. Working Paper 
8357. 
[21] V.Vuchic, “Transportation for livable cities”, New York,  
Routledge, 1999. 378 pages. 
[22] D.Pumain, “Pour une théorie évolutive des villes”, Espace 
géographique, Vol. 26, 2, 1997, pp. 119-134. 
[23] B.J.L Berry, “Cities as systems within systems of cities”, 
Papers of the Regional Science Association, 1964, Cited by 
Pumain, 1997. 
[24] A.Pred, “City systems in advanced societies”, London, 
Hutchinson, 1977. 
[25] A.Rousseau, “L'Ariège, l'anti-Start-Up Nation”, March 22nd 
2019, Les Echos. 
[26] ZoneAdsl, Couverture internet de l'Ariège, retrieved 1st 
March 2020. https://www.zoneadsl.com/couverture/ariege/. 
[27] C.Maisonneuve, “Nouvelle carte des déserts médicaux : votre 
commune est-elle concernée ? ”, La gazette.fr, 2017. 
[28] P.Neirotti et al., “Current trends in Smart City initiatives: 
Some stylised facts”., Cities, June 2014, pp. 25-36. 
Articles in conference proceedings: 
[29] H.Dou and P.Fournié, “Les Smart Villages dans le contexte 
européen” ,Val d'Europe, Codata 2019: Data value chain in 
Science and Territories, 2019, pp. 19-26. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-800-6
HUSO 2020 : The Sixth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

