CHUNK:
Curated Heuristic Using a Network of Knowledge
Ralucca Gera
Department of Applied Mathematics,
Associate Provost for Graduate Education,
Teaching and Learning Commons,
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA
Email: rgera@nps.edu
Michelle L. Isenhour
Department of Operations Research,
Naval Postgraduate School,
Monterey, CA
Email: mlisenho@nps.edu
D’Marie Bartolf
Teaching and Learning Commons,
Naval Postgraduate School,
Monterey, CA
Email: dmarie.bartolf.ctr@nps.edu
Simona Tick
Graduate School of Business and Public Policy,
Naval Postgraduate School,
Monterey, CA
Email: sltick@nps.edu
Abstract—What is the potential of a 21st century learning
environment that mirrors the capabilities of personalized
Apps? In contrast to the standard linear or tree-like educa-
tional system of sequential lectures or chapters, we propose
a real-time, modular, adaptive teaching-learning environment
for enhanced and personalized education, called the Curated
Heuristic Using a Network of Knowledge (CHUNK) Learning
concept. The CHUNK Learning model breaks away from the
predictable pattern of traditional education models and pro-
vides content delivery that adapts to the capabilities, learning
styles, and approaches to problem-solving of every learner.
With CHUNK Learning, students are empowered by a student-
centered teaching-learning system whose purpose is to make
learning engaged, ﬂexible, and respectful of the students’ time.
Much like a computer game approach, CHUNK Learning
system maintains an on-line learner proﬁle for each user, which
guides the learner through a Network of Knowledge composed
of lesson materials joined together by prerequisite relationships
and common attributes based on competency or skill levels.
Our vision also includes a mix of different delivery methods,
to include demos, videos, interactive applications, TED talks,
webinars, programming languages (personalized to the skill of
the learner), and data manipulations, all delivered through a
combination of online and traditional experiences.
Keywords—CHUNK Learning; network of knowledge; person-
alized learning; individualized education; networks and educa-
tion.
I. INTRODUCTION
Traditional education places all students through the same
topics, at the same time, at the same pace, generally teaching
to the average student. However, such a system fails to
provide every student the appropriate opportunity to learn
and engage, leaving some learners struggling, while failing
to challenge others. A strength in student-centered learning,
as opposed to traditional education, is the opportunity for
independence and autonomy that enhances different skills,
abilities, and interests learners might have. Unlike most
established sciences, new research ﬁelds such as Network
Science (an emerging ﬁeld overseeing traditional computer
science, operations research, sociology, and other ﬁelds)
hint at non-traditional methods of education that serve as
a starting point for the current effort.
The contrast between our views on the potential of 21st
century education and the current educational status quo
generates ideas which we believe can improve effectiveness
of educational programs through enhanced retention, trans-
fer ability and critical thinking linked to learner-centered
education. We introduce a vision for an adaptive teaching,
ﬂexible learning, and technology-enhanced student-centered
education strategy for the 21st century learner that operates
in the big data environment [1]–[3]. We describe our view on
how different teaching and learning tools can be joined into a
web/network of knowledge that will individualize learning
and leave a persistent impact on the learner’s career. We
introduce our unique structure and vision for catering to the
needs, motivations, and supply of learners with a system
that:
• Offers intense, short, and focused educational modules.
• Stimulates interest and relevance of topics.
• Integrates new information with learner’s pre-existing
knowledge.
• Provides personalized and individualized education.

• Optimizes content and methodology delivery to meet
the needs of each learner.
The structure of the paper is as follows. We present
related work in Section II followed by a short overview
vision of what the system is becoming in Section III.
We then introduce the CHUNK Learning framework in
Section IV followed by the science behind CHUNK Learn-
ing in Section V. We present the Network of Knowledge
and its components in Sections VI and VII, respectively.
Furthermore, we discuss and provide an example of how
CHUNK Learning is individualized and personalized, in
Sections VIII and IX. We conclude with further direction,
in Section X.
II. RELATED WORK
In the early 90’s, education slowly started to incorporate
digital resources and use of Internet in the classrooms. By
1999, 80 percent of the schools used these resources in
some form [4]. In the same year, studies of the Internet
surfaced and network science research started to bloom [5],
[6]. Yet, to this day, we still use the Internet and digital
resources primarily as a resource for information or to
host distance learning and Massive Open Online Courses
(MOOCs). Below, we expand on the richer use of pulling
educational information to personalize educational content
and to position the learner the way Amazon, Netﬂix and
social media do.
Educational content is generally organized in a hierar-
chical structure following a textbook or a collection of
books. Students enroll in a curriculum that consists of
several courses. Each course has themes organized into
chapters, and each chapter consists of several sections. In
general, the smallest level of educational material relevant
for learning is a section, whereas the smallest level a student
can choose from is at the course level. Our vision for
CHUNK Learning is to consider the data in educational
content at a more granular level, at the tier of topics, where
a section could be comprised of one or several topics,
possibly captured on transcripts by micro-credits. Moreover,
we consider that, based on design cognition, visualizing
the structured representation of concepts and the relations
between them as a map allows the learner to generate a
deeper, longer lasting learning [7]. Concept mapping allows
students to learn in a more meaningful way by elevating
their previous experiences and knowledge and relating them
to the new concepts for a more complex, longer lasting,
more effecting learning [8].
Information theory shows that learners are limited by
the amount of information one can receive, process, and
remember at the time [9]. Techniques such as “several stim-
ulus dimensions, recording, and various mnemonic devices”
along with breaking down the information supports the
learning environment. One of these techniques is to present
the information in smaller and shorter and interconnected
chunks that has been already used for both traditional [10]
and for e-learning [11]. A 2014 large scale empirical study
by Guo, Kim and Rubin found that shorter videos tend to
be more impactful for the students’ learning experience than
longer videos [12].
A step forward from traditional education is web-based
education or e-learning [13]–[16]. Particularly, e-learning
received more attention in the form of MOOCs [17], [18].
While the digitization of the lectures gives students freedom
in interacting with the content whenever they want, all the
students are still exposed to the exact same information,
presented in a single way, at a single pace.
Recent studies indicate that e-learning efﬁciency can be
dramatically improved if personal prerequisites, skills, and
individual learning preferences of students are taken into
account [19]–[21], often referred to as personalized learning.
“Personalized learning refers to instruction in which the pace
of learning and the instructional approach are optimized for
the needs of each learner. Learning objectives, instructional
approaches, and instructional content (and its sequencing)
may all vary based on learner needs. In addition, learning
activities are meaningful and relevant to learners, driven by
their interests, and often self-initiated.” [22].
A step further from personalized education is the adaptive
personalized approach that requires both detailed proﬁling
of the student’s personal learning preferences, an extraordi-
nary collection and annotation of educational material, and
updating the proﬁle based on the annotation of educational
materials [23], [24]. The latter is necessary in order to
identify educational material best ﬁtting the student’s proﬁle.
Network science can provide important tools that help to
achieve these goals, as we explore in this paper.
III. ON BECOMING A SYSTEM
We envision a network science approach serving as the
foundation for real-time personalized adaptive learning. All
curated educational content contained within the content
management system is presented as a Network of Knowl-
edge, that learners can navigate based on prerequisites and
correlations of topics. Building upon this foundation, the
learning management system must contain a personalized
and individualized recommender system which matches
learners’ needs (as stored in student proﬁles) with educa-
tional content (stored in the repository of CHUNKs), and
presents each learner with a personalized network as part
of the Network of Knowledge comprised of all the existing
CHUNKs. Lastly, we envision an adaptive learning environ-
ment where student proﬁle data and educational content are
continuously updated, based on observed patterns of learners
supported by artiﬁcial intelligence.
IV. CURATED HEURISTIC USING A NETWORK OF
KNOWLEDGE
The proposed CHUNK Learning is a real-time and Adap-
tive teaching-learning method for enhanced and personalized
education. It provides a Curated way of moving through
a Network of Knowledge composed of reusable learning
objects joined together by common attributes (i.e., tagged

with competency or skill levels), rather than following the
standard linear or tree-like system of lectures or chapters.
CHUNK Learning thus enables the learner to Heuristically
discover or learn based on personal background and inter-
ests, which we believe will not only enhance the learner’s
talents, but will make them a more valuable resource. This
system is live at [25].
How do we achieve CHUNK Learning? Our learner’s in-
terests determine his/her own learning path through the Net-
work of Knowledge with individualized learning outcomes.
Each student beneﬁts differently from the learning experi-
ence, based on his/her skills and desires. Simultaneously,
the Network of Knowledge builds on the experiences of the
students covertly guiding learners through the educational
materials, much like Amazon provides recommendations for
buyers. We achieve this by moving away from interdisci-
plinary teaching that transfers methods from one discipline
to another, opting instead for a trans-disciplinary teaching
approach that crosses the boundaries of many disciplines
using a diverse choice of teaching tools and software.
V. THE SCIENCE BEHIND CHUNK LEARNING: A
MOTIVATIONAL FRAMEWORK
In determining how best to create a platform to support
both educators and learners, CHUNK Learning focuses on
addressing how to positively affect educational engage-
ment as well as stimulate enthusiasm for self-directed life-
long learning. Research supports the need for educators
to effectively connect with learners by addressing learner
motivation. Pink and Brophy identiﬁed the importance of
providing relevance and utility of content as students are
motivated when they understand why they are being asked
to learn certain material [26], [27]. It is paramount that the
learning platform focuses on providing learners the answers
to “why should I care about this topic.” Additionally, adult
learners are more likely to engage in learning when topics
have intrinsic value and demonstrate importance within the
context of their lives [28]. Providing context for “how will I
use this knowledge in my life” ensures learners connect the
overall purpose and goals of instruction.
Personalized learning software respects the reality that all
learners are unique and, in order to maintain proper motiva-
tion, it is necessary to support their different learning styles
and timelines. Utilizing key motivational strategies to in-
clude a variety of content delivery methods and styles helps
ensure learners generate and maintain a positive attitude
towards learning [29]. Additionally, recognizing that even
the most motivated, self-directed learners may experience
challenges in the pursuit of education, it is necessary to
employ strategies that promote learners’ control over the
delivery of short and intense modules. Respecting learners’
time and empowering learning-oriented learners to engage
in self-directed study establishes an inclusive invitation to
education [28].
CHUNK presents learners materials in a variety of formats
supporting multiple pedagogies. This orientation empha-
sizes: the use of multiple mental and pedagogical repre-
sentations; the promotion of multiple alternative systems
of linkage among knowledge elements; the promotion of
schema assembly (as opposed to the retrieval of prepackaged
schemas); the centrality of “cases of application” as a vehicle
for engendering functional conceptual understanding; and
the need for participatory learning, tutorial guidance, and
adjunct support for aiding the management of complexity.
This approach is geared towards an active construction
of new knowledge and critical thinking skills, which is
especially learning-enhancing for adult learners who bring a
large array of previous experiences and knowledge to their
educational journey [30]. Similarities in prior experiences or
interests among learners can generate new paths of learning
in a network-of-knowledge based system, further deviating
from the linear path of the traditional education. We envision
an array of assessments of the CHUNK-generated learning
and experiences, relative to the traditional, linear educational
system, with the paramount goal of enhancing learning out-
comes and guiding the continuous shaping of the CHUNK
Learning environment.
VI. EDUCATIONAL MATERIAL AS A NETWORK OF
KNOWLEDGE
This research uses a network science [31] approach to
represent educational content that facilitate learning as a
map of aggregated materials. This collection of educational
materials and the curration that holds it together forms a
Network of Knowledge formally deﬁned by Cleven as:
A Network of Knowledge is the representation of
educational material as a (multilayer) network, in
which educational content builds nodes that are
linked by common attributes in several categories,
such as content, prerequisites, instructors, level,
etc. Each category of attributes links the nodes
in one layer, which provides an ability to ﬁlter
the entire collection of material with different
perspectives. [32]
We establish the network using metadata attached to
the educational material. We envision the backbone of the
network as a keyword ontology describing relationships
between the content the learners frequently access. However,
also included would be other relationships such as content
authors, prerequisites, media types, and learning methods. A
visualization of the Network of Knowledge thus established
is depicted in Fig. 1.
VII. WHY-HOW-METHODOLOGY-ASSESSMENT
Our work establishes a baseline template that all CHUNK
Learning modules follow, displayed in Fig. 2. This format
facilitates learning as an adaptation of Simon’s “Why-What-
How” [33] format. For example, in introductory courses in
science, the common practice is to provide a motivation
for the concept-to-be-introduced, with the message that
the learner will eventually be using the learned concepts.
CHUNK Learning’s “Why-How-Methodology-Assessment”

Fig. 1. CHUNK Network of Knowledge.
reverses this process. It is top-down teaching by anchoring
the concept-to-be-introduced to each learner’s knowledge
before introducing the methodology for the new concept. It
shows each learner how the content is used in that learner’s
speciﬁc ﬁeld of study, so that it has meaning and context
to the learner, before the learner even engages with the new
content. This is accomplished by having multiple choices
for each of the category in “Why”, “How”, “Methodology”,
and “Assessment”, in order to optimize the matching of
the content to each user. Throughout the paper, “user” and
“learner” are used interchangeably.
Fig. 2. Why-How-Methodology-Assessment Format.
1) “Why”: Tantalizing the Learner. Learners open a
“Why” CHUNKlet to reveal an enticing one-of-its-kind
educational trailer. The goal of CHUNK Learning is to
make the student eager to learn, so all CHUNKs begin
with a demonstration on why learning a particular topic
is important. Much like a movie trailer attracts movie-
goers to a movie, the “Why” CHUNKlet attracts an
exploratory learner to the CHUNK Learning module,
answering the following questions:
• Why is the topic relevant?
• Why should students learn the topic?
2) “How”: Applications, Real and Relevant Learners
dive into the “How” CHUNKlet to uncover real and
relevant applications. Here, students discover the an-
swer to the often-asked question, “When will I ever use
this in real life?” We also seek to answer the following
questions:
• How is the topic applied in practice?
• How does the learner validate what he/she already
knows?
• How are the learning outcomes tested?
• How is new information, anchored to the learner’s
interests, incorporated into the module?
• How
can
the
learner
apply
the
acquired
skill/knowledge?
3) Methodology: A Variety of Delivery Methods In-
structors carefully curate the “Methodology” CHUN-
Klets, guiding students though a variety of personal-
ized course materials and delivery methods, including
MOOCs and Creative Commons Licensed resources,
as well as instructor-created content. For interactive
modules, we envision that instructors will follow the “I
do it, We do it, You do it” model. The ”Methodology”
CHUNKlets’ main focus should be on answering the
following questions:
• What new information and skills will the module
deliver?
• What activities will the learner be required to
perform?
• What learning outcomes will the learner acquire?
• What different methodologies could be used to
engage with this new knowledge?
4) Assessment: Competency Based Learners can jump
into the “Assessment” CHUNKlet at any point in order
to test their knowledge on any given topic. Assess-
ments are available for every CHUNK. Opportunities
for remedial learning are always present. Successful
completion results in a CHUNK competency credit.
• What is the competency-based framework, de-
signed around learning objectives, needed for each
CHUNK?
• How should remediation be tested?
• How should the post-test differ from the pre-test?
We encourage instructors to complement this basic structure
with innovative methods of incorporating information and
engaging the learners.
VIII. INDIVIDUALIZED SYSTEM
Due to their various academic and professional back-
grounds, learners have unique gaps between current knowl-
edge and required predeﬁned course knowledge standards.
Additionally, individuals have different skills, preferred
learning modes, and motivation to learn. This challenges
educators to expand the one-size-ﬁts-all education method to
effectively engage with learners. CHUNK Learning provides
an interactive learning system that is able to identify each
learner’s unique knowledge and skill gaps and then ﬁlls those

Category
Examples
Application topics
Social networks, Cyber, Bitcoin, Biology, Economy,
Neuroscience, Internet, etc.
Programming Skills
Fortran, C, C++, Python, R, JMP, Matlab
Education
GED, A.A., A.S., B.A., B.S., M.A., M.S., Ph.D
Training
untrained, trained, need practice, refresher
TABLE I. Sample tags used in the proﬁle set up to support individualized
experiences
gaps, ensuring the required knowledge outcomes are met
based on the student’s uniqueness, as exempliﬁed in Table I.
In CHUNK Learning each learner creates a “user proﬁle”
tagged with keywords such as the examples from categories
in Table I, based on the speciﬁc user’s background. This pro-
ﬁle is used to attract CHUNKlets with matching keywords,
to present individualized learning materials. Each learner’s
proﬁle updates as the learner explores CHUNK Learning. A
video introducing users to the proﬁle can be found here.
Similarly, each CHUNKlet in the Network of Knowledge
is tagged with keywords, like the examples shown in Table I
and more. Once the learners register for particular CHUNKs,
the content inside the registered CHUNK gets suggested
to users based on the count of keyword matches between
the tags of the proﬁle and the ones on the CHUNKlets
of the registered CHUNK. The count of keyword matches
is displayed above the CHUNKlet, allowing the user to
make personal decisions and possibly take a scenic route to
complete the CHUNK. The CHUNK Learning’s set of tag
and categories grows based on users’ suggestions. A video
of how learners would use this Network of Knowledge can
be found here.
In CHUNK Learning, an author builds the necessary
CHUNKs within a course to ensure all learning objectives
are met at completion of all course’s assessments. The
CHUNK Learning system provides a pre-test capability for
each CHUNK, allowing learners to validate an individual
CHUNK by demonstrating competency while bypassing the
“why,” “how,” and “methodology” CHUNKlets, and com-
pleting the “assessment” CHUNKlet. Learners then engage
with remaining CHUNKs to satisfy the required learning
objectives of the course. The result is an interactive system
that identiﬁes and satisﬁes unique gaps of individual learn-
ers, respectful of the learner’s time and interests.
IX. PERSONALIZED SYSTEM
CHUNK Learning does more than provide a platform for
educators to individualize instruction for learners, it allows
users to take control of and be responsible for their learning.
The CHUNK Learning system also incorporates information
from the learner proﬁle based on the categories and examples
of Table II.
The matching between these categories captured in the
learner proﬁle and the CHUNKlets counts the same way
towards the score displayed above each CHUNKlet. The
difference is in the type of information it captures in
order to offer a personalized presentation of the educational
materials, as well as a personalized path through the content.
Category
Examples
Occupational Specialty
Educator, engineer, etc.
Professional Experience
Department chair, research team lead, etc.
Interest level
Depth, breadth, familiarity,
practice, gist
Goals
Reinforce something learner knows,
expand knowledge, get the gist
Preferred learning modes
Videos, PPT, exercises, research papers,
simulations, demos
TABLE II. Sample tags used in the proﬁle set up to support personalized
experiences
This is supported by system delivering engaging content
tailored to users’ learning preferences, and relevant to their
speciﬁc interests and realities of their daily and future lives.
By providing a network-based system, CHUNK Learning
is able to facilitate an education environment where learners
can see the connections between the topics captured by the
CHUNKs and how they ﬁt together, much like a digital
visualization of a map of the world. Thus, similarly to
navigating using the map, one can navigate the CHUNK
Learning network following the arrows that point from
the prerequisites of the desired content. As there might
be multiple ways to get to a destination CHUNK, this
visualization allows the learners to asses the different paths
to the desired CHUNK or CHUNKs, producing personalized
learning plans decided by students while guided by the
content creators. To see an example of this, consider a
learner who likes sports and has enrolled in Newton’s
First Law of Motion CHUNK as a refresher of a previous
exposure to the topic. Thus, the CHUNK trailer captured in
the “Why” video is presented based on American football
motivation. This is followed by an application to the science
of Olympics in the “How” CHUNKlet. Once the learner was
presented with these concise, rel and relevant educational
videos, he/she is engaged in the learning of the new content,
the “Methodology” CHUNKlet. In this case, as this is a
refresh of a topic, the user is routed to a Distance Learning
type of environment to reinforce the topic; otherwise, for a
new concept, a classic in class delivery method may be more
effective. The CHUNK concludes with the assessment.
Learners’ curiosity is ignited as they peruse a wide range
of topics, see the connections between them, and determine
areas to engage in deep study, utilizing assessments to meet
their own learning goals.
X. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS
In the 21st century’s fast-pace environment, surrounded
by personalized experiences that smart phones offer through
apps for shopping, movie watching and so on, education
seemingly lags behind in supporting digitally native learners.
Traditional education has many recognized shortcomings. It
typically presents the same educational content in a linear,
same-pace, same method of engagement for all students,
with a general goal of teaching to the average student.
Traditional education, therefore, produces similarly skilled
graduates with the same knowledge. Moreover, traditional

Fig. 3. An example of a personalized CHUNK for an American football fan, reinforcing Newton’s First Law of Motion.
education generally fails to enhance the different skills,
abilities, and interests of the individual learners. Advances
in new research ﬁelds, such as Learning Sciences, Artiﬁcial
Intelligence and Network Science, provide us with hints
on how to address shortcomings of traditional education
and support our vision for a new, non-traditional system of
learning.
In this work, we capitalize on the new research ﬁelds
and theories to introduce a ﬁrst step towards a personal-
ized, adaptive learning platform, called CHUNK Learning.
CHUNK Learning breaks away from the predictable pattern
of traditional education models and provides content deliv-
ery that respects the different capabilities, learning styles,
and approaches to problem-solving of every learner. Students
are empowered by a system that ensures learning is efﬁcient,
ﬂexible, and respectful of their time. Intense and short
educational modules, broken into smaller bits of information,
stimulate interest and applicability of topics through the use
of “Why learn this” content. It integrates new information
to learner’s pre-existing knowledge through a “How do
professionals in your ﬁeld use this” demonstration that is
personalized to individual learners’ backgrounds to provide
valuable context on how learners can use that knowledge in
their ﬁelds of expertise prior to learning new topics. This
allows the anchoring of the new information, supporting
meaningful and long term use of the new acquired knowl-
edge.
Supporting our desire of a system that meets the learners
where they are, rather than a system where learners depend
on standardized instruction from faculty, CHUNK Learning
also provides personalized & individualized education. This
is based on the learner’s best learning style (both at the
instructor level and at the content level) along with adaptive
content and methodology delivery that are optimized for
each learner.
We thus provide an exploratory environment that pro-
motes curiosity and creativity, collaboration and collegiality
as we search for meaningful ways to bring together and
curate knowledge for generations to come. This vision on
the future of learning also demonstrates the art of possibility
in teaching and learning leading to new partnerships with
industry, government, and academia to support education. It
shows the educator’s commitment to providing the best in
education that speaks to each learner.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank the United States Department of De-
fense (US DoD) for partially sponsoring the current research.
REFERENCES
[1] “e-classroom: The Future of Education,” Ed Tech Blog. Ac-
cessed March 16, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://edtechnyc.org/
e-classroom-the-future-of-education/.
[2] Dell, “Technology Trends Driving the Future of Higher Education,”
YouTube, May 2, 2017. Accessed March 16, 2018. [Video File].
Available: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=8FlgXB0eeq4.

[3] D. Wadhwa, “Using artiﬁcial intelligence technologies for personal-
ized learning and responsive teaching: A survey,” International Journal
of Advance Research in Science and Engineering, vol. 6, no. 1, pp.
207–217, 2017.
[4] A. Feldman, C. Konold, B. Coulter, and B. Conroy, Network Science,
a Decade Later: The Internet and Classroom Learning.
Routledge,
2000.
[5] R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Barab´asi, “Internet: Diameter of the
World-Wide Web,” Nature, vol. 401, no. 6749, pp. 130–131, 1999.
[6] M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, “On power-law re-
lationships of the Internet topology,” ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 251–262, 1999.
[7] R. Oxman, “Think-maps: teaching design thinking in design educa-
tion,” Design Studies, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 63–91, 2004.
[8] L. H. Hill, “Concept mapping to encourage meaningful student
learning,” Adult Learning, vol. 16, no. 3-4, pp. 7–13, 2005.
[9] G. A. Miller, “The magical number seven, plus or minus two: Some
limits on our capacity for processing information.” Psychological
Review, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 81–97, 1956.
[10] D. Lin-lin, “A Survey of Chinese English Majors’ Chunk Competence
[J],” Journal of Pla University of Foreign Languages, vol. 4, 2004.
[11] C. Zhang, G. Chen, M. Wang, and H. Wang, “Studying on Design
of Small-chunk Learning Resources in Mobile Learning [J],” Open
Education Research, vol. 3, 2009.
[12] P. J. Guo, J. Kim, and R. Rubin, “How video production af-
fects student engagement: An empirical study of MOOC videos,”
in Proceedings of the ﬁrst ACM conference on learning @ scale
conference.
ACM, 2014, pp. 41–50.
[13] B.
Abbey,
Instructional
and
cognitive
impacts
of
Web-based
education.
Hershey, PA, USA: Idea Group Pub., 2000.
[14] C. McCormack and D. Jones, Building a Web-Based Education
System, 1st ed.
New York, NY, USA: John Wiley & Sons, Inc.,
1997.
[15] J. A. Ruip´erez-Valiente, P. J. Mu˜noz-Merino, D. Leony, and C. D.
Kloos, “ALAS-KA: A learning analytics extension for better un-
derstanding the learning process in the Khan Academy platform,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 47, pp. 139–148, 2015.
[16] C. Thompson, “How Khan Academy is changing the rules of educa-
tion,” Wired Magazine, vol. 126, pp. 1–5, 2011.
[17] L. Breslow, D. E. Pritchard, J. DeBoer, G. S. Stump, A. D. Ho, and
D. T. Seaton, “Studying Learning in the Worldwide Classroom Re-
search into edX’s First MOOC.” Research & Practice in Assessment,
vol. 8, pp. 13–25, 2013.
[18] L. Pappano, “The Year of the MOOC,” The New York Times, vol. 2,
no. 12, p. 2012, 2012.
[19] P. Brusilovsky and C. Peylo, “Adaptive and Intelligent Web-Based
Educational Systems,” International Journal of Artiﬁcial Intelligence
in Education (IJAIED), vol. 13, pp. 159–172, 2003.
[20] R. Gera, J. M. Libertini, J. W. Roginski, and A. Zupancic, “The
Network Proﬁle Summary: exploring network science through the
lens of student motivation,” Journal of Complex Networks, vol. 6,
no. 3, pp. 470–484, 2017.
[21] D. S. Weld, E. Adar, L. Chilton, R. Hoffmann, E. Horvitz,
M. Koch, J. Landay, C. H. Lin, and M. Mausam, “Personalized
Online Education–a Crowdsourcing Challenge,” in Workshops at the
Twenty-Sixth AAAI Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence, 2012.
[22] US Department of Education, “Reimagining the Role of Technology
in Education: 2017 National Education Technology Plan Update,”
2017.
[23] P. Brusilovsky, J. Eklund, and E. Schwarz, “Web-based education for
all: a tool for development adaptive courseware,” Computer Networks
and ISDN Systems, vol. 30, no. 1-7, pp. 291–300, 1998.
[24] P. A. Henning, F. Heberle, A. Streicher, A. Zielinski, C. Swertz,
J. Bock, S. Zander et al., “Personalized Web Learning: Merging Open
Educational Resources into Adaptive Courses for Higher Education,”
Personalization Approaches in Learning Environments, pp. 55–62,
2014.
[25] “CHUNK: Curated Heuristic Using a Network of Knowledge,” Ac-
cessed March 16, 2018. [Online]. Available: https://chunklearning.net.
[26] J. E. Brophy, Teaching. International Academy of Education and the
International Bureau of Education, 1999.
[27] D. H. Pink, Drive: the surprising truth about what motivates us. New
York: Riverhead Books, 2009.
[28] S. B. Merriam, “The Changing Landscape of Adult Learning Theory,”
in Review of Adult Learning and Literacy, Volume 4, J. Comings,
B. Garner, and C. Smith, Eds. Mahwah, NJ, USA: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, Inc., 2004, ch. 6, pp. 199–220.
[29] R. J. Wlodkowski, “Enhancing adult motivation to learn: A com-
prehensive guide for teaching all adults (rev. ed.),” San Francisco:
Jossey-Basss, 1999.
[30] S. M. Yelich Biniecki and S. C. O. Conceic¸˜ao, “Using Concept
Maps to Engage Adult Learners in Critical Analysis,” Adult Learning,
vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 51–59, 2016.
[31] A.-L. Barab´asi, Network Science. Cambridge University Press, 2016.
[32] J.-D. Cleven, “A MULTILAYER NETWORK APPROACH FOR
REAL-TIME ADAPTIVE PERSONALIZED LEARNING,” Master’s
thesis, Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA, USA, 2018.
[33] TEDxPuget Sound, “Simon Sinek: How great leaders inspire ac-
tion,” TED, September 2009. Accessed March 16, 2018. [Video
File]. Available: https://www.ted.com/talks/simon sinek how great
leaders inspire action.

