 Innovations in Designing Territorial Platforms for Elderly Homecare Services 
in France
Bourret Christian 
Dicen-IdF Research Team 
University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) 
Val d’Europe, France 
e-mail: christian.bourret@univ-eiffel.fr 
Depeyrot-Ficatier Thérèse  
Dicen-IdF Research Team 
University of Paris East Marne-la-Vallée (UPEM) 
Val d’Europe, France 
e-mail: t.depeyrot@ndv-consulting.com 
 
 
Abstract - With the evolution of the demographic situation and 
the increase of the life expectancy, elderly people represent a 
large portion of the population. Their healthcare has become a 
real concern. As a result of important changes in the way of 
life, many of the elderly people live away from their children, 
so that they have to resort to getting services from local 
institutions when they become dependent. There are not 
enough accommodation establishments for the elderly people, 
and many of them prefer to stay at home. Our work takes into 
account the widespread wish of the elderly to stay at home 
longer, event when they become dependent. In this paper, we 
propose a new model regarding establishments for the elderly 
called “outside the walls” which may offer a solution, 
providing an appropriate and full array of services for 
homecare. The observation of some experiments for this model 
enables to consider that it may help to provide homecare 
services on a larger scale and open the way to the necessary 
transformations. 
 
Keywords - Territories; Healthcare; Digital Transformation; 
innovations; France; elderly people. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
With the demographical transition, the healthcare 
system has to face the problem of the increasing number of 
the elderly patients. The current frequency of chronic 
diseases requires to provide adequate care and monitoring 
for the elderly. This situation demands a transformation in 
the healthcare organization in order to cope with the lack of 
appropriate structures [1]. 
Until now, the usual model of structure offering 
accommodation and healthcare for the elderly in France has 
been the accommodation establishment for dependent 
elderly, EHPAD. An EHPAD is an establishment where 
dependent elderly people can get both accommodation and 
healthcare services; a doctor coordinates a team of 
professionals with some specialists; the staff is mainly 
composed of nursing auxiliaries, nursing assistants and 
nurses. It is managed according to a three-party agreement 
with the Healthcare Regional Agencies (ARS), the 
Departments Councils and the establishments. 
This model is now often reconsidered because of real 
problems of quality in the services provided, but also of the 
inadequacy between the needs and the wishes of the elderly 
and their families and the life in such establishments. Due 
in great part to limitations on healthcare expenditures, the 
present situation risks getting worse in the near future with 
both the demographical evolution and the increased life 
expectancy: actually, many diseases and disabilities 
aggravate with age.  
An important effort is now dedicated to the 
improvement of the quality of services. However, the 
question remains on the number of establishments that need 
to be planned for. EHPADs have also been strongly 
impacted by the health crisis linked to the Covid pandemic, 
in particular during the first wave of spring 2020, when 
people over 75 years of age, particularly those living in 
EHPADs, accounted for a large proportion of deaths. 
Meanwhile, many elderly people are expressing their 
wish to stay at home longer, even when advancing in age 
and in spite of diseases. “The solution is certainly in a 
universal offer, under common law, which would allow the 
elderly population to stay as long as possible at home (…).” 
[2]. 
Different models for implementing and managing 
appropriate services at home have been investigated during 
the workshops in the consultation process for the report 
about “Concertation old age and autonomy” managed by D. 
Libault [3]. The EHPAD and the multi services 
organization for support and healthcare at home may have 
the same legal structure, in a model where EHPAD plays 
the leading role. The stakeholders may also assemble their 
services through a gerontological web platform without 
forming a legal structure. 
      The concept “outside the walls” refers to the extension 
of the services provided to beneficiaries at home on the 
territorial area of the EHPAD. It emerged from the idea of 
providing services from skilled professionals working in 
those institutions to the elderly at home. Two main models 
of EHPAD may be distinguished: the traditional one and an 
innovative “EHPAD outside the walls”. 
After this introduction (Section 1), we propose to 
examine the background of the EHPAD “outside the walls” 
(Section 2). We present our scientific positioning and the 
methodology used in Section 3. Then, in Section 4, we 
present the concept of territorial EHPAD and we intend to 
observe it through some case examples in order to highlight 
the main results of present experimentations. We aim at 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

analyzing how they can satisfy the needs from different 
viewing angles: for the elderly and their families, but also 
for the healthcare professionals who are involved and 
finally for the healthcare system. After a discussion around 
the main challenges of this new model (Section 5), we plan 
to address the questions of transformation of the healthcare 
system through such territorial innovation (Section 6). 
II. THE BACKGROUND 
The combined effects of the post-World War II increase 
of births and the extension of the life expectancy due to 
scientific progress led to important changes in the 
demographic situation.  The proportion of elderly people in 
the total of the population was in France in 2018 nearly at 
the European level, as shown on the chart from Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Proportion of people aged 60 or older in the European Union 
in 2018 - Insee – Extracts in 2019 from Eurostat [7]. 
The increase in the number of rooms in EHPADs in 
France was only 2% annually between 2009 and 2018 [7]. 
With this progression, the total capacity was less than 595 
000 rooms in 2018. As for homecare for the elderly, an 
indicator may be the number authorized for the homecare 
nursing services, which reached 127 000 in 2018.  
Meanwhile, as in other countries, France has to face the 
issue of the increase in the number of elderly people with 
loss of independence or autonomy. According to the 
projections by the French national institute of statistical and 
economic studies (Insee), 4 million senior citizens would be 
in loss of autonomy in 2050 [8], as specified in Table I:   
 
TABLE I. 
NUMBER PEOPLE AGED 60 OR OLDER IN LOSS OF AUTONOMY 
Source – Insee, Omphale projections [8]. 
Year 
2015 
2027 
2050 
Number of elderly people 
16 235 900 
19 933 500 
24 274 500 
Number of elderly people 
in loss of autonomy 
2 488 900 
2 958 300 
3 989 200 
At home 
1 948 700 
2 347 400 
3 160 200 
In an institution 
540 200 
610 900 
828 900 
 
 
As a consequence, the care for the elderly people has 
become a real concern with changes in the way of life: they 
are often away from their families because of the jobs. They 
need care as soon as they become dependent. 
III.  SCIENTIFIC POSITIONNING AND METHODOLOGY 
This proposal associates a teacher-researcher in 
information and communication sciences and an associate 
researcher, strongly involved in field actions.  We place 
ourselves in an interdisciplinary perspective of action 
research by also mobilizing management sciences to 
produce knowledge for action. We are in a position that can 
be described as "observational participation". 
We link the two aspects of information (production 
and use of data) and communication (cooperation to build 
new practices together). According to F. Bernard, we focus 
on four converging aspects: link (interactions), meaning (in 
situation), production of knowledge, for action [4]. We 
insist on different notions such as situations, in particular 
situations of activity or information communication, 
interactions and ecosystems (systemic approaches in their 
global context), according to A. Mucchielli approach of 
“situational and interactionist semiotics” [5], with all the 
importance of the emotions or feelings and the 
consideration of human body as a media as for F. Martin-
Juchat [6]. 
Uses of new tools are also essential in a context of 
global digital transformation: namely, they should enhance 
data analysis at the territorial level for a better knowledge of 
the social and healthcare needs; for the follow-up care, they 
should also help a better coordination between all the 
stakeholders, whether professionals or relatives. Our 
approach is also positioned in the main challenge of 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

improving resilience, not only in the sector of elderly 
people houses but of the whole healthcare system. 
IV. THE CONCEPT OF TERRITORIAL EHPAD 
In an opening process and a territorial approach, more 
EHPADs conduct proactive actions for extending their 
services outdoors allowing access to other persons than 
their own residents: it might be for the meals, with 
sometimes the creation of a specific place for conviviality, a 
concert performance, or some consultations, for instance 
when they have organized kinesitherapy, dentistry or 
ophthalmology on site, etc. Some actions aim at avoiding a 
negative image and the feelings of a closed space; they 
contribute to diversify the activities for the residents; other 
actions are developed for economic purposes, trying to 
make profitable some services that satisfy the residents’ 
needs. In this orientation, a recent measure consists in the 
installation of rooms dedicated to temporary stays. 
This ongoing process of the territorial opening is part of 
the current transformation of those structures and the 
change from a facility-centered logic to a services-oriented 
logic with the opening on its territorial ecosystem. Another 
step might be reached with providing services outdoors and 
build a new patient at home-centered model. Recent call for 
applications or for projects initiated by some Regional 
Healthcare Agencies unveil the national orientations for 
encouraging the EHPADs to their transformation.  
In the region Pays de la Loire, the reflection led since 
2018 results in the innovative concept of territorial 
gerontologic services cluster where the EHPADs have to 
take a central place for providing their expertise. The 
creation of such clusters requires to define the skills needed 
and the role of each services provider for organizing the 
complete homecare support to the elderly people with loss 
of autonomy. The objective is not merely the coordination 
between different stakeholders, but above all the creation of 
an overall basket of elderly’ homecare-centered services: 
the elderly patients’ needs and their evolution have to be 
covered by graduated and quality services, and moreover 
the continuity and fluidity of their healthcare pathways have 
to be guaranteed. The reflection points out some missing 
services within the existing ones provided by homecare 
stakeholders, due in particular to the hours for their 
interventions:  there is for instance to organize 
complementary healthcare services for the night.  
In a recent call for applications, the ARS Ile-de-France 
defined the concept of territorial EHPAD in order to 
support projects for the transformation of the existing 
structures already settled in their territories and to 
accompany them aiming to obtain a complete range of 
services for all the situations of the elderly at home on their 
geographical proximity. The territorial EHPAD has to 
position itself both “within its walls” and “outside the 
walls”, in an evolution towards a resource platform as a 
network in coordination with the hospitals, the ambulatory 
field, the social stakeholders and the voluntary associations.  
Thus, the EHPAD is considered as the appropriate 
structure for innovation in order to diversify its services 
delivery and lead experiments based on both its team 
expertise and new technologies as sensors or telemedicine. 
In a territorial approach, it has to play a role in developing 
prevention of the loss of cognitive and physical autonomy 
or undernourishment. This positioning on the territory 
requires at the same time to strengthen actions “within the 
walls” creating new collective spaces and opened events, to 
develop solutions for providing respite to the elderly at 
home’ families and caregivers, and to organize partnerships 
with other stakeholders for maintaining the elderly patients 
at home.  
There are different stages in this evolution: first, it may 
be offering the services provided inside the establishment to 
the elderly in the territory. Another positioning consists in 
providing temporary reception when needed for the elderly; 
finally, services may be organized “out of the doors”. 
Figure 2 formalizes those new trends. 
 
 
Figure 2. The different axes of the transformation in direction to the 
territorial EHPAD 
V.  THE SERVICES PROVIDED FOR HOMECARE SUPPORT 
With the increase of the life expectancy, the EHPAD 
model is challenged from different angles: the very old 
people are more dependent and have sometimes cognitive 
or behavioral disorders and several chronical diseases; so, 
they need more interventions for their healthcare. The 
problem of recruitment and keeping skilled staff in spite of 
difficult working conditions is added to this situation. 
Moreover, the current demographical transition brings 
with it a visible social evolution in the worsen isolation for 
the elderly and their strong wishes to stay at home as long 
as possible. Building a sufficient number of EHPADs to 
satisfy the needs does not seem realistic, mainly for 
financial reasons.  
The three different fields of services offered by the 
EHPAD are: accommodation, vulnerability and healthcare 
with similar situations to those at home. For the elderly at 
home, the services have to be provided in answer to their 
needs in their life pathways, which are both healthcare and 
dependence. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Among the main breaking points in those pathways, the 
support for healthcare during the nights and the weekends is 
identified as causing problems for keeping the patients at 
home. Security surveillance devices are now more widely 
used but there are not sufficient. Very often, the patients’ 
conditions demand the intervention of a healthcare provider 
at their bedsides.  
Furthermore, the elderly’ s transfers to the emergency 
department are too frequent. Such situations must be 
avoided because they present risks of aggravation of the 
patients ‘state of health. 
For providing services efficiently, the EHPAD have to 
work in relation with all the different stakeholders in the 
patients’ healthcare and monitoring, in an intensified 
partnership to operate on a network with all the different 
structures that intervene at home in order to complete the 
services delivery for providing the effective management of 
the support to the elderly homecare. Figure 3 highlights the 
positioning 
of 
the 
EHPAD 
among 
the 
homecare 
stakeholders acting in a patient-centered network: 
 
Figure 3. Configuration for assembling graduated services for the elderly’ 
homecare 
The objective is to provide a wide range of services for 
appropriate support at home in the assistance and the 
graduated patients’ care. There is to outsource some 
services in order to combine them with different home 
interventions aiming at securing the home support for 
keeping the patients at home: it consists mainly in 
strengthening the actions of the existing homecare 
structures for the patients’ healthcare. Thus, the EHPAD is 
placed at the center for organizing the care of the elderly 
who wish to stay at home and guaranteeing the fluidity of 
the patients’ pathways. 
The EHPAD have to identify how to outsource their 
services organized indoors in the objective to maintain the 
elderly patients at home, which skills or expertise are 
required and which resources assign to this new activity. 
Moving to the patients’ homes takes time besides the 
interventions. The partnerships have to guarantee a 
permanent monitoring of the elderly patients in a 
coordinated response to all the changes. It is important to be 
coordinated with the hospital in the proximity for managing 
any aggravation and preparing any potential transfer to the 
hospital. EHPADs need to re-define their services to ensure 
they are meeting the needs for elderly patients, as described 
in Figure 4.  
 
 
Figure 4. Process of identification of complementary services for the 
elderly’ homecare 
Thanks to their expertise and daily practice in geriatrics, 
the EHPADs may create value in the elderly’ homecare, 
especially 
for 
the 
patients’ 
healthcare 
continuous 
monitoring, and also with specific actions aimed at 
stimulating the patients’ autonomy. The option of night 
home visits of coordinators and nurses from the EHPAD to 
the elderly’ bedside is very important in emergency 
situations.  
VI.  THE INNOVATION IN THE ELDERLY HOMECARE 
With the demographic transition, it is becoming 
compulsory at the same time to optimize the organization in 
order to mutualize the resources and to provide appropriate 
healthcare to older patients for enabling them to stay at 
home. Providing additional interventions by specialized 
professionals is the way to avoid breaches in the elderly’ 
homecare pathways. 
A. 
The integration of services in a territory-scale 
gerontological pole  
The implementation of gerontological poles around the 
EHPAD at the scale of the territories is a way to fill the gap 
between the services delivery and the elderly’ homecare 
needs without creating a new structure. Homecare must be 
considered in a global approach including the medical, 
psychological and social scopes, which leads to the 
integration of different services towards a global offer: an 
integrated social and service network platform [9]. The 
major breakthroughs are set in the reduction of the 
compartmentalization 
within 
the 
various 
structures 
belonging to different healthcare, medico-social and social 
fields.  
B. 
Strengthening the older patients’ healthcare 
services 
With an increased life expectancy, the elderly’ 
healthcare monitoring is more demanding and requires to 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

manage some complex cases, due to the interaction of 
multiple pathologies including several chronic ones. 
Furthermore, the older patients often have both diseases and 
disabilities; they may be afflicted by neurodegenerative 
diseases or psychiatric disorders or become highly 
dependent. So, the EHPADs have to organize a network in 
relation with different mobile stakeholders and using 
telemedicine [10] in order to strengthen the healthcare 
services provided and develop physical, sensory and 
psycho-cognitive stimulations. A large range of services has 
to be provided in relation with other structures for covering 
all the elderly’ needs. Figure 5 illustrates the management 
of services delivered by different organizations. 
 
Figure 5. The example of home services coordination platforms [11]. 
For implementing such an organization, it is necessary to 
identify the territorial needs and to enhance the coordination 
between the numerous stakeholders.  
C. 
Perspectives for the human resources management 
For the nursing and support staff in the EHPAD as for 
homecare, the work is arduous and solutions are sought in 
order to motivate people to accept and keep those jobs. The 
possibility for the staff in the EHPAD to diversify their 
activity and to move “out of the doors” may represent an 
opportunity for them finding different roles among the 
homecare teams in a rewarding way and enriching their 
knowledge. Different formations may be organized. Some 
tasks like the relation with the other stakeholders and the 
caregivers may be different for the patients at home. In 
terms of human resources management, it might bring new 
perspectives for the evolution of the professional careers.  
D. 
An innovative approach in the digital processes 
As in the model of Healthcare Networks, the different 
interventions have to be coordinated and a digital platform 
may work as an aggregation point for centralizing and 
articulating them. The aim is to exploit the potential of each 
local 
resource 
and 
articulate 
the 
elderly-centered 
information. As different shareholders interact, there is not 
to implement an Information System (IS) designed as for a 
structure; the creation of value may result from the use of 
the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) in 
an innovative way for improving the information flow and 
the sharing of the right information with the right 
professional at the right moment. 
As for the organization of a team as the healthcare circle 
in patients’ pathways, all the structures and the different 
professionals involved in this elderly-centered approach 
have to be identified. Their actions have to be registered in 
a structured description. The schedule of the interventions 
has to be shared in a consolidated patient-centered view.  
The aim is to enable an effective transmission of the 
information, and the access to the relevant data to all the 
stakeholders according to their roles in the homecare 
support and their authorizations. Some types of information 
like incidents and adverse events require traceability 
through registered reports; other sorts have to be registered 
as targeted transmissions. An efficient operating mode 
consists in getting the information automatically pushed to 
the right professional. Moreover, due to the importance of 
sharing instantly immediate information, some media like 
text messages or discussion groups may be essential means. 
VII. THE OBSERVATION OF SOME EXPERIMENTS 
We tried to list the existing experiments the most similar 
to the model described rather than to make a complete 
inventory of the EHPADs that are now opened towards 
their territory. As the model of healthcare homecare 
services delivery is recent for the EHPAD, not only there 
are still few experiments “outside the walls” up to now but 
also their evaluations are not achieved.  
We analyze the main experiments in the chronological 
order towards the more recent ones in order to point out 
some potential elements of evolution. We intend to 
highlight both their main and distinctive features. 
M@do (Corrèze) [12] 
This project was launched in 2015 by the Partage & 
Vie, a fund that has many facilities and services in the 
medico-social field both for the elderly and for the disabled 
people. The project is developed near Tulle in the 
department of Corrèze for testing the model legally and 
economically. It aimed mainly at the elderly at home in loss 
of independence, except those suffering from serious 
behavioral disorders. Around forty patients are registered in 
the project. The case manager and the coordinating doctor 
are both in charge of the coordination. As a structure, 
M@do employs the professionals and the team is formed 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

with the staff members. The major objective is to deliver a 
complete range of services for supporting the elderly 
patients at home. For securing their monitoring, a night and 
day permanent assistance service is provided with the 
intervention of a professional moving to the site if alerts 
require it. 
As well as for the services within the EHPAD, the 
elderly homecare support services provided are funded by 
the department council of Corrèze. The main feature in this 
experiment is the financing of the healthcare services by the 
Regional Healthcare Agency, which is for an outdoors 
home patient twice more than the healthcare budget for a 
patient inside the EHPAD.  
The complexity of designing this model is pointed out 
among the results of this experiment. Moreover, the 
exceptional derogatory funding method for healthcare at 
home is the most important factor that may explain why this 
experiment is not replicated in other EHPADs of the 
structure or in others, as initially intended. Therefore, the 
economical dimension of the model is an important issue to 
deal with: it might represent the major difficulty and 
requires to be thought in an innovative way. 
Ehpad@dom (Yvelines) [13] 
The project was set up in 2017 at Sartrouville in the 
department of Yvelines by an EHPAD in relation with two 
structures for home services:  a Service for aid and 
accompaniment at home and a Service for nursing 
healthcare and aid at home. The different structures are 
managed by the Red Cross. Unlike the project M@do, there 
is no creation of a specific structure, the organization is 
based on the EHPAD and the constitution of an integrated 
mobile team is quite innovative. 
The services offer includes the daily aid and homecare, 
the coordination of all the interventions: those dispensed by 
liberal practitioners, the home delivery of meals, the aid for 
administrative procedures, some little layout and renovation 
work for the housing, a nurse’s intervention during the 
night, a permanent home tele-assistance platform with 
connected devices for detecting the falls and a special room 
kept for emergency cases in the EHPAD. The team can 
follow 24 elderly people, and gathers nurses, nursing 
assistants, psychomotor, psychologist and maintenance 
staff.  
The main challenge in this experiment is to organize the 
coordination between the EHPAD and the structures 
providing services at home. For each new elderly patient, 
after taking the general practitioner’s opinion, the 
coordinator in the EHPAD goes at home for evaluating the 
needs and organizing the healthcare support in relation to 
the families and caregivers: the duration of the different 
services is defined for all the staff belonging to the EHPAD 
or the home structures.  
The coordination also deals with the medical 
monitoring, the reception of prescriptions sent by the 
general practitioner, the order and reception of medicine, 
etc. Another coordinator in the SSIAD (Home Nursing 
Services) is in charge of bringing the medicine at home in 
pill boxes for the week, informing the EHPAD, the general 
practitioner or the families of possible new needs and 
potentially contacting the different healthcare stakeholders. 
In this way, the experiment deals with the complex issue 
of the coordination of all the stakeholders for homecare and 
integration of the different services for their delivery. As for 
the main factor to highlight, we may point out that the 
experiment aims at providing services equivalent to those in 
an EHPAD, although less expensive. This is very important 
for considering the extension of the experiment with the 
high budgetary constraints due to the increasing needs. 
Diapason 92 (Hauts de Seine) [14] 
Another experiment began in 2018 at Asnières in the 
Hauts-de-Seine Department on the initiative of the Fund 
called Fondation Aulagnier. It is named Diapason 92. 
Initially, the project was selected at a call for projects of the 
ARS in the region Ile-de-France, which gathers Paris and 
seven departments around, and the departmental council of 
Hauts-de-Seine for the territory of the EHPAD. The aim is 
to experiment during five years the coordination of the 
homecare services for thirty elderly patients requiring to 
enter the EHPAD.  
The unique pathway referent and manager is in relation 
with all the different professionals involved. For the 
healthcare, the regular general practitioner remains at the 
center of the team organization around the patient. Some 
volunteers are an integral part of the network set up. After 
the evaluation of the patients’ state of healthcare, in order to 
meet their needs, the personalized healthcare and support 
plan, the expected stakeholders and their respective work 
time are defined and a specific team is set up for each 
patient thanks to the partnerships with homecare structures. 
There are three distinct levels of services: the basic one 
is designed for every elderly person and includes the 
creation of a specific team, the delivery of nursing and 
medical homecare by the SSIAD and essential support 
services (as tele assistance). Another level of services is 
adjustable and consists mainly in more working time for 
support, the home meal supply, the support for moving and 
the itinerant night guard. The optional level has to be paid 
by the elderly; it includes hairdressing and socio-aesthetic. 
Diapason 92 is currently in charge of thirteen elderly 
patients at home with very different situations. There are 
many pending files due to the duration for the 
administrative process. The average out of pocket expenses 
are 1 254 euros, which is considered quite acceptable.  
The general practitioners involved in the project express 
that they appreciate the organization. It is noted that the 
activities like the fall prevention as provided in the EHPAD 
do not arise great interest among the elderly patients. 
The organization of the support during the evening is 
identified at the same time as creating value and requiring 
improvement. The elderly patients’ needs are to be put to 
bed according to their own habits and wishes. However, it 
is difficult to make the working hours evolve for the staff in 
the SSIAD or to find nursing assistants who accept to work 
at the end of the day. For satisfying such needs, part time 
contracts are concluded with nursing students for itinerary 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

guards. Moreover, another observation focuses on the time 
required for organizing the partnership. For evaluating the 
experiment, the ARS will consider in particular its effects 
on the reduction of the length of stay in hospital as 
returning at home. 
VIII.  DISCUSSION 
The common feature in the experiments presented so far 
is the global approach in delivering a complete range of 
support services so that the dependent elderly may stay at 
home instead of being transferred to an EHPAD. 
Comparing them, some differences are noticed for the type 
of elderly patients in the active file. For instance, the 
projects M@do and Ehpad@dom do not seem to include 
patients suffering from behavioral disorders; unlike the 
other projects, Diapason 92 includes very dependent elderly 
patients (corresponding to the first level in the dependency 
classification: “GIR 1”). Other results of those experiments 
and the finalized design of the model will emerge from the 
work group formed by the National solidarity fund for 
autonomy with the three structures. 
The director of the ARS in Ile-de-France insists on the 
medico economic relevance of the solutions that have to be 
set up in a reflection to avoid the compartmentalization. A 
call for projects was hold in 2019 by the ARS in Provence-
Alpes-Côte d’Azur (PACA) Region. Six EHPADs were 
selected for the experiment which aims at checking how the 
model “out of the doors” meet the territorial needs with 
personalized and global support for homecare.  
Another experiment is held in Brittany Region by an 
EHPAD in Rennes in order to face increasing needs that 
require innovation: the requests for places in the EHPAD 
reach 400 while there are no more than 87 places. The 
project, funded by the ARS Bretagne, began at the end of 
2019 with twenty elderly patients. 
Some homecare services structures begin to experiment 
a very innovative and complementary model of alternative 
to the EHPAD from the homecare structure. This model 
offers very interesting perspectives but is still difficult to 
implement because of the average dimension of homecare 
structures and frequent problems of organization for them. 
The Think tank Matières Grises launched in November 
2020 a survey about “the EHPAD for the future” that draws 
the attention, with a reflection on a new model called 
“There is no alternative” (TINA), considering the EHPAD 
as the unique structure for the elderly, but insisting on 
compulsory evolutions for an acceptable future model. 
Among the different workshops, one is called “Making 
possible the EHPAD platform”, with both dimensions: “in” 
and “out”. 
IX. THE EFFECTS ON THE TRANSFORMATION OF THE 
HEALTHCARE SYSTEM 
In its contribution to the strategy of transformation of 
the Healthcare System, the High Council on the Future of 
Health Insurance considers that the priority for the 
transformation of the system is not to organize the offer on 
a territory but to facilitate “the access of its population to 
relevant and quality services concretely defined”. The 
concept “out of walls” is an important step to take towards 
the transformation for the EHPAD, due to a complete 
change in its model and in its own perception of its 
territorial positioning with this new paradigm. Setting up a 
network for the elderly’ homecare on the territory requires a 
new governance for managing the cooperation between all 
the stakeholders: would the EHPAD take this role?  
In order to organize a shared resources platform opened 
on its territorial environment, the inventory of the existing 
structures on the territory has to be done. The different 
services must be complementary in an efficient way for 
avoiding any duplication: they have to be specialized for 
their consolidation in a complete range for meeting the 
needs of the elderly at home, including a formalized 
partnership with the hospital. The evolution of the life 
expectancy induces the requirement of more medicalization 
for maintaining longer the elderly patients at home; the 
EHPAD has to specialize, in particular for giving support to 
the cognitive dependence. 
Furthermore, this transformation demands to create an 
attractive working environment for the gerontology staff, 
especially for the nursing assistants. The evaluation of the 
experiments should address the issue of improvement in the 
coordination of the elderly homecare-centered services and 
the added value of the EHPAD in the services delivery. 
X. CONCLUSION 
In the context of the demographical transition, the lack 
of facilities like the EHPADs in spite of their current 
expansion and the shortage of nursing assistants or other 
healthcare providers, the issue of the increasing number of 
elderly patients must be tackled through innovative ways 
[15]. The model “outside the walls” may represent the first 
steps to a change of paradigm for organizing homecare on a 
large scale. The observation of the experiments points out 
both the breakthroughs of such new models and the 
problems remaining to solve. The transformation may only 
be possible by breaking down the barriers between different 
sectors in the French Healthcare system, namely medical, 
medico social and social sectors. Innovation could be 
supported by new scopes for the coordination between all 
the different stakeholders at home and the exchanges of 
data for improving and securing homecare.  
According to P. Simon, a paradigm shift seems 
necessary for a complete transformation to gear the 
healthcare 
system 
from 
hospital-centrism 
towards 
“homespital” [10]. New disruptive healthcare organizations 
have to be designed and implemented, developing 
interprofessional cooperation; the medico-social field has to 
move from the division in very specialized structures to the 
logic of services delivery for improving the healthcare and 
life pathways, organizing resource centers for extended 
homecare. 
Moreover, the innovative model of EHPAD “outside the 
walls” must provide a level of healthcare and monitoring 
services at home similar to those “within the walls” of an 
institution, with the transposition at home of the same usual 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

services delivery as in the EHPAD. It implies the 
coordination and the quality control of all the services 
provided at the elderly’ bedside [1]. 
The digital disruption is also essential to support this 
transformation: beyond the widespread development of the 
use of devices and sensors for home monitoring, it becomes 
fundamental to consolidate the distinct services provided by 
different stakeholders integrating them in a shared digital 
space. Such digital platforms may contribute to the 
mutualization of resources. They have to be patients-
centered and to manage personalized healthcare pathways 
with interactive process for sharing information at any time. 
They must deal with the interoperability issue, which is 
exacerbated by the lack of common glossaries in the 
medico-social field. 
All these trends and new ways have been greatly 
accelerated by the health crisis related to the Covid 
pandemic; the situation emphasizes the importance of a 
better organization for the follow-up in healthcare as the 
patients cannot all be treated at the hospital. Furthermore, a 
part of the elderly does not stay in establishments but at 
home; the professionals are very often overloaded, which 
requires to implement all the means that could help them. 
This work in progress is a first step for a more long-term 
work on the transformation of the EHPAD in France with 
the evolution of the needs and expectations of the users and 
their families, in a perspective of territorialization of new 
services and articulation as services platforms for patients 
who want, for their most part, to be able to continue to live 
in their own home. For us, it will be a question of 
integrating not only the needs of users and their families in 
the whole operational and concrete dimension but also 
taking into account their feelings and emotions [6]. 
The notion of crisis is translated into Chinese by two 
ideograms, meaning both risk and opportunity. For us, this 
is the definition of the notion of "resilience", which is 
particularly important in the very serious health crisis we 
are currently experiencing and which is disrupting our 
entire health system and, more broadly, our entire society, 
particularly relations between generations. A new and 
innovative approach to EHPADs, particularly as "outside 
the walls" and as a platform of services for home care, is for 
us an essential way of inventing new models, in a dual 
context of health crisis and digital transformation with the 
development of new tools based on new data uses. 
 J.-P. Le Goff has shown how our “sick society” must 
face a health crisis of unprecedented magnitude [16]. 
According to S. Paugam, the main challenge is to rebuild 
the social link [17] for a society that would be both more 
supportive and more resilient, and that better integrates its 
elderly. First of all, in a society that deeply doubts itself and 
its future, it is necessary to rebuild trust: trust being 
essential to any social life [18]. The reorganization of the 
health and solidarity system and therefore of our social 
protection system (Welfare state) should be a major element 
in rebuilding society around a project that unites all 
generations. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Iborra and C. Fiat, Rapport d’information sur les EHPAD 
/ Information report on the EHPAD, Paris, Assemblée 
nationale, March 2018. 
[2] F. Baudier, Crise à l’hôpital et dans les EHPAD, même 
combat : abattons les murs ! / Crisis at the hospital and the 
hospice, same combat; break down the walls! Santé 
Publique /2 
(Vol. 
31), 
pp. 
293-295 
, 
2019, 
https://doi.org/10.3917/spub.192.0293. 
[3] D. Libault, Rapport Concertation Grand Age et Autonomie. 
Available 
on: 
 
https://solidarites-sante.gouv.fr/affaires-
sociales/personnes-agees/concertation-grand-age-et-
autonomie/article/rapport-de-la-concertation-grand-age-et-
autonomie, March 2019. 
[4] F. Bernard, “Les SIC une discipline de l’ouverture et du 
décloisonnement” /  “SIC a discipline of openness and 
decompartmentalization”, 
in 
Bouzon, 
A. 
dir., 
La 
communication 
organisationnelle 
en 
débat. 
Champs, 
concepts, perspectives / Organizational communication in 
debate. Fields, concepts, perspectives, Paris, L’Harmattan, 
2006, pp. 33-46, 2006. 
[5] A. Mucchielli, “Situation et Communication”/ "Situation and 
Communication”, Nice, Less éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[6] F. Martin Juchat, L’aventure du corps. La communication 
corporelle une voie vers l’émancipation / The adventure of 
the body. Body communication as a way to emancipation ,  
Presses Universitaires de Grenoble, 2020. 
[7] Personnes âgées dépendantes / The dependent elderly TEF, 
édition 2020 – Insee Références, 2020. 
[8] K. Larbi and D. Roy, 4 millions de seniors seraient en perte 
d’autonomie en 2050 / 4 million of senior citizens would be 
in loss of autonomy in 2050, Insee Première, July 2019 . 
[9] F. Boll and P. Brune, Online Support for the Elderly – Why 
Service and Social Network Platforms should be Integrated. 
Elsevier Procedia Computer Science Volume 98, pp. 395-
400, 2016,  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.060. 
[10] P. Simon, La Télémédecine, le Télésoin et l’IA Médicale 
contribuent-ils à transformer au XXIème siècle notre système 
de Santé ? / Can telemedicine, telecare and medical AI 
contribute to transform the healthcare system in the XXIth 
century?  http\\www.ManagerSante.com N°24, September 
2019. 
[11] Fédération Nationale de la Mutualité Française Les enjeux du 
vieillissement de la population - EHPAD hors les murs et 
domicile connecté, November 2018.  
[12] https://www.fondationpartageetvie.org/jcms/fpv_7992/fr/m-
do 
[13] https://pourvous.croix-rouge.fr/etablissement-d-hebergement-
pour-personnes-agees-dependantes-residence-stephanie 
[14] https://agabc.asso.fr/sites/default/files/adessadomicile/page/fi
chiers_joints/diapason92.pdf 
[15] N. Rapegno and H. Bertillot, Transformer l’offre médico-
sociale ? Habitats “inclusifs” et établissements “hors les 
murs”: l’émergence d’accompagnements alternatifs pour les 
personnes âgées et les personnes handicapées. Transforming 
the socio medical offer ? / “Inclusive” housing and structures 
“outside the walls”: the emergence of alternative support for 
the elderly and the disabled. [Rapport de recherche] CNSA; 
EHESP. hal-02074025, April 2018.  
[16] J.-P. Le Goff, La société malade / The sick society, Paris, 
Stock, March 2021. 
[17] S. Paugam, Le lien social / The social ink, Paris, PUF, 2010.   
[18] C. Senik, dir. Crises de confiance ? / Trust crisis?, Paris, La 
Découverte, 2020. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-884-6
HUSO 2021 : The Seventh International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

