SEA-SF : Design of Self-Evolving Agent based Simulation Framework  
for Social Issue Prediction 
Joonyoung Jung, Euihyun Paik, Jang Won Bae, Dongoh Kang, Chunhee Lee, and Kiho Kim 
Data Analysis Software Research Section 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Deajeon, Korea  
e-mail: jyjung21@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Simulation is the imitation of the operation of a 
real-world process or system over time. Actual real world 
expectation is expensive and impossible because the modern 
society is complex and various. Therefore, simulation can be 
carried out to take proper measures for the problem which 
may be happened in the future. Agent based model (ABM) 
models each individuals and interactions among them. ABM 
mostly defines behaviors based on rule. However, ABM 
simulation has the weak point that simulation error is 
accumulated. If long term simulation is conducted, the 
simulation result will be highly inaccurate because of error 
accumulation. To overcome error accumulation, the model 
should be reconfigured using the real data recursively. In this 
paper, we propose the self-evolving agent based simulation 
framework (SEA-SF). The SEA-SF is consisted of data 
management, change recognition, model evolvement, ABM 
reconfiguration, 
user 
interface 
and 
ABM 
simulation 
environment. The SEA-SF should mitigate the long-term 
simulation error. Therefore, the SEA-SF performs change 
recognition between real data and simulation result. And then 
autonomously, it updates model parameters or the model 
configuration to increase accuracy of simulation. The proposed 
framework can be applied to solve the social issue problems 
because the social issue problems are happened through a long 
period. Therefore, the social issue simulation, such as the house 
policy and supply, can be performed using the proposed SEA-
SF.  
Keywords-Simulation; Agent Based Model; Self-Evolvement.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Simulation is the imitation of the operation of a real-
world process or system over time [1]. Simulation is used for 
predicting future in various fields. Simulation can be carried 
out to take proper measures for the problem which may be 
happened in the future. For example, the birthrate, the 
rearing of children, income, employment and education may 
be simulated in the field of society. So, various features of 
social members can be predicted. The policy of social 
security service can be established using the result of 
simulation which predicts socio-demographic characteristic. 
Therefore, the social problem, such as low birthrate and 
aging, can be prevented.    
Social issue prediction has been accomplished both 
macrosimulations 
and 
microsimulations. 
The 
macro 
simulation predicts the overall tendency of the social issue 
using the stochastic approach of entire social structures and 
characteristics.  However, the microsimulation could predict 
the behavior and characteristic of each member related with 
the social issue. Therefore, the cause of social phenomena 
could be analyzed variously by the microsimulation. 
Therefore, 
population 
dynamics 
is 
simulated 
by 
microsimulation to analyze various social features recently.  
Actual 
population 
expectation 
is 
expensive 
and 
impossible because the modern society is complex and 
various. Therefore, microsimulation modeling (MSM) and 
agent based modeling (ABM) are used for modeling and 
simulation. Microsimulation models the individuals with real 
data and defines behaviors based on transition probabilities 
derived from micro data. ABM models individuals and 
interaction between the individuals. ABM mostly defines 
behaviors based on rule. However, these technologies have 
the weak point that simulation error is accumulated. If long-
term simulation is conducted using these technologies, the 
simulation result is highly inaccurate because of error 
accumulation.  
To overcome error accumulation, the model should be 
evolved using the real world data recursively. In this paper, 
we propose the self-evolving agent based simulation 
framework.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes related work. In Section III, we describe the 
architecture of self-evolving agent based simulation 
framework. In Section IV, we describe the proposed 
framework for social issue prediction, and some concluding 
remarks are finally given in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
Most social issues, such as a lower birthrate problem and 
an aging phenomenon, relate with population dynamics. 
Therefore, the microsimulations of population dynamics 
have been performed for a long time. A MSM describes a 
system at the micro-level and the system is consisted of 
micro units. G. H. Orchtt [2] proposed a new type of model, 
MSM, of a socio-economic system in 1957. He described the 
model which was consisted of various sorts of interacting 
units. The outputs of each unit were related to prior events 
and were the result of a series of random drawings from 
discrete probability distributions. The appropriate probability 
distributions were determined by inputs into the unit and the 
operating characteristics of the unit. The units of this new 
type of model might be large aggregates, such as markets or 
industries, but they were elemental decision-making entities, 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

such as individuals, families, firms, labor unions, and 
governmental units. He represented individual units in the 
socio-economic system and analyzed the units’ behaviors. 
MSM could facilitate and improve prediction about socio-
economic aggregates and could be used either for short-run 
or long-run forecasting by appropriate selection of initial 
conditions and by altering the number of periods the model 
is run. A. Harding [3] described that dynamic population 
MSM provided one of the most useful available modelling 
tools for projecting the future distributional consequences of 
possible policy changes. He contended that the construction 
of a reliable dynamic population MSM for use in social 
policy formulation is a very demanding multi-year project. 
Nowadays, a lot of countries have implemented the dynamic 
population microsimulation models for predicting the future 
population and preparing a countermeasure. For example, the 
dynamic simulation of income model (DYNASIM3) was 
developed by USA for designing to analyze the long-term 
distributional consequences of retirement and ageing issues 
[4]. The dynamic microsimulation model (DYNAMOD 1 & 
2) was developed by Australia for modeling economic and 
demographic change in the Australian population over time, 
such as superannuation, age, education, health, and housing 
policy [5][6].  
An agent is a micro unit that can decide its own 
behaviors based on environment, its own state, and 
interaction with other agents. Therefore, each agent 
independently acts according the rules of the simulation and 
their own preprogrammed behaviors. And more, each agent 
is free for activity with the ability to make independent 
decisions 
[7]. 
ABM 
means 
that 
individuals 
have 
characteristic of the agent. T. C. Schelling [8] proposed the 
segregation model using ABM in 1971. He described a 
model that individual members of two recognizable groups 
distribute themselves in neighborhoods defined by reference 
to their own locations. The most previous works in the field 
of ABM have been proposed on dynamic demography, such 
as household demography [9] and population dynamics [10]. 
However, the previous ABMs are not able to evolve the 
structure and parameters of model autonomously. Therefore, 
when long-term simulation is performed, the simulation error 
is accumulated, according as times go on. In this reason, we 
propose the self-evolving agent based simulation framework 
(SEA-SF) to reduce the long-term simulation error.  
III. 
SEA-SF ARCHTECTURE 
The SEA-SF is an agent based simulation framework in 
order to reduce long-term simulation error. Therefore, the 
SEA-SF should perform change recognition between real 
data and ABM simulation result. And then autonomously, it 
should change model parameters or the model configuration 
to increase accuracy of simulation using the change 
recognition result. In the SEA-SF, there are some component 
modules as shown in Fig 1. First of all, the data management 
module (DMM) collects domain data and saves the data in 
database (DB). So, the domain data digitization and DB 
management are required in this module. Second, the change 
recognition module (CRM) estimates the difference between 
real world data and simulation result. So, data trace and 
change recognition is required in this module. Third, the 
model evolvement module (MEM) defines the strategy how 
to evolve the present model autonomously. The machine 
learning is required to micro-level and macro-level model 
evolvement. Forth, the ABM reconfiguration module (ARM) 
changes the model parameters or structure according to the 
evolving strategy. So, the agent should be consisted of the 
components. And the ARM also includes the ABM 
simulation engine to execute ABM simulation. Fifth, the user 
interface module designs the initial model and visualizes a 
simulation result. And more, simulation is conducted in 
distribution and parallel computing environment to improve 
simulation performance. 
 
 
Figure 1.  SEA-SF Architercure. 
In these modules, the essential modules are CRM, MEM, 
and ARM. Therefore, these important modules are described 
more detail below. 
A. Change recognition 
Change recognition detects the difference between the 
real world data and the simulation result as shown in Fig. 2. 
The CRM is consisted of the data trend analysis (DTA), 
feature point extraction (FPE), error estimation (EE) and 
change recognition (CR) function.  
 
 
Figure 2.  Change recognition. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

The domain data are received from DMM, and then the 
DTA analyzes these data for detecting data trend using 
machine learning, such as Hidden Markov Model. The FPE 
extracts the comparison point for EE using the results of 
DTA and the feedback from EE. The EE estimates error 
between the ABM simulation result and new domain data, 
and then the result of EE is sent to the FPE and CR. The CR 
estimates whether the change is detected or not. Whenever 
the change is recognized either micro-level or macro-level, 
the CRM informs the MEM of the result of CR.   
B. Model evolvement   
MEM 
performs 
micro-level 
and 
macro-level 
evolvements to make agent evolvement strategy and 
environment transition strategy as shown in Fig. 3.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Model Evolvement. 
 The MEM receives data, such as agent information, 
environment information, scenarios information and the 
result of CR, from the DMM and CRM to perform model 
evolvement. The MEM is consisted of micro agent and 
macro environment function. The micro agent’s property and 
the agent’s behavior are estimated to make the agent 
evolvement strategy.  The macro property of environment is 
detected and the environment variable is estimated to set out 
the change recognition direction of environment. This 
module informs ARM of the agent evolvement and 
environment transition strategies.  
C. ABM reconfiguration   
The ARM reconfigures ABM using component, previous 
ABM, and model evolvement strategy as shown in Fig. 4. 
ABM is consisted of agents, environments and 
interaction among these. The component of ABM means the 
behavior of agent, property of environment and interaction 
among agents and environment. For ABM reconfiguration, 
ABM should be componentized because structure and 
parameter of ABM are reconfigured using these components 
autonomously. The previous ABM is the ABM before 
reconfiguration is performed. ABM based simulation is 
conducted using this model and produces the simulation 
result in CRM.  The model evolvement strategy (MES) is the 
result of MEM to reconfigure the ABM.  
 
 
Figure 4.  ABM reconfiguration. 
Whenever the ARM receives the MES from the MEM, it 
reconfigures model using the component information, its 
own present ABM and MES. According to the request of 
MES, the model is reconfigured at parameter level or 
structure level. 
IV. 
SEA-SF FOR SOCIAL ISSUE PREDICTION 
The proposed framework can be applied to solve the 
social issue problems because the social issue problems are 
happened through a long period. Among the social issue 
problems, this framework can be applied to the house policy 
and supply. That is, the effect of government policy, such as 
house policy, is analyzed macro-level and micro-level on 
socio-economics, such as house supply, as shown in Fig. 5.  
 
 
Figure 5.   Social issue, house policy and supply, simulation using the 
SEA-SF. 
The leading economic indicators related to the house 
price and trade volume are gross domestic product (GDP), 
exchange rate, price index and money supply. These 
economic data, such as GDP and house price, are collected 
and digitalized. The ABM is designed using these data and 
the policy decision factors, such as interest rate, rebuilding 
and rental house. The ABM simulation is performed using 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

economic data, agent behavior and interaction. The CRM 
receives real world data and ABM simulation result about 
the house price and trade volume. Whenever this module 
recognizes the difference between these data, it notifies the 
result to MEM. The MEM evolves the present ABM using 
machine learning approach. It changes the micro features of 
agent, such as income, assets, debt, family member, saving 
and consuming, and agent behavior variables, such as 
residential types and contract types. The ARM reconfigures 
previous ABM using the changed ABM parameters and 
structure autonomously. The decision maker can also change 
the present policy to reconfigure the ABM. The result of 
evolved ABM simulation is compared with real world data at 
the CRM. These processes are repeated recursively. 
Therefore, the long-term simulation error can be reduced by 
SEA-SF.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper addressed the design of SEA-SF for social 
issue prediction. The simulation result may be inaccurate in a 
long-term simulation because the simulation error is 
accumulated. In this reason, the model of simulation should 
be evolved using change recognition method. We describe 
the architecture of the SEA-SF. It is consisted of DMM, 
CRM, MEM, ARM, user interface and ABM simulation 
environment. Among these modules, CRM, MEM and ARM 
conduct essential role of the self-evolving ABM. CRM 
detects the difference between the real world data and the 
simulation result and informs MEM of it. The MEM 
performs micro-level and macro-level agent based model 
evolvement. The ARM reconfigures ABM using component, 
previous ABM, and MES. The proposed framework can be 
applied to solve the social issue problems, such as house 
policy and supply, because the social issue problems are 
happened through a long period.  
We will implement the proposed framework to simulate a 
social issue problem, such as house price of South Korea.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by the IT R&D program of 
MKE/IITP, 
[R-20160224-002790, 
Development 
of 
Predictive Analysis Technology on Socio-Economics using 
Self-Evolving Agent-Based Simulation embedded with 
incremental Machine Learning]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Banks, J. Carson, B. Nelson and B. Nicol, “Discrete-event 
system simulation,” Prentice Hall, 1984. 
[2] G. H. Orchtt, "A new type of socio-economic system," The 
review of economics and statistics, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 116-123, 
May 1957. 
[3] A. Harding, "Challenges and opportunities of dynamic 
microsimulation modelling," Plenary paper presented to the 
1st General Conference of the International Microsimulation 
Association, Vienna, Aug. 2007. 
[4] M. Favreault, and K. Smith, "A primer on the dynamic 
simulation of income model (DYNASIM3)," Urban Institute, 
Feb. 2004. 
[5] S. Antcliff, "Introduction to DYNAMOD: a dynamic 
population microsimulation model," Technical Paper No 1, 
National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling 
(NATSEM), University of Canberra, 1993. 
[6] A. King, M. Robinson, and H. Baekgaard, “DYNAMOD-2: 
An overview,” Techincal Paper No. 19, National Centre for 
Social and Economic Modelling (NATSEM), University of 
Canberra, Dec. 1999. 
[7] A. Getchell, "Agent-based modeling," Physics, pp. 757-767, 
Jun. 2008. 
[8] T. C. Schelling, “Dynamic models of segregation,” Journal of 
mathematical sociology, vol. 1, pp. 143-186, 1971.  
[9] N. Geard, J. M. McCaw, A. Dorin, K. B. Korb, and J. 
McVernon, “Synthetic population dynamics: A model of 
household demography,” Journal of Articial Societies and 
Social Simulation, 16(1) 8, Jan. 2013.  
[10] K. Singh, M. Sajjad, and C. W. Ahn, "Towards full scale 
population dynamics modelling with an agent based and 
micro-simulation based framework," International Conference 
on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), pp. 495-
501, Jul. 2015. 
 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

