Component based Agent Simulation Modeling  
for Self-Evolving House Market Prediction 
Joonyoung Jung, Jang Won Bae, Chunhee Lee, and Euihyun Paik 
Smart Data Research Group 
Electronics and Telecommunications Research Institute 
Deajeon, Korea  
e-mail: jyjung21@etri.re.kr 
 
 
Abstract— Because actual population forecasting is expensive 
and impossible, recent agent-based microsimulation is used to 
predict social problems. An agent-based model (ABM) models 
the interaction between an agent and each agent. However, 
long-term simulations using rule-based ABMs accumulate 
simulation errors. To avoid this error accumulation, the 
simulation model must be dynamically reconfigured using the 
actual data during the simulation. In this paper, we propose a 
component-based agent simulation modeling for model 
reconstruction and implemented a housing market ABM 
simulation system using DEVS (Discrete Event System 
Specification) C++ engine to evaluate the effect of error 
accumulation avoidance. As the simulation progresses, the 
housing market ABM is dynamically modified to reduce errors 
between the actual data and the simulation results. 
Keywords-Agent Simulation; Component; Self-Evolvement.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Actual 
population 
expectation 
is 
expensive 
and 
impossible because the modern society is complex and 
various. Therefore, microsimulation modeling (MSM) and 
agent based modeling (ABM) are used for modeling and 
simulation. Microsimulation models the individuals with real 
data and defines behaviors based on transition probabilities 
derived from micro data. ABM models individuals and 
interaction between the individuals. ABM mostly defines 
behaviors based on rule. Simulation mimics the operation of 
an actual process or system and is used to predict the future 
[1]. We can perform simulations to take appropriate action 
on potential problems in the future. Through micro-
simulation, various characteristics of the members of society 
can be predicted and used to predict social problems [2] [3]. 
However, agent-based simulation has the disadvantage of 
accumulating errors, so long-term simulations can be error-
prone. To avoid this error accumulation, it is necessary to 
reconstruct the simulation model dynamically using real data. 
In this paper, we propose a component-based agent 
simulation model for reconstructing a simulation model. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes related work, while Section III describes the house 
market simulation. In Section IV, we describe component 
based ABM modeling for housing market simulation, and in 
Section V, we provide the result of our experiments. Some 
concluding remarks are finally given in Section VI. 
II. 
RELATED WORK  
MSM is one of the most useful modeling tools for 
simulating at micro level and for predicting the consequences 
of possible policy changes [2] [3]. A simulation model for 
predicting the future using MSM was implemented. In other 
words, the dynamic simulation of the income model was 
developed 
to 
analyze 
the 
long-term 
distributional 
consequences of retirement and aging problems in the United 
States [4] and the dynamic microsimulation model was 
developed in Australia to model economic and demographic 
change in the Australian population over time [5] [6]. An 
agent is a micro-unit that can independently determine its 
behavior based on environment, own state, and interaction 
with other agents [7]. The ABM was proposed in the 
segregation model [8], household demography [9] and 
population dynamics [10]. However, previous ABMs are not 
able to evolve the structure and parameters of model. 
Therefore, long-term simulations accumulate simulation 
errors. 
III. 
HOUSING MARKET SIMULATION 
We designed and implemented a housing market ABM 
simulation system to evaluate the effect of error 
accumulation avoidance. 
A. Self-evolving simulation framework 
The Self-evolving simulation is an agent simulation to 
mitigate long-term simulation error autonomously. To evolve 
simulation model, there are some modules in framework. 
The data management module (DMM) collects, digitizes, 
and saves data in database. The change recognition module 
(CRM) receives real world data and simulation results from 
the DMM and a simulation module (SIM). And then, it 
compares these data. Whenever the CRM recognizes 
difference over threshold, the CRM informs a model 
evolvement module (MEM) of the change. The MEM is 
triggered by the CRM when change is discovered. The MEM 
finds the evolving strategy to decrease the difference 
between real world data and simulation results. And then, it 
suggests that an ABM reconfiguration module (ARM) 
should change parameter and model with new parameter and 
model, which are suggested by the MEM. The ARM updates 
the simulation model according to the strategy from the 
MEM. To update a simulation model using an evolving 
strategy, the simulation model should be consisted of 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

components. For simulation performance, the distributed and 
paralleled simulation may be accomplished by a simulation 
engine.  
B. House market simulation scenario 
The self-evolution simulation framework can be applied 
to social problem simulations that require long-term 
simulations. We apply the proposed framework to a house 
market simulation, as shown in Figure 1.  First of all, there 
are some agents, such as a house holder, external supplier, 
and bank, and some environments, such as a house market 
and house, in a house market ABM. The house holder is a 
micro agent to buy, borrow, sell, and lend a house. The 
external supplier is a micro agent to make, sell, and lend a 
house. The bank is a micro agent to give loan to the house 
holder who wants to buy or borrow a house. The house 
market is an environment to collect the house information, 
which is listed to buy or sell. The house is an environment to 
have all houses information.  The real world house market 
data are collected. The essential data are house price and 
house trade volume. The economic data related to house 
market are gross domestic product, exchange rate, price 
index and money supply. Therefore, these data is received in 
real world and then digitized. The house policies are policy 
parameters, which have an effect on the house price and 
house trade volume. These policies are input parameters of 
the simulation. And then, these policies are analyzed using 
the simulation results.  
 
 
Figure 1.   Hosing market simulation scenario. 
The CRM receives the house price and trade volume of 
real world from DMM and the house price and trade volume 
of ABM simulation result from SIM.  
CRM receives real world house prices and trade volume 
from the DMM, and receives the house values and trade 
volume of the ABM simulation results from SIM. When 
CRM perceives the difference over threshold between these 
data, CRM informs MEM of it. The MEM evolves the 
economic condition recognition of each agent as hidden 
variable. The MEM decides the hidden variable using 
machine learning and then sends it to ARM. The ARM 
updates the simulation model according to information from 
MEM. After updating the simulation model, the new 
simulation model conducts a simulation. This process is 
recursively repeated to reduce a long-term simulation error. 
After finishing the simulation, the simulation results are 
analyzed by policy maker or simulation analyzer.     
IV. 
COMPONENT BASED ABM MODELING FOR HOUSING 
MARKET SIMULATION 
Agent model can be componentized. Each agent consists 
of the situation awareness (SA), adaptation and projection 
(AP), and decision making (DM). Each SA, AP, and DM 
consists of one atomic component. Components have various 
levels from atomic model (AM) to coupled model (CM). The 
model structure from the top level, housing market ABM, to 
the lowest level, AM, is shown in Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Housing market ABM structure. 
Housing market ABM is a top level model and includes 
the agent group and environment group. Agent group can 
identify the situation and make judgment on its own as an 
individual subject. The agent group is divided into the house 
holder, external supplier, and bank. The environment group 
is a passive object that does not judge itself and affects 
agents. A house holder is a key component of this model and 
includes buy, list, and contract actions. For buy and list, it is 
designed by SA, AP, and DM concept. An external supplier 
has the actions of list, construct, destroy, and contract. A 
bank gives a loan and receives money from house holder. 
The loan behavior can be designed by SA and DM concept. 
A housing market is an environment element that connects 
the house holder and house. It consists of the transaction 
management, responder, and contract management. In these 
AM and CM, the essential models are the agent group and 
buy model.  
A. Agent group design 
Agent group model consists of the house holder, external 
supplier, and bank. These agents interact with each other and 
environment group, as shown in Figure 3.  
The house holder provides the following functions. First 
of all, it lists houses for sale and rental at an environment 
group. Second, it purchases and rents a house listed in the 
environment group. Third, it carries out contracts with other 
agent. Forth, it requests the house information listed in the 
environment group. Fifth, it receives information about 
economic indicators from the environment group. Sixth, it 
receives and processes contract termination information from 
environment group. Seventh, it receives the housing market 
information from the environment group. Eighth, it requests 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

loanable amount to the bank and receives the response from 
the bank. Ninth, it requests a loan to the bank and receives 
the response from the bank. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Agent group model for housing market ABM 
The house holder provides the following functions. First 
of all, it lists houses for sale and rental at an environment 
group. Second, it purchases and rents a house listed in the 
environment group. Third, it carries out contracts with other 
agent. Forth, it requests the house information listed in the 
environment group. Fifth, it receives information about 
economic indicators from the environment group. Sixth, it 
receives and processes contract termination information from 
environment group. Seventh, it receives the housing market 
information from the environment group. Eighth, it requests 
loanable amount to the bank and receives the response from 
the bank. Ninth, it requests a loan to the bank and receives 
the response from the bank. The external supplier provides 
the following functions. First, it requests for demolition of 
the existing house listed in the environment group. Second, it 
builds new house and lists the new house in the environment 
group. Third, it receives and processes the contract 
termination information from the environment group. Forth, 
it receives the housing market information from the 
environment group. The bank provides the following 
functions. First, it carries out the function of giving loan to 
the agent who wants to purchase and rent the house. Second, 
it receives the inquiry message about loanable amount from 
the house holder and responds the loanable amount to the 
house holder. Third, it receives a message requesting a loan 
from the house holder and responds the loans to the house 
holder. 
B. Buy behavior design 
The buy behavior is consisted of SA, AP, and DM. The 
modeling methodology designed through SA, AP, and DM 
can easily reconstruct the detailed behavior of each agent. 
Basically, each behavior of Agent is designed as SA, AP, 
and DM as shown in Figure 4.  
The SA can be reconfigured into any type of component 
if only the input and output matches the AP and DM. AP and 
DM can be easily reconfigured if the input and output are 
matched with other components. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Buy behavior model for housing market ABM 
The SA receives the market information (average 
transaction price, average transaction rate, etc.) of housing 
from the environment group and judges the real estate 
market situation as boom, a recession and a normal time, and 
then transmits the real estate market situation to AP as shown 
in Figure 5.   
 
 
Figure 5.  SA model of buy behavior for housing market ABM 
The AP requests loan and house information and then 
receives the information on the market situation (boom, 
recession, normal), feedback (list of sale information, selling 
price, average selling price), loans, and a list of available 
houses. After receiving all information, it judges the house 
price after considering the current price and the future price, 
and transmits the result of judgment (buy list) to the DM as 
shown in Figure 6.  
 
 
Figure 6.  AP model of buy behavior for housing market ABM 
 
Figure 7.  DM model of buy behavior for housing market ABM 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

The DM receives a list of houses to be purchased from 
the AP and requests and receives a loan amount. And then, it 
determines a house to be purchased using the loan amount 
and the house list information. The result of DM (buy house) 
is transmitted to the environment group as shown in Figure 7. 
V. 
EXPERIMENTS 
In order to verify the developed housing market ABM, 
we implement it as a formal agent component model, and 
verify the reconstruction of component. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Model reconfiguration phase for mitigating the difference 
between validation data and simulation result 
We implement an ABM simulation system using the 
discrete event system specification (DEVS) C++ engine. The 
initial model (iteration 1) is conducted in the simulation 
system and then the simulation result (house trading volume) 
is compared with the validation data. The MEM finds better 
parameter and component of model to reduce the error 
between validation data and simulation result and then sends 
result information to ARM. The ARM updates the model 
according to the information from MEM, and then conduct 
simulation recursively.  
During the evolving simulation, the errors of previous 
model and changed model are compared as shown in Figure 
8. Errors with the verification data in the iteration 2 were 
reduced in the iteration 3. The validation data are the real 
house trade volume of Seoul in Republic of Korea. We got 
the real house trade volume data from the web site managed 
by Ministry of Land, Infrastructure and Transport in 
Republic of Korea.  
 
 
Figure 9.  Self-evolving simulation result for house market ABM 
After finishing the evolving iteration, the house trade 
volume of each model (from iteration 1 to iteration 5) is 
compared to see how much errors have gone down, as shown 
in Figure 9. As the iteration progresses form iteration 1 to 
iteration 5, the house trading volume errors with the 
validation data are reduced. Therefore, the parameter and 
component of model are properly modified autonomously.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper addressed the component based agent 
simulation modeling for self-evolving house market 
prediction. This paper proposed component model to 
reconfigure the model autonomously. To evaluate the 
effectiveness of the component based agent simulation 
modeling for self-evolving simulation, we implement house 
market ABM simulation system using DEVS C++ engine. 
The self-evolving simulation automatically updates the 
housing market ABM and reduces errors between the 
validation data and the simulation results. 
We will implement the proposed simulation in the 
distributed and paralleled simulation environment.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the ICT R&D program of 
MSIP/IITP, [R7117-16-0219, Development of Predictive 
Analysis Technology on Socio-Economics using Self-
Evolving 
Agent-Based 
Simulation 
embedded 
with 
Incremental Machine Learning]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Banks, J. Carson, B. Nelson and B. Nicol, “Discrete-event 
system simulation,” Prentice Hall, 1984. 
[2] G. H. Orchtt, "A new type of socio-economic system," The 
review of economics and statistics, vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 116-123, 
May 1957. 
[3] A. Harding, "Challenges and opportunities of dynamic 
microsimulation modelling," Plenary paper presented to the 
1st General Conference of the International Microsimulation 
Association, Vienna, Aug. 2007. 
[4] M. Favreault, and K. Smith, "A primer on the dynamic 
simulation of income model (DYNASIM3)," Urban Institute, 
Feb. 2004. 
[5] S. Antcliff, "Introduction to DYNAMOD: a dynamic 
population microsimulation model," Technical Paper No 1, 
National Centre for Social and Economic Modelling 
(NATSEM), University of Canberra, 1993. 
[6] A. King, M. Robinson, and H. Baekgaard, “DYNAMOD-2: 
An overview,” Techincal Paper No. 19, National Centre for 
Social and Economic Modelling (NATSEM), University of 
Canberra, Dec. 1999. 
[7] A. Getchell, "Agent-based modeling," Physics, pp. 757-767, 
Jun. 2008. 
[8] T. C. Schelling, “Dynamic models of segregation,” Journal of 
mathematical sociology, vol. 1, pp. 143-186, 1971.  
[9] N. Geard, J. M. McCaw, A. Dorin, K. B. Korb, and J. 
McVernon, “Synthetic population dynamics: A model of 
household demography,” Journal of Articial Societies and 
Social Simulation, 16(1) 8, Jan. 2013.  
[10] K. Singh, M. Sajjad, and C. W. Ahn, "Towards full scale 
population dynamics modelling with an agent based and 
micro-simulation based framework," International Conference 
on Advanced Communication Technology (ICACT), pp. 495-
501, Jul. 2015. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

