Integration of  Emotions and Feelings of Patients to Improve their Care - the Case 
of Healthcare Interface Organizations (HIO) in France 
 
Bourret Christian 
DICEN IDF 
University Paris East Marne-la-Vallée 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
e-mail : christian.bourret@u-pem.fr 
 
 
Abstract— In all the developed countries, Healthcare Systems 
are in crisis with the central question of costs. They therefore 
face the key issue of performance. Everywhere (United 
Kingdom, USA, Spain, France, etc.) solutions are sought in 
new uses of information and involvement of patients or 
empowerment. The French Healthcare System has strong 
characteristics (particularly divisions between primary care 
and hospitals) that determine its evolution that we will analyze 
after explaining our research position. Better integrating 
patients’ and in particular their emotions and feelings to 
improve their involvement in a coproduction of services 
perspective is one of the main goals of New Healthcare 
Interface Organizations (HIO) developed recently between 
primary care and hospital sector. We analyze how in this 
perspective they may play a key role to improve the French 
Healthcare System.  
Keywords - Healthcare; Interface Organizations; France; 
emotions; feelings; services. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Healthcare Systems are in crisis with the central question 
of costs, accentuated during the last years in all the 
developed countries with key issues of efficiency and 
performance. Solutions are sought in new uses of 
information and involvement of patients or empowerment. 
The case of France is specific: the French Healthcare System 
has strong characteristics that determine its evolution 
(Section III). We will analyze these specificities as strong 
constraints after explaining our research position (Section II). 
We will then show the key role of new Interface 
Organizations 
(HIO) 
to 
promote 
coordination 
and 
traceability and a cooperative process between primary care 
and hospital sector (Section IV) [1] [2] [3] [4]. Then we will 
examine the new role that could be given to patients by 
including their emotions and feelings to improve their 
involvement in a new coproduction of services perspective 
(Section V) [5]. 
II. 
RESEARCH POSITION 
Our research position corresponds to French Academic 
discipline of Information and Communication Sciences, as 
proposed by F. Bernard [6] at the convergence of four 
problems: that of link (relationships, interactions), that of 
meaning, that of knowledge and that of action. We choose an 
approach of complexity (global and systemic) and of Action 
Research: produce usable knowledge for action, validated by 
all the stakeholders [7]. 
We refer to the “situational and interactionist semiotic 
method”, 
in 
French, 
“sémiotique 
situationnelle 
et 
interactionniste” (A. Mucchielli [8]). This method tries to 
access  meanings by understanding what things mean for an 
actor in a specific situation. Its key concept is the 
contextualization. Different levels of background are built 
by actor interpretation and define a situation, split into 
different frameworks: the intentions and issues of the actors, 
their cultural background, their positions in relation to other 
actors, the quality of relations, historical and temporal 
framework. All the meanings for all the actors build a 
"global sense" of the studied phenomenon. 
We propose an extension of this method to integrate the 
experiences of actors including the emotions and the feelings 
of patients in a dynamic approach, considering the patient 
care pathway as a process in quality management. Always in 
a constructivist approach, we also consider the Activity 
Theory of Y. Engeström [9]. 
Our work in progress is based on cooperation established 
in France (particularly around students’ works for Masters’ 
degrees: observation, participation in meetings, interviews of 
key actors, etc.), but also with comparisons with other 
countries such as the Spanish Basque Country. 
III. 
THE SPECIFICITIES OF THE FRENCH HEALTHCARE 
SYSTEM 
The French Healthcare System can be regarded as “out of 
breath” that is at the end of its possibilities (Isaac, [10]) if we 
consider the results in comparison with the costs around 12 
% of GNP. It is strongly affected by divisions (walls) [11], 
particularly between the primary care and the hospital sector 
(very dominant: this is called “hospital-centrism”), between 
physicians (cure) and nurses (care), between medical and 
social jobs, etc. 
In the 1920s, physicians practicing in primary care 
(outside hospitals) refused the role of Health Insurance 
Companies (German model) to impose fees directly paid to 
them by patients who are subsequently reimbursed by 
Health Insurance Companies. So primary care physicians 
deny any link with Insurance Companies. For H. Isaac, ICT 
(Information and Communication Technologies) can afford 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
to develop another model, promoting prevention and cost 
savings. These prospects meet issues of "augmented human” 
or “quantified self " with all the new uses of Open Data or 
above all of Big Data with the risk of abuses, particularly on 
privacy, highlighted by the CNIL – National Commission 
for Informatics and Freedom (in French, Commission 
Nationale de l’Informatique et des Libertés) [12], and also 
another risk around ultra-connection and ultra-transparency. 
Patient involvement is essential, in reference to the 
Anglo-Saxon concept of empowerment. In France, we prefer 
to talk about “responsibility”. In this perspective, the law of 
March 2002 on “The Rights of Sick People and the Quality 
of the Healthcare System”  (in French, Loi relative aux 
Droits des malades et à la qualité du système de santé) was a 
major step by proposing the concept of "health democracy" 
(démocratie sanitaire) and valuing Healthcare Networks 
(Réseaux de santé). HIV-AIDS networks have played a key 
role for a new approach of patient role. The law of July 2009 
(“Hospital, Patients, Health, Territories”, in French : HPST - 
Hôpital, Patients, Santé, Territoires) proposed a new 
regionalization of Health management with the creation of 
ARS (Health Regional Agencies, in French, Agences 
Régionales de Santé) and two agencies to improve 
information systems (Agency for Shared Information 
Systems in Health (in French, Agence pour les Systèmes 
d’Information Partagés en Santé) and performance in the 
health and social sector (ANAP: Agence Nationale 
d’Amélioration de la Performance), particularly in the 
medico-social sector, also confirming the role of the High 
Authority for Health (HAS, Haute Autorité de Santé ). As an 
extension of the Companion - Ghali report (2014) [13], a 
new law voted by Parliament inl 2015 wants to give a new 
impetus to the concept of "health democracy". It also insists 
on a better use of information with the repositioning of the 
Electronic Health Record or DMP (in French, Dossier 
Médical Personnel), whose management since 2004 is 
largely a failure.  It is now redefined not as personal 
belonging to the patients (first perspective) but as shared by 
all the medical actors. 
In this context, the development of new Interface 
Organizations for facilitating cooperations between primary 
care and hospital sector, using ICT and involving more 
patients, is a key issue. The Godet - Durance - Mousli report 
(2010) [14] emphasized the role of the Health field as 
essential for innovation, focusing in particular on the 
experience of Healthcare Networks. 
IV. 
HEALTHCARE INTERFACE ORGANIZATIONS (HIO) AS 
A CHANGE LEVER 
New 
Healthcare 
Interface 
Organizations 
(HIO) 
developed to overpass divisions between primary care and 
hospital sector may be considered as spaces for innovation, 
experimentation and development of trust (Bourret, [2] [3]), 
both for the human actors (individuals or belonging to 
organizations) and also in digital tools (digital trust), also 
with the recognition of different roles: that of doctors, 
nurses, social workers, patients and their families, etc. 
Healthcare Networks (in French, Réseaux de santé) 
appeared in the 1980s, especially with the AIDS epidemic 
and the need for coordination between general practitioners 
(primary care) and hospital sector and between the medical 
and the social sector. Their role has been enshrined in the 
Law of March 2002. They were developed for different 
diseases (diabetes, cardiology, etc.), or for specific situations 
(perinatal care, addictions, obesity, geriatrics, oncology, etc.) 
and in some cases their role would be better defined with 
HAD (Hospitalization at Home, in French, Hospitalisation à 
Domicile) organizations, with whom they are often in strong 
competition on the same areas. 
First Healthcare Networks are coordination structures of 
professional activities engaged in different spaces, often with 
just a phone center to receive patients’ calls (Healthcare 
Network Bronchiolitis in Paris, Gérontopastel Network for 
old people in Toulouse, etc.).  
Their rivals, Multi Medical Homes (in French, Maisons 
de Santé Pluriprofessions) gather different practitioners on 
the same site, as it is, for example in Spain for ambulatorios. 
In the recent years, the authorities seem to prefer them and 
encourage their development, focusing also on grouping and 
coordinating activities. Thus the Healthcare Network on 
Diabetes in Eastern Ile-de-France (Revesdiab) became the 
main actor in the new structure of GCS (Health Cooperation 
Group, in French, Groupement de Coopération Sanitaire) 
Diapason (in southern Seine-et-Marne department, which 
represents half of the area of the Ile-de-France Region). The 
GCS is a new key tool to develop cooperations between 
public and private sector, but also between the primary care 
and the hospital sector. It connects public and private health 
institutions, health centers, nursing homes, medical 
professionals and the actors of medical-social sector, acting 
individually or collectively. 
Other modalities of cooperation have also emerged in 
recent years as the PAERPA experiments (Elderly People at 
Risk of Loss of Autonomy, in French, Personnes Agées en 
Risque de Perte d’Autonomie) that particularly highlight PPS 
(Personalized Care Plans – in French, Plans Personnalisés de 
Soins) (Bloch – Hénaut [4]) which, eventually focus on 
monitoring of individually sustain of patients’ care pathway, 
set up by the Healthcare Networks, applying in this case to in 
elderly patients. So GCS Diapason applies a PPS to diabetic 
patients. 
MAIA (Houses for Autonomy and Integration of 
Alzheimer Patients, in French, Maisons pour l’Autonomie et 
l’Intégration des Malades d’Alzheimer) were mainly 
intended to be the devoted entry for patients with this disease 
and their families. They were put in place by the new CNSA 
(National Solidarity Fund for Autonomy, in French, Caisse 
Nationale de Solidarité pour l’Autonomie). They have often 
considered the PAERPA as unfair and unnecessary 
competition. 
These interface organizations are an attempt to answer 
the central problem of the divisions or walls [11] of the 
French Healthcare System. But their proliferation, often 
without real coherence or overall vision, according to local 
initiatives of different Health Insurance or Social Security 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
funds or territory collectivities (departments, municipalities, 
etc.) can lead to new divisions and a loss of efficiency. 
V. 
A NEW PATIENT’S APPROACH INTEGRATING THEIR 
EMOTIONS AND ENCOURAGING THEIR INVOLVEMENT 
 
Patients gradually asserted their role, particularly in the 
applications of the 2002 Law (for example the hospitalized 
patient's charter in 2006) with the key role of associations 
such as the CISS (Interassociative Collective on Health, in 
French, Collectif Interassociatif Sur la Santé) and with the 
"judicialization" of health from the perspective of "perfect 
health" described by L. Sfez [15]: obligation of results and 
not only of means. 
Next, we will describe our point of view regarding 
experiments we are associated with. 
We will analyze in particular the concept of Personalized 
Care Plan (PPS) from the case of GPS Diapason whose 
mission is animation of the territory of Seine-et-Marne and 
testing of innovative practices involving the patient, 
especially 
diabetic, around 
the 
telemedicine 
project 
"Diabetes 
2.0" 
(including 
the 
Healthcare 
Network 
Revesdiab). Diabetes 2.0 is a multi-year large-scale 
innovative project involving both the city and the hospital. It 
provides 
various 
tools 
of 
tele-consultation, 
remote 
monitoring, tele-expertise, as well as virtual tools of 
therapeutic 
education. 
2.0 
Diabetes 
wants 
to 
use 
telemedicine as a training tool for health professionals and to 
promote patients’ compliance. The ultimate goal is to 
improve the management of chronic diseases (diabetes here) 
and associated complications, optimizing care pathways and 
controlling health expenditures. 
We will offer broader perspectives from “situational and 
interactionist semiotic method” (described in section II) 
extended to emotions and feelings of actors (Goleman, [16]), 
especially for patients and their families. And also extended 
to a dynamic approach of change (in a process approach 
regarding quality management), the patient’s pathway can be 
regarded as a process. 
We will insist on the concept of emotional skills of 
patients, central element of emotional intelligence. The 
human body is the mediator from which the individual can 
sensitize its affects and communication support them 
(Martin-Juchat, [17]). 
Our goal hypothesis is that managing emotions can 
become a collective objective of improving the quality of 
care. Social sharing of emotions is essential to promote the 
group membership (Bègue-Desrichard, [5]). This integration 
of emotions and feelings in the patient's personalized care 
can improve the quality of care, for example through better 
patient adherence to prescription compliance and taking 
medication. The notion of recognition is also essential in the 
discussion groups. So we will evoke the role of "mediator 
patients” already developed in some Healthcare Networks 
and that of “case manager” for coordination of care. So we 
will place ourselves in the perspective outlined by the High 
Authority 
of 
Health 
 (HAS) 
(2007 [18]) 
in its 
recommendations 
for 
patient’s 
education, 
asking 
to 
recognize how to act in the patient's positioning to analyze 
his psychological evolution by developing techniques of 
patient-centered communication (active listening, empathy, 
encouragement, etc.). 
In an Action Research perspective, we will conduct 
specific interviews with patients and their families both in 
individual and group perspectives and then we will try to 
improve the integration of their ideas by interactive 
discussions with medical and social actors. We particularly 
insist on the role of “mediator patients” with an idea to 
specific training to help to improve the implication of all the 
other patients. We will particularly work on the notion of 
“complex patient”, especially elderly people with chronic 
diseases and social problems. 
The digital dimension (ICTs) is also essential. The areas 
of activities of different Interface Organizations can be 
considered as Digital Care Territories (in French, TSN: 
Territoire de Soins Numérique), in the same way an 
individual patient is. 
The prospects outlined represent a new approach of 
services coproduction integrating emotions and feelings of 
actors (Maman, [19]) applied in this case to the Healthcare 
sector. More generally, this crossing from the individual 
dimension to the collective dimension is a major challenge to 
found a new citizenship, particularly in the Smart Cities 
project (digital), as outlined by M. Zacklad [20]. 
With GCS Diapason we begin to study the Diabetes 2.0 
Project. In isolated areas, to obtain an appointment with a 
specialist is very difficult with often very long delays. The 
main idea is to use telemedicine solutions to develop 
connection points on still isolated territories. Priority is 
given to new patients, but also patients who experience 
complications and elderly patients with reduced autonomy. 
The project is going to manage three different cohorts. A 
first cohort corresponds to newly diagnosed diabetic patients 
without known diabetes complications. A second cohort of 
already known and treated patients; diabetics aged 65 and 
older with at least one known diabetes complication. And 
finally, a third cohort of patients ages 65 years and older 
with loss of autonomy at home or in nursing homes, in 
diabetes care with risk of hypoglycemia. Integration of 
emotions of patients by discussions and use ICTs to develop 
their implication and their responsibility are key parts of this 
project. 
Loneliness is a huge problem. Discussing with other 
people, not to be alone and sharing views on illness is the 
first step to improve the quality of life of these patients and 
for integrating their emotions and their feelings. It is also a 
manner of taking into account the different times of all the 
actors and their different goals: these of patients being very 
different than those of doctors, nurses or social workers. 
Trying to integrate patients’ knowledge about their disease 
will be the second step. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The role of patients is essential to reinvent the Welfare 
State and a new local citizenship, with all the importance of 
the integration of their emotions and feelings. Health 
Interface Organizations may constitute privileged spaces for 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
developing 
new 
approaches 
emphasizing 
emotional 
intelligence dimensions, building trust, from the recognition 
of the role of all stakeholders, not just of the medico-social, 
but also of patients and their families. These approaches 
correspond to coproduction of services perspectives and 
“daily innovation”, according to N. Alter [21]. 
We have also begun to address these issues in a 
comparative European perspective, especially for cases of 
elderly patients in complex situations for example with the 
Carewell Project, principally coordinated by Healthcare 
Organizations of the Spanish Basque Country. Carewell is a 
project for the development of a new organizational model 
based on integrated care for chronic and elderly patients 
through ICTs [22]. 
The tracks we started to trace also belong to a more 
comprehensive approach to “sustainable development” of 
territories, corresponding to that of the Brundtland Report 
(1987) 
[23], 
which 
cannot 
be 
reduced 
solely 
to 
environmental issues but is also based on two other pillars: 
economic (growth) and social (education, health and respect 
for freedoms). 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] P. Larcher and P. Polomeni, Health in Networks. Goals and 
Strategy for a Primary Care – Hospital Collaboration / La 
santé en réseaux. Objectifs et stratégie dans une collaboration 
ville-hôpital, Paris : Masson, 2001. 
[2] C. Bourret, Organizational Dynamics aroud Collective 
Production of Information and Communicational Process. The 
cas or healthcare Interface Organizations / Dynamiques 
organisationnelles 
autour 
de 
la production 
collective 
d’information et de processus communicationnels. Le cas des 
organisations 
d’interface 
 
du 
secteur 
santé, 
HDR 
(Accreditation to Supervise Research / Habilitation à Diriger 
des Recherches), dir.  A. Mayère, University Paris East,  2 
vol., 2010. 
[3] C. Bourret, "E-Health and Societal and Territorial Intelligence 
in France. Collective Knowledge Production Issues and New 
Networked Interface Organizations", Chapter 12, Competitive 
Intelligence and Decision Problems, Edited by David A., 
ISTE – John Wiley Ed., London, 2011, pp. 247 – 268.   
[4] A.M. Bloch and L. Henaut., Co-ordination and Pathways. 
Dynamics of the healthcare, social and medico-social sectors / 
Coordination et parcours. La dynamique du monde sanitaire, 
social et médico-social, Paris : Dunod, 2014. 
[5] L. Bègue and O. Desrichard, dir., Treaty of Social 
Psychology. The Human Interactions Science / Traité de 
psychologie sociale. La science des interactions humaines, 
Bruxelles :  De Boeck, 2013. 
[6] F. Bernard, "ICS a Disciplinary of Openness and 
Decompartmentalization / Les SIC une discipline de 
l’ouverture et du décloisonnement ", in A. Bouzon, dir., 
Organizational Communication in Debat / La communication 
organisationnelle en débat. Champs, concepts, perspectives, 
Paris : L’Harmattan, 2006, pp. 33 – 46. 
[7] V. Meyer, " Utility of Action-Research in ICS /  De l’utiilité 
des recherches-actions en SIC (sciences de l’information et de 
la 
communication)", 
Communication 
& 
Organisation, 
Bordeaux :  Michel de Montaigne University, 30 / 6, 2006, 
pp. 89 – 108. 
[8] A. Mucchielli, Situation and communication, Nice : Editions  
Ovadia, 2010.  
[9] Y. Engeström and al. (eds), Perspectives on Activity Theory, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1999.  
[10] H. Isaac, dir., From a Curative to a Preventive Health System 
Thanks Digital Tools / D’un système de santé curatif à un 
modèle préventif grâce aux outils numériques, Renaissance 
numérique, 
Paris, 
2014. 
Available 
from : 
http://fr.slideshare.net/RenaissanceNumerique/lb-sante-
preventive-renaissance-numerique-1 (August 28th, 2015). 
[11] S. Glouberman, H. Mintzberg,  "Managing the Care of Health 
and the Cure of Disease ", Health Care Management Review, 
- Volume 26 - Issue 1, 2001, pp: 5-90.  
[12] CNIL (Commission Nationale de l’Informatique et des 
Libertés), " The Human Body a New Connected Object. From 
Quantified Self to Heath : New Territories of World Data 
Layout / Le corps, nouvel objet connecté. Du Quantified self à 
la santé : les nouveaux territoires de la mise en données du 
monde ", Cahiers IP Innovation et Prospective, 2014, n° 2,  63 
p.   
[13] C. Compagnon and V. Ghali, For Year II of Sanitary 
Democracy / Pour l’An II de la démocratie sanitaire, Report 
to The Ministry of Health and Social Affairs, Paris,  2014. 
Available 
from : 
http://www.sante.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/Rapport_DEF-version17-
02-14.pdf (August 28th, 2015) 
[14] M. Godet., P. Durance, and M. Mousli, Ceativity and 
Innovation on Territories / Créativité et innovation dans les 
territoires, Paris, Conseil d'Analyse Economique – La 
documentation Française, 2010. 
[15] L. Sfez, dir., Utopia of Perfect Health /  L’utopie de la santé 
parfaite, Colloque de Cerizy, Paris : PUF, 2001. 
[16] D. Goleman. Working with Emotional Intelligence, London: 
Bloomsbury, 1998. 
[17] F. Martin-Juchat, Human Body and Medias. Fresh tried by the 
Medias and the Social Spaces / Le corps et les médias. La 
chair éprouvée par les médias et les espaces sociaux, 
Bruxelles : De Boeck, 2008. 
[18] Haute Autorité de Santé (HAS). Patients’ Therapeutic 
Education. How to Propose and to Achieve it ? / L’éducation 
thérapeutique du patient : Comment la proposer et la 
réaliser ?, 
2007, 
Available 
from : 
http://www.has-
sante.fr/portail/upload/docs/application/pdf/etp_-
comment_la_proposer_et_la_realiser_-  
_recommandations_juin_2007 (August 28th, 2015). 
[19] C. Maman, "Deafness of the Provider in the Service 
Relationship: When the Recognition Deficit Deteriorate 
Customer Satisfaction/  La surdité du prestataire dans la 
relation de service : quand le déficit de reconnaissance 
dégrade la satisfaction du client", Development and 
Strengthening of Social Ties 
/ 
 Développement et 
renforcement du lien social, Management & Sciences 
Sociales, n° 16, Janvier – Juin, 2014, pp. 32 – 46. 
[20] M. Zacklad, "Economies of Conviviality in Information and 
Services Society / Les économies de la convivialité dans les 
sociétés de l’information et des services", Inaugural Lecture, 
Paris, CNAM, 2009. 
[21] N. Alter. Daily Innovation / L’innovation ordinaire, Paris :  
PUF, 2005. 
[22] Carewell Project, Available from: http://www.engaged-
innovation.eu/discussions/carewell-project-development-new-
organizational-model-based-integrated-care-chronic-and 
(August 28th, 2015). 
[23] G.O Brundland, dir., Our Common Future. Report of the 
World Commission on Envronment and Development, New 
York, 1987. Available on: http://www.un-documents.net/our-
common-future.pdf (August 28th, 2015). 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-447-3
HUSO 2015 : The First International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

