Theory and Development of Tool Frameworks for Interactive Knowledge and Data 
Visualization in Computational Social Science 
Tom McDermott 
Systems Engineering Research Center 
Stevens Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, Georgia 
Email: tmcdermo@stevens.edu 
Molly Nadolski 
Georgia Tech Research Institute 
Georgia Institute of Technology 
Atlanta, Georgia 
Email: molly.nadolski@gtri.gatech.edu
 
Abstract— We present a framework and sample case study 
linking knowledge visualization forms with visualization of 
human and social data analytics. This involves integration of 
qualitative methods to identify and connect conceptual models 
with computational social science approaches for data analytics. 
The framework addresses two challenges: explicitly linking 
conceptual knowledge visualization to data analytic tools and 
using that linkage to explore complexity in social situations. In 
social 
or 
organizational 
change 
management 
strategies, 
combining new data and knowledge is critical for decision 
making. When the situation is complex, data must be placed in a 
knowledge framework to build team learning and to create new 
mental models for strategic change. As situational complexity 
increases, the role of knowledge transfer in team social networks 
becomes more critical, and the ability to visualize knowledge (as 
opposed to information) becomes paramount to insight and 
effective decision making. We demonstrate a framework that is 
derived from theories in the systems thinking and complexity 
thinking domains, which is then linked to how leaders and 
managers visualize and communicate data, information, and 
knowledge. A case study based on Russia’s multi-domain 
influence in the country of Moldova is used to demonstrate 
explicit linkage between knowledge visualization forms and social 
data analytics. 
Keywords-knowledge management; complex adaptive systems; 
data visualization; conceptual modeling; leadership. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This research explores ways to explicitly link knowledge-
driven conceptual models with data-driven techniques that 
create insight for decision making in complex systems and 
situations. Visualization of knowledge in a conceptual form is 
primarily a qualitative process completed in group facilitation 
activities. It often uses data and information visualization but 
the linking of conceptual relationships to the data analytic tools 
seldom leaves the “whiteboard." With the advent of semantic 
data analysis and learning tools, there is more opportunity to 
formally link conceptual learning with data search strategies. 
This paper presents theory linking data, information, and 
knowledge visualization forms, then presents a case study 
exploring tools for combining visualization to demonstrate the 
possibilities. 
The central thesis of this work is that as complexity 
increases, the role of knowledge transfer in social networks 
becomes more critical, and the ability to visualize knowledge 
(as opposed to information) becomes paramount to decision 
making and strategy. Complex situations are characterized by 
periods of human social learning followed by periods of stable 
execution. Visualization tools allow the mapping of large 
amounts of data to visual patterns that aid human information 
processing. Exploring data and designing visualization 
approaches requires a modeling framework as shown in Figure 
1. We follow a systems thinking framework that semantically 
links a qualitative description of the system architecture and 
measurable constructs to a specification of quantitative 
methods for computational modeling of those measures. 
 
Visualization
Conceptual
Model
Workflow
Executable
Metamodel
System 
Constructs
System
Architecture
Inquiry
System
Metamodel
Specification
 
Figure 1. The bridge between qualitative analysis and social analytic model 
specification. 
 
We define the qualitative aspects in Figure 1 as “System 
Metamodeling” 
using 
three 
fundamental 
abstraction 
approaches: system metamodels, system constructs, and system 
architecture models. These are determined in a participative 
and inquiry-based process. We describe quantitative aspects as 
“Executable Metamodeling” determined by a specification and 
design workflow using conceptual models, computation, and 
data visualization. It is useful to think about this as a tool 
framework. The tools support structuring the systems 
metamodel, creating the conceptual models, creating the 
executable metamodels, analyzing and visualizing the decision 
space, and managing the contained knowledge over time [2]. 
The system metamodel is described as the set of constructs 
and rules used to define semantic relationships across 
information sets, associated data sets, and methodologies or 
processes. The metamodel definition on the semantic side is an 
architectural description of the system using modeling views 
and stakeholder viewpoints. The executable metamodel is the 
dataset design and any associated computational models. This 
is further discussed in section III. 
A research effort was conducted using the framework to 
explicitly deconstruct qualitative methods into a “system meta-
model” in order to identify and specify “executable meta-
models” using computational social science approaches.  
The research domain was the study of Russian foreign and 
security policies. Here, the conventional focus on single-factor 
explanations has been challenged by the emerging cross-
domain character of Russia’s statecraft and pursuit of so-called 
“new generation warfare” in gray zone conflicts. The domain is 
currently dominated by the application of a narrow set of 
research methods, such as comparative case studies, regression 
analysis, expert surveys, and interviews that confront 
systematic problems related to limited, out of sample, and 
disconnected data.  The case study uses the metamodeling 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

framework to engage more holistic methods that encourage 
flow of knowledge across multiple domain experts and 
methods [3] [4].  
There are a growing number of actor and event coding 
schemes and software tools that offer opportunity to 
automatically extract stakeholders, sentiments, and events 
related to foreign and security policy analyses. They parse a 
growing body of English and Russian language (and other 
languages) databases and media publications on daily and even 
real-time bases. They target actors and types of events, but 
struggle with visualization of complex and multi-domain 
relationships.  
We used a combination of scenario analysis and systems 
thinking methods, such as narratives, taxonomies, and 
accompanying visual diagrams, to create the systems meta-
model. The strategies and tactics within Russia gray zone 
operational and definitional domain and the key pressure points 
are identified by scenario development, which captures 
fundamental change in the present state.  The result was a set of 
conceptual models, and we identified methods to bridge them 
to computational models via data mining to realize the 
executable meta-model. This is presented in section IV. 
The use of the framework is recommended in periods of 
program complexity. Challenges of program complexity may 
have any or all of the following three dimensions: (1) the scale 
of the project and supporting enterprise, with the variety of 
organizational disciplines, processes, and tools that might be 
used to execute the program; (2) the uncertainties created by 
newness, originality, and innovation; and (3) the external 
context the program is surrounded by, including social and 
political factors and market dynamics [5].  
The data visualization challenge is to support the 
combination of qualitative or heuristic decisions that must be 
made in conjunction with quantitative data driven decisions. 
These can be categorized as knowledge-driven versus data-
driven decisions. How the network of decision-makers 
collaboratively use data, information, and shared knowledge is 
paramount. 
Progress on visually linking qualitative knowledge with 
quantitative data is still lacking but can be enabled by machine 
learning tools that find and semantically link knowledge and 
data. In complex and uncertain situations, the flexibility of 
most data visualization tools to create the “story” that is needed 
to move forward falls short, and decision makers must explore 
data in more qualitative frameworks. The challenge is to 
situationally master the combination of tools and visualization 
forms that visualize data and information to collect, transfer 
and communicate shared knowledge. The goal of this research 
is to build linkages between qualitative and quantitative 
visualization methods to aid decision making. This is discussed 
further in section II. 
II. 
CONTEXT: COMPLEXITY IN SOCIAL SYSTEMS 
Although all human and social systems can be described 
generally as complex adaptive systems, they undergo periods 
of stability and disruption driven by internal and external 
drivers of change. It is important to understand the drivers of 
this situational complexity and choose appropriate analytical 
constructs to assess and implement change. Geraldi and 
Albrecht [5] provided a useful categorization of complexity 
from the complex project management domain ascribing 
complexity across three dimensions: Complexity of Fact, 
Complexity of Faith, and Complexity of Interaction.  
A. Dimensions of Complexity 
Complexity of Fact is a measure of the number of entities 
and their interdependence as an issue of interdependent 
information. Given large complexity of fact, it is difficult to 
obtain and use information rapidly enough to support decision 
making. Data modelers search for available higher-level 
abstractions or simplifications to base their data for decisions. 
In this dimension, there exists a fundamental problem of 
abstraction – one needs to visualize the whole of the project 
and represent information in patterns that are embedded in the 
whole. Visualization frameworks that maintain the holistic 
perspective while allowing access to detailed information are 
necessary. 
Complexity of Faith relates to program situational 
uncertainty, often associated with the newness of the problem 
being solved or methods used to solve it. Complexity of Faith 
implies a need for learning. In periods of high uncertainty, 
decisions rely more on shared knowledge than on availability 
of data and information. Decision makers and their 
visualization methods and tools in these periods must 
encourage facilitation, knowledge transfer, and more abstract 
conceptualization of decision alternatives. 
 Complexity of Interactions exist at interfaces between 
different systems and domains. These include people, 
disciplines, locations, external stakeholders, and social and 
political factors. In complex situations, it is important to frame 
program interactions in a larger enterprise architecture 
framework. Understanding interactions drives the need for 
facilitation and conceptualization methods and tools.  
To manage complexity, one must develop strategies and 
tools that support 1) exchange and visualization of information 
across social networks, 2) exchange and visualization of 
knowledge between decision agents, and 3) evolutionary 
planning that includes cycles of learning. The presence of all 
three of these strategies imply that project learning be data-
driven, so visualization methods that support access to both 
information and knowledge must be used. These methods are 
discussed on literature related to systems thinking and the 
complexity sciences. 
B. Modeling Complexity using Enterprise Architecture 
Sociotechnical systems analysis is a specific methodology 
that supports modeling of multiple factors across all layers of a 
complex situation, enterprise or societal construct using sets of 
tools derived from system science and system modeling. The 
methods recognize that factors arise from the interaction of 
many and diverse enterprises that can be defined by their 
entities, 
relationships, 
established 
processes, 
pursued 
strategies, and emergent phenomena. The sociotechnical 
systems analysis attempts to capture the combined conceptual, 
data, and analytical modeling artifacts necessary to completely 
describe the problem [6] [7].  
With respect to social situations, the method produces a set 
of artifacts that describe the system context and boundaries, 
system entities and relationships, primary construct variables, 
potential causal variables, and phenomena of interest. This is 
the system meta-model. The process is conducted such that 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

insight can be fed into dynamic computer models. The 
sociotechnical systems analysis produces artifacts that 
communicate the abstractions and aggregation of behaviors 
across different scales, helping to explicitly document both the 
assumed and modeled variables. At the core are entities and 
their relationships, which can be organized into associated 
databases and warehouses. The entity-relationship model can 
be created, modified, and refined over periods of short- and 
long-term study. Standardized coding of the data entities then 
makes relevant data elements accessible to researchers and 
analysts. 
The conceptual model representations produced by the 
sociotechnical systems analysis serve as a bridge between the 
qualitative aspects of the problem (system meta-model) and 
the quantitative analysis approach (executable meta-model). 
This is the purpose of the framework shown previously in 
Figure 1. In the long-term, we expect that advances in machine 
learning and semantic graphs can bring the system meta-model 
(data constructs and conceptual models) and executable meta-
model (collected data and algorithms) into the same 
visualization toolsets. The bridge between the two meta-
models is a conceptual model that uses semantic relationships 
to 
specify 
the 
analytical 
models. 
This 
process 
of 
deconstructing complexity is tightly linked to mindsets and 
tools from the domain of systems thinking. 
C. Modeling Complexity of Gray Zone Warfare 
Russia’s use of “Gray-Zone” warfare is an example of 
intentional complexity as used to hide or ambiguate purposeful 
actions leading to objectives that would prepare or position a 
state for possible armed conflict. Figure 2 depicts the set of 
factors used in Gray Zone conflict. 
 
All three types of complexity are exhibited in Gray Zone 
conflict. Complexity of Fact is exhibited in the almost infinite 
number of actions and related events that a nation state might 
pursue. For a data analyst, finding the right abstractions to 
represent as evidence of such conflict is a continual challenge, 
as well as ensuring those abstractions are relevant to the 
current time or predictive of continuing events. The 
relationship between different objectives - such as diplomatic 
exchanges, troop movements, and economic sanctions - must 
be considered holistically. Care must be taken against 
presenting 
individual 
constructs, 
such 
as 
diplomatic 
exchanges, as a single indicator of state objectives. A 
conceptual model that shows the relationship between all 
objectives is important but often ignored by data analysts and 
even policy makers. 
Likewise, Complexity of Faith and Complexity of 
Interaction are reflected in the 
pursuit of multiple 
simultaneous objectives in dynamic combinations. In Gray 
Zone conflict this is intended to create uncertainty in the 
adversary and the relationship between an action and the 
adversary’s response – dynamic interaction – is the intent of 
the strategy. Again, a conceptual model in important before 
data analysis is relied upon. In section IV a conceptual 
modeling tool called a “Systemigram” is used to visualize 
knowledge about Russia’s strategies in the country of 
Moldova. 
III. 
SYSTEMS AND COMPLEXITY THINKING IN DATA 
ANALYTICS DESIGN 
McDermott and Freeman describe three systems thinking 
characteristics and competencies that are essential to 
managing complexity. These are sensemaking, adaptive and 
computational thinking, and a design mindset. Each of these 
competencies use data-driven activities that encourage 
visualizing the relationships between project uncertainties and 
the underlying project activities [1]. 
Sensemaking is a collaborative process that involves 
collection of knowledge, visually describing or modeling a 
problem or solution in the wider context and learning by 
doing. Adaptive and computational thinking is the ability to 
situationally adjust a team’s thinking and related activities by 
employing analytics and simulation methods that make sense 
of large amounts of data (or to understand when data is 
lacking).  Evolution of strategy and planning is a process of 
iterative design. Building a design mindset moves the 
entrained thinking of the team away from continued use of 
available data, methods and tools to a participatory team 
process of understanding and selecting new data, methods and 
tools. In complex situations, one should strategically design 
and redesign data analytic measures in response to new 
insights and understanding of the situation. Computational 
thinking then relates existing data constructs (generally 
performance measures) to new constructs selected to guide 
future evaluation and prediction. The challenge in data 
visualization is to begin automating these relationships. 
Systems thinking encourages modeling or mapping the 
program and external context together in order to visualize the 
internal and external interactions that drive project execution. 
Conceptual models are developed by experts who have the 
capacity to develop objectively multiple views of a system and 
its context based on background research and discussions at 
expert meetings. Conceptual modeling as a visualization 
strategy is thus a core aspect of any data analytic activity that 
involves complexity and uncertainty. 
The foundation of sensemaking is visualization. Visual 
modeling is used to frame the program and situation within the 
enterprise system that is addressing it.  
A. System & Complexity Thinking in Data Analytics Design 
Boulton, Allen, and Bowman describe the social networks 
in a design strategy as a “learning multi-agent model” – 
networks of individual agents who act according to their 
experience and their beliefs, but ideally aligned around 
common goals. Inducing change in complex systems requires 
self-organization around new shared beliefs [8]. A core 
concern of human social analytics is discovering, measuring, 
and informing those beliefs. However, creation of new shared 
Figure 2. Multiple Objectives used in Gray Zone conflict. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

beliefs is a knowledge transfer activity across individual 
agents. 
Snowden [9] in his work on complexity and the “Cynefin” 
framework recognized knowledge exchange in the form of a 
“learning multi-agent model.” Snowden’s work suggests that a 
data artifact may relate to a team’s knowledge, but it is the 
continual flow of new knowledge and artifacts that must be 
managed in complex situations. Knowledge exchange requires 
both content and a context. The content can only be exchanged 
if the context can be shared (language, education, experience, 
culture, etc.). Visualization tools that address both changing 
content and changing context are essential.  
Data visualization tools and strategies are part of that 
knowledge exchange but can work against it – they represent 
the situation only in the context of the tool and existing data, 
and force information exchange over knowledge transfer. 
Visualizing a future path of execution, in complexity and 
uncertainty, requires representation of information in a 
metamodel framework that tells a story. 
This gives us frameworks to evaluate two types of 
visualization, those that focus on data and information transfer 
and associated execution, and those that focus knowledge 
transfer and associated strategy development. Both have 
application in complex situations. Having a basis for and 
learning when to apply each type is the key to design of 
successful human/social analytics. In section IV we 
demonstrate how these can come together in a data analytic 
analysis. 
Knowledge visualization will often use text-based content 
in a form that emphasizes relationships or patterns. While 
information visualization is typically used to explore large 
amounts of abstract data, knowledge visualization is more 
used to aid in communication of abstract knowledge. The 
visual models provide the conceptual language for shared 
context that is required for knowledge flow. Knowledge 
visualization tools tend to support the sensemaking process, 
helping the observer to fill in additional insights based on 
patterns in the underlying information and data. 
The purpose is to properly conceptualize, structure, relate, 
and validate the relationships in the complex situations from 
factual data and information to the higher levels of abstraction 
or aggregation needed to relate meaning and knowledge. This 
is key to the abstraction of “Fact” to “Faith.” Narrative 
conceptual modeling forms are used to express emergence, 
relating to evolving situations in the domain or enterprise. In 
our research we have settled on a conceptual modeling tool 
called a “systemigram” which blends narrative and diagram. 
The next section provides an example. 
IV. 
CASE STUDY: INTERACTIVE CONCEPTUAL AND DATA 
ANALYTIC MODELING AND VISUALIZATION 
In the case study, we used a combination of scenario 
analysis and systems thinking methods, such as creating 
narratives, taxonomies, and accompanying visual diagrams, to 
build data analytic models that searched for evidence of 
Russian Gray Zone conflict in the country of Moldova. The 
Russian objectives, strategies and tactics are identified by 
scenario development.  This leads to a set of conceptual 
models, and we identified methods to bridge them to 
computational models via data mining. 
In order to visualize the problem space of gray zone 
warfare in Moldova, the conceptual model of the system was 
produced using the systemigram tool that describes the many 
actors, interactions, processes, resources, and feedback loops 
present in the Russia-Moldova interaction. Systemigrams are a 
qualitative model of system behavior that is useful for human 
reasoning about the dynamics of complex systems [10]. A 
systemigram serves to illustrate the relationships and flows 
that exist within a system in its specific context. Figure 3 
shows the full systemigram diagram. 
The term systemigram is derived from the phrase and 
portmanteau “systemic diagram.” Consisting of both narrative 
and diagram, systemigrams are a type of conceptual modeling 
tool closely related to concept maps – or “maps of learning.” 
These maps explore complex situations through the 
perspective of those embedded in the system or those who are 
affected by a specific challenge occurring within the system 
[10]. 
The systemigram models are developed by experts who 
have the capacity to develop objectively multiple views of a 
system based on background research and discussions at 
expert meetings. To frame such a model, a context for analysis 
was provided, then tested against the context of Russia’s 
perspective of gray zone warfare in Moldova. Central 
questions of interest are developed to derive system 
boundaries and ontology structure to support informing the 
computational model development. 
However, they are not quantitative models that are able to 
make predictions. In order to enable to the tools of inferential 
statistics and machine learning to bear on these systemigrams, 
they must be transformed into quantitative models. This 
required further addressing and defining ontological and 
semantic challenges to effectively model the semantics, and 
identifying the transformations that exist and occur between 
qualitative and quantitative approaches. In this phase, the team 
used exploration of the Global Database of Events Language 
and Tone (GDELT) events and established coding, as defined 
by the broader research on Russia-EU aggression, to find 
evidence that either confirm or deny Western perceptions of 
gray-zone operations and tactics, established by real event 
chains. This creates a model that links a series of events to sets 
of tactics, which together, form a perceived strategy. 
GDELT includes events reported in the global media 
coded with many pieces of extracted data. The primary 
information used in this project is the Date/Time, Location, 
Actors, and Cameo Event Code [11]. The Actors are the 
entities (people, government agencies, corporations) that 
engage in behaviors and the CAMEO codes are a systematic 
representation of the behaviors on a scale from 1, Make Public 
Statements, to 20, Unconventional Mass Violence. These 
codes are extracted from the news articles to enable 
researchers to study the dynamics of the global system of 
large-scale 
human 
behavior. 
These 
machine 
learning 
techniques will be specifically adapted to take as input the 
occurrences and frequencies of coded diplomatic events as 
related to gray zone conflict.  
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 Covariates such as Consult, Make Public Statements, 
Appeal, Express Intent, Threaten, Dis- approve, Approve, and 
Demand, along with control variables intended to proxy each 
dyadic 
member’s 
socioeconomic, 
demographic, 
and 
geopolitical characteristics (including discretizations and 
dyad-level combinations thereof), are used to predict the 
occurrences and frequency of specific outcome events. These 
are categorized categorized as: Engage in Diplomatic 
Cooperation, Engage in 
Material Cooperation, Yield, 
Investigate, Coerce, Assault, Fight, Reject, Exhibit Military 
Posture, Reduce Relations, and Provide Aid. By mapping the 
GDELT events to systemigram nodes, we are able to represent 
the world at any particular time in terms of the nodes of the 
systemigrams. Each systemigram node represents a predicate 
on the GDELT event records and we count how many records 
match the predicate for each node in the systemigram. An 
example is shown in Figure 4. At this point, relating the 
systemigram nodes and links to GDELT event codes is a 
manual process. However, additional research is exploring 
how to automate or partially automate this linkage. 
This yields two quantitative models from the systemigram. 
The first is a model based on the representation of a window 
of time as a multivariate state space. Each systemigram node 
is a variable and the window of time is represented as a 
number of events in each variable within that window. These 
counts are represented in Table 1. Once the system is 
represented as a multivariate time series it can be modeled 
with any appropriate time series technique. For example, this 
representation lends itself to a Kalman filter approach tracking 
changes in the true system in the presence of noisy 
observations. We then took bilateral relations data from the 
Moldova, Russia relationship as well as some surrounding 
actors and build both models. Since the Kalman filter 
approach can only generate windowed data, we will compare 
both models in terms of their ability to forecast at the 
windowed level. Comparisons will take the form of quality of 
fit assessment and visual representations of the dynamics of 
the system. In Table 1, the numbers on the top row represent 
individual system concepts that are represented by a node 1 + 
node 2 + link tuple. The numbers in column 1 are year/month 
date codes. Each data item represents an individual event in 
the GDELT database for that concept in a given year/month.  
 
 
       Figure 4. Relating systemigram nodes and links to GDELT codes. 
 
Figure 3. Systemigram Diagram of Russia's Perspective on Gray Zone Warfare in Moldova. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE 1. EVOLUTION OF SELECTED MOLDOVA SYSTEM 
CONCEPTS OVER THE TIME BETWEEN 12/2016-5/2018 
 
Concept 5 and concept 13 displayed the most obvious 
correlation of concept to events. Both of these concepts are 
shown in the full systemigram in Figure 3 as node (Russian 
Peacekeepers) link (deployed to alleviate) node (Frozen 
Conflict). These are periods of Russian troop withdrawals 
from Moldova. In 07/2017 and 12/2017 Russian troops were 
withdrawn from Syria which was picked up as a local 
maximum (676) and minimum (9) of the GDELT queries 
associated with concept 13. Concept 3, node (Russian Foreign 
Policy) link (Strategy attempts to) node (Create stability and 
pursue multivectorism) was also found to correlate with 
signals from the other two concepts and thus provide strategic 
analysts and planners with confirmatory signals of Russian 
objectives. We also see that some events with large coverage 
and a persistent presence such as node (Western States: United 
States) link (Stokes conflict to disrupt foreign policy agenda) 
node (Russian Foreign Policy Challenges and Threats), and 
this node to link (Informs strategy and policy) to node (Russia) 
follow a long term cyclical trend rising and falling together 
without significant spikes or crashes in concepts 8 and 9. 
These events form the background environment which is 
important to shaping the understanding of polities and 
decision-makers, and quantified systemigrams can help us 
understand these entities for foresight. 
V. 
 CONCLUSIONS 
This paper presented a framework to bridge qualitative and 
quantitative models and associated visualization of data with 
knowledge. Few efforts have been made to translate emerging 
research in these approaches into user-friendly and interactive 
visual tools that can aid in both hypotheses’ generation, 
strategic forecasting, and scenario assessment.  To create a 
holistic approach and toolset, this research draws on theories 
and frameworks from multiple disciplines including systems 
thinking, 
complexity 
thinking, 
and 
complex 
project 
management. Qualitative methods promote the development 
of conceptual models to aid in structuring and understanding 
real world systems and problems, in this context, applied to 
Russia’s application and perspective of gray zone conflict in 
Moldova. However, qualitative models are difficult to directly 
measure or validate. Thus, building off the conceptual models 
developed using the systemigram tool and identifying methods 
to bridge them to computational models via data mining 
provided insight into the system to inform further research and 
development of more quantitative models.  The techniques 
presented here can be adapted to near-real-time detection of 
hot-spots and anomalies or used as a basis for post-hoc 
quantitative analysis. 
The conversion of qualitative to quantitative models 
requires the construction of detailed mappings into coding 
spaces. These mappings are useful because they enable 
database systems to calculate measurements for each concept 
in the soft system model. This approach allows segmentation 
of the data by arbitrary filters on the actors involved and time 
spans covered, thus allowing researchers to compare these 
effects on various subsets of the corpus and draw conclusions 
about how these effects differ across regions, times, and 
combinatorial pairings of country- level characteristics for 
more foresightful strategy development. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. McDermott and D. Freeman, “Systems Thinking in the 
Systems Engineering Process, New Methods and Tools,” in M. 
Frank, S. Kordova, H. Shaked (Eds.), Systems Thinking: 
Foundation, Uses and Challenges, Nova 2016. 
[2] J. Ernst, “What is metamodeling, and what is it good for”. 
Retrieved from http://infogrid.org/trac/wiki/Reference/ 
WhatIsMetaModeling.  November 2015. 
[3] M. Nadolski and J. Fairbanks, “Complex Systems Analysis of 
Hybrid Warfare,” 17th Annual Conference of Systems 
Engineering Research (CSER), Washington, DC, 2019. 
[4] Nadolski, Molly. A Sociotechnical Modeling Framework for 
Complex Systems Analysis of Gray Zone Warfare. Conflicts in 
the Gray Zone: A Challenge to Adapt. Budapest, Hungary, 2017. 
[5] J. G. Geraldi and G. Adlbrecht, “On faith, fact and interaction in 
projects,” Project Management Journal, 38 (1), pp. 32-43, 2007. 
[6] W. B. Rouse & D. Bodner, Multi-level modeling of complex 
socio-technical systems – phase 1, A013 - final technical report, 
SERC-2013-TR-020-2, Systems Engineering Research Center. 
[7]  W. B. Rouse & M. Pennock, Multi-level modeling of socio-
technical systems a013 - final technical report, SERC-2013-TR-
020-3, Systems Engineering Research Center.   
[8] Boulton, J., Allen, P., & Bowman, C. 2015. Embracing 
complexity: strategic perspectives for an age of turbulence. 
Oxford University Press. 
[9] Snowden, D. 2002. Complex acts of knowing: paradox and 
descriptive self-awareness. Journal of Knowledge Management, 
6 (2), 100-111. May 2002. 
[10] Sauser, B., & Boardman, J. (2013). Systemic thinking: Building 
maps for worlds of systems. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell. 
[11] Conflict and Mediation Event Observations Event and Actor 
Codebook [Scholarly project]. (2012, March).  GDELT Project. 
Retrieved 
from 
http://data.gdeltproject.org/documentation/ 
CAMEO.Manual.1.1b3.pdf 
 
Month 
0 
1 
2 
3 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
13 
201612 
25 
6 
44 
13 
2 
50 
43 
2515 
5437 
54 
201701 
49 
58 
37 
58 
6 
231 
115 
7856 
9861 
182 
201702 
24 
57 
25 
18 
2 
317 
161 
6909 
10616 
122 
201703 
44 
49 
35 
37 
1 
244 
173 
6558 
11034 
176 
201704 
19 
20 
10 
31 
4 
177 
112 
5318 
10403 
172 
201705 
28 
29 
11 
24 
 
170 
82 
5900 
7729 
122 
201707 
44 
72 
39 
80 
 
171 
202 
6452 
11060 
676 
201708 
44 
63 
23 
53 
 
113 
97 
3303 
6540 
346 
201709 
51 
60 
15 
26 
 
221 
120 
3504 
6625 
142 
201710 
18 
34 
6 
11 
1 
173 
82 
2577 
4048 
34 
201711 
13 
34 
6 
26 
3 
165 
123 
3620 
7635 
76 
201712 
25 
12 
22 
7 
2 
199 
106 
4956 
8776 
8 
201801 
12 
16 
10 
10 
4 
183 
119 
3888 
5548 
64 
201802 
15 
15 
20 
16 
 
146 
152 
4850 
6646 
42 
201803 
10 
4 
17 
11 
 
296 
186 
6193 
10409 
50 
201804 
10 
8 
19 
8 
1 
193 
120 
4513 
8186 
80 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

