Modeling User Behavior in Social Media with Complex Agents
Jan Ole Berndt, Stephanie C. Rodermund, Fabian Lorig, Ingo J. Timm
TriLabS @ CIRT, Business Informatics 1
Trier University
54296 Trier, Germany
Email: [berndt,s4strode,lorigf,itimm]@uni-trier.de
Abstract—Social media like Facebook, Twitter, or Google+ have
become predominant means of communication. However, their
distributed structure and dynamic interaction processes make it
difﬁcult to analyze and understand that communication. Thus, we
propose agent-based modeling and simulation of user behavior for
analyzing communication dynamics in social media. We develop
an agent decision-making method that models motivations of
media users and their impact on behavior by means of social actor
types. Moreover, we apply this model to Twitter communication
accompanying a German television program. Our evaluation
shows that different actor constellations within a population of
agents drastically impact the dynamics of this communication.
Keywords–Agent-Based Modeling; Social Actor Types; Social
Media Analysis; User Behavior; Social Simulation.
I.
INTRODUCTION
One of the most noticeable advances of this century is the
omnipresence of information and communications technology.
The establishment of computer systems in our daily life and the
connection of private households to the Internet has initiated
and still promotes the digital revolution [1]. In particular,
social media like Facebook, Twitter, or Google+ have become
predominant means of communication for both private and
professional users. They are widely used for various purposes,
ranging from casual smalltalk to commercial marketing cam-
paigns and the shaping of political opinion [2] [3].
Understanding these communication processes is important
in both commerce and politics to derive communication strate-
gies for social media. For example, marketing campaigns can
reach a vast target audience through viral communication dy-
namics [4]. However, if the same dynamics distributes negative
opinions, emerging mass criticism can endanger a company’s
commercial success. Therefore, it is crucial to anticipate likely
reactions of social media users to such campaigns to avoid
unintended effects or to develop appropriate counter strategies
to those effects [5].
Nonetheless, the inherent distribution of social media and
the dynamics of user interactions therein make it difﬁcult to
analyze and understand that kind of communication. Thus,
manual analysis has been complemented with computational
linguistics, data mining, and simulation methods [6]. These
methods help recognize conversation topics, discern user com-
munities, and model information diffusion in social networks.
Especially agent-based social simulations [7] are a promis-
ing technique for understanding complex dynamics of inter-
related communication activities. They model behaviors of
humans by means of artiﬁcial agents in order to explore
the effects of different social actor constellations and various
situations in an experimental environment. For instance, viral
dynamics of mass phenomena in social media like the harlem
shake [8] can be reproduced by using artiﬁcial agents for
representing media users [9]. Each agent can react to other
agents’ communication activities in a simulated media environ-
ment. This interaction leads to complex dynamics. Exploring
various user constellations and agent decisions in a controlled
experiment helps understand these dynamics in real world
social media.
However, agent-based simulation for social media analysis
requires a model of user motivations and resulting behaviors
to yield realistic results. Agents must be complex enough to
explain why particular communication processes emerge and
which effects potential reactions to them will provoke. Thus, in
this paper, we develop an agent-based model of user behavior
for analyzing communication dynamics in social media. This
is a ﬁrst step toward a simulation-based decision-support
method for developing and testing social media communication
strategies as proposed by Berndt et al. [5].
The paper is structured as follows. Section II provides an
overview of the foundations of social media analysis, social
actor theory, and agent-based modeling as a technique for
dynamic analysis. Subsequently, Section III describes our con-
cept of complex agents for modeling user behavior. This con-
cept covers individual social actors, their respective decision-
making, as well as populations of media users. Section IV
applies that concept to communication processes on Twitter
which accompany a German television program. In Section V,
we evaluate our model by simulating user behaviors in that
scenario. Finally, Section VI concludes on our ﬁndings and
gives an outlook on possible future work.
II.
FOUNDATIONS
To analyze, model, and simulate user behavior in social
media, it is necessary to understand communication processes
within those media. These processes depend on the under-
lying platforms that structure possible communication, the
observable communicative activities, as well as the social
actors performing these activities. Thus, the following sections
discuss approaches and theories for analyzing and modeling
these aspects. In addition, we give an overview of the state of
research in agent-based modeling of human behavior to pro-
vide a foundation for our approach to user behavior analysis.
A. Social Media
Social media structure communication processes by provid-
ing options to their users to connect with each other. In terms
of graph theory, such a structure can be described by a set
of users (nodes) and relationships between the users (edges)
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[10]. Graphs can be unidirectional, deﬁning the direction of
the relationship, or bidirectional, connecting two nodes without
providing information regarding that direction.
For instance, the online social network Twitter can be mod-
eled as a directed graph. In contrast to most other platforms,
which consist of bidirectional relationships between users, a
distinction between followers and followees is made on Twitter.
That is, a user actively and voluntarily decides which other
users to follow for receiving their status updates. Following
another Twitter participant makes the following user become
a follower. However, a followee, i.e., the user being followed,
does not need to follow his or her followers.
When analyzing the structure of social media, a typical task
is to identify and assess the importance of the most inﬂuential
users by means of centrality measures [11]. The degree of
centrality corresponds to the total number of edges a node
has. Hence, it is a measure of a node’s interconnectedness in a
graph. Nodes having a high degree (compared to other nodes)
act as hubs for information diffusion within a social network.
By contrast, a graph’s density denotes the interconnected-
ness of an entire network. It is used for comparing different
network structures and their impact on information propaga-
tion. The density is deﬁned by the ratio of the number of
existing edges and the maximum number of edges in case
every pair of nodes would be connected by an edge (complete
graph).
B. Communication
Human communication can be considered as a sequence
of actions by individuals, where the behavior of a sender
inﬂuences the behavior of a receiver [12]. The sender uses
a set of characters to encode a message, which is transmitted
using an information medium. The receiver uses an own set
of characters to decode and interpret the message and returns
a feedback using the same mechanism [13]. The formulation
and transmission of messages by the sender as well as the
corresponding reaction by the receiver form the communicative
activities available to users of social media.
However, the shift of communication into technical media
is accompanied by a loss of information. The transmission of
messages is ensured, yet, the receiver does not know whether a
message was interpreted correctly. On Twitter, communication
results can only be returned by replying to a Tweet using
another Tweet. Consequently, conversations are formed as
sequences of messages which refer to or forward previous ones
[14]. To that end, Twitter provides mechanisms for replying to
other tweets and for addressing a tweet to a certain person.
Using the @-symbol followed by the name of a user or by
putting the preﬁx “RT” (retweet) at the beginning of a tweet,
the identiﬁcation of dialogs or conversations is supported.
In addition to the structuring of dialogs, Twitter users can
use another operator for classifying the content of a message.
The content provides information about the intention as well
as the context of communication. On Twitter, the #-symbol
(hashtag) is used for categorizing messages and for marking
keywords. This simpliﬁes ﬁltering Tweets according to certain
topics, which makes this kind of communication easily acces-
sible to media studies and communication research. In fact,
Twitter has been widely used for conducting studies of certain
subjects or events, e.g., spread of news and criticism [15] [6],
the activity of diseases [16], or political communication [3].
C. Social Actors
Communication is inherently social. In fact, sociality can
be considered to consist entirely of communication [17]. Social
systems emerge from interconnected communicative activities
being selected by social actors. Those actors are inﬂuenced by
an observed social situation. They decide about their reactions
to that situation. This results in observable behaviors that lead
to a new situation in effect (Figure 1). For example, a user can
observe an ongoing conversation about a speciﬁc topic (1). She
may decide to utter a controversial opinion about that topic (2).
Her utterance becomes observable to other users in the form
of her respective Tweet (3). This changes the conversation
and provokes further reactions. Thus, the conversation on the
macro-social level (4) both inﬂuences individual behaviors and
emerges from them on the micro-social level.
Macro-sociallevel
Micro-social level
1
2
3
4
Situation
Actor
Behavior
Effect
Figure 1. Emergence of macro-social effects from micro-social behavior [18].
There are several analyses of user behavior in social
media available. For instance, activity frequencies on Twitter
(i.e., Tweets, Responses, Retweets) have been related to user
attributes and traits such as gender, age, region and political
opinion [19]. While such an analysis reveals how social media
users interact with each other, it cannot explain why they do
it. To answer that question, other studies cover motivations
for communication. These motivations can be categorized into
groups like smalltalk, entertainment, or information and news
sharing [20]. Additionally, they can be derived from psycho-
logical personality traits [9] [21]. Such approaches provide
valuable insights into the decision-making process of social
actors in diverse situations ranging from casual comments on
a television series [22] to crisis communication [23].
In addition to social media speciﬁc and psychologically
founded motivational categories, there are also theories of
actor behavior in sociology. Sociologists distinguish between
four basic social actor types which differ in their behavior
[24]. Firstly, the homo economicus is a rational decision-maker
who strives to maximize her personal utility. Such an actor
attempts to reach personal goals as efﬁciently as possible.
Secondly, the homo sociologicus obeys social norms and
obligations. This actor type tries to conform with expectations
to avoid negative sanctions. Thirdly, the emotional man is
driven by uncontrollable emotions such as love, anger, respect,
or disgust. This leads to affective behavior in response to, e.g.,
unfulﬁlled expectations [25]. Finally, the identity keeper has
the goal to establish and maintain a desired social role. Such
an actor seeks social acknowledgment by provoking positive
reactions toward stereotypical behaviors. In the remainder of
this paper, we will show how these actor types can be applied
to agent-based modeling of user behavior in social media.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

D. Related Work: Agent-Based Modeling of Human Behavior
As discussed in the preceding section, communication
processes in social media emerge from individual activities of
the participating users. For investigating emergent phenomena,
agent-based modeling has been established as a standard
means. Artiﬁcial agents are capable of decision-making, com-
munication, and goal-directed behavior [26]. By modeling real
world actors as software agents, individual behavior and antici-
pation of behavior on the micro level can be simulated resulting
in emergent effects on a macro level [27] [28]. In terms of
social sciences, using such actor models for simulation studies
is referred to as agent-based social simulation [7].
The majority of agent-based models in social media anal-
ysis is concerned with information propagation. They aim at
identifying a group of users which can propagate information,
i.e., a message, to as many users as possible [29]. The users
are frequently modeled as agents being connected by neigh-
borhood relations in cellular automata [30] or general network
graphs [31]. These agents often have particular behavioral rules
that ﬁre if a certain activation threshold is reached. Such a
threshold denotes the required strength of inﬂuence (e.g., a
number of received messages) on an agent until it becomes
active itself. This method is particularly relevant for planning
advertising strategies since viral marketing campaigns make
use of information propagation effects [32] [4].
While threshold models are usually investigated by means
of simulation studies, there are also analytical approaches to
agent-based modeling of opinion formation. These focus on
the interactions among agents which lead to the diffusion and
adoption of opinions in a process of compromising [33]. They
model these interactions by means of thermodynamics [34]
or the kinetic theory of gases [35]. These methods describe
the emergence of macro-social phenomena from micro-social
interactions using differential equations. This allows for ana-
lyzing the resulting opinion dynamics mathematically.
However, there is a discrepancy between these threshold
and analytical models on the one hand, and the mentioned
sociological perspectives on decision-making on the other.
While these methods describe how opinion and communication
dynamics occur in agent-based social simulations, they lack the
descriptive power to analyze why this happens. That is, they
focus on the dynamics between interacting agents and treat
the agent population as a homogeneous mass. For instance,
in kinetic theory, gas molecules behave solely according to
their current states and their mutual inﬂuences without having
individual habits. The same holds for cellular automata in
which all cells, i.e., agents, are usually homogeneous and
strongly restricted in their neighborhood relations. As a result,
the discussed approaches largely disregard modeling individual
motivations for decision-making such as described by social
actor types.
For utilizing agent-based social simulation to understand
human behavior and to develop communication strategies, it is
necessary to apply more elaborate agent decision approaches.
Agents must have individual motivations to allow for analyzing
who participates in communication processes for which reason
[5]. Since, in social media, different users react differently
to the same message, this should also be the case for ar-
tiﬁcial agents in a simulation model. In fact, a wide range
of agent decision-making architectures based on philosophy,
psychology and cognitive science is readily available [36]. In
addition, sociological theory and agent-based modeling have
been combined in the interdisciplinary ﬁeld of socionics [37].
In that context, the described social actor types can be utilized
to explain social behavior in an agent-based simulation.
Dittrich and Kron model social characters by means of
actor types and combinations between these types [24]. They
simulate the so-called “bystander dilemma” in which persons
must decide whether or not to help a victim of physical vio-
lence. In their model, agents implementing the homo sociolog-
icus and identity keeper roles feel obliged to help while homo
economicus and emotional man ﬂee the situation. Combining
these dispositions on both an individual and on a population
level leads to complex macro-social behaviors. This makes that
approach a promising candidate for a transfer to modeling user
behavior in social media as described in the following section.
III.
CONCEPT: MODELING USER BEHAVIOR
In this section, we adapt the agent-based decision-making
approach by Dittrich and Kron [24] to modeling communica-
tive user behavior in social media. That is, we model the
selection of messages about a speciﬁc topic to be published
on a social media platform within a limited time frame [38].
Figure 2. Structure of the user modeling and simulation concept.
Our modeling and simulation concept is structured as
depicted in Figure 2. Each decision-making situation receives
an input of one or more keywords to describe that situation
(e.g., a list of hashtags or abstract topic description). The
respective output consists of messages being published at the
social network platform by the population of agents. In order
to produce that output, each agent observes the situation and
calculates expected values for its potential reactions according
to its respective social actor type and depending on the
activities of other agents. It then selects its next message (or
chooses not to publish any message) with respect to these
expected values. The following sections describe the actor
types, their combinations, and the resulting agent populations.
A. Social Actor Types and Decision-Making
Besides the current situation, its social actor type deter-
mines an agent’s decision-making. To that end, we model each
type by means of a function EV that returns an expected value
for each available activity option. For a homo economicus, this
amounts to a standard utility function. Contrastingly, a homo
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

sociologicus prefers socially adequate behaviors over contro-
versial actions. Such an agent makes its behavior dependent
on contributions to a conversation by other agents. In addition,
while the identity keeper has a genuine desire to further any
kind of discussion, the emotional man only becomes active
when being emotionally affected by the situation.
All of the expected value functions should cover the same
range of values to make them comparable with each other.
That range depends on the number of available activity options
and their effects in a particular application scenario. Each
option can either have a positive, neutral, or negative effect
on an agent’s goals. For instance, a scenario with ﬁve possible
messages can be encoded through the following set of values:
{−1, 0, 1, 2, 3}. In this case, a message is either detrimental
to an agent’s goals (-1), it can be neutral towards them (0), or
it furthers its motivations to different extents (1–3). Then, the
agent can select its actions as follows.
arg max
a
EV i(s, a)
(1)
Each actor type i (i ∈ {homo economicus, homo sociolog-
icus, emotional man, identity keeper}) maximizes its expected
value for all available actions a in the current situation s. If
there are several options with the same value, an agent decides
randomly among them. This results in a speciﬁc message (i.e.,
Tweet) being selected and published at the simulated social
network platform for all other agents to observe.
Using the described value maximization approach to select
a message to be communicated leads to a restriction in the
amount of behavioral randomness. This is especially useful
for evaluating the sensitivity of the resulting emergent effects
on the population level to the agent population. Different com-
positions of agents within a population will lead to different
interactions with low variance.
In order to increase the variance of agent behaviors,
ﬂuctuating populations can be introduced. Alternatively, a
random selection of messages, weighted by their respective
expected values, can be introduced. This will then increase the
randomness on an individual instead of the population level.
However, adding this stochasticity decreases the explanatory
impact of modeling social actor types because their respective
motivations become less pronounced in the selected commu-
nication activities.
B. Actor Type Combinations and Populations
According to the preceding decision-making model, each
agent can implement one of the four available actor types.
However, these are only prototypical examples for categorizing
motivations. In fact, an actor’s social disposition will often be
more adequately described by a mixture of several basic moti-
vations [24]. Consequently, we allow for combinations of actor
types within individual agents to represent that phenomenon.
For mixing several actor types, each agent is deﬁned by
four weights wi, one for each actor type i, with P
i wi = 1.
The weights denote the ratio with which those types contribute
to its decision-making. Then, an agent with mixed types selects
its activities by maximizing the weighted sum of the respective
expected values (with a randomized selection in case of several
maxima).
arg max
a
X
i
EV i(s, a) wi
(2)
In addition to combining actor types within an individual
agent, it is also possible to mix different agents within the
overall agent population. That is, a population can either
consist of homogeneous agents that all implement the same
actor type combination, or it can comprise different agents.
Homogeneous populations are particularly useful for model
validation and calibration. They make the effects of different
value functions easily observable and adjustable. Contrastingly,
heterogeneous populations are more realistic. They lead to
complex interaction dynamics which are necessary for replicat-
ing and explaining user behaviors in social media as described
in the following sections.
IV.
APPLICATION: AGENT-BASED ANALYSIS OF SOCIAL
MEDIA COMMUNICATION
In this section, we apply our agent-based modeling concept
to an analysis of user behavior in communication processes on
Twitter. In particular, we model live-tweeting behavior during
an episode of the German television series “Tatort” (meaning
crime scene). Running since 1970, “Tatort” is the most popular
German TV series, which attracts a broad audience across all
social groups, genders, and ages. We use a dataset of Tweets
about the episode “Alle meine Jungs” (all my boys), of 18
May 2014. The dataset contains eight distinct phases of very
high or very low Twitter activity which correspond to speciﬁc
scenes of the episode. These scenes provide the situation for
the agents in our model to react to. Each of them is described
by one or more out of ﬁve attributes as shown in Table I.
TABLE I. SITUATION DESCRIPTIONS.
Scene
Description
0
thrilling
1
funny, music-related
2
funny, music-related
3
funny, music-related
Scene
Description
4
funny
5
thrilling, emotional
6
thrilling
7
judgmental
In our model, the agents can act repeatedly during each
scene. At the beginning of a scene, they base their actions
only on the respective description; subsequently, they can also
react to other agents’ Tweets. Thus, a dynamic communica-
tion system emerges from these interrelated activities. In the
following, we describe the available actions and the decision-
making of the four actor types in these situations.
A. Agent Activity Options
The Tweets in our dataset can be classiﬁed by their
sentiment and tonality along two different dimensions. They
are either positive or negative and they are either joking or
not joking (i.e., serious). The possible combinations of these
categories result in four different message types available to
the agents. However, since not all users reply to every message,
an agent also has the option not to tweet. Nevertheless, it can
still decide to participate in the conversation about the current
scene at a later time after observing Tweets by other agents.
This results in the following ﬁve activity options for the agents.
1)
No Tweet
2)
Tweet – positive – joking
3)
Tweet – positive – not joking
4)
Tweet – negative – joking
5)
Tweet – negative – not joking
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Which of these options an agent selects at which time
depends on its underlying combination of actor types, as
well as on the activities of other agents as described in the
following.
B. Agent Decision-Making
In our application example, the actor types deﬁning the
agents’ decision-making represent typical behavioral roles and
motivations in social media communication. These include the
maximization of publicity, a desire for serious discussion, the
expression of anger, as well as genuine content production.
These motivations are represented by the homo economicus,
homo sociologicus, emotional man, and identity keeper, re-
spectively. For all actor types, we evaluate the available activity
options with respect to those motivations in each situation in
order to identify expected values for the agents’ decisions [39].
Table II summarizes the criteria and values for that evaluation.
TABLE II. DECISION-MAKING BY SOCIAL ACTOR TYPES.
Homo Economicus
Homo Sociologicus
Emotional Man
Identity Keeper
No Tweet (0)
Must (3)
Unchanged (0)
Strengthened (3)
Utility function
Should (2)
Increased (-1)
Weakened (-1)
(0 to 3)
Can (1)
Decreased (2)
Conversation size
Should not (-1)
Strongly
threshold (-1)
decreased (3)
In social media communication, a homo economicus agent
attempts to maximize the impact of its contributions on the
conversation. Such an agent gains the highest utility by pro-
voking agreement with as many other agents as possible. Thus,
its underlying utility function anticipates probable majority
opinions. Actions supporting these are rated higher than less
popular or even controversial contributions according to the
distribution of actions in the original dataset. This agent
type will maintain its ratings during an actual conversation
regardless of other agents’ behaviors.
In addition, we use a threshold of a minimal number of
Tweets by other agents for this type of agent to become active
itself. This threshold equals to the mean number of Tweets
across all scenes (24 in the dataset). Until the threshold is
reached, an agent will not participate in the conversation,
leaving its utility unchanged. Thus, the homo economicus
represents a casual media user who only joins ongoing con-
versations to represent common sense opinions shared by the
expected majority of recipients.
Contrastingly, a homo sociologicus agent rates the available
actions according to general social norms as well as other
agents’ behaviors. With respect to the scene description, its
expected value function evaluates these options by their per-
ceived strength of obligation. For instance, an agent should
not joke about an emotional scene. However, if the majority
of other agents has deviated from such norms before, the homo
sociologicus will mimic these previously observed activities in
order to gain acceptance by other agents. Hence, that type of
agent represents a both morally concerned and opportunistic
user who joins the dominant group as soon as one emerges.
This behavior is typical, e.g., in massive online protests [6].
The emotional man, on the other hand, represents an
outright dissatisﬁed and angry user. Such an agent strives to
express that anger. This leads to predominantly negative and
sometimes sarcastic (i.e., joking) contributions. By publishing
negative Tweets, the agent decreases its anger until it no longer
feels the need to communicate. Consequently, that behavior
produces isolated criticism without any intention of engaging
in an actual discussion.
Finally, the identity keeper is a genuine content producer.
This type of agent has the goal of bringing forward any kind of
discussion in order to maintain its participation in it. That is,
the agent can strengthen its identity by providing arguments for
other agents to react to. For that purpose, any kind of Tweet can
be appropriate, especially controversial ones if they provoke
reactions. Only remaining inactive weakens that identity. As
a result, the identity keeper represents a user who enjoys a
conversation for the sake of the conversation and who ensures
a certain diversity of perspectives on the discussed topic.
By combining the described actor type models within indi-
vidual agents, it is possible to represent mixed motivations and
to implement a wide variety of decision behaviors. Moreover,
heterogeneous populations of different agent types will lead to
complex interactions of these behaviors. The following section
evaluates these effects.
V.
EVALUATION: SIMULATION OF USER BEHAVIOR
As a proof of concept for our agent-based modeling ap-
proach, we have implemented the aforementioned agent types
and decision-making algorithms in a JAVA program. In the
following, we use that program to simulate user behaviors
emerging from different populations of various agents. Such
a simulation gives a ﬁrst impression of the range of effects
that the model can (re)-produce. In particular, it allows for
analyzing the interplay between several actor types on both
the individual and the population level.
In our simulation, we compare two different settings. The
ﬁrst one consists of a homogeneous agent population with
mixed actor types. That is, each agent combines all four
types with equal weights. By contrast, the second setting
comprises a heterogeneous agent population in which every
agent implements one of the four basic actor types. Throughout
the population, these agents are uniformly distributed. They
communicate about all eight scenes. Their respective activity
choices depend on the situation description for those scenes as
well as on the previous actions of other agents.
For both settings, the population size is set to 164 agents
that can join the conversation in each scene (as in the real
world dataset). This number is relevant as long as the homo
economicus uses a ﬁxed conversation size threshold. The more
agents there are, the sooner will a homo economicus impact the
communication dynamics. While the threshold can be scaled
up or down according to the population size, we use the
realistic one to enable comparisons of our simulation results
with that dataset in future studies.
Figure 3 shows the arithmetic mean of our evaluation
results together with the respective standard deviations out
of 100 simulation repetitions (except for the “No Tweet”
option). For the homogeneous population, the results show a
majority of negative not joking Tweets. This is due to the fact
that both identity keeper and homo economicus consider this
activity as adequate. Moreover, the emotional man favors it
over all others. Combining these within the agents leads to
the observed uniformity which even becomes ampliﬁed as the
homo sociologicus imitates dominant behaviors. Only scene
4 leads to negative as well as positive Tweets. That scene is
described as being funny. Hence, the positive actions favored
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

0
20
40
60
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Scene
Frequency
Action
Negative joking
Negative not joking
Positive joking
Positive not joking
Homogeneous population, mixed agents
0
10
20
30
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Scene
Frequency
Heterogeneous population, basic agents
Figure 3. Activity frequencies of a homogeneous population of mixed actors (left) and a heterogeneous population of basic actor types (right).
by all other actor types override the negative option selected
by the emotional man.
Contrastingly, the heterogeneous population leads to more
diverse behavior. In that case, negative Tweets are still preva-
lent for most scenes. This is caused by the same effects
as described: The homo sociologicus ampliﬁes the behavior
being initially driven by the other actor types, particularly
the emotional man. However, since these agent types act
simultaneously in a mixed population, all other actions are also
observable. This leads to realistic effects, such as decisions not
to tweet at all in scenes being described as thrilling.
Overall, these results show that the combination of ac-
tor types both within individual agents and their mixing in
heterogeneous populations drastically impacts the emergent
dynamics of simulated social media communication. This
demonstrates that modeling motivations of individual agents
can produce behavioral heterogeneity, which other models have
to introduce artiﬁcially, e.g., by means of random noise [35].
In contrast to those approaches, we can directly control which
type of agent reacts to which particular communicative situa-
tion in what manner. The composition of an agent population
then models the afﬁnity or aversion of a user group in social
media to certain topics, opinions, and communication styles.
Hence, we conclude that our model adds this composition of
populations as an important variable to existing methods for
studying information diffusion in social simulations.
However, it is important to select and calibrate the agent
types carefully for such a simulation to yield meaningful
results for understanding user behavior. To that end, it is nec-
essary to analyze available real world data and identify typical
activity patterns [6]. Then, potential underlying motivations
can be derived from those observations in order to deﬁne the
required actor types and their combinations [9] [21]. With this
work, we have shown how such actor types can be modeled
for exploring user behavior in agent-based social simulations.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have developed an agent-based model
of user behavior in social media. This model facilitates dy-
namic analyses of complex communication processes which
are difﬁcult to assess by means of conventional approaches.
In such a context, agent-based social simulations allow for
experimentally exploring emergent behaviors [6].
Our model focuses primarily on the decision-making of
social actors communicating about a speciﬁc topic. This is
in contrast to existing work on information diffusion, which
analyzes the impacts of social network structures on the spread
of messages. Instead, we have modeled motivational causes for
user behaviors by utilizing complex agents based on sociolog-
ical theory. To that end, we have presented a general concept
for representing and combining four different actor types in
agent-based social simulations. In addition, we have applied
this concept to model and analyze Twitter communication
about a German television program. Our evaluation shows that
particular combinations of different motivations either within
individual agents or across an entire population drastically
impact communication dynamics. Therefore, we conclude that
it is crucial to consider these motivations carefully in order to
realistically model and explain user behavior in social media.
While our model provides a promising ﬁrst step to agent-
based simulations of social media usage, there are several
extensions we consider for future work. Firstly, we are working
on calibrating the model to accurately imitate the user inter-
actions observed in our real world example. This will provide
insight into the achievable realism when combining the four
basic actor types into complex agents and populations. As a
ﬁrst result, we have already demonstrated that our model is
indeed capable of reproducing the communication activities of
real world users [39].
Secondly, it would be interesting to integrate the agent de-
cision method with existing information diffusion approaches
[29]. This will complement those methods with motivational
aspects of why information is spread within a social network.
In that context, the population composition will provide an ad-
ditional variable which impacts communication dynamics. The
various actor types can then produce behavioral heterogeneity
on a more detailed and explanatory deeper level than the
addition of abstract random noise to an equational modeling
approach [35].
Finally, it will also be necessary to model the activity
options for the agents in more detail. This covers particularly
the message contents. In order to simulate, e.g., the shaping of
opinions in political discourses, a classiﬁcation of communi-
cation contents and their impact on the interaction is required.
To achieve this, we plan to utilize content modeling and
annotation techniques from media and communication studies
[40] for encoding discourses in agent-based social simulations.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to thank Carla Schmidt, Christof Barth, and
Hans-J¨urgen Bucher for providing us with real world data and
a media studies perspective on our application example.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

REFERENCES
[1]
W. R. Neuman, Y. Park, and E. Panek, “Tracking the Flow of In-
formation into the Home: An Empirical Assessment of the Digital
Revolution in the United States, 1960-2005,” International Journal of
Communication, vol. 6, 2012, pp. 1022–1041.
[2]
J. Kirby, Connected marketing: the viral, buzz and word of mouth
revolution.
Amsterdam: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2010.
[3]
A. Maireder and S. Schl¨ogl, “24 hours of an# outcry: The networked
publics of a socio-political debate,” European Journal of Communica-
tion, 2014, pp. 1–16.
[4]
D. Kempe, J. M. Kleinberg, and ´E. Tardos, “Maximizing the spread
of inﬂuence through a social network.” Theory of Computing, vol. 11,
no. 4, 2015, pp. 105–147.
[5]
J. O. Berndt, F. Lorig, I. J. Timm, C. Barth, and H.-J. Bucher,
“A systematic approach to agent-based dynamic analysis of social
media communication,” International Journal On Advances in Internet
Technology, vol. 10, no. 1&2, to appear 2017.
[6]
I. J. Timm, J. O. Berndt, F. Lorig, C. Barth, and H.-J. Bucher,
“Dynamic analysis of communication processes using twitter data,” in
2nd International Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO
2016).
IARIA, 2016, pp. 14–22.
[7]
P. Davidsson, “Agent based social simulation: A computer science
view,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 5, no. 1,
2002.
[8]
J. Bollen, H. Mao, and A. Pepe, “Modeling public mood and emotion:
Twitter sentiment and socio-economic phenomena.” in 5th International
AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media, 2011, pp. 450–453.
[9]
F. Lorig and I. J. Timm, “How to model the human factor for agent-
based simulation in social media analysis?” in 2014 ADS Symposium
(part of SpringSim multiconference).
SCS, 2014, p. 12.
[10]
F. Vega-Redondo, Complex Social Networks.
Cambridge University
Press Cambridge, MA, 2007.
[11]
L. C. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual clariﬁcation,”
Social networks, vol. 1, no. 3, 1978, pp. 215–239.
[12]
C. R. Berger, “Interpersonal communication,” The International Ency-
clopedia of Communication, 2008.
[13]
C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” ACM
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 5,
no. 1, 2001, pp. 3–55.
[14]
D. Boyd, S. Golder, and G. Lotan, “Tweet, tweet, retweet: Conversa-
tional aspects of retweeting on twitter,” in 43rd Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS).
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–10.
[15]
K. Lerman and R. Ghosh, “Information contagion: An empirical study
of the spread of news on digg and twitter social networks.” ICWSM,
vol. 10, 2010, pp. 90–97.
[16]
A. Signorini, A. M. Segre, and P. M. Polgreen, “The use of twitter to
track levels of disease activity and public concern in the us during the
inﬂuenza a h1n1 pandemic,” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 5, 2011, p. e19467.
[17]
N. Luhmann, Social Systems.
Stanford, USA: Stanford University
Press, 1995.
[18]
P. Hedstr¨om and P. Ylikoski, “Causal mechanisms in the social sci-
ences,” Annual Review of Sociology, vol. 36, 2010, pp. 49–67.
[19]
D. Rao, D. Yarowsky, A. Shreevats, and M. Gupta, “Classifying latent
user attributes in twitter,” in 2nd international workshop on Search and
mining user-generated contents.
ACM, 2010, pp. 37–44.
[20]
A. Java, X. Song, T. Finin, and B. Tseng, “Why we twitter: understand-
ing microblogging usage and communities,” in 9th WebKDD and 1st
SNA-KDD 2007 workshop on Web mining and social network analysis.
ACM, 2007, pp. 56–65.
[21]
S. Vandenhoven and O. De Clercq, “What does the bird say? exploring
the link between personality and language use in dutch tweets,” in 2nd
International Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO 2016).
IARIA, 2016, pp. 38–42.
[22]
S. Schirra, H. Sun, and F. Bentley, “Together alone: motivations for
live-tweeting a television series,” in 32nd annual ACM conference on
Human factors in computing systems.
ACM, 2014, pp. 2441–2450.
[23]
V. Hoste, C. Van Hee, and K. Poels, “Towards a framework for the
automatic detection of crisis emotions on social media : a corpus
analysis of the tweets posted after the crash of germanwings ﬂight
9525,” in 2nd International Conference on Human and Social Analytics
(HUSO 2016), 2016, pp. 29–32.
[24]
P. Dittrich and T. Kron, “Complex reﬂexive agents as models of
social actors,” in Proceedings of the SICE Workshop on Artiﬁcial
Society/Organization/Economy, ser. Meeting of Systems Engineering,
vol. 25, Tokyo, 2002, pp. 79–88.
[25]
H. Flam, “Emotionalman’: I. the emotionalman’and the problem of
collective action,” International Sociology, vol. 5, no. 1, 1990, pp. 39–
56.
[26]
M. Wooldridge and N. R. Jennings, “Agent theories, architectures, and
languages: a survey,” in International Workshop on Agent Theories,
Architectures, and Languages.
Springer, 1994, pp. 1–39.
[27]
E. Bonabeau, “Agent-based modeling: Methods and techniques for
simulating human systems,” Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, vol. 99, no. suppl 3, 2002, pp. 7280–7287.
[28]
J. O. Berndt and O. Herzog, “Anticipatory behavior of software agents
in self-organizing negotiations,” in Anticipation Across Disciplines.
Springer, 2016, pp. 231–253.
[29]
C. Zhang, J. Sun, and K. Wang, “Information propagation in microblog
networks,” in 2013 IEEE/ACM international conference on advances in
social networks analysis and mining.
ACM, 2013, pp. 190–196.
[30]
M. S. and B. F., “A stochastic model of self-stabilizing cellular automata
for consensus formation,” in 15th Workshop Dagli Oggetti agli Agenti
(WOA 2014), Catania, 2014.
[31]
A. Tsang and K. Larson, “Opinion dynamics of skeptical agents,”
in International conference on Autonomous agents and multi-agent
systems (AAMAS 2014), 2014, pp. 277–284.
[32]
W. Chen, Y. Wang, and S. Yang, “Efﬁcient inﬂuence maximization in
social networks,” in 15th ACM SIGKDD international conference on
Knowledge discovery and data mining.
ACM, 2009, pp. 199–208.
[33]
S. Monica and F. Bergenti, “Opinion dynamics in multi-agent systems:
selected analytic models and verifying simulations,” Computational and
Mathematical Organization Theory, 2016, pp. 1–28.
[34]
F. Schweitzer and J. A. Hołyst, “Modelling collective opinion formation
by means of active brownian particles,” The European Physical Journal
B-Condensed Matter and Complex Systems, vol. 15, no. 4, 2000, pp.
723–732.
[35]
S. Monica and F. Bergenti, “An analytic study of opinion dynamics
in multi-agent systems with additive random noise,” in AI* IA 2016
Advances in Artiﬁcial Intelligence.
Springer, 2016, pp. 105–117.
[36]
T. Balke and N. Gilbert, “How do agents make decisions? a survey,”
Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 17, no. 4,
2014.
[37]
K. Fischer, M. Florian, and T. Malsch, Socionics: scalability of complex
social systems.
Berlin: Springer, 2005.
[38]
R. Belkaroui, R. Faiz, and A. Elkhliﬁ, “Conversation analysis on social
networking sites,” in 2014 Tenth International Conference on Signal-
Image Technology and Internet-Based Systems (SITIS).
IEEE, 2014,
pp. 172–178.
[39]
S. C. Rodermund, F. Lorig, J. O. Berndt, and I. J. Timm, “An agent
architecture for simulating communication dynamics in social media,” in
15th German Conference on Multiagent System Technologies (MATES
2017).
Berlin: Springer, to apper 2017.
[40]
K. A. Neuendorf, The content analysis guidebook.
Sage, 2016.
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

