Digital Disqualification, Digital Suffering, Digital Reliance
The Case of French Retired People over Sixty Years Old
Eloria Vigouroux-Zugasti
Laboratory of DICEN IDF 
University of Paris-East Marne-la-Vallée
Val d’Europe / Serris, France
Email: eloria.vigouroux-zugasti@u-pem.fr
Christian Bourret
Laboratory of DICEN IDF 
University of Paris-East Marne-la-Vallée
Val d’Europe / Serris, France
Email: christian.bourret@u-pem.fr
Abstract—  Occidental  society  tends  to  be  increasingly
dependent  on  digital  technologies,  even  for  basic  activities
(socialization, work, administrative tasks, etc.). For instance,
since 2016 in France, the tax return must be submitted online.
However, does  this  evolution  consider  those  who  lack  the
required  capacity?  How  to  measure the  digital  divide?  To
explore this issue, we study the case of older adults with low
technological knowledge and skills. This population presents
more  difficulties  in  using  digital  devices  than  the  young
generation because of the effect of digital divides and the lack
of digital literacy. This situation has the potential to produce
some (digital) suffering, making this population feel outdated
and excluded from the social entity.
Keywords:  Elderly;  retired  people;  digital  technologies;
suffering; emotional behaviour; social challenges; loneliness;
reliance.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Older people have to suffer from a denial of recognition
from the rest of society. They do not meet the standards
currently required by contemporary society. The phenomenon
of ageism, a kind of stereotypes attached to older people [1],
reflects  a  negative  image  of  the  retired  population  and
emphasizes the discourses encompassed the value of eternal
youth.  This  population  suffers  from  common  negative
representations, referring to a certain contempt and denial of
recognition from the rest of society [2].
In parallel to this denial, we observe the evolution of the
digital sphere and its related capacities, with the impetus of
thousands  of  users  who  define  social  codes  that  use
technologies.  The  digital  sphere  tends  to  become  a
community space with its own rules, obligations and social
recognition systems, enabling users to join in a system of
social relationships [3]. To gain recognition and full social
identity, web surfers must match their use of technology with
the technical use of the online community.
The  effect  of this standardised  uses  goes beyond the
digital sphere itself. Since the 1990s, we have entered an area
dominated  by  the  Information  and  Communication
Technologies (ICTs), which are understood as a necessary
requirement for a renewed exercise of democracy, making
possible  to  break  free  from  old  hierarchies  [4].  This
“necessary requirement” reveals the phenomenon we want to
talk about. The use of digital technologies is nowadays an
implicit or explicit requirement for continuous development
within society. The conventional approaches are punctuated
by the obligation to use these technologies, such as taxes
returns, although the French State does not provide resources
to help people make a successful digital transition. Even more
worryingly, public services are gradually phased out, though
they could help people with low, or non-existent, digital
skills.  The  digital  teaching  tasks  are  mainly  devoted  to
associations, family, or friends.
It seems that retired  people show different digital uses,
influenced by historical and social contexts that may or may
not encourage the expansion of their digital skills [5]. How
can you consider yourself as a citizen, in a society whose
norms do not correspond to yours? Speaking of digital norms,
can not we talk about a kind of suffering, feeling experienced
by those who are not embedded in the actual digital mould?
By learning how to absorb social requirements, particularly in
digital terms, older people would be able to (re)integrate the
society. Incorporating the norms would be a solution for them
not to suffer from social and digital disqualification.
To answer the questions listed above, we propose a study
case.  We  conducted  an  exploratory  qualitative  research,
interviewing thirty-one elders over sixty years old, living in
the south-west of France, where the digital divide is stronger
than in other parts of this country. The region was selected for
its social, digital and economic features (repartition between
countryside  and  cities,  the  proportion  of  older  people,
territorial digital equipment, etc.), highlighting the low level
of  technological  knowledge  and  skills  of  older  adults,
resulting  on  issues  related  to  social  and  digital
disqualification.
This article will be divided into four parts. In section II,
we will explain the methodology used for our investigation.
In  section  III,  we  will  present  the  actual  social  and
technological background in western societies, related to the
elderly  social  disqualification  resulting  from  the  massive
implementation of ICTs. In section IV, we will develop the
concept of digital imperative and its effects on collective and
individual norms. Then, in section V, we will present the
consequences of these social and digital disqualifications,
namely  the  feelings  of  loneliness,  suffering,  and  digital
reliance.
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

II.
METHODOLOGICAL APPROACH
In  this  section,  we  would  like  to  specify  the
methodological  approach  we  followed,  both  in  terms  of
sampling and interviews analysis.
A.
Epistemological choices
First of all, we would like to point out the results of this
investigation  do  not  tend  to  be  excessively  generalized.
Indeed, if we seek to take some theoretical distance, from the
corpus and model concepts, we also  aware of the limited
impact of our results.
The study is based on an exploratory approach of older
people  digital  skills.  Our  purpose  is  to  grasp  the
consequences of those skills on well-being, social integration
and  self-esteem.  To  this  end,  we  choose  to  develop  a
qualitative survey. It seemed to be the most relevant way to
investigate digital skills and practices, as close as possible to
the realities of elderlies. Indeed, this kind of methodology is
in line with our research goals, as "confrontation with the
corpus is a necessary condition for the perception of social
practices" [26]. The objective is to understand the symbolic
appropriation  of  digital  technology  by  respondents,  by
placing them in specific contexts, applied in particular to
social cohesion and wellbeing.
We  did  the  survey  according  to  a  comprehensive
epistemological point of view. We sought to understand the
meaning of elderlies' digital uses.  Thus, our study aims to
grasp uses as they are perceived by the interviewed people,
as well as to grasp the meaning they are given in an everyday
life context. The comprehensive paradigm tends to place the
researcher in a position to understand his interviewed sample
as closely as possible to reality [27]. This paradigm implies a
work of empathy about one of the authors who, intends,
during an interview or analysis by putting himself in the
place of the respondent and tries to understand the world
from his own point of view.
B.
Construction and justification of the sample
The choice of the interview sample was based on two
criteria. First, we investigated territories that share the same
public policies, involving aging, health, institutional accesses
and technological mediation management. The comparative
study  of  public  policies  in  different  counties,  while
potentially interesting, is not the subject of our research. It
seemed more  coherent  to focus on users with the same
social, health and political frameworks, starting from the
postulate that can be influenced by these same frameworks.
We chose to consider all Aquitaine counties to vary the
profile of the users we interviewed. This region offers a wide
variety of living places and social aspects that allow us to
diversify the profiles of respondents. Although they are all
affected by the same public policy, we still considered the
influence of their living environment: urban, semi-urban,
rural; married, living alone, in cohabitation; from a high,
medium, low social background, etc.
The selection of a retirement sample was based on socio-
professional categories, limiting the disparity in lifestyles, by
having only people who are no longer working. 
Hereafter, we propose a summarizing table about the
criteria we used to make up the corpus.
TABLE I. 
DISTRIBUTION OF THE INTERVIEWED ELDERLIES
Criteria
Distribution
Number
%
Gender
Male
13
41,93
Female
18
58,07
Age
60-64
11
35,48
65-69
10
32,26
70-74
5
16,13
74-78
5
16,13
Living
situation
Married
21
63,63
Alone
7
21,21
With one children
3
9,09
Cohabitation with other
elderlies
1
3,03
Living
places
0 > 2 000 inhabitants 
5
15,15
2 001 > 10 000 inhab.
5
15,15
10 001 > 30 000 inhab.
6
18,18
30 001 > 60 000 inhab.
6
18,18
60 001 > 100 000 inhab.
5
15,15
> 100 001 inhab.
4
12,12
Counties
Dordogne
4
12,9
Gironde
14
45,17
Landes
4
12,9
Lot-et-Garonne
3
9,68
Pyrénées-Atlantiques
7
19,35
Socio-
professional
background
Wealthy class
10
32,27
Middle class
10
32,27
Working class
11
35,48
C.
Interview chart and analysis
In order to provide some details about our investigation
without  losing  the  reader  in  too  many  information,  we
recommend explaining three of the themes we explored,
which related to our article. First, we examined the impact of
generational  belonging  on  the  evolution  of  digital  uses,
questioning the time when respondents started using digital
technologies and the role of relatives in digital learning.
Then, we explore the ability of the Internet to respond to
social expectations, such as biographical break or projection
and daily-life restructuring. The third theme is devoted to
understanding  the  subject  of  social  recognition  through
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

online uses and digital skills. The goal of these themes,
questions and topics, was to investigate the ability of digital
technologies to support the social inclusion of retired people
and to verify converging / diverging phenomena, according
to the criteria we chose for the survey. To keep it concise and
consistent, we will focus, in this article, on the most relevant
results.
To analyze these results, we assume that speeches are
performative, that speeches build meaning. It induces actions
and implies consequences in the real world. Analyzing a
discourse is trying to grasp and to identify the actions it
involves. The enunciation, through its elaboration, influences
and transforms the world. We so analyzed the interviews,
considering that everyone, during the production of a speech,
develops  some  special  meaning  [28].  This  perspective
corresponds to a discourse design that is appropriate for this
survey. The idea that speech is an act is at the heart of our
study, as we will see in the analysis chapters.
III.
SOCIAL EXCLUSION: SOCIO-ECONOMIC ISSUES FOR
ELDERLY
Digital technologies are seen as a potential for innovation
to transform communities’ lifestyle by influencing the way
people  live  together. It  seems  that  technology  improves
people’s ability to act by expanding the panel of information
resources and networked communication [6]. Not being a
user of digital technologies, or more broadly of ICTs, is now
a  factor  of  exclusion  and  disqualification.  Indeed,  in  a
continually increasing digital civilization, the individual who
is not equipped, or who does not know how to use these
platforms,  sees  his  capacity  for  action,  knowledge  and
integration significantly reduced.
Connectivity appears to be a hot issue for those who want
to take full advantage of their social abilities, concerning,
particularly,  intergenerational  relations  or  institutional
changes.  The  requirement  to  file  the  tax  return  on  the
Internet,  for  example,  is  representative  of  a  numerical
disqualification  factor.  In  2016,  in  France,  it  became
mandatory, for the first tranche of taxpayers, to file their
returns online. However, the institutional tends, by 2019, to
get each taxpayer to do the online tax return, under penalty
of  having  to  pay  a  lump  sum  fine.  This  revision  of
declaration completion is less vital than what it implies:
people who are not connected to the Internet or who do not
have sufficient knowledge will be, in a few years, illegal.
A.
Elders and digital dependency
The  evolution  of  French  social  context  towards  an
increasingly digital dependency appears to be a factor of
social disqualification. This is reflected in the development
of e-inclusion policies, such as in Switzerland or through
projects, proposed by certain several clusters specializing in
digital technology, such as Cluster Health ICTs in Aquitaine,
in France. The “e-” brings back to electronic literacy and,
more  broadly,  to  digital  culture.  The  term  “inclusion”
highlights the fracture lines, due to the digital divide, both on
the technical and uses aspects. This institutional evolution is
linked with the recognition of the right, developed by Axel
Honneth.  “If  some  people  rights  [...]  are  denied,  this
implicitly means that they are not recognized to the same
degree of moral respectability as other members of society”
[2]. However, with the current digital transition, institutions
are changing the notion of “right”.
As  the  digitalization  of  administrative  procedures
increases,  the  right  to  take  measures  without  digital
technology tends to decrease. This evolution means the full
spread of technologies within society. However, despite the
massification  of  ICT’s  in  society,  some  digital  divides
remain,  based,  for  instance,  on  income,  education  level,
cultural and social capital, or even age [7]. Indeed, as shown
by the Research Centre for Study and Observation of Living
Conditions’  (from  now  on  called  CREDOC)  statistical
studies and the scientific literature,  there are  many fault
lines, as much due to lack of equipment (first-degree divide),
as for the lack of digital skills (second-degree divide). The
standard of living has a substantial impact on household
equipment,  with  the  purchasing  power  of  the  wealthiest
making it easier for them to purchase equipment than people
with low incomes. Moreover, a user must have a certain level
of digital literacy to be able to develop serene and relevant
digital practices [5]. However, as Charmakeh notes, some
segments of the population (retired, for example) do not have
such knowledge [7]. They do not have sufficient expertise
and are not able to consider the opportunities offered by
technologies. As a result, despite the increasing rate of the
equipment, reaching almost 97% among teenagers (12-25
years old) and young adults [8]–[11], there are still social
groups on the margins. The older we get, to harder it is to
perform changes. Any change creates a “small crisis” and
requires real personal work to change individual habits. So,
making a transition from habit to a new model is difficult,
sometimes  impossible  for  adults  or  elderlies,  by  joint
persistence, tenacity, comprehensibility, often reinforced by
common sense, experiences or values [12].
Institutional change tends, through the firmness of these
reforms, to influence the diffusion of ICTs, at the societal
level.  As  Claude  Dubar  explains,  it  is  tough,  perhaps
impossible, for some people to follow this evolution. This
can be all the more applied to the populations that had
missed the digital revolution of recent decades, as well as to
some of the older generations, especially those over 80 years
old [5]. Thus, the change desired by institutions tends not to
take root among these groups, in which digital culture and
uses remain alien. They find themselves out of step with the
values and practices of the other social groups.
B.
Disruption and disempowerment: consequences of 
social disqualification
Some older people can have some difficulties to feel in
accordance with today’s society. This feeling leads them to
experience  ever-increasing  concern  in  understanding  the
world they live in, which no longer recognizes them  [13].
However, the  loss of  meaning and the loss of common
points,  of  complicity,  imply  phenomena  of  disruption
(physically, psychologically and healthily speaking).  This
concept may be defined as the abandonment of activities or
habits, by someone who is no longer able to perform them,
whether for physical, cognitive or cultural reasons, as it is the
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

case with elders of our study context. To keep in touch with
the world, people must find some matching points with the
environment  they  live  in.  Most  of  the  time,  it  is  the
contradictions between people’s skills or needs and the world
they are surrounded by that lead them to disruption [13]. The
lack  of  correlation  leads  the  individual  to  be  no longer
attached to his life or the world he lives in.
Existentially speaking, it therefore seems necessary to
offer  meaningful  activities  to  individuals  to  help  them
(re)connect with their environment. In today's institutional
context,  it  appears  difficult  very  old  people  to  find
commonalities,  opportunities  of  commitment  within  the
digital sphere, that tends to isolate them, generating, in this
way,  exclusion  and  social  disqualification.  As  Vincent
Caradec says, anyone should expect from a culture that it
supports him, from the beginning of existence until death.
This support can have many variations, from living models,
stimulating policies, help to improve their abilities, etc. [14]
IV.
DIGITAL IMPERATIVE: COLLECTIVE NORMS AND
INDIVIDUALITY
The example of the tax return mentioned above does not
concern only social exclusion. It also highlights, in a more or
less subtle way, what we consider as a numerical imperative,
using Fabien Granjon's terminology. It concerns a feeling of
obligation, linked to the use of digital technologies. The
subject,  through  institutional,  media  and  social  pressure,
tends to develop uses to preserve social integration. For the
people we interviewed, the imperative is reflected by the
desire to gain recognition from the social body. Stop working
and enter retirement are sometimes equated with the idea of
social and identity break-up. The term “retirement” is, itself,
often associated with a social withdrawal [15]. Integrating
digital sphere is, then, a way to regain social esteem, as we
will see later in this article, through the development of
knowledge  and  skills  in  this  field  and  an  acclaimed
development through media and social discourse.
A.
The intergenerational implication in the elders’ uses of 
ICTs
Digital  imperative  is  also  expressed  through
intergenerational relationships, particularly with descendants,
whether children or grandchildren. These generations are
predisposed to use online communication platforms because
of their appropriation of digital technologies during their
youth or working life. Their digital literacy level and the
incorporation of communication habits lead them to favour
this type of medium. In this way, in order to keep in touch,
elderlies are encouraged to develop online communicative
practices, in line with the attitudes and preferences of the
person they wish to contact. Younger generations enrol the
old ones in the digital sphere. The more they are equipped,
the more they will propose opportunities to elderlies to join
the movement of digital communication by, for instance,
training  them  to  use  social  platforms  or  offering
technological gifts [16]. The term “enlisting” corresponds to
the  idea  we  want  to  develop  here.  Since  the  desire  to
maintain  social  bonds  is  stronger  than  traditional
communication  formats,  elders  develop  new  uses,  by
copying  the  uses  already  embedded  among  younger
generations,  who  are,  in  turn,  closely  involved  in  the
development  of  the  digital  sphere.  This  sphere  tends  to
impose itself as an imperative in maintaining communication
with family and close social  circle.  The family's use of
digital technologies tends to create an incentive effect that
retired  people,  who  respond  to  a  normative  desire,  in
connection with a desire to maintain their socialization and
their belonging to the social sphere.
B.
The construction and the effects of collective and 
normative expectations on people
Through  political,  media  and  institutional  discourses,
representations or behaviours, society establishes rules of
conformity, moral, technical and ethical, which individuals
are required to respect from an early age and throughout their
lives, to become an integral part of the social body [17]. This
process  of  socialization  results  in  the  internalization  of
norms. Those norms are established from the generalization
of all society members’ expectations [2].
As Alex Honneth says, an individual has to understand,
to learn to respect and, above all, internalize the normative
social rules imposed on him. By doing so, he earns the
capacity to evolve in interactions and in his environment, he
lives in, to be accepted by his group or society. The norms he
learns allow him to identify his rights and duties concerning
the other member of the group. So, he learns to understand
himself from a generalized view of others [2].
The training of someone as a member of the collective
social group, therefore, implies a reflexive posture, where
someone queries his habits, behaviours and values, in order
to integrate collective norms and rules that he must respect to
be socially accepted, both by institutions and peers.
C.
Collective norms and individual construction
Individual construction is partly based on the relationship
with people, primarily through other's eyes. The image that
interlocutors  sends  back  influences  how  we  perceive
ourselves.  This  exchange,  particularly  in  the  normative
framework we are talking about, allows knowing whether or
not if someone is recognized as an equal by his interaction
partner. Therefore, being in interaction with someone else
means being in interaction with oneself and (re)building
oneself, through the perception that the interaction partner
sends back.
Being oneself, within a normative framework, is like
being like the other, by sharing some morality, rules and
common standards. By accepting or rejecting the speaker, the
speaking partner or the institution defines the condition in
which the told speaker is perceived. In other terms, “the
normative idea that everyone has of oneself [...] depends on
the possibility that he always has of being confirmed in the
other […]. The feeling of contempt can be perceived as a
threatening  attack  and  can  ruin  someone’s identity  as  a
whole” [2]. Being outside a normative framework or of a
society  tends  to  place  people  in  a  position  of  social
disqualification.  In  this  way,  social  groups  use  this
framework  to  develop  normatively  expectations,  social
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

pressure to conformity [18] to which people must submit to,
in order to (still) be considered as a full citizen.
We note ambivalence in surveyed elders’ speeches. On
the  one  hand,  the  opportunities  they  discover  through
technology lead them to perfect their knowledge of these
tools.  Online  practices  multiply  the  number  of
communication  and  information  channels.  It  offers  more
ways to communicate and help elders to enhance their daily
life  and  complete  the  connexions  they  have  with  their
environment. The entire sample we interviewed says that
ICT’s have developed and improve their digital literacy, as
well as their lifestyle.  On the other hand, this very same
discourse is tinged with bitterness [5], which reminds us of
the  notion  of  digital  imperative.  Social  pressure  for
compliance  and  the  need  to  respond  to  normative
frameworks  are  particularly  intense  when  it  comes  to
connecting elders with the digital sphere. There is a kind of
double pressure:  the first is due to the prevailing social
representation attached to retirement age, the second due to
the digital imperative.
D.
Constraint and call of duty: when elders have no other 
choice than “get started”
The  social  and  digital  pressure  made  “digital  path”
unavoidable. It explains that almost twenty people of our
survey feel like they had to force themselves to get “digitally
started” [5]. They link this to the hope of  catching up with a
backlog they have accumulated in this area and which, in a
way, gives them a marginal position [18]. This constraint is
firmly rooted in our interviews, to the point of becoming a
model statement, such as: “you have to get started”, “you
have to live with today’s trend”, “in any case, today, you can
no  longer  do  anything  without  ICT’s”,  “it  has  become
essential”,  etc.  [29].  This  social  pressure  does  not
differentiate by age or social background within our sample.
The notion of imperative and pressure that underlies the
interviews seems to be experienced uniformly throughout
our corpus.
As we said in the beginning of this article, we currently
live in a strongly ageist societal context. Thus, for the people
who have accumulated many years, it seems necessary for
them  to develop  digital  practices,  in order  to encourage
collective  social  recognition  and,  so,  emancipating
themselves from the cult of eternal youth. They also mark
their distance from their chronological age [16], as well as
from  collective  representations  related  to  it.  Therefore,
developing digital and technological skills appears to be a
way for elders to counteract  negative stereotypes and to
encourage their social valorisation.
It seems getting closer to the aesthetic reference model
makes life simpler and easier [19] and gives full meaning to
digital imperative. Being accepted by others and by society is
a fundamental element of well-being. That is why accepting
and  complying  with  standards  is  a  way  of  being  well
integrated  and  valued,  with  an  absolute  peace  of  mind.
However, in the context of an actively and favourably ICT’s
society, becoming a digital user seems to be a way to live in
peace, to be accepted and recognized as a full citizen.
V.
SUFFERING AND LONELINESS: CONSEQUENCES OF
DISQUALIFICATION
Sociologists,  such  as  Vincent  Caradec  [20]  or  Serge
Guérin [21], have studied the loss of meaning of life and
activities at retirement age, which leads  people to social
withdrawal and disruption. Replying to an email, playing on
a virtual farm, enjoying a replayed TV show represent many
emotional investment opportunities for people suffering from
loneliness. New uses for new habits allow the development
of automatic processes, the anchoring of changes, offering,
in this way, a meaningful restructured daily life.
As we said previously, older adults tend to be even more
put aside from social and digital evolutions. We now would
like to develop on some of their consequences on elderlies'
everyday  life,  based  on  the  results  of  our  exploratory
qualitative survey [5] [29].
A.
Loneliness and suffering: social or digital issues?
We first would like to talk about the feeling of loneliness.
We attribute  to  this  notion  to  the  feeling  of  not  being
integrated into a social community and suffering from it.
Thus, an “isolated” person does not feel necessarily “alone”
if it does not experience it as an annoyance [5]. This is a
spread  sentiment,  common  to  twenty-two  people  we
interviewed: “My two sons live abroad, my daughter lives
hundreds kilometres from me. I have other family members
here, but it’s not the same. I miss them and I feel a bit alone”
[29]. This seventy years old woman has a computer, but do
not  use  it  for  her  social  activities,  nor  to  develop  her
intergenerational relationships. When she is asked about this
opportunity, she answers: “Yes, I know I could. My children
don’t stop asking me the same question. But I don’t feel
comfortable with it. I don’t understand how it works, I don’t
know how to call someone, what I can publish or not. I’m
afraid of doing something wrong and to break the computer.
I feel alone, but I don’t feel capable of using something like
Facebook” [29].
This  feeling  of  loneliness  is  even  more  paradoxical,
compared to the society we live in. A society is characterized
by  the  diversity  of  its  technological  possibilities  of
communication [22]. In the previous case, we note that the
woman has everything she needs, from a technological point
of  view, to  keep  communicating  with  her  children.  The
problem seems to be related to her capacity to use it and to
understand how to use it.
In the cases we studied during our survey, the feeling of
loneliness  seems  to  be  even  stronger  since  the  massive
diffusion of ICTs technology, related to a need for emotional
stability and a lack of recognition [22]. Indeed, having a
computer, without knowing how to use it, seems to spawn
feelings  of  worry  and  loneliness,  more  significantly  in
everyday life activities. As they do not share the current
social ways to get in touch with distant relatives, elderlies
seem to feel even lonelier. They can not talk as frequently as
they  want  to  with  their  family  They  also  feel  socially
depreciated and rejected, with some lack of recognition [5].
This is confirmed by Cécile Tréton and Christian Bourret,
according  to  whom  “the  infrastructure  that  offers  many
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

opportunities for communication and security can not resolve
the appearance of a feeling of loneliness for a growing part
of the population” [22].
What our survey also highlights is the lack of digital
teaching. Even when family members know the faint abilities
of elderlies, very few of them try to help. “I asked my sons,
but they don’t have time, with the kids and their work. They
tried to teach me some things, like going on Facebook, but I
need a lot of time to learn, and they were quite upset of keep
repeating the same things”, says a seventy-two-year-old man
[29]. So, increasing technology accessibility does not involve
technological adoption. It is difficult, for most elderlies, to
adopt new habits, especially technological ones, as we said
previously. Furthermore,  they also develop some distress
concerning computers and digital technologies [23]. It results
in  everyday  difficulties  and  negative  self-judgment,
regarding their abilities to learn and use digital technologies,
bringing elderlies back to a kind of social failure [5].
In our survey, loneliness seems to be related to suffering.
Interviewed people seem to suffer from the digital evolution
of the society and of the digital communication habits of
their family. Despite e-inclusion policies, suffering keeps
being a fundamental issue concerning elderlies.  Suffering
appears to be a consequence of the lack of recognition, both
from society, family members and even from institutions’
digitalization.  The  feeling  of  suffering  seems  to  be  a
significant setback of the current consideration accorded to
social elderlies problems, which push them to doubt of their
technological self-efficacy [23] and of their adequacy with
the world they live in. However, as we said previously in this
article, feeling useless and disconnected from the world is one
of the most severe causes of disruption among retired people.
In this context, we could conclude that digitalization seems to
reinforce  the  feelings  of  loneliness  and  suffering  among
elders, increasing the risks of social or cognitive disruptions.
B.
Digital reliance: consequences on self-consideration 
and everyday life activities
It seems older adults are unaware of many existing digital
technologies  and  might  lack  necessary  digital  literacy
(knowledge and skills) [23]. The lack of acculturation is one
of  the  hottest  issues  concerning  the  elderly.  Indeed,
acculturation  is  influenced  by  the  relationship  to
technologies during working life [5]. However, most of the
current older people were already retired when ICTs were
massively spread in working places. So, they have never
been acculturated to them during their professional life and
still ignore most of the advantages offered by them. “I fill the
taxes returns for my mother. She’s ninety-five years old; she
doesn’t want to hear about technologies. What she doesn’t
want to hear is that I also need to be helped by my own
daughter to fill my own taxes return”, says a seventy-five
years old man [29].
What we observe here is the concept of digital reliance.
The man we just talked about is dependent on his daughter to
fill his taxes returns and those of his mother. His lack of
digital literacy unable him to be autonomous. How, in this
context, can some scientists still talk about empowerment?
Our observations are confirmed by Heo and Yoon, who
write that asking for help is counter-intuitive with the feeling
of  autonomy  [23].  Digital  use  is  becoming  a  common
standard for online administrative and everyday life tasks
(buying, searching for information, etc.). However, it raises
the question of the digital dependence of unconnected or
unaccustomed elderly.
This  digital  reliance  seems  to  be  all  the  more
problematical  as  it  echoes  to  the  concepts  of  digital
vulnerability and digital suffering. Such cases of reliance
seem to worsen the negative feelings and self-judgments, as
they show elderlies in a position of relational vulnerability
[22].
VI.
CONCLUSION
The  limits  of  our  study  is  linked  the  number  of
investigated people and on the particular contexts they live
in, in the south-west of France. A broader study and some
comparative point of view could confirm our observations,
give more detailed and find some other phenomenon.
According to French national statistics [24], people over
sixty years old would currently represent more than 25% of
the total French population. This number, still according to
the same source, would keep on increasing in the coming
years.  Digital  suffering  or  social  digital  disqualification,
would be even more problematical, considering the growing
number of elderlies and other social groups that can not
follow the current  digital path (living standard, incomes,
social failure, digital divide, etc.). However, French society
does not seem to take into account the number of people
made  disadvantaged  by  its  digitalization  and  the
consequences  it  has  on  well-being,  by  imposing  new
technical, technological and social norms, without paying
attention to the crucial need of supporting digital transition,
from  a  social,  financial  and  technical  point  of  view. A
country can not encourage such an evolution, without giving
its people the support the need to follow it.
This path could be considered as quite solutionist [25].
Digital public policies mean to resolve all the problems,
health failure among others, by implementing technologies,
without  paying  attention  to  the  importance  of  social,
technological (also considering digital practices levels) and
human  surroundings.  Moreover,  talking  about  elderlies’
digital  reliance,  can  not  we  consider  these  solutions  as
fundamentally  paradoxical,  as  they  propose  to  solve
dependence issues by creating another form of dependence
through digital reliance?
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors would like to thank the MAIF foundation,
which allowed them to develop their exploratory qualitative
survey.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Lagacé, “Ageism: understanding and changing the social
view of aging”, Laval University Press, 2010.
[2]
A. Honneth, “The struggle for recognition”, Gallimard, 2013.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[3]
S.  Proulx,  ‘Thinking  about  the  uses  of  information  and
communication  technologies  today:  challenges  -  models  -
trends’, in “ICT issues and uses: social and cultural aspects”,
Bordeaux University Press, vol. 1, p. 7-20, 2005.
[4]
F. Granjon, “Recognition and use of the Internet: a critical
sociology  of  connected  computing  practices”,  Transvalor-
Mine Press, 2012.
[5]
E.  Vigouroux-Zugasti,  “The  digital  experience  of  elderly:
Challenges and limitations of technological solutionism”, Vol
1, Bordeaux Montaigne University, Bordeaux, 2017. [Online].
Available
 
from:
 https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-
01764923/document [Accessed: 23-May-2019].
[6]
C.-A. Rivière and A. Brugière, Ageing well thanks to digital
technology, FYP Editions, 2010.
[7]
H.  Charmarkeh,  “Older  people  and  the  “second  degree”
digital divide: the contribution of the critical perspective in
communication”,  French  Journal  of  Information  and
Communication Sciences, no. 6, Jan. 2015.
[8]
CREDOC, “Aging well, retirement, dependency, fragility of
seniors  Representations,  realities  and  expectations  of  the
French population with regard to institutions”, 2016.  [Online]
.  Available  from:
 https://www.credoc.fr/publications/la-
diffusion-des-technologies-de-l-information-et-de-la-
communication-dans-la-societe-francaise-2016  [Accessed  :
23-May-2019)
[9]
CREDOC, “The diffusion of information and communication
technologies  in  French  society  (2015)”,  2015.  [Online]  .
Available
 
from:
 https://www.credoc.fr/publications/la-
diffusion-des-technologies-de-l-information-et-de-la-
communication-dans-la-societe-francaise-2015  [Accessed  :
23-May-2019)
[10] CREDOC, “The diffusion of information and communication
technologies in French society (2014)”, 2014.  [Online] .
Available
 
from:
 https://www.credoc.fr/publications/la-
diffusion-des-technologies-de-l-information-et-de-la-
communication-dans-la-societe-francaise-2014  [Accessed  :
23-May-2019)
[11] CREDOC, “The diffusion of information and communication
technologies in French society (2013)”, 2013.  [Online] .
Available
 
from:
 https://www.credoc.fr/publications/la-
diffusion-des-technologies-de-l-information-et-de-la-
communication-dans-la-societe-francaise-2013  [Accessed  :
23-May-2019)
[12] C. Dubar, The identity crisis: the interpretation of a mutation.
French University Press, 2010.
[13] V.  Caradec,  “Sociology  in  the  face  of  old  age,  from
indifference to the exploration of aging”, in “Ageing and old
age,  vulnerability  and  resources:  cross-regards”,  Aquitaine
House of Human Sciences, 2011, pp. 81–92.
[14] J. Bouisson, C. Brisset, I. Tournier, and C. Vion, “Ageing and
old age, vulnerability and resources: cross-regards”, Aquitaine
House of Human Sciences, 2011.
[15] S. Guérin, The new senior citizens' society, Michalon, 2011.
[16] L. Le Douarin and V. Caradec, “ICTs, grandparents and their
grandchildren:  towards  a  conflict  of  technological
generations?, in Living the ages of life, The Harmattan, 2012,
pp. 253–276.
[17] M. Bahuaud, C. Destal, and A. Pecolo, “The generational
approach to communication: placing audiences at the heart of
the process”, Communication & Organisation, no. 40, p. 5–
18, Jan. 2013.
[18] D. Le Gall and C. Le Van, “Get your equipment at home.
Domestic  microcomputing  and  social  cleavages”,  Hermès
Lavoisier., 2009, pp. 89–118.
[19] P.  Bourdieu,  The  Distinction:  Social  Criticism  of  the
Judgment, Midnight Editions, 2016.
[20] V. Caradec, Ageing after retirement: a sociological approach
to ageing, French University Press, 2004.
[21] S. Guérin, The invention of the seniors. Hachette Literatures,
2007.
[22] C.  Tréton  and  C.  Bourret,  “Loneliness  and  Relational
Biography”, presented at the HUSO, Malta,  2015. [Online].
Available
 
from:
https://pdfs.semanticscholar.org/41a4/667ed99d3f1eb2838787
a1fc8a5d87949bff.pdf [Accessed:  23-May-2019]
[23] J. Heo and J. Yoon, “Use of Smart Speakers by Elderly in
Home  Environment”,  presented  at  the  ACHI  2019 :  The
Twelfth International Conference on Advances in Computer-
Human Interactions, Athens, 2019. [Online]. Available from:
http://thinkmind.org/index.php?
view=article&articleid=achi_2019_5_20_20074 
[Accessed:
23-May-2019]
[24] INSEE, “Population by sex and age group in 2019”. [Online].
Available  from:  https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/2381474.
[Accessed: 23-May-2019].
[25] E. Morozov, “To solve everything click here: The aberration
of technological solutionism”, FYP Editions, 2014.
[26] L. Monnoyer-Smith, Laurence, For an complex epistemology
of information and communication sciences, presented at the
16th 
SFSIC  Congress,  Paris.  2008  [Online]:
https://www.sfsic.org/congres_2008/spip.php?article78,
[Accessed: 23-May-2019]
[27] W. Feuerhahn, “Max Weber and comprehensive explanation”,
Philisophie,
 
no
 
85,
 
p.19-41.
 
[Online]:
http://www.cairn.info/resume.php?
ID_ARTICLE=PHILO_085_0019 [Accessed: 23-May-2019]
[28] L.  Bardin,  “Content  analysis”,  French  University  Presses,
Pars. 2013
[29] E.  Vigouroux-Zugasti,  “The  digital  experience  of  elderly:
Challenges and limitations of technological solutionism”, Vol
2, Bordeaux Montaigne University, Bordeaux, 2017. [Online].
Available
 
from:
 https://tel.archives-ouvertes.fr/tel-
01764923/file/These_Eloria_VIGOUROUX_ZUGASTI_anne
xes.pdf [Accessed: 23-May-2019]
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

