Data for Healthy Decisions: Computation for Passive Monitoring of Medium-Risk 
Individuals at Home 
 
Dennis J. Folds  
Lowell Scientific Enterprises  
Carrollton, Georgia USA  
email: dennis.folds@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— Many senior adults living independently are at 
some risk of severe health problems, and have adult caregivers 
who do not live with them.  There is a need for positive 
indicators of well being to be available to those caregivers.  
Technology that requires the senior adult to actively perform 
tasks, such as filling out logs or hooking up sensors, may not be 
effective, due to the burden on the individual leading to non-
compliance. What is needed is technology that is largely 
passive, installed unobtrusively in the home, that can generate 
the data needed for calculating indicators of well being. Such 
data is useful to remote caregivers as well as to medical 
professionals. One example of such a system, a prototype used 
to passively monitor and compute nocturnal trips to the 
bathroom, is presented.  Data were collected from 7 senior 
adults living alone over a four-week period.  Computational 
challenges were significant.  Effectiveness of such technology 
requires social acceptance, ease of use, data security, and 
calculation of reliable, actionable metrics.  
Keywords- Computational social science; social analytics, 
independent living. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Increasing life expectancy across the developed and 
developing world results in significant increases in the sheer 
number of senior adults, and in many countries, of the 
percentage of the population that are seniors.  The quality of 
life experienced by seniors is directly impacted by the 
adequacy and efficacy of the health care they receive.  There 
are tradeoffs between the common desire for seniors to 
continue to live independently, versus the need to monitor 
and manage risk factors related to health. 
Senior adults tend to value their ability to continue to live 
independently, either in their long-occupied home, or in a 
newer domicile.  Independent living is a strong contributor to 
Subject Well Being (SWB) in senior adults, and higher 
levels of SWB are associated with better health outcomes 
[1].   
Individuals who live alone – even if in a close 
community – may be at particular risk for maladies that are 
associated with general trends of decline.  Poor sleep, poor 
medication adherence, and poor nutrition are examples of 
trends that are associated with increased risk of a multitude 
of health problems that may require treatment.  The problem 
is likely worse when living conditions are more isolated. 
Many senior adults continue to live quite active lifestyles, 
especially in the earlier years of that period labeled as 
“elderly”.  These individuals may be considered low risk. 
Some develop acute conditions that require close medical 
monitoring for a period of time, while others develop chronic 
illnesses or other chronic conditions that require medical 
monitoring on a continuing basis. These individuals may be 
considered high risk.  For such individuals, whether on 
temporary or long-term basis, it is reasonable to expect that 
the devices and procedures used for medical monitoring may 
be somewhat intrusive, and may require active participation 
by the individual being monitored. 
In the present paper, a third group of senior adults is of 
primary interest.  These are perhaps well described as 
“medium risk”, in that they have no particular health issues 
that require ongoing monitoring, but are experiencing some 
general trends that are predictive of increasing probabilities 
of various health problems.  An increased risk of falling is an 
obvious concern, especially for people who live alone.  
Undetected rapid growth of certain skin features, such as 
moles or warts, is another.  This list of examples can go on 
and on; the challenge is to find ways to help monitor general 
indicators in a way that can help the individual, and care 
givers (e.g., an adult child), make good decisions about (a) 
medical interventions that may be needed, and (b) whether 
continued independent living is wise. 
One example of a general indicator of risk is gait speed.  
Imagine two senior adults walking in the park.  One may 
walk confidently, at a pace unchanged since middle age.  
The second may walk hesitantly, with a much slower pace 
and somewhat irregular gait.  This second person not only 
has a higher risk of falling, but also has a higher risk of 
cognitive decline, disability, and other maladies [2].  Thus, 
monitoring gait speed could help with a general assessment 
of a person’s level of risk. 
A second general trend, and the one of particular interest 
in the present paper, is the number of nocturnal (nighttime) 
trips to the bathroom to void the bladder.  Falls are but one 
risk during nocturnal trips to the bathroom.  Frequent 
nighttime urination, known as nocturia, is common in older 
adults.  Up to three fifths of the senior adult population void 
at least twice during the night [3]. In this context, a nocturnal 
void means the person awakes from sleep, goes to the 
bathroom and voids the bladder, and returns to bed and to 
sleep.  In addition to a potential fall, these frequent trips 
directly reduce sleep quality, which in turn is a general 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

predictor of increased risk.  Perhaps more importantly, 
nocturia can also be an indicator of other serious health 
conditions (including chronic kidney disease and congestive 
heart failure), and may indicate a general neurological 
decline in which the brain’s ability to control the kidneys at 
night (to produce more concentrated urine) is lessening.   
In Section 2 below, an example of a passive monitoring 
system focused on monitoring indicators of nocturia is 
presented.  The example system is a prototype kit of sensors 
used in an exploratory study [4], aimed at identifying key 
challenges for this type of monitoring.  Results from that 
study are summarized in Section 3. Discussion of the 
technical challenges, ease of use issues, and computational 
methods appears in Section 4.  In Section 5, the key 
attributes of a passive monitoring system that would achieve 
the 
goals 
of 
unobtrusively 
monitoring 
medium-risk 
individuals at home are described. 
II. 
EXAMPLE 
The kit used in the exploratory study featured 
Commercial Off The Shelf (COTS), prototype, and custom 
components, specifically chosen to unobtrusively measure 
indicators of nocturnal trips to the toilet.  The kit was placed 
in the homes of eight research participants for a period of 
four weeks.  The data were used to develop the 
computational 
algorithms 
necessary 
to 
automatically 
compute the number of trips to the bathroom each night, and 
to compile that data by individual in a summary form 
suitable to share with a caregiver. 
The kit consisted of the following components: 
• 
A COTS sleep tracker called Beddit, which is 
installed under the sheet and measures bed presence 
along with various physiological parameters used to 
infer sleep state. 
• 
A prototype sensor called SmartMat, which 
primarily consists of a pressure sensitive film affixed 
to the underside of a mat. We placed the mat in front 
of the toilet in the homes of the participants.  
• 
The Misfit Shine, a COTS activity tracker worn on 
the wrist that detects steps and sleep, among other 
things.  
• 
A custom built proximity detector that we dubbed 
the Ping Presence Sensor (PPS), which used 
ultrasound to detect a person sitting on, or standing 
in front of, the toilet. 
These components permitted redundant measures of sleep 
and proximity to the toilet, and single measures of steps and 
bed presence.  With ideal data, it should have been possible 
to parse for the following sequence: bed presence, sleep, bed 
departure, steps, toilet proximity, steps, bed presence, and 
sleep. The number of times this sequence occurred each 
night was the measurement of interest in the study. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Given that the components used in this kit were a mixture 
of COTS, prototype, and custom components, it was not 
surprising that there were numerous instances of lost or 
corrupted data.  The Beddit bed presence sensor generally 
worked well, but did not reliably sense bed presence or sleep 
state when the participant was in a position that was partially 
off the sensor.  This was a bigger problem with participants 
who slept in a queen sized bed. The SmartMat exhibited a 
data loss problem when it temporarily lost data connectivity 
– a problem not seen in preliminary pilot testing – and 
required a power cycle to resume proper data collection.  The 
PPS was dependent on a direct line of sight between the 
sensor and the person seated on (or standing in front of) the 
toilet.  There were instances of the other objects also being 
placed on the back of the toilet, partially blocking the direct 
line of sight, and hence corrupting the data from this sensor.   
A different set of challenges emerged with the Misfit 
Shine activity tracker.  The data were reliably collected and 
stored on the device, but the device did not reliably synch 
with the IPod that was paired with it.  The path to get the 
data off the device required the IPod to retrieve the data and 
then upload it to a cloud-based service.  The research 
technicians were able to manually trigger the synch operation 
during the last home visit; little data were lost.  Nevertheless. 
these data were not available for use in computing day-to-
day results as the study progressed.  Another issue was that 
the default data provided by the device was simply a 
summary of the total number of steps for a day (midnight to 
midnight). Time-stamped step data would have been better, 
for use in algorithms to help distinguish the cases of interest 
(simple trips to the toilet) from other cases in which the 
person left the bed and performed some other action (e.g., 
going to the kitchen), as well as going to the toilet.  
Rectifying this problem would have required interaction with 
the engineers for the device and access to a special device 
configuration 
not 
normally 
used 
with 
consumers.  
Consequently, it was not possible to use the time-stamped 
step data in our algorithms. 
Usable data sets were obtained from seven of the eight 
participants.  The kit placed in the home of the eighth 
participant repeatedly malfunctioned, and the participant had 
difficulty performing the required tasks.   A set of algorithms 
were developed to align the data from the four sources, and 
to identify patterns that fit the profile of interest.  For each of 
the seven participants, there were a few nights that had data 
amenable to straightforward parsing.  More generally, 
though, the data for a given participant on a given night 
tended to have data missing or corrupted from at least one of 
the four components of the kit.   
A general observation on the computing challenges is 
that the two COTS products provided data that were easier to 
integrate, whereas the prototype and custom components 
provided data that were more challenging.  The COTS 
product data had reliable time stamps, but required some 
post-processing to combine data from two days (midnight to 
midnight) into a single night.  The data from the prototype 
and custom components were also time-stamped, but there 
appeared to be some drift or inaccuracy in the time base, as 
there were many instances in which the time stamp of the 
toilet proximity event differed between the two components, 
and in some cases, was logged as earlier than the bed exit 
event.   
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

The pervasive challenge was that the incomplete data did 
not provide a solid basis for computing reliable counts of the 
number of trips to the toilet during the night.  In some 
instances, it was possible to manually inspect the data and 
spot an anomaly that, if corrected, could result in apparently 
correct data.  Thus it is possible to include case-by-case 
anomaly corrections into the algorithms, but this required 
manual detection (and understanding) of the anomaly. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
This section contains a description of the research results 
related to technical feasibility of the technology, ease of use 
by the participants, and the computing challenges that were 
encountered during the execution of the study.  
A. Technical Feasibility 
The example described above demonstrates that it is 
technically feasible to collect certain data of interest for 
medium risk individuals in a home setting, without imposing 
undue burdens on the person to perform required tasks, such 
as starting or stopping a device, manually transferring data, 
or keeping logs.  A combination of consumer products 
(especially from the burgeoning personal fitness sector) and 
custom-designed components can yield a combined data set 
that supports calculation of the measures of interest.  
Although feasible, there are significant technical 
challenges ahead.  Power management, especially for 
devices powered by batteries, will be a challenge.  In the 
example study, the Beddit sensor was powered through an 
electrical plug, and the other three devices ran off batteries.  
The Misfit Shine required regular recharging (preferably 
daily.) The SmartMat and the PPS had batteries that were 
sufficient for the four-week study, but would have required 
replacement for a longer deployment period.   
The network connectivity of the devices was also a 
technical challenge.  The Beddit and the Misfit Shine relied 
on transferring data through a mobile device (tablet or 
phone) to a cloud-based service, and thus required an internet 
connection that could be accessed by the device.  The 
SmartMat also required its own data connection through 
WiFi, and did not automatically reconnect in certain 
conditions after interruption. 
. 
B. Ease of Use 
The two commercial products required some minimal 
interaction from the participants, but were generally typical 
of products in the commercial fitness tracking market.  
Usability concerns will be greater when using such products 
with some senior adults – those less familiar with mobile 
devices in general, and with common actions, such as pairing 
and synching.    
The other two components were generally easy to use 
and required little active cooperation from the research 
participants.  Their effectiveness, though, required the 
participant to leave them in place and to leave them 
configured as intended.  In a longer term deployment, 
laundering the SmartMat would be an issue.  Neither of these 
two components provided any direct signal to the participant 
if they had malfunctioned or were not configured correctly. 
 
C. Computing Challenges 
The computing challenges were significant.  If 
commercial products are to be used, it is desirable to get their 
data in relatively raw form (e.g., time stamped step data 
rather than daily summaries).  Summary data for the 
midnight-to-midnight day will have limitations on its 
usefulness to compute the measures of interest.  Partial 
redundancy on certain measures led to higher confidence 
when both agreed, and allowed computation of a measure of 
interest when one was absent.  Cases in which they 
disagreed, however, led to anomalies that had to be manually 
corrected.   
The 
algorithms 
themselves 
were 
relatively 
straightforward to develop for the subset of data that were 
intact.  Applying a time-stamp correction in the form of an 
offset solved some data problems, and this process could 
probably be automated.  Many of the other anomalies, 
however, required manual inspection and speculation to 
resolve.  For example, in one instance the SmartMat showed 
proximity to the toilet when the PPS did not, and the Beddit 
indicated the participant was in the bed.  The proximity 
signal persisted for many minutes.  We speculated that the 
participant’s pet had probably laid down on the mat for that 
period of time, and manually discarded it.   
In the example study, participant eligibility required that 
they live alone, normally sleep in the same bed each night, 
and normally use the same toilet during the night.  The 
computational challenges will increase significantly with 
more than one occupant, especially if they sleep in the same 
bed.  With more than one occupant, however, there may be 
less need for passive monitoring. 
V. 
KEY ATTRIBUTES 
This section presents a description of the key attributes of 
systems that will provide the capability to monitor medium-
risk individuals in the home, unobtrusively.  
 
A. Ease of Use for the Intended Population 
Ideally, the technology used for this type of monitoring 
should only require consent for the equipment to be installed 
in the home.  Realistically, though, it may require some user 
actions, such as replacing batteries.  Initial actions, such as 
entering network credentials, could be performed by a 
technician or another caregiver.  Day to day activities, 
including donning and doffing a device, charging and 
synching a device, or updating a device, should be as non-
intrusive as possible, and should be commensurate with the 
types of actions already familiar to the individual.   
It is important that such technology not be reliant on 
active participation and cooperation, such as entering data or 
completing logs.  It is also important that normal activities, 
such as house cleaning, be minimally impacted by the 
presence of the technology. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

B. Data Security and Privacy Protection 
Given that the intended use of technology of interest in 
this research is to promote independent living for senior 
adults as long as they wish, and that it wise to do so, it is 
vitally important that the senior adult not feel like the 
technology is too intrusive on their privacy.  It is important 
that the data be provided, securely, to only those people 
acceptable to the senior adult.  Further, it is essential that the 
data are positively associated with the senior adult, not 
inadvertently collected from guests or other non-occupants in 
the home temporarily (e.g., service providers).  
The reliable availability of the data to the caregiver is 
also important.  If the caregiver, living elsewhere, is to use 
these data to help monitor well being of the senior adult, 
prolonged 
periods 
of 
unavailable 
data 
will 
be 
counterproductive.  Instances in which the data have become 
unavailable should be flagged for correction. 
C. Actionable Metrics 
Most importantly, the technology of interest should 
provide to the decision maker clear data on specific instances 
and general trends so that a decision can be made.  Primary 
decisions of interest are (a) whether a specific follow-up, 
such as a home visit, is needed,  (b) whether a medical 
intervention, such as a doctor’s appointment or trip to a 
clinic is needed, and (c) whether continued independent 
living is wise.  In many cases there is access to graduated 
levels of care before residency in a skilled nursing facility is 
warranted.  The graduated levels may include daily visits 
related 
to 
medication 
and 
meals, 
assistance 
with 
transportation and general community mobility, and taking 
measurements (such as blood pressure) directly.   
Development of suitable metrics will require a focused 
research program.  The example used in the present paper 
concentrated on integrating measures of sleep and activity, to 
produce a simple count of the number of trips to the 
bathroom during the night.  Such data from a single night is 
not the basis for a decision.  Data over weeks and months are 
needed to establish whether the person routinely awakens to 
void the bladder more than once per night.  Long term data is 
also needed to establish whether the frequency of the 
nighttime voids is increasing.   
In developing these metrics, it is important to develop 
positive indicators of well being, as well as indicators of 
potential concerns.  That is, it will be useful to caregivers 
outside the home if they can see results showing that the 
person being monitored exhibits such attributes as (a) gets 
plenty of uninterrupted sleep, (b) is taking their medication 
appropriately, (c) has good nutrition, (d) has a good gait, (e) 
has a healthy appearance of the face and skin, and (f) has 
plenty of social interactions.  Such measures, along with 
others that might be added, are predictive that the senior 
adult is doing well. 
D. Positive Socialization 
One can imagine two different socialization paths for 
passive monitoring technology.  There is a negative path, in 
which the technology is seen as invasive of privacy and 
denigrating to dignity. On the other hand, there is a positive 
path, in which the technology is seen as supportive, wise, 
useful as a precaution, and an enabler of independent living.   
Positive socialization will not occur in a vacuum.  
Introduction of technology that measures the activities 
described in the present paper is easily labeled as “spying” or 
other pejorative terms.  The current trends in fitness and 
activity tracking may provide a path for positive 
socialization.  These trends include presentation of feedback 
to the person on a daily basis, along with a summary of 
recent (and sometimes long-term) trends, comparing the 
person’s data with data from peers, and sharing data among a 
designated group.   
Current trends across healthcare providers and public 
health services reveal growing interest in using mobile 
devices (e.g., smartphones) and the Internet of Things (IoT) 
to help monitor at-risk individuals, groups and regions.  For 
example, monitoring for spread of infectious diseases in 
areas of concern can possibly be accomplished more 
efficiently using specialized sensors that scan populated 
areas for indicators of interest (e.g., high fever), and combine 
that data with data from other sources, to more quickly detect 
spread of serious disease [5].  The hybrid crowdsensing 
paradigm [6], applied to healthcare, may result in greater 
familiarity with using general surveillance of people in 
public places, along with specialized sensors intentionally 
carried by individuals.  This greater familiarity may help 
facilitate easier acceptance of similar technologies deployed 
in private residences.   
Indeed, there is general interest in leveraging the IoT to 
improve healthcare for senior adults, across the spectrum of 
early warning systems (enabled by artificial intelligence), 
assisted living, and mobile health [7]. IoT data obtained from 
home appliances, utilities, and smart home technologies may 
enable the types of algorithms of interest in the present paper 
to be developed and used to monitor individuals at all levels 
of risk.   
Ultimately, positive socialization will require that the 
senior adult feel more confident as they continue to live 
independently, as well as increasing the confidence of 
caregivers who monitor the metrics remotely.  If the 
technology can improve the SWB of the senior adult, 
perhaps it will also help promote better health and quality of 
life outcomes for this segment of the population. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
It is clear from the results that the goal of monitoring 
individuals at the medium-risk level, unobtrusively, is 
attainable.  The challenges, however, require deliberate 
design and engineering to ensure that the burden of making 
this technology work does not fall on the individual to be 
monitored.  Supporting technologies, such as batteries and 
wireless communications, are improving at an impressive 
pace.  They will be required for the technology of interest to 
become successful. Future research should focus on 
improving the reliability and interoperability of the key 
component technologies, making it easier to integrate 
multiple sources of information into an unambiguous 
chronology of events.  Future work is also needed on 
developing complementary sensors that could provide 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

additional, confirmatory sources of information.  One 
example, investigated in the current effort but not included 
due to lack of maturity, is technology to monitor water usage 
in the home.  Actions such as flushing the toilet may have a 
unique signature that, in principle, can be monitored by 
sensors attached to water lines in the home.   Monitoring 
electrical circuit loads can also provide information about 
activities such as laundry, cooking, and light housework. Use 
of mobile communications devices can provide information 
about community mobility and social interconnectedness.  
Still further information may come from a variety of sources 
(such as home appliances) associated with the IoT. 
Collectively, an array of such technologies can be useful in 
monitoring medium-risk individuals performing a variety of 
activities of interest.  By combining information about bed 
presence, sleep, walking (including gait speed), using the 
toilet, using water and electricity in the home, mobility 
outside the home, and communications patterns, it may be 
possible to compute indices of well-being across a wide 
spectrum of activities that are vital to the physical and mental 
health of senior adults.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Diener and M. Chan, “Happy people live longer: 
Subjective well-­‐‑being contributes to health and longevity,” 
Applied Psych: Health and Well-Being, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1-
43, 2011, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1758-0854.2010.01045.x.   
[2] G. Abellan Van Kan, et al. “Gait speed at usual pace as a 
predictor of adverse outcomes in community,” J Nutr Health 
Aging, 
vol. 
13, 
pp. 
881-889, 
2009, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12603-009-0246-z 
[3] J. R. Bosch and J. P. Weiss,  “The prevalence and causes of 
nocturia”  J of Urology, vol. 184, no. 2, pp. 440-446, 2010. 
[4] D. Folds, J. Ray, T. Johnson, and B. Ake, “Data to healthy 
decisions (D2HD),"  GTRI IRAD Report,  2015,  Atlanta, 
GA:  Georgia Tech Research Institute.  
[5] T. Edoh, “Risk prevention of spreading emerging  infectious 
diseases using a hybrid crowdsensing paradigm,  optical 
sensors, 
and 
smartphone. 
Journal 
of 
Medical  
 Systems, 
vol. 
42, 
no. 
5, 
article 
91, 
2018, 
http://doi.org/10.1007/s10916-018-0937-2. 
[6] M. Avvenuti, S. Bellomo,  S. Cresc,  M/ La Polla, and M. 
Tesconi, “Hybrid Crowdsensing: A Novel Paradigm to 
Combine the Strengths of Opportunistic and Participatory 
Crowdsensing,” WWW 2017 Companion, April 3-7, 2017, 
Perth, 
Australia. 
ACM 
978-1-4503-4914-7/17/04. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/3041021.3051155. 
[7] [7] B. Farahania, F. Firouzib, V. Changc, M. Badaroglud, N. 
Constante, and K. Mankodiyae, Towards fog-driven IoT 
eHealth: Promises and challenges of IoT in medicine and 
healthcare,” Future Generation Computer Systems, vol. 78, 
part 
2, 
pp. 
659-676, 
2018, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.future.2017.04.036. 
 
 
 
 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

