Producing Affective Language 
Content Selection, Message Formulation, and Computational Modelling 
Martijn Goudbeek, Nadine Braun, Charlotte Out, Emiel Krahmer 
Center for Cognition and Communication 
Tilburg University  
Tilburg, the Netherlands 
m.b.goudbeek@uvt.nl, n.braun@uvt.nl, c.out@uvt.nl, e.j.krahmer@uvt.nl 
Abstract— We introduce a project investigating how emotional 
states influence language production using both experimental 
and corpus based approaches. Here, we illustrate our project 
by asking whether content selection (“deciding what to say”) 
and linguistic realization (“deciding how to say it”) are affected 
by the emotional state of a speaker. We do this first by 
assessing whether disgusted speakers are more or less prone to 
align with their dialogue partners than amused speakers. 
Second, we develop a corpus of emotionally laden soccer 
reports that, even though they refer to the same event, will 
differ depending on whether the report comes from the 
winning or losing team. In both cases, we focus on the 
production and analysis of referring expressions. Our findings 
will be used to build an affective natural language generation 
system.  
Keywords-Emotion and Cognition; Language production; 
Referring expressions; Natural Language Generation. 
I.
INTRODUCTION
Spoken language conveys a lot of information about 
someone’s emotional state. For example, angry speakers 
speak with a loud and high pitched voice, while sad 
speakers generally speak with a soft and low voice [1][2]; 
the words used may also vary; even though only a limited 
number of words can be classified as emotional [3], word 
use has been shown to be indicative of speaker's feelings. 
For instance, suicidal poets used relatively more first person 
singular pronouns, more words referring to death, and fewer 
references to other people in their poems than non-suicidal 
poets [4]. 
The effects of emotion on speech prosody and word 
production are well established, but the impact of emotion 
on other aspects of the speech production process is 
understudied. Our project aims to the conjecture that 
emotion influences the early content selection and message 
formulation stages of language production. In particular, we 
study how language production models can be interfaced 
with emotion models, and will test predictions made by such 
a combined model in a series of studies, where we zoom in 
on referential communication. Based on our findings, we 
aim to develop a computational model that is capable of 
generating different linguistic realizations of the same 
content, as a function of emotional state.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the processes involved in language production. 
Section III describes the relationship between emotion and 
language. Section IV describes the research questions we 
aim to address in our project “Producing Affective 
Language”. Section V introduces two current projects, one 
experimental, one corpus based, that address the relationship 
between 
emotion 
and 
language 
production. 
The 
acknowledgment and conclusion close the article. 
II.
LANGUAGE PRODUCTION
Speaking is a complex cognitive activity that starts with 
the conceptual preparation of a message and that ends in 
articulation. Levelt has described the emerging consensus 
that speech production takes place in a number of 
consecutive stages, each of which produces an output 
representation that provides the necessary information for the 
next stage [5]-[7]; see also the work by Griffin and Ferreira
[8]. Despite different views regarding the exact division of 
the processes involved (e.g., compare [5] and [6]) the two 
main processes preceding articulation are generally assumed 
to be content selection or conceptualization (“deciding what 
to say”) and message formulation or linguistic realization 
(“deciding how to say it”), as illustrated in Figure 1.  
Once a speaker has decided what to say and chosen the 
words to express the message, the relevant linguistic 
Idea 
Content Selection 
Message Formulation 
Articulation 
Figure 1. The stages in the speech production process.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

properties of these words (e.g., their gender, number, 
whether they are mass or count nouns) are selected and 
integrated [7]. In contrast to this automatic process of 
selecting the properties of a word, content selection and 
message formulation are influenced by perspective taking [6] 
and dialogue factors [9]. We adjust our words depending on 
whether we are talking to a colleague (“I study content 
selection”) or to a family member (“I study how we decide 
what to say”). 
These psycholinguistic insights have been adopted in the 
field of natural language generation [10][11], although 
sometimes using different terminology. Generally, the results 
from psycholinguistic experiments have proven useful in the 
development of algorithms for natural language generation. 
For example, Levelt’s Speaking [5] and Pechmann’s work on 
overspecification [12] were important influences for Dale 
and Reiter’s [13] incremental algorithm for referring 
expression generation [11]. 
Importantly, these phases of the speech production 
system have traditionally been understood as modules that 
receive and process input in an automatic and encapsulated 
way. However, given its basis in affective and social 
processes together with the accumulating evidence that many 
cognitive processes are cognitively permeable, it would be 
surprising if the language production system were entirely 
isolated from other affective and cognitive processes (see 
also [14]). 
III.
EMOTION AND LANGUAGE
Beginning with Bower [15], emotional states have been 
linked to cognitive effects in a spreading activation 
approach where an individual’s dominant emotional state 
spreads to semantic nodes related to that state, resulting in 
the stronger activation of conceptually related nodes 
[16][17]. Research in this field has provided evidence for 
the claim that, because they are connected to nodes that 
indicate a relatively safe situation, positive emotions result 
in global, heuristic processing [16][18], whereas negative 
emotions warrant more local, analytical, processing because 
they activate nodes that indicate a potentially dangerous 
situation. 
In some sense, the influence of emotion on language 
production is obvious: when we are in a specific affective 
state, we express that state in words (“I’m angry”), as well as 
by nonverbal means (we shout and shake our fist). Almost all 
of this takes place at the levels of Idea and Articulation as 
depicted in Figure 1. However, the influence of emotion on 
the early stages of language production proper (content 
selection and message formulation) is far from trivial, and 
understudied as well. Our working hypothesis is that the 
relation between emotion and early language production is 
affected by specific emotional appraisals [19][20]. These are 
evaluations of stimuli with respect to a number of 
dimensions, such as novelty and pleasantness, but also 
attributions of agency [21], where people are either 
responsible for their situation and have control over the 
outcome (high agency) or have no control and thus no 
responsibility over the situation (low agency), and the 
possible violation of moral and social norms [22]. 
While there is evidence for the influence of emotion on 
the articulatory stage of speech production, there is 
surprisingly little work on the earlier stages involving 
content selection and message formulation. A few notable 
exceptions exist, of which the work of Kempe et al. [23] is a 
prime example. They showed that happy speakers were less 
likely to specify an ambiguous word such as “bat” with a 
property (such as baseball bat or flying bat, when both are 
visible) that uniquely identified the intended referent. The 
authors conclude that a positive mood leads to a less 
effortful processing style (because a positive state signals a 
safe situation [16][18]) that causes speakers to spend less 
mental energy on perspective taking [23].  
IV.
RESEARCH QUESTIONS
Starting from the idea that emotional appraisals inform 
other cognitive systems (the “affect as information” theory, 
see [17]), they are expected to affect the language 
production process as well. The main research question of 
this project is if and how the emotional state of language 
users influences the early processes involved in language 
production. The emotion part of this question is understood 
in terms of appraisal theory, and the speech production part 
is understood in terms of the global version of Levelt’s 
model presented in Figure 1. Here, we will investigate 
content 
selection 
and 
message 
formulation 
by 
experimentally inducing in discrete emotional states such as 
amusement and disgust using film fragments and by 
analyzing the language of emotionally charged sports 
reporting, comparing reports of teams that won and lost 
their match. 
Future work will be concerned with building a 
computational model of emotional language production. 
While a handful of computational models have been 
developed that address personality-based [24][25] and 
affective [26][27] text generation, this issue remains largely 
unexplored. This is unfortunate, given the growing interest 
in this topic. This kind of application could enable 
individually tailored reporting with appropriate emotional 
“shading”, which is more likely to be appealing and 
interesting for readers than straightforward “vanilla” reports 
[28].  
V.
CURRENT PROJECTS
In this section, two ongoing projects are described, 
addressing the research questions introduced above. The 
first project investigates whether dialogue partners align less 
when in a positive emotional state (as compared to a 
negative one). The second project involves a newly 
developed corpus of soccer reports that describe the same 
event (a soccer match) from a positive or a negative 
perspective. 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

A. Emotional state and Lexical Alignment 
Previous research has shown that content selection is 
affected by alignment processes occurring in interaction (see 
[9] for a recent model). Speakers tend to select the same 
properties as their dialogue partners when referring to 
objects, 
even 
if 
these 
properties 
were 
previously 
dispreferred [29]. Given that emotions play a central role in 
our social interactions and in evolution of the speech 
production system [6], positive emotions will likely result in 
a less effortful and more egocentric processing style, while 
negative emotions will result in a more effortful and less 
egocentric processing style. In addition, emotions that result 
in different approach or avoidance stances (such as disgust, 
and amusement) are also expected to influence the extent to 
which speakers align with their conversation partner.  
We will be testing this using a non-scripted version of 
the interactive reference paradigm [29] in which participants 
engage in a dialogue and alternatingly describe objects in a 
director matcher task designed to elicit alignment (as can be 
seen in Figure 2). First, participant A has to describe the 
target (1). To uniquely identify the target, she can only use 
the dispreferred attribute (size), e.g., “the large desk”, or, 
when she uses color redundantly, “the large green desk”. By 
using the property size in her description, she primes 
participant B to use this property as well in her description 
(assuming that participants will align in this task). 
Participant B first identifies the correct object (2) by 
pointing at it and then describes his object (3) that is finally 
identified by participant A in (4). Note that in describing his 
target object (3) participant B can use color (“the red sofa”) 
or size (“the large sofa”) or both (“the large red sofa”), in 
which case one of the properties is redundant, to distinguish 
the target picture from the distractors. Thus, if participant B 
uses size more when participant A has done so previously, 
that would be evidence for alignment. 
Methodologically, the role of emotion in cognitive 
phenomena is often experimentally investigated by first 
inducing a particular emotion in participants and then asking 
them to perform a particular task [1]. The most used (and 
most effective) method has been to use validated film clips, 
to induce specific emotions [30][31]. In the present study, 
participants first view an excerpt of an amusing (e.g., the 
restaurant scene from “When Harry met Sally”) or 
disgusting video (e.g., Devine eating poop in “Pink 
Flamingo’s”) and were asked to indicate their level of 
amusement and disgust on a seven-point scale. A 
preliminary manipulation check shows that participants 
report higher levels of amusement (Mean = 4.93, Standard 
Deviation = 1.34) than disgust (Mean = 2.50, Standard 
Deviation = 1.71) after viewing an amusing video, and, 
conversely, higher levels of disgust (Mean = 6.43, Standard 
Deviation = 1.32) than amusement (Mean = 2.13, Standard 
Deviation = 0.94) after viewing a disgusting video (All 
these differences are statistically significant; F (1, 56) = 
36.70, p < .001 and F (1, 56) = 206.89, p < .001 
respectively). 
The proportion of attribute alignment will be used as 
dependent variable. As indicated, alignment at the level of 
content selection (i.e., deciding to say “the small chair” 
versus “the red chair”) occurs when participant B uses the 
dispreferred attribute to describe the target when participant 
A did use the dispreferred attribute as well. If the amount of 
alignment indeed depends on whether the speaker is amused 
or disgusted, that would be evidence for the role of emotion 
in the conceptualization stage of speech production. 
Specifically, we predict that disgusted speakers, who should 
be less egocentric and more willing to engage in effortful 
processing, will align more with their partner by using the 
dispreferred attribute size when their partner uses the 
dispreferred attribute. Conversely, we predict that amused 
participants, who will be more egocentric and less prone to 
engage in effortful processing, will align less with their 
partner and keep using the preferred attribute color, even 
when their partner uses size. 
B. A multilingual corpus of affective soccer reports 
Sports reports open up a lot of room for creative 
language use, starting with the headlines of the match 
reports [32] and extending to almost every aspect of the 
report. For many biased ports reports, that is, sport reports 
that are written from the perspective of one of the 
competing teams, the point of view of the author of a match 
report is clearly definable from the beginning. So, it is easy 
to assume that the different possible outcomes of such a 
match would also produce different match reports in terms 
of language and communicated emotion (i.e., different 
conceptualizations and linguistic realizations). Take for 
example the following introductory sentences:  
“AFC Wimbledon’s five-match unbeaten league run 
came to an end in frustrating fashion tonight as Neal 
Figure 2. The four tasks that constitute a trial. In frame 1 and 3 the 
speaker describes the marked object, in frame 2 and 4, the listener 
identifies the described object.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Ardley’s men were beaten by struggling Dagenham 
& Redbridge.” (AFC241115, EO, LOSS, MASC, 
2016) 
Compared to: 
“Daggers recorded a first win in 12 league games 
with a 1-0 success away to AFC Wimbledon” 
(DR241115, EO, WIN, MASC, 2016) 
Both describe the exact same match and events, with 
totally different emotional nuances and very different 
emotions shining through in the texts. For Wimbledon, all 
the frustration is written out in the long first sentence 
(“frustrating fashion”, “beaten”, “struggling”), while the 
winners limit themselves to a shorter and much more 
positive -possibly more objective- text (“win”, “success 
away”). These and other differences in biased sports 
reporting shed light on the language conceptualization and 
realization process that takes place when writing in an 
emotional state and would be especially valuable for 
automatic generation of natural language [33]. Indeed, Hovy 
[34] describes that taking into account the speaker’s 
emotional state, rhetorical, and communicative goals, is 
crucial for generating suitable texts for different readers.  
However, the reality of automatic text generation is that not 
many NLG systems are able to adapt to the mood of the 
recipients of the produced text [28] and to convey the mood 
of the author.  
To find out more about the language in texts produced in 
negative and positive emotional states, we (manually) 
compiled the Multilingual Affective Soccer Corpus [33]. 
We collected match reports from 121 different clubs 
participating in the first and second league in England, 
Germany, and the Netherlands. A first look at our data 
shows that reports describing wins are, on average, longer 
than reports describing losses or ties (777 words versus 715 
or 713 words respectively). Of course, length is but one very 
superficial property of a text. There are likely many other 
textual elements, such as word choice, grammatical 
constructions, and pronoun use that potentially differ 
between biased reports. 
We plan to use text analysis tools, such as LIWC [34] to, 
for example, help to determine the proportions of negative 
and positive emotion words, such as “frustrating” in 
example (1) or “success” in example (2). Analyzing this 
corpus will contribute to the understanding of how different 
emotional states influence and change (written) language 
production. We are currently planning a detailed descriptive 
analysis on surface features, such as already indicated text 
lengths and emotion words, as well as a more in-depth 
analysis of, for example, referential expressions and 
pronouns. Analyzing pronouns possibly sheds light on the 
focus of the author in the respective outcome of the game. If 
the match results in a win, does the report focus on the own 
team’s great performance or on the opponent’s failure (“us 
vs. them”)? Additionally, we plan to investigate whether 
there are linguistic features that are related to the affect 
present in the texts – for example, whether certain 
grammatical constructions occur more in positive or 
negative contexts. 
VI.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduced a project investigating the 
relationship between emotion and language production, 
approaching the issue from an experimental as well as a 
corpus based perspective. We have briefly described the 
process of language production and argued for the 
relationship between emotion and language production. To 
study this relationship, we focus on two aspects of referring 
expression generation, namely content selection (“deciding 
what to say”) and linguistic realization (“deciding how to 
say it”) and use appraisal theory to generate hypotheses 
about the influence of specific emotions on these processes. 
We illustrate our approach by introducing two studies, one 
experimental and one corpus based, that are currently being 
conducted in this project. These and similar studies will 
shed light on the relationship between linguistic and 
affective processes and will serve as the basis for a 
computational model of affective language generation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We received financial support for this work from The 
Netherlands Organization for Scientific Research (NWO), 
via Grant PR-14-87 (Producing Affective Language: 
Content Selection, Message Formulation and Computational 
Modelling), which is gratefully acknowledged.  
REFERENCES
[1]
K. R. Scherer, “Vocal communication of emotion : A review 
of research paradigms,” Speech. Commun, vol. 40, pp. 227-
256, 2003. 
[2]
J. A. Bachorowski, and M. J. Owren. “Sounds of emotion,” 
Ann NY Acad Sci, vol. 1000, pp. 244-265, 2003. 
[3]
J. W. Pennebaker, M. R. Mehl, and K. G. Niederhoffer, 
“Psychological aspects of natural language. use: our words, 
our selves,”. Annu. Rev. Psychol., vol. 54, pp. 547-77, 2003. 
[4]
S. W. Stirman and J. W. Pennebaker, “Word Use in the Poetry 
of Suicidal and Non-Suicidal Poets”, Psychosom. Med., vol. 
63, pp. 517-522, 2001. 
[5]
W. J. Levelt, Speaking: From Intention to Articulation, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989. 
[6]
W. J. Levelt, “Producing spoken language: A blueprint of the 
speaker”, In The neurocognition of language (chapter 4), C. 
Brown & P. Hagoort, Eds. Oxford, UK: Oxford Press, pp. 83-
122, 1999. 
[7]
W. J. Levelt, “Spoken word production: A theory of lexical 
access”, P. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 98, pp. 13464-13471, 
2001. 
[8]
Z. M. Griffin and V. S. Ferreira, “Properties of spoken 
language production”, In The handbook of psycholinguistics, 
(2nd ed.), M. J. Traxler and M. A. Gernsbacher, Eds. 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, pp. 21-59 2006. 
[9]
M. Pickering and S. Garrod, “An integrated theory of 
language production and comprehension”, Behav. Brain Sci., 
vol. 36, pp. 329 – 347, 2013. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[10] E. Reiter, “Has a consensus NL generation architecture 
appeared, and is it psycholinguistically plausible?. In Proc. of 
the Seventh International Workshop on Natural Language 
Generation, 
Kennebunkport, 
Maine: 
Association 
for 
Computational Linguistics, pp. 163-170, 1994. 
[11] E. Krahmer, “What computational linguists can learn from 
psychologists (and vice versa)”, Comput. Linguist., vol. 36, 
pp. 285-294, 2010. 
[12] T. Pechmann, “Incremental speech production and referential 
overspecification”, Linguistics, vol. 27, pp. 89-110, 1989. 
[13] R. Dale and E. Reiter, “Computational interpretations of the 
Gricean maxims in the generation of referring expressions”, 
Cognitive Sci., vol. 19, 233-263, 1995. 
[14] G. Vigliocco and R. J. Hartsuiker, “The interplay of meaning, 
sound, and syntax in sentence production”, Psychological 
Bulletin, vol. 128, pp. 442-472, 2002. 
[15] G. H. Bower, “Mood and memory”, American psychologist, 
vol. 36, pp 129-148, 1981. 
[16] J. P. Forgas, “Mood and judgment: the affect infusion model 
(AIM)”, Psychol. Bull., vol. 117, pp. 39-66, 1995. 
[17] N. Schwarz and G. L. Clore, “Mood as information: 20 years 
later”, Psychol Inq., vol. 14, pp. 296-303, 2003. 
[18] B. L. Fredrickson, “The role of positive emotions in positive 
psychology: The broaden and build theory of positive 
emotions. Am. Psychol., vol. 56, pp. 218-226, 2001. 
[19] N. H. Frijda, “The Emotions”, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1986. 
[20] K. R. Scherer, “The dynamic architecture of emotion: 
Evidence for the component process model”, Cognition 
Emotion, vol. 23, pp. 1307-1351, 2009. 
[21] C.A. Smith and P. C. Ellsworth, “Patterns of cognitive 
appraisal in emotion”, J. Pers. Soc. Psychol., vol. 48, pp. 813-
838, 1985. 
[22] C. A. Hutcherson and J. J. Gross, “The moral emotions: A 
social–functionalist account of anger, disgust, and contempt”. 
J. Pers. Soc. Psychol, vol. 100, pp. 719-737, 2011. 
[23] V. Kempe, M. Rookes and L. Swarbrigg, “Speaker emotion 
can affect ambiguity production”, Lang. Cognitive Proc., vol. 
28, pp. 1-12, 2012. 
[24] F. Mairesse and M. Walker, “PERSONAGE: Personality 
generation for dialogue”, in Ann Meeting of the Association 
for Computational Linguistics, Association for Computational 
Linguistics, June 2007, p. 496-503. 
[25] M. Walker, J. Sawyer, G. Lin and S. Wing, “Does Personality 
Matter? Expressive Generation for Dialogue Interaction”, in 
Natural Interaction with Robots, Knowbots and Smartphones, 
vol 28, J. Mariani, S. Rosset, M.  Garnier-Rizet, L Devillers, 
Eds. New York: Springer, pp 285-301, 2014. 
[26] I. van der Sluis and C. Mellish, “Towards empirical 
evaluation of affective tactical NLG”, in Empirical Methods 
in Natural Language Generation: Data-oriented Methods and 
Empirical Evaluation, E. Krahmer and M. Theune, Eds. 
Berlin: Springer, pp. 242-263, 2010. 
[27] I. van Der Sluis, C. Mellish and G. Doherty, “Affective text: 
Generation strategies and emotion measurement issues” Proc. 
of 
the 
Twenty-Fourth 
International Florida 
Artificial 
Intelligence Research Society Conference (FLAIRS 2011), R. 
Charles Murray, P. M. McCarthy, Eds. The AAAI Press, May 
2011, Menlo Park, California. Palm Beach, Florida., pp. 123-
128. 
[28] S. Mahamood and E. Reiter, E, “Generating affective natural 
language for parents of neonatal infants” Proc. of the 13th 
European Workshop on Natural Language Generation (ENLG 
2011), C. Gardent  and  K. Striegnitz, Eds. Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Sept. 2011, pp. 12-21, 2011. 
[29] M. Goudbeek and E. Krahmer, “Alignment in Interactive 
Reference Production: Content Planning, Modifier Ordering, 
and Referential Overspecification. Top. Cog. Sci., vol. 4, pp. 
269-289, 2012. 
[30] J. J. Gross and R. W. Levenson, “Emotion elicitation using 
films”, Cognition Emotion, vol. 9, 87-108, 1995. 
[31] A. Schaefer, F. Nils, X. Sanchez and P. Philippot, “Assessing 
the effectiveness of a large database of emotion-eliciting 
films: A new tool for emotion researchers”, Cognition 
Emotion, vol. 24, pp. 1153-1172, 2010. 
[32] M. K. Smith and M. B. Montgomery, “The semantics of 
winning and losing”, Lang. Soc., vol. 18, pp. 31-57, 1989. 
[33] N. Braun, M. Goudbeek and E. Krahmer, “The Multilingual 
Affective Soccer Corpus (MASC): Compiling a biased 
parallel corpus on soccer reportage in English, German and 
Dutch”, in Proc. of the Ninth International Natural Language 
Generation conference (INLG 2016), Association for 
Computational Linguistics, Sept. 2016.  
[34] E. H. Hovy, “Pragmatics and natural language generation”, 
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 43, pp. 153-197, 1990. 
[35] J. W. Pennebaker, M. E. Francis and R. J. Booth, “Linguistic 
inquiry and word count: LIWC 2001”, Mahway: Lawrence 
Erlbaum 
Associates, 
71, 
2001.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

