Integrating New Technologies in Human-Driven Professions:  
How Can Tourist Guides Leverage Digital Transformation? 
 
 
Christian Bourret 
DICEN-IdF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: christian.bourret@univ-eiffel.fr 
 
Claudia Da Re 
DICEN-IdF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: claudia.da-re@univ-eiffel.fr 
Denis Juillière 
IFIS – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: denisjmlv@gmail.com 
 
Karim Fraoua 
DICEN-IdF – Gustave Eiffel University 
Marne-la-Vallée, France 
Email: karim.fraoua@univ-eiffel.fr 
 
 
Abstract—Qualified tourist guides are professionals in cultural, 
technical, and scientific mediation and they work mainly in 
public spaces, museums, and historical monuments. The digital 
transformation of the 2010s has revolutionised the approach to 
knowledge and has led to a change in the role of qualified 
tourist guides. By this we mean the explosion of Wikipedia and 
social networks, as well as the introduction of multimedia in 
museums. The effects of the current health crisis (Covid) have 
added to all this and imposed profound changes and 
irreversible developments. Our reflection is about, on one 
hand, the way in which the qualified tourist guides can rely on 
digital technology during a tour and, on the other hand, the 
new skills that student guides must acquire during their 
scholarship. We seek to understand where and how digital 
technology can be an ally of qualified tourist guides without 
replacing them. We will rely on the professional degree of 
qualified tourist guides (in French: guides-conférenciers), 
prepared in our Gustave Eiffel University, as well as on our 
connections with the National Federation of Qualified Tourist 
Guides, to analyse the digital approach of future professionals 
in the sector. 
 
Keywords – Tourist Guide; Guide-lecturer; digital 
tools; cultural mediation; museums. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Since 2010, the tourism sector has been facing a 
profound digital transformation and has also hit the shock of 
a health crisis. This is particularly true for qualified tourist 
guide’s profession. We propose to analyse the evolution of 
the profession of qualified tourist guides, or in French 
guide-conférencier [1], in the global context of digital 
transformation and Covid pandemic. After an introduction 
(Section I), we explain our scientific positioning (Section II) 
and we give an overview of human mediation (Section III). 
Then, we outline the use of digital new tools in the 
mediation (Section IV). Finally, we analyse the future of 
qualified tourist guides facing the Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT) (Section V) and we give 
a conclusion (Section VI). Observing our students over the 
last few years and following the experience of a qualified 
tourist guide, we realised that it became necessary to re-
think the profession of tourist guide by integrating digital 
tools. Through their master’s dissertations and their 
internships, our students reflect on how to integrate digital 
tools in their job. We intend to analyse their approach of this 
subject during their studies and also after, when they will 
start to work. We want to understand in which way digital 
technology can be an ally of a qualified tourist guide and 
will try to provide an overview of the current situation. 
The decree n. 2011-930 of August 1st 2011, relating to 
persons qualified to conduct guided tours in museums and 
historical monuments [2], has modified the status of the 
qualified tourist guide. From now on, the law recognises 
only one professional figure that groups together the four 
professions that existed until 2011 (regional guide-
interpreter, national guide-interpreter, guide-lecturer of the 
Cities and Countries of Art and History, national lecturer): 
the qualified tourist guide or in French guide-conférencier. 
Obtaining the professional license, which is valid 
throughout France, is subject to the validation of a 
professional bachelor’s degree or a master's degree if the 
following courses units have been validated: tourist guide 
skills, professional practice, and modern foreign language. 
The professional bachelor’s degree is characterised by its 
multidisciplinary approach. The bachelor’s degree proposed 
at the Gustave Eiffel University, for example, focuses on 
three fundamental aspects: history of art, cultural heritage 
and general knowledge; practical aspects with guiding 
techniques and oral mediation of the public; professional 
aspects of communication, marketing and occupational 
integration. The aim is to provide students with tools 
allowing to deal with any type of situation and being able to 
practice their profession independently or in collaboration 
with tourist offices and other tourist 
or cultural 
establishments, as well as connecting and networking with 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

professionals of the National Federation of Qualified Tourist 
Guides [3].  
The profession of qualified tourist guide is in constant 
evolution. It requires constant adaptation to the various 
audiences and the context or subject of the visit. This is 
especially true with the arrival of new technologies in the 
2010s, which have revolutionised the approach to 
knowledge and have led to a change in the role of the 
qualified tourist guides. Three stages in the evolution of the 
profession of qualified tourist guide allow us to better 
understand its link with the evolution of the Information and 
Communication Technology (ICT). The first one is about 
the operating mode of the mediation of the public in general 
and is related to the evolution of public’s expectations. The 
second is more specific to the content of the tourist guide's 
presentation, which has evolved with the availability of 
online information. The last stage combines the two 
previous ones, gathered in the digital solutions developed in 
the field of public mediation. 
In the following sections, we will detail these three 
stages in order to understand how the profession of qualified 
tourist guide must evolve and adapt to the new socio-
cultural context. We will analyse the context of the 
professional bachelor’s program of Guide-Conférencier at 
Gustave Eiffel University, and more specifically the 
relationship of future guides to the digital world. These 
analyses will be carried out using an information and 
communication sciences approach. 
 
II. 
SCIENTIFIC POSITIONING: CONVERGENCE BETWEEN 
LINK, MEANING ACTION AND KNWOLEDGE 
This communication associates two teacher-researchers, 
one in information and communication sciences, the other in 
computer science, a research engineer working on cultural 
heritage and a qualified tourist guide, teacher in the same 
University. They constitute a large part of the supervision 
and teaching staff of the Guide-Conferencier professional 
bachelor’s degree at Gustave Eiffel University. This work is 
placed 
in 
a 
perspective 
of 
research-action 
and 
transdisciplinarity, with the construction of knowledge for 
action starting from new uses of socio-technical devices. 
Our scientific position is in the field of information and 
communication sciences, within a research team: DICEN-
IdF (Information and Communication Devices in the Digital 
Era). We therefore have an approach that integrates the 
dimensions of communication (exchanges, interactions), 
uses and production of data and the use of socio-technical 
devices. We position according to F. Bernard [4] insisting 
on the convergence of link, meaning, action and knowledge.  
Our work is mainly action research, in particular to 
analyse activity situations, with the dimension of social 
constructivism: construction of social reality by the actors. 
We thus integrate the "situational and interactionist 
semiotics" approach proposed by A. Mucchielli [5] with the 
dimension of feelings, emotions and the body as social 
media, as proposed by F. Martin-Juchat [6], which is 
particularly important in times of health crisis. 
From a methodological point of view, we are depending 
on the context, in situations of "participant observation", but 
more often in "observer participation", by being very 
involved in the follow-up of students in professional 
situations or in professional activities (all range of touristic 
and cultural structures). 
This double positioning, which is also a positioning of 
theoretical reflection and strong practical involvement, 
allows us to be particularly proactive in a reflection on the 
employability of new graduates and the evolution of this 
profession of mediation for the development of cultural and 
tourist heritage in the territories. In an approach of 
economic and territorial intelligence [7], we insist on the 
reliance (links, interactions) to participate in the resilience 
of territories, in the double context of digital transformation 
and health crisis. As in the idea to search for new ways in 
Competitive or Economic Intelligence [8]. 
Reliance and resilience by insisting on the informational 
and communicational stakes of activity situations, to 
improve the added value and employability of the qualified 
tourist guides for a better adaptability to meet the 
expectations of new audiences, and to be much more active 
in their stays and visits and much more sensitive to the 
authenticity 
of 
the 
territories 
and 
to 
personalised 
experiences. 
 
III. 
OVERVIEW AND EVOLUTION OF HUMAN MEDIATION 
The scope of intervention of a qualified tourist guide is 
very vast and covers the whole of the French cultural and 
natural heritage. 
In France, qualified tourist guides are the only ones 
allowed by law to conduct visits and lectures in museums 
and historical monuments (except for curators and teachers, 
to a certain extend). We, therefore, chose to focus on 
museums and historical monuments where the digital 
element is increasingly important.  
The functions of the museum, as we recall, are 
exhibition, conservation, scientific study and animation. 
Museums bring their collections to life and offer different 
approaches to reading them for different types of visitors. 
Animation acts as a driving force in the museum institution 
and can take various forms: educational activities, guided 
tours, 
lectures, 
concerts, 
workshops, 
events 
and 
demonstrations of all kinds [9]. Consequently, mediation 
approaches, whether human or digital, are based on the 
knowledge of the public’s expectations. In fact, the modus 
operandi of mediation professionals has evolved to adapt to 
the expectations of the public by moving from the simple 
discourse (from "saying") to action (to "doing"), with the 
rise of performative and participative interventions. As 
Stéphanie Airaud reminds us, "The mediator's discourse 
proposes to go beyond the guided tour to play on the springs 
of aesthetic experience.  Embodied by the lecturer for an 
audience, this speech uses taste, sound, imagination, fiction, 
the illusion of image and word to invent a performative 
maieutic. It therefore seems possible to move from saying to 
doing" [10]. We consider here “dire” (say) as an oral 
transmission of a discourse on the artistic works, and “faire” 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

(do) as the creation of a situation, a space for play and the 
advent of a form. Many guides and lecturers then invented 
new forms of mediation, in which the public more easily 
speaks up during debates, physically invests the tour 
framework in artistic forms (dance, poetry, meditation, etc.) 
or playful forms (photo rally, treasure hunt). The most 
important thing is to become an actor (or "spect-actor") of a 
new type of participative visit.  
The discourse of tour guides has also evolved with the 
increasing access of the public to information. From the 
mid-2000s onwards, Wikipedia revolutionised public access 
to online information. As its diversity and reliability grew, 
tourist guides gradually lost their status as knowledge 
holders. They questioned the content of their discourses and 
sought to offer more reflection and perspective in addition 
to the raw information. Since the explosion of social 
networks in the mid-2010s, the youngest users now rarely 
consult traditional media and instead lock themselves into 
information loops. For these audiences, the discourse of the 
qualified tourist guide has evolved further with the return of 
popularisation content combined with increased vigilance 
on discernment since the explosion of fake news from 2016. 
 
IV. 
DIGITAL, NEW TOOLS FOR MEDIATION IN THE 
MUSEUM AND PUBLIC SPACE: THE THIRD STAGE IN THE 
EVOLUTION OF THE TOURIST GUIDE PROFESSION 
Our reflection here is about the way in which the 
qualified tourist guide can rely on digital technology during 
a guided tour. We therefore exclude the use of digital 
technology for communication and marketing purposes [11]. 
The same applies to creative content of a cultural and 
immaterial nature which excludes de facto human mediation 
(eEducation/EdTech, video games, digital publishing, 
digital press, 3D animation, virtual reality, augmented 
reality, music, audiovisual, radio, television, cinema). 
We will try to show how digital can be a complementary 
tool for guides without trying to replace them. The Covid 19 
pandemic and its many lockdowns have proved the need of 
human relationships and interactions in education and 
leisure activities. Hence, the importance of closely 
associating and balancing the level of intervention of the 
digital world and the human in the mediation with the 
public. We can define three levels of intermediation in 
which digital takes a more or less important place. 
In 100% immersive mediation, the public wanders 
through spaces with a high level of scenography which use 
interactive digital tools in different contexts and for 
different purposes and where guides do not have a lot of 
opportunities for their intervention. The first type offers 
immersive exhibitions of digital creations on artistic themes, 
such as the Atelier des Lumières [12] in Paris. The second 
type offers a tour combining immersive content and varied 
interactive digital content with the aim of facilitating the 
understanding of a subject. This is the case of the Château 
d'Auvers sur Oise [13] focusing on 19th century art. In a 
constrained tour, visitors wander from room to room 
interacting with various contents and operating modes. It 
should be noted that this type of mediation can be very 
useful for people with motor or visual and hearing 
disabilities. 
Finally, the third type makes use of new technologies as 
an innovative positioning in terms of product, which enables 
it to stand out in the cultural offer of a destination. This is 
the case of the Hôtel de la Marine in Paris [14], which 
opened in 2021 and offers an immersive tour within highly 
planned environment and constrained pathway using various 
devices to enhance the visitor experience. 
Some cultural places offer interactive or immersive 
contents while allowing the guide to intervene at key 
moments in the visit. This is the case at the Cité des 
Sciences in Paris [15], where permanent and temporary 
exhibitions are accessible on their own or with a guide. In 
this case, it is necessary for the guide or scientific mediator 
to be aligned with the imposed scenography by becoming 
familiar with contents and operating modes of the digital 
tools in order to integrate them into his tour and its 
discourse. Consequently, he must be a specialist in the 
subjects covered in order to be able to deliver the necessary 
information, answer to certain questions from the public and 
achieve an optimal customer experience. 
The third level of intermediation takes place in 
environments with lesser scenography and leaves much 
more opportunities to the guide to integrate digital 
technology into his visit. This is the case of the Sainte 
Chapelle in Paris [16], which has a freely accessible 
interactive digital table offering 3D reconstructions of the 
place and its surroundings during the history. It is large 
enough for a dozen people to gather around and can easily 
be used during the visit to support the guide's presentation. 
Augmented reality offers a significant cognitive support in 
understanding and reinforcing the content delivered by the 
guide. Here again, the guide must be familiar with the 
contents and functionalities of the tool in order to be able to 
integrate them perfectly into his tour scenario. Similarly, the 
Conciergerie in Paris offers its visitors histopads [17], 
which provide 3D reconstructions of the site, also in 
augmented reality, accompanied by written information. 
These can easily be integrated into a tour in which the guide 
will find in this tool an ally enabling him to evoke the 
atmosphere of a place that is now not so furnished and 
decorated. 
In these places, the digital visit materials are very often 
designed and produced without taking the guide into 
account, not involving them into the creative, design and 
planning process. Even if, for some museums, guided tours 
represent a less important part in terms of attendance than 
the self-guided tours for which these tools are designed, we 
can only encourage a dialogue in which museums consults 
its guides or mediators for the selection of digital tools and 
the drawing up of specifications for the contents and 
operating methods. The objective is to meet the needs of the 
public in a guided tour situation and to offer the guide a 
better appropriation and a more relevant integration of the 
tool in his visit according to contents and operating methods 
that are adapted to his visit. 
The emergence of digital technology must be integrated 
into a perspective of human interaction to encourage the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

creation 
of 
new 
services. 
The 
100% 
immersive 
intermediation, in particular, forces the actors of cultural 
and scientific mediation to a new approach of service 
definition and guides more precisely to an in-depth 
reflection on how to give a new added value to their 
profession. 
Despite the interest and progress brought by the variety 
of digital tools, we do not think that 100% digital is the 
most relevant approach in terms of services, public 
mediation, and product. In the same way that we have 
integrated the hybrid into professional, medical or relational 
perspectives, human mediation must remain at the centre of 
these approaches, and this is why we propose to integrate 
the expertise of qualified tourist guides into the design of 
digital tools. In the graph from Figure 1, we show the 
difference between opportunities of mediation and easiness 
of mediation according to the degree of digitization: 
- The opportunities (dotted line) exist as soon as there is 
at least one digital tool, and they decrease with the 
intervention of immersive content and scenography 
- The easiness for the guide is optimal when he has more 
variety of choice of digital supports as he is not forced to 
use the one and only available which may not be relevant 
for his visit. 
Easiness starts to drop as soon as the content is 
immersive (histopad for example with its predetermined 
immersive scenario), and collapses in an immersive 
scenographic environment. 
Note that the difficulty of mediation also depends on the 
complexity of the scenario of the digital tool, which the 
guide should manage and be comfortable with to integrate it 
in his visit. 
 
 
Figure 1. Difference between opportunities of mediation and easiness 
of mediation according to the degree of digitization. 
V. 
FUTURE TOURIST GUIDES-FACING ICT 
The digital media present in the museums are designed 
to accompany an individual visit and provide in-depth 
information that the visitor must be able to use 
independently. The mediation offered by the museum is not 
necessarily intended to use these media either. At the same 
time, within the framework of our bachelor’s degree, we 
have noticed that until now future qualified tourist guides 
have not shown a significant interest in new technologies, 
but this is changing very quickly with the renewal of 
generations. The profession of guide is still largely 
perceived in a purely interactional reading without 
measuring the interest and need of the integration of new 
technological tools. The relationship with digital technology 
is still limited to treasure hunts or to a complementary 
communicative role, which may raise questions about the 
employability of future tourist guides, particularly regarding 
the acquisition of new segments of the public who are 
increasingly equipped with tools and applications that can 
be used to carry out a tour otherwise perceived as basic. 
Furthermore, appropriating new technologies would allow 
guides to position themselves in the market of 3D 
reconstructions and 100% immersive, thus ensuring the 
continuity of the profession. A qualified tourist guide, in 
addition to his cultural background and knowledge of the 
various audiences, could show and additional knowhow in 
technical skills that would be useful for the design of digital 
products offering progressive interpretating frameworks 
required by the different stages of a well-prepared visit. 
To fill this gap in the integration of qualified tourist 
guides in the design of public mediation projects, Gustave 
Eiffel University encourage a close collaboration between 
touristic sites and guides to involve them in the creation of 
digital tours. For example, in 2018, a student of our 
professional degree developed a tour of the Gallo-Roman 
site of 
Le Fâ (Barzan, Charente-Maritime) using 
geocaching [18]. The visitors were offered to walk through 
the site on their own with the aim of finding caches 
according to an itinerary planned by the management and 
the guide. The scenario of visit foresaw that the guide would 
be near strategic caches to offer additional information on 
the history, archaeology, the site, etc., and to answer to 
visitors' questions. This twofold interpretative approach 
responds to the issue of the types of discourse explained in 
part 2: to propose a framework of information completed by 
exchanges in the form of questions. 
Gustave Eiffel University and IFIS [19] are currently 
setting up exchanges between student guides and students of 
the Tourism and New Technologies professional degree in 
order to allow exchanges on each other’s practices, and also 
to help our future guides to integrate an ICT dimension into 
their end-of-study projects in order to better prepare 
themselves to accompany publics who make increasing use 
of tools, applications and digital practices. 
Some students from the Guide-Conférencier degree are 
currently working on a project for a guided tour of the 
Louvre Museum in Paris in the form of a treasure hunt using 
digital tablets. They are preparing specifications for the 
developers to work together on the content, ergonomics and 
functionalities of the application in order to make this 
treasure hunt fun, by integrating immersive and participative 
solutions. The didactic content will be provided by the 
qualified tourist guides who will be positioned at strategic 
points to offer additional information and answer questions. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

VI. 
CONCLUSION 
We have traced here, although in a synthetic way, the 
evolution that the profession of tourist guides has undergone 
over the years and with the arrival of digital technology.  
We have shown how much the new uses of digital 
technology condition the evolution of this profession of 
mediation facing of audiences that are increasingly using 
digital technology. To ensure the sustainability of their 
profession, guides must know how to adapt to this new 
context and give added value to their interventions. All 
these developments in the digital transformation take on an 
additional significance in times of the Covid pandemic, 
which reminds us how essential and necessary human 
interaction is. This new perspective has moreover imposed a 
major reinvention of the profession of qualified tourist 
guides, notably towards new remote services now integrated 
into their service offer. It is therefore not a question of 
putting ourselves in opposition to digital media, but rather 
of learning to use them so that they become our allies.  
Starting from this initial analysis, we wish to conduct 
research among the students of our professional bachelors’ 
degree to better understand their approach to digital 
technology and to propose an educational pathway that 
meets the requirements of the market. Secondly, we would 
like to develop collaborations between guides and computer 
scientists to make the tour app even more effective [20] 
[21]. 
REFERENCES 
[1]   L. Uzlyte, “The profession of guide-lecturer in the service of 
heritage and tourism. Identity, training and professional 
situation”/« Le métier de guide-conférencier au service du 
patrimoine et du tourisme. L’identité, la formation et la 
situation professionnelle », In Situ – Cultural Heritage journal 
/In 
Situ 
– 
Revue 
des 
patrimoines, 
30/2016. 
http://journals.openedition.org/insitu/13654. 
Retrieved 
January 2021. 
[2]  Decree n. 2011-930 of 1 August 2011, on the skills required 
for the issue of the professional guide card to holders of a 
professional or a master degree. / Arrêté du 9 novembre 2011 
relatif aux compétences requises en vue de la délivrance de la 
carte professionnelle de guide-conférencier aux titulaires de 
licence professionnelle ou de diplôme conférant le grade de 
master. 
https://www.legifrance.gouv.fr/loda/id/JORFTEXT00002481
3610/. Retrieved January 2022.  
[3] French National Federation of Qualified Tourist Guides/ 
Fédération Nationale des Guides Interprètes et Conférenciers : 
https://www.fngic.fr/ 
[4]  F. Bernard, “CIS: a discipline of openness and release”/« Les 
SIC une discipline de l’ouverture et du décloisonnement », in 
A. Bouzon. Organizational communication in debate. Fields, 
concepts, perspectives / La communication organisationnelle 
en débat. Champs, concepts, perspectives, Paris, L’Harmattan. 
pp. 33 – 46, 2008. 
[5] A. Mucchielli, Situation and communication/Situation et 
communication, Nice, Les éditions Ovadia, 2010. 
[6] F. Martin-Juchat The adventure of the body. Body 
communication, a way to emancipation/L’aventure du corps. 
La communication corporelle, une voie vers l’émancipation, 
PUG/ Presses Universitaires de Grenoble, Grenoble, 2020. 
[7]  C. Bourret, N. Fabry and C. Da Re, "Economic intelligence, 
data, resilience and territories"/« Intelligence économique, 
données, résilience et territoires », I2D - Information, data & 
documents/ I2D - Information, données & documents, 2020/3 
(n°3), p. 8-12. DOI : 10.3917/i2d.203.0008. URL : 
https://www.cairn.info/revue-i2d-information-donnees-et-
documents-2020-3-page-8.htm. Retrieved January 2022. 
[8] M.-A. Duval. The New Territories of Economic Intelligence/ 
Les nouveaux territoires de l’intelligence économique, aris: 
ACFC - IFIE Editions, 2008. 
[9] A. Gob & N. Drouguet, N., “Museums for which purpose? 
Roles and Functions of the Museum”/« Des musées pour 
quoi ? Rôles et fonctions du musée », chapter 3, in A. Gob éd 
Museology: 
History, 
development, 
present 
issues/La 
muséologie : Histoire, développements, enjeux actuels, Paris, 
Armand 
Colin, 
pp. 
69-97, 
2021. 
https://doi.org/10.3917/arco.gob.2021.01.0069. 
Retrieved 
January 2022. 
[10] « Le discours du médiateur se propose d’aller au-delà de la 
visite guidée pour jouer à son tour des ressorts de 
l’expérience esthétique. Mis en corps par le conférencier pour 
un public, cette parole utilise le goût, le son, l’imaginaire, la 
fiction, l’illusion de l’image et du verbe pour inventer une 
maïeutique performative. Il apparait dès lors envisageable de 
passer du dire au faire ». S. Airaud, The performative 
statements of the guided tour/« Les énoncés performatifs de la 
visite guidée », conference catalogue event/catalogue du 
colloque événement « du dire au faire », MACVAL, 
December 2011. 
[11] Webinaire CLIC France-Atout France "Maintaining the 
Relationship in 2021 with International Visitors via Digital 
Tools: Feedback and Perspectives/Entretenir la relation 2021, 
avec les visiteurs internationaux via les outils numériques : 
retours d’expériences et perspectives, 14 December 2021. 
http://www.club-innovation-culture.fr/event/webinaire-clic-
france-atout-france-visiteurs-internationaux-dec-2021/. 
[12] www.atelier-lumieres.com/ Retrieved January 2022.       
[13]www.chateau-auvers.fr/2878-la-visite-vision-impresssionniste-
.htm Retrieved January 2022.  
[14] www.hotel-de-la-marine.paris/, Retrieved January 2022. 
[15] www.cite-sciences.fr/fr/accueil/, Retrieved January 2022. 
[16] www.sainte-chapelle.fr/, Retrieved January 2022. 
[17]www.paris-conciergerie.fr/Explorer/Decouvrez-la-
Conciergerie-avec-l-HistoPad, Retrieved January 2022. 
[18] K. Meinau, How to enhance the Gallo-Roman museum and 
site of Le Fâ/Comment mettre en valeur le musée et site gallo-
romains du Fâ ?, professional degree’s dissertation, directed 
by Denis Juillière, 2018.    
http://www.sudoc.abes.fr/cbs/xslt/DB=2.1//SRCH?IKT=12&
TRM=233522298. 
[19] IFIS : Institut Francilien d’Ingénierie des Services/Ile-de-
France Services Institute. https://ifis.univ-gustave-eiffel.fr/  
[20] K.E. Fraoua, C. Bourret, “City 2.0 and Tourism 
Development”, in Ozok A.A., Zaphiris P. (eds) Online 
Communities and Social Computing, OCSC 2013 Lecture 
Notes in Computer Science, vol 8029, Springer, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, 2013, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-39371-
6_31. Retrieved January 2022. 
[21] K.E. Fraoua, S. Michelin, “Is Tourist Markovian Under 
Asymmetric Information?”, in C. Stephanidis, M. Antona 
(eds) HCI International 2019 HCII 2019. Communications in 
Computer and Information Science, vol 1088. Springer, 
Cham, 2019, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30712-7_52 
Retrieved January 2022. 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-979-9
HUSO 2022 : The Eighth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

