Acquisition and Analyses of Lessons Learned from Social Network R&D Using
Machine Learning
Marco Javier Suárez Barón
Research Department
University Corporation UNITEC
Bogotá, Colombia
marcosuarez@unitec.edu.co
Abdelraouf Ishtaiwi
Faculty of Information Technology
Petra University
Amman, Jordan
aishtaiwi@uop.edu.jo
Johan David Diaz Mendivelso
Faculty of Computing
UPTC University
Sogamoso, Colombia
johan.diaz@uptc.edu.co
Abstract—This
article
presents
the
development
of
a
computational framework used for the extraction and recovery
of lessons learned that have been extracted from academic and
research related social networks; the lexical analysis applied is
focused to Spanish language. The algorithm executes the
lexical analysis using Natural Language Programming (NLP)
techniques. The final result of the process shows that the use of
this type of lexical and semantic analysis is a key component in
tasks of social analysis, text mining and semantic enrichment.
Keywords-Lexicon analysis; Semantic annotations; Machine
Learning; Lessons learned; Social networks.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Social networks are currently considered as the main tool
for
sharing
information
and
data.
In
this
research,
information and data will be taken from lessons learned
contained in specialized social networks focused on research
and such as Research gate [1], LinkedIn [6] and Blogs [1].
Nevertheless,
most
of
the
research
experiences
and
knowledge are not registered or used, and information is not
being properly exploited in those networks.
As a solution for that, the use of computational models
like Machine Learning or Deep Learning enables the
structuring
and
integration
of
specialized
knowledge
acquired from significant experiences, such as lessons
learned [7]. The application of these models allows for
greater flexibility in the acquisition process and facilitates
the capture, recovery, transfer, and reuse of knowledge.
Implementing these technological platforms will provide the
entire organizational structure with a crucial tool for
decision-making and strategic planning on R & D issues.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes
the theoretical background, which involves Knowledge
Management (KM) process and methods, models to manage
knowledge on social systems and Learning technologies and
organizational strategies to exchange knowledge; Section 3
details our proposed framework to combine and summarize
research information and data to obtain final lessons learned;
Section 4 presents results and discussion on the main
components and phases of this computational model desing.
Finally, in Section 5, we present our main conclusions and
further works.
II.
BACKGROUND
The generation of new knowledge is used for decision-
making in non-simulated and simulated environments within
the Learning process in the network. Planned R & D entities
are thus created to optimize processes, reduce costs, increase
innovation, and consider new projects. Specifically, these
entities will be the context in which individuals and the
organization will learn more [2].
Despite scientific advances on this subject, there are still
gaps in the analysis of information from social networks of
investigative type whose content specifically covers issues
related to science, technology and innovation. The social
networks studied in this article and the information registered
in these networks correspond specifically to academic,
business and scientific social networks, although, for this
work
we used information contained in Twitter social
network for the extracting and integrating process.
The
application
of
Machine
Learning
enables
the
structuring
and
integration
of
specialized
knowledge
acquired from significant experiences, such as lessons
learned [3]. The application of these models allows for
greater flexibility in the acquisition process; it facilitates the
capture, recovery, transfer, and reuse of knowledge.
Social media has increased interest in our daily activities,
and the user profile of each individual is considered a
significant source of information [3]. Both Web sites and
social networks are potential tools for the management,
updating, and exchange of information and knowledge in
fields that are interested in knowing the basic thoughts, ideas,
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

relationships and activities of each individual in their
environment, such as marketing.
On the basis of this concept, Knowledge Management
(KM) theories center on mechanisms to help maintain
knowledge within an organization. According to [4], as KM
theory
evolved,
different
models
were
proposed
for
innovation management in companies from multiple sectors
in France and Germany, which have led us to focus our work
primarily
on
the
concept
of
Personal
Knowledge
Management (PKM), one of the most recent lines of work in
this field [5].
III.
METHODOLOGY
In
the
framework
purposed,
the
process-centered
approach focuses on individuals, as the most significant
source of knowledge within an organization, and upholds the
idea of resolving the cooperation problems amongst them
through a process to achieve their social commitment to
transfer and share knowledge. The basic methods used in this
approach, such as Computer-Supported Cooperative Work,
Workflow Administration, or processes training, among
others, seek to foster communication and collaboration
between individuals.
The framework used in this research project enabled the
authors to standardize concepts, practices, and criteria to
apply to the proposed metamodel and served as a reference
for confronting and resolving new test cases of a similar
nature.
This framework also includes the promotion of new
forms
of
knowledge
capture,
based
on
sources
of
information, such as lessons learned, that circulate in social
networks. The generation of new knowledge is used for
decision-making
in
non-simulated
and
simulated
environments within the Learning process in the network.
Planned R & D entities are thus created to optimize
processes, reduce costs, increase innovation, and consider
new projects.
Specifically, these entities will be the context in which
individuals and the organization will learn more. The
framework objectives described above are summarized in the
functional components presented in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Learning and organizational knowledge framework
The acquisition and structure of a lesson learned, also
known
as
"pattern"
or
relevant
information
in
the
metamodel, represents the relationship between the result of
a process, project, indicators, conditions or causes that
facilitated and / or hindered the strategic plan of R & D. In
general, it is recommended to describe the finding in the past
tense; however, the present can be used in those cases in
which the effects and / or contexts continue to be valid.
Figure 2 shows an example of lessons learned registered in
social network Twitter.
Figure 2. Example of lessons learned registered in social network
Twitter.
IV.
RESULTS
To carry out the information extraction process, an
application has been implemented for these three social
networks; the application based, on Python-social-auth[6]
technology, allows the development in an agile way and
provides the connection to numerous social networks with
little configuration of parameters; the social networks
connected to framework are shown in Figure 1. The
framework is integrated with certain profiles; this application
allows access to tweets, retweets and mentions that refer to
textual structures of topics related to R + D lessons. The text
structures are identified with a # hashtag that will be defined
by the research group or groups of researchers associated
with the R + D centers.
The mathematical model applied to obtain the associated
trends in each lesson learned identifies an entity named
category. The entity defines relevant and not relevant topics
in the R & D center; the mathematical model is shown in (1).
The results can then be used to calculate aggregations,
identify
trends
and
produce
reports,
dashboards
and
performance measures.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics



Where:
A:
Represents the content relevance for extracting. If
the relation is equal to zero, then the lesson learned is not
a candidate for acquisition.
P: Weight (I like it, comments): evaluates the number of
likes or retweets linked to each lesson registered.
A: Relevant publications: Similarity R & D terms for P,
e.g. Synonyms, folksonomies, Hashtags.
D: Registration time: Determines the timeline from lesson
registered to first response; e.g. hours, days, minutes.
n: Number of arcs: Represents the thread or sequence for
each lesson learned.
The knowledge management model continues with the
implementation of a syntactical/morphological process of
analysis, using the ontology-lexicon variation method,
which has been combined with Natural Tool Kit Language
(NTKL) [6], a natural language processing tool. When
using NLTK, it was possible to separate each extracted
lesson learned. In the syntactic/morphologic process of
lessons learned, Spanish language grammar rules are
applied, and we consider punctuation marks as key
syntactic items, so that the reading of each one of the
characters contained in texts related to lessons learned
could be started/stopped; see equation (2). If each
character (c) in a phrase is considered as a chain, and
spaces separate each character are followed additionally,
by a period and a space; then that phrase is considered as
complying with the suggested structure.

The tree grammar decomposition described in Figure 3
shows the semantic behavior for each word, each one
regarded as an entity contained in the R & D data
ontology; articles, connectors and linking words have been
discarded in this analysis.
Figure 3. Lexical/morphological decomposition of a lesson learned
Figure 4 shows the standardized interface in order to
optimize the ability to search, retrieve and analyze the
texts of lessons learned extracted. In this case, the capture
and extraction of texts from the Twitter social network is
presented. The figure shows the user interface of the
framework in its semantic analysis component. The result
involves entities and concepts that are analyzed lexically
and syntactically. Meanwhile, the semantic (structural)
analysis given to each learned lesson made it possible to
identify entities that are or are not contained within the R
& D vocabulary.
Figure 4: Standardized interface in order to optimize the ability
Finally, Figure 5 shows the comparison of the trends of
lessons learned regarding the strategic axes of the R & D
centers. The analysis shows that in September there was a
greater opinion tendency on R & D Management (45.76%)
as in the month of October (33.93%) and the trend of
publications with respect to R & D projects is greater,
75.00%.
Figure 5: Comparison of the trends of lessons learned.
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
Lessons learned analysis from social network using
Machine Learning allows for understanding the impact
that perceptions and opinions shared by R & D social
networks resources have in a series of experiences or
pieces of knowledge,
for instance,
in technological
surveillance. An R & D specialized social group can
perform
regular
offline
analysis,
writing
reports
understanding the impact that perceptions and opinions
shared by R & D social networks resources have in a series
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

of experiences or pieces of knowledge, for instance, in
technological surveillance, retrieved and formalized in real
time. The research proposed in this paper makes it easier
to incorporate the great volume of spontaneous and real
time information provided by social networks, forums and
blogs to assess its impact on trends and thematic
behaviour, so that both critical events and competitive
advantages could be discovered.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Suárez and B. Pico, “Framework of Organizational
Learning
in
R&D
centers,
Supported
by
Lessons
Learned”, Advances in Information Sciences and Service
Sciences,
Vol.8,
pp.
8-15,
2016,
https://doi.org/10.4156/aiss.
[2]
P. Różewski, J. Jankowski,  P. Bródka, and R. Michalski, 
“Knowledge workers’ collaborative Learning behavior
modeling in an organizational social network” Computers
In Human Behavior, pp. 1248-1260.
[3]
T. Makkonen and T. Inkinen,
“Innovation quality in
knowledge cities: Empirical evidence of innovation award
competitions
in
Finland”,
Expert
Systems
with
Applications, Vol. 2 pp. 5597–5604, 2013.
[4]
Sh. Liao and Ch. Wu, “System perspective of knowledge
management, organizational Learning and organizational
innovation”, Expert Systems with Applications, Vol 4, pp.
1096–1103, 2013.
[5]
R.
Maruta,
“The
creation
and
management
of
organizational knowledge”, Knowledge-Based Systems,
Vol 3, pp. 26-34, 2014.
[6]
M. Suárez and B. Pico, “Framework of Organizational
Learning
in
R&D
centers,
Supported
by
Lessons
Learned”,
International
Journal
of
Applied
Engineering Research, Vol.10, pp. 41744-41748, 2015
[7]
P. Bermell-Garcia, W. Verhagen, S. Astwood and K.
Krishnamurthy.
“A
framework
for
management
of
Knowledge-Based Engineering applications as software
services:
Enabling
personalization
and
codification”,
Advanced Engineering Informatics, pp. 219-230, 2012.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

