An Adaptive Education Approach Using the Learners’ Social Network
Ralucca Gera
Department of Applied Mathematics,
Associate Provost for Graduate Education,
Teaching and Learning Commons,
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA
Email: rgera@nps.edu
Alex Gutzler,
Ryan Hard,
Bryan McDonough, and
Christian Sorenson
Department of Applied Mathematics,
Naval Postgraduate School, Monterey, CA
Abstract—How can the 21st century education system capi-
talize on online social networks to support formal education?
As education transitions away from the traditional brick-and-
mortar style, so does the social network that supports learners.
Traditional collegiate education lacks the use of an adaptive
system through which students can optimize learning, and
educators can promote such learning with the assistance of real-
time digital feedback. We develop the means through which the
Curated Heuristic Using a Network of Knowledge (CHUNK)
learning [6] can provide an adaptive learning framework
by designing a dynamic social network of students based
on social and academic attributes. Learners use a rating
system to determine what educational methods are effective
or ineffective in assisting their learning, and the CHUNK
Learning system exploits this data to provide other learners
more effective methods. We explore the impact that users have
on each other when they are considered to be similar based
on sharing similar interests. We learn that while different
modeling methodology can capture the strength of similarity
between users, our experiments show that strongly connected
groups have a stronger inﬂuence on each other than the weakly
connected ones.
Index Terms—Education; Chunk Learning; Adaptive Learn-
ing
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Collegiate education is based on traditional lecturer-
student interactions where the educator has a preset construct
of how the course material should be conveyed to the
students, usually in the form of a lecture, for a set amount of
time, at frequent intervals, weekly or otherwise. Students are
expected to learn the course material via the lectures as well
as textbooks and other supplementary methods. Students
can pose inquiries to the educator regarding the material
to improve their understanding. As a basic educational
structure this method works, but can inhibit both those who
quickly grasp the subject matter and those who struggle,
since they are all exposed to the same information at the
same pace.
The newly introduced CHUNK Learning personalized
educational system [6] can be found at [1]. Also, references
need to be listed as [7], [8] accelerates and deepens learning
by introducing targeted short modules for the students. This
system allows students to learn in ways that are effective
for them, whether it be watching videos, reading the book,
reading through slides of the material, working example
problems, running code, or a combination of those and
other methods. Learning through these activities frees up
the lecturing time, allowing the educator to teach at a
higher level with deeper classroom discussion; whether that
be critical thinking about the learned topics, teaching at
an accelerated rate, focusing more on hands-on examples
of the learned material, etc. Similar studies and systems
looked at web-based and mobile learning CHUNKing of
knowledge [2], [13], studying languages [11], [12], math [9],
and so on.
Students at the collegiate level and above leave behind
generic education that is received during primary and sec-
ondary schooling, and begin picking and choosing topics that
interest them, and applying to where they see themselves
in their future. Naturally, social connections form between
students in similar curricula as they go through coursework
together, as well as those that live together or participate in
extracurricular activities together. These connections grow
into a social network of those participating in higher ed-
ucation. From this social network, learning styles can be
observed and extended to groups of similar students to help
them learn quicker and with greater impact. Adding this
social network to CHUNK Learning attempts to best assign
content within the learning modules to each person, based on
what the social network suggests about their interests, their
preferred learning methods, and also the learning methods
from their friends. Using this educational aid, students have
the ability to learn in a way that makes sense to them and
lets them take more away from each education opportunity.
The structure of the paper is as follows. The required
deﬁnitions and the problem statement are explained in
Section II followed by an overview of the related work
in Section III. We then introduce the methodology for the
recommender system in this environment in Section IV. We
present the experimental setup in Section V, followed by
the results and interpretation in Section VI. We conclude
and present further direction in Section VII.
66
Copyright (c) The Government of US DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

II. PROBLEM DEFINITIONS
As the amount digital information grows, teaching and
learning methods must be adapted to enhance education,
especially at the collegiate level. Many current methods of
education cater to either a lowest common denominator,
where the instructor starts at square one for each subject
to ensure no student gets left behind, or at a static level in
which no consideration is given to the skill levels of the
students.
In the ﬁrst case, the advanced students academically
degrade since they are not challenged and waste valuable
education time not improving their knowledge and skills. In
the second case, the advance students are still not engaged,
and those below the level of instruction might constantly
struggle with the material, must work disproportionately
hard to achieve some level of academic success, and possibly
never gain any understanding. For both cases, the failure
to appropriately challenge, engage and enlighten students
results in sub-par education and a lack of innovation. Mean-
while, a challenging academic atmosphere can lead to just
several students graduating with a high level of academic
success. In order for the academic environment to improve,
education must adapt to all students’ levels, capitalizing on
their strengths and knowledge, and do so quickly.
CHUNK Learning is a pilot system seeking to enhance
education through targeting modules to match the user’s
learning style and knowledge [6]. The CHUNK Learn-
ing system has three main components: a learner proﬁle,
CHUNKs, and CHUNKlets. Each of them is tagged with
keywords based on the topics to be learned, the teaching
method, applications, and so on.
The learner proﬁle captures static information from the
learner regarding interests and preferred learning styles. The
learner enrolls in a course, and then is presented with the
courses’ modules, called CHUNKs. Each CHUNK is built
around a topic, equivalent to a section in a textbook. The
CHUNK content is broken down into smaller education
materials, called CHUNKlets. The CHUNKlets capture the
breaking down of a topic into short and intense educational
materials, allowing the learners to be engaged for a short
period of time and practice it before continuing to the next
CHUNKlet. The CHUNKlets are categorized into four types:
“Why”, “What”, “Methodology”, and “Assessment”. For
each CHUNK, the CHUNKlets within the same category are
interchangeable as they present the same topic from different
points of view, allowing for personalized education when the
most appropriate CHUNKs are suggested to the learner.
The above structure of CHUNK Learning is comple-
mented with capturing feedback from users. After the com-
pletion of a CHUNKlet of a CHUNK, each user can rate
how useful and engaging the CHUNKlet was on a scale
of one to ﬁve. Moreover, users can give thumbs up and
thumbs down to the CHUNKlet capturing the relevancy
of the learned content. These two measures streamlining
the learning process by support an up to date learning
environment, as older and less useful content be suggested
less.
In the current work, we propose a two step process for
recommending CHUNKs and CHUNKlets to each user to
support personalized education, based on its current struc-
ture. First, relevant CHUNKs and CHUNKlets are deter-
mined based on the user’s academic requirements and goals.
Second, for each relevant CHUNK, the relevant CHUNKlets
are rated based on the user’s learner proﬁle and the social
connections they share with other user’s in the system. The
goal of this process is to maximize the chances that the user
engage with CHUNKlets that are both useful and interesting
to him/her. Currently, the recommendation of a CHUNKlet
is based on the learner proﬁle’s keywords. For this research,
we complement the process of personalizing the chosen
CHUNKlet for each user by creating and utilizing a social
network that ranks relevant CHUNKlets for each user.
The newly proposed rating for each CHUNKlet is gen-
erated using the learner’s proﬁle and how that information
links him/her to similar users, building on the CHUNKlet
feedback provided from previous learners in the network.
This maximizes the chances learners use methods that work
for them. The built in rating system is used to affect the
ranking the CHUNKlet receives for other related users in the
network, with the strength of that effect being determined
by the strength of the individual’s social connection with
other users. Throughout the paper, “user” and “learner” are
used interchangeably.
Our CHUNK Learning approach requires indentifying the
relevant connections between the users in order to accurately
recommend appropriate new CHUNKlets to users; that is to
say it relies on the overlaying social network that emerges
between the users of the CHUNK Learning system. This
paper seeks to determine a method to generate this social
network and apply the CHUNK Learning approach in tan-
dem by having the social network assign and modify the
score of each CHUNKlet, to be used for recommendations
to other users. The social network’s nodes are the individual
learner proﬁles and the edges (weighted and undirected) con-
nect nodes with similar attributes. We extract the attributes
from each student proﬁle. Examples of such attributes are
the current degree, branch of service, and previous degrees,
and extracurricular interests.
III. RELATED WORK
A CHUNK Learning type adaptive algorithm has already
been explored by Cleven in his thesis [4], on a set of courses
at the Naval Postgraduate School. Cleven investigates how
to create an adaptive learning algorithm that links the best
suited learning modules to each user, based on user-speciﬁc
proﬁles and feedback. Cleven’s work focuses on connecting
users to the modules that most suit their method of learning,
with emphasis on adapting to favor modules that cater
to previous user feedback. Cleven’s work provides a base
example that we extrapolate to create a social network
between users. The same feedback mechanism that Cleven
67
Copyright (c) The Government of US DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

uses to create an interpersonal adaptive learning software
can be extended to spread feedback across connected users,
thus generating an interpersonal adaptability, rather using the
CHUNK Learning modules instead of the courses offered
at the Naval Postgraduate School. This approach presents
a different challenge, as the courses are tagged and capture
different information than the modules in CHUNK Learning.
Diffusion of Knowledge is a problem that has been
investigated over the last several decades. The basic concept
is that certain network layouts are optimally suited for fast
and efﬁcient spreading of knowledge. Cowan and Jonard [5]
investigate how knowledge spreads throughout three basic
network conﬁgurations. The ﬁrst is a regular network, and
the second is a random network. The ﬁnal network layout is
the Watts-Strogatz small world network model [10]. Cowan
and Jonard show that the more closely connected two nodes
are, the higher the rate of knowledge transfer. They ﬁnd
that the layout of a Watts-Strogatz network is most suited to
optimal diffusion of knowledge throughout a social network.
This concept can be extended to creating interpersonal con-
nections in educational software, facilitating faster learning
by users.
A recommender systems that builds on Social Media
websites creates a framework for user-to-user connections
that complements the content network for a wholistic ap-
proach. In the case of Facebook, these connections manifest
themselves as friend recommendations, targeted advertising,
and preferential displays on a user’s feed. Chen and Fong
analyze the algorithm that Facebook uses to create similarity
functions and trust factors between users [3]. The authors
explain that Facebook’s similarity function is generated
by taking comparison factors between multiple attributes
of user proﬁles, and subsequently assigning a weight to
each attribute. For example, the function put more weight
on the “interested in” attribute than the “sex” attribute.
The attribute weights are determined by the algorithm de-
velopers, based on what they believe are more important
connecting traits. Trust factors form the second layer of
connectivity generation. Facebook trust factors are formed
based on a tiered system. Each tier has a discrete trust factor
based on the relationship level between users. For instance,
family members have a much higher trust factor than users
with which one is not Facebook friends [3]. Collaborative
Filtering is the notion that a network of user preferences act
as an effective way to ﬁlter future data. In other words, the
network collaborates to determine what data is favored. The
Facebook collaborative ﬁlter is formed by the combination
of the two levels of connection: similarity functions and
trust factors, which form a system that determines what
content appears on a user’s Facebook interface. Similar
algorithms could also ahve an impact in creating educational
recommendations in an adaptive learning software.
In this paper we introduce a collaborative ﬁltering algo-
rithm that presents CHUNK Learning users with modules
preferred by similar users. The introduction of this algo-
rithm into CHUNK Learning facilitate a higher diffusion
of knowledge throughout the network of learners. Building
on the adaptive learning techniques used by Cleven [4], we
present an initial social network framework for the CHUNK
Learning system.
IV. METHODOLOGY
We create the social network using learner proﬁles as the
nodes, and we use the attributes of those nodes as criteria to
create edges. If two nodes have the same attribute, they will
be connected by an edge. Attribute selection is limited to
a predeﬁned set of options to ensure uniform responses for
a given category. This minimizes errors during data entry
and ensures rank and designator selections correspond to
the selected service. As the network grows, new categories
and/or attributes may be added.
For the purposes of this paper, we create a set list of
categories and attributes to generate a usable network, as a
subset of the CHUNK Learning system’s list of attributes.
The selected categories have either a drop down list of
attributes for single selection or a multiple choice list
for attributes which may contain multiple items, such as
extracurricular interests and classes. The categories are the
following:
1) Rank
2) Service
3) Designator/MOS
4) Masters (Current Curriculum)
5) Major (Previous Degrees)
6) Extracurricular Interests
7) Classes.
Our model focuses on the recommendation of CHUN-
Klets and assumes CHUNKs have already selected by the
user directed for the course he/she is enrolled in, since the
CHUNKlets are interchangeable within their category. For
the purposes of this research, we limit the model to 11
courses, with each course containing exactly one CHUNK
and each CHUNK containing exactly three CHUNKlets.
For this reason, the terms “course’ and “CHUNK’ are
interchangeable in our model.
For our analysis, we generate a synthetic social network
using MATLAB by creating and connecting ﬁctional users.
This allows us to create an environment of users and their
initial ratings for each CHUNKlet. Though in reality a
user not necessarily complete all CHUNKlets relevant to a
particular CHUNK, our model assumes that a user completes
and rates all three CHUNKlets relevant to a CHUNK if that
user is enrolled in the applicable course. As we introduce
new users to the network, we connect them to existing users
based on the attributes they select. The MATLAB code also
allows us to control the similarity distribution of the users
resulting in stronger or weaker connections between the
users as similarity is adjusted from high to low.
Using the randomly generated proﬁles, we create a social
network by determining how strongly each user is connected
to every other user. First, we weigh how important each cat-
egory is for determining social connectivity. As an example,
68
Copyright (c) The Government of US DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

current degree may be given a weight of three and past
degree may be given a weight of one, indicating connections
made using a user’s current degree are three times more
important than connections made using a user’s past degrees.
Next, for each category, the category’s weight is used to form
weighted edges between users if the users share an attribute
in that category. Finally, these edges are added together to
form the connections in the overall social network, where
the weighted edge between each pair of users determines
how well-connected they are.
We now explore the effect of the social network on
CHUNKlet recommendations. As new users are introduced
to the network and connected to existing users, the score of
a CHUNKlet is updated for that user and may result in dif-
ferent recommendations. These suggestions for CHUNKlets
are based on the highest scored CHUNKlet in that category.
Though the method for constructing the edge weights in the
social network remains the same, we use three methods for
the edge weights to determine CHUNKlet ratings. Let x be
a new user, and y,z be existing users in the network.
1) The linear method: the CHUNKlet’s rating is propor-
tional to the social edge weights. If the weight of the
edge x,y is 5, and the weight of the edge x,z is 10,
then user z have twice the impact that user y has on
the suggestions presented to x.
2) The exponential method: the impact a user has on
CHUNKlet ratings grow exponentially with their social
weight.
3) The tier method: in this method, connections between
users are split into three tiers according to the social
weight connecting them. Highly connected individuals
fall into Tier 1, followed by Tier 2, and then Tier 3,
as their social weight decreases. All individuals in the
same tier have the same impact on CHUNKlet ratings
- i.e 6 for the top tier, 3 for the middle, and 1 for the
bottom tier.
Each method has potential beneﬁts and drawbacks, which
is why we proposed three methods. The tiered approach
prevents highly connected users from drowning out less
connected users, but could also result in dissimilar users
having the same effect as those slightly similar, depending
on the bounds of each tier. The exponential method does
the opposite, it magniﬁes the effect highly similar users
have on each other. The linear method is the middle ground
between tiered and exponential. As more users interact with
the CHUNKlets the recommendations become more robust.
We present the details in Section V.
V. EXPERIMENTAL SET UP
The goal of our experiments is to determine how adding
new users to the CHUNK Learning system affects the
CHUNKlets’ ratings. In this section, we explain the details
of the experiment set up.
A. Overview
To focus our approach, we limit ourselves to one speciﬁc
CHUNKlet of one speciﬁc test learner, and observe how the
CHUNKlet score for that test learner changes as new users
join the network. To minimize the number of variables, the
number of original users, the number of new users added,
CHUNKlet ratings, and category weighting factors all are
held constant between experiments. The original users rate
for the observed CHUNKlet is 1, and the new users rate for
the observed CHUNKlet is 5. Additionally, we require all
users to enrol in just this one single course.
Between experiments, we change how similar the existing
and new users are to the test learner. This changes the
structure of the social network, which modiﬁes the impact
the existing and new users have on the CHUNKlet score to
be recommended to the test learner. For each experiment,
we use the social network to change the CHUNKlet rating,
based on each of the three methods described in Section IV.
B. Similarity
To support the goal of our experiment to test how varying
the strength of the social network affects a CHUNKlet’s
rating, we ﬁrst see how the random proﬁle generator is
adjusted to create groups of similar or dissimilar people.
The generator uses a parameter called “Similarity’ which
helps determine the probability of different users sharing
attributes. Similarity can take a value greater than or equal to
one, and though the value does not have a linear relationship
with the probability distribution (a Similarity of 2 does
not double the likelihood of creating matching users as
compared to a Similarity of 1), higher Similarities increase
the likelihood of creating users with matching attributes.
We start the process by creating a vector for each node
category, listing attributes for that category. For instance,
the vector [“Ofﬁcer’, “Civilian’, “Enlisted’] corresponds to
the category of Rank. When a new user is created, one
of these values is selected randomly for that user’s Rank.
If Similarity is set to a value of 1 for Rank, then the
probability of selecting each value is uniformly distributed,
so the user has an equal probability (i.e. 1/3) of being an
Ofﬁcer, a Civilian, or Enlisted. As similarity is made higher,
the probability distribution is shifted to favor attributes in
the order listed in the vector. For instance, a Similarity of
10 results in the probability of the new user to be Ofﬁcer,
Civilian, and Enlisted to be approximately 0.69,0.19, and
0.12, respectively.
The exact method for choosing a vector’s index uses
Equation 1, where Similarity variable (S) and Vector Length
(L) are parameters. The input value is a random number (r)
uniformly distributed between 0 and 1. The output value,
I(r), corresponds to the chosen index for that vector. Since
the output falls in the interval [0,L], the value is then rounded
up to the nearest integer to get the actual index selected.
Also, since the vectors do not have an index of 0, then
I(r) = 0 is replaced with I(r) = 1.
69
Copyright (c) The Government of US DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

I(r) = r ·L·S−(1−r)
(1)
Figure 1 shows the output of the Equation 1, where L = 3
and S = 10.
Fig. 1: Chosen Index I(r) vs Random Number r (L = 3,S =
10)
Figure 2 shows the probability distribution for selecting a
speciﬁc index, given L = 3and S = 10.
Fig. 2: Index Probability Distribution (L = 3,S = 10)
Notice that the probability of selecting index one is much
greater than index two or three. Also, the probability of
selecting index two is slightly higher than index three.
Regardless of the speciﬁc values of S and L, lower indices
always have a larger probability of being selected than
higher indices (except if S = 1, in which case the probability
is the same for all indices).
C. Experiment Parameters
Each experiment begins with 51 original users that all
rate the observed CHUNKlets with a rating of 1. One of
the original 51 users is the test learner, and his attributes
remain constant between experiments. Note that since we
are observing the CHUNKlet’s score for the test learner, his
ranking does not actual affect the CHUNKlet score (since
there are no loops in the social network). The other 50
original users have their similarity to the test learner varied
between experiments.
Next, 50 new users are added, one at a time, which all
rate the observed CHUNKlet with a rating of 5. The 50 new
users have their similarity to the test learner varied between
experiments. The observed CHUNKlet score is recorded for
each new user added, so a trend of CHUNKlet score versus
number of new users added can be determined.
The available categories for each user proﬁle are Rank,
Service, Designator, Current Degree, Previous Degrees,
Extra-curricular Interests, and Enrolled Classes. The weight
for each category is assigned as 2,2,2,3,3,2, and 1, respec-
tively, and they remain constant between experiments.
The users are selected as test learner and other users (that
come in groups of Similar, Dissimilar, or Realistic people),
and are deﬁned as follows:
• The test learner: which remains constant between exper-
iments, always chooses the ﬁrst (most likely) attribute
for each category. For instance, since the Rank vector
is [“Ofﬁcer’,“Civilian’,“Enlisted’], the test learner is
always an ofﬁcer.
• Similar people use a Similarity value of 9000 for every
category (see Section V-B for more details); therefore,
there is a high probability each member of this group
is similar to other members of the group as well as the
test learner.
• Dissimilar people use a Similarity value of 1. This cre-
ates an equal chance of choosing any attribute for each
category, so the chance that each person in this group
is similar to the test learner is completely random.
• Realistic people attempt to better simulate the learner
population at the Naval Postgraduate School. Their
Rank category is given a Similarity of 100, which gives
each person in the group a 0.81 probability of being an
ofﬁcer. Their Service category is given a similarity of
5, which gives each military person in the group a 0.42
probability of being in the Navy. All other categories
for this group have a Similarity of 1. The speciﬁc
probabilities of choosing a index depends on the vector
length for that category, Table I shows the probability
distribution for a vector length of f5 and Similarities of
5,100, and 9000.
TABLE I: INDEX PROBABILITY FOR VARIOUS SIMI-
LARITIES
Index 1
Index 2
Index 3
Index 4
Index 5
S=5
0.4723
0.1999
0.1363
0.1071
0.0844
S=100
0.7243
0.1177
0.0659
0.0525
0.0396
S=9000
0.8449
0.0661
0.0377
0.0281
0.0232
The ﬁrst experiment looks at an extreme case where the
50 original people are dissimilar, and the 50 new people
70
Copyright (c) The Government of US DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

are similar. The second experiment uses 50 realistic people
as the original group, and 50 similar people are added one
at the time. Finally, the third experiment uses 50 realistic
people as the original group, and 50 dissimilar are added
one at the time. Table II, below, summarizes the experiment
groupings.
TABLE II: EXPERIMENT GROUP TYPES
Original People
New People
Exp 1
Dissimilar
Similar
Exp 2
Realistic
Similar
Exp 3
Realistic
Dissimilar
VI. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
We run each of the experiments described in Section V
one time, and record the CHUNKlet score for each new
person added. For each experiment, the random number
generator is reset, so if nothing else changes, the people
generated are identical.
The CHUNKlet score versus number of people added is
graphed in Figures 3-5 for each experiment. Each graph con-
tains four lines. The purple line is used to mark the reference
value of 3, the score the CHUNKlet would receive if the test
user received no input from the social network. The blue,
yellow, and red lines correspond to the linear, exponential,
and tiered methods of using social weighting, respectively.
For more details on these methods, see Section IV. It should
be noted that the exponential and tiered methods are very
dependent on the equations and parameters used for those
methods. These experiments show only one way the tiered
and exponential methods could be established.
We now dedicate a subsection to each experiment estab-
lished by Table II. Each subsection presents the CHUNKlet
score versus new people added, and be followed by a brief
analysis of the results. Note that since the original people
always rate the CHUNKlet as 1, the CHUNKlet score always
starts as 1, with zero new people added. Also, since the new
people always rate the CHUNKlet as 5, the CHUNKlet score
always increases as new people are added.
A. Experiment 1: 50 Dissimilar & 50 Similar
As expected, due to the high similarity of the new group,
the CHUNKlet score quickly becomes closer to 5 than
it is to 1. Due to the high social network values in the
Similar group, the exponential method has a signiﬁcantly
greater effect on the CHUNKlet score than the other two
methods. The exponential method only requires about eight
new people to return the CHUNKlet score to the baseline
of 3. The linear and tiered methods require between 15
and 20 people, which is still low considering the original
group contains 50 people. The ﬁnal CHUNKlet score for
the exponential method is about 4.25, with the linear and
tiered methods having a score just under 4.
Fig. 3: Experiment 1 Results
Fig. 4: Experiment 2 Results
B. Experiment 2: 50 Realistic & 50 Similar
As opposed to the ﬁrst experiment, the original group of
people in this experiment are better connected socially. Due
to this, the one ratings of the original 50 people carry more
weight, so the CHUNKlet score rises slower and reaches
a smaller ﬁnal value. Still, the new people are still better
connected than the original people, so the ﬁnal score is still
well above the baseline of 3. The exponential method is
still dominant due to the large values in the new group’s
social network. Of note, the tiered method has a higher ﬁnal
value than the linear method, which is reversed from the
ﬁrst experiment. Since the 50 new people are exactly the
same in both experiments, we believe the difference is due
to the change in social network for the 50 original people.
Therefore, for the parameters used to establish this tiered
system, the tiered method appears to carry more weight
when the group is Dissimilar than it does when the group
is Realistic.
71
Copyright (c) The Government of US DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

C. Experiment 3: 50 Realistic & 50 Dissimilar
Fig. 5: Experiment 3 Results
The ﬁnal experiment has a new group which is less con-
nected than the original group. As expected, the CHUNKlet
score does not reach the baseline of 3. With no Similar
group, the values in the social network are much lower. This
appears to cause the exponential method to have a nearly
identical effect as the linear method. The tiered method now
has the highest ﬁnal value. This is once again mostly likely
due to the relatively smaller effect this tiered system has
when dealing with the Realistic populations.
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER DIRECTIONS
Current teaching methods do not customize the experience
to the individual in order to maximize educational gains. The
CHUNK Learning system brings attention to this deﬁciency
by assigning material to users that is both relevant to their
learning goals as well as compatible with their interests
and learning styles. Our method uses the attributes of each
CHUNK user proﬁle to establish a social network which
helps direct people towards learning materials (CHUNKlets)
that are most compatible to their proﬁle.
Our experiments examined how changing the similarity
between people in a social network affected CHUNKlet
scores. Additionally, three methods for utilizing the social
network to affect CHUNKlet scores were examined: linear,
exponential, and tiered. No matter which method was used,
the experiments always showed that strongly connected
groups had a greater effect on CHUNKlets scores than
weakly connected groups. This is a validation of our concept,
since people that share more of your interests have a greater
effect on your recommended learning material.
Another result of the experiments is that the methods
used to implement the social network has a variable degree
of effect depending on the strength of the connections in
the social network. For example, the exponential method
appears to have a dominant effect for highly connected social
networks, but as the network acquires dissimilar users, the
exponential method becomes nearly indistinguishable from
the linear method. However, the exact way in which the
different methods interact with different social networks is
dependent on the equations and parameters that deﬁne those
methods.
To better understand how a social network affects CHUN-
Klet scores, an extensive survey is required so that real
user data can be collected and used. Only then can the
effects of the different social network weighting techniques
be analyzed and adjusted. Additionally, user feedback is
required to determine if the recommended CHUNKlets are
actually well tailored to the individuals based on their social
connections. This user feedback can be used to adjust the
parameters of the social network, such as the available
categories and attributes as well as the weighting factor for
each category.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to thank the DoD for partially
funding this work.
REFERENCES
[1] www.chunklearning.net. www.chunklearning.net.
[2] Peter Brusilovsky.
Adaptive hypermedia: From intelligent tutoring
systems to web-based education.
In International Conference on
Intelligent Tutoring Systems, pages 1–7. Springer, 2000.
[3] Wei Chen and Simon Fong.
Social network collaborative ﬁltering
framework and online trust factors: a case study on facebook. IJWA,
3:17–28, 01 2011.
[4] Jan-Daniel Cleven.
A multilayer network approach for real-time
adaptive personalized learning, 2018.
[5] Robin Cowan and Nicolas Jonard. Network structure and the diffusion
of knowledge. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 28:1557–
1575, 06 2004.
[6] Ralucca Gera, Michelle Isenhour, D’Marie Bartolf, and Simona Tick.
CHUNK:Curated Heuristic Using a Network of Knowledge.
In
The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics.
HUSO, July 2019.
[7] DIAO Lin-lin. A survey of chinese english majors’ chunk competence
[j]. Journal of Pla University of Foreign Languages, 4, 2004.
[8] George A Miller. The magical number seven, plus or minus two:
Some limits on our capacity for processing information. Psychological
review, 63(2):81, 1956.
[9] Alan H Schoenfeld. Purposes and methods of research in mathematics
education. Notices of the AMS, 47(6):641–649, 2000.
[10] Duncan J Watts and Steven H Strogatz. Collective dynamics of ‘small-
world’networks. nature, 393(6684):440–442, 1998.
[11] GUO Xiao-ying. Prefabricated chunk and college english writing [j].
Journal of Lanzhou Jiaotong University, 2, 2008.
[12] Qian Xujing. A preliminary study on chinese chunk [j]. Journal of
Peking University (Philosophy & Social Sciences), 5, 2008.
[13] Chi ZHANG, Gang CHEN, Minjuan WANG, and Huimin WANG.
Studying on design of small-chunk learning resources in mobile
learning [j]. Open Education Research, 3, 2009.
72
Copyright (c) The Government of US DoD, 2019. Used by permission to IARIA.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-725-2
HUSO 2019 : The Fifth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

