 
 
Toward “Satisficing” Creativity Effort within Project Management 
Leonie Hallo 
Entrepreneurship, Commercialisation and Innovation Centre  
The University of Adelaide 
 South Australia 5005, Australia 
e-mail: leonie.hallo@adelaide.edu.au  
Alex Gorod  
Entrepreneurship, Commercialisation and Innovation Centre  
The University of Adelaide 
 South Australia 5005, Australia 
e-mail: alex.gorod@adelaide.edu.au  
Anama Morriss 
Entrepreneurship, Commercialisation and Innovation Centre  
The University of Adelaide 
 South Australia 5005, Australia 
e-mail: anama.morriss@adelaide.edu.au  
 
 
Abstract— Project management plays an important role in our 
society as most work activities are organized around projects. 
While many are successful, a large number of projects fail due 
to the inability to meet project management constraints. One of 
the key constraints is that of budget, and projects often go over 
the planned budget. This happens because of inefficient 
allocation of resources to such critical areas as fostering a 
culture of innovation and creativity. It is a current standard 
practice to maximize creativity regardless of the nature of the 
project. However, such an approach is not always effective, and 
this paper proposes an adaptive decision-making framework 
based on the degree of project complexity. The framework can 
be used to determine the “satisficing” level of creativity effort 
needed to be generated and supported depending on the project 
type. In turn, this can lead to a more productive allocation of 
resources and achievement of project goals. 
Keywords-optimizing; 
satisficing; 
creativity; 
project 
management; project complexity 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Projects often go over budget with significant negative 
consequences for the project concerned [1]. This is partly due 
to the waste associated with ineffective use of resources: and 
part of this is the extensive expenditure allocated to fostering 
creativity. Fostering creativity requires significant investment 
[2]. Although creativity is crucial, fundamental and at the 
center of innovation, all of the effort and cost expended on 
creativity must be financially accountable. Is there a point 
where additional resources devoted to creativity effort 
produce less and less return on investment, and if so how is 
that point determined? Even though creativity is important and 
needed, there may be times when investments in creativity 
effort may be greater than the project warrants. This paper 
presents a method of assessing whether investments in 
creativity efforts are appropriate and justifiable. The 
complexity of a project is a factor which needs to be 
considered when making an investment in creativity. What 
this paper is proposing is that the investment in creativity 
needs to be matched with the complexity of the project; that 
is, how much creativity effort is warranted needs to be 
assessed against the level of complexity of the project. This 
assessment will result in more effective investments in 
creativity.  
It is generally believed that creativity is always positive, 
and that fostering creativity is always a good investment [3]. 
Typically, decision-makers tend to optimize or maximize 
creativity in an effort to obtain the best result for a given 
project. In general, project management is based upon the 
concept of optimization. However this is not always the best 
way to go, especially under conditions of severe constraints 
[4]. It has become standard practice to maximize expenditure 
on creativity, regardless of the nature of the project. However, 
such an important project management decision should be 
financially accountable. This paper focuses on decision-
making: in particular, the decision whether or not to invest 
additional resources into creative solutions to a project. This 
type of decision-making occurs in social human analytics, and 
the benefit of this approach is that it recognizes that investing 
more resources will not necessarily lead to better outcomes.  
The paper analyses investment in creativity against the 
effectiveness of that investment as it relates to the complexity 
of the project and proposes a framework which can be useful 
in helping project managers to determine the most effective 
allocation of resources invested in creativity effort under 
differing levels of complexity. Investing in the right amount 
of creativity will be cost-effective: fostering too much 
creativity for the project is costly; on the other hand, 
insufficient creativity effort will also be costly in terms of loss 
of opportunity. It is therefore important that the project 
manager assesses the complexity involved in the project of 
interest before investing in creativity effort. The paper 
addresses a way of assessing a project and its degree of 
uncertainty, and then applying the correct level of creativity to 
match that project. The framework will assist project 
management decision-making regarding how much to invest 
in creativity effort, and this will mean greater efficiencies. The 
framework minimizes the loss or waste associated with 
unused creativity effort.  
Section II of this paper discusses the benefits and costs of 
creativity efforts; Section III looks at an approach to allocating 
creativity efforts; Section IV presents a typology of projects 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
based on degree of complexity; Section V discusses 
benchmarking creativity in line with project complexity; 
Section VI presents a model; and Section VII concludes the 
paper. 
II. BENEFITS AND COSTS OF CREATIVITY EFFORTS 
There are many ways to define creativity and there is no 
one universally accepted definition, but creativity is generally 
viewed as entailing the production of something novel and 
appropriate [5]. Other definitions focus upon usefulness and 
aesthetics [6]. Howard et al. [7] listed several keywords 
describing 
creativity, 
including 
unobvious, 
adaptive, 
unexpected, resourceful. Creativity is therefore considered to 
be about producing outcomes which are different from 
expectations or from the norm. The relationship between 
individual creativity and organizational innovation has been 
investigated [8], as has the optimal method for organizations 
to encourage creativity in the working environment [9]. 
Creativity has also been linked with resilience [10], through 
for instance the capacity of flexibility. Metzl and Morrell [10] 
suggest that creativity can be a predictor as well as a facilitator 
of resilience. Creativity clearly has many benefits. 
Creativity can be considered solely as a mental process of 
the individual: however, some authors contend that creativity 
is also social and cultural. Social systems make judgements 
about the creative products of individuals and decide whether 
and how valuable they are. A systemic approach assesses 
creativity against various interacting systems. For example, 
the evolving systems approach of Gruber (1988) considers 
three interacting systems, which through their interaction 
make the creative work; knowledge, purpose and affect. A 
systemic approach to creativity, then, asserts that the cognitive 
process occurs within a context and that looking at the process 
itself and not considering the importance of the context is a 
limited view of creativity. The creative person is interacting 
with the environment and those interactions affect the internal 
process of creativity. Csikszentmihalyi [11] proposed the DFI 
model of creativity which contains three major component 
systems; the domain, the field and the individual. The system 
of the field consists of people who make the judgements about 
what is creative and valuable and what is not. The creative 
process is thus considered to be not just the emergence of an 
idea, but also considers the larger process in which that idea is 
impactful and accepted. Ideas need to be used to be useful. A 
systemic approach addresses not just whether a creative idea 
is generated but also the extent to which an idea has an impact 
in its field and is accepted as a creative contribution in that 
field. There is a larger process beyond the creative act itself.  
Within the realm of project management, creativity is the 
engine of innovation: without creativity new ideas do not 
evolve: and innovation is necessary for businesses to maintain 
competitiveness. Improved processes, new markets, new 
products all arise as a result of creative thinking, and 
companies need to foster creativity in order to maintain their 
competitive advantage. However, there are costs involved in 
encouraging creativity in terms of investments in money, time, 
resources, staff and leadership; and the investment in 
creativity efforts needs to be justifiable.  
III. AN APPROACH TO THE ALLOCATION OF CREATIVITY 
EFFORTS 
There are multiple approaches to the allocation of 
creativity efforts. One of the standard approaches is 
optimization. Project managers often choose this as their 
decision-making method, but there are limitations to this 
approach. Optimizing or rational decision-making consists of 
exploring all the available alternatives and then choosing the 
best possible option to achieve the best outcome. In using this 
approach, the project manager decision-maker needs to have 
a full knowledge and understanding of all the creative 
possibilities and options and must be able to assess those 
possibilities in an effective way.  However, there are problems 
with this method of allocating creativity effort. Because in the 
real complex world rationality is bounded due to various 
constraints, it is not always possible or feasible to make an 
optimizing decision about the deployment of creativity and to 
encourage maximum creativity effort by considering all the 
options.  
An alternative approach to optimizing is that of 
“satisficing” [10]: this approach is more adaptive to the 
complexity of a project. Projects are becoming more and more 
complex and require a different form of decision-making than 
optimizing. High-quality decision-making under complex 
conditions has spawned a number of tools such as decision 
trees, probability analysis, Monte Carlo simulation and others 
[12]. “Satisficing” is one decision-making method for 
complex projects and involves searching through the available 
alternatives until an acceptability threshold is met. 
“Satisficing” is a decision process used when all the available 
alternatives cannot be feasibly listed out and the best 
alternative chosen in an orderly fashion. If the project is 
dynamic, there are unclear boundaries and emergence is 
occurring, it is necessary instead to choose a “satisficing” 
“good enough” option which will satisfy a previously set 
benchmark [13][14]. Within project management, a 
“satisficing” decision will mean not continuing to invest in 
creativity efforts beyond the point when that investment will 
not be effective. 
This paper suggests that, traditionally, project managers 
tend to optimize creativity, irrelevant of the degree of 
complexity. When a project is simple, it is feasible to 
optimize. However, when a project is complex, it is not 
feasible, and “satisficing” is what will be required. This paper 
suggests that it is necessary to decide whether it is appropriate 
to optimize creativity or instead use “satisficing”, so that 
investments can be more effective. In this way, creativity 
efforts will only be engaged when they are really needed. 
IV. A TYPOLOGY OF PROJECTS BASED ON THE DEGREE OF 
COMPLEXITY 
The degree of complexity present within projects varies: 
not all projects are the same based upon the variable of 
complexity. 
Several 
different 
typologies 
of 
project  
complexity have been proposed: this paper is based upon the 
typology of Snowden and Boone [15], which presents a model 
of four levels of complexity, similar to the work of Volberda 
[16]. This framework has been applied across many domains 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
including medicine [17]. Quantification of complexity is still 
in the early stages [18]. In this typology, projects are 
recognized as falling into four main types, as listed below; 
A. Simple  
Known; in simple projects, operations are predictable and 
repeatable; cause and effect are clear. There is no need for 
analysis or experimentation as the outcomes are known. This 
is the area of knowable best practice. 
B. Complicated 
Known unknown; in the case of complicated projects, 
there is some degree of interconnectedness of constituents and 
problems are those of coordination or specialized expertise. 
Cause and effect can be surfaced through analysis. 
Investigation, analysis and specialized knowledge are helpful 
in this kind of scenario. Good practice, not best practice, is 
applicable to complicated problems. 
C. Complex  
Unknown unknown; in complex projects, it is not possible 
to know and understand all the features within any project and 
there are ambiguity, unpredictability and uncertainty: because 
of the dynamic nature of the project, things are constantly 
changing, and emergence occurs. The management process is 
about probing, identifying possible responses, trial and error 
and evaluation. This scenario is not about imposing best 
practice or good practice, but rather emergent practice. 
Previously established protocols are not likely to work in 
complex projects. Cause and effect are understood only in 
retrospect. 
D. Chaotic  
In chaotic projects there is high turbulence and constant 
change, and there are no clear cause and effect relationships. 
The project is very dynamic and flexible and produces a lot of 
outcomes. The boundary of the system is not clearly definable.  
A great amount of information is flowing around in the system 
and the project manager needs to make sense of this 
information and propose a clear way forward.  Decisions need 
to be made quickly and there is no time for consultation; 
communication is top-down.  Establishing a focus and a sense 
of control may be more important for managers than selecting 
the ‘right’ or best way to respond. Gaining control is the first 
imperative [15].  
V. BENCHMARKING THE LEVEL OF CREATIVITY IN LINE 
WITH THE COMPLEXITY OF THE PROJECT 
Traditionally, the complexity of a project is not considered 
when assessing how much creativity effort should be fostered; 
rather, decision-makers tend to maximize creativity efforts 
under all conditions. However, this paper suggests that 
complexity is important in making the decision about the level 
of creative effort to be deployed. There are benefits and costs 
for creativity in each type of context, as presented below. 
 
 
A. Simple Project 
1) Benefits of creativity 
Even in simple projects, some people need the stimulation 
of varying their approach to keep their mind on their work and 
to avoid being bored, which can lead to carelessness and a loss 
of focus [19]. 
2) Costs of creativity 
In simple projects, creativity may impede work progress 
[20]. The scenario is known and understood and there is not 
much need for creativity effort. When the instructions are 
clear, and the task is straightforward, it is more efficient and 
accurate for people to follow the rules as they are laid out.  
Deviations from instructions are unnecessary and may be 
damaging and wasteful. Organizations do not need a great 
amount of creativity in the simple project. 
B. Complicated project 
1) Benefits of creativity 
In complicated projects, there is room for minor 
adjustment in ways of approaching a problem to get an 
optimal outcome. Complicated projects often require the input 
of experts [15]. A moderate amount of creativity will be useful 
under these circumstances. 
2) Costs of creativity 
Whenever experts need to be brought in, this cost will need 
to be built into the assessment of the investment. 
C. Complex Project 
1) Benefits of creativity 
In complex projects when things are changing rapidly, 
there is much more uncertainty and it is necessary to 
encourage as many ideas as possible, to use a trial and error 
approach to address unique, fast changing project challenges. 
This is the field for a high level of creativity effort and 
innovation. Enabling leadership which encourages creative 
effort is important [21][22]. There may be a paucity of 
resources, including time. There is no blueprint for how to 
respond and there is a need for ideas generated specifically for 
the project [23].  
2) Costs of creativity 
As well as considering the costs of wide consultation with 
a variety of participants, if a great number of creative ideas are 
produced, many of them can be wasted, especially if 
management has no control [17].  
D. Chaotic project 
1) Benefits of creativity 
 In a chaotic project there are opportunities for 
innovations, provided the project can be managed. Decision-
making in the chaotic project is not straightforward. The 
project manager needs to decide how to channel decisions to 
the correct level of decision-making: some decisions are 
simple and not requiring creativity; some decisions will be 
complicated and there may be room for some creativity; some 
decisions will be complex and require a great deal of 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
creativity. The decision to act may be simple, but the process 
of execution will require some creativity in how resources are  
organized and applied [23]. In the chaotic project, maximum 
creativity effort is useful. 
2) Costs of creativity 
There is often a lack of control and it is possible that 
creativity effort will be wasted. In a chaotic project, all ideas 
generated may not able to be capitalized upon because there is 
no boundary of the system. Too much creativity effort is 
destructive and distracting because people can lose sight of 
their objectives. If there is limited time to reach a solution the 
fostering of an excessive amount of creativity effort will cause 
a loss of focus. 
VI. CREATIVITY AND PROJECT COMPLEXITY: A MODEL 
Not all projects require high levels of creativity.  Figure 1 
shows that optimizing in simple projects is unnecessary. There 
are not many outcomes and there is not much built-in 
uncertainty: there is no need for a range of different 
approaches and investment in creativity is unnecessary. As 
projects become more complex, more uncertainty is present, 
and a wider variety of approaches and solutions is needed. To 
deal with this variety of outcomes, a commensurate variety of 
approaches is needed. Ashby [24, 25] indicated in his Law of 
Requisite Variety that the variety of solutions available within 
a project must be at least equal to the variety of problems 
which need to be addressed. Thus, a complex project needs 
sufficient creativity and innovation in devising a variety of 
approaches to match the complexity contained within the 
project. In a chaotic project, maximum creativity effort is 
needed to cope with the turbulent environment. Thus, 
optimization of creativity effort is beneficial. However, it is 
difficult to capitalize on all the ideas generated and there will 
be a lot of waste.  
 
Figure 1. The relationship between complexity of the project and creativity effort 
When “satisficing” is undertaken, the right amount of 
ideas is generated, and waste is minimized. Choosing to 
optimize under all circumstances without considering the 
complexity of the task is clearly an inefficient approach and 
an incorrect investment into fostering creativity [26]. The 
framework shown in Figure 1 is useful because project 
managers need to assess the type of project they are dealing 
with before deciding the amount of creativity effort which is 
needed: and this consideration will lead to greater investment 
effectiveness overall. 
As an example, consider the following scenarios as an 
illustration of decision-making at various levels of 
complexity. The project is to transform an uninhabitable piece 
of land into a livable solution.  At the simplest level, a person 
may go to a dealer of mobile homes to make their selection. 
There may be limited options available, the person chooses 
one, and arranges for delivery. There is no customization, no 
preparations are needed, and the mobile home is already 
complete. Creativity effort is not necessary. Alternatively, the 
person may decide to use a partly customizable dwelling in 
the form of a modular home. They go to a dealer who has five 
different modules which can be assembled in various 
combinations. Now, there are more outcomes and the decision 
scenario entails a greater amount of choice. The home is 
complete but does need foundations and sewerage and other 
considerations concerning the environment. Some creativity 
effort will be needed. At the more complex level, a person may 
decide to commission an architect to produce detailed plans 
for a highly customized unique home. Next, a contractor will 
be hired to build the house. There it is much more uncertainty 
in this scenario and many more potential outcomes for this 
project. The individual can have whatever they want. 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
Creativity effort is certainly required in this complex project. 
As an example of chaos, an owner may decide to build their 
own home with no plan, no approvals, no architect, no zoning 
checks and not much idea of what they are doing. In this 
scenario, there are many choices and the options may 
constantly change. Optimization of creativity is necessary in 
this project. Figure 2 below locates these projects on the 
“satisficing”/optimizing model. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Examples of housing projects of differing complexity and their relationship with creativity effort 
VII. CONCLUSION 
This paper addresses the important issue of how much 
creativity is necessary under different contexts. It is 
commonly believed that the more creativity is generated, the 
better the outcome. In recent times, a high value has been 
placed on creative endeavors: stimulating, encouraging and 
financing these is seen as desirable and a measure of 
contribution to society. This paper presents a novel approach 
in suggesting that it could be more effective to map the amount 
of creativity effort against the nature of the project, and that 
not all projects require maximal stimulation of creative ideas. 
Based upon the complexity of the project, it will be necessary 
to decide how much creativity to generate, to minimize the 
wasted creativity effort. It is wise for practitioners and 
managers to assess the level of complexity in any given 
project, and to adjust investment in the generation of creative 
ideas accordingly. This can lead to a viable return on 
investment related to creativity effort within project 
management. 
The practical strength of this paper is that it generates a 
rule which will help project managers to know how to allocate 
creativity efforts in line with the complexity of the project. In 
terms of theoretical contribution, the paper has deconstructed 
the idea that fostering creativity is necessarily good. The paper 
has demystified creativity by putting a financial value on it. 
The concept of parsimony is relevant here. This theory 
separates out the action from its value. The paper is moving 
away from an evaluation of creativity on its own merits 
towards an evaluation of creativity as an ability to solve a 
problem and move forward. Putting a practical and financial 
value on creativity challenges the current view which places 
creativity on a pedestal in terms of its value to society.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank Dr. Rosemary Hallo for the 
illustrations in Figure 2. 
REFERENCES  
[1] 
B. Whittaker, "What went wrong? Unsuccessful information 
technology projects," Information Management & Computer 
Security, vol. 7, pp. 23-30, 1999. 
[2] 
G. Tan, "Managing Creativity in Organizations: a Total 
System Approach," Creativity and Innovation Management, 
vol. 7, pp. 23-31, 1998. 
[3] 
A. H. Y. Hon, "Does job creativity requirement improve 
service performance? A multilevel analysis of work stress and 
service environment," International Journal of Hospitality 
Management, vol. 35, pp. 161-170, 2013/12/01. 
[4] 
A. Einsiedel Jr., "Profile of effective project managers," 
Project Management Journal, vol. 18, pp. 51-56, 1987. 
[5] 
Y. L. Wong and K. W. M. Siu, "A model of creative design 
process for fostering creativity of students in design 
education," International Journal of Technology and Design 
Education, vol. 22, pp. 437-450, 2012. 
[6] 
L. Gabora, "Research on Creativity," in Encyclopedia of 
Creativity, Invention, Innovation and Entrepreneurship, E. G. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
Carayannis, Ed., ed New York, NY: Springer New York, 
2013, pp. 1548-1558. 
[7] 
T. J. Howard, S. J. Culley, and E. Dekoninck, "Describing the 
creative design process by the integration of engineering 
design and cognitive psychology literature," Design Studies, 
vol. 29, pp. 160-180, 3/2008. 
[8] 
T. M. Amabile and M. G. Pratt, "The dynamic componential 
model of creativity and innovation in organizations: Making 
progress, making meaning," Research in Organizational 
Behavior, vol. 36, pp. 157-183, 2016. 
[9] 
C. Andriopoulos, "Determinants of organisational creativity: 
a literature review," Management Decision, vol. 39, pp. 834-
841, 2001. 
[10] E. S. Metzl and M. A. Morrell, "The Role of Creativity in 
Models of Resilience: Theoretical Exploration and Practical 
Applications," Journal of Creativity in Mental Health, vol. 3, 
pp. 303-318, 2008/10/10. 
[11] M. Csikszentmihalyi, "A systems perspective on creativity," 
in Handbook of creativity, S. R, Ed., ed Cambridge: 
Cambridge University press, 1997, pp. 313 - 335. 
[12] R. Bratvold and S. Begg, Making good decisions. Texas, 
USA: Society of petroleum engineers, 2010. 
[13] H. Simon, "Rational choice and the structure of the 
environment," Psychological Review, vol. 63, 1956. 
[14] H. Simon, Administrative behaviour: a study of decision-
making processes in administrative organisations, 4th ed. 
New York: The Free Press, 2013. 
[15] D. J. Snowden and M. E. Boone, "A Leader's Framework for 
Decision Making. (cover story)," Harvard Business Review, 
vol. 85, pp. 68-76, 2007. 
[16] H. Volberda, "Building a flexible firm: how to remain 
competitive," Corporate Reputation Review, 1998. 
[17] B. Gray, "The Cynefin framework: applying an understanding 
of complexity to medicine," Journal of Primary Health Care, 
vol. 9, pp. 258-261, 2017. 
[18] M. Efatmaneshnik and M. Ryan, "A general framework for 
measuring system complexity," Complexity, vol. 21, pp. 533-
546, 2016. 
[19] D. Sachau, "Resurrecting the Motivation-Hygiene Theory: 
Herzberg and the Positive Psychology Movement," Human 
Resource Development Review, vol. 6, pp. 377-393, 
2007/12/01. 
[20] A. H. Y. Hon, "Shaping Environments Conductive to 
Creativity:The Role of Intrinsic Motivation," Cornell 
Hospitality Quarterly, vol. 53, pp. 53-64, 2012. 
[21] M. Uhl-Bien and R. Marion, "Complexity leadership in 
bureaucratic forms of organizing: A meso model," The 
Leadership Quarterly, vol. 20, pp. 631-650, 2009/08/01. 
[22] M. Uhl-Bien, R. Marion, and B. McKelvey, "Complexity 
Leadership Theory: Shifting leadership from the industrial age 
to the knowledge era," The Leadership Quarterly, vol. 18, pp. 
298-318, 2007/08/01. 
[23] A. Mark and D. Snowden, Researching Practice or Practicing 
Research: Innovating Methods in Healthcare - The 
Contribution of Cynefin, 2006. 
[24] W. R. Ashby, Variety, constraint, and the law of requisite 
variety. Chicago: Aldine, 1968. 
[25] W. R. Ashby, "Requisite Variety and Its Implications for the 
Control of Complex Systems," in Facets of Systems Science, 
ed Boston, MA: Springer US, 1991, pp. 405-417. 
[26] A. Gorod, T. Nguyen, and L. Hallo, "Systems engineering 
decision-making: Optimizing and/or satisficing?," in 2017 
Annual IEEE International Systems Conference (SysCon), 
2017, pp. 1-6. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

