The Social Side of Community Resilience: Human Capital Modeling 
C.J. Hutto, Alexandra Trani, Elizabeth Williams, Hi Shin Shim, Tom McDermott,  
Dennis Folds, and Molly Nadolski 
Georgia Tech Research Institute 
Atlanta, Georgia 
e-mail: cjhutto@gatech.edu 
 
 
Abstract—Present measures of community resilience – that is, 
how communities respond or adapt to changes as well as recover 
from disasters – are often too shallow and fail to account for the 
gamut of variables contributing to community health. We argue 
that this problem stems from attempting to measure community 
resilience with an overly simplistic assessment. It 
is 
understandably difficult to construct a predictive model of 
community resilience. Such a model would need to be composed 
of variables that represent a range of elements which capture 
the community’s ability to respond to and/or overcome natural 
or man-made disasters/disruptions, including factors spanning 
the resilience or (in)vulnerability of houses and buildings, roads 
and bridges, emergency services, electrical grids, computer and 
information exchange networks, potable water distribution 
systems, sanitation systems, and so on. Furthermore, the 
resilience associated with the aggregate human/social spirit of a 
community is often marginalized or, in some cases, ignored 
completely. The disparate nature of such a broad range of 
variables is that they are measured on different scales, with 
incongruent units, collected from diverse sources, at dissimilar 
time intervals. The current paper addresses all three of the 
challenges associated with (1) incorporating human and social 
elements of community resilience, (2) representing the 
complexity of community (social) resilience variables in a single 
common latent variable construct model that addresses concerns 
about disparate scales, units, sources, and types of data, and (3) 
creating useful models for both characterizing and predicting the 
resilience of a given community. We achieve this by 
demonstrating a novel technique for translating extant data 
such that the entire gamut of relevant variables are expressed in 
terms of their impact on human capital. Our technique then 
utilizes structural equation modeling techniques to construct 
causal (and thus, descriptive and predictive) models of 
community resilience.  
Keywords-human capital modeling, social capital modeling, 
structural equation modeling, transformation techniques 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Global changes including international tensions and 
climate related stresses increasingly impact American 
communities. Policy makers and the public are also 
increasingly concerned with the health of American cities in 
regards to aging American infrastructure amidst rapid 
technological developments. To address these problems, 
policy makers and researchers have begun investing in 
community 
resilience—that 
is, 
investments 
towards 
understanding and improving how communities respond and 
adapt to changes as well as recover from disasters [1]–[3]. 
Improvements in physical engineering and city infrastructure 
are often the first consideration for improving community 
resilience. For instance, improved road systems allow for 
easier access both in to and out of a city, earthquake-proof 
buildings reduce risks of structure collapse in the event of an 
earthquake, and investments in emergency services increase 
community response time in the event of disasters or threats. 
Engineered infrastructures in urban communities 
are 
necessary ingredients of community resilience in the presence 
of stressors such as such as economic downturns, natural or 
man-made disasters, or Carrington Event-like phenomena. 
However, the ultimate criteria for resilience are the 
preservation (or restoration) of the human population affected 
by such stressors. Indeed, it is for the benefit of the human 
population that infrastructure systems even exist; it is human 
welfare and quality of life which are ultimately served by 
fortifying critical infrastructures against stressors. 
Social science has a well-established body of literature 
demonstrating the strong relationship between an individual’s 
social resilience and the role of protective factors related to 
their assemblage of health, well-being, and livelihood 
‘competencies’, ‘assets’, ‘resources’, or ‘endowments’ 
collectively referred to as human capital [1][2][4]–[9] and 
social capital [10]–[13]. Thus, human and social capital are 
both recognized as crucial in achieving resilience and, through 
their dynamic interplay, enable a community to respond 
positively to risks and alter or reduce the effects of adversity 
[3][6]. 
Furthermore, 
individuals are 
responsible for 
maintaining and increasing human capital within communities 
[5][14], and human capital is vital for economic growth [15]. 
As human capital increases, community conditions improve 
and new opportunities become available for individuals [16], 
[17]. In turn, individuals who are higher in human capital are 
more likely to recognize and exploit new opportunities when 
they become available within the community [18].  
As such, we argue that humans are both the source of 
community resilience and the beneficiaries of it. Nevertheless, 
a major, often unconsidered, aspect of community resilience 
is social and human capital. A paucity of adequately 
comprehensive measures of human and social capital creates 
a major obstacle in assessing community resilience. Present 
measures fail to capture the intricate relationships between 
objective quality of life measures, subjective well-being, 
general political and economic climates, and community 
demographic factors. Indeed, traditional systems-of-systems 
models integrating aspects of engineered infrastructures with 
human behavior are often over-simplified representations of 
what in actuality are very complex aspects of the social and 
physical world [19].  
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

A single measure or survey of human and social capital is 
an impractical goal for researchers; it is unlikely any one 
measure could be both comprehensive enough and time-
efficient to administer. We embrace more multifaceted 
representations of human behavior with more complex 
models. Our model of human capital assimilates data of 
disparate forms, using disparate units of measure, collected 
from disparate sources, at disparate scales, and integrates them 
for the purpose of developing a complex, system-of-systems 
representation of community 
health, well-being, 
and 
livelihood. Importantly, our complex models are (first and 
foremost) explicitly motivated by extant scientific literature, 
and further derived based on data-driven insights from well-
established public data sets comprising records from 30 
different collection activities spanning 42 years (from 1972 to 
2014) across nine different divisions of the United States 
Census Bureau and assimilated into a single data repository 
called the General Social Survey (GSS) [20], as well as 
historical data from the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics 
[21][22] and the World Bank Open Data repository [23].  
Using this well-pedigreed data model (c.f., Section II), in 
Section III we then present a technique for transforming the 
multifaceted, disparate data into ordinal measures of a single 
common construct: human capital. Once transformed, we next 
employ advanced statistical techniques in Section IV to 
characterize both the strength and direction of relationships of 
community resilience factors (i.e., human and social capital, 
economic climate, political climate, etc.), which allows us to 
capture causal (thus, descriptive and predictive) models of the 
social side of community resilience. Section IV presents the 
results of our initial SEM analysis and discusses some of the 
limitations associated with the approach. Section V concludes 
by situating our work in current and prior literature, and makes 
recommendations on future directions for this sort of research. 
II. 
SOCIAL FACTORS OF COMMUNITY RESILIENCE 
We define social aspects of community resilience using a 
combination of theory and available data (e.g., survey data, 
public reports, and scientific findings). To begin, we briefly 
elaborate on the theoretical definitions for the community 
resilience factors in the present study. Also, we elaborate upon 
the types of data employed to create these factors.  
A. Constituants of Human Capital: SWB and SOL 
Folds and Thompson  [2] argue that human capital is a 
complex latent (i.e., not directly observable) construct that can 
be split into two factors: objective quality of life 
measurements (i.e., standard of living) and subjective well-
being measures. These two factors can be further broken down 
into sub-factors to account for the broad range of resilience-
protective factors related to the assemblage of health, well-
being, and livelihood for a given community: 
1) Subjective well-being (SWB): The subjective emotions 
and attitudes a person maintains in regards to their own life 
are collectively referred to as “subjective well-being” 
[24][25]. Using the GSS and other public data resources, we 
integrate at least 25 manifest indicators of general happiness 
and overall satisfaction with their personal life. The manifest 
indicators are organized into latent variable constructs 
representing four principal constituents of subjective well-
being [26][27], as initially operationalized by Folds and 
Thompson [2] for use in our human capital modeling efforts:  
a) Affective Experiences: the longer-term experiences 
of pleasant affect (as well as a lack of unpleasant affect) as 
indicated, for example, via a person’s general perceived 
happiness in life, in their marriage, and with their cohabitation 
companion (e.g., partner or roommates).  
b) Global Life Judgements: a person’s judgements 
about their sense of purpose and general feelings of optimism 
towards the future. Examples of global life judgements 
include a person’s overall belief regarding how interesting 
they find their own life in general (e.g., whether they consider 
life to be dull, routine, or exciting), and judgements about the 
general nature of humanity (whether they believe most other 
people to be trustworthy, fair, and helpful).  
c) Cognitive Appraisals: a person’s subjective self-
assessment of their own current socioeconomic state relative 
to their life goals, as well as broader social comparisons. 
Determinants 
include 
financial 
status self-appraisals, 
appraisals regarding their career and wages, social status self-
appraisals (e.g., social rank and social class), and self-
appraisals regarding the relative quality of their domicile.  
d) Domain Specific Satisfaction: the degree of 
fulfillment or contentment with important social elements 
such as satisfaction with their family life, friendships, 
recreational interests, job, health, and their city of residence.  
2) Objective measures of quality of life and standard of 
living (SOL): Measures of subjective well-being should be 
complemented with objective measures like income and 
property value when evaluating community health and 
livelihood [28]–[30]. When used in tandum with subjective 
measures such as SWB, objective measures of standard of 
living (SOL) allow researchers to assess the degree to which 
a person’s beliefs about present life conditions (e.g., a 
person’s belief that they are in the upper-middle class) maps 
on to objective information about their tangible present life 
conditions (e.g., actual earning wage and property value). We 
operationalize SOL using 17 indicators from the GSS data to 
capture objective measures of individual quality of life and 
standard of living in our human capital model. These 
indicators include, for example, records of individual’s 
highest education level attained, the number of people living 
in their household, type of dwelling (and whether owned or 
rented), various employment characteristics (part time, full 
time, student/homemaker, unemployed, retired, etc.), and 
constant (i.e., annual inflation adjusted) income in dollars. 
Standard of living is closely connected with subjective well-
being—that is, decreases in objective standard of living 
results in reduced subjective feelings of well-being and 
increased mental health risks which, which then in turn can 
further reduce objective standards of living [31]–[35].  
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

In addition to SWB and SOL, we must also consider other 
important elements of the social side of community resilience. 
The next section addresses many of these additional factors. 
B. Other Socially Oriented Community Resilience Factors 
Together, subjective well-being (SWB) and standard of 
living (SOL) capture the respective subjective and objective 
aspects of Human Capital; but, this is only a part of what 
comprises the social side of community resilience. We must 
not neglect consideration of individual and community 
demographics, nor the greater context the community; we 
need to account for demographic information as well as social 
perceptions of the national economic conditions, the general 
political climate, and the general security atmosphere. 
1) Demographics: these characteristics form the basis by 
which “communities” are defined in the first place. As such, 
it is important to have access to information at the individual 
and aggregate level about community 
demographics 
including aspects of personal identity (e.g., ethnicity, age, 
gender, 
marital 
status), 
geographic 
identity 
(e.g., 
city/community size and geolocation), and cultural identity 
(e.g., political and religious affiliations, preferences and 
practices). Using items from the GSS, we operationalize 
community demographics at the national and regional levels.  
2) Larger contextual environment: the general political 
climate incorporates public opinion regarding the utility and 
morality of national programs (e.g., satisfaction with 
healthcare and transportation services) as well as general 
attitudes about the government (e.g., public trust and 
perceptions that social liberties are protected). The general 
political climate influences—and is also influenced by—the 
general economic climate and the general security climate. To 
represent the general economic climate, we access national 
level historical information from the U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics [21][22] and the World Bank Open Data repository 
[23]. This includes annually recorded economic data such as 
national unemployment rates, consumer price indices, 
inflation rates, prime lending interest rates, and annual gross 
domestic product (GDP) per capita. Our representation of the 
general security climate incorporates community exposure to 
crimes, feelings of fear, and beliefs of the efficacy of the court 
system as constructed from data immediately available 
within the GSS.   
III. 
METHODS 
A. Principal Data Source 
The General Social Survey has been administered to a 
representative sample of the American public from 1972 
through 2016. The present study used data from the years 
1972 through 2014. Survey items include feelings about 
national spending, community safety, membership and 
engagement in social groups, income and subjective feelings 
of financial health. We selected this survey because it offers 
a long-term examination of social changes within American 
communities while also providing us with important 
information that can be adapted to represent the theoretical 
underpinnings of human and social capital. The GSS consists 
of hundreds of questions with varying degrees of 
hypothesized relationships to community resilience. For 
instance, a person’s astrological sign is unlikely to be 
indicative of their subjective well-being or objective quality 
of life. For this reason, we went through each question 
surveyed on the General Social Survey looking for those that 
were most representative of our theoretical conceptions of the 
community resilience factors. Items were selected based on 
evidence from existing scientific literature and a-priori 
hypotheses about the theoretical makeup of identified 
community resilience factors. 
B. Transforming Dissimilar Data Into a Common Form 
Responses to selected items on the GSS were next 
transformed into ordinal variables—that is, we translated 
(typically categorical) data into their corresponding linearly 
ranked associated to either SWB or SOL. Transformations in 
this case were generally informed by the GSS data itself (e.g., 
people of lower income score lower in objective quality of 
life than people with higher income; people with more 
positive global life judgements score higher on subjective 
well-being than people with more neutral or negative global 
life judgements). All ordinal transformations were further 
vetted using a top-down approach where we identified 
predominant scientific studies examining the relationship 
between variables of interest and their hypothesized 
community resilience factors. Using age variables as an 
example, we ordinally transformed age response categories 
in terms of their hypothesized human and social capital 
clusters, resulting in 5 groups with people between the ages 
of 15 and 20 having the lowest value (i.e., “1”) and people 
between the ages of 60 and 75—retired and still healthy—
having the highest value (i.e., “5”).  
This 
transformation 
step 
has 
three 
important 
characteristics: (1) it relies on a systematic, principled, and 
scientifically-grounded mapping of survey item responses to 
their appropriately ranked (ordinal) impacts on a common 
construct (human capital), (2) it is extensible to any data type, 
as long as a relationship can be defined in terms of direction 
and magnitude of influence on a factor or sub-factor within 
the human capital model (3) once transformed, it allows 
researchers to employ advanced statistical techniques (such 
as structural equation modeling) to create causal models with 
predictive capabilities. Fig. 1 illustrates the social aspects of 
community resilience; the full list of factors considered for 
the model (discussed in Section II) consists of 68 variables. 
Because documentation for these factors is voluminous (it is 
more than 26 pages alone), we provide the factors, the GSS 
survey items (and response options) associated with those 
factors, and literature and data-derived rationale for the 
transformation of the typically non-linear (categorical, or 
nominal) data into linear (polytomous, or ordinal) data for our 
model in a supplementary package accompanying this paper.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
Figure 1.  Factors associated with the social side of community resilience. 
 
C. Causal/Predictive Modeling for Community Resilience 
Any ordinally transformed variable—like 
the age 
variable in our earlier example—can be employed in complex 
statistical analyses including structural equation models of 
community resilience. Structural equation modeling (SEM) 
allows for objective item selection based on the degree to 
which items “load” onto their respective factors (i.e., the 
strongest predictive relationships to underlying theoretical 
factors will have the highest factor loadings). Additionally, 
SEM models provide information about the viability of 
hypothesized relationships between variables and factors via 
model fit indices. All our statistical analyses were performed 
in R to make our findings easily accessible, replicable, and 
repeatable.  
SEM provides information about the direction and 
strength of relationships between variables and factors (either 
directly observable or latent) while assessing the viability of 
causal relationships among variables and factors [36]. 
Relationships are assumed to be linear so that changes at the 
start of a path result in linear changes in variables or factors at 
the end of a path [37]. To accomplish this, structural equations 
are computed allowing relationships to be both tested and 
graphically 
modeled 
[38]. 
When 
modeling 
causal 
relationships or in situations where unknown amounts of error 
exists in variables and factors of interest, SEM is generally 
superior to regression [38] making SEM a popular and 
accepted 
technique 
for 
behavioral 
and 
social 
modeling[39][40]. 
Because SEM uses a confirmatory 
approach toward hypothesis and model testing [37][38], it has 
proven to be an ideal method for modeling hypothesized 
human capital [14]. 
The best fitting SEM model is also the most parsimonious 
model because it accounts for the most variance between 
factors using the fewest causal paths. Generally, when sample 
sizes are large—as would be expected in human and social 
capital contexts—the χ2 test is biased and, while still 
reported, is generally not used to assess model fit [37][38], 
[41]–[46]. Instead, we rely on the comparative fit index (CFI; 
[47]) and root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA;  
[48]) to assess model fit. The CFI tests complete covariation 
between a hypothesized model and actual data providing a 
value constrained between 0 and 1.00. Values greater than 
0.95 generally indicate a well-fitting 
model [38][42]. 
RMSEA—the best measure of model fit [38]—examines the 
extent that models fit a hypothesized population covariance 
matrix [49]. Discrepancies between population and model 
covariance matrices are reported as a number constrained 
between 0.00 and 1.00. Models with RMSEA values between 
0.05 and 0.08 are considered to have adequate fit; models 
with values less than 0.05 have nearly ideal model fit [49]. 
SEM also provides information about the viability of 
hypothesized relationships between ordinally transformed 
survey items and community resilience factors. That is, the 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

items that best represent a hypothesized factor will also have 
the highest factor loading in the model. Items with weak or 
non-existing 
(i.e., 
not 
significant) 
relationships 
to 
hypothesized sub-factors can be objectively eliminated using 
this approach.  
Ordinal transformation also allows for aggregate 
examinations into community resilience factors of interest. 
Once transformed, survey items can be furthered centered to 
the mean (i.e., subtracting a mean constant from a variable of 
interest) and then objectively combined (i.e., summed) to 
form an indicator of total community resilience in an area. 
Total scores for individual community resilience factors can 
also be examined allowing for easy graphical representation 
(e.g., what would be accomplished using a choropleth map) 
for factors of interest in communities or regions of interest.  
IV. 
RESULTS 
We transformed items from the General Social Survey 
from years 1972 through 2014 into polytomous, ordinal 
measures of human and social capital, as well as the general 
political economic, and security climates. We tested the 
relationships between these variables and their hypothesized 
factors using a structural equation model (SEM). Model fit 
statistics regarding the χ2 test for goodness of fit and the root 
mean square error (RMSE) for the model were adequate, 
though the low score for the comparison fit index (CFI) 
indicates that a model derived from less sparse data—e.g., a 
model that incorporates additional data sources along with 
the GSS—would likely be a better fit (χ2 = 251851, df = 1476, 
p < 0.00; CFI = 0.445; RMSEA = 0.053). We explore such 
models in subsequent research  [50]. Fig. 2 shows a graphical 
representation of the latent variables within our structural 
equation model, as well as information about the strength of 
our hypothesized relationships between factors (e.g., 
subjective well-being, standard of living, demographic data, 
and the general political, economic, and security climates – 
all factors are statistically significant). 
As is common when relying on a single data source, 
questions on the General Social Survey were not consistently 
 
 
Figure 2.  SEM latent variable model with factor weightings. 
asked across years, leaving information for many important 
items unavailable. Thus, even comprehensive surveys like 
the GSS are often not enough to model community resilience 
when used in isolation. We argue that future researchers 
would greatly benefit from either (1) combining multiple 
surveys, reports, and data sources to create a fully 
comprehensive measure or, (2) simulating data based on 
available population statistics. The methods presented in this 
paper support either initiative; we explore the latter in 
subsequent research [50]. 
V. 
 CONCLUSION 
We present a technique for transforming disparate 
survey data into measures of human and social capital in a 
community resiliency context. This technique allows 
researchers 
flexibility 
to 
create 
complex 
and 
representationally accurate models of human and social 
capital using readily available data. Our technique fulfills 
many of the requirements for advancing social science 
research, including methods for enabling researchers to 
analyze data consisting of huge sample collected over 
multiple points in time (i.e., large-N and multiple-T; [19]). 
We also advance social science research because our 
technique can be quickly utilized to extend exploratory and 
predictive analyses for researchers interested in human and 
social capital [19]. Researchers interested in applying this 
technique for data exploration and prediction should refer to 
a subsequently submitted paper [50].   
Our technique was tested using Folds and Thompson’s 
[2] structural equation model of human and social capital. We 
also incorporated model structure proposed by McDermott 
and colleagues [51] who argue that community resilience is 
composed of an interaction of systems including human and 
social capital, built environments, and city infrastructure. Our 
technique and model fit statistics demonstrate reasonably 
good support for these existing models of human capital and 
community resilience.  
We argue that researchers using this technique in the 
future—especially those researchers using our technique for 
simulated data—should incorporate a structural equation 
model to both check findings and provide further tests of 
reliability and replicability.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. J. Folds, “A notional model of creation, maintenance, and 
enrichment of human capital,” presented at the 6th International 
Conference on Applied Human Factors and Ergonomics (AHFE), 
2015. 
[2] D. J. Folds and V. M. Thompson, “Engineering Human Capital: A 
System of Systems Modeling Approach,” presented at the 8th 
International Conference on System of Systems Engineering, 2013. 
[3] G. Windle, “What is resilience? A review and concept analysis,” Rev. 
Clin. Gerontol., vol. 21, no. 02, pp. 152–169, May 2011. 
[4] M. Bartley, I. Schoon, R. Mitchell, and D. Blane, “Resilience as an 
Asset for Healthy Development,” in Health Assets in a Global Context: 
Theory, Methods, Action, A. Morgan, M. Davies, and E. Ziglio, Eds. 
New York, NY: Springer New York, 2010, pp. 101–115. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

[5] G. S. Becker, Human capital: a theoretical and empirical analysis, 
with special reference to education, 3rd ed. Chicago: The University 
of Chicago Press, 1994. 
[6] J. G. Dyer and T. M. McGuinness, “Resilience: Analysis of the 
concept,” Arch. Psychiatr. Nurs., vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 276–282, Oct. 
1996. 
[7] A. S. Masten, K. M. Best, and N. Garmezy, “Resilience and 
development: Contributions from the study of children who overcome 
adversity,” Dev. Psychopathol., vol. 2, no. 04, pp. 425–444, Oct. 1990. 
[8] J. Mincer, “The Distribution of Labor Incomes: A Survey With Special 
Reference to the Human Capital Approach,” J. Econ. Lit., vol. 8, no. 1, 
pp. 1–26, 1970. 
[9] T. W. Schultz, “Investment in Human Capital,” Am. Econ. Rev., vol. 
51, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 1961. 
[10] J. S. Coleman, “Social Capital in the Creation of Human Capital,” Am. 
J. Sociol., vol. 94, pp. S95–S120, 1988. 
[11] R. R. Dynes, “Social Capital: Dealing With Community Emergencies,” 
Homel. Secur. Aff., vol. 2, no. 3, Jul. 2006. 
[12] Y. Nakagawa and R. Shaw, “Social Capital: A Missing Link to Disaster 
Recovery,” Int. J. Mass Emergencies Disasters, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 5–
34, 2004. 
[13] B. Wellman and S. Wortley, “Different Strokes from Different Folks: 
Community Ties and Social Support,” Am. J. Sociol., vol. 96, no. 3, pp. 
558–588, 1990. 
[14] M. Ruzzier, B. Antoncic, R. D. Hisrich, and M. Konecnik, “Human 
capital and SME internationalization: a structural equation modeling 
study,” Can. J. Adm. Sci. Rev. Can. Sci. Adm., vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 15–
29, Mar. 2007. 
[15] M. Novak and S. Bojnec, “Human Capital and Economic Growth by 
Municipalities in Slovenia,” Manag. Glob. Transit., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 
157–177, 2005. 
[16] N. Bontis and J. Fitz-Enz, “Intellectual capital ROI: a causal map of 
human capital antecedents and consequents,” J. Intellect. Cap., vol. 3, 
no. 3, pp. 223–247, 2002. 
[17] J. S. Coleman, Foundations of social theory. Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press, 1994. 
[18] P. Davidsson and B. Honig, “The role of social and human capital 
among nascent entrepreneurs,” J. Bus. Ventur., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 301–
331, May 2003. 
[19] C. J. Hutto, “Blending Quantitative, Qualitative, Geospatial, and 
Temporal Data: Progressing Towards the Next Generation of Human 
Social Analytics,” in Proceedings of the Second International 
Conference on Human and Social Analytics (HUSO), Barcelona, 
Spain, 2016. 
[20] T. W. Smith, P. V. Marsden, M. Hout, and J. Kim, “General Social 
Surveys, 1972-2014 [machine-readable data file].” NORC at the 
University of Chicago [producer and distributor], 2014. 
[21] The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Consumer Price Index Data from 
1913 to 2016,” U.S. Inflation Calculator, 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.usinflationcalculator.com/inflation/consumer-price-index-
and-annual-percent-changes-from-1913-to-2008/. 
[22] The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Labor Force Statistics including 
the National Unemployment Rate (Current Population Survey - CPS),” 
BLS.gov Databases, Tables, and Calculators, 2016. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.bls.gov/data/. 
[23] World Bank, “GDP per capita (current US$) and Lending interest rate 
(%) from 1972 to 1016 [Custom cross-tabulation of data],” World 
databank: World Development Indicators, 2016. [Online]. Available: 
http://databank.worldbank.org/data/reports.aspx?source=2&series=N
Y.GDP.PCAP.CD&country=USA. 
[24] F. M. Andrews and J. P. Robinson, “Measures of subjective well-
being,” Meas. Personal. Soc. Psychol. Attitudes, vol. 1, pp. 61–114, 
1991. 
[25] E. Diener, S. Oishi, and R. E. Lucas, “Personality, Culture, and 
Subjective Well-Being: Emotional and Cognitive Evaluations of Life,” 
Annu. Rev. Psychol., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 403–425, Feb. 2003. 
[26] E. Diener, “Assessing subjective well-being: Progress and 
opportunities,” Soc. Indic. Res., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 103–157, Feb. 1994. 
[27] E. Diener, E. M. Suh, R. E. Lucas, and H. L. Smith, “Subjective well-
being: Three decades of progress.,” Psychol. Bull., vol. 125, no. 2, pp. 
276–302, 1999. 
[28] E. Angner, “The Politics of Happiness: Subjective vs. Economic 
Measures as Measures of Social Well-Being,” SSRN Electron. J., 2008. 
[29] E. Diener and E. P. Seligman, “Very Happy People,” Psychol. Sci., vol. 
13, no. 1, pp. 81–84, 2002. 
[30] D. Kahneman, A. B. Krueger, D. Schkade, N. Schwarz, and A. Stone, 
“Toward National Well-Being Accounts,” Am. Econ. Rev., vol. 94, no. 
2, pp. 429–434, Apr. 2004. 
[31] M. Blaxter, Health and lifestyles. New York, NY: Routledge, 2003. 
[32] D. G. Blazer, R. C. Kessler, K. A. McGonagle, and M. S. Swartz, “The 
prevalence and distribution of major depression in a national 
community sample: the National Comorbidity Survey,” Am. J. 
Psychiatry, vol. 151, no. 7, pp. 979–986, 1994. 
[33] D. P. Goldberg and P. Huxley, Common mental disorders: a bio-social 
model. London ; New York: Tavistock/Routledge, 1992. 
[34] H. Meltzer, B. Gill, M. Pettigrew, and K. Hinds, “OPCS surveys of 
psychiatric morbidity in Great Britain,” 1, 1995. 
[35] S. Weich and G. Lewis, “Material standard of living, social class, and 
the prevalence of the common mental disorders in Great Britain,” J. 
Epidemiol. Community Health, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 8–14, Jan. 1998. 
[36] P. M. Bentler, EQS structural equations program manual. Encino, CA: 
Multivariate Software, 1995. 
[37] J. C. Loehlin, Latent variable models: an introduction to factor, path, 
and structural equation analysis, 4th ed. Mahwah, N.J: L. Erlbaum 
Associates, 2004. 
[38] B. M. Byrne, Structural equation modeling with EQS: Basic concepts, 
applications, and programming, 2nd ed. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates, 2006. 
[39] R. P. Bagozzi and Y. Yi, “Multitrait–multimethod matrices in 
consumer research: Critique and new developments,” J. Consum. 
Psychol., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 143–170, Jan. 1993. 
[40] R. C. MacCallum and J. T. Austin, “Applications of Structural 
Equation Modeling in Psychological Research,” Annu. Rev. Psychol., 
vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 201–226, Feb. 2000. 
[41] D. W. Gerbing and J. C. Anderson, “Monte Carlo Evaluations of 
Goodness of Fit Indices for Structural Equation Models,” Sociol. 
Methods Res., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 132–160, Nov. 1992. 
[42] L.-T. Hu and P. M. Bentler, “Evaluating model fit.,” in Structural 
equation modeling: Concepts , issues, and applications, R. H. Hoyle, 
Ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 1995, pp. 76–99. 
[43] K. G. Jöreskog and D. Sörbom, LISREL 8: Structural equation 
modeling with the SIMPLIS command language. Scientific Software 
International, 1993. 
[44] R. C. MacCallum, M. W. Browne, and H. M. Sugawara, “Power 
analysis and determination of sample size for covariance structure 
modeling.,” Psychol. Methods, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 130–149, 1996. 
[45] H. W. Marsh, J. R. Balla, and R. P. McDonald, “Goodness-of-fit 
indexes in confirmatory factor analysis: The effect of sample size.,” 
Psychol. Bull., vol. 103, pp. 391–410, 1988. 
[46] J. S. Tanaka, “Multifaceted conceptions of fit in structural equation 
models,” in Testing structural equation models, K. A. Bollen and J. S. 
Long, Eds. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993, pp. 10–39. 
[47] P. M. Bentler, “Comparative fit indexes in structural models.,” 
Psychol. Bull., vol. 107, no. 2, pp. 238–246, 1990. 
[48] J. H. Steiger and J. C. Lind, “Statistically based tests for the number of 
common factors,” in Annual meeting of the Psychometric Society, Iowa 
City, IA, 1980, vol. 758, pp. 424–453. 
[49] M. W. Browne and R. Cudeck, “Alternative ways of assessing model 
fit,” in Testing structural equation models, K. A. Bollen and J. S. Long, 
Eds. Newbury Park, CA: Sage, 1993, pp. 445–455. 
[50] A. Trani, C. J. Hutto, D. J. Folds, and T. A. McDermott, “Community 
Works: Predicting Changes in Community Resilience,” in Proceedings 
of the Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics 
(HUSO) (submitted), Nice, France, 2017. 
[51] T. McDermott, D. Folds, C. J. Hutto, and M. Nadolski, “A Human-
Focused, Holistic Model of Community Resilience,” INSIGHT, vol. 
19, no. 4, pp. 66–69, Dec. 2016. 
 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

