Forecasting Civil Strife: An Emerging Methodology
Dipak K. Gupta, Sathappan Muthiahz, David Maresy and Naren Ramakrishnanz
Professor Emeritus
Department of Political Science
San Diego State University
yChair for Inter-American Affairs
Institute of the Americas
University of California, San Diego
zDiscovery Analytics Center
Department of Computer Science
Virginia Tech, Arlington, VA
Abstract—From the earliest time of recorded scholarship, fore-
casting civil strife has been the Holy Grail to political theorists.
Yet, without actual data and ability to conduct empirical analyses,
until the 1960’s such analyses were no more than speculation.
The advent of high-speed computing along with collection of
data on civil unrest allowed political scientists to empirically test
their hypotheses. Yet, these analyses did not result in short term
prediction due to the lack of real time data. Today the rise of social
media has witnessed a radically different methodology in how we
can understand, monitor, and forecast incidents of social strife
in real time. This emerging methodology, however, requires a
multi-disciplinary effort no one even contemplated until recently.
This paper presents results of forecasting events of politically
motivated violence based on monitoring open source information
(Twitter, blogs, newspaper articles) in 10 Latin American coun-
tries by a multi-university, multi-disciplinary team of academics,
supported by a grant from the Intelligence Advanced Research
Projects Activity (IARPA).
Keywords–Forecasting, Civil Strife, Social Media, Multidisci-
plinary Methodology
I.
INTRODUCTION
Generally speaking, social scientists are reluctant to fore-
cast incidents of civil unrest. The open system, within which
these outcomes are derived, has been considered far too
complex to forecast anything more than the direction of
trends or the increased likelihood of an event occurring. In
fact, the noted social scientist Paul Collier [1] ﬂatly admits
concerning his own model: “More fundamentally, our model
(of political conﬂict) cannot be used for prediction, it cannot
tell you whether Sierra Leone will have another civil war
next year. That depends on a myriad of short-term events.”
As a result, the efforts of social scientists have largely been
conﬁned to the understanding of the determinant variables
using various types of causal models or by using time-series
projections. From a public policy standpoint, the importance
of forecasting imminent political upheavals is undeniable. The
urgency of developing such predictive capabilities has been
further precipitated by the spread of social media and the
Internet. The prime example of the potential of social media to
mobilize civil strife was amply demonstrated during the sudden
uprising, dubbed, the “Arab Spring.” Rise of social media has
been a double-edged sword; along with its ability to mobilize
the disgruntled, it has accorded us a new avenue through which
we can understand society in a way that was impossible in
the past. Our ability to understand and forecast civil strife
has been vastly expanded because of two primary reasons.
First, social media, especially in democratic nations, allows
individuals to express their opinions freely. As a result, when
monitored properly, social media allows us to comprehend
societal trends in a way that even the best-constructed opinion
surveys are not able to capture. Second, thanks to the recent
advancements in a number of related academic disciplines
as well as computational capabilities, we are witnessing a
revolutionary change in how we understand and then predict
various societal events [2] [3], such as spreading chaos in the
ﬁnancial market [4] [5], spread of infectious diseases [6]–[9],
etc. These efforts require a multi-disciplinary focus that was
until recently largely absent.
Our multidisciplinary research effort, which brings in ex-
pertise from wide-ranging disciplines across social sciences,
linguistics, geographic information systems, and computer
science, concentrates on “Civil Strife“, by which we mean
mass movements, such as protest movements and riots and
other acts of collective rebellion and not on terrorism or the
so-called “lone wolf” attacks, plotted and carried out by a small
group or an isolated individual.
For our study, we chose 10 large Latin American coun-
tries. These countries offer a unique combination of mostly
functioning democracies with a long vibrant tradition of public
discourse of political issues along with excellent penetration
of Internet communication.
Our article is divided in four broad parts. The ﬁrst part
introduces the problems of forecasting from a social science
perspective and provides a theoretical basis of human moti-
vation for participating in mass movements (Section I and
Section II). The second part provides the foundation of our
subsequent analyses (sections III and
IV). The third part
(Section V) explains the index of accuracy of our research
effort. The ﬁnal part (Section VI) of the paper discusses ways
of moving our research forward.
II.
THEORETICAL BASIS OF FORECASTING THROUGH
SOCIAL MEDIA
Social media is a noisy medium, where individuals and
groups participate using messages that are confusing in lan-
guage, terminologies, and expressions, made even more com-
plicated by their temporal malleability. Therefore, before we
begin to make sense of this vast and chaotic linguistic land-
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

scape, we need to put our analysis within a broad theoretical
framework.
As scholars looked deeper into the process by which indi-
vidual participants are moved into creating collective actions,
Olson [10] raised a theoretical concern. When it comes to
volunteering for a political cause, there is an inevitable inertia
of what is known in social sciences as the “collective action”
problem, where a rational actor asks the inevitable question,
“why me?” The answer to this question may be found in the
work of social psychologists, starting with the path breaking
work of Tajfel and his associates [11] [12]. Their work, widely
accepted as “social identity” theory argues that, contrary to
the economic assumption of human behavior that equates
self-interest with human rationality [13], individuals are also
motivated to voluntarily participate in collective actions out
of their community concerns. Group identity as a political
force, however, does not develop spontaneously [14]. For that,
the society needs to have leaders or “political entrepreneurs.”
These leaders need to clearly deﬁne the perimeters of the “us”
and “them,” by instilling in the minds of the adherents, the
most primal emotion of all: fear [15].
We can forecast future actions in social media by searching
for markers of extant grievances (“injustice”, “deprivation”,
“inequality”, etc.), the boundaries of the in-group (viz., “stu-
dents”, “workers”, “farmers”, “indigenous people”, etc. along
with the names of the “heroes” of the community) the out-
group (viz., “politicians”, “thieves”, “oppressors”, “police”
etc., along with names of the “villains” of the movement).
Finally, we can also track the actions suggested by the lead-
ers (viz., “protest”, “march”, “destroy”, etc.). Based on this
theoretical framework, we developed a library of keywords,
reﬂecting existing grievance, the leaders’ framing of collective
identity, and prodding of actions against the offending party.
The results of tracking such keywords in social media lead us
to our forecasts of impending civil strife. For our forecasting,
we found a dichotomy between planned and unplanned events
to be useful. We search for “planned events” by searching for
news or announcements by various organizations for upcoming
protest events. Figure 1 illustrates the theoretical framework,
where political entrepreneurs take the prevailing grievances
and frame those in terms of “us” and “them,” provide an action
plan to bring about events of political demonstrations or riots.
By tracking this process, we predict incidents of civil strife in
a country.
Figure 1. Theoretical Framework of Forecasting Civil Strife
III.
FEATURES OF OUR STUDY
Our study offers a number of important features:
1)
On the Internet there is information that is public
(“blasts” to world) and private (communication be-
tween individuals or groups, otherwise protected by
law). We strictly use only public information obtained
from open sources, such as newspapers, blogs, and
public areas of social media such as Facebook and
Twitter. In other words, none of our data are private
or classiﬁed.
2)
The events of civil strife were classiﬁed by strict
deﬁnitions of who participates (general population,
labor unions ...), issues (political, environmental
...), geographic location, and time of event. The
who part of an event is described by the categories
deﬁned in the “social” sector of the TABARI [16]
event coding system. The issues or the why part of
an event is classiﬁed into 7 categories. Apart from
encoding the who and why part of an event, our
study also strives to identify if a civil strife will turn
violent or not. An event is deemed violent if there
is signiﬁcant damage to property or if there is any
act of violence directly associated with the event that
results in injuries to anyone involved. The geographic
location entry of an event description uses a 3-level
typology with the country at the top, province or state
(admin level 1) in the middle and city at the last level.
The geonames gazetteer [17] is used as the reference
standard for the location speciﬁcation of an event.
Finally, the time of an event is encoded with date
level accuracy.
3)
The actual post-facto events were recorded from
the local, national, and international newspapers and
codiﬁed by a third party (in this case, MITRE Corpo-
ration) and were published in IARPA’s Gold Standard
Report (GSR). The list of newspapers were identiﬁed
using the rankings as provided by 4 International
Media & Newspapers [18] and with subject matter
expert input.
4)
Forecasts had to be submitted in real time and at the
end of every month would be matched against the
GSR by MITRE Corporation and rated for accuracy
as well as lead time. False positives and false nega-
tives were also tracked as were the conﬁdence in the
forecasts.
5)
Ultimately, the delivery of warnings had to be fully
automated, without a “human in the loop”. Humans
may be involved in the development and training
phases of modeling, but the ﬁnal warnings must be
fully machine generated and automatically submitted
without any interference (in form of ﬁltering or
guiding) from subject matter experts.For illustrative
purposes, we have also presented a sample of a
hypothetical warning in Figure 2.
6)
Every forecast should have an audit trail for IARPA
to trace it back to the causal factors.
IV.
ALGORITHMS FOR FORECASTING
In this section, we provide details of how open source data
is harvested and enriched by our system and ﬁnally how this
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Figure 2. An example of computer generated warning
enriched data is used in various models to produce forecasts
or alerts.
A. Data Collection and Enrichment
Our work begins with searching the vast open source (pub-
lic) areas of the Internet by following the keywords seeded by
social scientists (the subject matter experts). Figure 3 explains
our system architecture. These searches scoop up a signiﬁcant
quantity of linguistic information, much of which are unre-
lated to our objective. These data are stored in a “vat” and
“enriched” by a Natural Language Processing(NLP) pipeline
(includes language identiﬁcation, tokenization, lemmatization,
named entity recognition and Part-of-Speech tagging) to make
the necessary connections between words and their sought
meaning. The Basis technologies RLP suite [19] is used for all
the NLP tasks. The textual data is then passed through a tempo-
ral normalization system like Heideltime [20] which converts
any relative temporal expressions such as today, tomorrow, a
week ago to absolute time based on the article/tweets publish
time. It is not enough, however, to understand the underlying
meaning of the collected keywords; for forecasting, we need
to also know the geographic points of origin. A geographic
information system allows us to geo-locate these conversations
onto maps. We use different geocoding systems for different
types of data sources. For example, twitter geocoding is
achieved by looking at different parts of a tweet in an orderly
fashion starting from the least available source, viz. geotags,
followed by Twitter places ﬁeld, the text ﬁelds contained
in user proﬁle (location, description) and ﬁnally the tweet
text itself to ﬁnd mentions of relevant locations. For news
articles and blog posts, we develop a probabilistic reasoning
engine using Probabilistic Soft Logic (PSL) [21] to identify
which among the multiple location names mentioned within
the text(such as the location of reporting, the incident location,
etc.) is the main geographic focus of the article. These data
points are now ready for statistical analyses, yielding forecasts.
B. Data Modeling
In this section we introduce brieﬂy some of the main
prediction models that work on different real-time datasets to
produce alerts and a fusion engine that combines these alerts
to achieve high quality and performance.
Figure 3. System Architecture
Protests in many countries are regular occurrences (for
example Mexico has an average of 245.95 events per month in
the GSR during 2013-2014). A baseline model that produces
forecasts using only historical occurrences of events and no
real-time data performs reasonably well and can be beat only in
situations where there is an abnormal spike (or dip) in number
of events The baseline model is trained using the ground truth
event data from the previous three months to make forecasts for
the current month. The baseline model estimates the expected
number of events for the current month, for a given location,
reason (or issue) and population (the who part) as the average
of the number of such events in the training period. Finally,
the time information (expected date of occurrence of event)
is obtained by performing a random draw from a uniform
distribution. We have conducted a maximum entropy analysis
wherein we evaluated the baseline model’s ability to forecast
surprising events (i.e., events whose frequency falls outside the
norms of historical data) and found that EMBERS consistently
beats the baseline model [22]. EMBERS uses a suite of
six forecasting algorithms that posit different approaches to
modeling civil unrest.
The planned protest model aims to identify incidents of
organized and preannounced protests from news and Twitter
using language-processing techniques [23]. It searches for oc-
currences of phrases denoting “calls for protest” (like “planar
protesta”, “Announce Strike”, “Manh˜a de mobilizac¸˜ao”,.etc) in
news and Twitter along with the mention of a future date to
produce alerts. The phrase list is developed in a semi-automatic
manner using template based matching techniques on about 1
year worth of data (twitter, news articles and blog posts) and
has mostly remained static barring a few changes for the entire
duration of our project.
A second model uses spatial scan statistics to identify
geo-located clusters of tweets enriched with a deﬁned vo-
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

cabulary of 726 keywords [24].The goal of the model is to
identify anomalous spatial regions based on Poisson mixtures.
A fast linear time subset scan [25] is applied to identify the
anomalous regions and each such region is scored using p-
values computed by Monte Carlo simulations. The keyword
ﬁltered twitter stream is split into day level chunks and the
fast subset scan is run separately for each day. A spatial
cluster on any day is considered to be an continuation of
a previous day cluster if the two clusters have a jaccard
similarity (between the keywords present in each cluster) is
greater than a threshold. In this manner the growth of a cluster
both in terms of size and density is tracked over time and
these characteristics are then used to issue a forecast for a
given spatial region. The spatial scan model is trained using 6
months of twitter data. In comparison to the planned protest
model, this model can track the development of a protest from
its birth.However this models performance is limited by the
amount of coverage/popularity the issue of a protest achieves
on social media as not all protests are covered by social media
like twitter. Also since social media is more prone to rumors
it can lead to alerts being generated falsely.
The cascade regression model recognizes situations where
social media, such as Twitter, is utilized as the staging ground
for galvanizing support for protests via online recruitment to
the underlying causes [26]. The model studies activity cascades
in twitter to understand spread of inﬂuence and information
and tries to forecast date of event based on this information
spread besides identifying a critical subset of users responsible
for the formation and survival of the activity cascade. The
model analyzes over 353 million tweets over a 1.5 year period.
Each tweet contains at least 3 keywords from a dictionary
of over 900 keywords in 3 languages related to civil unrest.
This ensures the activity cascades are relevant to our topic
of interest. Next, for making forecasts a regression model
(LASSO) using a feature set based on structural properties of
cascades like size of cascade, number of participants, duration
of cascades, change in the number of participants and tweets,
average growth rate of tweets ,.etc, is used to predict the
probability of a civil unrest event in a given day.
The dynamic query expansion model is similar to the
spatial scan model but aims to learn new emerging key-
words, unlike the static vocabulary used by the spatial scan
model [27]. In 2013, for instance, there were a series of
protests in Venezuela due to a shortage of toilet paper, a
novel circumstance that was uncovered using this model. The
dynamic query expansion model starts with a very small set
of seed keywords (like protest, march, demonstration etc.) and
iterates through the data identifying semantically similar and
co-occurring terms. The model repetitively sweeps through
the data, learning a larger set of relevant keywords at each
iteration, unless it converges. This dynamic learning of new
relevant keywords helps the model identify novel/unusual
circumstances of protest.
Both the cascade regression model and dynamic query
expansion suffer from the same disadvantages as the spatial
scan model and is trained on at least 6 months worth of
historical data.
The volume-based LASSO model uses every possible data
source in our study (news, tweets, blogs, economic indicators,
TOR, and smiles) to forecast the imminence of protests in
the next day or two [28]. The volume-based LASSO model
provides insights about the underlying social dynamics in
different countries by identifying predictive features that are
tied to unrest. The model also is capable of identifying the
value of different data source in predicting an unrest and
is more robust to changes in individual data characteristics
as compared to the previously mentioned models. The main
disadvantages of such a model is low recall and lead-time.
Also, this model works better at country and state levels as
opposed to city level (not all datasets are available at city level
granularity)
Finally, the MLE(Maximum Likelihood Estimate) model
aims to identify regularities in the GSR and provides a baseline
performance level [29]. Each of these models is tuned for high
precision, and their fusion aims to achieve high recall.
All the above-mentioned models produce alerts indepen-
dent of each other with each model tuned for high precision.
The fusion model then aims at combining the different pre-
dictions from these individual models to achieve high quality
forecasts with tunable precision and recall. The goal of the
fusion model is to (i)identify duplicate alerts (alerts with same
location, date, type and population) as models share data
sources and thus their hypothesis space overlap, (ii) ﬁll-in
missing values if any in an alert (for example certain forecasts
of the volume based model are only at country level and it
is the fusion engines responsibility to add city information)
, (iii) re-write warning ﬁelds if necessary as it is possible
for a model to issue alert for an improbable combination of
<date,location,type,population> due to noisy data and ﬁnally,
(iv) balance recall and quality. The recall-quality trade-off is
achieved by ﬁrst building a random forest regression model
to predict the expected quality score of an alert and then a
threshold set on this expected quality score can be used to
tune the precision and recall (with a lower bound on quality)
of our overall system.
V.
ACCURACY OF FORECASTS
The forecasts for a given month are evaluated by MITRE
at the end of every month using the Gold Standard Report
(GSR). The forecasts are matched against the GSR using the
Hungarian [30] bipartite matching algorithm. At the end of the
bipartite matching set of alert-event match pairs are obtained
along with the list of unmatched events and unmatched alerts.
Each alert-event match pair is assigned a quality score out
of 4. The problem of measuring forecasting accuracy is that
each forecast is a multi-dimensional phenomenon. Thus, a
speciﬁc forecast must match the time and geographic place
where it was supposed to have taken place and it should also
correspond to the type of protest and its speciﬁc cause. Thus,
the quality score is a composite measure of four components.
These are: location score, date score, event-type score and
event-population score. Precision refers to the fraction of alerts
that got matched to a true event, whereas recall refers the
fraction of true events (GSR) that got matched to an alert
(i.e., were accurately forecasted). The average lead-time of
the system of was 9.76 days i.e., on an average our system
produced an alert for a civil unrest event 9.76 days in advance
of the ﬁrst report of the event.
Our ability to forecast events in Latin America was put to
test by a sudden explosion of public anger in Brazil during
mid-2013 and in Venezuela in early 2014. Table I provides
the performance metrics for the two countries during these
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE I. COMPARISON OF ACCURACY FOR BRAZIL AND VENEZUELA
Country
Period
Quality
Precision
Recall
Lead-Time
Brazil
May’13-Aug’13
3.44
0.53
0.69
7.04
Venezuela
Feb’14 - March’14
3.66
0.91
0.50
2.25
periods. Similar to the so-called “Arab Spring,” where three
years earlier the self-immolation by an obscure fruit vendor in
Tunisia’s capital city touched off a cascading wave of protests
engulﬁng nearly the entire Arab world, a sudden spread of
protests inundated Brazil. Clearly, these were not protests that
were planned weeks in advance. Therefore, our models had to
quickly adapt to the rapidly changing political landscape with
government forces interacting with the protesters, sometime
quelling, other times adding fuel to the ﬁre through their
highhanded reactions. We have presented our forecasts in
Figure 4. The demonstrations originally started in protest of
rising bus prices in June. We have also presented our results of
Venezuelan protests of February 2014 in Figure 5. The map of
geolocation for the Venezuelan protests is shown in Figure 6.
Figure 4. Forecasting performance during Brazil Spring
Figure 5. Forecasting performance in Venezuela 2014
VI.
DISCUSSION: A BRAVE NEW WORLD OF
FORECASTING AND CONTROL?
The rise of social media has allowed us to break down the
barriers of geographic space and to create virtual communities
Figure 6. Geolocation of Venezuelan Protests
of like-minded people. This trend has simultaneously united
and divided people all over the world. Our current effort aims
at detecting these trends to forecast incidents of civil strife
in real time. Similar to any new innovation, this emerging
methodology has its obvious downside; it carries the risk
of being a tool of state oppression. Authoritarian regimes
all over the world are trying to ﬁnd ways to control their
citizens by manipulating Internet conversations, particularly in
the aftermath of the “Arab Spring.” Given the newness of the
technology, the ethical implications of all of these issues are
still evolving. However, there are some important considera-
tions related to forecasting acts of civil strife. First, in light of
recent events there is a heightened awareness of privacy issues
surrounding developing surveillance capabilities, even when
they involve publicly available information.Yet, our project
does not use any information that is not publicly available.
Our project does not use any information that is not publicly
available. Our project has developed a completely automated
system based on 10 Latin American nations that begins with
monitoring social media and ends with generating warnings
in one smooth loop.Second, the genie is out of the bottle.
As new modes of social media spring up, their use spread
throughout the world and algorithms are perfected to monitor
the conversations-whether for public policies or for private
commercial gains - there is simply no effective way of stopping
these monitoring efforts.
There is little doubt that we are witnessing a brand new
world of information processing and trans-discipline inquiries.
Although we can clearly see that we have developed the
capability for real-time forecasting of incidents of civil strife,
we must realize that our efforts at forecasting events is only
in the short term. As for the long-term course of a mass
movement, we must agree with Collier [1] ; it is impossible to
conceive of any algorithm that would be able to do an effective
job. Finally, our effort was strictly focused on forecasting
and not about ﬁnding causal relationships that create political
instability. We must use this methodology to gain a deeper
insight into this aspect of academic inquiry.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Our project (EMBERS: Early Model-Based Event Recog-
nition using Surrogates) is supported by the Intelligence Ad-
vanced Research Projects Activity (IARPA) via DoI/NBC con-
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

tract number D12PC000337, the US Government is authorized
to reproduce and distribute reprints of this work for Gov-
ernmental purposes notwithstanding any copyright annotation
thereon. Disclaimer: The views and conclusions contained
herein are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as
necessarily representing the ofﬁcial policies or endorsements,
either expressed or implied, of IARPA, DoI/NBC, or the US
Government.
REFERENCES
[1]
P. Collier, “Bottom billion,” The Wiley-Blackwell Encyclopedia of
Globalization, 2007.
[2]
L. An, M.-H. Tsou, S. E. Crook, Y. Chun, B. Spitzberg, J. M.
Gawron, and D. K. Gupta, “Space–time analysis: Concepts, quantitative
methods, and future directions,” Annals of the Association of American
Geographers, vol. 105, no. 5, 2015, pp. 891–914.
[3]
L. An, M.-H. Tsou, B. H. Spitzberg, D. K. Gupta, and J. M. Gawron,
“Latent trajectory models for space-time analysis: An application in
deciphering spatial panel data,” Geographical Analysis, vol. 48, no. 3,
2016, pp. 314–336.
[4]
H. Mao, S. Counts, and J. Bollen, “Predicting ﬁnancial markets:
Comparing survey, news, twitter and search engine data,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1112.1051, 2011.
[5]
E. J. Ruiz, V. Hristidis, C. Castillo, A. Gionis, and A. Jaimes, “Correlat-
ing ﬁnancial time series with micro-blogging activity,” in Proceedings of
the ﬁfth ACM international conference on Web search and data mining.
ACM, 2012, pp. 513–522.
[6]
K. Lee, A. Agrawal, and A. Choudhary, “Real-time disease surveillance
using twitter data: demonstration on ﬂu and cancer,” in Proceedings
of the 19th ACM SIGKDD international conference on knowledge
discovery and data mining.
ACM, 2013, pp. 1474–1477.
[7]
H. Achrekar, A. Gandhe, R. Lazarus, S.-H. Yu, and B. Liu, “Predicting
ﬂu trends using twitter data,” in Computer Communications Workshops
(INFOCOM WKSHPS), 2011 IEEE Conference on.
IEEE, 2011, pp.
702–707.
[8]
A. A. Aslam et al., “The reliability of tweets as a supplementary method
of seasonal inﬂuenza surveillance,” Journal of medical Internet research,
vol. 16, no. 11, 2014.
[9]
A. C. Nagel et al., “The complex relationship of realspace events and
messages in cyberspace: case study of inﬂuenza and pertussis using
tweets,” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 15, no. 10, 2013.
[10]
M. Olson, The logic of collective action.
Harvard University Press,
2009, vol. 124.
[11]
H. Tajfel and J. Turner, “The social identity theory of inter group
behavior in s worchel & wg austin (eds) psychology of intergroup
relations,” Chicago: Nelson, 1986.
[12]
H. Tajfel, “Differentiations between social groups: Studies in intergroup
relations,” 1978.
[13]
A. K. Sen, “Rational fools: A critique of the behavioral foundations of
economic theory,” Philosophy & Public Affairs, 1977, pp. 317–344.
[14]
D. K. Gupta, Understanding terrorism and political violence: The life
cycle of birth, growth, transformation, and demise.
Routledge, 2008.
[15]
J. M. Gawron, D. Gupta, K. Stephens, M.-H. Tsou, B. H. Spitzberg,
and L. An, “Using group membership markers for group identiﬁcation.”
in ICWSM, 2012.
[16]
P. A. Schrodt, “Automated production of high-volume, near-real-time
political event data,” in American Political Science Association meet-
ings, 2010.
[17]
M. Wick and B. Vatant, “The geonames geographical database,” Avail-
able from World Wide Web: http://geonames. org, 2012.
[18]
http://www.4imn.com/, [Online; accessed 2012].
[19]
“Basis Technology Rosette Linguistics Platform,” http://www.basistech.
com/text-analytics/rosette/.
[20]
J. Str¨otgen and M. Gertz, “Heideltime: High quality rule-based
extraction and normalization of temporal expressions,” in Proceedings
of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, ser.
SemEval ’10.
Stroudsburg, PA, USA: Association for Computational
Linguistics, 2010, pp. 321–324. [Online]. Available: http://dl.acm.org/
citation.cfm?id=1859664.1859735
[21]
A. Kimmig, S. Bach, M. Broecheler, B. Huang, and L. Getoor, “A
short introduction to probabilistic soft logic,” in Proceedings of the
NIPS Workshop on Probabilistic Programming: Foundations and Ap-
plications, 2012, pp. 1–4.
[22]
S. Muthiah et al., “Embers at 4 years: Experiences operating an open
source indicators forecasting system,” in Proceedings of the 22Nd ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data
Mining, ser. KDD ’16.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2016, pp. 205–
214. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2939672.2939709
[23]
S. Muthiah, B. Huang, J. Arredondo, D. Mares, L. Getoor, G. Katz,
and N. Ramakrishnan, “Planned protest modeling in news and social
media.” in AAAI, 2015, pp. 3920–3927.
[24]
F. Chen, J. Arredondo, R. P. Khandpur, C.-T. Lu, D. Mares, D. Gupta,
and N. Ramakrishnan, “Spatial surrogates to forecast social mobilization
and civil unrests,” in Position Paper in CCC Workshop on “From GPS
and Virtual Globes to Spatial Computing-2012, 2012.
[25]
D. B. Neill, “Fast subset scan for spatial pattern detection,” Journal
of the Royal Statistical Society: Series B (Statistical Methodology),
vol. 74, no. 2, 2012, pp. 337–360.
[26]
J. Cadena, G. Korkmaz, C. J. Kuhlman, A. Marathe, N. Ramakrishnan,
and A. Vullikanti, “Forecasting social unrest using activity cascades,”
PloS one, vol. 10, no. 6, 2015, p. e0128879.
[27]
L. Zhao, F. Chen, J. Dai, T. Hua, C.-T. Lu, and N. Ramakrishnan, “Un-
supervised spatial event detection in targeted domains with applications
to civil unrest modeling,” PloS one, vol. 9, no. 10, 2014, p. e110206.
[28]
G. Korkmaz, J. Cadena, C. J. Kuhlman, A. Marathe, A. Vullikanti,
and N. Ramakrishnan, “Combining heterogeneous data sources for
civil unrest forecasting,” in Advances in Social Networks Analysis and
Mining (ASONAM), 2015 IEEE/ACM International Conference on.
IEEE, 2015, pp. 258–265.
[29]
N. Ramakrishnan et al., “’Beating the news’ with EMBERS: forecasting
civil unrest using open source indicators,” in Proceedings of the 20th
ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and
data mining.
ACM, 2014, pp. 1799–1808.
[30]
“Hungarian
Algorithm,”
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hungarian
algorithm, [Online; accessed 01 July, 2017].
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-578-4
HUSO 2017 : The Third International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

