Dynamic Analysis of Communication Processes using Twitter Data
Ingo J. Timm,
Jan Ole Berndt, Fabian Lorig
Business Informatics 1
Trier University
54296 Trier, Germany
Email: [itimm,berndt,lorigf]@uni-trier.de
Christof Barth,
Hans-J¨urgen Bucher
Media Studies
Trier University
54296 Trier, Germany
Email: [barth,bucher]@uni-trier.de
Abstract—Due to the omnipresence of information technology
and the increasing popularity of online social networks (OSN),
communication behavior has changed. While companies beneﬁt
from, i.e., viral marketing campaigns, they are challenged by
negative phenomena, like Twitterstorms. Using existing empirical
approaches and theories for analyzing the dynamics of social
media communication processes and for predicting the success of
a campaign is challenging as the circumstances and the access
to communication processes have changed. Agent-based social
simulation (ABSS) provides approaches to overcome existing
restrictions, e.g., privacy settings, and to develop a framework
for the dynamic analysis of communication processes, e.g., for
evaluating or testing OSN marketing strategies. This requires
both a valid simulation model and a set of real world data serving
as input for the model. In this paper, a procedure model for the
creation of a simulation model is developed and the steps are
demonstrated by examples.
Keywords–Social Network Analysis; Conversation Detection;
Networks of Communication; Data Collection and Handling; Sim-
ulation Methodology.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the digital revolution initiated by the Internet, social
media platforms have gained popularity and have become
an inherent part of our private communication. Nowadays,
popular OSN, e.g. Facebook, Twitter, or Google+, have more
than 1 billion registered users each and the tendency is still
rising. Studies report that approximately 28% of the online-
time of internet users is spend in OSN [1]. Companies have
observed this trend, too, identiﬁed the potential of OSN as
a platform of aggregated customer contact, and have shifted
the focus of many business units to OSN, e.g., customer
service or marketing. This has the beneﬁts of facilitating the
determination of the customers’ demands, of decreasing the
efforts of client contact, and of allowing for an identiﬁcation
of trends at an early stage.
A. Dynamics of Communication Processes in OSN
Especially the high degree of connectivity between the
users make OSN beneﬁcial for companies, e.g., in terms of
word-of-mouth marketing. Compared to the real world, users
of OSN are connected with a large average number of people
which results in an increased speed of information distribution.
This is utilized by marketing strategies of companies to quickly
reach a high level of awareness, e.g., in viral marketing cam-
paigns [2]. The self-replicating process of gaining awareness
for a certain product or brand is driven by messages or media
which are spread by users and which contain information on
the entity that is advertised.
However, the effects and mechanisms which are beneﬁcial
for companies in terms of viral marketing and for gaining
a high level of awareness can also result in harmful conse-
quences. Due to the fast diffusion of information in OSN,
negative comments or criticism can be multiplied in an uncon-
trollable way and cause in a storm of protest. As these storms
often occur on Twitter, they are called Twitterstorms. A recent
example is the #CrippledAmerica Twitterstorm. In late 2015,
Donald Trump, an American businessman who announced his
candidacy for the US presidential election in 2016, mocked
a disabled reporter during a political rally while promoting
his book “Crippled America”. Stuttering stand-up comedian
Nina G took this as an opportunity to ask everyone to use
the hashtag #CrippledAmerica for writing about experiences
with disability [3]. As a result, the hashtag’s focus shifted
from promoting Trump’s campaign and book to reports on
peoples’ experiences with disabilities and negative responses
to his statement.
Currently, companies lack methods to direct or end Twit-
terstorms and thus sometimes inadvertently promote the dis-
tribution of negative statements. But the challenge is not
only to avoid negative impacts. Also utilizing positive aspects
of OSN communication is difﬁcult as traditional concepts
of communication can no longer be applied to analyze the
dynamics of OSN. The reasons are multilateral communication
behaviors as well as an increased number of interpersonal
relationships in OSN. Furthermore, the lack of distribution
barriers, e.g., (“death of distance” [4]), and the increased size
of the potential addressees of messages need to be considered.
This does not only challenge companies. Also from a scien-
tiﬁc perspective, there is a lack of empirical methods for inves-
tigating social mechanisms and dynamics of communication
processes as well as for ﬁnding explanations in complex sys-
tems [5]. Due to their characteristics, compared to traditional
ofﬂine communication, innovative concepts and techniques
are required for analyzing communication processes in OSN
[6]. Related research questions arise from the ﬁelds of media
studies and communication research, as the content and effects
of mass media as well as human communication are in focus.
Considering standard research methods from these areas, two
major challenges can be identiﬁed: On the one hand, operators
of OSN restrict the access to data and users applying privacy
settings to protect their personal data prevent researchers from
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

accessing relevant information. Thus, ﬁeld studies can only be
conducted when the communication is openly accessible. On
the other hand, anonymity and the large number of actors in
OSN are factors inﬂuencing the behavior of the users. This
is why empirical experiments under laboratory conditions are
unfeasible, too. It can be assumed that actors will not behave
the way they would behave in real OSN, when knowing they
are part of an artiﬁcial network which is being observed as
part of a scientiﬁc study. Consequently, alternative approaches
are needed for analyzing communication dynamics in OSN,
e.g., for evaluating Twitterstorm strategies in advance.
B. ABSS for Analyzing Communication Processes
Computer simulation is a commonly used technique for
analyzing complex and inaccessible systems in many disci-
plines. Here, artiﬁcial systems are created by modeling and
simulating actors and mechanisms which then can be studied
using existing research methods. In contrast to real world
systems, simulated systems can be fully accessed, modiﬁed,
and recreated by the researchers as required. In social sciences,
ABSS has been established as a special type of simulation for
studying emergent social behavior [7]. By modeling the actors
of the real world system as autonomous entities, individual
decision-behavior can be simulated and global social phenom-
ena emerge from local interactions of the actors.
For the use in OSN, a data basis as well as a procedure
model for the creation of a simulation model are required.
The data basis comprises both data about the actors (the users
of the OSN), as well as the environment of the actors (the
OSN itself). Especially information regarding the types of
actors, their actions and goals but also the structure and the
opportunities for actions provided by the OSN are needed for
creating a suitable simulation model.
Many OSN provide APIs (application programming inter-
faces) for gathering data about their users and interactions
between them. However, APIs provide a large amount of
isolated data and the identiﬁcation of relevant data in terms of
ABSS studies is challenging. Thus, the handling of data needs
to be assisted and integrated into the process of conducting
simulation studies.
This paper presents a ﬁrst step towards the development
of a framework for analyzing communication dynamics in
OSN and for testing communication strategies using an ABSS
approach. This work particularly focuses on the automated
collection, as well as the preparation and selection of relevant
communication data from OSN for developing a simulation
model as shown in Section IV. In Section V the implemen-
tation and evaluation of the approach is described. Here, the
syntactical context of the communication will be in focus with-
out further consideration of its semantics. Using the example of
Twitter, isolated tweets related to the same topic are selected,
individual actors and messages sent by them are derived, and
communication dynamics are reconstructed. Furthermore, to
evaluate this approach, communication dynamics of Twitter-
storms and political discourses are analyzed. Finally, Section
VI provides a concluding summary of the ﬁndings.
II.
FOUNDATIONS
For analyzing the dynamics of OSN communication pro-
cesses, the act of communication itself but also the structure
of OSNs need to be considered.
A. Communication
Human communication can be considered as a sequence of
actions of individuals, where the behavior of a sender inﬂu-
ences the behavior of a receiver [8]. It can be understood as
a process, where the sender uses a set of characters to encode
a message, which then is transmitted using an information
medium. The receiver uses an own set of characters to decode
and interpret the message and returns a feedback using the
same mechanism but not necessarily the same medium [9].
However, a message does not necessarily need to be a verbal
utterance but can also be nonverbal.
Each message consists of different layers of information.
Without further knowledge, a message is only perceived as
a set of characters. By adding syntax, the characters become
a message, based on rules deﬁning the relationship between
characters. The meaning of a message is determined by its
semantics. Because of this, the transfer of information can only
be achieved if both the sender and receiver share the same
semantics. Pragmatics reveal the intention of the message’s
sender.
The shifting of communication into technical media is
accompanied by a loss of information. The transmission of the
message is ensured, yet, the receiver does not know whether
the message was interpreted correctly. On Twitter, e.g., the
platform determines and restricts the communication processes
between users and inﬂuences the understanding. The result of
the communication can only be returned on the same technical
way it has been received, by replying to a Tweet using another
Tweet. Thus, we can focus on the analysis and simulation of
sequences of Tweets and not take nonverbal communication
into account at ﬁrst. For this, it is necessary to know the
structure of the network and how communication is made
possible. As pragmatics and semantics need to be abstracted
for the simulation model, tools for the automated evaluation of
messages are needed and are provided by computer linguistics.
Even though our example does not focus on the computer
linguistic analysis of Tweets, it is an essential part of the
model building process as the large amount of data requires
an automated approach.
B. Social Networks
In terms of graph theory, the structure of a social network
can be described by a set of users (nodes) and relationships
between the users (edges), connecting those nodes [10]. De-
pending on the direction of the relationship, graphs can be
unidirectional, deﬁning the direction of the relationship, or
bidirectional, connecting two nodes without providing infor-
mation regarding the direction of the relationship.
For assessing the importance of a node in a graph, e.g.,
the most inﬂuential users of an OSN, centrality measures can
be used [11]. The degree of centrality corresponds to the total
number of edges a node has and can be used as a measure
of a node’s interconnectedness in a graph. Nodes having a
high degree (compared to other nodes) are classiﬁed as hubs
in terms of information diffusion. When considering directed
graphs, the indegree (number of inbound edges) needs to be
distinguished from the outdegree (number of outbound edges).
In contrast to this node-speciﬁc measure, the density is
calculated for an entire network or graph. Doing so, it can be
used for comparing different graphs. The density of a graph is
deﬁned by the ratio of the number of existing edges and the
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

maximum number of edges in case every pair of nodes would
be connected by an edge (complete graph).
For simulating communication in OSN, the structure of
the network needs to be recreated. A representation of a
network using a graph deﬁnes the communication channels and
the described characteristics give indication of the conditions
under which communication is taking place, e.g., who can send
messages to whom and how their reach can be assessed.
C. Computational Linguistics
In addition to the structure, OSN consist of messages which
are send between the users. For analyzing communication
processes, the content of the messages is of relevance, too.
It provides the researcher information about the intention as
well as the context of communication. Thus, it is desirable to
automatically classify the topic of individual messages and
communication processes. Doing so, a ﬁrst impression of
the content of communication is given which facilitates the
researcher’s process of ﬁnding and selecting relevant commu-
nication processes. Furthermore, a basis for the abstraction of
the content for the modeling process is provided. Yet, as the
messages consist of natural language, analyzing the content
in an automated way is challenging. Computational linguistics
focuses on the modeling and processing of natural language
and provides suitable techniques.
1) Machine Learning: One basic technology used in com-
putational linguistics is machine learning which evolved from
artiﬁcial intelligence. In contrast to other algorithms following
hard-coded program instructions, machine learning algorithms
learn from experiences gained from data or from models build
from data [12]. Generally, a distinction is made between three
types of learning: supervised, unsupervised, and reinforcement
learning. While supervised algorithms try to learn rules from
example inputs and outputs, unsupervised learning approaches
need to ﬁnd patterns in data on their own. Reinforcement
learning takes place in dynamical environments and will not
be considered any further in this paper.
2) Content and Lexical Analysis: When using machine
learning algorithms for processing natural language, the text
ﬁrst needs to be divided into its linguistic entities. These
include words as well as phrases or even entire paragraphs
of a text. For separating words, whitespace characters can be
used in most segmented writing systems, e.g., those consisting
of Latin characters. The entities received when dividing a text
are called n-grams and are used for creating a model of the
language. In this work, n-grams are used for analyzing the
mood of messages, i.e., tweets.
For assigning attributes (tags) to words, part-of-speech
tagging (POST) is applied [13]. Given a text, POST identiﬁes
the grammatical categories of each word, e.g., noun, verb, or
adjective. This is challenging, as words may appear in different
parts of speech at the same time. Yet, analyzing the mostly
used nouns, verbs, and adjectives in a large data set, e.g., a set
of Tweets, may provide a ﬁrst impression regarding the most
commonly discussed topics.
When analyzing frequencies of words in a text or when in-
dexing documents, a reduction of the words to their base form
is needed. Stemming aims at reducing words with a similar or
identical meaning, but which differ in its sufﬁx, to its word
stem. Here, each language requires own stemming algorithms.
A commonly used algorithm for the English language is the
porter stemming algorithm [14].
Summarizing it can be said that for evaluating communi-
cation processes in OSN, content and lexical analysis provide
information regarding the topic of a conversation and allow
for a ﬁrst assessment of the Tweet.
D. Related Work
The approach presented in this paper is accompanied by
related approaches and disciplines where networks of commu-
nication and discourses in OSN are analyzed.
Information propagation aims at identifying a group of
users which can propagate an unspeciﬁed information, i.e.,
a message, to as many users as possible. Approaches exist
where the topics of communication within OSN are explic-
itly modeled for providing a topic-aware estimation of the
propagation probability [15]. Thus, information propagation
provides valuable ex-post approaches for analyzing networks
of communication but lacks methods for integrating individual
and more complex opinion making processes.
Cogan et al. [16] used Twitter data to reconstruct complete
conversations around an initial tweet which is given. This
enables a more detailed evaluation of conversation topologies,
as social interaction models can be compared to OSN. Yet,
only isolated and minor conversations lasting up to six hours
were analyzed, not larger networks of communication as they
occur in Twitterstorms.
For analyzing political discourses among Twitter users,
Hsu et al. [17] examined their participation in discussions.
The identiﬁcation of key users was based on the users’ public
data, e.g., Twitter ID, location, number of tweets, and follower-
followee-networks, instead of considering the communicative
behavior of the users.
Maireder [18] described discourses on Twitter using three
perspectives: networking topics, networking media objects,
and networking actors. By connecting these perspectives, the
author aims at understanding the process of political opinion-
making through Twitter using empirical approaches by hand.
These approaches consider the collection and preparation
of data as isolated processes for social network analysis. An
integration of data handling as a step of an entire research
process for generating theories, testing hypotheses or deriving
conclusions is not proposed and an adoption of data handling
as part of a simulation study is not performed. Therefore,
the approach presented in this paper complements existing
approaches such that an agent-based simulation of commu-
nication processes in OSN is facilitated.
III.
ANALYSIS
For analyzing the dynamics of OSN communication pro-
cesses, a data basis is needed. As the number of existing OSN
is large and as OSN differ in structure and mechanisms, the
process of data collection differs, too. In this paper, Twitter
is used as an example platform due to the size of the OSN
on the one hand, and the unrestricted access to data on
the other hand. Compared to other OSNs like Google+ and
Facebook, Twitter’s data is not as much affected by privacy
settings and can be accessed using the provided API. Still, the
communication processes which can be observed on Twitter
are of relevance as they affect the general public and have
resulted in cross-media phenomena in the past, e.g., the harlem
shake [19].
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

A. Twitter as a Communication Platform
Twitter was founded in 2006 and, compared to other OSN,
its unique feature is the limitation of the message (“tweet”)
length to 140 characters. Another difference is how friendships
are represented. While most OSN consist of bidirectional
relationships between users, meaning two users constitute the
friendship together, a distinction between followers and fol-
lowees is made on Twitter. Here, a user actively and voluntarily
decides which other users to follow for receiving their status
updates in an unidirectional way. Following another Twitter
participant makes the following user become a followee, yet,
the user being followed does not need to follow its followees.
Thus, a connection between two users does not imply that
they exchange information in both directions. In consequence,
for analyzing communication dynamics, the directions of the
relationships need to be considered.
Besides the user network, the hashtag (#) emphasis Twitter
provides is of special interest from a media studies and com-
munication research point of view. When publishing messages,
Twitter users can make use of two operators for classifying
a message. The #-symbol is used for categorizing messages
and for marking keywords of a tweet. This simpliﬁes the re-
searcher’s assignment of tweets to a certain topic. Furthermore,
Twitter provides mechanisms for replying to other tweets and
for addressing a tweet to a certain person. Using the @-symbol
followed by the name of a user or by putting the preﬁx “RT”
(retweet) at the beginning of a tweet, the identiﬁcation of
dialogs or conversations is supported. Due to these features,
Twitter has been widely used for conducting online studies of
certain subjects or events, e.g., spread of news [20], the activity
of diseases [21] or political communication [22].
B. ABSS of Communication Processes in OSN
For developing a dynamic analysis framework which makes
use of simulation techniques, the simulation method needs
to be chosen according to the phenomena to be analyzed.
A special feature of phenomena occurring in OSN, e.g.,
Twitterstorms, is that they are emergent [23]. Due to the local
interactions of the users on a micro level, global effects occur
on a macro level. Yet, they can not (entirely) be explained by
the local actions. For analyzing, reproducing, and investigating
such emergent phenomena, agent-based computer simulation
has been established as a standard means. By modeling real
world actors, in this case the users of an OSN, as autonomous
software agents, individual behavior and anticipation of behav-
ior on the micro level can be simulated resulting in emergent
effects on a macro level [24]. The observation of the global
phenomena in combination with the knowledge of the actions
and interactions of the actors can then be used for deriving
as well as examining scientiﬁc explanations regarding the
mechanisms of the system. In terms of social sciences, using
agent-based actor models for doing social simulation studies
is referred to as ABSS [25].
For using ABSS to analyze communication dynamics in
OSN, three entities need to be modeled: the users of an OSN
(actors), the decisions and actions of the users (behavior), and
the connections between the actors (network). While actors
and their behavior can be considered as the micro level of
the model, the network is a macro phenomenon and can be
observed in the real world. Accordingly, an understanding of
the macro level needs to be established ﬁrst, as a basis for
further consideration of the actor-based micro level.
During the model-building process, domain expertise is
needed for modeling real world mechanisms and processes
according to observations or results from discourse and content
analysis over time. This information, enriched with theories
from software agent technology, can then be technically for-
malized and used for specifying a multiagent system for sim-
ulating OSNs. As a result of this, different artiﬁcial scenarios
and processes can be observed based on how stochastic events
inﬂuence the mechanisms. Instead of using the real world
system as an object of research, domain-speciﬁc research
methods can then be applied to the artiﬁcial system. Compared
to the real world system, a more cost-efﬁcient and restriction-
free access to data is provided. Furthermore, variations of
the spatial or temporal dimension as well as repetitions of
experiments are possible and the real world system is not
exposed to any risk or needs not be existent at all. Results
of the simulation experiments will be used for reﬁning the
model. This enables domain experts to draw conclusions and
implications from the model regarding the real world system
using speciﬁc theories, e.g., for analyzing viral marketing or
for preventing Twitterstorms.
The described process results in two interconnected loops
of research methodologies where a central interdisciplinary
model serves as intermediator. This model is improved and
reﬁned stepwise by both disciplines, i.e., simulations and
media, until a satisfying state is reached (see Figure 1). The
model then can be used in the dynamic analysis framework for
simulating OSN and communication processes within them.
IV.
CONCEPT
The process of performing a simulation study for analyzing
dynamics of communication in OSN can be divided into three
major steps (see Figure 3): the acquisition of relevant data,
the conduction of the simulation experiments, and the drawing
of conclusions from the results of the experiments regarding
the real world. In this paper, we focus on the ﬁrst step, the
acquisition of relevant data.
In order to decide which data is relevant for a speciﬁc
simulation study, the experiments need to be designed in
advance. This includes the determination of the methodology
of the simulation study as well as the deﬁnition of research
hypotheses to be tested. After the experimental design has
been deﬁned in consultation with the domain experts, e.g.,
PR experts, relevant data needs to be collected, prepared, and
selected accordingly.
A. Data Collection
When gathering OSN data using APIs, most of the data is
provided in standardized data formats, e.g., JSON or XML.
Due to the structure of the data format, each message or
contribution (e.g., tweet or Facebook posting) is transferred
as a single piece of information. Additionally, each entity is
described by meta data, e.g., a unique ID, the name of the
author, a timestamp when it was published, and a reference to
which other message it replies.
Twitter provides REST APIs for both, reading and writing
data. The access to the API is at no charge and the data can
be downloaded as JSON ﬁles. Each tweet is characterized by
up to 35 attributes, e.g., favorite count and geo coordinates,
and up to 500 million tweets are sent per day. Two APIs
are intended for the assessment of data, the streaming API
for accessing the global stream of data and the search API
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Scalability and
Simulation
Formalization and 
Specification
Conclusions
and Implications 
Observations, Discourse 
and Content Analysis
Multiagent System
I
O
Real World
I
O
Interdisciplinary 
Discourse Model for 
Online Social Networks
t
t
Theories from
Agent Technology
Theories from Media & 
Communication Science
Figure 1. Integrated research method for creating an interdisciplinary model.
allowing queries against a subset of tweets from the past
week. Still, both APIs need to be requested with a set of
predeﬁned keywords, i.e., hashtags, restricting the results.
Here, the tradeoff is the extent of the data. The streaming API
provides complete data regarding a hashtag, yet, this results in
large datasets which need to be collected and stored in real-
time. Technical problems during this process may result in
a loss of data, as past data can not be accessed. In contrast
to this, the search API provides relevant data only which
decreases the size of the dataset. The data of the last week
can be accessed, which enables a non-real-time collection of
data, but the completeness as well as representativity of the
provided data are questionable.
Certainly in terms of topics and events that are not dis-
cussed using a hashtag which is known in advance, e.g., a
Twitterstorm, the advantages and disadvantages of the two
APIs are noticeable. The keywords of the real-time streaming
API need to be modiﬁed in order to capture the tweets of the
storm of protest. Yet, when the Twitterstorm is recognized, the
beginning has been in the past and thus can not be captured
using a real-time API. The search API, in contrast, can be used
to collect “popular” tweets of an event which has occurred
up to one week ago. Yet, Twitter determines the popularity
of a Tweet without providing any information regarding the
weighting function being used. Thus, the completeness of the
dataset collected using the search API can not be assessed.
Consequently, according to the design of experiment, the
appropriate API needs to be chosen or a combination of both
APIs needs to be used for the collection of data.
B. Data Preparation & Selection
After a dataset has been collected using the API provided
by the OSN, it needs to be stored for further processing. In
this phase of the data handling, communication processes are
identiﬁed in the set of isolated tweets, and the content of
the communication is analyzed. Furthermore, the network of
communication is reconstructed representing related messages
and conversations.
1) Conversation Detection & Content Analysis: Topic-
related communication processes, i.e., discourses, are consid-
ered as coherent dialogs between users or groups of users
regarding a certain topic [26]. From a media studies and com-
munication research perspective, the identiﬁcation and analysis
of these discourses within a network of communication is of
high relevance. They are the foundation for reconstructing and
evaluating topics and opinion-making processes over time.
For discovering discourses in a network of communication,
both the conversations between users and the content of the
messages need to be analyzed. A conversation is deﬁned by
the direction as well as the order of messages which were sent.
First, the beginning of a discourse, i.e., the initial tweet, needs
to be identiﬁed. The identiﬁcation of this tweet in a dataset
can be achieved by selecting all tweets, one after another, and
checking the following two conditions: 1) Does another tweet
exist in the dataset, which is a reply to the selected tweet?
and 2) Is the selected tweet no reply to other tweets itself?
In case both conditions are fulﬁlled, a tweet is considered an
initial tweet. Still, the dataset may contain only a part of a
conversation. This might occur, if the initial tweet has not been
part of the collection received from the API. In this case, the
initial tweet is the one which is a reply itself, yet, the tweet
it replies to is not part of the dataset. By iteratively applying
this procedure (see Figure 2), communication processes can
be identiﬁed as shown.
After identifying communication processes between users
in networks of communication, an automated analysis of the
conversation is desirable due to the large amount of data.
Doing so, researchers can get a ﬁrst impression regarding
the type and topic of the conversation. On the one hand, the
tonality of tweets can be determined using sentiment analysis,
providing information about the mood expressed in the tweets.
In terms of discourses, an alternating tonality can be assumed,
as two parties talk about the truth of a certain statement.
Furthermore, communication processes can be differentiated
according to differences of opinion, i.e., pro and contra. On
the other hand, an automated analysis of the topic of the
conversation can be performed. Content analysis provides
techniques for determining commonly used terms in tweets,
giving a ﬁrst impression regarding the potential topic of the
conversation.
The tweets are analyzed in two ways. First, the hashtags
used in the tweets are identiﬁed and collected. An overview of
the most commonly used hashtags of a conversation provides
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

!"#$%&'()(*(#+'
*,""*'-).'$"/+01
2*#$*
!"#$%&'
$"/+("!3#)!,"$!
!#4"'*,""*
5"/+0'
6.7)89
0"!
).
!#4"'
%.)4"$!#*(.)
#)#+0:"'
%.)4"$!#*(.)
;)8
Figure 2. Conversation detection in Twitter dataset.
a ﬁrst impression regarding the topic of the conversation. As
a second step, a POST approach is used for analyzing nouns
and adjectives. For doing so, all tweets of the conversation
need to be divided into single words. Hashtags can be removed
from the set of words, as they have already been evaluated
individually and as hashtags often consist of made-up words
or abbreviations. Thus, the decision whether a hashtag is a
noun or adjective is difﬁcult, too. POST will then be applied
to the remaining words to identify nouns and adjectives which
occur multiple times. The outcome enables a ﬁrst assessment
of the conversations’ topics.
Furthermore, the tonality of a tweet is another indicator for
assessing its content. Applying supervised learning algorithms
for classifying tweets according to their tonality requires a
three-stage approach [27]. As a ﬁrst step, classiﬁcation algo-
rithms require a set of training data, which has been classiﬁed
by hand. Using this data, the learning algorithm is trained and
conﬁgured for the third step, the automated classiﬁcation of
the remaining tweets. In order to increase the accuracy of the
algorithm, a preprocessing of the data should be performed.
As the mood of the tweet is assessed by analyzing natural
language only, artiﬁcial constructs, such as links to websites,
@-mentions, and the “RT” preﬁx can be removed. Doing so,
the disturbance of the algorithm can be reduced.
2) Network of Communication: At this point, the dataset
contains a large number of individual communication pro-
cesses. Yet, for analyzing the dynamics of communication,
these conversations must not remain separate. Instead, the
entire network obtained when merging all individual com-
munication processes is of interest. It contains dependencies
between different conversations and provides a chronological
order of each conversation. In the following, this topic-speciﬁc
network of users and messages sent between the users is
referred to as network of communication.
When reconstructing networks of communication in OSN,
the relationships between the users are of relevance. Generally,
Twitter provides two kinds of relationships between users:
communicative relationships expressed by the use of the RT
or @ operator and social relationships which are represented
by Twitter’s follower-followee-mechanism.
Analyses of the communicative structure of past Twitter-
storms have shown that a small amount of the involved OSN
users operate as central nodes and drive the diffusion of the
criticism (see Section V). Thus, for reconstructing networks
of communication, communicative relationships seem to be
most relevant. Social relationships, in contrast, do not contain
any information regarding the participation and intensity of
communication. Yet, the “communicative power” [26] of a
user can be determined by the social interconnectedness of a
user. This is relevant when analyzing scenarios that potentially
can lead to Twitterstorms, i.e., prospective analysis. In terms
of networks of communication, communicative power can be
considered as the ability to gain a high level of awareness
for a message due to the large number of users the writer
is connected with. Accordingly, for reconstructing networks
of communication, these types of relationships need to be
extracted from the dataset.
Beginning with a large amount of separate tweets and
related attributes derived from the Twitter API, a preselection
regarding a deﬁned hashtag of interest needs to be performed.
At this point, additional ﬁlters can be applied for limiting the
extent of data, e.g., structure, content or mood ﬁlters. Doing so,
the dataset is reduced to the relevant tweets directly associated
with the topic to be analyzed. Here, the assumption is made
that the hashtags mentioned by the tweet imply the topics the
tweet is related to, as intended by Twitter. Tweets, that are
meant to be related to a topic, yet, do not mention the hashtag
in particular, can not be considered as part of the study, as
they are not recognized by the API. As a next step, isolated
users need to be removed, as they are not part of the network
of communication. Accordingly, isolated tweets need to be
removed as well, as they are considered not to be of interest
to other users. A tweet is classiﬁed as isolated when it is
neither addressing a certain user nor is a retweet or reply to
a previous tweet. By considering retweets, circles may occur,
as some users tend to retweet their own tweets. These tweets
are irrelevant for the network of communication, too.
Based on this cleaned dataset, a directed graph can be
generated. In this graph, the nodes represent the users of the
OSN and the edges represent the tweets of the users. For
simpliﬁcation purposes, just one type of edges will be used
for all three types of communication: retweets, replies, and @-
mentions. At that point, the calculation of centrality measures
can be performed, e.g., degree or closeness centrality. When
visualizing the graph, the researcher gets a ﬁrst impression of
the structure of the network of communication.
As the aim of this process is to create a realistic and
valid simulation model, the conceptualization of the simula-
tion model is performed parallel to the data collection and
preparation. This facilitates the coordination and enables a
harmonization of these two interdependent processes. For one
thing, the simulation model is created according to the dataset
which has been collected and thus can take account of certain
characteristics of the dataset, e.g., involved actor types or
speciﬁcs of the topic. For another thing, the collection and
preparation of data can be adapted to the model ensuring the
suitability of the dataset. Starting with a basic conceptualiza-
tion of the model during the design of experiment and data
collection phases, a more detailed conceptualization during the
preparation and selection phase is done. This results in the
creation of an applicable simulation model which matches the
acquired data as it has been developed based on them.
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

Tonality 
Analysis
Tweet 
Database
Conversation 
Analysis
Content
Analysis
Filter
Tweets
User
Network of 
Communication
Visualization
ABSS
Theories
Simulation
Explanation
Mechanisms / 
Expert know-how
Design
Collection of 
Data (API)
Design of 
Experiment
Data Collection
Data Preparation & Selection
Detailed Conceptualization
Methodology
Hypothesis
Simulation 
Model
Basic Conceptualization
Data
Tested 
Hypothesis
Conclusions
Other OSN
Figure 3. Procedure model for collecting, editing, and aggregating OSN data for ABSS studies.
The data collected and prepared in the previous steps can
now serve as input for the simulation model that has been
developed simultaneously. At this step, ABSS experiments can
be conducted using the results of the previous process step. In
addition, expert know-how is needed in order to validate and
verify the simulation model as well as to interpret the results
of the experiments. This includes proving or disproving of the
hypotheses deﬁned during the design of experiment phase as
well as deriving conclusions or theories from the results.
V.
IMPLEMENTATION AND EVALUATION
As a proof of concept and for evaluating the procedure
model proposed in Section IV, the process of collecting and
preparing data for ABSS studies is implemented. Furthermore,
the feasibility of the implementation is evaluated by analyzing
the datasets of two Twitterstorms.
A. Implementation of the Framework
For querying the Twitter API, a PHP script has been
developed and used. The results are formatted as JSON objects
and include all necessary information regarding the tweet itself
as well as the user which has been the author of the tweet.
The data is stored in a MySQL database which is used for the
central data management.
For the preparation of the data, existing software packages
can be used providing basic algorithms, e.g., machine learning
or part-of-speech tagging algorithms. A number of frameworks
exist, e.g., Apache Mahout or Scikit-Learn. However, due to
the programming language it is implemented with and the
large amount of preimplemented algorithms, the DatumBox
framework [28] has been chosen for this implementation.
DatumBox is a framework which provides natural language
processing and classifying services written in JAVA. It focuses
on social media monitoring as well as text analysis and quality
evaluation in online communities. The learning algorithms of
the DatumBox machine learning framework have been used
for this implementation, as the framework can handle large
datasets and is open-source. The implementation of the support
vector machine uses LIBSVM [29], a widely used open-source
implementation of SVM. Furthermore, Apache Lucene [30] is
used as text search engine, which is open-source and used by
large companies, e.g., Twitter, for real-time search.
After collecting raw communication data, this implemen-
tation allows for performing tonality analyses using the al-
gorithms of the DatumBox framework and Apache Lucene.
In order to obtain the required training data, a number of
tweets needs to be classiﬁed by human beings, after they
have been edited. This training data as well as SVM, n-gram,
and stemming algorithms provide a classiﬁcation of the tweets
regarding their mood.
The conversation detection has been implemented as shown
in Figure 2, followed by an analysis of the conversations’
topics. The results of both analyses are then saved in the central
database, too.
As a next step, for reconstructing networks of communi-
cation, the tweets of the database are ﬁltered regarding the
hashtags of interest. Additionally, the involved users are loaded
from the database and a graph is created. The users serve
as nodes, while each tweet is illustrated as a directed edge
indicating the direction of the communication. For a reply, the
edge would point from the user who replied to it to the author
of the original tweet.
B. Analysis of the #pegida Twitterstorm
For evaluating the proposed approach, Twitter data has
been collected since the beginning of 2015. For doing so,
the hashtags of current topics of online news media have
been used as keywords. During this period, 18 Mio. tweets
containing 8 Twitterstorms have been recorded. Both #pegida
and #deﬂategate are hashtags of considerable communication
processes which took place on Twitter during this period of
time.
The evaluation of the conversation analysis requires a
highly discursive topic, providing conversations with a high
depth. For this reason, the social media echo of the Pegida
protests has been chosen as dataset containing 3.2 Mio. Tweets
[31]. Pegida is a right wing political movement that was
founded in Dresden, Germany in October 2014 and opposes
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

the perceived “Islamisation” of the Western world. Hence, due
to the formation of opposing interest groups supporting or
rejecting Pegida’s point of view, opinions are divided and the
formation of discourses is facilitated.
Analyzing the dataset, 19 685 conversations were identiﬁed
consisting of nearly 51 000 tweets. Conversations can be clas-
siﬁed by the number of replies as well as by the depth (steps)
of the conversation. Figure 4 shows the distribution of the
conversations by number of replies and depth. Conversations
of a depth higher than 10, meaning that two users wrote 5
messages each replying to the previous message of the other
user, are not existing whereas 136 conversations have more
than 10 replies.
!"#"#
!$%&
!'(
&&
!#
'
&
)
!
!&"#$
)"!'
($*
&&%
)$'
!#*
()
'&
#%
)%
!#*
!
!$
!$$
!+$$$
!$+$$$
!$$+$$$
!
)
#
&
'
*
%
"
(
!$
!"#$
!"#$%&'()'*(+,%&-./0(+-
1".+/0/2
,-./0
1234-5+67+8-.9:-;
Figure 4. Distribution of conversations by number of replies and depth of
conversation frm the #pediga analysis.
The structure of conversation trees can be divided into two
major groups: paths and stars [32]. A star is deﬁned by a
low depth of the tree combined with a high number of tweets,
consequently, a high amount of replies to one or a few tweets.
In contrast, paths have a high depth while the total number of
tweets is low.
Further analysis of the data showed that two types of stars
exist in the dataset that differ in the number of involved users.
The most extensive conversations of the dataset, consisting of
107 and 100 tweets, are the result of only 3 resp. 2 users.
On closer examination, these conversations were classiﬁed as
spam. Thus, we assume that for conversations on Twitter the
ratio between the number of tweets and the number of involved
users can serve as a indicator for spam. This assumption was
strengthened by a manual analysis of the dataset. For most
spam conversations, the ratio between users and tweets was at
least 1 to 10. Accordingly, this type of star can be referred to
as spam star and is not relevant for further analysis.
A second type of stars exists where the ratio is inverted.
In this case, the number of tweets and the number of users is
almost equal implying that the majority of users commented on
the conversation only once. In over 90% of the conversations
which were detected in the dataset, 90% of the tweets have
been written by different users. Consequently, most of the
tweets have not been replied to. Even though these stars
represent relevant conversations, they may not be considered
as discourses, as the “back-and-forth” character of discourses
is missing.
The paths, in contrast, are what we consider to be dis-
cursive behavior. Two or more users respond to each other’s
Tweets and constitute a conversation. By merging both stars
and paths, the network of communication can be reconstructed
for further analysis. Furthermore, for the modeling of agent
behavior, it appears that the communication rather than the
exchange of opinions is in focus. This is triggered by an initial
tweet and results in a Fire-and-forget behavior of the users.
C. Analysis of the #deﬂategate Twitterstorm
The reconstruction of the networks of communication is
evaluated using the dataset of the #deﬂategate Twitterstorm.
Due to the limited timespan of a Twitterstorm, the collection
of a complete dataset is simpliﬁed. Furthermore, analyzing
a Twitterstorm’s network of communication is of interest, as
central users or tweets can be identiﬁed.
The #deﬂategate storm started three days after the 49th NFL
Super Bowl and was triggered by a Tweet of the journalist
Chris Mortensen, claiming 11 of the 12 footballs were under-
inﬂated [33]. As each team plays with separate footballs and
as the hosting team supplies the balls, this appeared to have
happened on purpose, to inﬂuence the behavior of the ball
when thrown, kicked or caught. 17 621 tweets from 9 870
users have been collected during the #deﬂategate storm. Out
of this, 41 tweets reply to themselves and 4 577 users are
isolated and thus were removed. Consequently, the network
of communication consists of 5 293 users and 6 067 tweets.
Two central nodes can be identiﬁed in the network of com-
munication. This observation is conﬁrmed when comparing the
degree centrality of the nodes. While the average degree is 1,
a user named TomBradysEgo (Twitter User-ID: 317170443) is
having the maximum degree of 509. TomBradysEgo is a parody
account on Tom Brady, the quarterback of the New England
Patriots, having 235 000 followers and posting an average of
113 tweets per month. During the Twitterstorm, 39 tweets
were published by the account. Due to the high outdegree,
97.4% of the total degree of the node, in combination with
the low number of published tweets, it can be assumed that
the user’s tweets have often been retweeted. Thus, a central
role of TomBradysEgo can be implied and the account can be
classiﬁed as a hub.
Similarly, the user named brownjenjen (Twitter User-ID:
2453787236) has a degree of 485 and is an American blog-
ger. Having only 23 000 followers, brownjenjen published 43
tweets during the Twitterstorm. Due to the outdegree of 100%,
a large number of retweets can be assumed, too. As the account
does not reply to other tweets and participates in different
topics, it can be classiﬁed as a hub, too.
The important role the two accounts play for the Twitter-
storm clariﬁes, when removing the two nodes and the related
communication from the network of communication. Doing
so, the density of the graph is reduced by 12.46% which
can be compared to a reduction of the communication by the
same extent. The union of the ego-centered networks of the
two central nodes illustrates their maximal neighborhood, i.e.,
all nodes that can be reached from the central nodes. Here,
69.69% of the communication of the storm is linked to the
two central nodes, showing their overall impact. According to
this, a more detailed consideration of these two users seems
promising in terms of social network analysis.
For both topics, #pegida and #deﬂategate, the feasibility of
the approach proposed in this paper has been shown. In terms
of content and discourse analysis as well as reconstruction
of networks of communication, preliminary results assisting
the selection of relevant data for subsequent studies were
generated. Thus, when simulating emergent OSN phenomena,
the different reach of agents needs to be considered. Some
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

agents need to serve as hubs for pushing the diffusion of
messages.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, a ﬁrst step towards the development of a
dynamic analysis framework for OSN communication pro-
cesses is proposed. A major challenge is the collection as
well as the preparation and selection of relevant data, which is
addressed by the presented approach. Currently, the analysis
of a set of collected data for interesting phenomena for further
consideration is done by hand. Our concept aims at providing
assistance functionalities, by automating the handling of data
for the preparation of simulation studies.
For gaining a ﬁrst overview of the dataset of isolated mes-
sages, conversations between users are detected, the content
and tonality of the messages are assessed, and the network
of communication is reconstructed. Using the examples of
#deﬂategate and #pegida, the process of data collection as well
as data preparation and selection has been implemented and
evaluated. The network of communication has been visualized
and central nodes of the communication graph have been
identiﬁed automatically.
This work is only a ﬁrst step towards a framework for
analyzing the communication dynamics of OSN. Besides the
aspect of data collection and preparation, which has been sub-
ject of this paper, the creation of the simulation model as well
as the integration of data and model for conducting simulation
experiments need to be considered. For building an agent-
based simulation model, actor types need to be derived from
social network data, too, and a consideration of communication
across different networks is desirable. Furthermore, from a
media studies and communication research perspective, a more
detailed speciﬁcation of the interactions between users and the
subject of communication are needed for conducting sound
ABSS studies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge our master students Nils
Dammenhayn, Stephanie Rodermund, Christopher Schulz and
Nicolas Schulz for contributing to this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
J.
Mander,
“Daily
time
spent
on
social
networks
rises
to
1.72 hours,” https://www.globalwebindex.net/blog/daily-time-spent-on-
social-networks-rises-to-1-72-hours, [retrieved: 09/16].
[2]
J. Kirby, Connected marketing: the viral, buzz and word of mouth
revolution.
Amsterdam: Butterworth-Heinemann, 2010.
[3]
Nina
G,
“Disability
Community
Tweet-in,”
https://ninagcomedian.wordpress.com/2015/12/01/
donald-trump-tweet-in-for-crippledamerica/, [retrieved: 09/16].
[4]
E. Tranos and P. Nijkamp, “The death of distance revisited: Cyber-place,
cyber-place, physical and relational proximities,” Journal of Regional
Science, vol. 53, no. 5, Dec. 2013, pp. 855–873.
[5]
R. Mayntz, “Mechanisms in the analysis of social macro-phenomena,”
Philosophy of the social sciences, vol. 34, no. 2, 2004, pp. 237–259.
[6]
F. Lorig and I. J. Timm, “How to model the human factor for agent-
based simulation in social media analysis?” in Proceedings of the 2014
ADS Symposium (part of SpringSim multiconference).
SCS, 2014,
p. 12.
[7]
D. Helbing, Social self-organization: Agent-based simulations and ex-
periments to study emergent social behavior.
Springer, 2012.
[8]
C. R. Berger, “Interpersonal communication,” The International Ency-
clopedia of Communication, 2008.
[9]
C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” ACM
SIGMOBILE Mobile Computing and Communications Review, vol. 5,
no. 1, 2001, pp. 3–55.
[10]
F. Vega-Redondo, Complex Social Networks.
Cambridge University
Press Cambridge, MA, 2007.
[11]
L. C. Freeman, “Centrality in social networks conceptual clariﬁcation,”
Social networks, vol. 1, no. 3, 1978, pp. 215–239.
[12]
D. E. Goldberg and J. H. Holland, “Genetic algorithms and machine
learning,” Machine learning, vol. 3, no. 2, 1988, pp. 95–99.
[13]
A. Voutilainen, “Part-of-speech tagging,” The Oxford handbook of
computational linguistics, 2003, pp. 219–232.
[14]
M. F. Porter, “An algorithm for sufﬁx stripping,” Program, vol. 14, no. 3,
1980, pp. 130–137.
[15]
C. Zhang, J. Sun, and K. Wang, “Information propagation in microblog
networks,” in Proceedings of the 2013 IEEE/ACM international con-
ference on advances in social networks analysis and mining.
ACM,
2013, pp. 190–196.
[16]
P. Cogan, M. Andrews, M. Bradonjic, W. S. Kennedy, A. Sala, and
G. Tucci, “Reconstruction and analysis of Twitter conversation graphs,”
in Proceedings of the First ACM International Workshop on Hot Topics
on Interdisciplinary Social Networks Research (HotSocial 2012). ACM
Press, 2012, pp. 25–31.
[17]
C.-l. Hsu, S. J. Park, and H. W. Park, “Political Discourse Among KEy
Twitter Users: The Case Of Sejong City In South Korea,” Journal of
Contemporary Eastern Asia, vol. 12, no. 1, 2013, pp. 65–79.
[18]
A. Maireder, “Political Discourses on Twitter: Networking Topics,
Objects and People,” in Twitter and Society.
Peter Lang, 2013.
[19]
J. Bollen, H. Mao, and A. Pepe, “Modeling public mood and emotion:
Twitter sentiment and socio-economic phenomena.” in Proceedings of
the Fifth International AAAI Conference on Weblogs and Social Media,
2011, pp. 450–453.
[20]
K. Lerman and R. Ghosh, “Information contagion: An empirical study
of the spread of news on digg and twitter social networks.” ICWSM,
vol. 10, 2010, pp. 90–97.
[21]
A. Signorini, A. M. Segre, and P. M. Polgreen, “The use of twitter to
track levels of disease activity and public concern in the us during the
inﬂuenza a h1n1 pandemic,” PloS one, vol. 6, no. 5, 2011, p. e19467.
[22]
A. Maireder and S. Schl¨ogl, “24 hours of an# outcry: The networked
publics of a socio-political debate,” European Journal of Communica-
tion, 2014, pp. 1–16.
[23]
J. Goldstein, “Emergence as a construct: History and issues,” Emer-
gence, vol. 1, no. 1, 1999, pp. 49–72.
[24]
J. O. Berndt and O. Herzog, “Anticipatory behavior of software agents
in self-organizing negotiations,” in Anticipation Across Disciplines.
Springer, 2016, pp. 231–253.
[25]
P. Davidsson, “Agent based social simulation: A computer science
view,” Journal of Artiﬁcial Societies and Social Simulation, vol. 5, no. 1,
2002.
[26]
J. Habermas, Between facts and norms: contributions to a discourse
theory of law and democracy, ser. Studies in contemporary German
social thought.
Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press, 1996.
[27]
S. Abney, Semisupervised learning for computational linguistics. CRC
Press, 2007.
[28]
DatumBox Framework, http://www.datumbox.com, [retrieved: 09/16].
[29]
LIBSVM, http://www.csie.ntu.edu.tw/∼cjlin/libsvm, [retrieved: 09/16].
[30]
Apache Lucene, http://lucene.apache.org/core, [retrieved: 09/16].
[31]
E. Crecsi, “How Germans documented Pegida’s far-right protests
on
social
media,”
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2015/jan/06/
how-germans-documented-pegidas-far-right-protests-on-social-media,
[retrieved: 09/16].
[32]
P. Cogan, M. Andrews, M. Bradonjic, W. S. Kennedy, A. Sala, and
G. Tucci, “Reconstruction and analysis of twitter conversation graphs,”
in Proceedings of the HotSocial ACM International Workshop.
ACM,
2012, pp. 25–31.
[33]
A. Jaafari, “The goodell, the bad, and the ugly: The minimal level
of integrity in the NFL’s disciplinarian of players,” Social Science
Research Network (SSRN), 2016.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-519-7
HUSO 2016 : The Second International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

