Mobile Technology to Support Didactic Strategies
Bianca Carvalho Martins 
 Geane Santana Rocha Quixabeira 
Leysson Muriel Tavares Guimarães Barros 
Claudio de Castro Monteiro 
Federal Institute of Education, Science and Technology of Tocantins (IFTO) Palmas 
IT department 
Palmas, Brazil 
e-mail: {bianca.etf, geanezinha, leyssonm}@gmail.com 
e-mail: ccm@ifto.edu.br 
 
Abstract — This paper discusses the uses of the results of 
external assessments in educational assignments to improve the 
quality of elementary teaching. The challenge of disseminating 
such results is highlighted in an intuitive and attractive way. It 
also refers to the repercussions of the implemented mobile 
application, which is aimed at improving the current 
educational environment. In this way, the importance of the use 
of technologies in numerous areas, in this case, in education, is 
proven with the development of this work. The elaborate mobile 
application was tested and evaluated by the target audience of 
interest and the article shows the results obtained through the 
evaluation. 
 
Keywords-application; external assessments; educational quality. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 Education evaluation in Brazil has become a State policy 
based on the reforms, policies and educational actions 
implemented since the 1990s. Since then, discussions about  
Brazilian educational problems in both basic education and 
higher education have been based on the dissemination of 
information 
produced 
by 
the 
evaluation 
processes 
implemented, with a focus on large-scale, centralized and 
standardized exams, pointing out the students’ strengths, 
profit and are expressed by rates in scores form or concepts. 
It has been emphasized that from the 1970s the post-
graduate stricto sensu had already had an assessment led by 
the Coordination of Improvement of Higher Level Personnel 
(Capes). Basic education began to be evaluated by the Basic 
Education Assessment System (Saeb) and the higher by the 
National System for the Assessment of Higher Education 
(Sinaes). 
After this process, everyone became involved in the 
planning of didactic situations that favor development of the 
competences and skills that have not yet been built or that are 
in the process of construction. Therefore, this allows the 
teacher to carry out real and significant interventions through 
diversified tasks, bringing about critical and collective 
reflection for overcoming difficulties and for advancing 
towards improvement in learning.  
Education and technology came to be seen no longer 
separately, but as a necessary alliance. Teaching practice has 
changed constantly as new demands and learning needs as 
well as great amounts of information acquired at a surprising 
speed. Thinking about it, the teacher, who needs to master 
these changes and has little time, also needs the support of 
technology to optimize time, find interesting content, prepare 
lessons, communicate with students and more. The tool 
created to help access the information of the evaluations 
already mentioned thus helps to inform the daily planning of 
the teacher for the classroom. 
This paper has the objective of examining the assessment 
system for basic education in Brazil, with emphasis on the 
Palmas Educational Assessment System-SAEP. Besides 
presenting concepts and objectives of the main systems of 
assessment, it tries to discuss some of weaknesses in the way 
that the data are made available. The paper was divided into 
the following forms: In Section 2, the assignments are related. 
In Section 3, the proposal is presented for creating of the tool. 
I Section 4, the methodology used for creation and 
implementation of the tool are shown. Section 5 presents the 
results through the use of its didactic application, closing in 
Sections 6 and 7 with the acknowledgment, future 
assignments and references.  
II. 
RELATED ASSIGNMENTS 
The Saeb introduced in the early 1990s was initially based 
on the quantitative results of a test applied to a sample of 
students and was changed in 2005. There were two 
components: the National Assessment of Basic Education 
(Aneb). This  is a large-scale examination applied in a sample 
of schools, and the National Assessment of School Income 
(Anresc), known as the Brazil Test, which is also a large-
scale examination applied to all students. The Brazil Test was 
introduced in 2005 as an evaluation instrument based on the 
application of large-scale exams in order to evaluate the 
performance in Portuguese and Mathematics of all students 
enrolled in the educational systems, which made it possible 
to disseminate the results by school unit. In 2007, the Basic 
Education Development Index (Ideb) was introduced, which 
began to combine the results of the students in the 
examinations of the Brazil Test with the approval rates by 
school (school flow). Based on these indicators, schools and 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

education networks were classified on a numerical scale. 
Based on these two indicators - Brazil Test and school flow - 
the Ideb began a major media campaign, in which the 
instrument that indicates the quality of Brazilian basic 
education, also serves to mount rankings of schools and states 
of the federation. The policy of rankings in basic education 
was then established. 
It is possible to develop a system of evaluation aimed at 
improving the quality of education - including teaching, 
learning and institutional management with the aim of 
transforming the current school into an institution dedicated 
and committed to the democratization of knowledge and 
education, as well as with the transformation of society [1]. 
In this way, to evaluate implies in taking of decision with a 
view to refining the improvement of institutional quality and 
providing accountability accounts the society. 
In this context, contemporary theorists such as [2]-[5] 
have innovated conceptions of evaluation and contributed to 
the evolution of the teaching and learning process. In this 
perspective, assessment is a qualitative appreciation of 
relevant data in the process of teaching and learning that 
assists the teachers in making decisions about their work. 
Therefore evaluation is a reflection on the level of quality of 
school work. Thus, large-scale evaluation must also be 
perceived in the same way. 
The evaluative act is thus  perceived as inherent and 
indispensable, during any educational process that takes 
place in a constant work of action-reflection-action, as in [6], 
to educate is to act as subject, is to question the world in 
which we live in order overcome the contradictions, 
committing ourselves to   this world to constantly recreate it. 
Based on the history of educational assessments and the 
need for growth and increasing information in educational 
networks, the idea came about of creating a tool that 
facilitates the access and dissemination of important data 
about the evaluation system of the municipal network of 
Palmas -TO. 
Palmas Educational Assessment System (SAEP) is 
characterized as an external evaluation that aims to provide 
consistent, periodic and comparable indicators of the 
Municipal Teaching Network of Palmas that can guide the 
agents involved in the educational system in the quest for 
improving the quality of teaching. 
The assessment was an action requested by the Municipal 
Department of Education to for the Evaluation, Statistics and 
Training Board, aiming to present the index of non-literate 
students in the classes of 5th to the 9th grade of elementary 
school. The process was initiated based on a pre-diagnosis 
carried out by the teaching units of the aforementioned 
network, raising the abilities of students with difficulties in 
the construction of reading, interpretation and writing 
development. 
The diagnostic assessment is an inquiry instrument and it 
intends to contribute to the construction and resignification 
of a differentiated understanding for the teaching and 
learning process and to the evaluation practice from an 
action-reflection-action perspective. In this regard, the 
diagnostic assessment is considered to be a diagnostic tool 
that will allow the teacher to observe and become familiar 
with the characteristics of the students' thinking, what they 
know and what they need to know in order to learn, in order 
to develop a diversified work and to make progress learning. 
In other words, the goal is to know the real development 
zone (what the student has already learned and performs with 
independence and understanding alone). That will enable 
interventions in the proximal development zone (which is 
still in the process of maturation) and take the pupils to the 
potential development zone (in which the student is able to 
perform independently after mediated learning). 
Any process that was planned in such a way makes it 
possible to diagnose the learner's level of learning about their 
writing and reading construction process. The instrument was 
composed of questions that assesses the student's competence 
and their ability to read and interpret a text, using as a 
mechanism the ability to find explicit information and infer 
implicit information. To verify the level of writing 
construction, the mechanism used was the ability to write 
canonical and non-canonical words and the production of a 
text. 
After the application assessment instrument was carried 
out by the schools in question, the Board of Statistical 
Evaluation and Training, through specialists in the areas of 
Portuguese Language and Literacy carried out the correction 
of the task, analyzing the construction and interpretation of 
the student, verifying the level of each student, and then 
tabulating and to condensing the data. 
III. 
PROPOSAL 
Two decades ago, large-scale educational evaluations 
were carried out in Brazil to inform education departments in 
the formulation of educational policies and schools in 
improving pedagogical practices and management. However, 
it is difficult for managers and education professionals to 
understand the results of these assessments and to use them 
to subsidize educational action.  
Aiming to broaden the debate and the use of evaluations as a 
strategy for improving quality in education, the proposal of 
the application aims directly at teachers offering inputs for 
reading the results of external evaluations and stimulating 
proposals that focus on improvement of educational 
processes. 
The pedagogical reading and interpretation of external 
evaluation results is a starting point. Identifying, for example, 
the information in the Brazil Test bulletins that provide 
clarification about student learning broadens the perception 
of teaching practices, as well as management practices. This 
reading goes beyond knowing the averages of performance 
and comparing them with those of other schools and systems. 
This reading should direct efforts towards understanding 
what actually happened to that generation of students who 
took the test and what could have produced the result in 
question. This movement is what turns a result into a point of 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

support to understand, criticize and eventually change the 
pedagogical process. The detailed analysis of the distribution 
and variability of the students' performance in the proficiency 
scales is what makes the difference in reading and 
interpreting the results, and what enables a deeper knowledge 
of the school performance and from this, to make decisions 
and rethink interventions. 
Little is known about the consequences and effects of 
evaluation policy on the organization of school work, and in 
particular on pedagogical action. However, some studies 
indicate that it is possible to affirm the existence of 
movements that intensify the use of external evaluations and 
their results by educational networks and schools in Brazil, in 
the articulation and organization of pedagogical work [7]-[9]. 
Since the release of the results of the first assessments in 
1995, the researchers have had to face the challenge of 
disseminating them so that they could be understood by the 
school community, parents and all interested in knowing the 
levels of performance of a given population of pupils [10]. 
Currently, the test is being conducted and the results are 
passed on to the Assessment Board, which tabulates, and 
condenses the data and produces reports that are made 
available to the teacher on the site of the SAEP, where they 
can be worked on in the classroom. This is shown in Figure 
1, below: 
 
Figure 1.  Flowchart of the Procedure Evaluation Currently 
With the application, the test results are then passed on to 
a server, which interprets and presents the data on a 
smartphone application, more clearly and efficiently, and 
accessible to all teachers. This process is illustrated in Figure 
2 below. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Flowchart of the Evaluation Procedure With the Application 
Thus, the proposal of this paper is to enable the 
Generation of Reports on the Indicators of Quality of the 
Education of the System of Educational Evaluation of Palmas 
- SAEP, a form to facilitate the access to the information by 
the teacher in the classroom, making the diagnosis of the 
learner's level of learning more intuitive, quick and effective. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY 
In this section, the necessary methodology will be shown 
on how to carry through the proposal presented in previous 
section 3, with the intention of later presenting the obtained 
results of entire process. 
A. Materials 
The materials used in this study are the following related 
ones: 
● 
Computer - System Linux Ubuntu 
● 
Ionic Framework 2.0 
● 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON)  
● 
Google Forms 
B. Methods 
In this context, the Ionic is inserted in a framework for 
developing applications for mobile devices that aims for the 
implementation of hybrid applications for fast and easy 
development. The framework is the easiest way for the web 
developer to create, develop and scale multiplatform mobile 
applications. It offers to many libraries a simplified 
development and helps to produce apps with a presentable 
appearance, without giving much work to the developer, and 
does not require much knowledge, merely Hypertext Markup 
Language (HTML), Cascading Style Sheets (CSS) and 
Javascript. 
The diverse advantages of if using the Ionic framework 
have brought about the necessity for a light format combined 
with its work for data exchange and makes reading simpler. 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

With this the applications program was developed in the Ionic 
framework with information consumed by a JSON archive, a 
light format for data exchange. JSON is in text format and is 
a completely independent language because it uses 
conventions that are familiar to C and familiar languages, 
including C ++, C #, Java, JavaScript, Perl, Python and many 
others. These properties make JSON an ideal data exchange 
format. 
C. Field Work 
Field research is the type of research that seeks to find 
information directly from the population surveyed. It is used 
to establish or confirm facts, reaffirm the results of previous 
work, solve new or existing problems, support theorems and 
develop new theories. 
Similar to a thermometer, which shows the temperature 
on a scale, the Palmas Educational Assessment System is an 
instrument that will point out the pupil learning on a scale, 
more specifically, the percentage reached in the evaluated 
descriptors. Combining these results with the easiness of 
using applications, the tool was developed and then evaluated 
through a form. 
All the Portuguese and mathematics teachers from the two 
schools that were presented the applications responded to the 
form and two others from the group of the Post-graduate Lato 
Sensu in Telemática of IFTO. This is shown in Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Amount of people per school 
The form presented to the users (teachers) was answered 
accordingly to their opinion of the application, on a linear 
scale, organized accordingly to the Likert scale, ranging from 
1 if they completely disagreed with the affirmation, and up to 
5, in the case of full agreement. 
All statements written for this research are listed below. 
1. The application information is presented in a clear 
way. 
2. The application information is of great relevance to 
the teacher’s planning. 
3. The data shown in the application makes it possible 
to identify where the biggest learning deficit lies in 
relation to the descriptor in the disciplines 
evaluated. 
4. The navigation in the application is in an intuitive 
form. 
5. One can always access information that is of one’s 
own interest. 
6. The application enables faster identification of the 
deficits of each class and consequently the 
implementation of possible solutions. 
7. It is imagined that most people would learn to use 
this system quickly. 
8. The students benefit from the idea of the application, 
where they will be able to improve in the areas of 
learning in which they have difficulties. 
9. The 
information 
accessed 
will 
significantly 
contribute to quality planning in order to obtain 
better results in internal and external assessments. 
10. Compared to the previous form of access to results, 
the application speeds up this access and offers a 
faster and more efficient way of showing and then   
planning for recovering or maintaining the results. 
  
Such research had a previously calculated sample of 15 
people, which counted on all teachers mentioned of the two 
schools presented in the application. Besides the 15 teachers, 
as already mentioned, two more users also answered the 
form. 
In many cases, it is possible to determine the minimum 
sample size in order to estimate a statistical parameter. These 
formulas work with the idea that the population where the 
sample is located is so large that it can be considered infinite. 
However, many populations are not considered large enough 
compared to the samples, which is the case of the study in 
question [11]. For the circumstances already highlighted, the 
population available for the two schools present in the 
application are 15 teachers. 
Thus, the formula used in this situation to determine the 
sample (n) was based on the average population and is shown 
in (1) that follows [11]. 
 
𝑛 =
𝑁.𝜎2.(𝑍𝛼
2
)
2
(𝑁−1).𝐸2+𝜎2.(𝑍𝛼
2
)
2           (1) 
Where: 
n = Number of individuals in the sample; 
N = Size of the population; 
𝑍𝛼
2
= Critical value that corresponds to the desired degree 
of confidence; 
𝜎 = Standard deviation of the studied variable; 
E = Margin of error. 
 
The values of all variables mentioned above are described 
in Table 1 below. 
 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

TABLE I.  VARIABLES AND VALUES FOR THE DETERMINATION OF THE 
SAMPLE 
Variables 
Values 
N 
15 teachers 
𝑍𝛼
2 
1,96 
𝜎  
1,18 
E 
0,03 (3%) 
n 
14,96 
 
The critical value considered is associated with a degree 
of confidence of 95%. The standard deviation was 
determined through an assumption of the 15 teachers' 
answers to one of the questionings of the applied form. Thus, 
it reached a sample value close to 15 and which could be 
summed up to this value. 
V. 
RESULTS 
In this section, we will present the results, which were 
obtained through the application of the form described in the 
previous section. 
The 10 statements written for the form can be related to 
the navigability/layout or the idea of the application, where 
the division was of 5 topics for each relation. 
In the first evaluated scenario, the statements covered the 
way in which the application was presented, more precisely, 
its navigability and appearance. The topics that describe this 
situation are 1, 3, 4, 5, and 7. All the answers to the 5 
affirmations of this first scenario were compiled in the graph 
of Figure 4 below. 
 
.
 
Figure 4.  Results of statements related to navigability and layout 
Analyzing Figure 4, it is possible to affirm that the 
questions obtained a considerable negative percentage. 
Affirmative answers were approximately 25 %, while the 
other 75 % had some parameters that they disagreed with. 
Clarity of information and access were the items that stood 
out most in the research as the least well evaluated. It is 
believed that the improvement of these two factors is 
essential for the application to be somewhat attractive and 
well spread. 
In the second evaluated scenario, the idea of the 
application, its relevance and contribution were the items 
evaluated. The statements that are part of this second 
situation are 2, 6, 8, 9 and 10. The answers to these five 
affirmations can be seen in the compilation of Figure 5 that 
follows. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Results for statements related to the idea, relevance and 
contribution of the application 
In this scenario, it is possible to realize the difference of 
acceptability for the situation analyzed previously. The 
relevance of the application is evident in the results obtained 
from field research. A better planning by the teacher for 
implementing later on a possible solution for one given 
situation was the most accepted item in the research. 
The most rejected statement, the one with the most 
negative responses, is directly related to the clarity of the 
information in the application. The most viable explanation 
for such rejection is given in the little information of what the 
descriptors would be and what they are related to. The results 
are exposed directly, without a previous detailing of each line 
evaluated. Figure 6 shows this disagreement. 
 
 
Figure 6.  Result for statement 1 
The most approved affirmation, and that can be 
considered as one of the most important, is the comparison 
with previous form of accessing the results. This assertion 
can be proved in the Figure 7. 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

 
 
Figure 7.  Result for statement 10 
The test application speeds up the access to results, offers 
a faster and more effective way to show present and then plan 
to recover or keep the indicators. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The conception of evaluation as a broad process of 
informing decision-making in the context of the teaching 
systems is recent in Brazil. It should be understood as a 
process that aims at contemplating skills and abilities, the 
curriculum itself, students study habits and the teaching 
strategies of the teachers. In also involves management styles 
of the directors and the resources they offer, to improve the 
performance of their work. 
Evaluation is then a necessary process and condition for 
qualitative and quantitative targets to be established and 
monitored, and to ensure that the latter are reached. With this 
in mind, evaluation can foster in schools and networks a 
systematic interpellation into the quality of their practices and 
results, link the contributions of the external evaluation with 
the culture and the devices of self-evaluation of schools and 
strengthen their capacity to develop their autonomy, 
regulating the functioning of the educational system. 
Thus, it is necessary to observe the information coming 
from the assessment as evidence of the teaching and learning 
process, showing the trajectories of students, schools and the 
network itself, in order to support pedagogical decisions and 
reconfigurations. 
This whole scenario of strategies for the improvement of 
learning is facilitated by the use of technologies, making it 
faster to identify the deficiencies of each class in each 
discipline of each school. Applications such as these bring 
more intuitive, quick, and effective ways of identifying some 
problem. It is worth highlighting, therefore, the importance 
of investing, technologically speaking, in education in 
general. 
Future missions will be for improving the application, 
both in layout and in new functions. An additional suggestion 
of new work is faster notifications for each specific type of 
user. 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Isaura, M. Heitor and C. S. Luzia, “Evaluation Methodology in 
public policies: an experience in professional education”, 3th ed. São 
Paulo: Cortez Publishing company, 2003. 
[2] D. Lea, “The challenge of Learning Assessment: foundations for an 
innovative proposal”, São Paulo: EPU, 1989. 
[3] G. Moacir, “History of pedagogical ideas”, São Paulo: Ática, 1984. 
[4] H. Charles, “Demystified Evaluation”, Porto Alegre: Artmed 
Publishing company, 2001. 
[5] H. Jussara, “Evaluate to promote: the arrows of the path”, Porto Alegre: 
Mediation, 2001. 
[6] C. L. Cipriano, “Evaluation of school learning: studies and 
propositions”, 6th Edition, São Paulo, SP: Cortez Publishing company, 
1997. 
[7] P. Claudia, “External evaluations and the work of pedagogical 
coordinators: study in a municipal network in São Paulo”, 2012.   
Dissertation (Master in Education) - Faculty of Education, University 
of São Paulo, São Paulo, 2012. 
[8] S. Maria, “Educational regulation: the use of proficiency results of 
Proeb assessments by school principals in Minas Gerais”, 2011. Thesis 
(Doctorate in Education) - Faculty of Education, Federal University of 
Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, 2011. 
[9] E. Rosimar, “There, on the table: the data of the large-scale evaluations 
and the mediation of the pedagogical coordinator”, In: W. Flávia, 
“Large scale evaluation: focus on school”, São Leopoldo: Oikos; 
Brasília: Book Liber, 2010, p. 134-146. 
[10] S.  F. Nilma, “The Disclosure of School System Assessment Results: 
Limitations and Perspectives”, pp. 8, April 2013. 
[11] D. M. Levine, M. L. Bereson and D. Stephan, “Statistics: Theory and 
Applications using Microsoft Excel in Portuguese”, Rio de Janeiro: 
LTC, 2000. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-648-4
HUSO 2018 : The Fourth International Conference on Human and Social Analytics

