AC/DC: Autonomic Computing to Maintain Drone Fleet Continuity 
 
Fiachra Merwick,  Roy Sterritt  
Ulster University 
Belfast, Northern Ireland 
email: fiachra.merwick@gmail.com 
| r.sterritt@ulster.ac.uk   
 
  
Abstract— This paper aims to review the current state of the 
art of autonomic computing as it relates to the management of a 
fleet of drones being used for surveillance. Drones, for the 
purposes of this paper, refer to unmanned aerial vehicles that 
incorporate sensors for autonomous detection and surveillance. 
As economies of scale and improvements in the technology 
continue to materialize, fleets of drones become a viable 
commercial option to perform surveillance. In order to ensure 
self-management of these complete systems, an architecture is 
proposed to ensure the self-Configuring, Healing, Optimizing 
and Protection (self-CHOP) properties of the system are 
realized. The theoretical implementation of this autonomic 
computing solution is then discussed with respect to both its 
advantages and ethical implications.   
Keywords—Autonomic Computing; UAV; swarm; self-
management. 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Autonomic Computing is a term originally derived and 
proposed by IBM in 2001, which describes the area of self-
governing systems [1]. It has been compared with some 
biological functions of the human body which are essentially 
self-managed, not requiring conscious thought, such as the 
nervous system which self regulates the body [2]. As the 
predicted increase in complexity of computer systems would 
far outweigh the number of operators required to maintain 
them at that time, it was imperative to develop a discipline of 
computing whereby the systems would manage themselves to 
a certain degree, often occurring in the background 
unbeknownst to both the user and the operator [3]. This initial 
concept gave rise to the idea of the CHOP properties, which 
defines self-managing systems as being self–configuring, self-
healing, self-optimising and self-protecting [4]. The self in 
this instance refers to the information system [5].  
Recent improvements in drone technology, or more 
specifically Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), which 
incorporate autonomous flight capabilities, have led to the 
ability to deploy UAVs in commercial settings for 
surveillance purposes [6]. There are still many hurdles to 
overcome with respect to the technology, however, 
incorporating a fleet of UAVs will become increasingly 
commercially viable as the technology scales and the scope of 
work/area of surveillance increases [7].  
One distinction that is important to make is the difference 
between the terms autonomous and autonomic. Although IBM 
initially described Autonomic computing as self-governing 
[1], a more recent distinction between autonomy and 
autonomicity is that autonomy is self-governing and 
autonomicity is self-managing. Self-governing relates to the 
“delegation of responsibility to the system to meet the defined 
goals of the system (automation of responsibility including 
some decision making for the success of tasks), whereas 
autonomicity is system self-management (automation of 
responsibility including some decision making for the 
successful operation of the system)” [8]. 
Surveillance systems using UAV technology have the 
advantage of being adaptive with respect to automation for 
both flight controls, altering coverage and improving flight 
efficiency, as well as the object or risk detection models used 
to power the sensing portion of the system. This is particularly 
important where surveillance is used as a deterrent to criminal 
activity or threats, as individuals that pose the threat may adapt 
to the safeguards put in place, thus there is more scope to keep 
up with any potential changes in the behaviour of those that 
pose the threat. 
The main objectives of this paper are to: 
• 
Identify the current state of the art in UAV 
surveillance technology. 
• 
Outline requirements of an autonomic system as 
it relates to a surveillance system comprising of 
multiple UAV’s. 
• 
Propose an autonomic solution to ensure 
appropriate self-management as fleets of UAV’s 
begin to scale. 
• 
Consider both the suitability and ethical 
implications of this proposal. 
The format of the remainder of this paper is organised in 
the following manner: Section 2 details previous work carried 
out relating to the development and use of autonomic 
computing, focussing on its use in multi agent systems. 
Section 3 introduces an architecture that could be 
implemented to ensure self-management of the system. 
Section 4 discusses the results and provides a conclusion to 
the study.  
II. RELATED WORK 
A. Autonomic Computing 
A self-managing or autonomic system is summarised in 
[9] by four general properties, which include both objectives 
and attributes. The objectives of the system are to be self-
configuring, self-healing, self-optimising and self-protecting. 
The attributes help to define the implementation of the system 
in order to achieve the objectives and can be categorised as 
self-aware, self-situated, self-monitoring and self-adjusting 
[10]. This is represented as a quality tree presented in Figure 
1 and accurately captures the elements of autonomic 
computing [10]. 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
Figure 1. Autonomic Computing Tree [10]. 
a) Self-Configuring 
This can be described as the system’s ability to 
“automatically install, configure or integrate new software 
components” [10] or more simply, the ability to “readjust 
itself automatically” [9]. 
b) Self-Healing 
This is the ability of the system to recover from a fault, 
including identifying the fault and repairing it where possible.  
c) Self-Optimisation 
This is the system’s ability to improve its performance 
against its ideal performance, which is known by the system, 
by measuring its current performance and implementing 
policies that attempt to improve it.  
d) Self-Protecting 
The system will have awareness of potential threats and 
will defend itself from these threats, whether they be 
accidental or malicious in nature.  
The autonomic element, shown in Figure 2, is a control 
loop that manages the self-monitoring of a system, which was 
coined as MAPE by IBM. This refers to the functions of 
Monitoring, Analyzing, Planning and Executing [11]. The 
autonomic managers also communicate with each other using 
a reflex signal, which ensures the robustness of the system.  
 
 
Figure 2. Control loops in an autonomic element [11]. 
B. Heartbeat Monitoring 
The reflex signal, introduced in the previous paragraph, is 
a crucial element in the design of autonomic systems and 
heartbeat monitoring can enable achieving this. It is noted in 
[4] that there is a facility designed within Grid computing to 
detect and report on whether processes are still alive. The idea 
behind heartbeat monitoring is that a process or agent within 
a system continuously broadcasts a signal to indicate its 
health.  
The important aspect of heartbeat monitoring is that it 
reduces the amount of data sent by an agent or process, by 
just transmitting a simple signal. It is only in the absence of 
receiving this signal that the reflex signal then performs more 
complex tasks and more detailed information can be sent  
[11].  
Ultimately, this can then be used to ensure the self-CHOP 
objectives can be met by the system. 
C. UAVs  
The concept of a large fleet of UAV’s operating 
autonomously 
and 
self-managing 
using 
autonomic 
computing methods with a surveillance objective as topic for 
investigation was inspired by research carried out for NASA 
on the use of swarms for future missions, where a swarm 
describes a “large number of simple entities that have local 
interactions (including interactions with the environment)” 
[12].  
The limitations in the use of induvial UAVs are 
highlighted in [13], noting the limited battery life and field of 
view and suggests a swarm of UAVs working in 
collaboration with each other as a sustainable solution. It is 
quite evident from recent studies that the main stakeholders 
when it comes to swarm technology for surveillance are 
world militaries [14], [15], [16]. This raises some ethical 
concerns with respect to the development and improvement 
of the technology.  
 In a review of communication architectures for swarms 
of UAV’s by [17], autonomic computing, as per the goals, 
objectives and attributes outlined in Figure 1, is not referred 
to specifically, and is not encompassed by the architectures; 
however, many aspects of autonomic computing are 
considered.  
A more robust autonomic computing approach to 
communication between multiple agents is taken by [18], 
where computer vision is the primary method of 
communication using optical character recognition.  
The following section attempts to improve on the swarm 
communication architecture by implementing an autonomic 
computing approach, inspired by [18], with due consideration 
to each aspect of the system goals. 
III. AC/DC ARCHITECTURE 
A comprehensive review of UAV swarm communication 
architectures is provided in [17]. The “Single-Group Swarm 
Ad hoc Network” architecture is used as the baseline 
architecture in this proposal and will be enhanced using 
lessons learned from [18]. A schematic of the infrastructure is 
shown in Figure 3, where U-T-U stands for UAV-to-UAV 
communication and U-T-I stands for UAV to base 
infrastructure communication. 
 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
Figure 3. Single-Group Swarm Ad hoc Network architecture [17]. 
In a “single-group swarm Ad hoc network”, there is no 
dependence on the base station infrastructure providing 
communication to all UAVs, therefore eliminating a single 
point of failure in the system. At any given instant, the closest 
UAV to the base station infrastructure, known as the “gateway 
UAV” sends and receives information at high power, with 
only low power transmission being required to transmit and 
receive information between the remaining UAVs.   
Although “UAVs in the swarm can share situation 
information in real time to optimize collaborative control and 
improve efficiency” [17], loss of the gateway UAV may 
constitute a single point of failure if the loss is not managed 
appropriately, and this is where an autonomic solution fits in 
perfectly to maintain the continuous deployment of the swarm 
without human intervention. This is due to the fact that the 
gateway UAV contains additional transceivers to allow it to 
communicate at high power to the base station infrastructure.  
An enhancement is proposed for this infrastructure by 
including heartbeat monitoring, similar to that described in 
[11] [18]. Autonomic elements, as per Figure 2, will be 
incorporated in each individual UAV of the swarm, as well as 
the base station infrastructure.  
The concept is that each UAV in the swarm will be 
emitting an “I am alive” signal. This will be received by both 
surrounding UAVs using the U-T-U communication and by 
the base station infrastructure using the U-T-I communication, 
for the UAV sending the high-power transmission. If this 
signal is not received at any instance, then an algorithm, as 
specified in Figure 4, will be executed.  
 
Figure 4. Proposed algorithm for reflex signal, inspired by [18]. 
The successful implementation of this algorithm will rely on 
the swarm of UAVs and the base station operating as 
autonomic managers and it aims to:  
1) Dispatch a new UAV: This will ensure self-healing of 
the system is achieved, specifically addressing the issue of 
gateway UAV loss and re-establishing the connection 
between the swarm and the base station infrastructure. 
 
2) Send the closest UAV by GPS position: This is carrreid 
out to monitor the location of the lost UAV and identify any 
obstacles or threats and the location of the lost UAV. This 
ensures the system achieves the self-protection objective, if 
threats or new obstacls do exist.  
 
3) If applicable, update the routing plan for the swarm: 
Based on the findings from point 2, this aspect will help 
achieve the self-configuration and self-optimisation of the 
autonomic system by ensuring repetition of the UAV loss will 
not occur due to spacial or external threats. 
 
4) If applicable, send information on lost UAV: Also, 
based on the findings from point 2, this aspect will help 
achieve self-healing to a degree, although the underlying 
motivation for the execution of this procedure is for an 
operator to use this data for physical retrieval and inspection 
of the site of the loss. 
IV. CONCLUSION & FUTURE WORK 
The proposed autonomic solution is an enhancement to the 
current state of the art of UAV swarm communication 
technology, as informed by the reviewed literature. The main 
advantage of incorporating an autonomous computing 
element to the swarm architecture is ensuring self-
configuration and self-healing of the system, particularly in 
the case where the gateway UAV is lost.  
The heartbeat reflex signal methodology is a good fit for 
the autonomic elements of this architecture, as it is imperative 
for UAVs to consume as little power as possible and a simple 
signal achieves that requirement. The result of the 
implementation, which achieves the self-CHOP objectives, 
will be UAV swarms operating without operator intervention, 
for the most part, though it is noted that the physical nature of 
robotic swarms will always require some physical 
involvement.  
Although this enhancement will improve upon swarm 
route optimisation and threat avoidance, a real ethical concern 
is raised, as military usage of these swarms is inevitable. It is 
difficult to state, prior to implementation, if this could be used 
purely defensively, or offensively also. However, it is clear 
from both the research carried out and the reasons behind 
implementation of the autonomic elements of the system, such 
as healing due to loss of UAVs and optimisation after 
identification of threats to the system, that military use is the 
use case that would ultimately benefit the most.  
Autonomic computing and its implementation in systems 
is not as widely known or publicised as autonomous 
implementations, however it is clear from the research carried 
out for this paper and the potential implication of the 
implementation of the proposal in this paper, that without 
autonomic computing, the autonomous algorithms may be 
rendered useless. 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper was produced as part of COM760 Autonomic 
Computing & Robotics for Ulster University’s MSc. in 
Artificial Intelligence. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1]  P. Horn, “Autonomic Computing: IBM's Perspective on the 
State of Information Technology,” IBM, October 2001.  
[2]  S. Dobson, R. Sterritt, P. Nixon and M. Hinchey, “Fulfilling 
the vision of Autonomic Computing,” in Computer, 2010, pp. 
35-41. 
[3]  C. Franke, W. Theilmann, Y. Zhang and R. Sterritt, “Towards 
the Autonomic Business Grid,” Fourth IEEE International 
Workshop on Engineering of Autonomic and Autonomous 
Systems, pp. 107-112, 2007.  
[4]  R. Sterritt and S. Chung, “Personal Autonomic Computing 
Self-Healing Tool,” Proceedings of the 11th IEEE 
International Conference and Workshop on the Engineering 
of Computer-Based Systems, pp. 513-520, 2004.  
[5]  T. Wong, M. Wagner and C. Treude, “Self-Adaptive Systems: 
A Systematic Literature Review Across Categories and 
Domains,” Information and Software Technology, vol. 148, 
2022.  
[6]  K. Kanistras, G. Martins, M. J. Rutherford and K. P. 
Valavanis, “A survey of unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) for 
traffic monitoring,” 2013 International Conference on 
Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pp. 221-234, 2013.  
[7]  Y. Zhou, B. Rao and W. Wang, “UAV Swarm Intelligence: 
Recent Advances and Future Trends,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, 
pp. 183856-183878, 2020.  
[8]  W. Truszkowski, L. Hallock, C. Rouff, J. Karlin, J. Rash, M. 
G. Hinchey and R. Sterritt, Autonomous and Autonomic 
Systems: With Applications to NASA Intelligent Spacecraft 
Operations and Exploration Systems, London: Springer, 
2009.  
[9]  R. Sterritt, G. Wilkie, G. Brady, C. Saunders and M. Doran, 
“Autonomic Robotics for Future Space Missions,” European 
Space Agency, 2015.  
[10]  R. Sterritt and D. Bustard, “Autonomic Computing - a means 
of achieving dependability?,” 10th IEEE International 
Conference and Workshop on the Engineering of Computer-
Based Systems, pp. 247-251, 2003.  
[11]  M. G. Hinchey and R. Sterritt, “Self-Managing Software,” 
Computer, vol. 39, pp. 107-109, 2006.  
[12]  M. G. Hinchey, J. L. Rash, W. F. Trusz, C. A. Rouff and R. 
Sterritt, “Autonomous and Autonomic Swarms,” in Software 
Engineering Research and Practice (SERP), 2005.  
[13]  M. G. Cimino, M. Lega, M. Monaco and G. Vaglini, 
“Adaptive Exploration of a UAVs Swarm for Distributed 
Targets Detection and Tracking,” in Proceedings of the 8th 
International 
Conference 
on 
Pattern 
Recognition 
Applications and Methods, 2019.  
[14]  Z. Xiaoning, “Analysis of military application of UAV swarm 
technology,” 2020 3rd International Conference on 
Unmanned Systems (ICUS), pp. 1200-1204, 2020.  
[15]  M. Campion, P. Ranganathan and S. Faruque, “UAV swarm 
communication and control architectures: a review,” Journal 
of Unmanned Vehicle Systems, pp. 93-106, 2018.  
[16]  Y. Wang, P. Bai, X. Liang, W. Wang, J. Zhang and Q. Fu, 
“Reconnaissance Mission Conducted by UAV Swarms Based 
on Distributed PSO Path Planning Algorithms,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 7, pp. 105086-105099, 2019.  
[17]  X. Chen, J. Tang and S. Lao, “Review of Unmanned Aerial 
Vehicle Swarm Communication Architectures and Routing 
Protocols,” Applied Sciences, vol. 10, p. 3661, 2020.  
[18]  C. Saunders, R. Sterritt and G. Wilkie, “Computer Vision 
Techniques for Autonomic Collaboration between Mobile 
Robots,” The Seventh International Conference on Adaptive 
and Self-Adaptive Systems and Applications, pp. 51-57, 2015.  
 
 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

