Improvement of Fatty Acids Composition of a Microalga Isolated from the 
Moroccan Seawater for Biodiesel Production 
 
Salima Ouled Hajja 
Geosciences, Water and Environment 
Laboratory (L-G2E) Faculty of Sciences 
Mohammed V University (UM5) in Rabat 
Rabat, Morocco 
Email: fatiallalatserine@gmail.com 
 
Miloudia Slaoui, Houria El Bakraoui 
Energy, Materials and Sustainable Development 
(EMDD) Laboratory, Higher School of Technology- 
SALE, CERN2D 
Mohammed V University (UM5) in Rabat 
Rabat, Morocco 
Emails: smslaoui2@gmail.com, houriya1234@gmail.com
 
 
Abstract— The cellular biochemical composition of the isolated 
microalga Chlorella sp. was investigated in both favorable and 
nitrogen-depleted circumstances, with a particular focus on 
lipid classes and fatty acid distribution.  When algal cells were 
grown 
in 
nitrogen-starvation 
media, 
the 
lipid 
and 
carbohydrate content increased, but the protein content 
decreased. Under control conditions, glycolipids were the most 
abundant lipid component at about 58.2% of total lipids, 
however under nitrogen stress conditions, neutral lipids 
became more prevalent at 74.8% of total lipids. The level of 
TAGs in nitrogen stressed cells was more than four times 
greater than in control cells. Oleic acid was the most prevalent 
fatty acid (47.2%) in the neutral lipids fraction. Under 
nitrogen stress, lipid quality analysis revealed that this alga has 
the potential to be used as a biodiesel feedstock. 
Keywords- Chlorella sp; biodiesel; stress conditions; 
Nitrogen; Phosphorus; bioenergy. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Overuse of fossil fuels has resulted in an energy crisis 
and environmental issues [1]. Considering this, sustainable 
bioenergy, particularly biodiesel, has received a lot of 
attention in recent years. Biodiesel is a compound composed 
of fatty Acid Methyl Esters (FAME), created normally by 
the transesterification of vegetable oils or animal fats [1]. 
Microalgae are now seen as a viable feedstock for biodiesel 
production 
due 
to 
many 
benefits, 
including 
high 
photosynthetic efficiency, quick growth rate, and high lipid 
content [2]. In contrast to terrestrial energy crops, these 
organisms exhibit a significant lipid yield per unit of 
marginal land, possess the capability to harness sunlight and 
other nutrients to recycle carbon from fossil sources, and 
contribute positively to the environment [3]. The widespread 
commercial production of Microalgae biodiesel faces 
limitations due to various techno- logical and economic 
constraints [4]. Therefore, it is crucial to enhance both the 
yield of microalgal biomass and lipid production to maintain 
competitiveness and economic viability [5]. Various factors, 
including culture conditions like nitrogen and phosphorus 
stress, cultivation methods, temperature, light intensity, 
light/dark cycles, salinity, and pH, wastewater type can 
influence these parameters [6] – [8]. 
Chlorella has long been used commercially to make 
bioactive chemicals, animal feed, and nutrition for humans. 
Due to their high lipid output and environmental 
adaptability, reports of the potential of chlorella for the 
manufacture of biodiesel has increased in recent years [9]. 
There have been claims that several species of Chlorella 
might boost the lipid accumulation under conditions of 
nutritional restriction or famine. Given the preceding 
knowledge, it is critical to explore the buildup of lipids in 
microalgae growing under stress condition. In addition, total 
lipids are a useful tool for identifying oleaginous species and 
their fatty acid profiles offer a more targeted indication of the 
kind of substrate that is best for producing biodiesel. 
In light of this, the purpose of this research is to assess 
the effects of nitrogen stress on biomass production, lipid 
accumulation, and fatty acid composition of an isolated 
microalga, Chlorella sp., cultured in f/2 medium. 
II. 
METHODS 
The strain Chlorella sp. investigated in this study was 
isolated from saltwater near Sidi Moussa beach in Morocco. 
Before being transferred to 100 mL beakers, the seawater 
samples were collected and filtered. Microalgae were 
identified using an optical microscope (Nikon ECLIPSE 
E200). Serial dilution was utilized to generate a pure culture. 
By inserting   a loop of sample culture from the highest 
dilution tubes on the agar growth medium, a sterile loop was 
employed to form parallel streaks on the agar growth media. 
The petri dishes were covered with parafilm and incubated at 
25◦C. After 30 day of incubation, f/2 medium has been 
employed in the maintenance of the culture of this species in 
100 mL Erlenmeyer flask. 
The cellular biochemical composition of the isolated 
microalga Chlorella sp. was investigated in both favorable 
and nitrogen-depleted circumstances, with a particular focus 
on lipid classes and fatty acid distribution after six days of 
cultivation. Carbohydrate concentration was determined by 
the phenol-sulfuric acid method. Total lipid extraction from 
dry biomass was carried out using the Bligh and Dyer 
technique. 100 milligrams of dry cells are maintained in 3.5 
mL of a chloroform/methanol/water (2/1/0.5 v/v/v) mixture. 
The mixture was centrifuged for 15 minutes at 4000 rpm 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

after vertexing, and the organic phase was extracted and 
deposited in a tube that has been previously dried and 
weighed. 
      The lipid content was determined by using the following 
equation:   
 
                      Lipid content (%) = ML/MA*100 
 
where ML (g) is the mass of the extracted lipids 
(corresponding to the difference in mass of the empty tubes 
and containing the dry lipids) and MA (g) is the mass of dry 
algal biomass. 500 µL of chloroform was used to resuspend 
the extracted lipids. 100 µL of this mixture was combined 
with 800 µL of 10% Boron trifluoride-methanol solution in a 
screw tube, and the combination was then heated to 100 ◦C 
in a water bath for 15 minutes. 750 µL of the solvent (100 
µL of heptadecane in 10 mL of hexane) and 1.5 mL of water 
were added after cooling, and the mixture was vortexed for 2 
minutes. The upper phase was retrieved with a Pasteur 
pipette, and 10 µL of it was injected into an Agilent gas 
chromatography (6850) system to characterize the methyl 
esters. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
Results indicate that, when algal cells were grown in 
nitrogen-starvation media, the lipid and carbohydrate content 
increased but the protein content decreased. Under control 
conditions, glycolipids were the most abundant lipid 
component about 58.2% of total lipids, however under 
nitrogen stress conditions, neutral lipids became more 
prevalent 74.8% of total lipids. The level of TAGs in 
nitrogen stressed cells was more than four times greater than 
in control cells. Oleic acid was the most prevalent fatty acid 
(47.2%) in the neutral lipids fraction. Similar trends have 
been documented in the cells of Chlorella vulgaris [10]. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
      The primary components of microalgal biomass 
consist of protein, carbohydrate, and lipid. Our findings 
demonstrated that when subjected to nitrogen deprivation, 
there was an elevation in carbohydrate and lipid content, 
accompanied by   a reduction in protein content. Hence, 
environmental stress conditions play a crucial role in 
enhancing lipid quality for biodiesel production. Although 
nitrogen starvation can significantly increase the content of 
neutral lipids in microalgae, its main drawback is the limited 
biomass production. 
Therefore, in the future work, it will be essential to 
further optimize the culture conditions for the isolated 
microalgae Chlorella sp. to achieve the desired quantity and 
quality of lipids for biodiesel production such as providing 
high light levels, limiting other nutrients. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Liu, J. Huang, Z. Sun, Y. Zhong, Y. Jiang and F. Chen, 
“Differential lipid and fatty acid profiles of photoautotrophic 
and heterotrophic Chlorella zofingiensis: assessment of algal 
oils for biodiesel production,” Bioresource Technology, vol. 
102, pp. 106–110, 2011. 
[2] Q. Hu, M. Sommerfeld, E. Jarvis, M. Ghirardi, M. Posewitz, 
M. Seibert, and A. Darzins, “Microalgal triacylglycerols as 
feedstocks 
for 
biofuel 
production: 
perspectives 
and 
advances,” The Plant. J, vol. 54, pp. 621–639, 2008. 
[3] H. 
Li, 
“Environment-Enhancing 
Process 
for 
Algal 
Wastewater 
Treatment, 
Heavy 
Metal 
Control 
and 
Hydrothermal Biofuel Production: A Critical review”, 
Bioresource Technology, vol. 298, pp. 122 421, 2020. 
[4] F. Chu, “Enhancing Lipid Production in Microalgae Chlorella 
PY-ZU1 with Phosphorus Excess and Nitrogen Starvation 
under 15% CO2 in a Continuous Two-Step Cultivation 
Process,” Chemical Engineering Journal, vol. 375, pp. 
121912, 2019. 
[5] K. R. Renjith, G. John, S. Muraleedharan Nair and N. 
Chandramohanakumar, “Biodiesel Prospective of Five 
Diatom Strains Using Growth Parameters and Fatty Acid 
Profiles”, Biofuels. 8, no.1, pp. 81-89, 2017. 
[6] M. A. Yaakob, R. M. S. R Mohamed, A. Al-Gheethi, R. 
Gokare, and R. R. Ambati, “Influence of Nitrogen and 
Phosphorus on Microalgal Growth, Biomass, Lipid, and Fatty 
Acid Production: An Overview”, Biomolecule, vol. 10, pp. 
393, 2021. 
[7] H. El. Bakraoui, M. Slaoui, D. Hmouni, and F. El aamri, 
“Impact of color of light and nitrogen concentration on 
Pavlova sp. biomass, cells size and biochemical composition,” 
Biofuels, 2022. 
[8] H. EL Bakraoui, M. Slaoui, J. Mabrouki, D. Hmouni and C. 
Laroche “Recent Trends on Domestic, Agricultural and 
Industrial 
Wastewaters 
Treatment 
Using 
Microalgae 
Biorefinery System,” Applied Sciences, vol. 13, no.1, pp. 68, 
2022. 
[9] X. P. Zhou, L. Xia, H. M. Ge, D. L. Zhang, and C. X. Hu, 
“Feasibility of biodiesel production by microalgae Chlorella 
sp. (FACHB-1748) under outdoor conditions,” Bioresource. 
Technology, vol. 138, pp. 131-135, 2013. 
[10] S. H. Ho, S. W. Huang, C. Y. Chen, T. Hasunuma, A. Kondo, 
C. Chang, and J. S, “Characterization and optimization of 
carbohydrate production from an indigenous microalga 
Chlorella vulgaris FSP-E” Bioresource. Technology, vol. 135, 
pp.157-165, 2013. 
 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

