Recommendation Ranking Based on AHP Approach
for Productivity Improvement in SME Context
Youcef Abdelsadek, Kamel Chelghoum and Imed Kacem
Universit´e de Lorraine, LCOMS
F-57000 Metz, France
email: youcef.abdelsadek@univ-lorraine.fr, kamel.chelghoum@univ-lorraine.fr and imed.kacem@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract—This work deals with a multi-criteria decision mak-
ing problem that consists in providing recommendations, which
can improve productivity in Small and Medium-sized Enterprises
(SMEs) based on measures comparison. This problem is very
interesting because it allows SMEs to beneﬁt from the expertise
of a panel of experts avoiding pitfalls and bad decisions. On one
hand, SMEs must stay competitive. Therefore, it is crucial to
adopt efﬁcient productivity improvement using the best methods.
On the other hand, it is often necessary to implement facilitators
knowing that SMEs do not have enough resources and tech-
nological experience to implement several methods. Therefore,
how to chose the most important method or measure? This
work answers this question and an attempt has been made to
compare and rank the well-known measures in Lean Production
and Industry 4.0 by applying the Analytic Hierarchy Process
(AHP). The obtained results show that the top three methods are
Design of the value Stream, Continuous Improvement Processes
and Material Replenishment, respectively. The on-line platform of
the INTERREG Prodpilot project provides access to the proposed
recommendations and the obtained ranking.
Index Terms—Recommendation ranking; AHP; Productivity
improvement; Lean Production; Industry 4.0; SME.
I. INTRODUCTION
Several countries around the world try to support their
companies with different economic programs to improve their
industrial sector. The objective is to increase their produc-
tivity. This becomes more important nowadays with the free
international trade [1] where companies have to be able to
propose their products at competitive prices and with high
quality. This implies that productivity must be improved to
remain competitive and gain in performance.
Furthermore, on one hand, there is a quick increase in
production demand with continuous markets expansion gain-
ing lands against competitors, which force the industries,
particularly the small and medium-sized enterprises [2], to use
their resources to the maximum of their capacity in order to
make the highest proﬁt. On the other hand, industries can no
longer afford spending time to try several methods to gain
in productivity. This could lead to failure and seeing sales
contracts going to the competitors, which implies loses in
terms of money and branding.
Other important variables of this complex equation are the
proposed products prices, which are inﬂuenced by the increase
in the price of consumables and raw materials, such as fuel or
semi-conductors. Industries tend to ﬁnd out the most economic
process in provisioning, warehousing, production and delivery
to handle this variability.
For all these challenges, companies can rely on the progress
that technology makes nowadays, such as Internet of Things
(IoT) [3] [4], Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) [5] and Big Data
technologies [6]. Indeed, new doors are opened and new
facilities are now possible. The key words ”Smart Companies”
and ”Digitalisation” are more and more widespread in the
industrial sector [7]–[10]. Every company wants to follow
the fourth industrial revolution and to integrate the industry
of the future into their methodology and process. Several
advantages emerge with the industry of the future, such as real-
time accessibility and ﬂexibility, data-driven analysis and self-
adjusting production. Companies that want to perform better,
should begin utilizing methods coming from Lean and Industry
4.0. Thanks to new technologies, companies can identify the
capacity of their active resources to allocate them accurately
and to better plan and forecast peak periods with production
levelling [11].
It seems that there are several existing approaches for
production enhancement, and it is not always easy to make
a reliable strategic plan in the top management with regards
to created value, ﬂexibility and durability avoiding a bad
decision. Therefore, companies have a challenge when deal-
ing with this heterogeneous, dynamic and complex decision
making. The purpose of this article is to overcome that,
and it introduces a prioritized list of recommendations for
productivity improvement of well-known methods in Lean and
Industry 4.0 based on Analytic Hierarchy Process (AHP). A
decision-maker can rely on this ranking to orient its decision
by taking into account the opinion of a panel of experts in
productivity. We point out that the development of the Maturity
Model for measuring the advancement in Lean and Industry
4.0 of SMEs is not part of this work.
The remaining part of this paper is organized as follows.
In Section II, we introduce more in detail the concept of
productivity, Lean Production and Industry 4.0 used in this
work. In Section III, a survey of the available measures
for productivity improvement and also the description of the
general framework for comparative evaluation are presented.
Following that, Section IV is devoted to the comparison
and the ranking of measures for productivity improvement
and discussion of the obtained results. Finally, the last part
of the paper includes the conclusion and offers the future
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

perspectives.
II. PRODUCTIVITY, LEAN PRODUCTION AND INDUSTRY
4.0 CONCEPTS
This section introduces more in detail the concept of pro-
ductivity, Lean Production and Industry 4.0 used in this work.
A. Productivity
Productivity can be seen from different points of view, but
commonly deﬁned as the ratio between the output and the
input used to product this output (see (1)), like goods or
services [12] [13]. In general, productivity is an objective
concept, where it measures how efﬁciently resources are used
in the production process. For the industrial sector, productiv-
ity is expressed by the efﬁciency to transform inputs such as
investments, raw materials, energy and labour into products.
In other words, it is an overall measure of the ability of
production per unit of used input. Other parameters can affect
this equation like the supply chain reliability [14] and the
efﬁciency of the delivery system or even also customers and
employees satisfaction for a better quality of work life [15]
[16].
Productivity = Outputs
Inputs
(1)
However, the productivity differs from production. The
former is a quantitative relationship between the products and
the converted inputs while the latter concerns the amount of
outputs over a period of time. Furthermore, considering (1),
higher productivity means either producing the same amount
of products with less resources (i.e., smaller denominator) or
producing with the same amount of resources more products
(i.e., bigger numerator).
B. Lean Production
The Lean Production principle is to remove all unnecessary
tasks from the production process, which waste resources
without creating value and delaying the delivery time [17]. The
base of Lean Production are continuous improvement (Kaizen)
and Muda reduction (5S). It is built with two columns of
Just-in-Time (JIT) [18] and autonomation (Jidoka) [19], which
rely on 2 foundations production levelling (Heijunka) and
standard working in order to absorb the demand ﬂuctuations.
Techniques like Single-Minute Exchange of Dies (SMED) and
elimination of error causes (Poka-Yoke) are used to reach the
delivery time, quality and costs objectives.
C. Industry 4.0
The fourth industrial revolution consists in integrating Data
Science and Information and Communication Technology
(ICT) in the process of companies digitalization [20]. Nowa-
days, with the technological progress, techniques and facilities
can be categorized in three groups:
1) Connectivity and data transmission:
The Internet offers a large range of technologies to
access information at any moment from any location,
ensuring ﬂuid communication between people, processes
and equipment, especially IoT [21]. It is not longer
necessary to invest in a large IT infrastructure to process
big data thanks to Cloud and High-Performance Com-
puting, which has contributed greatly to this information
accessibility. Cybersecurity is another facet providing
authentiﬁed connections in a trusted environment where
the information can be transmitted without being inter-
cepted by malicious third parties.
2) Management and business intelligence:
The use of software packages, like Enterprise Resource
Planning (ERP), for business management has become
more than a necessity. Such a generic tool is intended
to manage different sections of the company including
inventory, purchasing and sales for a centralized and
irredundant information. Custom-made tools are more
and more widespread in Intelligent Production relying
on Effective Algorithms [22] and Machine Learning
[23]. Those aim to provide an effortless and efﬁcient
tool to a decision-maker, which integrates its expertise
in a user-centred algorithm, like in Active Learning
[24], towards the optimized use of resources, pattern
recognition in fault detection or accurate forecasting of
product sales.
3) Cyber-physical system:
One can say that there is a bidirectional pipe between
the real-world and the virtual world where devices can
be used to enrich one world with information gathered
from the other world. For instance, augmented reality
with smart glasses for remote-guided maintenance [25]
or improving manual production process [26]. On the
other hand, sensors can be used for locating targets in
indoor industrial locations [27] or in outdoor industrial
locations, like GPS tracking of a ﬂeet of trucks in order
to optimize a real-time delivery system [28].
III. MEASURES AND FRAMEWORK
This section presents more in details the measures that can
be used in maturity assessments with the underlying enablers
for productivity improvement, the general framework and the
followed methodology.
A. Existing maturity models
Nowadays, almost all companies recognize what Lean Pro-
duction and Industry 4.0 can bring to them in terms of
progress. It has become a trend in this industrial era and
every company wants to be part of it. Nevertheless, most of
them cannot accurately determine their status-quo and do not
really know how to adopt an appropriate transformation. In this
context, a maturity model can be considered as a powerful tool
to assess the degree of maturity and to deﬁne the next mile-
stones. In this research ﬁeld, there is no consensus regarding a
common standard which characterizes the dimensions and the
measures of the models. The objective of this article is not to
make a survey of the numerous models, but a non-exhaustive
list is presented in what follows.
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

In [29], the initial version of the Lean Enterprise Self-
Assessment Tool (LEAST) is introduced. Based on a user
needs identiﬁcation, it is organized into three dimensions,
namely Lean Transformation/Leadership, Life Cycle Pro-
cesses, and Enabling Infrastructure Processes. Thereafter, other
models are proposed including additional dimensions, like in
[30].
Regarding Industry 4.0, Schumacher et al. propose an
empirically grounded model to assess the Industry 4.0 maturity
in the domain of discrete manufacturing [31]. Its main goal
was to extend the dominating technology focus of the previous
models by including organizational aspects. More recently, a
6Ps model for digital maturity has been introduced, which
stands for Product-Services, Processes, Platform, People, Part-
nership, Performance [32].
Other models are assessing both Lean Production and
Industry 4.0 aspects because they are intrinsically correlated.
For interested readers, some surveys are given in [33]–[35].
B. Used maturity model - dimensions and measures
This article introduces a prioritized list of measures of a self-
assessment tool providing recommendation for productivity
improvement. This self-assessment tool is based upon Lean
Production and Industry 4.0 principles with a SME scope.
It is organized into ﬁve dimensions, 36 measures and 4
levels (beginners, intermediate, experienced and expert for
each measure) illustrated in Figure 1. We point out that the
development of the used self-assessment tool is not part of this
work. For more details, we refer to the INTERREG Prodpilot
project (040-4-09-104) [36].
C. Framework
In order to prioritize the measures for productivity im-
provement in a SME context, we adopt the Analytic Hier-
archy Process (AHP) method as framework. AHP is one of
the most widespread methods in Multiple Criteria Decision
Making (MCDM) methods [37], offering to a decision-maker
an effective tool for ranking alternatives based on quantitative
comparisons. Indeed, a numerical scale reﬂecting qualitative
superiority/inferiority can be used to solve complex decision
problems with conﬂicting alternatives. AHP was introduced by
Saaty in 70’s and its major strengths are to consider several
criteria simultaneously and making subjective trade-offs to
arrive at a consensus [38]. To obtain this ranking, an Eigen
value problem is solved using as input the pairwise comparison
matrix. Thus, the ﬁrst normalized Eignen vector represents
weights (prioritized alternatives) while the Eigen value rep-
resents the Consistency Ratio (CR). The latter expresses the
degree of cohesion through transitivity when the expert is
ﬁlling in the comparison matrix. The closer this ratio is to
the value 1, the more randomly the comparison matrix has
been ﬁlled.
AHP can be applied in various complex decision issues,
such as raking solution techniques for reactive scheduling [39],
evaluating ﬂexible manufacturing systems [40], management
Figure 1. Self-assessment tool.
of construction projects [41], healthcare research [42], supplier
selection [43] and choosing ERP Systems [44].
In this ﬁeld, building an appropriate hierarchical structure of
the addressed problem (i.e., goal, criteria and alternatives) is
the cornerstone of an accurate prioritization. Figure 2 shows
the different levels of the proposed AHP hierarchy to rank
the productivity improvement measures. In Level 3, it is
envisaged to compare 14 preselected measures (alternatives)
of the aforementioned self-assessment tool. The root of the
hierarchy represents the objective, which is the most effective
measure for productivity improvement in the SME context.
The intermediate level represents the criteria on which the
experts will rely to make their judgements and rank measures
for recommendation.
Figure 2. Deﬁned hierarchy for AHP.
Each criterion is deﬁned accordingly to reach the targeted
objective.
1) Feasibility (Cr1):
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

In a SME context, there are not enough resources and
technological experience to implement several methods.
Feasibility stands for how easily a measure can be im-
plemented by a company. How much does the company
need additional resources or experience?
2) Potential (Cr2):
This criterion refers to the degree of improvement in
productivity that the company reaches after implement-
ing a measure. To what extent the implementation of
a measure allows for a noticeable progress in terms of
productivity?
3) Sustainability (Cr3):
Last but not least, sustainability represents the durability
of an action over time before it becomes obsolete.
Obviously, the longer the company beneﬁts from the
measures implementation, the better the measure.
D. Methodology
Figure 3 depicts the followed methodology for ranking mea-
sures as recommendation toward productivity improvement.
An explication is given in what follows for the pre-processing
steps in contrast to AHP steps.
Figure 3. Pre-processing and AHP steps.
• Experts selection:
The criteria and measures with their relative importance
impacting productivity are investigated using a specially
designed questionnaire. The self-assessment tool is joined
with the questionnaire for an explanatory purpose. The
experts pool is composed of either academics or man-
ufacturers with at least 5 years of experience in Lean
Production and Industry 4.0.
• Measures reduction:
It is obvious that providing consistent pairwise compar-
ison of 36 measures of the initial self-assessment tool
is not a task that a human can perform. We asked the
experts to keep only the most important 14 measures
according to them, and to determine which are the most
representative of the 5 dimensions. After the reduction
step, the most preselected 14 measures is considered as
the ideal set of measurements. Therefore, ≃ 80% of
the aggregate comparison matrix was ﬁlled in because
the experts did not necessarily select the same measures
during the reduction step. Nevertheless, this shows an
agreement among the experts concerning measures re-
duction giving rise possibly to a shorter self-assessment
tool for productivity improvement in SME context.
• Missing data completion:
One question might be raised, namely, how to ﬁll in
the ≃ 20% of missing data. To answer this question,
the ﬁrst approach consists to apply the Harker’s method.
The idea is to replace the missing values in the com-
parison matrices with the most consistent values, which
minimize CR [45]. However, it is not recommended to
apply Harker’s method when all entries of a row in the
comparison matrix are missing. In this case, bias could
be introduced in the data. The second approach relies
on the Shannon’s entropy principle of the Information
Theory [46]. In particular, having no prior knowledge,
the entropy is maximal for a source whose symbols are
all equi-probable. Analogously to our context, having
no prior knowledge regarding the superiority/inferiority
of one measure over the others for an expert, then the
relative measures are equi-important. The latter approach
is used in this work for missing data completion.
• AHP steps:
The described hierarchy in Figure 2 is utilized as AHP
hierarchy structure. Furthermore, the criteria and the pre-
selected measures are compared with each other using
the comparison scale [1-9]. Indeed, 1 denotes equal
importance, 2 low importance and 9 extreme importance.
IV. OBTAINED RANKING
This section describes the obtained results by applying the
framework presented in Figure 3. Table I shows the importance
of each criterion with the respective weightings.
TABLE I
PAIRWISE COMPARISON OF CRITERIA WITH RESPECT TO THE IDEAL
MEASURE FOR PRODUCTIVITY IMPROVEMENT
Importance
Criterion
Level
Weighting
Feasibility (Cr1)
Hight importance
0.505
Potential (Cr2)
Moderate importance
0.301
Sustainability (Cr3)
Low importance
0.192
CR
0.094
According to the experts, the feasibility criterion is the most
important, followed by potential and ﬁnally the sustainabil-
ity criterion. This could be argued by the fact that SMEs
suffer from lack of resources and technological experience
to implement or adapt all measures. Indeed, compared to
larger companies having an Research and Development (R&D)
department where processes are continuously optimized and
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

where new technologies are supported at all hierarchical levels,
the feasibility is not as important as in a SME context.
Furthermore, the potential of productivity improvement has an
intermediate level of importance in the SME context, which
can clearly be considered as the highest level of importance by
larger companies. Finally, sustainability has obtained relatively
the least important degree due to technology obsolescence for
which companies of all sizes are aware.
Figure 4.
Ranking of measures for productivity improvement taking into
account Cr1, Cr2 and Cr3.
Figure 4 presents the obtained prioritization of the 14 mea-
sures for productivity improvement considering the criteria.
The recommendations based upon experts’ opinions places
Design of the Value Stream (DVS) at the top followed by
Continuous Improvement Processes (CIP) and Material Re-
plenishment (MR), respectively. Table II presents the potential
pitfalls and the related aspects to be tackled for the top three
measures.
Obviously, the above subjective ranking is very sensitive to
experts opinions. Therefore, the choice of the pool of experts
is a very important step to achieve an effective and qualitative
recommendation based on AHP for which the researchers
must pay attention. Moreover, the cohesion ratio is acceptable
(CR < 0.1, see Table I) knowing that incoherence is part of
the experts’ judgement. Of course, the CR could be lowered
by reinterviewing experts whenever inconsistency is observed.
However, automatic methods should be avoided to reduce CR
TABLE II
TOP THREE MEASURES, POTENTIAL PITFALLS AND THE ASSOCIATED
ACTIONS
Potential pitfall
Action
DVS
Persisting
non-value
added tasks
Continuous analysis and optimization
of the whole value chain from the
supplier to the customer end to reach
the desired value-added percentage
CIP
Unstructured complex
problem solving
Problem structuring and utilization of
intelligent tools like Active Learning
MR
High
inventory
and
material stock-out
Optimization of material stocks via
collaborative tool involving different
parties of supply chain
because they may alter the pairwise comparisons leading to
unrepresentative data [47].
V. CONCLUSION
This work deals with recommendation making for pro-
ductivity improvement in the SME context. The obtained
prioritization is based upon experts judgements to rank the
important measures in Lean Production and Industry 4.0
with respect to three criteria, namely feasibility, potential and
sustainability. Companies can rely on these recommendations
to adopt efﬁcient productivity improvements and to choose
the most important measure according to the experts in their
strategic action plan. Particularly, in a SME context, there
are not enough resources and technological experience to
implement several measures. Therefore, the resulting measures
ranking by applying AHP is presented in this paper and can
be also accessed via the on-line platform of the INTERREG
Prodpilot.
Regarding the perspectives, this work could be extended and
it will be worth to consider other criteria to rank measures
for productivity improvement, such as the reticence of SMEs
regarding some measures.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the Interreg PRODPILOT V A
project (040-4-09-104). The authors would like to thank the
interviewed experts in Lean Production and Industry 4.0 for
their valuable inputs.
REFERENCES
[1] Centre for the Study of Living Standards (CSLS), International Produc-
tivity Monitor. OECD Publishing, 2017.
[2] T. Munyai, B. Mbonyane, and C. Mbohwa, Productivity Improvement
in Manufacturing SMEs: Application of Work Study. Taylor & Francis,
2017.
[3] I. Lee and K. Lee, “The Internet of Things (IoT): Applications, invest-
ments, and challenges for enterprises,” Business Horizons, vol. 58, no. 4,
pp. 431–440, 2015.
[4] S.-L. Chen, Y.-Y. Chen, and C. Hsu, “A New Approach to Integrate
Internet-of-Things and Software-as-a-Service Model for Logistic Sys-
tems: A Case Study,” Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), vol. 14, pp. 6144–
6164, 2014.
[5] A. Burgess, The Executive Guide to Artiﬁcial Intelligence: How to iden-
tify and implement applications for AI in your organization. Palgrave
Macmillan Cham, 01 2018.
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

[6] E. Raguseo, “Big data technologies: An empirical investigation on their
adoption, beneﬁts and risks for companies,” International Journal of
Information Management, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 187–195, 2018.
[7] R. Y. Zhong, X. Xu, E. Klotz, and S. T. Newman, “Intelligent Manufac-
turing in the Context of Industry 4.0: A Review,” Engineering, vol. 3,
no. 5, pp. 616–630, 2017.
[8] E. Hofmann and M. Rsch, “Industry 4.0 and the current status as well as
future prospects on logistics,” Computers in Industry, vol. 89, pp. 23–34,
2017.
[9] S. Mittal, M. A. Khan, D. Romero, and T. Wuest, “Smart manufacturing:
Characteristics, technologies and enabling factors,” Proceedings of the
Institution of Mechanical Engineers, Part B: Journal of Engineering
Manufacture, vol. 233, no. 5, pp. 1342–1361, 2019.
[10] P. Zheng et al., “Smart manufacturing systems for Industry 4.0: Con-
ceptual framework, scenarios, and future perspectives,” Frontiers of
Mechanical Engineering, vol. 13, pp. 137–150, June 2018.
[11] P. Rewers, A. Hamrol, K. Zywicki, M. Bozek, and W. Kulus, “Pro-
duction Leveling as an Effective Method for Production Flow Control
– Experience of Polish Enterprises,” Procedia Engineering, vol. 182,
pp. 619–626, 2017.
7th International Conference on Engineering,
Project, and Production Management.
[12] J. Gordon, S. Zhao, and P. Gretton, On productivity: concepts and
measurement. Productivity Commission Staff Research Note, Canberra,
2015 Feb.
[13] C. Syverson, “What Determines Productivity?,” NBER Working Papers
15712, National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc, Jan. 2010.
[14] S. Nallusamy, A. M. Muhammad Umarmukdhar, and R. Sugan-
thini Rekha, “A Proposed Supply Chain Model for Productivity En-
hancement in Medium Scale Foundry Industries,” International Journal
of Engineering Research in Africa, vol. 20, pp. 248–258, 1 2016.
[15] J. Liker, The Toyota Way : 14 Management Principles from the World’s
Greatest Manufacturer. Business/ Management, Mcgraw-Hill, 2003.
[16] M. Rother, Toyota Kata: Managing People for Improvement, Adaptive-
ness and Superior Results. McGraw-Hill Education, 2009.
[17] Y. Monden, Toyota Production System: An Integrated Approach to Just-
In-Time, 4th Edition.
A Productivity Press book, Taylor & Francis,
2011.
[18] R. McLachlin, “Management initiatives and just-in-time manufacturing,”
Journal of Operations Management, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 271–292, 1997.
[19] D. Romero, P. Gaiardelli, D. Powell, T. Wuest, and M. Threr, “Re-
thinking Jidoka Systems under Automation & Learning Perspectives in
the Digital Lean Manufacturing World,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 52,
no. 13, pp. 899–903, 2019.
9th IFAC Conference on Manufacturing
Modelling, Management and Control MIM 2019.
[20] H. Lasi, P. Fettke, H.-G. Kemper, T. Feld, and M. Hoffmann, “Industry
4.0,” Bus Inf Syst Eng, vol. 6, pp. 239–242, 2014.
[21] S. Kumar, P. Tiwari, and M. Zymbler, “Internet of Things is a revolu-
tionary approach for future technology enhancement: a review,” J Big
Data, vol. 6, pp. 1–21, 2019.
[22] Y. Abdelsadek and I. Kacem, “Productivity improvement based on a
decision support tool for optimization of constrained delivery problem
with time windows,” Comput. Ind. Eng., vol. 165, p. 107876, 2022.
[23] I. H. Sarker, “Machine Learning: Algorithms, Real-World Applications
and Research Directions,” SN COMPUT. SCI., vol. 2, no. 160, pp. 1–21,
2021.
[24] J. M. Rozanec, E. Trajkova, P. Dam, B. Fortuna, and D. Mladenic,
“Streaming Machine Learning and Online Active Learning for Auto-
mated Visual Inspection,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 277–
282, 2022. 14th IFAC Workshop on Intelligent Manufacturing Systems
IMS 2022.
[25] W. Vorraber, J. V. Gasser, H. Webb, D. Neubacher, and P. Url, “Assessing
augmented reality in production: remote-assisted maintenance with
Hololens,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 88, pp. 139–144, 2020.
[26] A. Szajna, R. Stryjski, W. Woniak, N. Chamier-Gliszczynski, and
M. Kostrzewski, “Assessment of Augmented Reality in Manual Wiring
Production Process with Use of Mobile AR Glasses,” Sensors (Basel,
Switzerland), vol. 20, no. 17, p. 4755, 2020.
[27] M. A. Khan, M. A. Khan, A. U. Rahman, A. W. Malik, and S. A.
Khan, “Exploiting cooperative sensing for accurate target tracking in
industrial Internet of things,” International Journal of Distributed Sensor
Networks, vol. 15, no. 12, p. 1550147719892203, 2019.
[28] L. Salhieh, M. Shehadeh, I. Abushaikha, and N. Towers, “Integrating
vehicle tracking and routing systems in retail distribution management,”
International Journal of Retail & Distribution Management, vol. 49,
no. 8, pp. 1154–1177, 2021.
[29] D. J. Nightingale and J. H. Mize, “Development of a Lean Enterprise
Transformation Maturity Model,” Inf. Knowl. Syst. Manag., vol. 3, no. 1,
pp. 15–30, 2002.
[30] M. A. Maasouman and K. Demirli, “Assessment of Lean Maturity Level
in Manufacturing Cells,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 1876–
1881, 2015. 15th IFAC Symposium onInformation Control Problems
inManufacturing.
[31] A. Schumacher, S. Erol, and W. Sihn, “A Maturity Model for Assessing
Industry 4.0 Readiness and Maturity of Manufacturing Enterprises,”
Procedia CIRP, vol. 52, pp. 161–166, 2016. The Sixth International
Conference on Changeable, Agile, Reconﬁgurable and Virtual Produc-
tion (CARV2016).
[32] M. Spaltini, F. Acerbi, M. Pinzone, S. Gusmeroli, and M. Taisch,
“Deﬁning the Roadmap towards Industry 4.0: The 6ps Maturity Model
for Manufacturing SMEs,” Procedia CIRP, vol. 105, pp. 631–636, 2022.
The 29th CIRP Conference on Life Cycle Engineering, April 4 6, 2022,
Leuven, Belgium.
[33] C. Leyh, S. Martin, and T. Schffer, “Industry 4.0 and Lean Production
a matching relationship? An analysis of selected Industry 4.0 models,”
in 2017 Federated Conference on Computer Science and Information
Systems (FedCSIS), pp. 989–993, 2017.
[34] S.-V. Buer, J. O. Strandhagen, and F. T. S. Chan, “The link between
Industry 4.0 and lean manufacturing: mapping current research and
establishing a research agenda,” International Journal of Production
Research, vol. 56, no. 8, pp. 2924–2940, 2018.
[35] L. S. Angreani, A. Vijaya, and H. Wicaksono, “Systematic Literature
Review of Industry 4.0 Maturity Model for Manufacturing and Logistics
Sectors,” Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 52, pp. 337–343, 2020. System-
Integrated Intelligence Intelligent, Flexible and Connected Systems in
Products and ProductionProceedings of the 5th International Conference
on System-Integrated Intelligence (SysInt 2020), Bremen, Germany.
[36] “Interreg prodpilot project (040-4-09-104).” http://prodpilot-plateforme.
lcoms.univ-lorraine.fr/. (Date last accessed 22-July-2022).
[37] A. Ishizaka and A. Labib, “Review of the main developments in the
analytic hierarchy process,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 38,
no. 11, pp. 14336–14345, 2011.
[38] R. W. Saaty, “The analytic hierarchy processwhat it is and how it is
used,” Mathematical Modelling, vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 161–176, 1987.
[39] V. Farrokhi, I. Kacem, and L. Pokordi, “Ranking the solution techniques
for reactive scheduling problem in operating room,” in 2014 Interna-
tional Conference on Control, Decision and Information Technologies
(CoDIT), pp. 001–006, 2014.
[40] O. Bayazit, “Use of AHP in decision-making for ﬂexible manufacturing
systems,” Journal of Manufacturing Technology Management, vol. 16,
no. 7, pp. 808–819, 2005.
[41] H. Doloi, “Application of AHP in improving construction productivity
from a management perspective,” Construction Management and Eco-
nomics, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 841–854, 2008.
[42] K. Schmidt, I. Aumann, I. Hollander, K. Damm, and J.-M. G. von der
Schulenburg, “Applying the Analytic Hierarchy Process in healthcare
research: A systematic literature review and evaluation of reporting,”
BMC medical informatics and decision making, vol. 15, p. 112, 2015.
[43] A. K. Kar, “An approach for prioritizing supplier selection criteria
through consensus building using Analytic Hierarchy Process and Fuzzy
set theory,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Signal Process-
ing, Computing and Control (ISPCC), pp. 1–6, 2013.
[44] L. He and C. Li, “A Method for Selecting ERP System Based on Fuzzy
Set Theory and Analytical Hierarchy Process,” in 2009 WRI Global
Congress on Intelligent Systems, vol. 1, pp. 329–332, 2009.
[45] P. T. Harker, “Incomplete pairwise comparisons in the analytic hierarchy
process,” Mathematical Modelling, vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 837–848, 1987.
[46] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” The Bell
System Technical Journal, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948.
[47] T. L. Saaty and L. T. Tran, “On the invalidity of fuzzifying numerical
judgments in the Analytic Hierarchy Process,” Mathematical and Com-
puter Modelling, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 962–975, 2007. Decision Making
with the Analytic Hierarchy Process and the Analytic Network Process.
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

