 
 
Autonomic Computing for Autonomous Vehicles 
Alastair Martin and Roy Sterritt 
School of Computing, Ulster University 
Belfast, Northern Ireland 
eMail: Martin-A68@ulster.ac.uk |  r.sterritt@ulster.ac.uk 
Abstract—Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) offer huge potential 
benefits to society in terms of safety, business opportunities and 
improved transport experiences. But AVs are very complex, and 
although prototypes have been successfully tested on public 
roads, major challenges remain before the technology can be 
rolled out to the mass market. This Systematization of 
Knowledge (SoK) paper looks at how the techniques and 
solutions developed in Autonomic Computing (AC) could be 
applied to AVs to help overcome some of these challenges. It 
gives some specific examples and concludes that while more 
research and development is needed, it is already clear that AC 
will need to be a central component of AV technology. 
Keywords—Autonomous Vehicle; Autonomic Computing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Autonomous Vehicles (AVs) offer huge potential benefits 
in areas, such as:  
• Safety. The World Health Organisation estimates there are 
about 1.25 million fatal traffic accidents per year, and the 
US Department of Transport estimates 93% of accidents 
are caused by driver error [21]. AVs have the potential to 
significantly reduce these figures.  
• Business opportunities. AVs have the potential to improve 
efficiency, and free up driver time for other tasks.  
• Improved consumer centric experience. AVs will facilitate 
easier access to personal transport for disabled or young 
people, autonomous parking and improve traffic 
conditions. 
AVs have been in development for several decades, and 
further development will be needed before they will be ready 
for the mass market. Section II of this paper looks at the 
history of AV technology. Section III gives an overview of 
Autonomic Computing. Section IV outlines the challenges 
still facing AVs and Section V looks at how the principles of 
AC could be applied to AVs to help overcome the challenges 
and achieve the benefits outlined above. 
II. 
HISTORY OF AUTONOMOUS VEHICLES 
An AV, sometimes referred to as a “self-driving car”, is a 
vehicle that can operate without input from a human driver. 
Early concepts proposed embedding guidance systems in 
roads. But, by the 1980s, car manufacturers and research 
universities had switched their attention to vehicles that were 
self-navigating, and this has been the main focus of attention 
since then. 
The AV industry was given a big boost when the Defence 
Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) in the United 
States organised a series of prize competitions for AVs from 
2004 – 2007 called Grand Challenges. By 2007, the event was 
called the DARPA Urban Challenge, and teams had to design 
an AV that could navigate through an urban environment, 
while obeying traffic laws and avoiding obstacles. 
The potential of AV technology for public use was starting 
to become clear, and numerous partnerships were formed 
between universities and industry to push it forward. Perhaps 
the most famous example is Stanford University’s Sebastian 
Thrun, a member of the team that won the DARPA Grand 
Challenge in 2005 [1][22]. He went on to co-found Google’s 
Self-Driving Car project in 2009. This is often seen as the start 
of the commercial phase of AV development.  
By 2016, the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE 
International) had defined a 6-level scale of automation, 
known as SAE J3016 [8]. 
• Level 0 – No automation. The driver is responsible for 
being aware of the environment, and for all driving tasks 
on a continuous basis. Some warning and emergency 
assist systems do fall into this category, e.g., park distance 
control, and anti-lock brakes.  
• Level 1 – Driver assistance. Some tasks involving speed 
and steering are executed by the car, e.g., Adaptive Cruise 
Control (ACC) and Lane Keeping Assist (LKA). But the 
driver is responsible for all other aspects of driving.  
• Level 2 – Partial Automation. The driver can “take their 
hands of the wheel” for some operations, e.g., Advanced 
automatic parking and Traffic Jam Assist. But the driver 
must still activate and deactivate the systems, and must 
monitor the environment at all times and be prepared to 
take full control at any point. 
• Level 3 – Conditional Automation. The AV can manage all 
aspects of driving and safety in some circumstances, e.g., 
“Highway Chauffeur”. The driver does not need to 
constantly monitor the driving tasks, but does need to be 
able to take over control at short notice if conditions 
require it. 
• Level 4 – High Automation. Similar to Level 3, but does 
not need the human driver to provide a fall back because 
the AV can slow or safely stop if necessary. 
• Level 5 – Full Automation. The AV is capable of 
performing all driving tasks in all conditions. A human 
driver does not need to be present. 
 
Cars at level 1 are now widely available. Cars with level 2 
capabilities are also on sale, although some functionality may 
be disabled, depending on local regulations – it can be 
switched on via “over the air update”. Vehicles with higher 
levels of autonomous behaviour are still in development. The 
latest Gartner hype cycle for Connected Vehicles and Smart 
Mobility (Figure 1) shows many of the key enabling 
technologies are in the trough of disillusionment. The SAE [7] 
is upbeat about this, suggesting it means that “the hard work 
of commercializing many significant technologies is 
underway. Over the next five years or so, many technologies 
on this Hype Cycle will become productive parts of the 
automotive and smart-mobility ecosystem.” 
III. 
OVERVIEW OF AUTONOMIC COMPUTING 
Computer systems are becoming increasingly complex, 
and also becoming increasingly important to people and 
businesses. This leads to the twin problems of increased costs 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
of managing and maintaining the systems, and the increased 
cost implications of faults and failures. To address these twin 
challenges, the concept of Autonomic Computing was 
proposed, where “autonomicity implies self-managing” [2].  
The goals of AC are to reduce the costs of managing and 
maintaining complex systems and reducing the likelihood and 
impact of faults and issues. 
 
 
Figure 1. The Gartner™ Hype Cycle for AVs, 2020 [7]. 
 
“Self-managing” is often split into four autonomic system 
objectives [3]: 
• Self-Configuration – the system re-adjusts itself to support 
a change in circumstances or new objectives. 
• Self-Healing – the system can recover automatically when 
a fault occurs, or proactively avoid health problems. 
• Self-Optimisation – the system can measure current 
performance, adjust to improve and react to policy 
changes. 
• Self-Protection – the system can defend itself against 
accidental or malicious attacks, is aware of threats and 
can defend itself against them. 
To achieve these objectives, an AC system needs to be 
self-aware, aware of its environment, and have the ability to 
monitor and adjust. An AC system, and in particular the 
policies that drive monitoring and adjustment, can be designed 
and built, or can learn and adapt using AI. 
IBM did some of the initial work on AC. In 2003, they 
proposed the idea of an autonomic element, consisting of a 
managed element and an autonomic manager [4], see Figure 
2. The autonomic element runs a continuous control loop that 
Monitors the managed element via sensors and Analyses, 
Plans and Executes updates based on Knowledge about the 
element. This is known as MAPE-K. 
 
  
Figure 2. MAPE-K control loop [4]. 
There have been many impressive advancements in AC 
since the initial proposals in the early 2000s, but the breadth 
of the original vision, and the ever increasing complexity of 
computer systems, means there is still much to do [5]. There 
is a balanced review on some of the early successes of AC 
versus the hype in [6]. This “hype-cycle” (a term coined by 
Gartner) is common to many areas of technology (including 
AVs – see Figure 1 – as well as AC). 
IV. 
CURRENT STATE OF AV TECHNOLOGY 
An Autonomous Vehicle architecture is made up of three 
functional blocks [21]:   
• Data Acquisition. This can be through sensors like 
RADAR, LIDAR and camera, and via communication 
with other cars or the internet.  
• Data processing. This takes in the data and uses it for 
situational and environmental awareness. It then merges 
that with navigation and path planning logic to determine 
the next actions to take.  
• Actuation. Carry out the actions to ensure a safe and 
smooth journey. 
There are two basic architectural approaches [23]: 
• Centralised System Architecture, where the sensors and 
data inputs feed into a single computation unit, which in 
turn drives the actuators. 
• Distributed System Architecture, where functional 
subcomponents of the overall system are implemented in 
separate local units, and are connected using a shared 
communications bus.  
The centralised approach is relatively simple in theory, 
with all logic collocated and no communications delays to 
manage. But an overall AV solution is very complex, and a 
centralised approach is difficult to build and test 
incrementally. There is also a single point of failure (the 
central computation unit) and it is difficult and expensive to 
design and build a backup. 
In contrast, the components in a distributed system can be 
designed and tested separately, and can be removed, replaced 
or upgraded independently. The system can also be made 
more robust to point failures, and redundancy can be built in 
more easily and at lower cost.  
In spite of rapid progress, and broad consensus on the best 
architecture, numerous challenges still need to be overcome 
before AVs will be ready for commercial roll out. These 
include:  
• Software reliability. A recent Which? report [9] found that 
electric car manufacturer Tesla – a major AV innovator – 
was the least reliable car brand in the UK in 2021. And 
most of the faults reported were “software problems” and 
not problems with the electric motors or batteries. This 
suggests that major improvements in the design, 
implementation and operation of vehicle software 
systems will be needed before more complex, safety 
critical AV solutions can be launched. 
• Interpretable and Verifiably Safe solutions. AVs must be 
safe and efficient. Rule based systems, designed manually 
by humans, are explainable and testable, but tend to 
behave overly cautiously. On the other hand, solutions 
based on machine learning often give better results but 
are hard to explain and do not offer any formal safety 
guarantees.  
• Reliability of Communications. AVs require fast and 
reliable communications, and will place large and unique 
demands on the emerging 5G network. 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
• Legal and regulatory issues. Some countries and states 
allow limited testing of AVs on the public road, but the 
wider legal and regulatory framework for public use of 
AVs still needs to be sorted out. In particular, insurance 
and legal liability in the case of accidents remain difficult 
areas.  
• Data Privacy. AVs collect huge amounts of data about 
their own vehicle and other road users, and this can lead 
to complex ethical issues. Two examples highlighted in 
[11] are: 
• 
If an AV detects another car that is owned by a driver 
that the insurance company knows has had multiple 
accidents, should the AV take an alternative route to 
avoid the risky car? 
• 
If an AV detects another car performing a dangerous 
or illegal manoeuvre, should it report it to the police? 
Or to their insurance company? 
 
These issues need more debate, and potentially some sort  
      of industry wide ethical framework, to resolve. 
• Public perception. AVs are already much safer than 
human controlled cars in terms of accidents per million 
kilometres driven. But there have been some high profile 
incidents that have dented public confidence in computer 
based solutions. These include one in 2016, when a Tesla 
in automatic mode crashed into a truck killing the driver, 
and one in 2018, when an Uber autonomous car hit and 
killed a pedestrian [13]. 
 
V. 
THE FUTURE – APPLYING AC PRINCIPLES TO AVS 
Autonomous 
Vehicles 
overlap 
with 
several 
big 
technology trends, including Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
Internet of Things (IoT), mobile communications (5G), 
security and personal data. And looking at the issues outlined 
in the previous section, it is apparent that the principles of 
Autonomic Computing would also be crucial to making AV 
technology a success.  
A recent Institution of Engineering and Technology (IET) 
comment article [10] highlighted the importance of “Start 
Early and Think Big” when it comes to getting the benefits of 
automation. We need to spot the systemic issues early and 
address them before the implementation approach becomes 
irreversible. To ensure the right strategy, we first need to 
understand any commercial constraints, such as cost, attitude 
to risk and regulatory restrictions. We then draw out the high-
level technical requirements and constraints, and feed those 
into the core solution.  
The similarities between AV technology and AC are 
striking. At the core of both is the need to collect data on their 
environment, interpret that data and then plan and take 
appropriate action. Both have evolved towards a distributed 
architecture, and to using Artificial Intelligence (AI) to 
improve the analyzing and planning stages of the process. 
And both have worked to balance the potential of machine 
learning against the need for explainable and verifiable 
solutions. It therefore makes sense that AC should be at the 
core of AV design, and that AVs should look to AC for ideas 
and inspiration. 
The following subsections outline some future AV trends 
and possible areas where AC principles could add value. 
A. Internet of Things (IoT) 
Autonomic Computing was originally proposed for 
relatively static systems like computer networks in an office, 
or the nodes in a telecommunications network. More recently 
researchers have looked at how to apply AC techniques to the 
more dynamic architecture of the IoT [14]. An AV can be 
thought of as a complex object in the IoT, and some of the 
principles being considered for IoT in general will also apply 
to AVs. 
In the original context of AC, the managed resources were 
typically clusters of machines in a grid, application servers, 
routers, and so on. An IoT environment is made up of a far 
wider range of heterogeneous devices, which may often be 
mobile. And the number of devices and their arrangement can 
be highly dynamic. This is particularly true of AVs, where 
the AV can be talking to a wide, and rapidly changing, variety 
of AVs and roadside devices as it drives along. Similarly, the 
autonomic managers in the original AC context were often 
software components in a relatively centralized solution, 
whereas in an IoT environment the autonomic managers are 
more likely to be distributed across many different types of 
devices. 
This leads to new challenges, including: 
• 
How to implement and manage device to device 
communication.  
• 
Additional self.* objectives, like self-adaptation and 
self-organization, are more important in a dynamic 
IoT context. 
• 
Decision making is more likely to be de-centralized. 
• 
Security and device identification. 
• 
Failure recovery and adaptation strategies will be 
different, because IoT environments are often 
remote with fewer options for remote human 
intervention. 
AVs should study and adopt AC techniques developed for 
IoT. 
B. 5G Mobile Communications 
AVs are a classic example of the IoT goal that envisages 
the interconnection of objects that have historically been 
offline. The term Vehicle to Everything (V2x) has been 
coined to cover this interconnectivity, including Vehicle to 
Vehicle (V2V), Vehicle to roadside infrastructure (V2I) and 
Vehicle to the internet, including links to backend systems 
like car manufacturers and insurance companies (V2N).  
All this communication requires bandwidth and flexibility 
and is increasingly being enabled using 5G networks. A study 
[12] of one million connected cars, found that “connected 
cars have distinct sets of characteristics, including those 
similar to regular smart phones (e.g. overall diurnal pattern), 
those similar to IoT devices (e.g. mostly short network 
sessions), but also some that belong to neither type (e.g. high 
mobility)”. 
AVs will place new demands on 5G networks, which in 
turn will place new demands on the autonomic management 
of those networks. Research is already underway on how to 
use 
“Machine 
Learning 
for 
Autonomic 
Network 
Management in a Connected Cars Scenario” [15] to address 
these new challenges. One critical factor for AVs is 
performance. Network degradations could impact safety, so 
the 5G autonomic management systems needs to detect this 
in advance and take action, for example by being aware of 
rush hour traffic patterns, or more irregular hot spots caused 
by road works or accidents and adjusting 5G capacity in 
anticipation.  
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
C. Safety Critical Engineering and MAPQE-K 
There is a view that Autonomic Computing is not an 
entirely new concept, but is related to existing concepts like 
dependability, and builds on existing engineering principles 
like fault tolerance and safety critical systems standards and 
design [19]. 
Safety and dependability are critical considerations in the 
aircraft industry, and the increasing complexity of aircraft 
suggests that the self.* properties of AC could be desirable in 
avionics software platforms. But the rigid aircraft 
certification processes, and the current requirements for static 
and pre-determined behaviour, are at odds with the flexible, 
adaptive nature of AC.  
One paper [20] proposes a novel architecture that 
modifies the typical AC MAPE-K approach by adding in a 
“Qualifier” step – creating MAP-QE-K. Safety critical 
aircraft systems are based on Design Assurance Levels 
(DAL). The proposal is that the M, A and P steps could be 
low-level DAL, but the new Qualifier step along with 
Execute would be high level DAL and would act as a robust 
gatekeeper for any changes being carried out on the managed 
element. By isolating the complex MAP stages in a low DAL 
partition, with only the simpler Q and E steps requiring high 
DAL, it is hoped that an acceptable solution could be reached. 
The updated architecture is outlined in Figure 3. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. MAP-QE-K with DALs (from [20]). 
 
A similar approach could be considered for AVs, to help 
balance the often-competing demands of verifiable and 
explainable solutions and acceptable levels of performance. 
D. Reinforcement Learning 
AVs must be safe and efficient. Manually designed rule-
based systems are explainable and verifiable but need to act 
conservatively to ensure safety. On the other hand, Machine 
Learning (ML) based solutions often give better results but 
are hard to explain and do not offer any formal safety 
guarantees.  
One paper [16] looked at a novel form of Reinforcement 
Learning (a type of ML) that can generate safe and efficient 
policies, while also being easy to interpret and open to formal 
proofs of safety. The paper focuses on the specific scenario 
of an AV over-taking other vehicles, but the “Verifiable 
Software Reinforcement Learning” approach proposed could 
be adapted to other challenges in AV, including how to use 
AC principles in an AV context. 
E. Other areas 
There are numerous other areas where AC techniques 
(both new and adapted from other domains) could be applied 
to AVs. Here are three examples. 
• 
Security is a big concern for AVs, including cyber 
security, denial of service attacks (DOS), and protection 
of personal information. There has been some work done 
in this area, for example the “COSCA framework for 
CONseptualising Secure Cars” [25], but more work is 
needed. AVs could potentially adopt AC techniques like 
ALice (Autonomic License Signal) for positively 
identifying actors. 
• 
Fix Over the Air (FOTA). This is already possible in 
some modern cars (e.g. Tesla), to both fix problems, and 
to enable new (potentially paid for) features. AVs are 
likely to require much more interaction with the 
manufacturer and other businesses and authorities, for 
example to update the vision system to recognise new 
road signs, and to update the AC MAPE-K control loop 
with new strategies. 
• 
Swarm intelligence and AC have been studied in the 
context of space exploration [17]. Some of the concepts 
could be applied to AVs [18], including ideas around 
cooperation (e.g. to improve traffic flow) and sharing of 
information (e.g. about slippery road surfaces). Other 
proposals (e.g. self-destructing a faulty satellite) might 
not be so appropriate in an AV context. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
Autonomous Vehicle technology is hugely complex and 
ambitious, but there are big potential rewards in terms of 
safety, 
business 
opportunities 
and 
better 
customer 
experiences. 
There is a lot of overlap between AVs and other big 
technical areas, particularly Artificial Intelligence (AI), 
Internet of Things (IoT) and Fifth Generation Mobile 
Networks (5G). To this list we should add Autonomous & 
Autonomic Computing (Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 4. the complex interactions and overlaps between five technical 
areas. 
 
This paper has outlined the current state of AVs and some 
of the challenges that still need to be overcome before AVs 
are ready for “prime time”. These include technical, ethical 
and legal challenges. The paper has also highlighted the 
similarities and overlaps between AV technology and AC, and 
has identified several areas where AC techniques and 
practices could help address AV challenges (and in some cases 
there has already been progress). Many more examples exist, 
and more research and development are needed, but it is clear 
that AC principles will need to be a central part of AV 
technology if it is to be a success. 
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This paper was produced as part of COM760 Autonomic 
Computing & Robotics for Ulster University’s MSc in 
Artificial Intelligence. 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Seetharaman, A. Lakhotia, and E. P. Blasch, "Unmanned vehicles 
come of age: The DARPA grand challenge," in Computer, vol. 39, no. 
12, pp. 26-29, Dec. 2006, https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2006.447 
[2] R. Sterritt and M. G. Hinchey, “Why Computer-Based Systems Should 
be Autonomic”, In Proc. 12th Annual IEEE International Conference 
and Workshop on the Engineering of Computer Based Systems (ECBS 
2005) - Greenbelt, MD, USA, pp. 406-412, Apr. 2005. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/ECBS.2005.75 
[3] M. G. Hinchey and R. Sterritt, “Self-managing software”, IEEE 
Computer, 
vol. 
39, 
no. 
2, 
pp.107-109, 
2006. 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2006.69 
[4] J. O. Kephart and D. M. Chess, “The vision of autonomic computing”, 
IEEE Computer, vol. 36, no.1, pp. 41–50, 2003. 
[5] S. Dobson, R. Sterritt, P. Nixon, and M. Hinchey, "Fulfilling the Vision 
of Autonomic Computing", IEEE Computer, 43(1), pp. 35-41, 2010, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/MC.2010.14. 
[6] R. Sterritt and M. G. Hinchey, “Birds of a Feather Session: Autonomic 
Computing: Panacea or Poppycock?”, IEEE Workshop on the 
Engineering of Autonomic Systems (EASe 2005) at 12th Annual IEEE 
International Conference and Workshop on the Engineering of 
Computer Based Systems (ECBS 2005) - Greenbelt, MD, USA, Apr 
2005, pp. 335-341, doi:10.1109/ECBS.2005.22 
[7] B. Visnic, “2020 Gartner Hype Cycle for Connected Vehicles and 
Smart Mobility”, Society Automotive Engineers International, 
(sae.org), 2020. [retrieved Oct. 2023]. 
[8] SAE, “J3016C: Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms Related to 
Driving Automation Systems for On-Road Motor Vehicles”, Society 
Automotive Engineers International (sae.org), 2021. [retrieved Oct. 
2023]. 
[9] J. Loughran, “Electric vehicle reliability survey paints bad picture for 
Tesla owners”, E&T Magazine (theiet.org), Engineering & 
Technology, 3 March 2022. 
[10] M. Cheah, “Want to benefit from automation? Start early, and think 
big”, E&T Magazine (theiet.org), Engineering & Technology, 10 
March 2022. 
[11] R. Zallone, “Artificial Intelligence vs Autonomous Cars vs General 
Data Protection Regulation”, 2020 AEIT International Conference of 
Electrical and Electronic Technologies for Automotive (AEIT 
AUTOMOTIVE), 
2020. 
Doi:10.23919/AEITAUTOMOTIVE50086.2020.9307410. 
[12] C. E. Andrade et al., “Connected cars in cellular network: a 
measurement study”, In Proceedings of the 2017 Internet Measurement 
Conference (IMC '17). Association for Computing Machinery, New 
York, NY, USA, pp235–241, 2017. Doi:10.1145/3131365.3131403 
[13] D. Wakabayashi, "Uber's Self-Driving Cars Were Struggling before 
Arizona Crash." 
The 
New 
York 
Times, 23 Mar. 2018, 
www.nytimes.com/2018/03/23/technology/uber-self-driving-cars-
arizona.html [retrieved Oct. 2023] 
[14] M. Tahir, Q. Mamoon Ashraf, and M. Dabbagh, "Towards Enabling 
Autonomic Computing in IoT Ecosystem," 2019 IEEE Intl Conf on 
Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing, Intl Conf on 
Pervasive Intelligence and Computing, Intl Conf on Cloud and Big 
Data Computing, Intl Conf on Cyber Science and Technology 
Congress (DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech), 2019, pp. 646-
651, doi:10.1109/DASC/PiCom/CBDCom/CyberSciTech.2019.00122 
[15] G. Velez, M. Quartulli, A. Martin, O. Otaegui, and H. Assem, 
“Machine Learning for Autonomic Network Management in a 
Connected Cars Scenario”, Communication Technologies for 
Vehicles. Nets4Cars/Nets4Trains/Nets4Aircraft 2016. LNCS, vol. 
9669. Springer, doi:10.1007/978-3-319-38921-9_12. 
[16] L. M. Schmidt, G. Kontes, A. Plinge, and C. Mutschler, "Can You 
Trust Your Autonomous Car? Interpretable and Verifiably Safe 
Reinforcement Learning," 2021 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium 
(IV), 2021, pp. 171-178. doi:10.1109/IV48863.2021.9575328. 
[17] R. Sterritt, "Apoptotic computing: Programmed death by default for 
computer-based systems", IEEE Computer, Vol. 44, No.1, pp. 59-65, 
Jan. 2011, doi: 10.1109/MC.2011.5.  
[18] Y. Anand and R. Ajithkumar, "Autonomous Car With Swarm 
Intelligence", 2019 2nd International Conference on Intelligent 
Computing, Instrumentation and Control Technologies (ICICICT), 
2019, pp. 1659-1662, doi: 10.1109/ICICICT46008.2019.8993301. 
[19] R. Sterritt and M. Hinchey, "Autonomicity - an antidote for 
complexity?", 2005 IEEE Computational Systems Bioinformatics 
Conference - Workshops (CSBW'05), 2005, pp. 283-291, doi: 
10.1109/CSBW.2005.28. 
[20] B. Annighoefer, J. Reinhart, M. Brunner, and B. Schulz, "The Concept 
of an Autonomic Avionics Platform and the Resulting Software 
Engineering Challenges", 2021 International Symposium on Software 
Engineering for Adaptive and Self-Managing Systems (SEAMS), 
2021, pp. 179-185, doi:10.1109/SEAMS51251.2021.00031. 
[21] R. Hussain and S. Zeadally, "Autonomous Cars: Research Results, 
Issues, and Future Challenges", IEEE Communications Surveys & 
Tutorials, 
21(2), 
pp. 
1275-1313, 
2019, 
doi:10.1109/COMST.2018.2869360. 
[22] M. Buehler, K. Iagnemma, and S. Singh, eds. “The 2005 DARPA grand 
challenge: the great robot race”, vol. 36. Springer, 2007. 
[23] K. Jo, J. Kim, D. Kim, C. Jang, and M. Sunwoo, "Development of 
Autonomous Car—Part I: Distributed System Architecture and 
Development Process," IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 
61(12), pp. 7131-7140, Dec. 2014, doi:10.1109/TIE.2014.2321342. 
 
 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

