Sensorization and Optimization of Industrial Graphic Arts Machinery Using Artiﬁcial
Intelligence Techniques
Angel Luis Garrido
University of Zaragoza
Henneo Media
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: garrido@unizar.es
Jonathan Rodr´ıguez
Technical Ofﬁce Manager
Henneo Print
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: jonathan.rodriguez@henneoprint.com
Mariano S´anchez
Maintenance Head
Henneo Print
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: msanchez@henneoprint.com
Jos´e Manuel Ant´on
Production Manager
Henneo Print
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: jmanton@henneoprint.com
Roberto Cast´an
Development Department
Hiberus Tech.
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: rcastan@hiberus.com
Susana Sangiao
Development Department
Hiberus Tech.
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: ssangiao@hiberus.com
Carlos Bobed
IIS Department
I3A, University of Zaragoza
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: cbobed@unizar.es
Eduardo Mena
IIS Department
I3A, University of Zaragoza
Zaragoza, Spain
Email: emena@unizar.es
Abstract—Today, manufacturing companies have technologies
that allow them to monitor the different processes carried out in
their facilities. These technologies, based on Real-Time Operating
Systems and Internet of Things paradigms, are mature, and their
application is widespread in different sectors. The problems come
when factories own old machinery and legacy systems, and when
the processes are poorly automated, which is a typical scenario
in the graphic arts industry. To solve this situation, we propose
a comprehensive management framework that obtains real-time
information through Sensing systems and Artiﬁcial Intelligence
technologies. The advantages obtained are the uniﬁcation of infor-
mation, the simpliﬁcation of obtaining information by different
departments, the automation of processes, and the support in
planning tasks. We are currently testing our proposal in a real
environment with promising results.
Keywords-Sensors;
Knowledge-Based
Systems;
Internet
of
Things; Machine Learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, manufacturing companies have technology that
allows them to monitor the processes performed in their
facilities. These technologies, based on Real-Time Operating
Systems (RTOS) and Internet of Things (IoT) paradigms, are
in a mature state, and their use is already being normalised by
factories from diverse sectors [1]. The problems come when
a series of circumstances occur, such as those listed below:
• Factories with old machinery.
• Machines and information systems without connection
among them in the same manufacturing tasks.
• Presence of manual and little automated processes.
In those cases, when it is necessary to modernise the pro-
duction systems, there is no choice but to carry out retroﬁtting
work [2], which involves the replacement of existing parts or
the incorporation of new ones to improve the characteristics of
the machine or device. Ontologies and knowledge bases are
often found in the literature as common resources for inte-
grating legacy industrial systems with current systems [3] [4].
Still, as far as we know, there are no application studies in the
graphic arts sector.
Precisely, if we focus on the graphic arts sector, in the
speciﬁc scenario of printing publications with large rotary
machines, the three situations mentioned above usually come
together [5]. The life cycles of the machinery are very long,
so it is easy to ﬁnd rotary presses that are 20 years old
or more, in perfect operation, logically dragging with them
old computer systems that are complex to interconnect with
current systems. The disadvantage is that the electronic and
computer systems are based on legacy systems, and when
they were manufactured, the RTOS and IoT paradigms were
barely developed. Furthermore, many of the processes in these
factories are still semi-automated, or even manual.
To work in this environment, we propose a comprehensive
management framework that obtains information in real-time
from both the old machinery and the legacy systems, through
sensorization techniques and Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) tech-
nologies such as semantics management tools and machine
learning. We are currently testing our proposal in collaboration
with Henneo Print [6], a signiﬁcant company in Spain devoted
to printing all kinds of publications. The rest of this paper
is organized as follows. Section II describes the graphic arts
working context. Section III depicts the proposed architecture,
and ﬁnally, Section IV addresses the conclusions and future
work.
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

II. GRAPHIC ARTS CONTEXT
There are two types of technologies when printing publica-
tions with large rotary presses: the so-called ”coldset” (with
cold ink) and the so-called ”heatset” (hot ink, because a press-
dryer intervenes in the process). The coldset technology is used
to print newspapers, and heatset is used to print leaﬂets, books,
and magazines, products that require a higher quality.
In the coldset stage, job planning is relatively simple, since
publications generally have a ﬁxed periodicity (daily, weekly,
monthly, etc.) and very stable delivery windows. But, in the
heatset stage, planning is fully variable as it is speciﬁed by
customers. So, any delay entails a critical modiﬁcation of
the factory’s global planning. It is a much more dynamic
and unstable work environment, and many factors come into
play, so decision-making becomes complicated, and tools are
necessary to assist managers in their daily work, both in terms
of machine maintenance and production planning.
Therefore, today’s challenge in this sector is to computerise
heatset processes at printing plants by incorporating RTOS
and IoT technologies on old machinery and systems. In other
words, we need suitable information to assist complex tasks
such as planning tasks or maintenance reporting.
III. ARCHITECTURE
In Fig. 1, we can see the different elements of the proposed
architecture and the relations among them:
Figure 1. Overview of the proposed architecture.
Through retroﬁtting techniques and incorporating speciﬁc
sensors, raw information is obtained from different aspects
of the press: speed, temperature, electrical consumption, etc.
At the same time, the most relevant information from the
other systems existing in the factory has been considered:
the Manufacturing Enterprise System (MES), the Enterprise
Resource Planning (ERP), and speciﬁc systems, which, in most
cases, are legacy systems. All the data stored on those systems
are collected from their respective databases by “Heat-Seer”,
an AI system, which, guided by the historical information
and business rules contained in a speciﬁc knowledge base,
is capable of performing the following tasks:
1) To assist the technical ofﬁce in its planning tasks, sim-
ulating different production scenarios. It uses business
rules and information obtained through machine learning
from historical production data.
2) To automate data collection tasks and reporting for the
production and maintenance departments.
3) To show Key Performance Indicators (KPI), the critical
quantiﬁable indicators of progress toward an intended
result. In this case, business results.
After passing the sensorization and information collection
phase, the architecture implementation and testing work is
underway, along with the development of the AI tool.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The contribution of this work is to propose a methodology
for the problem of optimizing production tasks such as re-
porting, planning or maintenance when using legacy systems
and machinery in the graphic arts sector. The advantages
obtained will be the uniﬁcation of information that allows
data exploitation by different departments, the automation of
processes, and the creation of new tools that will enable, for
example, the planning and simulation of varying manufactur-
ing scenarios. In future work, we have planned to integrate
the knowledge base with a conversational system that allows
operators to resolve doubts regarding work procedures using
natural language.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is being supported by the Heat-Seer Project (no.
22021/C005/00148375) - Action co-funded by Red.es and the
European Union through the European Regional Development
Fund (ERDF), by the Spanish project PID2020-113903RB-I00
(AEI/FEDER, UE), and by DGA/FEDER.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Jiang, S. Yin, J. Dong, and O. Kaynak, “A review on soft sensors
for monitoring, control, and optimization of industrial processes,” IEEE
Sensors Journal, vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 12 868–12 881, 2020.
[2] A. Alqoud, D. Schaefer, and J. Milisavljevic-Syed, “Industry 4.0: a
systematic review of legacy manufacturing system digital retroﬁtting,”
Manufacturing Review, vol. 9, p. 32, 2022.
[3] G. Bitsch, P. Senjic, and J. Askin, “Integration of legacy systems to cyber-
physical production systems using semantic adapters,” Procedia CIRP,
vol. 118, pp. 259–263, 2023.
[4] B. A. Mozzaquatro, R. Melo, C. Agostinho, and R. Jardim-Goncalves,
“An ontology-based security framework for decision-making in industrial
systems,” in 2016 4th International Conference on Model-Driven Engi-
neering and Software Development (MODELSWARD).
IEEE, 2016, pp.
779–788.
[5] S. Baray, S. Hameed, and A. Badii, “Analysing the factors responsible
for effectiveness of implementation and integration of enterprise resource
planning systems in the printing industry,” Journal of enterprise informa-
tion management, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 139–161, 2008.
[6] https:\\henneoprint.com, [last access Nov. 2023].
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

