Application of Three-Phase Methodology for Retrofit 4.0 in Legacy Industrial 
Plants 
Andrei Tchepurnoy Machado, Renan Yamaguti, Raphael Montali Assumpção, Omar Carvalho Branquinho, Paulo 
Cardieri 
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Campinas, Brazil 
a263837@dac.unicamp.br, renan.o.yamaguti@gmail.com, r075126@dac.unicamp.br, omar.branquinho@gmail.com, 
cardieri@unicamp.br 
 
Abstract—This work presents the non-invasive Retrofit 4.0 in a 
metal-mechanical 
industry 
employing 
the 
Three-phase 
Methodology (TpM) for Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT). 
Retrofitting 4.0 involves integrating legacy industrial machinery 
into a real-time monitoring environment using a data network, 
aligning with Industry 4.0 principles. The primary objective of 
this endeavor is to monitor production performance and 
anticipate plant enhancements through real-time monitoring of 
machine operation cycles and Receiver Signal Strength 
Indicator (RSSI) variations. These variations are tied to the 
movement of sector operators' quantities. Due to the absence of 
an online monitoring system, certain production processes 
suffer from information gaps and reliance on manual 
production data entry.  Using the TpM, a Proof of Concept 
(PoC) was conducted with two motivations: monitoring machine 
operating cycles through current sensors and evaluating 
personnel 
movement 
through 
RSSI. 
For 
the 
PoC 
implementation, a wireless sensor network was designed for 
data transmission, without the need to alter the manufacturing 
processes, ensuring non-invasive monitoring. The results for the 
operating cycle and operator movement were effective, 
integrating this industry and its legacy into the IIoT context, 
enabling a non-invasive Retrofit 4.0 in conjunction with a 
guiding methodology.  
Keywords- TpM Three-phase Methodology (TpM), Proof of 
Concept (PoC), Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT), Wireless 
Sensor Network (WSN), Key Performance Indicator (KPI), 
Receiver Signal Strength Indicator (RSSI), Computer Numeric 
Control (CNC). 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
This paper addresses the challenge faced by legacy 
industries in Brazil and other countries, which cannot fully 
adopt Industry 4.0 due to the cost and complexity of replacing 
existing systems with IIoT solutions. In Brazil, there are 
extensive legacy industrial complexes that are gradually 
transitioning to Industry 4.0 [13], with a significant need for 
modernization without replacing the existing infrastructure. 
Many of these plants are highly efficient and effectively 
deliver the desired final products or services, but with some 
hidden production performance data mismatches sometimes, 
enforcing the needs of an evasive approach in many cases to 
attend the correct 4.0 transition. Despite meeting their 
demands, these industries have an underlying need to 
integrate into IIoT for advantages such as productivity and 
efficiency. The article proposes the adaptation of the TpM [1] 
[2] for a non-invasive Retrofit 4.0, aiming to develop an IIoT 
solution through a Proof of Concept in a metal-mechanical 
sector company.  
 
The approach focuses on operational improvements 
without altering any manufacturing processes, highlighting 
the relevance of IIoT for industrial efficiency. The article 
presents a structured framework, including conceptual 
review, proposal, description of the proof of concept, 
execution steps, results analysis and conclusion, the objective 
is to emphasize the importance of IIoT in enhancing financial 
outcomes in modern industries. The case study involves 
establishing a connection between a legacy sector of an 
industrial plant and a 4.0 industrial environment. 
This connection aims to address two Key Performance 
Indicators (KPIs): monitoring machine cycles through 
specific current draw motor values and observing RSSI 
variations caused by personnel movement that affect signal 
propagation. 
This paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we 
explain the Three-phase Methodology and the industrial 
scenario. In Section III, we detail our proposal for 
methodology chain application in Retrofit 4.0 through PoC. 
Section IV describes the PoC with TpM chaining and 
motivations. In Section V, we present the results analysis. We 
conclude our work in Section VI. 
A. Related work 
The Industry 4.0 revolution is in full swing, and many 
traditional industrial facilities are on the path to 
transformation through Retrofit 4.0. Below are some 
significant research examples focusing on the modernization 
of legacy industrial plants. 
Article [9] describes the transition from a traditional 
production line to Industry 4.0 using logical connectors, 
which function as management interfaces. This retrofit, 
combining both hardware and software, is invasive and might 
not be suitable for all industries. 
Article [4] highlights the use of energy sensors to monitor 
KPI´s in traditional CNC machines. This data is wirelessly 
transmitted and can be monitored in real-time through a 
mobile app. 
Article [10] focuses on monitoring drilling machines, 
capturing data such as rotation speed and drilling depth. The 
data is converted into packets and transmitted to an edge 
device on a wireless sensor network. 
II. 
THE THREE-PHASE METHODOLOGY AND THE 
INDUSTRIAL SCENARIO CONSIDERED 
In this section, we review some concepts related to our 
proposal. We begin by reviewing TpM as a methodology for 
153
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

IoT solutions [1] [6]. We adapt this approach to the specific 
monitoring needs of the industry targeted in the proof of 
concept. Next, we examine the industry's structure as defined 
by [5], encompassing the levels of enterprise and factory. 
This analysis served as a basis for applying TpM to the non-
invasive Retrofit 4.0, facilitating the industry's transition to 
IIoT. 
A. Three-phase Methodology – TpM 
The Three-phase Methodology was created for the 
development of IoT solutions. However, it is not designed for 
IIoT and is a generic proposal not directly suitable for 
Retrofit 4.0. The methodology segments the analysis into 
three phases: 
Phase 1 - Business Consideration: It establishes the 
fundamentals for a viable IoT solution, detailing the business 
and identifying needs. A 6-level reference model [8] is 
adopted, differentiating between streaming and static data 
[3]. 
Phase 2 - Requirements Gathering: In this phase, the 
focus is on collecting requirements for an IoT solution 
aligned with the business needs. A "top-down" approach is 
adopted, considering display, abstraction, storage, edge, 
connectivity, and data acquisition. 
Phase 3 - Implementation: In this phase, the IoT solution 
is implemented, adopting the appropriate technologies to 
meet the requirements defined in Phase 2. Aspects related to 
variable analysis, connectivity, edge elements, storage, and 
the creation of a platform for data display and analysis are 
addressed. 
B. Industry Structure 
This work proposes an approach that combines a 
methodology for developing IoT solutions with the industrial 
structure outlined by [5]. The industrial structure is divided 
into Enterprise Level, responsible for strategic management, 
and Factory Level, where production processes and quality 
control take place, shown in Figure 1. 
 
 
Figure 1. Division of the Production system [5]. 
 
 
The IoT solution aims to drive the efficiency and growth 
of the company, benefiting it with increased revenues through 
internal investment, encompassing manufacturing processes 
and impacting the entire organization. 
III. 
PROPOSAL 
This paper proposes a PoC for the application of the TPM 
to enable an IoT solution through Retrofit 4.0 in industrial 
environments. The focus is to demonstrate how this approach 
can enhance revenues at the enterprise level. The 
combination of the TPM with IoT within the context of 
Retrofit 4.0 aims to optimize manufacturing operations, 
improve efficiency, and drive growth in business revenues, 
the TpM phases are incorporated, and the scalability of this 
methodology allows for the organized inclusion of new 
projects. The segmentation of project phases creates a 
connection with the divisions of the production system 
defined by [5]. This exemplifies the collaborative utilization 
of the TPM in deploying Retrofit 4.0 to drive business 
expansion through IoT. 
The segmentation of project phases using the TPM 
establishes a connection between Figure 1 and the divisions 
of the production system according to [5], as illustrated in 
Figure 2.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Incorporating TpM project phases into company areas [1]. 
 
The proposal for Retrofit 4.0 in the industry combines the 
concepts of the production system [5], the IoT reference 
model [3], and the TpM. 
In Figure 2, Phase 1 is associated with the enterprise level, 
along with part of Phases 2 and 3 up to storage at the 
enterprise level. The remaining portions of Phases 1, 2, and 3 
are connected to the factory level, encompassing assets, 
experts, edge elements, connectivity, sensors, and actuators. 
Phase 1 establishes the foundation for Phases 2 and 3 of 
Retrofit 4.0. The process begins with a business assessment 
at the enterprise level to determine the feasibility of the IIoT 
solution, assured by a methodology. Furthermore, the 
proposal motivates the company to develop scalable IoT 
solutions over time. With the adoption of Retrofit 4.0, IIoT 
solutions are created in an organized manner, avoiding 
isolated approaches within the factory. This guides the 
industry in effectively crafting IIoT solutions aligned with its 
overarching goals. 
154
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

IV. 
PROOF OF CONCEPT 
A. Description of the TpM phases for the PoC 
1) PHASE 1 BUSINESS  
A survey carried out in the company identified a lack of 
real-time automatic monitoring in the production line, with 
the chamfer-grinding department as the focal point. 
Currently, the control is manual, involving data input into 
terminals and storage on a server. This leads to gaps in 
records and a lack of information about events preceding 
performance drops. 
a) Motivation 
The initial motivations are twofold: 
1- To monitor the performance of a machine within the 
sector. 
2- To conduct real-time monitoring of operator’s 
movement within the same sector [7]. 
 
Motivation 1: To monitor the current values of an AC 
motor in a machine, focusing on KPIs such as "machine in 
cycle" and "machine stopped." 
Motivation 2: To implement a wireless sensor network to 
measure operator’s movement through radio signal variations 
within the sector during different shifts. 
The study proposes the establishment of a wireless sensor 
network with multiple strategically positioned links across 
the factory floor. The objective is to monitor variations in 
movement through RSSI and install a current sensor on a 
machine number 6 Rectifier Device (RD) model that is the 
chamfer griding machine located in the specified sector, to 
monitor the electric current of the specific motor shown in 
Figure 4 (drag rectification engine) during operations or 
inactivity. 
The PoC entailed a detailed study of machine locations, 
considering distances and the feasibility of wiring. A wireless 
sensor network was chosen due to the impracticality of wiring 
in the environment. The necessary RSSI variations also 
proved crucial in monitoring operator movement during 
different shifts: four operators from 7:00 AM to 5:30 PM, two 
from 5:30 PM to 9:30 PM, and four again from 9:30 PM to 
6:20 AM. 
MOTIVATION 1 – MONITORING MACHINE CYCLES 
The current measurement was conducted using a 10A 
current sensor on the specific AC motor of the RD6 machine, 
connected to the analog ports of the ATMEGA controller in 
the radio device. Figure 3 illustrates the RD6 machine and the 
rectified piece. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. RD6 Machine and Rectified chamfered piece. 
 
The radio device's firmware was configured to detect 
current values and transmit them in packets through the 
wireless sensor network [12] [14] [15]. 
Figure 4 illustrates the process of current measurement 
and the connection to the WSN up to the "Sensor Base" [11] 
(an edge element in Layer 3 of the TpM). This base receives 
machine data and forwards it to a computer in the factory 
office (Layers 4, 5, and 6 in the TpM) using a physical USB 
connection via an RJ45 CAT5 Ethernet cable, as depicted in 
Figure 5 from Motivation 2. Other devices within the WSN 
serve as sensor nodes, retransmitting the signal. 
 
 
 
Figure 4. RD6 Current Measurement. 
 
From Figure 4, it is noteworthy noting that the RD6 
machine comprises three distinct AC motors. The first motor 
controls the platform's movement, the second one maintains 
continuous rotation of a grinding wheel, and the third one, 
known as the 'drag motor,' is activated by the operator after 
inserting the piece to be rectified. 
      The measurement of current in the drag motor is critical 
in determining whether the machine is operational or stopped. 
During operation, the drag motor consumes between 1 and 
1.5 A for approximately 30 seconds when used for grinding 
a piece. After this interval, the motor no longer consumes 
current (0 A). 
MOTIVATION 2 – RSSI MEASUREMENT TO DETECT 
OPERATOR’S MOVEMENT IN THE AREA. 
A wireless sensor network was used to monitor the 
operators' movement in the chamfer grinding sector by 
analyzing variations in movement through RSSI. Figure 5 
provides a detailed view of the network and showcases the 
"things" of the associated IoT solution.  
 
155
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
Figure 5. WSN topology.  
 
The topology of a WSN defines the distances and heights 
of the sensor nodes, illustrating the propagation environment 
from the base station to the sensor nodes. 
      Before continuing with the PoC, it is necessary to collect 
all necessary information regarding production environments 
of the specified sector including routines, machines work 
type and specific rules. Meetings with designated specialists 
and understanding of business rules aligned with the things 
can define the bases of the PoC deployment. 
b) Business Rules  
The current scenario involves understanding production 
performance and management, emphasizing the lack of real-
time monitoring in production. There is a need to supervise 
both machines and operators, and it is crucial for the IIoT 
solution to be non-intrusive to avoid disrupting production. 
c) Specialist  
The designated company expert engineers of the 
production plant explained the operation of the machines and 
their components. A study identified relevant parameters and 
a suitable sector for prototyping. The parameters to be 
collected and the best approach for the IIoT solution were 
defined. 
d) Things  
Details about the location, machinery, and processes were 
provided. The chamfer grinding sector, being the oldest in the 
company, was chosen for the Proof of Concept. After being 
approved at the enterprise level, the PoC was implemented in 
the factory through connected devices. 
 
2) PHASE 2: REQUIREMENTS 
a) Level 6  Exibition  
Methods were established to quantify and display data for 
the enterprise level, including RD6 machine operation cycles, 
idle times, and personnel movement with 4 and 2 operators 
during different shifts. 
b) Level 5 Abstraction  
During two-and-a-half-hour measurements intervals in 
each shift, algorithms analyzed the collected digital data and 
presented it graphically. 
 
 
c) Level 4 Storage 
For the execution of the PoC, which took place after 
processing, the files stored the raw data from machine cycles 
and operator activity. 
d) Level 3 Edge Element 
Edge component responsible for collecting raw data 
during the testing period. 
e) Level 2  Connectivity 
Data transmission takes place through a wireless sensor 
network due to the absence of wiring in the environment. 
RSSI variation is crucial for monitoring operators across 
different shifts. The shifts are as follows: 4 operators from 
7:00 AM to 5:30 PM, 2 operators from 5:30 PM to 9:30 PM, 
and 4 operators from 9:30 PM to 6:20 AM.  
f) Level 1  Local Node / Sensing 
The key parameters to be measured are the current of the 
motor in the machine during movement or idle states, and the 
variations in RSSI to monitor the number of operators in the 
sector. 
3) PHASE 3 IMPLEMENTATION 
During implementation, a framework is utilized, aligned 
with the technology, to define the elements according to the 
reference model [8]. 
a) Level 1 Local Node 
In WSN, a node on the RD6 machine includes a current 
sensor and an S4 sensor for data transmission. The current is 
measured by a sensor capable of up to 10 A, connected to the 
RD6's drag AC motor and the ATMEGA controller of the 
radio device. 
The firmware of the radio device has been adjusted to 
transmit the current values over the wireless network. Figure 
4 illustrates the process up to the sensor base. This base 
receives and forwards the data to a computer in the factory 
office through USB connections and an RJ45 CAT5 Ethernet 
cable. 
b) Level 2 Connectivity  
The radio sensor devices, internally developed by the 
WISSTEK/Unicamp lab, operate at 915 MHz with 2-FSK 
modulation and 125 kHz channels. They feature an RF 
module with an integrated microcontroller, transceiver, and 
RF amplifier, achieving a transmission power of up to 
500mW (27 dBm). 
The devices were configured to operate on channel 4 
(915-928 MHz) with a power of 5 dBm (31mW). RSSI and 
current measurements were collected during shifts with 4 and 
2 operators, totaling approximately 2 and a half hours 
measurement per shift. The data, including RSSI and current, 
is sent to the base node and processed on the computer. 
The RSSI measurements are recorded and graphically 
analyzed in LOG_TXT files, with received power values 
from the sensor nodes (in dBm) in the LOG_RSSI_TXT file. 
Routes configured with multiple hops generate noticeable 
RSSI variation based on the movement of operators in the 
sector. Figure 6 illustrates the WSN topology with the 
specification of hops for each route. 
156
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
Figure 6. Hops. 
 
c) Level 3 Edge 
A Raspberry Pi computer was installed and connected to 
the base node to store and display the data. Current values 
were collected, converted into packets, and subsequently 
processed at the edge element. At this element, thresholds 
were configured to differentiate between the machine's 
operating cycle (ON) and the stopped state (OFF) based on 
the current values. Current measurements stay within the 
established thresholds, corresponding to the machine's 
operating cycle, with values ranging from 1.0 A to 1.6 A. 
d) Level 4 Storage 
On the Raspberry Pi, the data is stored in CSV-compatible 
formats for later conversion in Excel. 
e) Level 5 Abstraction 
The raw data collected by the edge element was processed 
through algorithms and analyzed in Excel. 
f) Level 6 Exibition 
Illustrates the collected data with graphics and statistics 
analysis. 
V. 
RESULT ANALYSIS 
A. RSSI 
For the analysis of RSSI variation results, we considered 
only the links that were physically installed, traversing the 
production sector. These links are more susceptible to RSSI 
variations due to operator movement. 
Based on the measurement logs, we could observe the 
correlation between the line-of-sight location of the link and 
the RSSI variations, resulting in a more realistic scenario. 
Figure 7 shows the relevant links for analysis, selected from 
the result records, excluding irrelevant links. 
 
 
Figure 7. Important Links. 
 
Figure 8 shows the RSSI measurement over time in two 
distinct scenarios: when 4 and 2 operators were close to the 
machines. 
 
Figure 8. RSSI Variations. 
 
It is clear, from this figure, that the level of RSSI variation 
is affected by the number of nearby operators.  
      To quantify the level of RSSI variation, we calculated the 
standard deviation of the RSSI measurements over a window 
of L = 100 measurements, using equation (1) 
 
V(k) = √
1
L−1 ∑
i=k−L+1[T(i) − 𝜇(k)]2
i=k
  
(1)  
 
where L is the window length and T(i) are the RSSI 
measurements. The quantity µ(k) is the mean RSSI calculated 
as the equation (2)  
 
𝜇(k) = ∑
T(i)
L
i=k−L+1
i=k
 (2)  
 
 
 
 
 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

Figure 9 displays the standard deviation with 4 and 2 
operators. 
 
Figure 9. Std deviation.  
 
 
This figure clearly shows that the standard deviation tends 
to be higher when there are more operators close to the 
machine, indication that RSSI measurements can be used to 
monitor operator’s movement.  
B. RD6 Machine Current Measurement 
A pie chart illustrates the active and inactive time ratio 
and ON and OFF cycles in Figure 10. Figure 11 displays the 
measurement of motor current during operation and at rest in 
a zoom view. 
 
 
 
Figure 10 - Cycle ON OFF. 
 
 
Figure 11. ON OFF ZOOM. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Retrofit 4.0 followed the principles of the production 
system and the reference model, adopting TpM at every 
stage. The method played a pivotal role in shaping the IIoT 
solution, from understanding the business to implementing 
the proof of concept. The PoC met the expectations of the 
enterprise sector, demonstrating the effectiveness of the 
solution at the factory level. 
The results of the PoC described the industrial 
environment, serving as a baseline for comparing variations 
in production performance and identifying gaps. The RSSI 
measurements revealed sector movement more clearly in the 
curve with four operators compared to that with two. RSSI 
variations can be used to interpret different patterns of human 
movement. 
The monitoring of the RD6 machine's motor current 
demonstrated effectiveness in tracking the "ON" and "OFF" 
states. This allows real-time recording of production 
performance, indicating rework, production adjustments, and 
technical improvements. Both RSSI and current have proven 
to be powerful tools for productive management within the 
context of Industry 4.0. 
The TpM application for Retrofit 4.0 through PoC proved 
effective contributing to a non-invasive transition process for 
legacy industrial plant and shown various possibilities of 
KPI´s management, like control machine work cycle and 
personal behavior in our study case, narrowing control gap 
which is reflected on production performance data. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
 
This study was financed in part by the Coordenação de 
Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de Nível Superior - Brasil 
(CAPES) - Finance Code 001, and by Conselho Nacional de 
Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico - Brazil, Grant  
313213/2021-6. 
 
 
 
 
 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

REFERENCES 
[1] 
L. C. B. Ferreira, O. Branquinho, P. Chaves, P. Cardieri, F. Fruett, and 
M. Yacoub, "A PBL-Based Methodology for IoT Teaching," in IEEE 
Communications Magazine, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 20-26, November 
2019, doi: 10.1109/MCOM.001.1900242. 
[2] 
L. C. B. Ferreira, P. Chaves, R. Assumpção, O. C. Branquinho, F. 
Fruett, and P. Cardieri, “The Three-phase Methodology for IoT Project 
Development”, Internet of Things, vol. 20, 2022, ISSN 2542-6605, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iot.2022.100624. 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S254266052200105
6. 
[3] 
J. Green, CTO of Cisco’s Data and Analytics Business Group, “IoT 
Reference Model”, IoT World Forum, October 2014, Chicago USA, 
pp. 1-12, 
https://dl.icdst.org/pdfs/files4/0f1d1327c5195d1922175dd77878b9fb.
pdf 
[4] 
F. Lima, A. A. Massote and R. F. Maia, "IoT Energy Retrofit 4.0 and 
the Connection of Legacy Machines Inside the Industry 4.0 Concept," 
IECON 2019 - 45th Annual Conference of the IEEE Industrial 
Electronics Society, Lisbon, Portugal, 2019, pp. 5499-5504, doi: 
10.1109/IECON.2019.8927799. 
[5] 
M. Groover, “Automation, production systems, and computer-
integrated manufacturing”.  ISBN 978-85-4301-501-9. Groover, 
Mikell, In Portuguese, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2011. 
[6] 
D. Chew, The Wireless Internet of Things: A Guide to the Lower 
Layers, Wiley-IEEE, 2018. 
[7] 
H. Wang, F. Zhang, and W. Zhang, "Human Detection through RSSI 
Processing with Packet Dropout in Wireless Sensor Network", Journal 
of Sensors, 2020, pp. 1-9, 2020, https://doi.org/10.1155/2020/4758103. 
[8] 
A. L. Boni Deo, Master´s Thesis, “Proposal for an open-source 
reference model for IoT – focus on SMEs.”, in Portuguese, Pontifical 
Catholic University of Campinas, 2018, Brazil. 
[9] 
J. Palmeira, G. Coelho, A. Carvalho, P. Carvalhal and P. Cardoso, 
"Migrating legacy production lines into an Industry 4.0 ecosystem," 
2022 IEEE 20th International Conference on Industrial Informatics 
(INDIN), 
Perth, 
Australia, 
2022, 
pp. 
429-434, 
doi: 
10.1109/INDIN51773.2022.9976084. 
[10] 
S. Kolla, D. Lourenço, A. Kumar, and P. Plapper, “Retrofitting of 
legacy machines in the context of Industrial Internet of Things (IIoT)” 
Procedia 
Computer 
Science, 
pp. 
62-70, 
2022, 
10.1016/j.procs.2022.01.205. 
[11] 
P. Chaves, R. Assumpção, L. Ferreira, P. Cardieri, O. Branquinho, and 
F. Fruett, “A remote emulation environment for the teaching of low‐
power wireless communications”, Computer Applications in 
Engineering Education, 2021, 29. 10.1002/cae.22397. 
[12] 
C. Bell, “Beginning Sensor Networks with Arduino and Raspberry Pi”, 
doi: 10.1007/978-1-4302-5825-4, © Press 2013. 
[13] 
S. L. Stevan, M. O. Leme, and M. M. D. Santos, “Industry 4.0: 
Fundamentals, Perspectives, and Applications”, São Paulo Brazil, 
Érica publisher, 2018. 
[14] 
E. Gaura, L. Girod, J. Brusey, M. Allen and G. Challen, “Wireless 
Sensor Networks: Deployments and Design Frameworks”. Springer 
publisher, Eds. 2010, https://doi.org/10.1007/978-1-4419-5834-1. 
[15] 
H. A. P. Zanetti and C. L. V. Oliveira, “Projects with Python and 
Arduino: How to Develop Practical Projects in Electronics, 
Automation, and IoT” in Portuguese Edition, Erica publisher, 2020. 
 
 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

