The Screen is not Flat 
 
Luciane Maria Fadel 
Graduate Program in Knowledge Engineering and Management (PPGEGC) 
Federal University of Santa Catarina 
Florianópolis, SC, Brazil 
e-mail: luciane.fadel@ufsc.br
 
 
Abstract— A characteristic of the digital interface is its 
multidimensionality. However, its design continues to be 
influenced by multiple remediations, mainly from printed 
media, which give the interface a flat surface, suppressing its 
communicative and interactive potential. Interface design has 
dealt with this problem fragmentedly, focusing on specific 
elements. For the students, there remains the need to visualize 
the 
blurred 
screen 
depth. 
This 
paper 
outlines 
the 
multidimensionality of the interface in terms of use and 
aesthetics. To this end, it draws the boundaries for the aesthetics 
of the screen and interaction dimensions, combining 30 years of 
experience teaching digital design with the current literature on 
the topic. The results establish design dimensions that 
contribute to understanding the interface's imagistic potential 
in terms of use and aesthetics. In addition, the results highlight 
some of the challenges to be addressed by designers.  
Keywords-screen; interface; design; remediation; dimensions. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Our society is moving towards an intensive use of screens. 
This use began with screens of static images such as painting 
and photography, which framed a moment of the imagination. 
From there, it migrated to screens with moving images, such 
as cinema, which framed a period of the imagination. When 
the TV occupied an essential space in our homes, its screen 
demanded more hours of visual contact, as it became 
accessible as the paintings and photographs hanging on the 
wall and clamored for attention as the cinema. Between one 
screen and another, we learned to see, accept, and apprehend 
its images as technology.  
According to [1], technology is a complex reality 
involving technological knowledge and a human attitude. As 
an attitude, technology becomes habitual, and it is believed to 
make our lives easier and contribute to our comfort. 
The complexity of technology also occurs in the interface 
design teaching, either by facing technology in its 
manifestation (designing) or the craft of its poetics. Poetics 
constitute the principles of design that best define an object or 
work [2]. Remediation is a central poetic of the digital 
interface. 
Remediation is the process of representing one media into 
another [3]. For example, a digital calendar is expected to 
simulate its printed form. The months follow a table form, and 
the days are presented by cells. Therefore, this paper suggests 
that understanding the screen as flat is a consequence of the 
remediation process. 
For [3], remediation undergoes a 4-level evolution, where 
the representation of a new media moves further away from 
the media that precedes it. Therefore, we argue that each level 
is reached through understanding contemporary media and 
recognizing its language and properties, i.e., creating its 
poetics. 
Another poetic of digital media is its multidimensionality, 
rooted in the principle of numerical representation [4]. This 
principle enables new dimensions using the artifact through 
multiple aesthetic expression and interaction forms. 
The poetic of multidimensionality, investigated by [5], is 
established by the data density that [6] defines as the intense 
flow 
of 
information 
captured 
and 
sent 
by 
the 
interactor+artefact. Thus, the screen mediates this data density 
from visible, perceived, or social dimensions. This paper 
focuses on the visual dimensions because it is a reasonable 
first step to building the base to comprehend others. In 
addition, teaching poetics benefits from visualizing each 
dimension, as the students could design each one or even play 
with the interconnection among dimensions to create depth. 
Therefore, we argue that the screen is not flat, as its depth 
develops through its many dimensions. This paper draws the 
boundaries for the aesthetics of the screen and interaction 
dimensions.  
The method follows qualitative research, highlighting 
screen dimensions from the literature and dialoguing with 
teaching practice.  This practice enabled many observations 
about students’ difficulties in visualizing the screen 
dimensions. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 and Section 3 present the background review of the 
aesthetic and interaction dimensions. Section 4 discusses its 
implication on interface design. Finally, Section 5 draws a 
brief conclusion. 
II. 
AESTHETIC DIMENSION 
The multiple dimensions of the screen become undeniable 
when establishing the possibilities of the interface design 
aesthetic. One option is simulating three-dimensional objects, 
i.e., the object is created in its three dimensions. In addition, 
remediation, 
layers 
of 
information, 
movement, 
and 
Information Design (ID) are screen dimensions. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

A. The screen interface remediation 
The interface can be understood as a mediating layer 
between the artifact and the interactor. The user interacts with 
the product through the physical or digital interface. Thus, a 
product can be complex to manipulate, and its use requires a 
layer of translation of its mechanics. For example, a typewriter 
presents itself to the interactor through a coating, which hides 
its gears and leaves enough in view to be used. Therefore, [7] 
associates design with the interface. For the user, the interface 
links the user, the tool, and the action. Thus, it is likely that 
the more complex the object’s engineering, the more critical 
the role of the interface as a tool facilitating use. This role 
becomes evident with digital interfaces, given the complexity 
of the artifact. 
Reference [8] states that the interface is the software for 
the user, which means it does not matter if the algorithm is 
highly complex or has a layer of artificial intelligence. What 
the user perceives is the contact and control over the tool 
mediated by the interface. 
Thus, digital interfaces have made this mediating layer 
visible (hypermediation), often because of the complexity of 
its use. Understanding this complexity, many designers seek 
to create invisible or transparent interfaces (immediacy). 
However, one of the main qualities of digital objects is their 
oscillation between hypermediation and immediacy.  
This oscillation is also referred to as remediation by [3]. 
The authors argue that the opacity of the interface is necessary 
for interaction to occur, as the interactor needs to see the 
options to act on them (hypermediation). On the other hand, 
immersion happens when engaging with the content, and the 
interface becomes transparent (immediacy). Therefore, this 
oscillation is another poetic of interactive media and a 
dimension of the interface. 
To 
decrease 
the 
oscillation, 
[9] 
advocates 
the 
narrativization of the interface. Lessening the oscillation can 
be accomplished by (1) narrativized ‘look and feel’ of the 
interface, (2) behavioral mimic and behavioral metaphors, (3) 
narrativized perspective, and finally, by building (4) bridges 
and mixed-reality interfaces. 
The ‘look and feel’ incorporates narrative elements into 
the graphic representation. The aforementioned has to do with 
the visual identity of the artifact, as all the imagery 
representation should reinforce the project concept. For 
instance, feedback could be presented as illustrations, 
reinforcing the adopted narrative. 
Also, interface elements can mimic behaviors or 
behavioral metaphors. For example, if an interface element 
demands an urgent response, its graphical representation can 
assume a hurried behavior, such as getting agitated. 
Narrativized perspective, on the other hand, acts on the 
depth dimension of the screen. That is, the screen’s graphic 
design makes explicit the z-axis of the spatial representation. 
This representation is evident in-game scenarios or 
environments where the interactor can move around. 
Finally, data density can support the bridges and mixed-
reality interfaces establishing digital and virtual connections. 
Augmented reality artifacts are excellent examples, as they 
apply new layers of dynamic data on top of the captured image 
of the place (Figure 1). Other bridges can be established by 
using interactors' information and capturing information from 
the environment. Locative media are examples of this 
dynamic. 
 
Figure 1. Example of augmented reality artifact using Google translate App. 
B. Tri-dimensional objects 
Treating objects in three dimensions allows different 
renderings to simulate their spatiality, such as rotating the 
object or moving it in the screen space. So, it requires the 
object to be thought in true 3D, which moves away from the 
printed media since this support requires a 2D representation. 
In this case, the design domain would approach the realm of 
sculpture because it would encompass elements of 3D 
representation such as body, weight, movement, and lines of 
action, among others, expanding to volume treatment.  
In addition to 3D representation, space simulation enables 
layers of movement and different forms of interaction. By 
treating the screen as a three-dimensional space, motion layers 
are created in the depth of this space, where objects can move 
around. For example, a disabled element can occupy a bottom 
layer of space and project to forward layers when enabled. 
Moreover, the space can become active, posing as a design 
and communication element. As advocated by [10], the digital 
space, as a remediation of the medium, expands the 
possibilities of interaction as it becomes a meaningful 
dimension.  
The screen's shape implies a reduction in the treatment of 
a two-dimensional space. But examples, such as the Apple 
Watch bring new possibilities when the screen is designed 
in its three-dimensional space (Figure 2). The surface is 
considered spherical, which implies that the graphic elements 
can slide around the sphere, assuming different sizes when 
traversing it. They increase in the center and decrease when 
approaching the edges. 
The treatment of the surface in 3D enables new attention 
arrangements, given primarily by size and position. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Apple Watch Interface.  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

C. Information layers 
Two fronts provide an understanding of information 
layers: position and meaning. While the positioning layer 
defines different layers in different spatial positions (on any 
of the three axes of the screen), the meaning layer implies 
different degrees of importance built through Information 
Design using contrast, hierarchy, typography, composition, 
color, and image. 
 The positioning layer uses the spatial geometry of the 
screen to place the information layers. Spatial geometry 
implies the independence of the layers, both at the content and 
interaction levels.  
One of the best examples of this arrangement of multiple 
layers on the same screen is Augmented Reality (AR) 
applications. AR presents a layer of dynamic information on 
the physical environment, whether captured by a camera or 
not. That is, its definition guarantees a multidimensional 
understanding. 
AR can happen in 3 arrangements: (1) through information 
projected on a physical space, such as films projected on 
buildings; (2) using an instrument to capture the physical 
space and, on the same screen, insert the dynamic information; 
and; (3) using glasses or lenses on which the information is 
projected while the ocular system captures the physical space 
[11]. 
AR is distinguished from a simple projection of a video 
onto a screen by considering the three characteristics that [11] 
attributes to AR:  
• 
It combines the real and the virtual; 
• 
It is interactive in real-time; 
• 
It is registered in three dimensions. 
The multidimensionality of the screen is explicit, given 
that the interactor is the one who builds it. This co-creation 
allows a certain degree of control to the interactor, given the 
dynamism of the composite image. 
In the composition of AR, one can have several layers of 
information organized by the distance between the object and 
the interactor, the screen's permanence, the interactor's 
importance, or any other design criterion. These criteria that 
are exposed by AR composition can be applied in other 
interface design projects. AR makes it easier to understand 
this multidimensional composition of information. 
D. Movement 
Movement is another screen dimension that can be 
understood on four approaches: moving objects, moving 
images, the movement of the interactor in space and 
navigation, or the movement of the device itself.  
Given the principle of numerical representation, objects 
projected onto the screen can be created in true 3D, which 
allows the objects to be manipulated on all three axes. 3D 
object occupies the multidimensional space of the screen and 
offers many possibilities of representation. Just as the 
screen's surface allows it to be treated as a 3D surface, objects 
can also be designed with three dimensions. 
The calendar, for example, which is constantly translated 
into digital with firm reference to its printed predecessor, i.e., 
two-dimensional, can be represented by a 3D object, such as 
a sphere. The spherical calendar allows movement to explore 
new possibilities of representation.   
The object movement through animations, micro 
animations, sliding in different directions, and appearance, 
among others, adds dynamism to the interface elements, 
providing feedback to the interactor. Moving images is 
characteristic of media based on time, such as video, movies, 
or animation. These media are complex, translating 
narratives into different dimensions, such as time, space, or 
sequential images.  
The interactor’s movement occurs in physical space 
or/and on the screen, navigating among pages. As argued by 
[6] and [12], the former is supported by mobile technology 
with small screens. The device's movement brings new 
possibilities of embodied or haptic interaction. That is, the 
control of the screen can occur through actions with the 
device. For example, shaking the device can switch pages. 
E. Information design (ID) 
The design project also presents new dimensions because 
ID parallels interaction and navigation. 
The layers intertwine various “designs” that increase the 
depth of the screen. The ID acts on the implications for the 
reception of the information that allows interaction and 
navigation. Thus, when creating a button to serve as an 
interaction element, the ID crafts the button to better inform 
about the possible action. 
The Navigation Design presents the same dynamic, as it 
establishes a path among digital pages, while the Information 
Design delivers the best solutions to offer the way. 
Therefore, it is considered that Navigation Design plans 
the possible paths; the Interaction Design proposes the 
mechanisms to allow the interactor to act upon the interface, 
while Information Design conceives these mechanisms. 
III. 
USE AND INTERACTION DIMENSIONS 
Mobility has intensified the use of digital objects. This 
property amplifies the concept of screen since the place of 
use needs to be within the covered reception area to transmit 
and receive data. The creation of the interface happens 
dynamically from the imbrication in receiving, treating, and 
providing the data, which is named performative cartography 
[12]. Thus, mobility and performative cartography become 
dimensions of screen use. 
A. Mobility 
Mobility, i.e., the use of digital products in different 
places, is supported by the technology of individual Internet 
access and the size of artifacts, such as smartphones and 
tablets, which enables their use while the interactor is on the 
move. Mobility has enabled data density, making space active 
by collecting data from interactors or delivering locative data 
and information. The screen has become a portal through 
which the information about the place is presented to the 
interactor. Locative media, such as games or apps, can create 
new dimensions of responsiveness provoked by space.  
Reference [6] labeled this active space as augmented space 
and argued that this expansion should be seen as an idea or a 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

cultural and aesthetic practice. This reconceptualization 
expands the creation possibilities, making the screen a 
complex space. 
This complexity embraces the idea of constant monitoring, 
which goes unnoticed by the interactors. These two situations 
need to be faced as design domains. That is, monitoring is a 
fact, and it can be omitted or used by the digital artifact, which 
requires addressing it in the interface. 
As a cultural practice, several objects integrate the work 
and leisure routine, such as ubiquitous computing, artificial 
intelligence, augmented reality, and wearables. Aesthetics 
accompanies this engineering but still disconnects from the 
presence of the interactor and its surroundings. In addition, 
these objects are still imagined alone, and thus, their ecology 
is not much considered. For instance, the IoT (Internet of 
Things) features could be integrated into the digital artifact 
design to improve the use of the data or functionalities.  
These are some of the challenges to be thought of in the 
mobility dimension. These challenges are made explicit in the 
cultural practice of performative cartography. 
B. Performative cartography 
The double displacement of the individual in the physical 
environment and on the screen is known as “performative 
cartography” [12]. The interactor navigates the interface while 
the interface is formed. For example, the map in Google Maps 
is generated from the subject’s position in space (Figure 3).  
Thus, visualization and image construction co-occur in a 
creative process that [12] indicates is a 4D operation of a 3D 
space. To solve the representation dilemma, the author 
suggests that the 4th dimension would treat space-time instead 
of treating time. The argument that both time and space are 
revealed in use supports this suggestion. For this reason, 
performative cartography implies changes, differences, and a 
certain unpredictability of movement that forms. 
 
 
Figure 3. Example of performative cartography using Google Maps. 
C. Interaction 
In addition to the device's movement, interaction with the 
digital object occurs in new dimensions because of 
interactivity. Considering that the interactors’ experience with 
the screen occurs through actions and perceptions, that is, how 
they act and understand, a two-way communication process is 
established between the interface and the interactors. Thus, the 
interactivity of a narrative experience is discussed by [13] in 
4 modes: cognitive, functional, explicit, and meta-
interactivity. Cognitive Interactivity [13] relates to revisiting 
a text that conflicts with the previous understanding. 
Functional Interactivity deals with its physicality, usability, 
and Information Design. Explicit Interactivity examines the 
actions when using the interface, the interaction per se. And 
Meta-interactivity considers the involvement with the text 
outside the experience when the interactor talks about it. 
Interaction can be interpreted through the categories 
pointed out by [14]. The authors list different concepts 
associated with interaction, such as dialogue, transmission, 
tool use, tool use, optimal behavior, embodiment, experience 
and control. Each concept conceives the relationship between 
product and human in a particular way. In this paper, all these 
concepts imply dimensions of the screen, as they establish 
poetics of use and meaning. 
The interface establishes a conversation with the interactor 
through a dialog. It is expected to be a fluid conversation, 
either from the side of the interactors who understand how the 
interface works and what “response” they can send or from 
the side of the interface that also responds according to the 
interactors’ emission. Therefore, it is likely that the mental 
model dimension of conversation is strongly considered in 
this design. 
Interaction, as transmission, requires a design focused on 
the quality of the channel as it pays attention to the number of 
bits transmitted. In this case, the noise dimension becomes the 
most relevant.  
For [14], interaction conceived as tool use has three 
implications: (1) the tool shapes how the interactor will act 
(focus on the task artifact); (2) the focus can be on the 
mediation value of the interface; (3) the focus falls on the use 
itself. Thus, looking at interaction as a tool requires a 
dimension of the extension of the body and senses, as 
proposed by [15]. 
When interaction is optimal behavior, there is a 
confrontation to establish the best result between performance 
and resources (both human and technological). Therefore, the 
time-space-statistical dimension [14] of the screen emerges.  
Designing interaction as embodied requires situating its 
agents in a physical world. Reference [14] indicates that 
situating interaction involves intention, coupling, and context. 
Conceiving 
interaction 
as 
experience 
means 
understanding how the interaction unfolds. It considers the 
qualities of the technology and not only the object's properties 
and turns to aesthetic, emotional, and completeness aspects. 
Therefore, the value dimension deepens the attribution and 
expectations regarding the screen. Finally, the concept of 
control highlights errors against an ideal, meaning the system 
adjusts actions following feedback. 
IV. 
IMPLICATIONS OF THE DIMENSIONS 
This paper argues that the multidimensionality of the 
screen is a property of digital media conceptualized in [6] 
principle of numerical representation. From this principle, the 
dimensions of the screen can be understood in the field of 1) 
Aesthetics, which involves the graphic qualities of the 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

interface; 3D representation; space as a medium; layers of 
information; movement and the design of information, and 2) 
Use and Interaction, comprising at least mobility; 
performative cartography and interaction. 
However, the new media's nature is the older media's 
remediation. Therefore, in order to form a new media, it is 
necessary to construct its poetics. Thus, determining the 
screen's dimensions can contribute to its definition and 
recognition of its language and properties. Once defined, the 
dimensions can be addressed in both the teaching and practice 
of design. Figure 4 summarizes the main findings.  
A. Teaching design 
Recognizing the multidimensionality of the screen 
implies responsible teaching of interface design. This 
responsibility lies in treating the various dimensions of the 
screen, starting with understanding digital technology as 
habitual. Therefore, this treatment suggests facing questions 
about the role of digital technology in everyday life, and its 
effect on society. 
This paper proposes to address these questions focusing 
on the seven axes of design: composition, form, color, 
typography, human factors, technology, and movement. 
Therefore, to address the role of digital technology, design 
teaching could expose different contributions of the screen 
depending on the type of artifact in focus. For each axis, the 
design elements and their contribution to the role of the 
screen would be related. This construction promotes a critical 
position and develops the analytical skill of the designer. The 
field of Aesthetics, Use, and Interaction could elaborate on 
other issues raised in this paper. 
The teaching of Aesthetics develops the gaze towards the 
interface, i.e., recognizing the interface as an active 
mediating field. An active media requires treating the 
interface as a dynamic object oscillating between opaque and 
transparent. In addition, the elements of the interface support 
and respond to the actions of the interactor, delivering 
information and feedback. Furthermore, teaching 3D 
modeling promotes the abstract reasoning of thinking about 
the screen space and its objects in three dimensions. 
Teaching design also explores layers of information by its 
nature. Objects (type, form, and function), action (passive or 
interactive), hyperlinks in depth, design choices such as 
gamification and metaphors, or even behavior, such as 
movement, shape this nature. 
The movement remains on the periphery of design 
projects. Thus, the urgency of teaching design to promote its 
integration into projects is notorious. 
Teaching movement requires building the ability to deal 
with time and space, favoring a narrative's constitution. 
Teaching narrative as a poetics of design requires treating the 
narrativization of the interface, that is, treating the design 
elements as passive or active agents of the narrative. 
Concepts and elements of narrative will be revisited for this 
purpose.  
 Information Design is a constant in design projects, but 
it has been absorbed by the specialties required in digital 
design, such as interaction design and navigation. Teaching 
digital Information Design reinforces the intertwining and 
boundaries of these specialties. 
The implications of dimensions in teaching about use and 
interaction lie in the recognition of mobility and performative 
cartography as requirements and properties of the object. 
Therefore, teaching can highlight such factors and discuss the 
axis of technology and its consequences on the artifact's use, 
production, and creation.  
The interaction dimension implies teaching interactivity 
through some biases such as narrative, embodied, and 
agency. These biases can broaden interaction treatment and 
incorporate new technology methods, presenting the 
potential for accessibility. 
Figure 4. Visual dimensions and its implication in teaching and practice. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

B. Design practice 
The implications of dimensions in design practice are 
configured in a digital design discourse through the iterative 
and responsible construction and creation of artifacts that 
shape a cyber society. It is argued that facing the 
multidimensionality of the screen provokes thinking, 
recognizing, analyzing, and discussing interface design in its 
multifaceted practices.  
The practice of the aesthetic dimension provides a critical 
engagement with the elements that contribute to the depth of 
the screen and its effect on reception by the interactor. It 
requires an active, managerial, collaborative practice that 
values the participation of multiple agents, human and non-
human. It also requires encompassing various areas of 
knowledge as a source of ideas and inspiration, which can be 
realized in alternatives through the design method. It also 
allows systematizing iterative analysis processes and creating 
the dimensions of use and interaction.   
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The multidimensionality of the screen is a characteristic 
investigated by several researchers in the axes of design, such 
as composition, shapes, color [16], typography [17], human 
factors [18], technology [19], and movement [20]. The design 
of virtual and augmented reality artifacts has imposed the 
need for research on other dimensions of the artifact [21].  
Establishing 
the 
boundaries 
of 
different 
screen 
dimensions inspires investigations and draws attention to the 
complexity of the screen. This complexity goes far beyond 
the reach of this paper because it involves social, emotional, 
psychological, 
historiographic, 
and 
philosophical 
dimensions, among others. 
This paper contributes to this field of research and 
practice by drawing interface dimensions in terms of use and 
aesthetics. Our experience teaching digital design pointed to 
great difficulty for students in giving depth to the screen. One 
issue is the lack of visualization of this depth. It is hoped that 
multidimensional interface design supports the visualization 
of these dimensions.  
The taxonomy of these and other dimensions presented in 
the literature is left as future research. In addition, future 
research should develop each dimension regarding design 
techniques to support teaching and designing a screen that 
explores its multidimensionality. This work is currently 
ongoing by this researcher. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  A. Cupani, “Types of technology and their cultural 
consequences,” Revista Dialectus, pp. 82-95, 2020.  
[2]  D. Bordwell, Poetics of Cinema, New York: Routledge, 2007.  
[3]  J. D. Bolter and R. Grusin, Remediation, MIT Press 
paperback edition, 2000.  
[4]  L. Manovich, The Language of New Media, Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 2001.  
[5]  L. M. Fadel and A. Coelho, “Augmented reality in 
information design,” In press, 2023.  
[6]  L. Manovich, “The Poetics of Augmented Space,” Visual 
Communication, pp. 219-240, 2006.  
[7]  G. Bonsiepe, Gui Bonsiepe: Interface - An Approach to 
Design, Jan Van Eyck Akademie, 1999.  
[8]  D. Norman, Design of Everyday Things: Revised and 
Expanded, New York: Basic Books, 2013.  
[9]  J. Bizzocchi, M. B. Lin and J. Tanenbaum, “Game, narrative 
and the design of the interface,” International Journal of Art 
and Technology, vol. 4, pp. 460-479, 2011.  
[10]  L. M. Fadel and J. Bizzocchi, “Designing background as 
space medium remediation,” Estudos in Design (Online), v. 
17, 2019, pp. 5-22.  
[11]  R. T. Azuma, “A Survey of Augmented Reality,” In 
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, vol. 6, 
no. 4, 1997, pp. 355-385.  
[12]  N. Verhoeff, Mobile Screens The Visual Regime of 
Navigation, Amsterdam: Amsterdam University Press, 2012.  
[13]  E. Zimmerman, “Narrative, Interactivity, Play and Games,” 
in First Person: New Media as Story, Performance, and 
Game, Cambridge, MIT Press, 2004, pp. 154-164. 
[14]  K. Hornbæk and A. Oulasvirta, “What is interaction?,” in 
CHI 2017, pp. 5040–5052, Denver, 2017, 
doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025765.  
[15]  M. McLuhan, “The Playboy Interview: Marshall McLuhan,” 
Playboy Magazine, pp. 53-74, 1969.  
[16]  Z. Wang, W. Liu and M. Yang, “Data-driven multi-objective 
affective product design integrating three-dimensional form 
and color,” in Data-driven multi-objective affective product 
design integrating three-dimensional form and color Zeng 
Wang, Weidong Liu, Minglang Yang Neural Computing and 
Applications (NCAA), pp. 15835–15861, 2022.  
[17]  J. J. Shen, K. Jin, A. Zhang, C. Breazeal and H. W. Park, 
“Affective Typography: The Effect of AI-Driven Font Design 
on Empathetic Story Reading,” in CHI EA’23, pp. 1–7, 
doi.org/10.1145/3544549.35856252023.  
[18]  P. J. Thomas, The social and interactional dimensions of 
human-computer 
interfaces, 
New 
York: 
Cambridge 
University Press, 1995. 
[19]  V. G. Motti, “Wearable Technologies: a Roadmap to the 
Future,” in WebMedia’20: Proceedings of the Brazilian 
Symposium on Multimedia and the Web, pp. 3-4, 2020, 
doi.org/10.1145/3428658.3431928. 
[20]  R. Sun, A. V. Wallop, G. Leslie and E. Y.-L. Do, “SoniSpace: 
Expressive Movement Interaction to Encourage Taking Up 
Space with the Body,” in DIS’23 Companion Publication, 
2023, pp. 279–283, doi.org/10.1145/3563703.359. 
[21]  M. O. Ellenberg, M. Satkowski, W. Luo and R. Dachselt, 
“Spatiality and Semantics - Towards Understanding Content 
Placement in Mixed Reality,” in CHI EA’23, 2023, pp. 1–8, 
doi.org/10.1145/3544549.3585853. 
[22]  J. Murray, Hamlet on the Holodeck, London: MIT Press, 
1998. 
 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

