BCI-based Game Control to Boost Focus and
Attention in Students
Komalpreet Kaur
Department of Computer Science
Salem State University
Salem, MA, USA
kkaur@salemstate.edu
Manish Wadhwa
Department of Computer Science
Salem State University
Salem, MA, USA
mwadhwa@salemstate.edu
Abstract—This study presents a non-invasive Electroencephalo-
gram (EEG) based Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) system to
control games developed for the purpose of increasing focus
and attention in students. For the study, data was collected
from 6 subjects. Each subject played a focus game designed to
evaluate their attention and focus before being trained through
a P300-based speller. In order to evaluate the effect of training,
subjects were asked to play the focus game again. The EEG
data collected from the subjects during the P300-based Speller
game training phase was analyzed to see the attentivity of the
subjects. As per the classification accuracies obtained for all
the subjects, the subjects were attentive and focused during the
training phase. This training phase resulted in an improvement
in their focus game performance metrics. P300-based BCI system
can be effectively used to enhance focus and attention in students.
Index Terms—BCI; EEG; ERP, P300-based Speller.
I. INTRODUCTION
The phenomenon of diminished focus and attention among
college students has garnered increasing attention in recent
years due to its multifaceted implications on academic per-
formance and overall well-being. This issue is closely linked
to the pervasive use of digital technologies, particularly smart
phones and laptops, which provide constant access to a multi-
tude of distractions, including social media, instant messaging,
and online entertainment. Research suggests that this constant
connectivity and exposure to digital stimuli can lead to reduced
cognitive control, making it increasingly challenging for col-
lege students to sustain their attention on academic tasks such
as lectures, reading assignments, and studying. Furthermore,
the demands of the college environment, including high-stress
levels, irregular sleep patterns, and over commitment to ex-
tracurricular activities exacerbate this problem. Understanding
the underlying factors contributing to the lack of focus and
attention is pivotal for designing effective interventions and
support systems aimed at enhancing the learning experience
and academic outcomes for college students.
The main purpose of the study is to use a non-invasive
Electroencephalogram (EEG) based BCI system to control
games that are designed to improve focus and attention.
Brain-Computer Interface (BCI) is a technology that enables
communication between the human brain and a computer
based external device [4] [5]. There are several ways in which
a BCI can be implemented. BCI based training sessions have
Fig. 1. Average P300 Response for Subject C. The blue waveform represents
the Target ERP while the red corresponds to the Non-target ERP.
been used to enhance children’s engagement in reading [9].
P300-based Speller is the most commonly used BCI system
that is based on oddball paradigm [6]. P300-based Speller
has been used to treat attention-deficit/hyperactive disorder
in children [7]. For this study, P300-based Speller Game
was utilized as a training tool to help enhance the cognitive
abilities of students. The P300 response is a prominent positive
deflection in the EEG signal, appearing approximately 300
ms after the presentation of the attended stimulus as shown
in Figure 1. P300 deflection is widely considered to be an
important indicator of attention and focus. In Figure 1, the
target ERP (Event Related Potential) shown in blue shows a
positive peak between 200 and 300 millisecond.
There are studies that have used BCI-based systems to
improve the focus and attention in subjects. Authors in [1]
[2] proposed an online EEG based neurofeedback game for
enhancing attention and memory. In both the studies, subjects
were asked to memorize a set of numbers in a matrix and later
correctly fill the matrix. The focus of the study was mainly on
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

memory of the subjects. The authors in [3] used a P300-based
BCI Interface for improving attention. The game used in the
study was challenging enough for the subjects to be attentive
all the time.
The primary goal of this study is to explore the effect
of P300-based Speller Game with and without feedback on
enhancing the focus and attention of the subjects. The study is
proposing a very simple, but monotonous game for the subjects
to test their attention and focus.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
presents the materials and methodology used for this study.
The section provides information about the subjects who
participated in the study for data collection and the procedure
used to collect the data. In Section III, preliminary results
obtained from the EEG and the focus game data are presented.
Section IV concludes the paper with the discussion of the
current study and presents the future plan of action.
II. MATERIALS AND METHODS
A. Subject Information
Since human subjects are a part of this study, the study
was approved by the university’s Institutional Review Board
(IRB). After the approval, a number of emails were sent to
all the students of the computer science department seeking
volunteers for the study. Seven subjects from the department
gave their formal consent to be a part of this study. To keep
the study as unbiased as possible, the emails were not sent
directly by the project investigators but by the department
administrative assistant. One of the subjects, out of these
seven, reported as being neurodivergent and thus was not
considered for further study. This is to remove any biases.
Only six subjects were thus considered for this study.
B. Procedure
The procedure used for the study is shown in Figure 2. All
the three tasks were completed in a single session and it took
around an hour for the subjects to finish all the tasks. During
all the tasks, subjects sat in a comfortable chair approximately
75 cm from the monitor. EEG was collected using g.Nautlius
Multipurpose 16-channel EEG cap. The headset has 16 elec-
trodes (FP1, FP2, F3, FZ, T7, C3, CZ, C4, T8, P3, PZ, P4,
PO7, PO8, and OZ) to record the data. All the electrodes were
reference to the right ear and amplified, bandpass filtered from
0.5 - 500 Hz, and digitized at 1200 Hz.
• Pre-training Focus Game - A Focus Game was designed
for the purpose of this study. The purpose of the Focus
Game was for the subjects to play a game that was very
monotonous and at the same time required attention and
focus. In the Focus Game, subjects were asked to click
on a moving target on the screen. The target could appear
anywhere on the screen and at a variable rate. Figure 3
shows the Focus Game layout. The subjects had to click
on a randomly appearing black box on a gray background
on the screen. This box would disappear in a matter of
100 milliseconds so the subjects had to move their cursors
quickly and click on the box before it disappeared and
Fig. 2. Procedure used for this study.
Fig. 3. Focus Game.
appeared somewhere else. The Focus Game lasted for five
minutes and the moving target appeared 50 times in total.
• Training: P300-based Speller Game - As a part of the
training phase, after completing the Focus Game task,
subjects were asked to train via P300-based Speller
Game. Each session of the P300-based Speller Game
consisted of 4 experimental runs. Each run was composed
of a 5 letter word. This set of characters that was
consistent for all the subjects was from a 6 × 6 matrix
displayed on the monitor, as shown in Figure 4. The rows
and columns of the matrix were intensified for 100 ms
with 25 ms between the intensifications [8]. There was
a gap of 2 seconds between each run. A sequence of
12 row/column intensifications constituted one character
epoch.
Words were presented on the top left corner of the mon-
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

itor, and the character currently specified for selection
was listed in parentheses at the end of the letter string.
To better understand, for example, in Figure 4, D is the
first letter of the word DICE. P300 response is generated
for letter D when the fourth column and the first row of
the matrix flashes.
Fig. 4. The 6 × 6 matrix used in this study. A row or column intensifies for
100 ms every 175 ms. The letter in the parentheses at the top of the window
is the current target letter “D”. For this target, a P300 should be elicited when
the fourth column or first row is intensified [8].
• Post-training Focus Game - After the training using P300-
based Speller Game, subjects were asked to play the
Focus Game again to see the impact of training.
III. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
A. EEG Analysis
The EEG data recorded during the training was analyzed
to identify the P300 brain activity response and used to
train a machine-learning model. To access the quality of the
recorded EEG signal, offline P300-based Speller accuracy was
computed. For each subject, an optimal classifier based on
Random Forest (RF) was trained. For each channel of the
data, 800 ms of the data segments were extracted following
each flash for analysis. A feature vector corresponding to
each stimuli was created by concatenating the extracted data
segments by channel. All data were lowpass filtered to 20 Hz
and decimated to 240 Hz, to smooth the data while retaining
sufficient samples for classification model. A Random Forest
classifier was trained using these features. In order to compute
the classification accuracies, 80% of the data was used for
training and the remaining 20% was used for testing. Table
I reports the classification accuracies obtained for all the
subjects.
The classification accuracies achieved for all the subjects are
exceptionally high. This shows that the subjects were attentive
and focused during the training phase.
B. Focus Game Score
To see the impact of P300-based Speller training, subjects
played the Focus Game again. To determine whether the P300-
based Speller Game contributed to enhanced motivation and
TABLE I
TRAINING AND TESTING CLASSIFICATION ACCURACIES FOR SIX
SUBJECTS.
Subject
Training Accuracy (%)
Testing Accuracy(%)
A
99.9
99.7
B
99.5
99.4
C
99.6
99.6
D
99.6
99.8
E
99.4
99.4
F
99.8
99.9
focus of the subjects, the scores of the Focus Game were
compared. Table II presents the improvement obtained in the
Focus Game scores for all the subjects.
TABLE II
IMPROVEMENT IN FOCUS SCORE FOR SIX SUBJECTS.
Subject
Improvement in Score (%)
A
20
B
2
C
2
D
10
E
4
F
7
In order to confirm if the improvement in the scores was
statistically significant, the p-value was computed. The p-value
of 0.03049 was obtained, which is much lower than 0.05, thus
indicating the results obtained are statistically significant.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
As can be seen from the results, training of the subjects
via P300-based Speller Game helps improve their focus and
attention. For all the subjects, there was an improvement in
the Focus Game score after the training phase. The authors
plan to consider three future directions, as follows.
• In this study, subjects were not given any feedback while
they were training via the P300-based Speller Game. It
is being anticipated that giving subjects neurofeedback
while they are training, will have a very strong positive
impact on the overall performance. The authors plan to
implement neurofeedback as a part of the future work.
• The EEG data recorded during the focus game was not
analyzed and thus is another potential candidate for the
future work. With the analysis of this data, we may be
able to find out what changes in the brain activity lead
to such improvements.
• The EEG data recorded in this study does not specifically
consider which brain areas were activated during EEG
recordings. In our future work, we plan to record the
brain areas that get activated during the focus activities.
Let us say if only a few channels are being activated then
instead of using all the 16 channels as done in this study,
we only need to use those channels. This will reduce the
setup time of data recording using EEG cap. Lesser data
will make analysis quicker and comparatively easier and
will allow for data collection from more subjects.
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

This study has the potential to make significant contribution
to the field of education and technology by providing insights
on how the P300-based Speller Game can be effectively used
to enhance students’ focus and attention. The results of this
study could lead to the development of new educational tools
and methods that utilize BCI technology to improve student
engagement and performance in the classroom. Ultimately,
our goal is to make learning a more interactive and effective
experience for students.
REFERENCES
[1] K. P. Thomas, A. P. Vinod, and C. Guan, “Design of an online EEG
based neurofeedback game for enhancing attention and memory.” 2013
35th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC), Osaka, Japan, pp. 433-436,
2013.
[2] J. R. Wang and S. Hsieh, “Neurofeedback training improves attention
and working memory performance.” Clinical Neurophysiology, vol. 124,
issue 12, pp. 2406-2420, 2013.
[3] A. Mahnaz, I. H. Robertson, and T. E. Ward, “A P300-based brain-
computer interface for improving attention.” Frontiers in human neuro-
science vol. 12, 2019.
[4] G. Schalk and E. C. Leuthardt, “Brain-computer interfaces using electro-
corticographic signals.” IEEE Reviews in Biomedical Engineering, vol.
4, pp 140-154, 2011.
[5] J. R. Wolpaw and E. W. Wolpaw, “Brain-computer interfaces: principles
and practice.” Oxford University Press, 2012.
[6] E. W. Sellers, D. J. Krusienski, D. J. McFarland, T. M. Vaughan,
and J. R. Wolpaw, “A P300 event-related potential brain–computer
interface (BCI): the effects of matrix size and inter stimulus interval
on performance.” Biological psychology, vol. 73, no. 3, pp. 242–252,
Elsevier publishers, 2006.
[7] D. A. Rohani, H. B. D. Sorensen and S. Puthusserypady, “Brain-
computer interface using P300 and virtual reality: A gaming approach
for treating ADHD.” 2014 36th Annual International Conference of the
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, Chicago, IL, USA,
2014.
[8] L.A. Farwell and E. Donchin, “Talking off the top of your head: toward
a mental prosthesis utilizing event-related brain potentials.” Electroen-
cephalography and Clinical Neurophysiology, Volume 70, Issue 6, pp
510-523, 1988.
[9] J. Huang et al., “FOCUS: enhancing children’s engagement in reading by
using contextual BCI training sessions.” In Proceedings of the SIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Association for
Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, pp 1905-1908, 2014.
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

