Hybrid Networking Platform for Minority Groups in Accessing Labour Market  
Understanding the Role of Online and Offline Social Capital Interplay in Resource Accessibility 
 
Cecilia Olivieri 
X23 Science in Society 
Treviglio, Italy 
e-mail: cecilia.oliveri@x-23.org 
Agathe Semlali 
X23 Science in Society 
Treviglio, Italy 
e-mail: agathe.semlali@x-23.org
Davide Carminati 
X23 Science in Society 
Treviglio, Italy 
e-mail: davide.carminati@x-23.org 
Lorenzo Maggio Laquidara 
X23 Science in Society 
Treviglio, Italy 
 e-mail: lorenzo.maggio@x-23.org
 
 
Abstract—Social interactions and resource accessibility have 
long been central elements in social research. Social capital, an 
idea pioneered by Pierre Bourdieu, is an extremely effective 
concept for reading and interpreting social interactions. The 
rise of communication technologies and online social networks 
has further shaped human interactions and created new 
avenues for social ties. Although the analysis of offline and 
online networks separately is supported by an extensive 
bibliography, the interplay between the two still needs further 
development. The study addresses the gap in understanding the 
relationship in mutual influence between online and offline 
networks, particularly within migrant communities and 
minority groups. Focusing on a case study platform, connecting 
young Afrodescendant women and orienting them to their 
professional career, this research explores how the hybrid 
nature of the platform (promoting both virtual and in person 
networks) impacts the interplay between online and offline 
social capital of the platform’s members and their ability to 
access resources. To achieve these goals, mixed-methods Social 
Network Approach (SNA) and a one-year longitudinal 
approach are employed. By uncovering the complexities of 
online and offline social capital dynamics, especially within 
marginalized groups, the study offers insights for effective 
platform-networking-building 
and 
highlights 
resource 
accessibility potential for similar platforms development. 
Keywords-online networks; migrations; discourse network 
analysis; participatory research; gender. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Understanding human social interactions and resource 
accessibility has long been a focal point in social research. In 
fact, investigating their functioning can offer an insightful 
vehicle to better understand research and policy issues such as 
migration, employment, social inclusion, and community 
development, just to name a few. Social capital was first 
conceptualized by seminal social scientist Pierre Bourdieu in 
his 1986 study on exclusion dynamics in French high society 
[3]. Social capital represents the aggregate of the actual 
potential resources that are linked to the possession of a 
durable network or, in other words, to membership in a group 
[15]. Social capital is a multifaceted construct, reflecting the 
multifaceted nature of human relationships. One’s own social 
capital consists of ties of various kinds (i.e., weak/strong, 
frequent/sporadic, direct/indirect) and nodes (that is, 
individuals, groups, institutions, or other entities). Each of 
them influences an individual's social standing and resource 
accessibility in relation to their social surroundings.  
The above-mentioned theories have been strongly applied 
to the field of migration [10] and minority groups studies [1] 
since they provide a deep understanding of the dynamics by 
which these groups constitute, maintain, and exploit their 
network for resource accessibility [19]. In this context, 
networks represent a meaningful resource, as they provide a 
means through which individuals belonging to multiple 
marginalized or disadvantaged groups can access a diverse 
range of support, knowledge, and opportunities. However, a 
detailed investigation of these ties, their nature, origins, and 
constitution can reveal the particular kind of resources that 
flow among them. The complexity of such ties and networks 
and how they are established and maintained has become 
more complex over time [10]. 
The rise of new communication technologies and online 
social networks has added a new dimension to this 
understanding. 
The 
spread 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication Technology (ICTs) and social media has 
transformed interpersonal connections and communications 
and affected the ways in which people create and maintain 
social ties [12]. Online networks, made possible by digital 
platforms, occupy an increasingly relevant role in shaping 
modern social interactions, especially in the COVID-19 
pandemic’s aftermath. Indeed, this change has imposed the 
need to complexify the view and analysis of all social fields, 
including migration and minority studies. 
Despite the relevance and permeability of such new 
human connection forms, the relationship between the online 
and offline dimensions needs further investigation [11]. 
Indeed, it is crucial for forthcoming research to delve into the 
specific domains where online and offline networks converge, 
not only enhancing the comprehension of network outcomes, 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

but also elucidating the underlying mechanisms through 
which ties influence outcomes in both contexts [16]. 
In this research, relying on an online platform fostering 
Afrodescendant networks case study, we intend to delve more 
into the interplay between the online and offline social capital 
by filling the above-mentioned gap. Through the analysis of 
this case study, we will explore (i) the role of this hybrid 
nature platform (active both virtually and offline, through in 
person activities) in promoting online and offline social 
capital at individual and community level, and (ii) how these 
different forms of social capital interplay and influence one 
another.  The first objective will be reached by deepening the 
factors enabling such connections and the effectiveness in 
accessing resources, while the second one by delving into the 
mutual networking dynamics. The ultimate scope of the 
research is to provide a tridimensional and in depth 
understanding of the networking phenomena related to the 
hybrid nature of the platform. From this baseline, we intend to 
implement and strengthen the impact in networking-building 
and resources-access of the platform, by extracting 
meaningful insights from online and offline networks 
interactions. The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In 
Section II, we present the case study the research is 
investigating. Finally, we conclude our work in Section III, to 
present our research methodologies. 
II. 
THE CASE STUDY 
This study intends to reach our research objectives by 
addressing a critical real-world issue that intersects with 
minority groups' online and offline social capital dimensions 
- and their mutual interplay - and access to economic 
opportunities. Afrodescendant women, in most countries, are 
disproportionately prone to unstable and precarious jobs [18]. 
Gender-based inequality often intercepts ethnic-based 
discriminations, resulting in fewer economic prospects for 
Afrodescendant women. These inequalities arise from a 
combination of factors, including overrepresentation in 
informal 
employment 
[7] 
and 
limited 
educational 
opportunities [1]. In this panorama, the online and offline 
network dimensions generate a form of social capital, thus 
representing a decisive factor for access or exclusion from the 
labor market group [5]. In particular, migrant organizations, 
active both online and offline, are mostly considered 
important means of support for ethnic minorities [14]. In 
addition to specific services, these organizations have indeed 
a major role in increasing the social engagement and in 
reducing the social exclusion of their users, so in 
strengthening their social capital [4]. 
We intend to consider the case study of an online platform, 
mainly active in the Ile-de-France area, orienting young 
Afrodescendant women to their professional career, as a 
means of understanding online and offline network interplay 
and resource access promotion. This community was created 
with the scope of connecting young graduates, employees and 
expert Afrodescendant women and creating an inclusive space 
for sharing experiences, knowledge and support. It is a hybrid 
platform with both a virtual dimension - mainly oriented 
towards offering webinars, training activities and digital 
networking - and an in-presence dimension that complements 
the networking experience with proximity and human 
involvement through activities and workshops.   
The hybrid character of this platform on the one hand and 
the target group participating in it on the other, will make it 
possible to investigate the relationship between the two 
network dimensions in a privileged field of investigation for 
access to resources such as that of minority groups. The 
reference to this case study will be functional to the extraction 
of actionable insights that can substantively enhance the 
efficacy of networking-building and resource access within 
similar contexts.  
III. 
EMPLOYED METHODOLOGY AND CONCLUSION 
Qualitative and language-based approaches represent a 
promising attempt to provide narratives informed by 
migrants’ voices and experiences. These approaches allow the 
researcher to get a progressively accurate knowledge of the 
community structure [8] [10] and multifocality [13]. This 
combines with ideas of community members shaping, 
mapping and evaluating their network and the resources 
linked to its belonging. 
For us to achieve these goals, our methodology will rely 
on mixed-methods Social Network Approach, or SNA [4]. 
Our data collection strategy will consist of in-depth, semi-
structured interviews, on a sample of ten subjects. Semi-
structured interviews make it possible to explore processes 
and human experiences participation and resources access 
within the studied network [2]. On the other hand, quantitative 
SNA techniques [6] will be used, in order to map the existing 
formal connections and their characteristics. Network 
member features, their degree of activity within the network, 
and their virtual connections will be mapped and analyzed. 
Such a protocol will produce quantitatively built network 
maps, which will represent network tie directionality and 
strength [6]. The quantitative and qualitative data collected 
will be jointly analysed [17]. In conclusion, a longitudinal 
approach [9] will allow us to study how the interplay between 
the two online and offline spheres evolves over one year. The 
same data collection and elaboration processes will be indeed 
conducted twice along the study, with ten to twelve months of 
distance between the first and second interview.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Anthias, “Transnational mobilities, migration research and 
intersectionality” 
in 
 Nordic 
Journal 
of 
Migration 
Research, 2(2), pp. 102-110, 2012. 
[2] E. Babbie and J.D. Edgerton, “Fundamentals of social 
research”, Cengage, Canada, 2023. 
[3] P. Bourdieu, “The Forms of Capital. Handbook of Theory and 
Research for the Sociology of Capital”, J. G. Richardson. New 
York, Greenwood Press, pp. 241-58, 1986. 
[4] A. D’Angelo, “Migrant organisations: embodied community 
capital?” In Migrant capital: Networks, identities and 
strategies.  London: Palgrave Macmillan UK, pp. 83-101, 
2015. 
[5] R. Dekker, G. Engbersen and M. Faber, “The use of online 
media in migration networks” in  Population, Space and 
Place, 22(6), pp. 539-551, 2016. 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

[6] G. Edwards, “Mixed-method approaches to social network 
analysis”, 2010. 
[7] E. Kofman and P. Raghuram, “Gender and global labour 
migrations: Incorporating skilled workers” in  Antipode, 38(2), 
pp. 282-303, 2006. 
[8] C. Noy, “Sampling knowledge: The hermeneutics of snowball 
sampling in qualitative research” in  International Journal of 
social research methodology, 11(4), pp. 327-344, 2008. 
[9] J. P. Ryan et al., “A coastal ocean extreme bloom incubator” 
in Geophysical Research Letters, 35(12), 2008. 
[10] L. Ryan, U. Erel, and A. D’Angelo, “Introduction 
understanding 
‘migrant 
capital’” 
 
in Migrant 
capital: 
Networks, identities and strategies. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan UK,  pp. 3-17, 2015. 
[11] L. Ryan, “Telling network stories: researching migrants' 
changing social relations in places over time. Global 
Networks, 21(3), pp. 567-584, 2021. 
[12] J. Sajuria, J. vanHeerde-Hudson, D. Hudson, N. Dasandi and 
Y. Theocharis, “Tweeting alone? An analysis of bridging and 
bonding social capital in online networks” in American Politics 
Research, 43(4), pp. 708-738, 2015. 
[13] G. Solano, V. Schutjens and J. Rath, “Multifocality and 
opportunity structure: towards a mixed embeddedness model 
for transnational migrant entrepreneurship” in Comparative 
Migration Studies, 10(1), pp. 1-24, 2022. 
[14] R. Zetter and M. Pearl, “The minority within the minority: 
Refugee community-based organisations in the UK and the 
impact of restrictionism on asylum-seekers” in Journal of 
Ethnic and Migration Studies 26, pp. 675–697, 2020. 
doi:10.1080/71368050 
[15] C. Kent, A. Rechavi and S. Rafaeli, “The Relationship Between 
Offline Social Capital and Online Learning Interactions” in 
International Journal of Communication, 13, pp. 1186–1211, 
2019. 
[16] J. Bisbee and J. M. Larson, “Testing Social Science Network 
Theories with Online Network Data: An Evaluation of External 
Validity” in American Political Science Review, 111(3), pp. 
502–521, 2017. 
[17] A. Bryman, Social Research Methods. 4th., 2012. 
[18] UN Office of the High Commissioner for Human Rights 
(OHCHR), “Women and girls of African descent: Human 
rights achievements and challenges (2018)”, 2020. 
[19] E. Sommer and M. Gamper, “Beyond structural determinism 
advantages and challenges of qualitative social network 
analysis for studying social capital of migrants” in Global 
Networks, 21(3), pp. 608-625, 2021.
 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

