Secure Publication Subscription Framework for
Reliable Information Dissemination
Shugo Yoshimura
Graduate School of Information Sci.
and Electrical Eng., Kyushu Univ.
Fukuoka, Japan
yoshimura.shugo.822@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Kouki Inoue
Graduate School of Information Sci.
and Electrical Eng., Kyushu Univ.
Fukuoka, Japan
inoue.kouki.882@s.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Dirceu Cavendish
Graduate School of Eng.
Kyushu Institute of Tech.
Iizuka, Japan
Dirceu cavendish@yahoo.com
Hiroshi Koide
Research Institute of Info. Tech.,
Kyushu Univ.
Fukuoka, Japan
koide@cc.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Abstract—In this study, to make it easy for everyone to
distinguish the right information from the wrong information,
we suggest a new framework (Secure Publication Subscription
Framework) that deﬁnes the reliability of publishers and provides
it to subscribers. Nowadays, services like blogs and social media
make available large amounts of information easily. On the other
hand, there is a lot of unreliable information on the Internet. It
is difﬁcult to distinguish between true and false information.
This problem is known as fake news and has become a serious
problem. To solve this problem, we suggest a new framework for
publishers and subscribers. The framework allows subscribers
to easily conﬁrm the authenticity of information by registering
publishers and subscribers, and tracking publishers’ reputation
via a reputation score, guaranteeing the quality of the information
that subscribers view. In this study, we show a proof of concept
of a simple Secure Publication Subscription Framework and
conﬁrm that it is possible to implement a framework with the
proposed functionality. We also conﬁrm that the reputation score
can be used as an indicator of the reliability of the information
by using 1000 randomly generated articles within the framework.
Keywords-dissemination; publication; social networking; authen-
ticity of information; reputation score.
I. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, Internet technologies have made great
progress, with the population of Internet users increasing
rapidly. Thanks to services like blogs and social media, anyone
can get a large amount of information easily. Nowadays, we
can see what is happening around the world, no matter where
we are.
On the other hand, there is a lot of unreliable information
on the Internet. It is difﬁcult to distinguish between true
and false information. This problem is known as fake news
and has become a serious problem. Fake news is fabricated
information that mimics news media content in form but not
in organizational process or intent [1]. It is not just a prank,
but a serious problem. As an example, during the 2016 United
Status presidential election, fake news was highly used and had
a big impact on Twitter [2] [3].
To solve this problem, we suggest a new framework for
publishers and subscribers. This framework allows subscribers
to easily conﬁrm the authenticity of information by registering
publishers and subscribers, guaranteeing the publisher of the
information that subscribers view, checking the information
challenge from subscribers, and providing the publisher’s
reputation score that increases or decreases as a result of the
authenticity of the information.
This framework consists of three parts, Publisher, Subscriber
and Arbitrator. The main role of the Publisher is publishing
articles or news. The Subscriber registers with the Publisher
and subscribes for publications. The Arbitrator provides the
Publisher’s reputation and veriﬁes the information challenge
from the Subscriber.
The paper is organized as follows. Related work is in-
cluded in Section II. Section III describes our proposed
secure publication/subscription reference model. Section IV
describes a proof of concept implementation of the reference
model. Section V describes two experiments used to track the
performance of the proposed publication/subscription model.
Section VI presents the performance results and discussions.
Section VII summarizes our studies and addresses directions
we are pursuing as follow up to this work.
II. RELATED WORK
Previous research on publication/subscription systems have
covered various areas, such as security, conﬁdentiality and
scalability.
Nakamura and Enokido [4] focused on a peer to peer
publication/subscription model where multiple topics are sup-
ported. In that work, they propose a subscription initialization
protocol to ensure that peers not authorized to have access
to topics do not have access to them. They do not address
the quality of the information exchanged within topics. In
contrast, our framework addresses information quality on a
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

Figure 1. Secure Publication/Subscriber Architecture
generic publication/subscription architecture, not necessarily
requiring a peer to peer model.
Salem [5] addresses the problem of authenticating users of
a pub/sub system containing a message broker in a privacy-
preserving way. The proposal supports mutual authentication
in a scalable way, and may be adopted by pub/sub systems
with a broker. In contrast, our work does not focus on
anonymity of publishers/subscribers, although our pub/sub
model could be adapted to include a broker, if necessary.
In Srivatsa [6], a secure event dissemination protocol is
proposed where encryption and authorization keys are used
on top of an IP network that does not provide conﬁdentiality
nor integrity of data. In contrast, although our pub/sub model
supports integrity veriﬁcation of data, our focus is on the
control of the quality of data published.
Bovet and Makse [3] describe an information ranking mech-
anism to ﬁght unreliable (spam) data in a pub/sub system
model with a broker reference architecture. They propose to
rank information as a way to avoid blacklisting. However, their
ranking system is still based on participants voting. Although
the purpose of the research is similar to ours, our solution to
control quality of disseminated data is based on an arbitrator
that is supposed to be able to verify data quality on speciﬁc
domains, rather than relying on voting.
III. SECURE PUBLICATION/SUBSCRIPTION
This section describes the operation of the Secure Publica-
tion Subscription Framework in detail.
Figure
1
describes
our
proposed
secure
publica-
tion/subscription system architecture. Multiple publishers
provide signed data contents to consumers, or subscribers.
Data content quality is tracked by an independent quality
arbitrator.
The
quality
arbitrator
provides
publishers’
reputation to subscribers. Also, the arbitrator may receive
data truthfulness challenges from subscribers.
A. Sec Pub/Sub Components
Figure 2 illustrates how Publishers provide signed data
contents. Publishers also produce a digest of the data content
using standard asymmetric cryptography, using their private
key to ensure data integrity.
Figure 2. Signed publishing
Figure 3 illustrates publisher/subscriber interfaces. The sub-
scriber requests subscription services from a publisher and
receives the publisher public key used to verify data authen-
ticity. Once the subscription service has been agreed upon, an
information retrieval interface is used to request signed data
from the publisher.
Figure 4 illustrates the subscriber’s data processing of pub-
lished data. Data processing includes data integrity veriﬁcation
and conﬁrmation authorship. The subscriber veriﬁes the digital
signature and the digest of the data, using the publisher public
key. In this process, the subscriber veriﬁes the integrity of the
received data and conﬁrms the data’s authorship.
Figure 5 illustrates publisher reputation tracking feature
of the secure pub/sub framework. Each publisher registers
ﬁrst with the quality arbitrator, upon which its public key is
passed to the arbitrator. The arbitrator then tests the publisher’s
possession of the corresponding private key as part of the reg-
istration. Each successfully registered publisher is associated
with a reputation score metric, which can be queried by both
the publisher itself as well as subscribers.
Figure 6 illustrates the subscriber/quality arbitrator inter-
faces. Subscribers can request publisher’s reputation score
from the arbitrator. In addition, subscribers can challenge
publisher’s trustfulness for each data received. The quality
arbitrator, upon receiving the challenge, veriﬁes data truth-
fulness, and adjusts the publisher reputation score according
with data veriﬁcation status.
B. Reputation Algorithm
The reputation score of a publisher is deﬁned as score =
(the number of correct data) / (the number of all published
data). However, as the quality arbitrator may not estimate
correctly every and all data published, we introduce a noise
model for data veriﬁcation, as per Figure 7. In the model, p
is the probability that a true piece of data be recognized as
false, whereas q represents the probability of a false piece of
information be admitted as true. In the experimental section,
we exemplify the arbitrator score reputation tracking on two
publisher scenarios: i- trusted publisher (all data is truthful);
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

Figure 3. Subscription and Information Retrieval
Figure 4. Data Integrity Veriﬁcation
ii- untrusted publisher; Publisher produces up to 1000 data
pieces (the data can be right or wrong).
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we describe an overview of the implemen-
tation of Publisher, Arbitrator, Subscriber. We implemented
the Publisher and the Arbitrator with Node.js and Express
that is a JavaScript Web framework, and we implemented
the Subscriber with Python3. The Publisher and the Arbitrator
operate like a Web server, independently, and the Subscriber
accesses them according to the scenarios. The versions used
in the implementation are summarized in Table I.
A. Publisher
The Publisher is implemented with Node.js and Express,
and it operates as a Web server. Figure 8 describes the im-
plementation. The Publisher has subscriber registration, login,
some data pages and digital signatures. In addition, it has a
MySQL database that saves the Subscriber’s name and hashed
TABLE I
IMPLEMENTATION
Application
Version
Node.js
12
MySQL
5.7
Python
3.9.12
password. If it receives an HTTP Request from the Subscriber,
it replies with an HTTP Response and sends the data.
B. Arbitrator
The Arbitrator is also implemented with Node.js and Ex-
press, and operates as a Web server. Figure 9 describes the
implementation of the Arbitrator. The Arbitrator receives the
Publisher’s registration, reputation query, as well as informa-
tion challenge and request for publisher’s pub key. Addition-
ally, the Arbitrator supports a MySQL database, which saves
the Publisher’s name, password, public key and Publisher
reputation score. Firstly, the Publisher registers its name,
password and public key. In our experiment scenarios, the
Publisher’s information is saved in initial state, so this step
is omitted. If the Subscriber requests the Publisher’s public
key, the Arbitrator responds to it. If the Subscriber requests
the Publisher’s reputation score, the Arbitrator sends the
Publisher’s score. If the Arbitrator receives an information
challenge from the Subscriber, it veriﬁes data truthfulness,
updating the score of the Publisher.
C. Subscriber
The Subscriber is implemented with Python3. It accesses the
Publisher and the Arbitrator according to the different scenar-
ios. During information processing, it veriﬁes the integrity of
received data and conﬁrms data authorship (Figure 10 ).
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

Figure 5. Publisher registration and Reputation Tracking
Figure 6. Reputation service interface
Figure 7. Noisy Channel Model
V. EXPERIMENT
This section demonstrates the evolution of the reputation
estimator and reputation score for the Secure Publication
Subscription Framework using 1000 randomly generated true
and false data.
The resulting graph shows 3 lines:
• Actual reputation score: the reputation score actually
obtained after going through the Secure Publication Sub-
scription Framework,
• Expected reputation score : the expected value of the
reputation score obtained from the actual truth of the data,
p and q,
• True reputation : proportion of data that is actually true.
We exemplify the secure publication/subscription model
with the following scenarios:
A. Scenario 1
1) Subscribers register and login in with the Publisher
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

Figure 8. Publisher
Figure 9. Arbitrator
2) Subscribers subscribe to data from the Publisher
3) Subscribers retrieve the data
4) Subscribers send a query about the Publisher’s reputa-
tion to the Arbitrator
In Scenario 1, the credibility of the Publisher’s data is
100%, hence the Publisher’s true reputation is 1. However,
the expected reputation score is (1 - p) because there is a
possibility that the Arbitrator will judge it to be false. In
this experiment, the values of the p and q are set to 0.3 to
check the reputation scores. To show that the accuracy of the
reputation score does not drop even if the accuracy of the
true/false discrimination is not so high, p and q were set to
fairly low values. We think that there is still room for further
study on this value.
Figure 11 shows the graph of the results for Scenario 1.
B. Scenario 2
In scenario 2, Publisher’s data is not always true.
1) Subscribers register and login in with the Publisher
2) Subscribers subscribe to data from the Publisher
3) Subscribers retrieve the data
4) Subscribers issue an information challenge
5) The Arbitrator decides the data as false, and updates the
Publisher’s reputation
6) Subscribers query the reputation of the Publisher from
the Arbitrator
Figure 10. Subscriber
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of data
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Reputation score
Actual reputation score
Expected reputation score
T
rue reputation
Figure 11. scenario 1
Let a be the probability that the publisher’s data is false. Then,
the expected value of the true reputation is (1 - a), while the
expected reputation score is a * q + (1 - a) * (1 - p). In
Scenario 2, step 1, 2, 3 are the same as in Scenario 1. However,
the Subscriber carries out an information challenge in steps 4
and 5. The probability of judging the data to be correct was
varied between 0.8 and 0.6, and p and q were 0.3 to check
the reputation scores for each case.
The experimental results are shown in Figures 12 and 13.
VI. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, we present the reputation tracking results of
our secure pub/sub system. In scenario 1, the ﬁnal three scores
obtained from the 1000 data points are shown in Tables II.
TABLE II
SCENARIO 1
Actual reputation score
0.713
Expected reputation score
0.700
True reputation
1.000
In scenario 2, the ﬁnal three scores obtained from the 1000
data points are shown in Table III and IV.
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of data
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Reputation score
Actual reputation score
Expected reputation score
T
rue reputation
Figure 12. scenario2 data accuracy = 0.8
0
200
400
600
800
1000
Number of data
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Reputation score
Actual reputation score
Expected reputation score
T
rue reputation
Figure 13. scenario2 data accuracy = 0.6
From these experimental results, with a sufﬁcient number
of data points and a certain degree of accuracy in determining
the truth of the data, we see that the actual reputation score
converges to the expected reputation score.
Moreover, we use a noise model for data veriﬁcation, and
we deﬁne the expected reputation to be a * q + (1 - a) * (1
- p). So, if p and q are known, the Publisher’s true reputation
can be estimated from the actual score.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we proposed a new framework (Secure Pub-
lication Subscription Framework) that allows subscribers to
check the accuracy of information based on the authenticity
of the publisher’s historical data by checking the reputation
score. In this framework, subscribers can check the reputation
score of the publisher and challenge data reliability if the
information is suspected to be unreliable. We also conducted
experiments on the publisher’s reputation score, and found
that the actual reputation score approximates the expected
TABLE III
SCENARIO 2 DATA ACCURACY = 0.8
Actual reputation score
0.615
Expected reputation score
0.623
True reputation
0.808
TABLE IV
SCENARIO 2 DATA ACCURACY = 0.6
Actual reputation score
0.535
Expected reputation score
0.543
True reputation
0.607
value calculated from the probability of correctly judging the
reliability of information.
With fake news becoming a major problem, it is important
to have a system that allows subscribers to easily verify the
authenticity of information. As such a system, our framework
can be one of the promising options.
As future research, integration of AI(Artiﬁcial Intelligence)
algorithms to automatically identify fake news with expert
arbitrators is a promising path. Although the accuracy of
discriminating fake news has been a challenge for AI technolo-
gies, our expert framework can aid by using AI algorithms to
improve false positives/negatives. Combined with these tech-
nologies, we believe that a robust data reliability framework
for publication/subscription platforms can emerge.
REFERENCES
[1] D. M. J. Lazer et al., “The science of fake news.” Science, pp. 1094–1096,
2018.
[2] N. Grinberg et al., “Fake news on Twitter during the 2016 US presidential
election.” Science, pp. 374–378, 2019.
[3] A. Bovet and H. A. Makse, “Inﬂuence of fake news in Twitter during the
2016 US presidential election.” Nature communications, pp. 1–14, 2019.
[4] S. Nakamura, T. Enokido, and M. Takizawa, “Subscription Initializa-
tion (SI) Protocol to Prevent Illegal Information Flow in Peer-to-Peer
Publish/Subscribe Systems,” 19th International Conference on Network-
Based Information Systems, pp. 42–49, Sept. 2016.
[5] F. M. Salem, “A Secure Privacy-Preserving Mutual Authentication
Scheme for Publish-Subscribe Fog Computing,” 14th International Com-
puter Engineering Conference, pp. 213–218, Dec. 2018.
[6] M. Srivatsa and L. Liu, “Secure Event Dissemination in Publish-Subscribe
Networks,” 27th International Conference on Distributed Computing
Systems (ICDCS ’07), pp. 22–22, June 2007.
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

