  
 
Towards a Secure City: The Contribution of the Smart City Physical Demonstrator 
in Threat Assessment 
Marina Galiano Botella 
Eduardo Ortega Serrano 
Elvira Lara Maudos 
CSIRT-CV 
S2 Grupo 
S2 Grupo 
Valencia, Spain 
Valencia, Spain 
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: csirtcv@gva.es 
e-mail: csirtcv@gva.es 
e-mail: csirtcv@gva.es 
 
Abstract- Smart Cities are susceptible to cyberattacks due to the 
large amount of data being collected and shared in real time 
across networks and connected systems. Cyberattacks on Smart 
Cities can have serious consequences, such as unauthorized access 
to sensitive information, sabotage of critical infrastructure, and 
disruption of essential services. Prior studies have developed 
testbeds in the context of Smart Cities, but these have not been 
primarily focused on cybersecurity. Furthermore, existing 
research on cybersecurity within Smart Cities often comprises 
literature reviews rather than practical experimentation in a test 
environment. In this paper, we propose a Smart City physical 
demonstrator. It aims to investigate and analyze in depth these 
systems to know the scope of the different attacks and generate 
measures to mitigate the risks and impact. In addition, the 
demonstrator seeks to raise awareness of Smart City users and 
organizations involved in its development. The physical 
demonstrator of a Smart City serves as an invaluable resource for 
cybersecurity teams, empowering them to enhance their 
understanding of Smart City environments. 
Keywords- Smart City; cybersecurity; traffic; waste; electrical 
vehicles. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Smart Cities are born with the aim of reducing the 
consumption of resources and improving the efficiency of the 
management of services, as well as improving the quality of 
life of citizens, reducing pollution and making cities safer and 
more livable. On the other hand, the revolution brought about 
by the Internet of Things (IoT) has made feasible the precise 
and instantaneous measurement of many variables that affect 
the environment of cities, making it possible for the first time 
to make decisions based on instantaneous, highly accurate 
data.  
The rapid transition to smart cities has led to the rapid 
adoption of the devices being used without regard to 
cybersecurity. This is reflected in some cyberattacks on smart 
cities that leave the city without the software necessary for city 
management, resulting in loss of police records or other court 
documents [1]. For these reasons, it is evident the need to have 
a thorough understanding of the implicit risks of this digital 
transformation and to be prepared to respond effectively to the 
possible risk scenarios to which a Smart City may be subjected. 
In short, a correct transition towards a Smart City model must 
be accompanied by a correct securitization specialized in 
cybersecurity. 
Among the systems that can be found in Smart Cities, 
traffic management, waste management and electric vehicle 
charging systems, are of particular interest. These systems are 
the ones that have been selected to make a physical 
demonstrator of a Smart City, based on the city of Valencia, 
Spain. The components used in the environment can be found 
in real Smart City locations, as well as with the same 
configurations. 
A.  Traffic management 
Traffic management is represented by the use of a camera. 
Cameras play an important role in traffic management in 
modern cities. They enable traffic operators to monitor and 
control vehicle flow, detect traffic violations and generally 
improve road safety. Cameras can be used to monitor traffic 
lights and crosswalks, detect vehicles in bus lanes or exclusive 
lanes, as well as to detect traffic violations, such as speeding, 
red light violations or using a cell phone while driving. In 
addition, cameras can be used to collect traffic data, which 
helps to plan and improve city infrastructure [2]. 
B.  Waste management 
Waste management in the demonstrator is represented by 
an urban waste sensor installed inside a container. These 
sensors are an important tool for improving waste collection 
efficiency, as they allow city operators to monitor container 
filling and plan waste collection more effectively. Sensors can 
also help reduce collection costs, as operators can collect 
containers only when they are full, rather than on a defined 
schedule. In addition, some of these sensors can be used to 
measure air quality, providing valuable data for urban planning 
and environmental management [3][4]. 
C.  Electric vehicle charging systems management 
In this case, electric vehicle charging is represented by an 
outdoor charging station. Electric vehicle chargers are essential 
in Smart Cities because they enable the transition towards a 
more sustainable and cleaner mobility. These chargers are 
important for urban planning, as they enable energy demand 
management and optimization of power grid usage [5]-[7]. 
The objectives of the demonstrator are to investigate and 
analyze in depth the systems and threats to which Smart Cities 
are exposed, raise awareness among people and organizations 
using the systems, and perform tests on these systems to know 
the scope of the different attacks and thus be able to generate 
measures to reduce or eliminate the impact. 
Within the paper’s structure, in Section 2, the related work 
concerning testbeds, digital twins and cybersecurity in Smart 
Cities will be presented. In Section 3, the testbed setup and the 
proposed cybersecurity investigation methods for Smart Cities 
will be outlined. In Section 4, the outcomes and consequences 
of the conducted attacks will be presented. In Section 5, 
conclusions are summarized, project challenges are discussed, 
and future work is highlighted. 
II. STATE OF ART 
Significant technological advancements in replicating 
environments have occurred, as we have witnessed a 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

  
 
noticeable shift from traditional testbeds to what we now refer 
to as digital twins [8]. These digital twins are highly detailed 
digital representations of physical products and even entire 
environments, playing a pivotal role in various applications, 
including Smart Cities [9]-[12]. While there are numerous 
testbeds specializing in Smart Cities [13]-[15], it is less 
common to find initiatives that integrate these testbeds with 
digital twins. Additionally, these approaches often overlook 
the aspect of cybersecurity. 
However, it is important to note that, on occasion, potential 
applications in the field of cybersecurity that these digital twin 
models offer are mentioned [11]. Cybersecurity stands as a 
critical element in Smart Cities, and the capability to simulate 
and analyze cyber threats in virtual environments can be 
essential for protecting critical infrastructure and intelligent 
systems within the city. 
Conversely, the continuous increase in cyberattacks 
directed at the Smart Cities sector has spurred the creation of 
studies that analyze trends and types of attacks that have 
occurred or could potentially occur within these smart cities 
[16]-[19]. Some of them apply new technologies such as Deep 
Learning or other kinds of Artificial Intelligence (AI) [20][21]. 
Nevertheless, it is relevant to mention that most of these studies 
tend to consist of literature reviews or compilations of existing 
data, rather than conducting actual attacks in a controlled 
testing environment. For this reason, the project focuses on 
creating a hybrid testbed that combines real systems with 
typical elements of a digital twin. The goal of this testbed is to 
represent a Smart City and be useful for conducting 
cybersecurity tests on a small and large scale, allowing us to 
observe the impacts of cyberattacks. It also serves as a means 
of raising awareness about these environments. 
III.  MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The Smart City demonstrator mainly represents three 
management systems: traffic, waste and electric vehicle 
chargers. For each of these systems, a traffic camera, a waste 
sensor and an electric vehicle outdoor charging station have 
been used as main elements, respectively. In addition, there are 
several PCs for the management of the devices. It should be 
noted that the connection of all devices is wired directly to the 
managed switch except for the waste management sensor, 
which communicates with a router to provide Internet 
connection and to communicate with a real pre-production 
platform. 
The environment has been designed with the aim of making 
the training and demonstrations as visual as possible. For this 
purpose, there are different visualization screens where the 
consequences of an attack on one of these systems can be 
shown. To play the role of an external attacker, there is a laptop 
from which some of the malicious behaviors can be simulated 
in order to affect the infrastructure of a Smart City. 
When monitoring the environment, a port mirror is used on 
the switch to study attacks from a defensive perspective. 
Figure 1 shows the pre-construction design of the Smart 
City. The laboratory consists of five assemblable parts (racks). 
• 
Main rack: The electrical cabinet containing the 
switchgear, network electronics and device control 
elements is located in this rack. In addition, there is a 
display at the top for the management of the devices in 
the environment. 
• 
Rack 1: Contains the electric vehicle charging station. 
• 
Rack 2: The waste management system has been 
installed, which includes a trash container and the 
sensor installed inside it. 
• 
Rack 3: It contains the traffic camera system. The 
camera is installed in the upper part and the display 
screen in the lower part. 
• 
Rack 4: Contains two screens showing the city's pre-
production platform and viewing environment. 
The abuse cases will be developed in Python 3, compiled 
into a single script that can be launched automatically, making 
it unnecessary for the attacker to have technical knowledge to 
compromise the different components of the Smart City. For 
attacks on the charger and camera, the attacker's PC will be 
connected via an ethernet cable, while attacks on the debris 
sensor will be done wirelessly. 
The abuse cases proposed for development are described 
below: 
A.  Ransomware attack on the charging infrastructure 
The goal of the attack is to power down the charger's 
sockets. In this way, the attacker would disable the charger 
and ask for a ransom to restore the charger to its normal 
state. During the attack, it will be shown that an attempt is 
made to enable the charger, but it automatically reverts to 
the disabled state. 
B.  Man in the Middle (MitM) in the charging system 
The purpose of the attack is to show the customer that their 
vehicle is charging when it is not. Thus, the blue light 
indicating "charging" status will illuminate but the charging 
socket will actually be powered down. 
C.  Obtaining camera credentials 
The purpose here is to obtain the camera’s credentials via 
web cookie or via brute force by performing an attack on its 
sending protocol Real-Time Streaming Protocol (RTSP). 
  
Figure 1. 3D design of the physical demonstrator of the Smart City. The 3D design consists of 5 racks with various displays and real systems of a Smart 
City. 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

  
 
D.  Attack on the camera access token 
By means of the user's access token, different configuration 
elements such as zoom, brightness or intensity can be changed 
so that the image displayed does not correspond to the real 
image. 
E.  Obtaining credentials from the waste management sensor 
This represents a method of extracting authentication 
credentials through tools against the Message Queuing 
Telemetry Transport (MQTT) protocol. 
F.  MitM between the waste management sensor and the 
management platform 
Tampering in the middle of the communications between 
the sensor and the sensor management web page to steal 
information or enter modified information. 
IV. RESULTS 
The Smart City demonstrator consists of several modules. 
Figure 2 shows the visualization of the Smart City racks. The 
image illustrates the structure of racks 2 and 4 in the Smart City 
prototype with the displays and the waste management sensor. 
Also, it shows the racks 1 and 3 where the charger of the 
electric vehicle charging management system and the camera 
of the traffic management system are located, respectively. 
The abuse cases are currently under development. 
However, an analysis of the implications of each of the attacks 
in case of success has been carried out. 
A.  Ransomware attack on the charging infrastructure 
Removing the availability of charging devices can create a 
significant logistical problem in the city. If the problem 
extends to several systems and for an extended period of time, 
it could create a sense of discomfort and dissatisfaction in the 
population by not being able to use the electric vehicle 
charging services of their city, undermining the mobility 
capacity of its inhabitants. 
B.  MitM in the charging system 
The spoofing of a charge may cause complaints from the 
population to increase and saturate certain citizen services or 
even if this extends to several devices, the technical staff will 
not be able to cover the repair of all of them. 
C.  Obtaining camera credentials 
Obtaining the credentials of traffic cameras may involve 
having access to modify the credentials and restrict workers' 
access to them or even power down the cameras. This would 
force technicians to go in person camera by camera to reset 
them. 
D.  Attack on the camera access token 
Altering camera visual settings means that traffic control 
center workers cannot do their job properly or the camera 
cannot analyze the data correctly. If one of the cameras records 
videos and uses AI algorithms to count vehicles but the zoom 
has been changed, this data would include errors. 
E.  Obtaining credentials from the waste management sensor 
Obtaining passwords via MQTT would be an initial step in 
order to be able to modify data emitted by the sensor. These 
consequences are explained in the following abuse case. 
F.  MitM between the waste management sensor and the 
management platform 
The data that can be manipulated is whether the trash 
container is full or not, forcing a vehicle to travel to the site, 
when it is not necessary, wasting resources. On the other hand, 
the trash container could be full, and no vehicle could appear, 
causing the neighbors' discomfort and the proliferation of 
pests. 
In the future, luminaires will be incorporated into one of the 
racks. In addition, the different abuse cases for each of the 
systems will be implemented, while in parallel we will analyze 
how to detect these attacks defensively, while analyzing the 
repercussions of each of the abuse cases. 
Finally, these abuse cases can be used in new research on 
industrial cybersecurity, conferences, lectures and trainings for 
cybersecurity awareness in Smart Cities environments, as well 
as, to train new professionals in attack and defense of such 
facilities for ethical purposes. 
V. CONCLUSIONS 
The Smart City physical demonstrator represents a valuable 
tool for cybersecurity teams, allowing them to improve their 
knowledge of these Smart City environments, test in a real 
simulated environment, and conduct research. Thanks to this 
technology, attack teams can identify vulnerabilities and 
exploit them without the risk of causing damage to either 
facilities or users, giving them the opportunity to gain hands-
on experience in a controlled environment. 
On the other hand, defense teams can monitor the actions 
carried out by attack teams, which allows them to learn about 
 
 
Figure 2. Representation of the SmartCity. A - Waste management system sensor. B - Display screens. C - Traffic management camera and electric 
vehicle charger. 
C
B
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

  
 
existing vulnerabilities in the system and improve their 
protection strategies. In addition, the detected abuse cases can 
be used in conferences, lectures and trainings to raise 
community awareness about the importance of cybersecurity 
in Smart Cities. 
In short, the Smart City physical demonstrator is presented 
as a fundamental tool for teaching and training new 
professionals in the field of Smart Cities cybersecurity. This 
technology allows users to learn how to defend and attack such 
facilities for ethical purposes, thus contributing to the 
construction of a safer and more secure environment. 
Smart City systems are characterized by their large-scale 
complexity, making it impractical to acquire numerous 
physical devices for conducting real-scale testbeds. As a result, 
virtualization of these systems becomes a crucial avenue for 
experimentation. Furthermore, the rapid proliferation of new 
devices in the Smart City landscape necessitates ongoing 
vigilance to identify and integrate these devices into testbeds 
effectively. 
In addition, achieving highly realistic configurations for 
these testbeds is a primary objective, as it allows for more 
accurate experimentation. However, achieving absolute 
fidelity to real-world configurations can prove challenging, 
given that each organization or municipal body may possess 
specific and unique configurations that deviate from the initial 
design 
parameters. 
This 
divergence 
can 
necessitate 
adjustments in testbed setups to accommodate these variations. 
Furthermore, in addition to the incorporation of luminaires, 
there is a need to conduct a comprehensive analysis of the 
systems currently deployed within Smart Cities that hold the 
potential for integration into the testbed environment. This 
necessitates an examination of emerging attack vectors and the 
development of use cases for training and awareness in the 
field of cybersecurity. 
Expanding the testbed environment is achievable through 
the integration of a 3D model representing a Smart City. This 
model facilitates the scalability of attacks across multiple 
devices, enabling a comprehensive evaluation of attack 
pathways and their real-world impact on an urban setting. 
Additionally, 
the 
introduction 
of 
new 
technologies, 
particularly those involving AI, holds promise for enhancing 
anomaly detection and countering attacks. This may also 
involve deploying AI-driven surveillance systems, which, it is 
important to note, can be vulnerable to manipulation by 
potential attackers, adding an additional layer of complexity to 
the research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “SAMSAM Ransomware Suspected in Atlanta Cyberattack - 
Noticias 
de 
seguridad 
- 
Trend 
Micro 
ES”. 
https://www.trendmicro.com/vinfo/es/security/news/cybercrime
-and-digital-threats/samsam-ransomware-suspected-in-atlanta-
cyberattack (accessed Sep. 01, 2023). 
[2] A. M. de Souza, C. A. Brennand, R. S. Yokoyama, E. A. Donato, 
E. R. Madeira, and L. A. Villas, “Traffic management systems: 
A classification, review, challenges, and future perspectives”, 
International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 13, 
no. 
4, 
p. 
1550147716683612, 
Apr. 
2017, 
doi: 
10.1177/1550147716683612. 
[3] B. Esmaeilian, B. Wang, K. Lewis, F. Duarte, C. Ratti and S. 
Behdad, “The future of waste management in smart and 
sustainable cities: A review and concept paper”, Waste 
Management, vol. 81, pp. 177–195, Nov. 2018, doi: 
10.1016/j.wasman.2018.09.047. 
[4] A. Hussain et al., “Waste Management and Prediction of Air 
Pollutants Using IoT and Machine Learning Approach”, 
Energies, vol. 13, no. 15, Art. no. 15, Jan. 2020, doi: 
10.3390/en13153930. 
[5] M. S. Mastoi et al., “An in-depth analysis of electric vehicle 
charging station infrastructure, policy implications, and future 
trends”, Energy Reports, vol. 8, pp. 11504–11529, Nov. 2022, 
doi: 10.1016/j.egyr.2022.09.011. 
[6] A. Khaksari, G. Tsaousoglou, P. Makris, K. Steriotis, N. 
Efthymiopoulos, and E. Varvarigos, “Sizing of electric vehicle 
charging stations with smart charging capabilities and quality of 
service requirements”, Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 70, p. 
102872, Jul. 2021, doi: 10.1016/j.scs.2021.102872. 
[7] B. P. Rimal, C. Kong, B. Poudel, Y. Wang, and P. Shahi, “Smart 
Electric Vehicle Charging in the Era of Internet of Vehicles, 
Emerging Trends, and Open Issues”, Energies, vol. 15, no. 5, 
Art. no. 5, Jan. 2022, doi: 10.3390/en15051908. 
[8] R. Vrabič, J. A. Erkoyuncu, P. Butala, and R. Roy, “Digital 
twins: Understanding the added value of integrated models for 
through-life engineering services”, Procedia Manufacturing, vol. 
16, pp. 139–146, 2018, doi: 10.1016/j.promfg.2018.10.167. 
[9] L. Deren, Y. Wenbo, and S. Zhenfeng, “Smart city based on 
digital twins”, Comput.Urban Sci., vol. 1, no. 1, p. 4, Dec. 2021, 
doi: 10.1007/s43762-021-00005-y 
[10] G. White, A. Zink, L. Codecá, and S. Clarke, “A digital twin 
smart city for citizen feedback”, Cities, vol. 110, p. 103064, Mar. 
2021, doi: 10.1016/j.cities.2020.103064. 
[11] M. Jafari, A. Kavousi-Fard, T. Chen, and M. Karimi, “A Review 
on Digital Twin Technology in Smart Grid, Transportation 
System and Smart City: Challenges and Future”, IEEE Access, 
vol. 
11, 
pp. 
17471–17484, 
2023, 
doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2023.3241588. 
[12] H. Xia, Z. Liu, M. Efremochkina, X. Liu, and C. Lin, “Study on 
city digital twin technologies for sustainable smart city design: 
A review and bibliometric analysis of geographic information 
system and building information modeling integration”, 
Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 84, p. 104009, Sep. 2022, 
doi: 10.1016/j.scs.2022.104009. 
[13] M. Zaman, N. Puryear, N. Zohrabi, and S. Abdelwahed, 
“Development of the OpenCyberCity Testbed: Smart City 
Research Innovation and Opportunities”, in Proceedings of the 
ACM/IEEE 14th International Conference on Cyber-Physical 
Systems (with CPS-IoT Week 2023), San Antonio TX USA: 
ACM, May 2023, pp. 233–234. doi: 10.1145/3576841.3589612. 
[14] R. Sell, R.-M. Soe, R. Wang, and A. Rassõlkin, “Autonomous 
Vehicle Shuttle in Smart City Testbed”, in Intelligent System 
Solutions for Auto Mobility and Beyond, C. Zachäus and G. 
Meyer, Eds., in Lecture Notes in Mobility. , Cham: Springer 
International Publishing, 2021, pp. 143–157. doi: 10.1007/978-
3-030-65871-7_11. 
[15] L. Sanchez et al., “SmartSantander: IoT experimentation over a 
smart city testbed”, Computer Networks, vol. 61, pp. 217–238, 
Mar. 2014, doi: 10.1016/j.bjp.2013.12.020. 
[16] V. Garcia-Font, C. Garrigues, and H. Rifà-Pous, “Attack 
Classification Schema for Smart City WSNs”, Sensors, vol. 17, 
no. 4, p. 771, Apr. 2017, doi: 10.3390/s17040771 
[17] A. A. Elsaeidy, A. Jamalipour, and K. S. Munasinghe, “A Hybrid 
Deep Learning Approach for Replay and DDoS Attack Detection 
in a Smart City”, IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 154864–154875, 2021, 
doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3128701. 
[18] M. Alamer and M. A. Almaiah, “Cybersecurity in Smart City: A 
Systematic Mapping Study”, in 2021 International Conference 
on Information Technology (ICIT), Amman, Jordan: IEEE, Jul. 
2021, pp. 719–724. doi: 10.1109/ICIT52682.2021.9491123. 
[19] M. Kalinin, V. Krundyshev, and P. Zegzhda, “Cybersecurity 
Risk Assessment in Smart City Infrastructures”, Machines, vol. 
9, no. 4, p. 78, Apr. 2021, doi: 10.3390/machines9040078. 
[20] C. Ma, “Smart city and cyber-security; technologies used, 
leading challenges and future recommendations”, Energy 
Reports, 
vol. 
7, 
pp. 
7999–8012, 
Nov. 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.egyr.2021.08.124. 
[21] Md. M. Rashid et al., “Adversarial training for deep learning-
based 
cyberattack 
detection 
in 
IoT-based 
smart 
city 
applications”, Computers & Security, vol. 120, p. 102783, Sep. 
2022, doi: 10.1016/j.cose.2022.102783. 
 
107
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

