An Epidemiological Approach for Mobile Ad-Hoc
Networks Monitoring
Christophe Guyeux, Abdallah Makhoul, and Jacques Bahi
Femto-St Institute, UMR 6174 CNRS
Universit´e de Bourgogne Franche-Comt´e, France
Email: {first}.{last}@femto-st.fr
Abstract—MANETS are vulnerable to many types of attacks. 
Moreover, many challenges arise in the MANET management, 
such as dynamic network topology, limited bandwidth, storage 
capacity, battery life and processing power. In order to ensure 
high network performance, an important function of network 
management is monitoring. It consists in observing the oper-
ational states of the connected mobile nodes and controlling 
the application quality of service and prevent attacks. Indeed, 
malicious participants may disrupt the system through altering 
the collected data, reporting false measurements, defining new 
management policies or flooding f alse a larms. I n t his paper, 
an epidemic model is developed to ensure an efficient MANET 
monitoring. It will be useful in various contexts, to provide for 
instance design parameters of the MANET such that the number 
of malicious nodes always remains under control. Theoretical 
modeling and analysis of various situations are then provided, 
and simulations results on real case scenario are proposed.
Keywords—Mobile ad hoc networks; Epidemiological ap-
proach; Monitoring model; Security.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Mobile Ad hoc NETwork (MANET) is defined a s an 
autonomous and infrastructure less system of mobile de-
vices, such as laptop, mobile phones,Personal Digital Assistant
(PDA), etc. [1] [2] which can be connected everywhere [3] [4]
[5] [6]. These devices can cooperate to maintain this temporary 
network and to provide services like routing, service discov-
ery, and other application services. Some of the challenges 
that face MANETs are dynamic network topology, undefined 
geographical coverage area, limited resources (battery power,
bandwidth, central processing unit (CPU) and storage space),
communication overhead, security, mobility, scalability, and so 
on [7] [8] [9] [10]. Considering these specific c onstraints, a
mechanism of self monitoring must be implemented to control 
the network state.
Monitoring of MANET consists in observing the operational
states of the connected mobile nodes, controlling the applica-
tion quality of service and preventing attacks. Monitoring can 
further be concerned with malicious attacks prevention. This
monitoring is achieved by a subset of mobile nodes (called
monitors) which are elected according to several predefined
parameters [11]. Each monitor performs its assigned tasks
(collect and process data) and, at the same time, is responsible
for controlling and monitoring a subset of mobile nodes in its
area called the monitored nodes.
In this article, we propose to determine the optimal pa-
rameters of a the network monitoring by means of epidemi-
ological models. The total number of sensors is divided by
compartment, according to their intrinsic nature: monitored,
monitoring, selfish, or malicious. Furthermore, various rates
define the state modification of a sensor (e.g., from monitoring
to malicious after a successful attack) [12] [13]. According to
the complexity of the model, which can take under considera-
tion the death rates, any scheduling process, or the discovery
of new nodes, the resulted differential system can either be
theoretically handled or it can only be observed through
numerical simulations. All these situations are presented in this
article, whose aim is to illustrate the power of epidemiological
modeling in the study of MANET monitoring.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. A brief
state of the art is presented in the next section. Then, an
example of study of a MANET at short timescales is proposed
in Section III. Section IV presents some numerical simulations
in the most complex situation where monitored, monitoring,
selfish, and malicious nodes are present in the network. This
article ends by a conclusion section, where the contribution is
summarized and intended future work is outlined.
II. RELATED WORK
In the literature, we can find several approaches for MANET
monitoring. The aim of these works is to guarantee an efficient
quality of service of the network in spite of the presence of
some anomalies and in the presence of malicious or selfish
nodes [14].
Liu et al. [15] propose an epidemic model for rechargeable
wireless sensor networks. This model is based on pulse
charging and aims to model the low and normal energy
in each periodic pulse point. In [16], the authors propose
a secure multi-casting in order to ensure data secret trans-
mission between the manager, the cluster heads, and the
agents. Thus, the exchanged data must be encrypted with
timeliness information and with a digital signature. Moreover,
a level-based access control model is implemented to protect
the monitoring data from unauthorized access. However, the
authors do not specify how the manager generates the security
level of each node. In [17], the authors propose a probabilistic
scheme in order to enhance the reliability of monitoring by
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

excluding the dishonest managed nodes that provide unreal
data management from the data collection. Nevertheless, the
scheme effectiveness depends on the exchanged measurements
correctness [18]. Furthermore, the authors do not take into
account the managers malicious behavior.
A survivable monitoring that allows a set of nodes called
domain nodes to monitor the behavior of visitors when they
join their domains, is presented in [19]. It supposes that
the supervisor is reliable and trusted and that the domain
nodes are too. In [20], the authors propose to assess the
selfish behaviors of each monitored node regarding its co-
operations in forwarding others packets. However, it is a
passive monitoring. In addition, they do not take into account
the monitoring units malicious and selfish behaviors.
The authors of [21] propose to authenticate mobile nodes in
order to detect intrusion. Thus, they use a non-interactive zero
knowledge technique to determine a set of nodes having access
to specific applications or services in MANET. Among these
authorized nodes, only those with the highest battery life can
play the role of monitors. However, the authors do not take into
account the monitors malicious or selfish behaviors. Finally,
in [22], the authors aim to detect the inappropriate behaviors
of mobile nodes for ensuring efficient routing. In fact, they
propose to add three components: a monitor, a reputation
system, and a path manager, to the DSR (Dynamic Source
Routing) routing protocol functionality.
All these limitations in the related works provide us with
the motivation to propose a new monitoring scheme based
on epidemiological modeling [23] [24]. Indeed, in this paper,
we consider a monitoring approach as efficient if it aims to
perform correctly and legally the monitoring tasks in spite of
the presence of some anomalies (mobility or the failure of a
monitor, unavailability of routes between monitors and some
monitored nodes, etc.) and in the presence of malicious and
selfish nodes as well. The theoretical study will encompass
short and large timescales, while a more complete model will
be investigated by means of numerical simulations.
III. STUDYING THE MANET AT SHORT TIMESCALES
Let us firstly consider 3 types of sensors:
• monitored S(t),
• monitoring I(t),
• malicious R(t).
Malicious nodes attack the monitors and make them unable
to do their work. These monitors, once attacked, become in
turn malicious. The adversary goal is to corrupt all the monitor
nodes (I(t) −→ 0 when t → +∞). Conversely, the user wants
the guarantee that, at each time, at least one of these monitors
is available for network surveillance (∀t, I(t) > 0).
We suppose in this article that attacks need contacts to be
performed (i.e., a monitor must be within the transmission
range of a malicious node), and we denote by β the rate of
successful attacks per contact. It is therefore, a rate of “effec-
tive contacts” between monitor and malicious nodes, in terms
of epidemiological models. When such an effective contact
occurs, the considered sensor moves from the I compartment
(monitoring) to the R (malicious) one.
Furthermore, let us denote by α the rate, constant over
time, of sensors moving from the “monitored” state to the
“monitoring” one. In practice, this rate depends on numerous
parameters: node reputation, their capacity, and their ability
(CPU, memory, mobility, energy, etc.). Let us remark that, if
the number of neighbors (that is, the degree of the node in
the connectivity graph) can be part of these parameters, most
of the times it is only a secondary factor according to the
literature.
We denote by N = S(t) + I(t) + R(t) the total number of
sensors. It will firstly be supposed to be constant, as we will
consider first the evolution of the network on small timescales:
the energy consumption (and the node failure due to an
empty battery) is negligible under such assumption. Indeed,
the objective at the beginning of this study is to evaluate if it
is possible to avoid, on small timescales, that I(t) becomes
equal to 0.
S
I
R
α
βR
N
Figure 1: Our first compartmental model
Having the definitions of S, I, and R on the one hand, and
the rates α and β on the other hand, we are then left to study
the compartmental model depicted in Figure 1. To begin with,
let us remark that, in the literature of epidemiological models,
susceptible individuals become infected proportionally to their
contacts with infected individuals, while infected people be-
come recovered at a rate independent from any contact. In
other words, the non-linearity is usually between S and I
compartments, leading to the classical SIR model depicted in
Figure 2.
S
I
R
β
αI
N
Figure 2: Usual SIR model
Our first model based on the MANETs study is not usual
and, until now, it has never been studied in the literature.
This remark still remains valid for the more refined models
that will be presented later in this article. However, if the
differential equations deduced from a compartmental modeling
of MANET monitoring are different from the ones usually
found with classical models (like the so-called SIR, SIS,
SEIS, and so on), their shape is similar enough to consider
that existing tools and methods may be applied to them too,
in order to resolve them. The model in Figure 1 can be
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

formulated using differential equations, as follows.









˙S = −αS
˙I = αS − β
N IR
˙R = β
N IR
(1)
As we suppose, in this section, that the total number of
sensors is constant over time, then S(t) can be deduced from
I(t) and R(t), as follows:
S(t) = N − I(t) − R(t).
We can thus only consider the two last variables and the two
last equations in Eq. (1):





˙I = α(N − I − R) − β
N IR
˙R = β
N IR
We can focus now on proportions
I
N and R
N , which are
renamed as I and R, which leads to the normalized equation:
 ˙I = α(1 − I − R) − βIR
˙R = βIR.
(2)
Let us remark first that ˙R ⩾ 0. So, at short timescale such that
the energy consumption is negligible, the number of malicious
nodes necessarily increases (similarly, in the usual SIR model,
the number of susceptible necessarily decreases).
The equilibrium solutions satisfying ˙I = ˙R = 0 are such
that:
• either R = 0, and so I = 1,
• or I = 0, and so R = 1.
In other words, the two equilibrium solutions of the system
are either when all the nodes are monitor ones, or when they
all are malicious. Starting in such a configuration, the system
will obviously not evolve.
Let us now study the behavior of the network at the neigh-
borhood of these equilibrium points, i.e., when the proportions
of monitor I and malicious R nodes are either close to (1, 0)
(almost all nodes are monitors) or (0, 1) (almost all nodes are
malicious). In order to do so, the system can be linearized. Its
Jacobian matrix is equal to:
 −α − βR
−α − βI
βR
βI

.
At the equilibrium (1, 0), this latter is equal to:
 −α
−α − β
0
β

.
This matrix being triangular, its eigenvalues are on the main
diagonal: −α and β. α and β being positive, we thus find non
null eigenvalues with opposite signs. So, the equilibrium point
(1, 0) is a saddle point in the phase diagram of (I, R).
Let us consider now the neighborhood of the point (0, 1).
The Jacobian matrix on this equilibrium point is equal to:
 −α − β
−α
β
0

.
Figure 3: Network behavior (I and R rates) close to the
equilibrium position (0,1).
The characteristic polynomial being X2 + (α +β)X +αβ, its
two eigenvalues are −α and −β. Being of the same negative
sign, we can conclude that this equilibrium position (0, 1) is
stable, see Figure 3. Note that, as ˙R = βIR, we have ˙R ⩾
0. So, R can only increase, which explains the shape of the
curves in Figure 3.
To sum up, either there is no malicious node at initial
time, and so in the absence of energetic considerations, all
the monitored nodes eventually become monitoring ones. Or
there is at least one malicious node and, over time, all nodes
become malicious. Such a description of the MANET behavior
is only valid when operations between nodes are negligible
when compared to the sensors lifetime.
After having investigated some capabilities of a theoretical
study of a MANET described in terms of epidemiological
models, we now numerically illustrate various evolutions of
the numbers of nodes according to the parameters of the
system.
IV. NUMERICAL SIMULATIONS
We now consider the existence of selfish nodes, that for
instance become inactive for the monitoring when their battery
is below a given threshold. We consider too the possibility
that a monitoring node switches to the monitored state, for
example if its battery is below a critical value. Such con-
siderations evoked in the literature lead to the compartment
model depicted in Figure 4. This model contains now four
compartments, corresponding to the inactive (compartment
A), monitored (B), monitoring (C), and malicious (D) nodes.
Various parameters can be defined between these four com-
partments.
• Λ is the rate used to define the integration of new
mobile devices within the area, which will populate the
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

monitored
monitoring
malicious
α
γD
Λ
µ2
µ3
µ4
inactive
s
µ1
β
A
B
C
D
Figure 4: A more global compartmental model for MANET
B compartment (as new devices are first set to monitored
mode).
• s is the rate under which some monitored nodes become
selfish, and thus stop to participate to the network. This
rate can be defined as a proportion of monitored devices
that, under a given energy threshold, prefer to preserve
themselves instead of the network.
• α is the rate at which monitored nodes start to monitor the
network. By doing so, they become more useful for the
network, but their activity increases accordingly, leading
to a reduced lifetime.
• Conversely, β is the rate on which a monitoring device
stops its monitor activity. According to the literature, this
may be for a large variety of reasons, encompassing a
coverage issue (too many monitors in a given area, or a
too small number of devices to monitor), battery level,
etc.
• Between C and D compartments, the rate is γD, which
is proportional to the number of malicious devices. γ
measures the probability of success that a malicious
node achieves to convert a monitoring node. Indeed, we
consider in this simulation that, in case of a successful
attack, the attacked monitoring device becomes a mali-
cious one (but other configurations are possible). As such
an attack needs a contact with a malicious node, this rate
is proportional to D.
• µ1, µ2, µ3, and µ4 are the “death” rates associated with
the four aforementioned compartments. They are the rates
that correspond to the depopulation of each compart-
ment: mobiles that have emptied their batteries or that
become deficient stop to be considered in their associated
compartment, as they cannot participate anymore to the
network life.
• Finally, the activity and the strength of malicious devices
are associated to µ4 and γ, respectively.
Such a compartment model leads to the following nonlinear
system of ordinary differential equations:











˙A = sB − µ1A,
˙B = Λ − sB − αB + βC − µ2B,
˙C = αB − βC − γ
N DC − µ3C,
˙D = γ
N DC − µ4D.
This system can be investigated theoretically, by following
an approach similar to what has been introduced in the
previous section. However, its larger number of variables
and parameters make it harder to study, theoretically speak-
ing. Furthermore, our objective in this article is to show
the usefulness of compartment models for MANET studies,
and such models can be investigated either theoretically or
through numerical simulations. We are then left, in this section,
to provide an illustration of the usefulness of numerically
simulated compartment models for decision-making aids in
complex MANETs.
To reach this goal, we have fully designed a mobile ad-
hoc network by using the Python language [25]. Each sim-
ulated mobile device belongs initially to one of the four
compartments considered in this section, and they change
compartments according to the model depicted in Figure 4.
For cross validation, the system of ordinary differential equa-
tions has been numerically solved too, by using lsoda from
the FORTRAN library odepack [26], as it is embedded in
SciPy [27]. The obtained results are convergent, and various
situations can be emphasized, according to the parameters of
the system and to the initial population.
Let us first discuss about the worst case scenarios that are
depicted in Figure 5 (for the MANET designer, not for the
attackers). First of all, a disastrous situation can be seen in
Simulation 1 of Figure 5: the number of malicious devices,
which initially were quite low, has increased until reaching
the three-quarters of the network. Monitoring and monitored
nodes have decreased accordingly. This behavior is mainly
due to a very aggressive behavior of the malicious devices,
that most of the times achieve their attacks (see the value of
the γ parameter). The arrival of new devices, modeled by Λ, is
not high enough to counteract the node defections within the
MANET. Even though the death rate µ4 of malicious devices
is large here, as such attack performances lead to a large
battery consumption, the inactivation of some malicious nodes
is totally compensated by the new conversion of monitoring
devices to the malicious node.
This behavior is independent from the initial size of the
compartment, as can be seen in Simulation 2 of Figure 5.
In this simulation, the initial condition is different, but we
recover a pronounced increase of malicious nodes over time.
This increase is still preserved even if we consider that the
malicious device activity has a very important impact on its
morbidity (µ4 is now equal to 0.95).
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this article, a short state of the art in the field of MANET
monitoring has firstly been presented. This study has then
been completed by regarding intermediate timescales, and
the evolution of sensor number per compartment has been
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

(a) Simulation 1
(b) Simulation 2
(c) Simulation 3
(d) Simulation 4
Figure 5: Worst case scenarios
theoretically detailed. Some numerical simulations have finally
been presented, in a more complex situation where monitored,
monitoring, selfish, and malicious nodes are present in the
network.
Other theoretical results can be produced by using this
theoretical formulation, using compartments, on the monitor-
ing of a MANET in an hostile environment. For instance, it
is possible to compute the maximal number of monitors or
of malicious nodes that can be reached for a given set of
parameters, and the time needed to reach such an optimum,
etc. The results, and the difficulties that can be faced to obtain
them, depend both on the compartment model and on parame-
ters. Their exhaustive study, which cannot be completed in an
article of limited number of pages, is not the objective of this
work. Our intention was just to illustrate the relevance of such
a modeling to study the monitoring of MANETs. However, this
exhaustive study will be initiated in a couple of forthcoming
articles we intend to propose in the future.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially funded by the EIPHI Graduate School
(contract “ANR-17-EURE-0002”).
REFERENCES
[1] J. P. Hubaux, L. Buttyan, and S. Capkun, The quest for security 
in mobile ad hoc networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd ACM 
international symposium on Mobile ad hoc networking & computing, 
pp. 146–155, 2001.
[2] M. Ghonge, S. Pramanik, and A. D. Potgantwar, 
Software 
defined networking for ad hoc networks, publisher: Springer, 2022.
[3] P. Satyanarayana, M. Vani Pujitha, G. Venkata Subbaiah, and Mugada 
Srivani. Enhancement of performance parameters in wireless mobile 
adhoc networks using dsr and cache-modified dsr routing protocols. In 
Smart and Intelligent Systems, pp. 257–267. Springer, 2022.
[4] D. Kanellopoulos and F. Cuomo, Recent developments on mobile ad-
hoc networks and vehicular ad-hoc networks. electronics 2021, 10, 364. 
Recent Developments on Mobile Ad-Hoc Networks and Vehicular Ad-
Hoc Networks, p. 1, 2021.
[5] J. Azar, A. Makhoul, R. Couturier, and J. Demerjian, 
Robust 
IoT time series classification with data compression and deep 
learning. Neurocomputing, 398:222–234, 2020.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

[6] A. Makhoul and C. Pham, 
Dynamic scheduling of cover-sets in 
randomly deployed wireless video sensor networks for surveillance 
applications. In 2009 2nd IFIP Wireless Days (WD), pp. 1–6, 2009.
[7] M. Chatzidakis and S. Hadjiefthymiades, 
A trust change detection 
mechanism in mobile ad-hoc networks. Computer Communications, 
187:155–163, 2022.
[8] M. Fayaz, G. Mehmood, A. Khan, S. Abbas, and J. Gwak, Counteracting 
selfish nodes using reputation based system in mobile ad hoc networks. 
Electronics, 11(2):185, 2022.
[9] H. Harb, A. Makhoul, and C. Abou Jaoude, A real-time massive data 
processing technique for densely distributed sensor networks. IEEE 
Access, 6:56551–56561, 2018.
[10] H. Harb, A. Makhoul, R. Couturier, and M. Medlej, Atp: An aggregation 
and transmission protocol for conserving energy in periodic sensor 
networks. In 2015 IEEE 24th International Conference on Enabling 
Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprises, pp. 134–
139, 2015.
[11] N. Battat, H. Seba, and H. Kheddouci, Monitoring in mobile ad hoc 
networks: A survey. Computer Networks, 69:82–100, 2014.
[12] J. Bahi, C. Guyeux, and A. Makhoul, Secure data aggregation in wireless 
sensor networks: Homomorphism versus watermarking approach. In 
Jun Zheng, David Simplot-Ryl, and Victor C. M. Leung, editors, Ad 
Hoc Networks, pp. 344–358, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2010. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg.
[13] A. Makhoul, R. Saadi, and C. Pham, Risk management in intrusion 
detection applications with wireless video sensor networks. In IEEE 
WCNC, vol. 182, p. 10. Sydney, Australia, 2010.
[14] J. Bahi, C. Guyeux, A. Makhoul, and C. Pham. Low cost monitoring and 
intruders detection using wireless video sensor networks. International 
Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, 2012, November 2012.
[15] G. Liu, K. Su, F. Hong, X. Zhong, Z. Liang, X. Wu, and Z. Huang, A 
novel epidemic model base on pulse charging in wireless rechargeable 
sensor networks. Entropy, 24(2), 2022.
[16] W. Chen, N. Jain, and S. Singh, Anmp: Ad hoc network man-agement 
protocol. IEEE Journal on selected areas in communications, 
17(8):1506–1531, 1999.
[17] R. Badonnel, R. State, and O. Festor, Probabilistic Management of Ad-
Hoc Networks. In NOMS, pages 339–350, Vancouver, Canada, 2006.
[18] Remi Badonnel, Radu State, and Olivier Festor. Management of ad-hoc 
networks. In Handbook of Network and System Administration, pages 
331–360. Elsevier, 2008.
[19] G. Ateniese, C. Riley, and C. Scheideler, Survivable Monitoring in 
Dynamic Networks. IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 5:33–
47, Sept. 2006.
[20] H. Kazemi, G. C. Hadjichristofi, and L. A. Dasilva. MMAN - a monitor 
for mobile ad hoc networks: design, implementation, and experimental 
evaluation. In Mobile Computing and Networking, pp. 57–64, 2008.
[21] M. K. Rafsanjani and A. Movaghar, Identifying Monitoring Nodes with 
Selection of Authorized Nodes in MANET. World Applied Sciences 
Journal, 4, 2008.
[22] K. Gopalakrishnan and V. R. Uthariaraj, Neighborhood Monitoring 
Based Collaborative Alert Mechanism to Thwart the Misbehaving Nodes 
in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks. European Journal of Scientific Research, 
57(3):411–425, 2011.
[23] A. Makhoul, C. Guyeux, M. Hakem, and J. Bahi, Using an epidemiolog-
ical approach to maximize data survival in the internet of things. ACM 
Transactions on Internet Technology (TOIT), 16(1), February 2016.
[24] J. Bahi, C. Guyeux, M. Hakem, and A. Makhoul, Epidemiological 
approach for data survivability in unattended wireless sensor networks. 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 46, November 2014.
[25] G. Rossum, Python reference manual. Technical report, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands, 1995.
[26] A. C. Hindmarsh, 
ODEPACK, a systematized collection of ODE 
solvers. In R. S. Stepleman, editor, Scientific Computing, pp. 55–
64, Amsterdam, 1983. North-Holland.
[27] E. Jones et al., SciPy: Open source scientific tools for Python, 2001–. 
[Online; accessed July 2022].
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

