  
 
Physical Demonstrator of Medical Imaging Unit: Threat Analysis and Protection 
Strategies in Cybersecurity 
Marina Galiano Botella 
CSIRT-CV 
Valencia, Spain 
csirtcv@gva.es 
 
Abstract- Cyberattacks on healthcare systems are increasing. For 
this reason, there is a need to investigate and protect the operation 
of the technologies involved in healthcare facilities. One of the 
technologies with the greatest impact on healthcare has been 
diagnostic imaging. To cover this need for protection, a physical 
demonstrator of a Medical Imaging Unit has been developed, 
using the specific technologies of this system. In addition, abuse 
cases are specifically developed for this system. The purpose of 
this demonstrator is to help in the training on the operation and 
use of the technologies of a Medical Imaging Unit, to raise 
awareness among professionals and organizations, to determine 
the scope that an attack on the system could have and to generate 
measures to reduce or mitigate the impact. 
Keywords- health, cybersecurity, radiology, medical imaging. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The use of Information Communications Technologies 
(ICTs) has become essential to meet the challenges faced by 
the healthcare system. In this sense, the use of some ICT tools 
such as electronic prescriptions or the Electronic Health 
Record has meant a great advance in the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the use of healthcare resources. Another 
technology that has led to a revolution due to its digitalization 
is diagnostic imaging. 
In recent years, diagnostic imaging has advanced 
exponentially, becoming the focus of attention of engineers 
and scientists in order to improve medical imaging [1].  
Healthcare systems are increasingly under attack by 
cybercriminals [2], [3]. Areas of hospitals that use these 
technologies can sometimes find themselves unprotected due 
to their rapid advancement and the increasing connectivity of 
devices to the Internet.  
As shown in Fig. 1, during 2022, the healthcare sector was 
one of the most targeted. There are several reasons why the 
healthcare sector is targeted by cyberattackers. The first is that 
the information handled is highly sensitive and therefore offers 
great value to attackers. The second is the need to require the 
immediacy of the operation of the entire structure. A hospital 
cannot stop, since it has patients who need treatment, and 
whose lives depend on the uninterrupted operation of the 
hospital facilities. It is for this reason that many hospital 
systems are subject to computer attacks, such as ransomware 
(which involves encrypting and rendering computer systems 
unusable unless a ransom is paid). In such cases, hospital 
systems are forced to comply with ransom demands in order to 
continue operating. 
A cyberattack on a hospital can have repercussions on the 
different systems and the usual operations of the facility. The 
attack can block the systems, making it impossible to access 
patients' medical records and forcing professionals to make 
medical reports manually. On the other hand, there are many 
consequences when the computer system is blocked, such as 
the cancellation of medical appointments, delays in surgical 
operations and the loss of electronic documents used by the 
hospital system such as procedures, among others. 
Patient medical records are highly valuable on the dark web 
due to their comprehensive and sensitive information. This 
data, including personal, medical, and financial details, is used 
for identity theft, financial fraud, extortion, and healthcare 
scams. These records are targeted for their potential in both 
criminal activities and unauthorized research or commercial 
use. 
 
In order to understand the scope of cyberattacks on 
healthcare environments, the objective is to develop a physical 
demonstrator of a medical environment. The medical 
environment will seek to represent a typical radiology or 
medical imaging unit of a hospital. This environment will 
realistically represent the delivery of medical images from a 
hospital. In addition, the mock-up of the environment will be 
 
Fig. 1. Attacks by targets breakdowns in 2022 per sector. Data retrieved from [9]. 
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
Multiple Industries
Human health and social work
Public admin and defence, social security
Individual
Finance and insurance
Professional, scientific and technical
Education
Fintech
Information and communication
Manufacturing
Wholesale and retail
Unknown
Transportation and storage
Arts entertainment, recreation
Administration and support service
Accommodation and food service
Electricity, gas steam, air conditioning
Other service activities
Mining and quarrying
Real estate
Water supply, waste mgmt, remediation
Extraterritorial orgs and bodies
N/A
Malware number
Unknown number
Account Takeover number
Vulnerability number
Targeted Attack number
Fake Social Accounts number
Misconfiguration number
DDoS number
Malicious Script Injection number
Business Email Compromise number
Defacement number
Other number
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

  
 
done in such a way that it is as visual as possible when 
representing different abuse cases or attacks to the medical 
environment. 
The simulation environment aims to investigate and 
analyze in depth the systems and threats that involve the 
hospital sector in the area of medical imaging, raise awareness 
among people and organizations involved in the health sector 
and test the different systems of the network of the Medical 
Imaging Unit, being able to determine the scope of the attacks 
and generate measures to reduce or mitigate the impact. For 
this purpose, during the project, several abuse cases will be 
developed, cyberattacks to the environment and its systems, to 
know the scope of these and use them in future awareness 
sessions. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, 
we present the devices that integrate the demonstrator, the 
defined architecture, and the cases of abuse to be developed. In 
Section III the results of the cases of abuse developed and 
launched are presented. Finally, we conclude our work in 
Section IV highlighting the most relevant aspects of the work 
performed. 
II.  MATERIALS AND METHODS 
The Medical Imaging Unit environment developed 
represents 6 medical imaging rooms with 5 different 
techniques: 2 X-ray rooms, 1 Computerized Tomography 
(CT), 1 Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), 1 mammography 
and 1 ultrasound. These imaging techniques are all simulated 
using PCs with Ubuntu 18.02 OS installed, except for the 
ultrasound scanner, for which the actual device is physically 
used, Chison ECO2. 
The environment has been designed so that training and 
demonstrations can be carried out as visually as possible. For 
this reason, screens have been used to display the images that 
each modality would be taking in each room, in a simulated 
way. On the other hand, the modalities of each room have been 
3D printed, as well as other decorative objects. 
The 
environment 
uses 
the 
Digital 
Imaging 
and 
Communications in Medicine (DICOM) [4] standard for 
transmission, storage, retrieval, printing, processing and 
visualization of medical images and their information. It is 
used both as a storage format and as a transmission protocol 
for medical images. 
The open source software used for the DICOM server is 
ORTHANC [5]. This software is used as the Picture Archiving 
and Communication System (PACS) of the environment. In 
addition, a PC with OS Windows 10 is used to perform 
consultations within the network, simulating that of a doctor's 
or radiologist's health practice. The architecture is shown in 
Fig. 2. 
ORTHANC has been configured so that the consultation 
PC can access the PACS web server and upload and download 
images, delete patients and other default permissions. 
In order to develop abuse cases in the Medical Imaging 
Unit physical demonstrator, the use of DICOM within the 
environment has been understood. The use of C-ECHO, C-
STORE, C-MOVE, C-FIND and C-RETRIEVE has been 
studied in depth [6]. A specific configuration was performed in 
the environment when performing the abuse cases. The server 
configuration allowed C-ECHO, C-FIND and C-STORE from 
all devices within the network, while C-MOVE and C-
RETRIEVE were only allowed for the specific asset simulating 
the radiography consultation equipment.  
The abuse cases are developed in Python 3 using mostly the 
pydicom library for working with images in DICOM format 
[7]. The abuse cases should be launched from the radiologist's 
consulting PC, simulating that one of the radiologists' PCs has 
been compromised. However, depending on the network 
topology, these abuse cases could be launched from any 
network access point. 
The proposed abuse cases are: 
A.  Convert an image to DICOM 
The objective of the attack is to convert jpeg or png files 
into DICOM files so that a medical image can be replaced by 
the desired image and uploaded to PACS. There are multiple 
programs and libraries that can convert an image from a 
specific format to DICOM. In this case, the Python-GDCM 
library has been used [8]. 
B.  Steganography in DICOM 
The goal of the attack is to embed a message in a DICOM 
file in a hidden way so that it can be used as a means of 
communication between cyber attackers. For steganography of 
messages in a DICOM image, we focus on its metadata. 
DICOM has its own function which is to create private blocks 
to store patient information that has not been matched to any 
of the base fields of the DICOM metadata. Therefore, several 
private blocks are created, and the text is encrypted using 
Base64. The size of the image is not a limiting factor as these 
images are usually around 5MB in size. 
C.  Modify metadata 
The objective of the attack is to acquire the image from the 
PACS, modify the metadata and replace it in the PACS. In this 
case, the original metadata is changed to that of another patient, 
potentially creating confusion for clinicians reviewing the 
patient, modality or clinician who performed the assessment. 
D.  DICOM image modification 
The objective of the attack is to obtain a medical image 
from the PACS and modify the DICOM image by varying the 
pixels in such a way that it cannot be readable. In this way, we 
can darken the image or create areas with more brightness that 
may look like pathologies. We can also modify the image with 
another image, leaving the original metadata but completely 
modifying the image. 
 
Fig. 2. Medical Imaging Unit environment architecture. 
Attacker
Consult PC
(Practitioner/Radiologist)
Simulating medica 
imaging devices PCs + 
ultrasound scanner
Managed Switch
PACS 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

  
 
E.  Exfiltration of information 
The aim of the attack is to extract the medical images 
available in PACS in order to modify them and delete the 
original ones. In this way, the saved images of patients would 
not correspond to the original ones. In addition, these images 
are connected to patient data, and private health data can be 
obtained. 
F.  Export metadata 
The aim of the attack is to obtain confidential patient 
information. To do this, all this data is stored in a local file. 
The abuse cases are compiled into a single script that can 
be launched automatically, making it unnecessary for the 
attacker's technical knowledge to compromise hospital patient 
data.  
III.  RESULTS 
The medical environment has been built taking into account 
that it must be a mobile unit, compact and easy to move without 
losing sight of the functionality of the environment, 
represented in a single module and with the capacity to 
integrate new modules. The visualization of the environment is 
shown in Fig. 3.  
Therefore, the training and execution of attacks in the 
environment are more visual. In addition, when investigating 
the operation of the DICOM standard, tests can be performed 
without having to consider that the system shutdown may be 
critical or that the safety of any patient dependent on the 
operation of the devices may be involved. 
The results obtained with the developed abuse cases are 
shown and discussed below. 
A.  Convert an image to DICOM 
The image conversion is successful, but the DICOM file 
gets a unique identifier (UID) related to JPEG. When 
uploading the file to the DICOM server, the configuration of 
the server must be taken into account, since if it is not in 
promiscuous mode or does not accept these UIDs or image 
types, the upload may be rejected. Another alternative 
proposed is to modify the UID of the image created, pretending 
that it has been obtained from one of the modalities of the 
Medical Imaging Unit. This case of abuse is the beginning of 
most of the more developed cases, being essential in some 
occasions. 
B.  Steganography in DICOM 
The private blocks have been created correctly and the 
Base64 encrypted message has been successfully included. 
The image has hardly suffered any variation in the image size 
as estimated, and in addition, the encrypted message is well 
camouflaged as there are several fields with numbers in the 
metadata that doctors do not usually check. On the other hand, 
more robust encryption could be used for future iterations or 
other steganography methods could be sought where the 
patient's image is involved instead of the metadata itself. These 
types of communications have been used by advanced 
persistent threat (APT) groups in social networks or other 
environments. They are not currently known to be used in 
healthcare settings, but it is a starting point to consider 
monitoring. 
C.  Modify metadata 
Patient data can be changed for images previously 
downloaded from PACS. This may have an impact on the study 
not being found in common searches if the main search fields 
such as patient name or patient ID number have been modified. 
D.  DICOM image modification 
Image modification using pixels can cause initial chaos for 
the radiologists who have to treat that image or for the 
physician who receives it this way post image processing. 
However, it could be easily reversible for a skilled technician. 
On the other hand, medical images could be exchanged 
between patients, leading to misdiagnosis by medical staff. 
However, the rise of AI also makes it increasingly difficult to 
distinguish real medical images from those generated by an 
algorithm. An example of substitution in the Medical Imaging 
Unit is shown in Fig. 4. This is one of the cases of abuse with 
the greatest impact both because of its visual nature and 
because it could lead to a real diagnosis, since the patient could 
be diagnosed with a pathology that he/she does not suffer from 
or even not be diagnosed with one that he/she does suffer from, 
putting his/her life at risk. 
E.  Exfiltration of information 
This case of abuse is only possible if the compromised 
machine requesting it has permission to obtain such images, as 
is the case with a radiology station. However, proper network 
segmentation, or monitoring of strange or abundant requests, 
can help prevent this type of attack in a hospital environment. 
Cyberattackers sometimes get this information from patients 
along with their medical images in order to sell them on the 
 
Fig. 3. Medical Imaging Unit Representation. 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

  
 
dark web. Proper segmentation, permissions management and 
monitoring of the DICOM standard could help prevent and 
detect this type of attack. 
F.  Export metadata 
In the Medical Imaging Unit, this case could be executed 
from any point in the network since the only thing obtained 
was the patient data and not the image itself. An expert attacker 
could obtain them despite being a complex protocol. 
Segmentation and configuration of permissions on each device 
is essential to prevent this type of attack. In addition, 
monitoring the requests helps to detect them. 
In many cases, the measures that are implemented or 
advised in hospital environments for the prevention and 
detection of these attacks are usually technical. Some of these 
countermeasures are:  
• 
Use strong passwords. 
• 
Encrypt DICOM communications. 
• 
Perform periodic audits on medical network. 
• 
Monitor DICOM requests and accesses through web 
interface. 
• 
Network segmentation. 
• 
Implement security measures as firewalls. 
 
However, not all of them must be of this technical nature. 
It is crucial for cyberattack prevention to involve all staff and 
raise their awareness of cybersecurity. These countermeasures 
are based on awareness and training in cybersecurity, and of 
course, targeting this education to the healthcare sector. 
Raising awareness of the hospital's internal processes and the 
repercussions that misuse of systems can bring is 
indispensable. It is also very important to create security 
procedures to help implement these cybersecurity practices. 
The development and construction of the Medical Imaging 
Unit, in addition to the creation of the abuse cases, helps to 
conduct more visual training sessions that reinforce this 
message. 
The creation of the abuse cases has helped to gain a deeper 
understanding of the risks that can exist in a hospital, so that 
once they are known, they can be mitigated. 
IV.   CONCLUSIONS 
The developed Medical Imaging Unit environment helps 
the different teams involved in cybersecurity to improve their 
knowledge of healthcare environments, as well as to test in a 
real simulated environment using the developed abuse cases. 
Attack teams can identify vulnerabilities and exploit them 
without risk of causing harm to either facilities or patients, 
while defense teams can monitor such actions. The execution 
of the abuse cases assists in the threat analysis of an attacker 
compromising an in-network system in a hospital with access 
to medical images of a hospital's patients. Finally, these abuse 
cases can be used in conferences, lectures, and trainings for 
cybersecurity awareness in healthcare environments, as well as 
to teach new professionals how to defend and attack such 
facilities for ethical purposes. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Desco and J. J. Vaquero, ‘Más de un siglo de imagen médica’ [in 
English: Over a century of medical imaging], Arbor, vol. CLXXVII, 
no. 698, pp. 337–364, Feb. 2004, doi: 10.3989/arbor.2004.i698.611. 
[2] ‘Ciberataque al hospital Clínic de Barcelona | Hospital Clínic 
Barcelona’ [in English: Cyberattack to Barcelona’s Hospital Clinic], 
Clínic Barcelona. https://www.clinicbarcelona.org/prensa/ultima-
hora/ciberataque-al-hospital-clinic-de-barcelona (accessed Mar. 23, 
2023). 
[3] E. Press, ‘Lockbit se disculpa por el ataque de ransomware a un 
hospital infantil y ofrece la herramienta para liberar los sistemas’ [in 
English: Lockbit apologises for ransomware attack on children's 
hospital, 
offers 
tool 
to 
free 
systems], 
Jan. 
03, 
2023. 
https://www.europapress.es/portaltic/ciberseguridad/noticia-
lockbit-disculpa-ataque-ransomware-hospital-infantil-ofrece-
herramienta-liberar-sistemas-20230103122550.html (accessed Mar. 
23, 2023). 
[4] ‘DICOM’. https://www.dicomstandard.org/ (accessed Feb. 28, 
2022). 
[5] ‘Orthanc - DICOM Server’. https://www.orthanc-server.com/ 
(accessed Mar. 23, 2023). 
[6] ‘9.3 Protocol’, https://dicom.nema.org/dicom/2013/output/chtml 
/part07/sect_9.3.html, (accessed Mar. 23, 2023). 
[7] ‘Pydicom |’, https://pydicom.github.io/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2023). 
[8] ‘python-gdcm: Grassroots DICOM runtime libraries’, 2023, 
[MacOS, Microsoft: Windows, POSIX, Unix]. Available: 
https://github.com/tfmoraes/python-gdcm/ (accessed Sep. 01, 2023). 
[9] ‘2022 Cyber Attacks Statistics – HACKMAGEDDON’, [Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.hackmageddon.com/2023/01/24/2022-
cyber-attacks-statistics/ (accessed Nov. 06, 2023). 
 
 
Fig. 4. Modification of a medical image. A. Image changed. B. Image modified by AI. 
A
B
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

