 
Commute Tracking Mentor Tool for Automobile to Decrease Car Accidents 
 
Mario Ervin, Kanwalinderjit Kaur 
Department of Computer Science 
California State University, Bakersfield 
Bakersfield, California, USA 
{mervin2, kgagnej}@csub.edu
Abstract— In 2020, nearly 39,000 lives were lost to motor vehicle 
accidents, and 2.3 million people were injured. In addition, over 
5 million not-fatal crashes occurred. New and emerging 
technology is being introduced and included in automobiles. 
Vehicles have been equipped with new features and gadgets to 
assist drivers with commuting. However, regardless of these 
features, driver error directly causes many accidents. Artificial 
Intelligence (AI) is used for this research to study and analyze 
driving patterns. This solution differs from others because the 
focus is on improving driving behaviors rather than providing 
the driver with tools that will only assist when the driver is 
making errors. This proposed solution is implemented and 
tested on smartphones using the data collected from a mobile 
app called Phyphox. The goal is to determine and detect 
irregular driving patterns from the driver to assess and improve 
their driving skills.  
Keywords—ride, automobiles, acceleration rate, driver-vehicle 
interaction, machine learning. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
      In 2020, the U.S. The Department of Transportation 
(DoT) reported 5,215,071 police-reported crashes. Among 
those crashes, 35,766 were fatal and took the lives of nearly 
39,000 loved ones. The report provided by the U.S. DoT does 
show a decrease in overall car accidents compared to the 
previous year. However, speed-related crashes increased by 
17%, and alcohol-impaired driving crashes up by 14% 
compared to the previous years' numbers.[6]. There are very 
few solutions to decreasing these numbers and improving 
driving scores. Liberty Mutual insurance company has an 
app, RightTrack, that evaluates its members driving habits. In 
addition, State Farm also has an app, Drive Safe & Save that 
is similar to RightTrack. Liberty Mutual's app tracks the 
user's Acceleration, Braking, Location, Phone Motion, 
Speed, and more. However, it will evaluate only for 90 days 
and give a score to determine the pricing of their car 
insurance. State Farm provides a discount that is adjusted at 
every new policy renewal. The app limits itself because of the 
duration its members use it for. Liberty Mutual could provide 
weekly scores and monthly pricing based on their monthly 
score. This would encourage drivers to drive safer and adjust 
their driving skills to be safer and save money. RightTrack 
uses the user’s mobile device to track all data because most 
smartphones have various sensors to measure the metrics 
mentioned earlier.  
      This paper provides a solution to address speeding, 
distracted drivers, and other factors that result in traffic 
accidents. The Commute Tracking Mentor (CTM) tool 
studies drivers' patterns and suggests improving their driving. 
In addition, the tool is tasked with understanding driving 
habits and behaviors. The paper aims to demonstrate the use 
of CTM in analyzing data and determining maneuvers made 
by the driver. Along with this demonstration, the goal is to 
improve driving skills and make drivers more aware of 
recurring errors that could lead to accidents.  
      The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
discusses related work on traffic accidents. Section III 
discusses the problem that is trying to be addressed and the 
motivation for the research. Section IV explains the approach 
and preparation for the data collection. Section V reviews the 
tool’s results and analysis, and Section VI concludes the 
paper. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
      Reducing traffic accidents will determine how drivers are 
held accountable. Car companies have added various features 
that assist the driver. For example, Auto Emergency Braking, 
or Smart Brake system, is designed to assist the driver in 
braking by detecting when the car is approaching another 
vehicle or object at a high acceleration rate. Car features that 
help the driver by alerting them will not reduce accidents. 
Priyanka et al. [7] focus on drivers by focusing on unintended 
acceleration and drowsiness by the driver. Their attention is 
channeled to solutions that react to users' driving actions, not 
driving behaviors. The authors in [7] suggest using ultrasonic 
sensors that use sound waves to determine the distance to an 
object. This proposition is similar to most intelligent braking 
systems in newer vehicles. In addition, they propose using a 
heartbeat sensor that will be attached to the driver's seatbelt. 
The driver's heartbeat is monitored, and when spiked or 
presents abnormal rhythms paired with the ultrasonic sensors 
will cause the car to decelerate and brake. The second 
solution is to detect if the driver is sleeping or beginning to 
fall asleep using the input obtained by a webcam using image 
processing tools [7]. This paper gives an example of 
technology being researched and created to react to driver 
behavior rather than improve driver behavior. Although these 
are excellent additions to a vehicle that will prevent various 
traffic accidents, they only give drivers the false belief that 
their hiccups and errors will be stopped due to car features. 
They do not encourage drivers to drive better, but rather give 
comfort to making mistakes.  
      Automobiles of the future could have customizable 
Driver-Vehicle Interaction (DVI) engines with an interaction 
system to learn driving propensity and behaviors, as Choi et 
al. [4] suggested. A successive and repetitive cycle to 
customize and personalize real-time driving environments 
will be developed utilizing Machine Learning (ML) [4]. This 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
will allow DVI engines to adjust and adapt to their driver and 
tailor certain features to them. The learning process is solely 
to create a better DVI engine for the driver rather than provide 
feedback to drivers. A great addition is sending the driver an 
assessment of their performance. 
      The explainability offered to drivers can inspire the 
development of training methods and evaluation metrics that 
guarantee trustworthiness and consistency [2]. In addition, 
evaluation metrics can be organized and tuned to fit the 
overall goal of this research. Using the same evaluation 
metrics for diverse design objectives can be problematic 
when selecting measurement methods [2]. For CTM, 
evaluation metrics made preemptively were adjusted and 
followed an interactive design process. This process and 
focus ensure that the tool is constantly evolving and 
improving to ensure feedback given to drivers allows them to 
identify accurately what driving behaviors can be improved.  
       Ali et al. [1] use evaluation metrics to evaluate their 
predictive model's performance. Accuracy is one of their 
metrics and represents the percentage of correctly classified 
Figure 1. Flow chart demonstrating the data collection and analyzation process of CTM. 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
subjects in the test dataset. Another metric is sensitivity, 
which conveys information about correctly classified 
patients' percentages. Metrics have been organized for CTM 
to identify when the driver has stopped their vehicle abruptly 
or identify their maximum speed. Identifying and analyzing 
this data throughout their car ride summarizes their actions. 
In addition, this metric can be tuned to identify poor and good 
drivers among the datasets.         
      Unlike previous work, in this paper, the pairing of CTM 
and mobile phone data is the ambitious factor in addressing 
drivers’ behavior using data collected from their driving 
patterns. AI will be used as a decision support/augmentation 
tool rather than as the automation of decision-making [3]. A 
significant difference in this paper's work is that the 
environment is not simulated and is recorded in real drivers’ 
performances. Various hardware and software algorithms are 
being developed; however, they are being tested in simulated 
environments instead of real driving ones [5]. This is mainly 
due to the danger of testing and analyzing specific scenarios 
such as drowsiness and drunk driving. Lastly, CTM focuses 
on learning drivers' behaviors and providing feedback. 
III. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT AND MOTIVATION 
      The focus of this paper is to study driving patterns from 
the driver and detect different drivers’ behaviors while they 
drive. Behaviors can include when the driver is speeding or 
stops abruptly. The focus of this paper will help address car 
accidents. If car accidents can be reduced, fewer people will 
lose their lives each year, and even more will not be injured. 
This paper proposes a solution that will lead to safer roads for 
automobiles. Each year, car accidents have a significant 
effect on countless individuals and their families. Lives are 
lost, and families are scarred and endure unbearable 
suffering. The motivation lies in being able to prevent these 
tragedies. In addition, the motivation is grounded in the belief 
that through research and practical solutions, car accidents 
can become less common, lives can be saved, and families 
can remain intact. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY/APPROACH 
      Data collection involves observing automobile trips from 
Point A to Point B. Data was collected using a mobile app 
called Phyphox. This app allows users to use tools such as a 
Gyroscope and Accelerometer in our phone to track the 
phones movement and its surroundings. Phyphox can gather 
data without inconveniencing the driver. Data collection was 
gathered, handled, and utilized with various resources. All 
experiments used an iPhone 13 Pro Max, the Phyphox app, 
and an automobile. After experiments, drivers can store the 
data locally on their phones or export it to another storage 
type (Google Drive, Dropbox, etc.). The flow diagram in 
Figure 1 presents a step-by-step process of collecting and 
processing the data. Data is collected from the sensors and 
saved locally onto the mobile device.  
      The Location sensor is then accessed to obtain the 
Longitude and Latitude. Those coordinates are sent using a 
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) request to a Google 
Application Programming Interface (API). The API it is sent 
to is the Road API. The API sends back the speed limits of 
the roads the drivers drove on. This speed limit data is used 
further when analyzing the driver's commute. The following 
process is the removal of any unused sensor data from data 
sheets. Decluttering unnecessary data allows CTM to process 
and analyze data more efficiently. In the following process, 
math calculations convert data into Miles Per Hour (MPH). 
The speed limit data is received in Kilometers Per Hour 
(KPH); therefore, using Eq. (1), the data is converted into 
miles per hour: 
 
MPH = kph ÷ 1.60934 
 
(1) 
 
      The Velocity data is received from the Location sensor. 
Velocity is needed to track the drivers’ speed throughout their 
commute. It is measured in meters per second (m/s); 
therefore, the data needed to be converted to MPH.  Eq. (2) 
was used in the conversion process:  
 
MPH = velocity ÷ 0.44704  
(2) 
 
      The data is pushed to CTM to begin analysis and provide 
feedback. CTM can determine the maximum speed reached, 
total stops, and whether the driver exceeded or remained 
under the limit. CTM has demands and uses a standard 
prompt response. However, CTM will add additional 
comments for the driver.  
      For this research, the following sensors were selected for 
the simple experiment: Gyroscope, Longitude, Latitude, 
Direction, and Velocity. Once set up, the driver must choose 
their simple experiment in the home screen and push start in 
the top right corner of the screen. An experiment would begin 
before leaving Point A and stop when the destination, Point 
B, was reached. 
      The Location sensor has seven parameters being 
collected. Displayed in Figure 2 are two of the four 
parameters collected from the Location sensor. The four 
parameters focused on in this paper are Longitude, Latitude, 
Velocity, and Direction. These parameters enable us to 
determine the max speed, speed limits, total stops, and 
directional changes. This is possible because the Location 
sensor uses the raw data from the phone’s Global Positioning 
System (GPS).  
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Velocity (a) and Direction (b) graphs of a 60-second car ride. 
 
      The Velocity graph (a) provides the most accurate vehicle 
speed data. In the graph, the velocity steadily increases, 
reaching its maximum velocity at 20 seconds. Toward the end 
of the journey, the vehicle has a relatively quick decrease in 
velocity. In Direction graph (b), the vehicle makes a turn 
early in the ride. This appears only to last a few seconds, 
eventually leveling into a linear road for the duration of the 
ride.  
      The second pair of parameters used from Location is 
Latitude and Longitude. The coordinates assist the CTM in 
identifying the minimum speed limit on roads the drivers 
travel on. The coordinates are sent using JSON. The 
coordinates arrive at a Google API called Roads API. Roads 
API accepts Hypertext Transfer Protocol Secure (HTTPS) 
requests with latitude/longitude coordinates. It uses the points 
to identify road segments and can return speed limits found. 
Once this data is received from Roads API, the speed limits 
are sent to CTM. CTM can see when the driver is below or 
above the speed limit, allowing the driver to be flagged for 
going above the speed limit.  
      These sensors provide the data and knowledge for CTM 
to accurately analyze their drivers’ commutes. Precise points 
in the driver’s commute make it possible to focus on 
improving their performance and behaviors in particular 
areas. Data collection, sanitization, and CTM flow are 
reliable and effective. CTM is given a CSV file where it can 
begin to analyze and provide the best and most applicable 
feedback to the driver. 
V. 
RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
      CTM’s analysis and understanding of drivers' behavior 
are remarkable. The goal was to determine four data metrics: 
Exceeded Speed Limit Count, Max Speed, Total Stops, and 
Total Abrupt Stops. In Table I, five test samples are 
presented. This data comes from one specific driver who took 
similar routes when recording their data and driving. The data 
collected by the sensors is recorded every second the 
experiment is running. The average seconds for these 
experiments were a little under 560 seconds, about 9 minutes.  
In the first column, the driver’s speed is investigated. The 
max speed reached is consistent, remaining between 57 and 
64 MPH. The max speed was determined because of the 
Location sensor mentioned earlier. The Velocity parameter 
allows to determine the speed. 
      The following two columns analyzed when the driver was 
at rest. In the Total Stops, the data is consistent. As 
mentioned, the driver took an identical route from Point A to 
Point B; therefore, shouldn’t the Total Stops be identical? The 
answer is no. The driver was unlucky in Test Sample 1, 
stopping ten times. This could be due to getting a red light or 
stopping abruptly because of other factors on the road. 
However, the driver was highly unlucky in Test Sample 5. 
They stopped a total of 40 times. In reality, this sample is a 
demonstration of inconsistencies that were found within the 
CTM analysis. It is important to note and understand that AI 
is not perfect, but it can be trained to be nearly perfect. This 
requires more data to train models and provide better and 
more accurate results.   
      Total Abrupt Stops were analyzed by analyzing the 
deceleration of the vehicle the Total Abrupt Stops were able 
to be determined. If the vehicle’s speed decreased by less than 
6.7 MPH in one second, it would be considered an abrupt 
stop. In the following equations, a is the vehicle's 
deceleration in m/s^2. Eq. (3) demonstrates the math needed 
to decide: 
 
athreshold = 
6.7 𝑀𝑃𝐻
1𝑠
× 0.44704 𝑚
𝑠2    
(3) 
 
      Once the threshold as given in the above equation is 
calculated, the MPH that occurred is compared with the 
following second. If the threshold exceeds the following 
MPH, then CTM will flag that as an abrupt stop. Eq. (4) 
demonstrates a visual of how CTM is pairing the thresholds 
and MPH. In Eq. (4), the current speed is compared to the 
previous speed multiplied by the threshold.  
 
𝑀𝑃𝐻 (𝑖 +  1) <  𝑀𝑃𝐻( 𝑖 ) × athreshold 
 (4) 
  
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
      Abrupt stops can occur for various reasons. To name a 
few: distracted driving (driver is on their phone, looking at 
something, not in front of the vehicle, stop light changes), 
other drivers abruptly stopping for unknown reasons, or 
something occurring in the road that forces the driver to stop. 
Abrupt stops can be avoided by safely following other drivers 
to react to their stops, keeping eyes on the road at all times, 
examining the surroundings of the path ahead, and lastly, 
abiding by the speed limit given for that specific road. 
 
 
TABLE I. TEST SAMPLE ANALYSIS AND PERFORMANCE 
Test 
Sample 
Max 
Speed 
Total 
Stops 
Total 
Abrupt 
Stops 
Above 
Speed 
Limit 
Phone 
Movement 
1 
64 
10 
5 
271 
8 
2 
57 
8 
3 
301 
7 
3 
60 
7 
4 
246 
5 
4 
57 
8 
4 
279 
12 
5 
58 
40 
2 
232 
7 
 
        
      The next column investigates when the driver exceeded 
the speed limit. The average the driver exceeded the speed 
limit in seconds was 266 throughout the five samples. They 
are not very safe drivers. CTM can provide feedback to the 
driver and notify them where they were speeding. This is an 
important aspect of CTM because it can interact with the 
driver and make recommendations. A recommendation could 
suggest the driver depart to their desired location sooner, so 
they are not rushing to their destination.   
        Finally, while the program was running, the drivers could 
not navigate through their mobile devices without ending the 
data collection process. CTM was tasked with analyzing 
drivers operating their mobile devices, but there would be 
minimal movement between the driver and their device. The 
final column reports the number of seconds the driver's phone 
moved. CTM flags when the device is moved. The phone 
movement mainly occurred when drivers had their devices in 
their hands, began to run a simple experiment or end one, and 
then placed their phones down. 
     Displayed in Figure 3 are three graphs from the gyroscope 
sensor. In graphs (a) and (b), there are no movements detected 
in their respective directions; however, in graph (c), there was 
a movement made in the direction Z. This was an intentional 
movement made to test CTM on being able to detect this 
movement. CTM was able to confirm movement for 4 
seconds successfully. 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 
 
(b) 
 
 
 
(c) 
 
Figure 3. The X (a), Y (b), and Z(c) Gyroscope graphs of a 60-second car 
ride. 
 
      This overview of mobile device’s sensors and data 
gathering, and analysis demonstrates the capabilities of 
providing a detailed response for the user's commute. The 
significance of these results is the opportunity to improve 
driving patterns and behaviors in aspiration to decrease 
automobile accidents. In addition, it focuses on the correction 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
of the driver and not the automobile. Mobile devices are in 
the hands of billions of people and go wherever their user 
goes; therefore, the accessibility to this tool is obtainable. 
CTM could be integrated with automobiles; however, this 
will be another price tag car companies will attach to their 
vehicles, thus deterring people from this technology and 
making it accessible. The accessibility, efficiency, and 
consumable format that this app offers will allow a wide 
range of applicants to contribute to safer roads. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
       This research paper has presented a comprehensive 
solution to address road safety and traffic accidents through 
AI-driven driving behavior analysis. Automobile accidents 
primarily occur due to driver errors. This knowledge 
emphasizes the urgency of finding innovative and practical 
solutions to improve drivers’ skills and behaviors. Car 
companies cannot continue to focus solely on the equipment 
and features that will react or assist drivers but focus on 
improving the drivers' driving capabilities. The solution 
provided in this paper is utilizing mobile devices to track 
driving patterns and drivers’ maneuvers. Liberty Mutual’s 
RightTrack app and its counterparts have demonstrated that 
with an incentive involved, driving behaviors can be 
improved using solely a mobile device. Leaders that can 
provide incentives are universities, car insurance companies, 
and government institutions. Solving this problem will 
require a collective effort and innovative ideas that will lead 
to better solutions. While some metrics require refinement, 
the paper’s approach significantly promotes responsible 
driving and expresses its efforts to reduce automobile 
accidents. 
      For future work, the goal would be to bundle the device’s 
sensors, data analysis, and a user interface that allows a 
descriptive and straightforward overview of results into a 
mobile app. This will allow for a more simplistic data process 
and a more straightforward data-gathering method. 
Furthermore, this will allow us to track and analyze when the 
driver is operating their mobile device. Device movement can 
be tracked using a Gyroscope, and the operation of the mobile 
device can be tracked through a mobile app—the possibility 
to see when they are navigating through their device while 
the vehicle is moving is obtainable.  
      Secondly, similarly to how authors in [4] focus on 
adaptive cockpits and DVI engines, CTM can adapt over time 
to understand the drivers and how to improve their behaviors. 
Drivers could have a specific CTM trained solely on their 
data, allowing the CTM to make concrete suggestions that 
will be more applicable to their driver. 
       Lastly, bringing CTM to a larger pool of test subjects will 
bring exponential growth to the improvement of this tool. 
Reaching out to large organizations like universities or car 
companies will open the door to providing better incentives 
to use the app and perform well. For example, students at 
university receive scholarship money for good driving 
behavior, or car companies can offer a specific program to 
reward their drivers for good behavior.  In addition, and most 
importantly, CTM will be brought to more people, further 
improving driving behaviors and decreasing traffic accidents. 
CTM has been proven to study and determine driving 
behaviors and patterns. It will be an excellent tool and 
solution to decreasing traffic accidents.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Ali, “An automated diagnostic system for heart disease 
prediction based on χ2 statistical model and optimally configured 
Deep Neural Network”, IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 34938–34945. 
doi.org/10.1109/access.2019.2904800   
[2] S. Ali et al., “Explainable artificial intelligence (XAI): What we 
know and what is left to attain trustworthy artificial intelligence”, 
Information Fusion, vol. 99  doi.org/10.1016/j.inffus.2023.101805  
[3] Y. Duan, J. S. Edwards, and Y. K. Dwivedi, “Artificial 
Intelligence for decision making in the era of big data – evolution, 
challenges, and research agenda”, International Journal of 
Information 
Management, 
48, 
pp. 
63–71, 
2019. 
doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.01.021   
[4] J. -K. Choi, K. Kim, D. Kim, H. Choi, and B. Jang, "Driver-
adaptive vehicle interaction system for the advanced digital 
cockpit," 2018 20th International Conference on Advanced 
Communication Technology (ICACT), Chuncheon, Korea (South), 
2018, pp. 307-310, doi: 10.23919/ICACT.2018.8323736.  
[5] H. B. Kang, "Various Approaches for Driver and Driving 
Behavior Monitoring: A Review," 2013 IEEE International 
Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, Sydney, NSW, 
Australia, 2013, pp. 616-623, doi: 10.1109/ICCVW.2013.85. 
[6] “NHTSA Releases 2020 Traffic Crash Data”, U.S. Department 
of Transportation, www.transportation.gov/briefing-room/nhtsa-
releases-2020-traffic-crash-data, 2020. 
[7] S. Priyanka, G. Hemalatha and C. Saranya, "Sudden unintended 
acceleration avoidance and drowsiness detector for automobile 
accidents prevention," 2017 Third International Conference on 
Science Technology Engineering & Management (ICONSTEM), 
Chennai, 
India, 
2017, 
pp. 
964-967, 
doi: 
10.1109/ICONSTEM.2017.8261346. 
 
 
 
 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

