Utilization of Ozone Water Generators for Preventing Infection in Home Care  
 
 Koichi Umimoto, Shinichi Iguchi, Yoshimasa 
Shimamoto,  Katsunori Tachibana, Syunji Nagata 
Department of Biomedical Science 
Osaka Electro-Communication University 
Osaka, Japan 
e-mail: umimoto@osakac.ac.jp, hpfkp523@yahoo.co.jp, 
yoshi_1014shima@yahoo.co.jp, tatibana@osakac.ac.jp, 
narasinagatashunji@yahoo.co.jp 
Yuki Nakamura 
Department of Medical Engineering 
Morinomiya University of Medical Sciences 
Osaka, Japan 
e-mail: yuki_nakamura@morinomiya-u.ac.jp 
 
 
Abstract—The 
prevention 
of 
opportunistic 
infection 
is 
important in-home care. Electrolyzation of water generates 
ozone water, which is strongly bactericidal. Because ozone 
water can be produced easily and reverts to water, it is an 
attractive option for hygiene management in home care. Here, 
we developed two devices for producing ozone water for home 
care and investigated the properties and bactericidal ability of 
the water. The first, simple device comprised a lead dioxide 
anode, a stainless cathode, and a diaphragm. We used the 
device to electrolyze 1 L of tap water and measured the ozone 
concentration over time. In addition, we assessed the 
bactericidal activity of the ozone water by performing an 
aerobic viable count of Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus 
aureus. The other device used a diamond-coated titanium plate 
as the anode and a stainless cathode to create ozone water from 
tap water flowing through an outdoor hose. The ozone 
concentration was measured at 0, 2, and 4 m from the hose 
nozzle. In the simple device, the ozone concentration was 1.1 
ppm 20 minutes after starting electrolysis, but 0 ppm 70 
minutes afterwards. Many colonies of E. coli and S. aureus 
were present in the cultures before ozone water was added, but 
none was detected after adding 1.1 ppm of ozone water. In the 
flowing water device, the ozone concentrations released at 0, 2, 
and 4 m were 1.6 ±0.2 ppm, 1.4±0.2 ppm and 0.6±0.3 ppm, 
respectively. Ozone water produced with our simple device 
showed strong bactericidal activity. The ozone water released 
within 2 m from the nozzle of the flowing water device 
contained more than 1.0 ppm of ozone. Thus, our devices 
represent an economical, environmentally friendly way to 
produce ozone water for use as a disinfectant in indoor and 
outdoor home care. 
Keywords- Home care; Ozone water; Bactericidal activity.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Hygiene management for infection is required in home 
care, especially to prevent opportunistic infection in older 
adults, who have reduced resistance to infection. Generally, 
chemical disinfectants are used to prevent infection, however, 
their chemical components remain in the environment after 
use and contribute to global environmental pollution. 
Electrolysis is a well-known technique for separating 
ionic substances. When water is electrolyzed with an 
electrolytic cell comprising two chambers separated by a 
diaphragm, ozone water is generated on the anode side 
(Figure 1). Electrolyzed ozone water is strongly bactericidal 
and reverts to ordinary water [1]. Economic and 
environmental factors make it highly suitable as a 
disinfectant in home care.  
In this study, we developed two devices for producing 
ozone water for use in home care. We used the first, simple 
device to investigate the properties and bactericidal activity 
of ozone water. With the second, flowing water device, 
which produces ozone water for outdoor use, we studied the 
concentration of ozone water at different distances from the 
hose nozzle. 
In Section 2, we present the methods of our approach. 
In Section 3, we give the results obtained, followed by a 
discussion in Section 4. Finally, we conclude our work in 
Section 5. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Principle of ozone water production. 
II. 
METHODS 
A. Development of the simple device 
We developed a simple device for making ozone 
water. The device was a batch type, and the exterior was 
made of acrylic resin. The device consisted of a lead dioxide 
as the anode, and a stainless as the cathode, and a solid 
electrolyte membrane as the diaphragm. The electric power 
is supplied via a direct current converter (Figure 2). 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Prototype of batch type for producing ozone water. 
B. Properties of the ozone water 
We electrolyzed 1 L of tap water in the simple device 
by using a 20V direct current and measured the ozone 
concentration on the anode side. To investigate the 
sustainability of ozone water, we put the fresh ozone water 
into a beaker and measured its ozone concentration over 
time by 4-aminoantipirin absorption photometry.  
C.     Bactericidal activity  
To investigate the bactericidal activity of ozone water, 
we prepared two strains of bacteria, Escherichia coli (E. 
coli) and Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus). E. coli is an 
intestinal, gram-negative bacterium, and S. aureus is a 
gram-positive bacterium. The bactericidal activity of the 
ozone water was examined by cultivating the two strains of 
bacteria separately at 37°C for 24 hours. Then, each culture 
was incubated with fresh ozone water, and the solution was 
added to fresh petri dishes and cultivated for 48 hours. 
Control samples were prepared in the same way, but no 
ozone water was added. The bactericidal activity was 
assessed by counting the number of colonies of bacteria in 
each petri dish. 
D.     Development of a flowing water device  
We developed a flowing water device for making 
ozone water, as shown in Figure 3. A diamond-coated 
titanium plate was used as the anode, and a stainless as the 
cathode. The device consisted of an electric cell with built-
in electrodes and a hose, which was directly connected to an 
outdoor water source. The ozone water was released by 
pressing the hose nozzle (Figure 4). 
 
 
Figure 3. Principle of flowing ozone water production. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Prototype of the flowing water device for producing ozone water 
(left), and procedure for measuring the ozone concentration at various 
distances from the hose nozzle (right). 
 
E.      Ozone concentration in water released by the flowing 
water device 
The leased ozone water at 0, 2, and 4 m from the hose 
nozzle was stored in the beaker and its ozone concentration 
was measured. 
III. 
RESULTS 
A.   Experiments with the simple device 
The ozone concentrations were 0.3 ppm at 10 minutes 
after the start of electrolysis and 1.1 ppm at 20 minutes, 
however, the concentration started to decrease immediately, 
and the levels were 0.3 ppm after 30 minutes and 0 ppm 
after 70 minutes (Figure 5). 
In the control water sample, many colonies of E. coli 
(13×107 cfu/mL) and S. aureus 35×106 cfu/mL) were 
counted. However, no bacterial colonies were seen after 
cultivation with 1.1 ppm of ozone water (Figure 6). 
B.   Experiments with the flowing water device 
The ozone concentration was 1.6±0.2 ppm in water at 
0 m from the hose nozzle and 1.4±0.2 ppm in water at 2 m. 
Thus, the ozone concentration at both 0 and 2 m exceeded 
1.0 ppm, i.e., the concentration that can be expected to have 
a sterilizing effect. However, at 4 m the concentration of 
ozone in the water was only 0.6±0.3 ppm (Table 1). 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Changes in ozone concentration during electrolysis (left) and 
residual ozone concentration after ozone water generation (right). 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     Figure 6. Bactericidal activity of ozone water. 
 
TABLE 1.  OZONE CONCENTRATION IN RELEASED WATER 
 
Released distance of ozone 
water (m) 
 
  
0 
 
2 
 
4 
 
 
Ozone 
concentration 
in 
released water(ppm)  
 
 
1.6±0.2 
 
1.4±0.2 
 
0.6±0.3 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
Generally, ozone has a strong oxidative effect and is 
used for sterilization and deodorization in a wide range of 
fields, such as medicine, engineering, and agriculture. 
Methods for producing ozone water include electrolysis and 
discharge techniques. In this study, we developed a simple 
device to produce ozone water by electrolysis. This device 
is easily installed at home and required almost no 
maintenance; it is also cheap to use because it requires only 
tap water. A concentration of 1 ppm of ozone water is 
required for bactericidal activity, and our device produced 
1.1 ppm of ozone water within 20 minutes (Figure 4) and 
showed strong bactericidal activity (similar to that of 
chemical disinfectants) against E. coli and S. aureus (Figure 
5). Our experiments showed that the ozone disappeared 
from the water 70 minutes after the start of electrolysis 
(Figure 4), meaning that there was no persistence of the 
chemically 
active 
substance, 
unlike 
with 
chemical 
disinfectants. This lack of persistence is an advantage of 
ozone water and makes it suitable for disinfection in home 
care. 
Previously, we studied the use of acidic electrolyzed 
water, which is produced by water electrolysis and is 
strongly bactericidal [2][3][4]. However, a small amount of 
sodium chloride is needed to produce electrolyzed water, 
and electrolysis generates harmful chlorine gas [5]. In 
contrast, ozone water can be generated from water alone and 
reverts to ordinary water.  
In addition to hand disinfection, the prevention of 
infection at home requires disinfection of utensils such as 
tableware, cooking utensils, and sanitary appliances such as 
toilets. Our study shows that ozone water can be easily 
produced at home and used indoors to prevent infection. 
Our experiment with ozone water produced by a flowing 
water device (Table 1) showed that the released ozone water 
can be used as a bactericidal agent outdoors up to about 2 m 
from the hose nozzle. Outdoors, ozone water can be used in 
a wide variety of applications, e.g, the disinfection of 
equipment. 
Our ozone water-generating devices and ozone water 
experiments indicate that the production of ozone water at 
home may be a useful approach to infection prevention in 
home care. Future studies should evaluate the use of ozone 
water in various indoor and outdoor applications and 
confirm its effectiveness.  
Ⅴ. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We developed two devices that can be used at home to 
produce ozone water for infection prevention. The simple 
device produces 1.1 ppm of ozone water within 20 minutes 
of starting electrolysis, and the ozone water shows strong 
bactericidal activity; the ozone disappears within 70 minutes. 
The flowing water device maintains a bactericidal ozone 
concentration up to 2 m from the hose nozzle and is suitable 
for outdoor use. The devices are useful for producing ozone 
water as a disinfectant for use in home care and are 
beneficial from both an economic and an environmental 
perspective.  
In the future, we will carry out the questionnaire survey 
using those devices in home care and summarize the points 
for improvement based on usage experience. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported in part by a Grants-in-Aid 
for Scientific Research from Japan Society for the 
Promotion of Science. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Hotta, K. Kawaguchi, K. Saito, K. Ochi, and T. Nakayama, 
“Antimicrobial activity of electrolyzed NaCl solution: effect on 
the growth of Streptomyces SPP,” Actinomyatologica, vol. 8, 
pp. 51-56, 1994. 
[2] K. Kumon, “What is functional water?” Artif. Organs, vol. 21, 
pp. 2-4, 1997. 
[3] Y. Tatsumi, K. Umimoto, Y. Kumayama, and K. Jokei, “Effect 
of long-term storage on bactericidal activity of strong acidic 
electrolyzed water,” Proceedings of IFMBE vol.14, pp. 3596-
3599, 2006. 
[4] K. Umimoto, H. Kawanishi, K. Kobayashi and J. Yanagida, 
“Development of a device to provide electrolyzed water for 
home care,” IFMBE Proceedings vol 21, pp. 738–741, 2008. 
[5] K. Umimoto, H. Kawanishi, Y. Tachibana, N. Kawai, S. 
Nagata and J. Yanagida, “Development of automatic controller 
for providing multi electrolyzed water,” IFMBE Proceedings 
vol. 25, pp. 306-009, 2009. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

