 
 
Advances in Sensors and X-ray Spectroscopy for Agricultural Soil Analysis 
 
 
Paulo E. Cruvinel 
 Embrapa Instrumentation, São Carlos, SP, Brazil 
Post-Graduation Program in Computer Science - Federal University of São Carlos, SP, Brazil 
Email: paulo.cruvinel@embrapa.br 
 
Abstract— This paper presents a study regarding sensors 
development and the use for X-ray spectroscopy. In fact, we 
include not only a novel discussion on sensors since the X-rays 
discovery, but we also present a prospective about the future. 
X-ray-based spectrometry is an analytical technique to 
determine the elemental composition of different materials. 
For agricultural soils, either soft or hard X-ray spectroscopies 
have been shown to improve agronomic competitiveness and 
agroecosystems sustainability. This review in X-ray sensors 
considers their use in both X-ray fluorescence and particle 
induced X-ray emission techniques, i.e., highlighting new 
materials, accuracy, resolution, efficiency, energy response, 
and related methods. 
Keywords—X-ray 
Sensors; 
Radiation-matter 
Interaction; 
Spectrometer; 
Intelligent 
Instrumentation; 
Soil 
analysis; 
Decision making. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Currently, it is possible to estimate that agriculture 
represents around 3 trillion USD of the global economy. This 
considers the planet’s growing population, the increased 
interest by consumers in the origins and quality of food, and 
challenges brought on by climate change, sustainability, and 
circular economy. Besides, it is becoming clear that the 
future of agriculture relies on technology and on 
technological advancement. In fact, the world already has 
experienced four waves of agricultural technologies, i.e., 
Mechanization (first wave, 1700–1940s); Agricultural 
chemistry, biochemistry, and genetics (second wave, 1940s–
1990s), which has included synthetic fertilizers, pesticides 
for pest control, and Genetic Modified Organisms (GMOs), 
created through genetic engineering and available to 
consumers; and Precision farming (third wave, 1990s–2014), 
that brought the huge use of Global Positioning System 
(GPS), smart sensors and instrumentation to support decision 
making in agriculture. However, beyond that, in recent times, 
the agricultural world has been using advanced sensor-based 
methods on the interaction of the electromagnetic radiation 
with matter, as well as big data and artificial intelligence, all 
to better understand and manage the complex system soil-
plant-atmosphere, i.e., not only for gain in production, but 
also looking for non-invasive operation and the resilience of 
the ecosystems [1][2]. Such a scenario has become the 
newest wave in the agricultural industry.   
In the context described above, technology development 
and innovation lead farming operations to be more 
productive, harvesting more crops per area and yielding 
higher quality products. In such a context, non-invasive 
sensors play a vital role in this technological revolution [3]. 
For example, sensors in a smart agriculture technology are 
essential in the measurement of soil pH, which is related to 
the availability of nutrients and essential to plant growth. In 
addition, Global Positioning System (GPS) sensors, which 
are typically associated with tractors and other machineries, 
including wireless communication on farms, are useful for 
plant harvesting and related farming techniques, including 
highly precise machine guidance systems, i.e., reducing 
process overlap and the amount of time required to complete 
and optimize management tasks [4]. Likewise, temperature 
sensors based on the use of infrared radiation are crucial for 
ambient condition monitoring and mechanical asset 
monitoring. Similar to the use of temperature sensors in 
predictive maintenance, wireless accelerometers are being 
widely utilized to predict and assist with required 
maintenance. Primarily used on moving components and 
motors, the wireless accelerometers detect slight variations in 
movement and vibration inconsistencies and predict when 
standard maintenance is required, which is quite useful to 
prevent 
failure 
and 
improve 
reliability 
[5]. 
Such 
accelerometers are also used in a variety of automated 
systems and tracking methods, such as, for instance, to 
monitor the status of an adjustable spray nozzle on the end of 
a fertilization beam. In more recent applications, they also 
have been used with Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) for 
inertial measurement, i.e., to track motion, speed, 
undesirable events, and position in space [6].  
Further, the use of smart cameras operating in several 
bands of frequencies (multispectral or even hyperspectral) 
has been adopted for a variety of smart agriculture 
applications, i.e., to detect either crop vitality or even 
families of weeds and other plant locations to automatically 
and accurately decrease the use of herbicides and improve 
sustainability. 
Furthermore, 
for 
soil 
quality 
evaluation, 
it 
is 
advantageous to have a large availability of sensors that are 
able to detect a set of elements and allow their measurement 
in a wide range of concentration values [7]. Such elements 
play an important role for plant growth. Actually, many of 
these elements have a quite well-known function with plant 
uptake, while others are still under investigation and demand 
scientific research. In such a context, the current elements 
that can be observed from an agricultural soil are 
macronutrients such as nitrogen (N), phosphorus (P), 
potassium (K), sulfur (S), calcium (Ca), and magnesium 
(Mg), as well as micronutrients, such as boron (B), chlorine 
(Cl), copper (Cu), iron (Fe), manganese (Mn), molybdenum 
(Mo), nickel (Ni), and zinc (Zn), all of which are based on 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
natural resources or come from soil inputs, like fertilizers. To 
obtain such information, it is necessary to perform soil 
analysis, which is a valuable tool for food production as it 
determines the inputs required for efficient and economic 
production. A proper soil analysis will help ensure the 
application of enough fertilizer to meet the requirements of 
the crop while taking advantage of the nutrients already 
present in the soil. It will also allow the farmer to determine 
lime requirements and can be used to diagnose problems in 
the crop areas. Soil analysis is a requirement for farms that 
must complete a nutrient management plan.  
Currently, there are several techniques available for soil 
chemical analysis [8]. The most common ones are 
spectrophotometry in the uv-visible and colorimeters, atomic 
absorption 
spectrophotometry, 
atomic 
emission 
spectrophotometry, inductively coupled plasma and High-
Performance Liquid Chromatography. However, despite 
being efficient, most of them have a high cost, not only in 
terms of instrumental infrastructure, but also in relation to 
sample preparation, which in general is based on chemical 
processes. Also, the analysis is highly time consuming, 
which is a critical factor. 
Based on the reasons mentioned above, the use of 
ionizing radiation for X-ray spectroscopy, which also allows 
elemental analysis of soil samples, has been considered even 
more for scientific research and innovation for soil analysis. 
Soil analysis is the only method that allows, before 
planting, to identify the ability of the soil to provide the 
nutrients that are needed by plants, in addition to having a 
basis for recommending the necessary amounts of 
correctives and fertilizers to intensify crop productivity and, 
consequently, obtain the best return on investments and 
increased profit. When carrying out the soil analysis, the 
producer also allows monitoring the changes in the fertility 
of the production area. This is because it offers the 
possibility of increasing production and plant resistance, 
reducing expenses with pesticides (insecticides, herbicides 
and fungicides) and consequently, also promoting a 
reduction in environmental impacts. 
The intelligent agriculture industry is expanding quickly, 
presenting new solutions to farmers practically daily. 
Methods and devices aggregate sensor data, relay critical 
information to farmers and are focused on the optimization 
of the agricultural processes for food, energy and fibers 
production.  
This paper presents advances in sensors and potential 
applications in X-ray spectroscopy for analysis, i.e., based on 
the applications of both X-ray Fluorescence (XRF) and 
Particle Induced X-ray Emission (PIXE) in agriculture. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section II 
presents the evolution of sensors for these two case studies, 
as well as their state-of-art and future prospective. 
Conclusions are presented in Section III.  
II. 
SENSORS FOR XRF AND PIXE 
X-rays were discovered in 1895 by the German scientist 
Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen [9]. These rays could pass through 
the heavy paper covering and exciting phosphorescent 
materials. One of Röntgen's first experiments late in 1895 
was the use of a photographic film as a sensor. Current 
radiographic films are based on polyethylene teratalate 
(polyester). 
The 
Roentgen's 
discovery 
lead 
to 
the 
development 
of 
the 
X-Rays 
Fluorescence 
(XRF) 
spectroscopy which has become a powerful and versatile 
technique for the analysis and characterization of materials. 
Pioneering work in XRF has been led by William Lawrence 
Bragg and William Henry Bragg [10]. This work 
distinguishes different elements present in a sample 
according to the characteristic X-ray energies they emit and 
helps in determining their respective concentrations. Figure 1 
presents a basic arrangement for a typical XRF instrument. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Instrumental arrangement for a typical XRF spectrometer. 
 
In fact, X-ray spectroscopy is a technique that detects and 
measures photons of light that have wavelengths in the X-ray 
portion of the electromagnetic spectrum. There are different 
X-ray spectrometers configurations and associated methods 
that can be used for several disciplines and fields of 
application. In 1996, Pessoa and co-authors presented one of 
the first arrangements based on XRF for agricultural soil and 
plant analysis [11].  
More recently, the definition for XRF has been expanded 
to include the study of the interactions between particles 
such as protons, electrons, and ions, as well as their 
interaction with other particles as a function of their collision 
energy. In such a context, one may use particles and their 
acceleration for the ionization of the atoms of a sample with 
subsequent X-ray emission, characteristic from the present 
elements, i.e., a technique named Particle Induced X-ray 
Emission (PIXE). The number of X-ray photons of a given 
element provides information on the quantity of that element. 
Pioneering work in PIXE has been first proposed in 1970 by 
Sven Johansson of Lund University, Sweden, and developed 
over the next few years with his colleagues Roland 
Akselsson and Thomas Johansson [12]. With this technique, 
samples can be analyzed with weight in the order of 10-12 g 
for solids and volume in the order of 1 mL for liquids. Such a 
technique allows the simultaneous detection of all elements 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
with an atomic number above Mg, and the inorganic matrix 
of the sample during its preparation for analysis is 
maintained. Figure 2 illustrates a typical arrangement for 
PIXE analysis. 
  
 
 
Figure 2.  Instrumental arrangement for PIXE analysis. 
 
In 1993, Cruvinel and Flocchini presented the first 
arrangement based on PIXE for agricultural soil analysis 
[13]. PIXE has allowed a very quick soil analysis. For 
instance, considering the X-ray induction by 4.0 MeV 
protons, the emergent X-rays have been obtained using the 
cross section as a function of the ionization energy, and the 
analysis of a set of soil samples was carried out. Further, 
additional arrangements using a particle accelerator either 
like a Cyclotron or a Pelletron, and an alfa source have 
allowed accurate analyses and configuration of portable 
PIXE instruments [14]. In fact, for both XRF and PIXE 
techniques in the quantitative analysis of agricultural soils, 
corrections are required, for the diameter size of the particles 
or aggregates of a certain composition. In addition, 
corrections are required for X-ray transmissions through 
filters, which are used with sensor-based detectors.  
For the X-ray sensors, a significant evolution has been 
observed since the first experiment organized by Röntgen in 
1895 using a photographic film. The Röntgen's original 
method remained important because it was widely available. 
In the 1900s and the 1910s, several rival techniques of 
chemical coloration evolved which were easier to use 
because no development was required. The discoloration of 
pastilles left on a body receiving radiotherapy would by 
comparison with a color chart give a measure of the dose 
applied. Such techniques were good enough if the precision 
required was not great. The rational radiotherapy of the 
1920s required greater precision, however, driving the 
development of instrumentation that required no judgment 
by the human eye. The instrument eventually chosen was an 
elaboration of that with which Ernest Rutherford and the 
Curies had conducted their experiments in radioactivity [15]. 
The idea was that radiation ionized air in a chamber and the 
ions were counted by measuring the current they produced 
across an electric potential. However, this was greatly 
dependent on the size of the chamber and the material of the 
walls, and also on the relative positions of the X-ray tube and 
chamber, and it was not until 1928 that an international X-
ray intensity standard was fully accepted, a standard that 
specified the behavior required to achieve the required 
precision. For the first time, X-ray researchers had 
confidence that numbers could be compared between 
laboratories [16], i.e., considering metrological bases 
aspects. 
New X-ray detectors are being developed since the 
1940s, with the emergence of proportional and scintillation 
counters and the electronics needed for signal processing. 
With an extensive use of tubes, solid-state counters have also 
been incorporated since they are less expensive, have high 
collection efficiency and there is no need for moving parts.  
The smaller counters have not only enabled portability in 
the 1980s, but also improvements in the analytical 
techniques related to XRF and PIXE. In fact, there are 
different detectors, especially based on single crystals [17]. 
For the X-ray detectors, many corporations can make their 
commercially 
available ones, 
including 
Silicon (Si) 
photodiodes, and Charge Coupled Devices (CCD) cameras, 
among others. In the low energy X-ray region called the soft 
X-ray region from a few hundred eV to about 20 keV, direct 
detectors such as Si PIN photodiodes (PIN layers: P, I, and 
N, where the P-layer is doped with a trivalent impurity, and 
its terminal acts like anode, the I-layer is undoped or very 
lightly doped, and N-layer is doped with a pentavalent 
impurity, and its terminal acts like cathode), Si with the 
transistor Active Pixel Sensors (Si APS), and CCD area 
image sensors are utilized. The PIN structure allows high 
quantum efficiency and fast response for detection of 
photons in the 400 nm to 1100 nm range [18]. All of these 
X-ray detectors can provide high energy efficiency and high 
energy resolution and can be useful for elemental analysis of 
agricultural samples. On the other hand, for the hard X-ray 
region with energy higher than 20 keV is sensors based on 
high penetration efficiency through samples or objects are 
utilized. For such a context, scintillator detectors are still 
widely used, i.e., they are able to convert X-ray into visible 
light and detect this visible light to detect the X-ray 
indirectly.  Likewise, one may find expressive diversity in 
the X-ray detectors currently in use for spectrometers; 
however, the majority of these are already semiconductor-
based detectors. This occurs because of the outstanding 
combination of high speed, spatial resolution, and sensitivity, 
as compared to other types of detectors, such as those based 
on gas and photomultiplier tubes with single crystals [19].  
As we have seen, the use of semiconductor materials to 
detect electromagnetic radiation has been developed 
extensively during the last forty years [20]. Within this 
period, for instance, the Lithium Silicon (Si(Li)) detector 
[21] of a particular shape and size has been the preferred 
choice for detecting low energy X-rays. These include XRF 
systems, among other applications. Within the last years 
[22], it has become known about the usefulness of 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
Germanium (Ge), as well as its advantages in relation to the 
use of Si. However, even though the technology based on the 
use of Ge is known for X-ray detectors, there are still 
customization and development needed for a wider range of 
experiments based on the use of high energies, such as those 
required in imaging. In fact, major attention has been 
employed for the development of these Ge detectors as 
devices for high resolution energy dispersive XRF. 
Gallium arsenide (GaAs) is also used in diodes, Field-
Effect Transistors (FETs), integrated circuits, as well as for 
X-ray sensors. For such devices, the charge carriers, which 
are mostly electrons, move at high speed among the atoms. 
This makes sensors based on GaAs components useful at 
ultra-high frequencies. GaAs devices generate less noise than 
most other types of semiconductor components [23].  
On the other hand, Cadmium telluride (CdTe) is also a 
semiconductor 
with 
favorable 
characteristics 
for 
spectrometer-based X-ray detectors. The band gap is 
sufficiently large so that only moderate cooling is required to 
obtain small leakage currents. The high density and high 
atomic numbers (Cd with Z=48, and Te with Z=52) result in 
efficient 
photoelectric 
absorption. 
This 
high-Z 
semiconductor material provides excellent stopping power, 
resulting in superior detection efficiency even at high X-ray 
energies. The manufacturing quality and the availability of 
Schottky 
contacts 
allow 
achieving 
adequate 
energy 
resolution over one useful workable range. The detrimental 
spectral tailing due to the comparatively short lifetime can be 
limited by applying large bias voltages. As an example, the 
CdTe thickness of 1000 µm provides high quantum 
efficiency for hard X-ray energies up to 100 keV, and it can 
be capable of operating high X-ray fluxes [24]. 
In addition, in terms of the state-of-the-art and the future, 
it is possible to find commercially available Silicon-Drift-
Detector (SDD), which incorporates two different design 
concepts, one based on an integrated FET and the other 
based on a discrete external FET [25]. Figure 3 shows a 
typical relation between efficiency and energy for the SDD. 
The performance of the SDDs provided by these two 
technologies can provide advantages and disadvantages, 
depending on the application and needs. 
Figure 4 illustrates, as an example, the evaluation of a 
high-performance semiconductor sensor that operates with a 
resolution in the order of 145eV in a wide working region, 
i.e., from 4keV to 30.0 keV. 
The SDD sensor with integrated FET considers 
integrating the FET into the sensor design as part of the 
anode assembly. This way, the capacitance of the anode-FET 
combination can be minimized. Besides, the high resistivity 
material used is very different from the lower resistivity 
material that has typically been used to optimize gain and 
noise for discrete FETs. Therefore, since it has lower voltage 
noise, a good resolution can be achieved at the minimum 
possible process time with the highest possible count rate. 
However, in such a set-up, part of the sensor is susceptible to 
irradiation by incident X-rays and the electrostatic fields 
surrounding the FET result in performance losses at low 
energies. To overcome this issue, the shape of the sensor can 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Efficiency versus energy for a typical 
Silicon Drift Detector (SDD). 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  An example for one solid state sensor working region 
evaluation based on 145 eV resolutions. 
 
be re-designed to place the anode and FET at the margins 
protected by a collimator. Likewise, the drift rings are 
designed in a tear-drop shape so the electrons drift towards 
the anode.  
The SDD sensor with a discrete external FET uses a 
dedicated feedback capacitor and a well-proven method of 
pulsed charge restoration. This allows stability and provides 
more accurate X-ray measurement. It also means FETs can 
be designed and manufactured separately and the materials 
can be chosen to maximize their performance. The advantage 
of this arrangement is that the bonding between anode and 
FET introduces higher capacitance than with integrated 
designs. Therefore, the speeds at which the best resolution 
can be achieved are lower, although still much faster than 
what can be achieved with Si(Li). Such a sensor can also 
provide reduction on the rise time effects, and excellence in 
low energy performance even with large area sensors. 
Beyond the SDD detectors, one prospective opportunity 
for the future is related to the use of conductive polymers for 
X-ray sensors. Conductive polymers present numerous 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
advantages such as high sensitivity, short response time, 
room temperature operation, and the possibility of tuning 
both chemical and physical properties by using different 
substituents [26][27]. Therefore, sensors based on conductive 
polymers and their composites have attracted much attention 
from researchers. The conductive polymers used for sensors 
mainly consist of polyaniline, polypyrrole and poly (3,4-
ethylenedioxythiophene), among others. In fact, conductive 
polymers composites combine different advantages in 
relation to other sensing materials such as carbonaceous 
materials, metal oxides, as well as they may lead to both high 
sensing characteristics and performance due to the 
synergistic effect of the components. 
Furthermore, the field related to X-ray sensors for 
spectrometry is still under a promise revolution, i.e., there 
are challenges related to the improvement in multiple 
energies response and resolution, size, non-invasiveness, 
operation at room temperature, low-power consumption, 
reliability, detectable limit, and methods for customization 
based on the application, among other aspects. Despite that, 
it is also important to observe that sensors are only one 
important part of a spectrometer into the analysis chain. The 
nuclear pulse processor and the additional electronics 
associated with the software design are equally important to 
achieve a reliable system not only for high but also for low 
count rates. 
III. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Even though different detectors are widely used in X-ray 
spectrometry, there are still challenges related to the need for 
improvements for both soft and hard X-ray detection. For 
such matter, several studies have been performed in the last 
decade, all of which are looking to new possibilities for 
advanced X-ray detection based on new materials and 
intelligent electronics for signal processing, and other 
decision-making 
computational 
support 
related 
developments. As shown, a new line of spectrometry and 
related methods have been generated focused on agricultural 
demands and analysis, i.e., related to food production and 
environmental protection. The concepts of physics and the 
analysis tools available or developed by various branches of 
knowledge and engineering have allowed advanced use of 
XRF and PIXE in agricultural sciences. One challenge is 
linked to the integration and interpretation of the results at 
different scales  
Another major challenge requiring continuous scientific 
and instrumentation effort is the development of on-the-go 
and portable X-ray sensors-based spectrometers, which can 
be taken to the field to carry out in-situ measurements. These 
could allow not only the measurements of stationary 
elemental concentration values, but also dynamic studies in 
relation to soil nutrients availability and uptake by plants. In 
addition, they could help with real-time soil fertilization at a 
variable rate based on the use of precision agriculture 
concepts. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Brazilian 
Corporation for Agricultural Research (Embrapa). 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. K. Sott et al., “Bibliometric network analysis of recent 
publications on digital agriculture to depict strategic themes 
and evolution structure”, Sensors, vol. 21, pp. 7889-7916, 
2021. 
[2] M. Liebman and L. A. Schulte, “Enhancing agroecosystem 
performance and resilience through increased diversification 
of landscapes and cropping systems”, Elementa: Science of 
the Anthropocene, vol. 3, pp. 000041-000048, 2015. 
[3] G. Agati et al., “In field non-invasive sensing of the nitrogen 
status in hybrid bermudagrass (Cynodon dactylon × C. 
transvaalensis Burtt Davy) by a fluorescence-based method”, 
European  Journal of Agronomy, vol. 63, pp. 89–96, 2015. 
[4]  Z. Zhai et al., “Decision support systems for agriculture 4.0: 
Survey and challenges”, Computer and Electronics in 
Agriculture, vol. 170, pp. 1052- 1057, 2020. 
[5] P. E. Cruvinel et al., “Real-time evaluation of failure and 
reliability in agricultural sprayers using embedded sensors 
and controller area bus protocol”, International Journal on 
Advances in Systems and Measurements, vol. 13, pp. 161-
174, 2020.. 
[6] K. S. Hatamleh et al., “Development of a specialinertial 
measurement unitfor UAV application”, Journal of Dynamic 
Systems, Measurement, and Control, vol. 135, pp. 011003-
011013, 2013. 
[7] R. I. Donahue, R. W. Miller and J. C Shickluna, Introduction 
to Soil and Plant Growth, 5th Edition, Library of Congress: 
New York, USA, 1983. 
[8] J. R. Okalebo,  K. W. Gathua and P. L. Woomer, Laboratory 
methods of soil and plant analysis: a working manual,  2nd 
Edition, Nairobi Tropical Soil Biology and Fertility 
Programme: Kenya, Africa, 2002. 
[9] F. Nüsslin, “Wilhelm Conrad Röntgen: The scientist and his 
discovery”, European Journal of Medical Physics, vol. 79, pp. 
65-68, 2020. 
[10] W. H. Bragg and W. L Bragg, X-rays and Crystal Structure, 
Bell and Sons: London, England, 1915.   
[11] J. D. C. Pessoa et al., “Preparation of soil and plant samples 
for determination of macronutrients by X-ray fluorescence”, 
in Proceedings of the Symposium on the interaction of 
photons and electrons with matter (SAIFEM 96), São Carlos, 
SP, Brazil, pp. 9-10,1996. 
[12] T. B. Johansson, R. Akselsson and S. A. E. Johansson, “X-ray 
analysis: Elemental trace analysis at the 10−12 g level”, 
Nuclear Instruments and Methods, vol. 84, pp. 141–143, 
1970. 
[13] P. E. Cruvinel and R. G. Flocchini, “Determination of Se in 
soil samples using the proton induced X-ray emission 
technique”.  Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics 
Research Section B, vol. 75, pp. 415-419, 1993. 
[14] P. E. Cruvinel et al., “Elemental analysis of agricultural soil 
samples by particle induced X-ray emission (PIXE) 
technique”, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics 
Research, Section B, vol. 150, pp. 478-483, 1999. 
[15] A. Hessenbruch, "Rutherford's 1901 experiment on radiation 
energy and his creation of a stable detector", Archives for the 
History of the Exact Sciences, vol. 54, pp. 403-420, 2000. 
[16] A. Hessenbruch, "The origins of exact x-ray dosage", in 
Proceedings of the Emergence of Modern Physics, Università 
degli Studi di Pavia, pp. 81-87, 1996. 
[17] F. C. Miguens et al., “A new protocol to detect light elements 
in estuarine sediments by X-ray microanalysis (SEM/EDS)J”, 
ournal of Electron Microscopy vol. 59, issue 5, pp. 437–446, 
2010. 
[18] C. Z. Zhou and W. K. Warburton, “Comparison of silicon pin 
diode detector fabrication processes using ion implantation 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
 
and thermal doping”, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in 
Physics Research, Section A, vol. 378, issue 3, pp. 529-530, 
1996. 
[19] K. Laqua et al., “Detection of radiation” Pure and Applied 
Chemistry, vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 1745-1760,1995. 
[20] Tru-Q™ – Making accurate analysis a reality for all 
application: Available through the Oxford Instruments: 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.oxinst.com/products/x-
ray-microanalysis. 
[21] D. Newbury, “X-ray Mapping in the Spectrum Image Mode at 
Output Count Rates above 100 kHz with the Silicon Drift 
Detector (SDD)”, Microscopy and Microanalysis vol. 12, pp. 
1380-1381, 2006.. 
[22] J. Y. Zevallos-ChaHvez et al., “Response function of a 
germanium detector to photon energies between 6 and 120 
keV”, Nuclear Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, 
Section A, vol.  457, pp. 212-219, 2001. 
[23] G. Lioliou and A. M. Barnett, “Gallium Arsenide detectors 
for X-ray and electron (beta particle) spectroscopy”, Nuclear 
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, Section A, vol. 
836, issue 11, pp. 37-45, 2016. 
[24] D. Krasikov et al., “Why shallow defect levels alone do not 
cause high resistivity in CdTe”, Semiconductor Science and 
Technology, vol. 28, 125019 (7pp), 2013. 
[25] P. Lechner et al., “Silicon drift detectors for high count rate 
X-ray 
spectroscopy 
at 
room 
temperature”, 
Nuclear 
Instruments and Methods in Physics Research, Section A, vol. 
458, issues 1–2, pp. 281-287, 2001. 
[26] H. Shirakawa et al.,  “Synthesis of electrically conducting 
organic polymers: halogen derivatives of Polyacetylene 
(CH)x”, Journal of the Chemical Society, Chemical 
Communications, vol. 16, pp.. 578 - 580, 1977.  
[27] E. C. Venancio et al., “Line patterning of graphite and the 
fabrication of cheap, inexpensive, `throw-away´ sensors”, 
Sensors & Actuators, B: Chemical, vol. 130, pp. 723-729, 
2008. 
 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

