An Exercise Recommendation System While Performing Daily Activities
Based on Contextual Information
Mizuki Kobayashi
Grad. School of Bio-Functions and Systems Science
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology
Tokyo, Japan
email: crescent3033@gmail.com
Kaori Fujinami
Div. of Advanced Information Technology and Computer Science
Tokyo University of Agriculture and Technology
Tokyo Japan
email: fujinami@cc.tuat.ac.jp
Abstract—Although exercise has positive physical and mental
effects, many people worldwide are inactive, and this trend has
not improved over the years. One reason for not increasing
opportunities for exercise is that people are busy with work and
household chores. Thus, we propose incorporating light exercise
into daily activities to help people develop exercise habits. In this
study, we present an exercise recommendation method based on
the contextual information of the user and environment. The
results of the offline and online evaluations showed that the
recommendation was successfully performed according to the
given context and that more than 80 % of the participants judged
the recommended exercises as appropriate.
Keywords—recommendation system; context-awareness; wear-
able sensors; exercise; daily activities.
I. INTRODUCTION
Exercise has physical and mental benefits, preventing dis-
eases such as heart disease, diabetes, and cancer, and de-
laying the onset of dementia. However, a survey conducted
by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 2016 indicated
that more than 1.4 billion people worldwide lead sedentary
lifestyles–a trend unchanged since 2001 [1]. Moreover, a 2021
Sports Agency poll [2] revealed that the primary reason for
not exercising is preoccupation with work or household chores.
Notably, the percentage of respondents who answered that they
exercised less frequently than they did one year ago exceeded
those who answered that they exercised more frequently.
The high cost and the need to make time for gymnasium
training are major hurdles to motivation for exercise. There
are concerns that self-initiated training may increase the risk
of injury owing to incorrect methods or excessive loads. Elec-
trical Myo Simulation (EMS) belts, which stimulate muscles
using electricity, have emerged in recent years and can be
used even while performing other tasks, and their effectiveness
in physical training has been demonstrated [3]. However,
repeated use in the same area may cause muscle fatigue and
risks muscle damage, without the user knowing. In addition,
when used in conjunction with medical electrical devices such
as pacemakers, EMS equipment may malfunction, resulting in
severe physical damage [4].
To solve these challenges and make exercise a habit, it
is desirable to incorporate it into daily life, which can be
performed while working or doing housework. In this study,
we focused on exercising while working [5] as an exercise
method that satisfies this requirement. Exercise relies on
muscular strength to obtain beneficial health effects, and exer-
cising while working allows people without sufficient time for
traditional exercise to incorporate it into their daily activities
at an appropriate intensity with a low risk of injury.
Kobayashi et al. have developed a systematic exercise
promotion system in an Internet of Things (IoT) environment,
aiming to develop an infrastructure system that can handle
various tasks and exercises using exercise recommendation and
evaluation during desk work as a case study [6]. The exercise
promotion system lowers barriers to exercise for people who
do not normally exercise and encourages behavioral changes,
such as spontaneously engaging in exercise. Appropriate rec-
ommendations that reflect the user’s current task and the
urgency and possibility of interruption, i.e., the context, are
crucial for enabling exercise while working. This appropriate
recommendation can be a solution for maintaining motivation.
In this study, we added an exercise recommendation function
based on user context to an existing exercise promotion
system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section
II examines the related work. Section III presents the basic
system configuration and describes the design of the exercise
recommendation mechanism, followed by a detection method
for user-related contextual information in Section IV. Offline
and online experiments are described in Sections V and VI,
respectively. Finally, Section VII concludes the paper. This
research was conducted with the approval of the Tokyo Univer-
sity of Agriculture and Technology Ethics Review Committee.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Reducing the lack of exercise
Consolvo et al. [7] investigated the effectiveness of pre-
senting information on underutilized cell phone background
screens and screen savers to increase awareness of exercise
in daily life. This study revealed that the abstract display of
the user’s own activity and physical information on the back-
ground screen of a cell phone increased the user’s awareness
and influenced their behavior. Another study by Klasnja et al.
[8] described lessons learned from a study that developed and
evaluated two systems aimed at promoting physical activity.
These studies have revealed that it is possible to develop sys-
tems that effectively motivate behavior by providing support to
sustain health maintenance goals, thereby encouraging various
188
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications
,

types of healthy behaviors and promoting social support. Al-
though these studies can sustain motivation to exercise, actual
exercise requires conscious time allocation. For non-regular
exercisers, barriers to participation may be lower if they can
exercise without conscious time allocation. In this study, the
system supports exercise while the user is performing work;
therefore, there is no need for conscious time allocation for
exercise.
Certain studies encourage users to engage in physical activ-
ity while working at their desks. Shimizu et al. [9] proposed
an exercise system that replaced computer keystrokes with
body movements. The proposed system assigns keys to body
movements (bending and stretching of knees and ankles) that
are equivalent to walking and disables the keys assigned to
the original keyboard. These movements can be performed
naturally by disabling the keys assigned to the keyboard.
Notably, their contribution is akin to our proposed system
as users can exercise while performing key input operations.
In this study, the proposed system enabled users to perform
exercises while performing tasks other than keyboard inputs.
Therefore, we aim to recommend appropriate exercises that
consider the user’s context.
B. Exercise recommendations
Lee et al. [10] proposed an exercise recommendation algo-
rithm that utilizes information on personal tendencies such as
eating habits and physical conditions. This algorithm enables
the recommendation of highly efficient exercises suitable for
everyone. However, before using the proposed algorithm, it is
necessary to collect personal information, including sensitive
information such as the user’s height, weight, and medical
history. The exercise events recommended in this study were of
moderate intensity; therefore, they can be easily performed by
anyone without the need to consider their physical conditions.
In addition, the recommendations are remarkably practical
because they can be formulated without requiring sensitive
information.
Zhao et al. [11] proposed an exercise recommendation
system that included gamification-based exercise promotion.
This system can yield personalized exercise recommendations
based on the information obtained from user questionnaires.
However, the system recommends exercises during breaks,
considering only the time and location of the user. In this study,
we differentiated our system by recommending exercises that
could be performed simultaneously without interfering with
the user’s work.
Yong et al. [12] designed an IoT-based fitness system. The
system consists of equipment installed in gyms and wearable
devices that measure and record the amount of exercise
performed by fitness users using the equipment and other
user activity data. The system can also calculate the cosine
similarity between users based on the data of users’ scores,
indicating their level of interest in the equipment installed in
the fitness club and can present recommendations to similar
users. However, a user evaluation of the proposed system has
not been conducted. Based on user evaluations, in addition
to offline evaluations, the recommendation system can be
evaluated more accurately.
III. EXERCISE FACILITATION SYSTEM FOR EXERCISING
WHILE WORKING
A. System Overview
Figure 1 depicts the major system components. First, the
system detects the user’s state based on data obtained from the
equipment and location (Figure 1 A). If the system detects that
the user is performing a less urgent task that can be interrupted,
an exercise recommendation process is invoked (Figure 1 B).
The type of exercise, that is, item, is determined by referring
to the rule using the contextual information obtained from
the user and the environment, such as the objects being used
and the places frequented by the user (Figure 1 C). The
information to be presented to the user includes an image of
the exercise category and the goal, ensuring that the necessary
information is conveyed in a concise manner. Subsequently,
the generated information is presented to the user via a push
notification to their smartphone at a time that does not interrupt
the current task (Figure 1 F). Once the user accepts and
follows the recommendation, the duration and form of the
exercise are evaluated based on the information collected on
wearable sensors and the sensor-augmented objects (Figure 1
D). In accordance with the evaluation, a feedback message,
including a chart of the exercise duration, is forwarded to the
user’s device through the same push-type mechanism as the
recommendation process (Figure 1 E, F).
Figure 1. The flow of exercise facilitation system while doing
daily activities.
In the event that objects or places are used and frequented by
an unspecific number of people, a user identification function
can be added to enable individual exercise recommendations,
feedback, and management of the exercise results using the
user’s device. Even in the absence of a user identification
function, the installation of a display device on or near objects
enables on-the-spot exercise recommendations and feedback.
User context is used in two aspects: the determination of
recommendation items and the timing of recommendations.
In this study, we focused on the item selection aspect (Figure
1 C), which is described in detail in Sections III-B and IV. In
contrast, context processing for timing determination is outside
the scope of this study.
189
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

TABLE I: CATEGORIES OF CONTEXTUAL INFORMATION AND SPECIFIC VALUES OR EXAMPLES IN EACH SUB-
CATEGORY, AND INFORMATION TO BE INFERRED FROM THE CONTEXTUAL INFORMATION.
Main-category
Sub-category
Elements in sub-category
Information to be inferred
User
Basic behavior
Sitting (SIT), Standing (STD),
Performable exercise
Walking (WLK), Lying (LYN)
Main working part
Upper body (UB), Lower body (LB)
Interruptibility to current task
Environment
Object in use
Fixed (FIX), e.g., chair, Portable (POT), e.g., vacuum cleaner
Performable exercise and
interruptibility to current task
Characteristics of place
Stay (STY), e.g., in front of a microwave, Travel (TRV), e.g., Corridor
Performable exercise and
Wide (WID), e.g., Space to spread hands
interruptibility to current task
Narrow (NRW), e.g., Space to bump into things if spreading hands
Public (PUB), e.g., Office, Private (PRI), e.g., User’s home
B. Recommendation Method
1) Contextual Information: Table I summarizes the cate-
gorization of contextual information and the elements in the
subcategories. The types of information inferred from these
subcategories are also presented. Contextual information from
the user side is further divided into basic behavior and main
working part as subcategories. Basic behavior consists of four
elements: sitting, standing, walking, and lying down, which
are common in various daily activities. This information can
be used to infer performable exercises. For example, knee lift
abdominal exercises are easier to perform while a person is
seated and not walking. The body part mainly used during a
specific task represents the availability (or unavailability) of
a certain exercise, specified as upper and lower body parts.
Standing push-ups are difficult to perform when a user is
using a smartphone, regardless of their behavior, because the
exercise mainly involves the arms. We refer to this subcategory
as the main working part. We assume that information on
the basic behavior and the main working part is obtained
by analyzing signals from wearable sensors, such as those in
smartwatches and smartphones.
Contextual information from the environment is also catego-
rized into two subcategories: object in use and characteristics
of place. The state of use and information of the objects
represent the current task of the user, such that a person
sitting on an office chair is involved in a task related to desk
work, as well as representing the social context, identity, and
place [13]. Thus, information regarding the object in use can
be used to infer performable exercises and interruptibility in
a current exercise recommendation task. Two elements exist
in this subcategory: fixed and portable. We assume that the
information is obtained by sensors embedded in the object
to determine if the object is being used as intended [14]
and that a dedicated “object-use detector (OUD)” is provided.
For example, more than two fixed objects can exist in a
system with a one-to-one relationship between the objects and
OUDs. Moreover, the location of a user contains meaningful
information, as indicated by the fact that location information
has been used for the longest period among the contextual
information [15]. For example, a person in front of a mi-
crowave appears to wait for the heated food, which indicates
an appropriate timing for recommending heel lift-up exercises.
As another example, a person standing in front of a wall
is recommended to perform push-ups. On the other hand,
standing push-ups may be inappropriate when climbing stairs
in the office but is acceptable at home. These examples suggest
that information regarding the location of a user can be used
as a cue to infer the performable exercise and interruptibility
of the user. We divided the characteristics of a place into six
elements: places for staying/traveling, wide/narrow areas, and
public/private areas. Location Information can be obtained in
various manners, such as motion sensors, distance sensors, and
cameras, which are placed in a specific location and tagged. A
Global Positioning System (GPS) can also be used for outdoor
localization, where the label is obtained from the original
geographic coordinates using a reverse geocoding service.
Similar to OUDs, we assume that a dedicated “presence
detector (PD)” is available and that more than two PDs in
the same place characteristic may exist. The left section of
Figure 2 depicts the relationship between the context sources,
detectors, and contextual information. This information is used
to determine the recommended items by referring to the rules
stored in the database, as described in Section III-B2.
Figure 2. The scheme of recommendation.
2) Recommendation algorithm:
An exercise is recom-
mended based on the similarity of context between the user
and candidate exercises in the rule database. A rule for a
specific exercise is represented by a tuple with binary values
indicating the suitability of the element of context for the ex-
ercise, that is, 0 and 1 for unsuitable and suitable, respectively.
Table II shows a rule for the knee-lift abdominal exercise with
190
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

14 elements, indicating that the exercise is suitable for people
who are sitting, with the lower body available for exercise,
and using a fixed object, for example, a chair; conversely, it
is unsuitable for people who are standing, walking, lying, or
performing upper-body work.
The context similarity was measured using the cosine
similarity. Cosine similarity is a measure of the similarity
between vectorized items. Let ri be a rule vector as presented
above, containing the suitability and unsuitability of each
contextual element for exercise i ∈ [1, N], and let c be
a vector that represents the user’s context. The method of
obtaining the value of each element of the vector depends
on the implementation of the system. Section IVdescribes the
proposed implementation. The posterior probability for each
class can be applied to the values in a classification-based
method such as those in basic behavior identification, whereas
a binary value, that is, 0 or 1, can be used for threshold-based
detection, such as for main working part detection, object
usage detection, and place detection. The similarity (simi)
between these rules for exercise i and the user’s context are
expressed in (1), where ⟨a, b⟩ indicates the inner product of
vectors a and b, and ∥a∥ is the length of vector a.
simi = ⟨ri, c⟩
∥ri∥∥c∥
(1)
We assumed that at least one wearable sensor was manda-
tory in the system, whereas sensors for the environmental
context were optional. For example, if there is no sensor-
augmented fixed object, the value is ignored in the calculation
of proximity. Exercise k with the highest similarity for all
exercises was recommended and selected by (2).
k = arg max
i∈[1,N]
simi
(2)
The recommended items determined in this manner are
passed to the information presentation (Figure 1 F), where
a message is created with information such as the exercise
method and the number of sets required. Figure 2 illustrates
the recommendation scheme.
IV. CONTEXTUAL INFORMATION FROM THE USER
As shown in Section III-B1, contextual information from
the user and the environment is used to recommend exercises.
The information obtained from the user’s movement or posture
using wearable sensors is generic compared to that obtained
from the environment, such as the object in use and the user
location. This section presents methods for obtaining user
contextual information.
A. Basic behavior classification method
The behavioral context assumes three values: sitting, stand-
ing, and walking. Thus, various daily activities must be classi-
fied as one such behavior. One approach may be to recognize
each activity first, for example, brushing teeth and vacuum
cleaning, and then categorize them into one of three behaviors
based on predefined rules, for example, “brushing teeth is
usually performed while standing.” However, this approach
must handle an unlimited number of daily activities in its
recognition task, which is computationally infeasible. Instead,
we assumed a different approach wherein the input signal
obtained during various activities is forcibly classified into one
of three classes.
Two accelerometers were attached to the left wrist and
right thigh, assuming a smart watch and a smartphone stored
in a trouser pocket, respectively. A machine learning-based
classification approach was used, featuring a random forest
classifier. In total, 66 features were calculated from a window
of 256 samples (50 Hz) with four axes, that is, x, y, z,
and magnitude (=
p
x2 + y2 + z2), with 50 % overlap, as
summarized in Table III.
The information from the two sensor nodes is integrated
to obtain the final result, as follows: First, each classifier
independently classifies the input feature vector into one of
the three classes with posterior probabilities. Subsequently, the
result of the classifier with the highest posterior probability is
chosen as the final answer. An advantage of classifier-level
fusion over data-level fusion, which uses a feature vector
consisting of features from sensor nodes, is that our approach
does not always require users to wear both sensors. If the
sensor on the thigh (wrist) is missing, the result from the
sensor on the wrist (thigh) is selected. From the perspective
of classification performance, we validated the superiority of
the proposed approach over data-level fusion.
B. Main working part detection method
Various daily activities need to be supported in the system.
Unlike basic behavior classification, it is not feasible to judge
the main working parts via individual daily activity recognition
using a predefined list. Instead, we assumed an approach based
on the information that “the moving body part is currently
in use.” Thus, if the acceleration signal exceeds a certain
threshold, the body part is considered in use for an activity;
otherwise, it is not in use.
The threshold was specified as follows: First, a moving
variance calculation was performed on the entire dataset of
daily activities described in Section V-A [16], using a window
of 256 samples (50 Hz) with a 50 % overlap. The median
of the variance values was specified as the threshold value.
The threshold is determined for each axis of the acceleration
signal. A threshold judgment was formulated for each axis,
given the time-series data during an activity. If the mean of the
variance of four consecutive windows exceeded the threshold
on all three axes, the body part was judged as unavailable for
exercise because it was in use; otherwise, it was considered
available. Detection was performed for each sensor node on
the left wrist and right thigh. The value in the context vector
(c) is represented as binary, that is, 0 and 1, for unavailable
and available, respectively.
V. OFFLINE EXPERIMENT
A. Daily activity dataset
We utilized a dataset previously collected by the au-
thors’ laboratory [16]. Data were collected from a Bluetooth-
191
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

TABLE II: A RULE FOR KNEE-LIFT ABS EXERCISE.
Basic behavior
Main working part
Object in use
Characteristics of place
SIT
STD
WLK
LYN
UB
LB
FIX
POT
STY
TRV
WID
NRW
PUB
PRI
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
TABLE III: CLASSIFICATION FEATURES FOR BASIC
BEHAVIOR CLASSIFICATION.
Signal domain
Feature
Time
mean, standard deviation, skewness, kurtosis, minimum
first quartile, median, third quartile, maximum,
inter-quartile range, correlation coefficient of two axes
Frequency
energy, entropy, average frequency, maximum amplitude
frequency component at the maximum amplitude
based Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) (ATR-Promotions Inc.
TSND151 [17]), comprising three-axes acceleration data and
three-axes angular velocity data of 23 daily life activities from
seven positions on the bodies of 14 volunteers (five females
and nine males in their 20s). Six of the seven sensor nodes
were attached symmetrically to the upper arms, wrists, and
thighs, whereas one node was placed on the chest.
Figure 3. 22 daily activities and grouping into basic behaviors
used in the evaluation: (a) having a drink while sitting down
(DK SIT), (b) eating food while sitting down (ET SIT), (c)
reading a book (RB), (d) using a computer while sitting down
(UC), (e) using a smartphone while sitting down (SP SIT),
(f) brushing teeth (BT), (g) having a drink while standing
(DK STD), (h) eating food while standing (ET STD), (i)
making coffee (MC), (j) setting table (ST), (k) using a smart-
phone while standing (SP STD), (l) washing dishes (WD), (m)
washing face (WF), (n) washing hands (WH), (o) wearing and
taking off the jacket (WJ), (p) erasing figures on a whiteboard
(EW), (q) writing figures on a whiteboard (WW), (r) going
down stairs (DS), (s) running (RN), (t) going up stairs (US),
(u) vacuum cleaning (VC), and (v) walking (WK).
In the present study, we only used data from the sensors
on the left wrist (LW) and right thigh (RT), assuming a
smart watch on the wrist and a smartphone in the trouser
pocket. Additionally, we removed the bicycle riding activity
because it did not fit any basic behavior, and only signals
from the three-axis accelerometer were used. The scenes of
the activities are depicted in Figure 3, which also shows
the grouping of basic behaviors as the ground truth for the
basic behavior classification experiment described in the next
section. Grouping (relabeling) was performed by judging the
photographs shown in Figure 3.
B. Evaluation on basic behavior classification
1) Method: The performance of the basic behavior clas-
sification was evaluated. The basic behavior classifier was
trained using data collected from 10 university students who
were instructed to perform four basic behaviors. They were
right-handed and attached to the same sensor nodes as those
used in Section V-A on their LWs and RTs. The dataset
described in Section V-A was used to test the classifier after
we relabeled the original 22 activities with one of the four
basic behaviors, as shown in the lower right of Figure 3. New
labels were treated as the ground truth. Notably, no activity
related to LYN exists in the dataset, and the results represent
general classification performance because the participants in
the training and test data collection were different.
2) Result and analysis: Figure 4 (a) presents the confu-
sion matrix of basic behavior classification. For example, the
numbers in the row of DK SIT indicate that the instances of
DK SIT were judged 2718 times as “Sitting”, 300 times as
“Standing”, 12 times as “Walking”, and 903 times as “Lying”.
The performance metrics are calculated and summarized
in Table IV, where the recall, precision, and F-measure are
defined by (3), (4), and (5), respectively. Suffix i indicates the
basic behavior classes, and Ncorrecti, Ntestedi, and Njudgedi
represent the number of instances correctly classified as class
i, the total number of instances in class i, and the number of
instances judged as class i, respectively.
recalli
=
Ncorrecti/Ntestedi
(3)
precisioni
=
Ncorrecti/Njudgedi
(4)
F − measurei
=
2
1/recalli + 1/precisioni
(5)
Table IV and Figure 4 (a) imply that the daily activities
were mostly classified into the appropriate basic behaviors that
the authors labeled, with some exceptions. Presumably, the
sitting-related activities, i.e., DK SIT, ET SIT, RB, UC, and
SP IT, were judged as “Lying” because they involved minimal
movement and the postures of the sensors were similar,
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

TABLE IV: SUMMARY OF BASIC BEHAVIOR CLASSIFI-
CATION.
Basic behavior
Recall
Precision
F-measure
SIT
0.763
0.998
0.865
STD
0.940
0.937
0.939
WLK
0.867
0.902
0.884
LYN
N/A
N/A
N/A
Macro average
0.857
0.946
0.896
Figure 4. Offline experimental results.
particularly when the participants were lying on their backs.
Vertical positioning must be considered to reduce misclassi-
fications. Furthermore, the classification of ST (setting table)
into “Walking” occurs because the activity includes occasional
walking around the table during serving meals. Similarly,
we consider that the judgment on VC (vacuum cleaning)
was dichotomized into “Standing” and “Walking” because the
vacuuming behavior is a mixture of standing and walking.
Because we expect to use posterior probabilities rather than
classification results (i.e., labels) for the elements of context
vector (c), we do not consider these trends problematic for the
recommendation in which multiple behaviors exist in a single
activity.
C. Evaluation on main working part detection
1) Method: The appropriateness of the main working part
detection was evaluated by counting the number of instances
judged as “being used.” The same dataset used to calculate
the thresholds was used for testing.
2) Result and analysis: Figure 4 (b) shows the availability
of each part by the ratios of “being not used” to the total
number of instances per activity. The closer the value is to 0.0,
the more cases are judged as “the body part is being used,”
while the closer it is to 1.0, the more cases are judged as “the
body part is not being used.” Note that the sum of the ratios
of “Upper body part” and “Lower body part” is not equal to
1.0 because the judgment was performed independently.
From Figure 4 (b), it was judged that the availability of
the wrist was lower than that of the thigh for hand-dominated
movements such as washing dishes (WD) and washing faces
(WF), and the value of the thigh was lower than that of
the wrist for activities involving movement but minimal hand
movement such as setting a table (ST), both of which were
judged to be low when the arms and legs were moved together,
such as walking (WK), climbing down stairs (WD), and
vacuuming (VC). In these cases, the proposed method using
threshold values functioned appropriately.
Misjudgment of the availability of activity that was assumed
to use the dominant hand (i.e., the right hand without a
sensor) was unavoidable, for example, DK SIT (drinking
while sitting). However, we found that even UC (using a
computer while sitting) had high availability of the left wrist
(0.97). In a UC, we can assume that the computer user uses
both hands. Therefore, there is a possibility of misjudging the
main working part of daily activities that use the fingertips,
which does not occur in wrist movements. To solve this
problem, a value corresponding to the confidence level of
the judgment can be calculated instead of using a binary
judgment of “being used” (unavailable). Furthermore, two
types of exercises suitable for the upper and lower body
can be recommended simultaneously such that the user can
determine which exercise to perform if their confidence level is
low. This may prevent mismatches between the recommended
exercise and the user’s situation, given that the final judgment
is exercised by the user.
D. Evaluation on recommendation
1) Method:
Similar
to
the
previous
evaluations,
a
simulation-based experiment was carried out using the dataset
described in Section V-A in a situation where a user performs
22 daily activities, which determines one of the following six
exercises based on context: knee pull-up abdominal exercise
(KLA), leg-pushing exercise (LP), standing push-up (SPU),
heel lift-up exercise (HL), breathing with a protruding belly
(DI), and striding with a large belly and fast walking (FW).
Table V lists the rule vectors (r) for the six exercises. As
described in Section III-B2, the values ‘0’ and ‘1’ indicate
that the element is unsuitable and suitable for the exercise,
respectively.
Regarding information on the use of objects and halts in
certain locations, the dataset did not gather such information
when it was collected. Thus, we specified the values ‘1’ by
assuming that a sensor-augmented chair, e.g., [6], was used in
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

the five activities categorized into “Sitting” and that an area
in front of a microwave was occupied by a person who was
preparing coffee (MC); otherwise, the values were set to ‘0’.
These assumptions also imply 100 % complete detection.
2) Result and analysis: Figure 5 shows the results of the
exercise recommendations for daily activities. The columns
in the matrix represent the recommended exercises, whereas
the rows represent the assumed daily activities. Note that
normalized values are shown because the amount of data
for each daily activity was different; thus, the number of
recommendations varied. KLA and LP, which are exercises
performed while sitting, are recommended more frequently
for daily activities performed while sitting such as sitting and
eating (ET SIT) and reading a book (RB). When a user is in
a sitting position, the user often performs tasks that use the
upper body; therefore, LP, an exercise that uses the lower body,
is recommended more often. For daily activities that require
standing, such as preparing coffee (MC) and washing the face
(WF), SPU and HL, which are exercises performed in the
standing position, were recommended more often. However,
DI was most frequently recommended for ST (Setting Table).
Catering involves walking around a table, similar to walking.
Therefore, exercises that can be performed during walking
are recommended. In addition, DI and FW, which can be
performed while walking, such as going downstairs (DS) and
going upstairs (US), are often recommended. As the lower
body is used while walking, DI, an exercise that uses the upper
body, has been recommended in many cases.
VI. ONLINE USER EVALUATION
As elaborated in Section V, we validated the feasibility
of the proposed exercise recommendations for daily activ-
ities through a simulation-based experiment. Subsequently,
we conducted an online experiment with 15 participants to
validate the recommendations based on the users’ actual work
context. Two conditions were specified: specified and free
conditions. In the “specified” condition, the participants were
instructed to perform three tasks in a laboratory room that
corresponded to three basic behaviors, i.e., watching videos
on a computer as SIT, waiting for their snacks to warm up
in front of microwave as STD, and entering and leaving
the room as WLK. In contrast, in the “free” condition, the
participants performed freely in the same room for 10 minutes.
To understand the effectiveness of each of the main-category of
contextual information, i.e., “User” and “Environment” shown
in Table I, recommendation in the following three cases were
performed.
1) User: Basic behavior and main work part obtained by
two accelerometers on the user’s body.
2) Environment: The state of use of a chair from a sensor-
augmented chair [6] and the presence of a microwave
detected by a distance sensor placed on a shelf under
the microwave.
3) All: All the contextual information and sensing devices
above.
Figure 5. Recommendation results for exercise in daily activ-
ities.
Under both conditions, the participants were provided with
recommendations by the system while performing certain ac-
tivities. A questionnaire survey was conducted for each recom-
mendation to evaluate whether the recommended exercise was
appropriate for the situation on five levels 5: appropriate, 4 =
slightly appropriate; 3 = neither appropriate nor inappropriate;
2 = slightly inappropriate; and 1 = inappropriate.
Table VI summarizes the relative frequencies of the user
evaluation scores for each experimental condition. Values in
the row with a score of 5 indicate participants. As listed in
the table, more than 80 % of participants in all conditions
evaluated the recommended exercise as appropriate. The “All”
conditions exhibited the highest ratios in both specified and
free activity conditions. We assumed that the users always
wore sensors on their bodies. The results show that the
recommendation accuracy can be improved by combining
information from the environment.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this study, we present an exercise recommendation
method based on the contextual information of the user
and the environment, which is a core part of an exercise
facilitation system for performing other activities. Both offline
and online experiments were conducted. An offline experiment
was performed to simulate an already-collected dataset. The
recommended items were deemed reasonable for each of the
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

TABLE V: RULE VECTORS (ri) REPRESENTING THE RULES OF EXERCISE RECOMMENDA-
TION WITH THE NAMES OF EXERCISE.
Exercisea
Basic behavior
Main working part
Object in use
Characteristics of place
SIT
STD
WLK
LYN
UB
LB
FIX
POT
STY
TRV
WID
NRW
PUB
PRI
KLA
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
LP
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
SPU
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
HL
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
DI
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
FW
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
a KLA: knee lift abdominal exercise, LP: leg-pushing exercise, SPU: standing push-up exercise, HL: heel lift-up exercise, DI:
drawing-in exercise, and FW: striding with a large belly and fast walking.
TABLE VI: RELATIVE FREQUENCIES OF THE USER
EVALUATION SCORES ON THE RECOMMENDED EX-
ERCISES.
Score
Specified
Free
User
Environment
All
User
Environment
All
1
0.014
0.000
0.005
0.014
0.012
0.014
2
0.032
0.022
0.014
0.041
0.012
0.010
3
0.045
0.034
0.032
0.041
0.043
0.024
4
0.104
0.134
0.127
0.092
0.092
0.077
5
0.805
0.810
0.824
0.812
0.840
0.876
Nrec*
221
179
221
218
163
209
* Total number of recommendation
main activities of sitting, standing, and walking, as well as for
the availability of the working part. An online experiment was
conducted using a real-time system to obtain user feedback in
real-world situations. The result showed that more than 80
% of the participants judged the recommended exercise as
appropriate ones in their current situations.
In the current implementation, the association of the el-
ements in the object in use and the characteristics of the
place with specific objects and places were performed by the
authors; however, numerous objects and places exist in real-
world conditions. Considering this aspect, we recommend that
extensibility and scalability in various operating environments
should be considered in practical systems. Regarding the
recommendation rule, the set of rules used in the experiment
was created by the authors and was thus not optimized for
individual users or a large population. In the future, we shall
report a method for user-driven recommendation rule creation
using an Interactive Genetic Algorithm (IGA), where the rules
listed in Table V are considered as gene sequences and the
user’s subjective evaluation is applied as a fitness function
to perform evolutionary processes, such as crossover and
mutation, to generate the user’s preferred rules.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Guthold, G. A. Stevens, L. M. Riley, and F. C. Bull, “Worldwide
trends in insufficient physical activity from 2001 to 2016: a pooled
analysis of 358 population-based surveys with 1·9 million participants,”
The Lancet Global Health, Vol. 6, No. 10, pp. e1077–e1086, 2018.
[2] Japan Sports Agency, “Public opinion poll on the status of sports imple-
mentation, etc.,”
https://www.mext.go.jp/sports/content/20220310-spt
kensport01-000020487 1.pdf (In Japanese. Last accessed: 20 August
2023).
[3] N. Maffiuletti et al., “The effects of electromyostimulation training and
basketball practice on muscle strength and jumping ability,” Interna-
tional Journal of Sports Medicine, Vol. 21, No. 6, pp. 437–443, 2000.
[4] The Japan Home-health Apparatus Industrial Association, “Voluntary
standards for the safety of ems equipment for home use,” https://www.
hapi.or.jp/documentation/information/ems 20201009r.pdf (In Japanese.
Last accessed: 20 August 2023).
[5] S. Nagano,
“Get rid of your busy schedule and get some exercise!
One-minute exercise diet,” PHP Institute, 2003 (In Japanese).
[6] M. Kobayashi, A. Tsuji, and K. Fujinami,
“An exercise-promoting
system for exercising while doing desk work,” In Distributed, Ambient
and Pervasive Interactions. Smart Living, Learning, Well-being and
Health, Art and Creativity, pp. 273–291, 2022.
[7] S. Consolvo et al., “Flowers or a robot army?: Encouraging awareness
& activity with personal, mobile displays,” In Proceedings of the 10th
International Conference on Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 54–63, 2008.
[8] P. Klasnja, S. Consolvo, D. W. McDonald, J. A. Landay, and W.
Pratt,
“Using mobile & personal sensing technologies to support
health behavior change in everyday life: lessons learned,” AMIA 2009
Symposium Proceedings, pp. 338–342, 2009.
[9] Y. Shimizu, A. Ohnishi, T. Terada, and M. Tsukamoto,
“DeskWalk:
An Exercise System by Replacing Key Inputs with Body Movements,”
In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Advances in
Mobile Computing & Multimedia, pp. 202–209, 2020.
[10] H. Lee and O. Jeong, “A personalized exercise recommendation system
using dimension reduction algorithms,” Journal of The Korea Society
of Computer and Information, Vol. 26, No. 6, pp. 19–28, 2021.
[11] Z. Zhao, A. Arya, R. Orji, and G. Chan, “Physical Activity Recom-
mendation for Exergame Player Modeling using Machine Learning Ap-
proach,” In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE 8th International Conference
on Serious Games and Applications for Health, pp. 1–9, 2020.
[12] B. Yong et al., “IoT-based intelligent fitness system,” Journal of Parallel
and Distributed Computing, Vol. 118, pp. 14–21, 2018.
[13] K. Fujinami, “Interaction design issues in smart home environments,”
In Proceedings of the 2010 5th International Conference on Future
Information Technology, pp. 1–8, 2010.
[14] K. Fujinami and T. Nakajima, “Sentient artefacts: Acquiring user’s con-
text through daily objects,” In Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing –
EUC 2005 Workshops, pp. 335–344, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg.
[15] M. Addlesee et al.,
“Implementing a sentient computing system,”
Computer, Vol. 34, No. 8, pp. 50–56, 2001.
[16] S. Toyomasu,
“A Study on a Semantic Zero-Shot Human Activity
Recognition Based on Action Elements Content,” Master Thesis, Tokyo
University of Agriculture and Technology, 2020 (In Japanese).
[17] ATR-Promotions Inc.,
“Wireless sensors,”
http://www.atr-p.com/
products/sensor.html (Last accessed: 20 August 2023).
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

