Investigating Hand Dexterity in Patients with Hand Injuries through A Self-made 
Data Collection Glove 
Jong-Chen Chen 
National Yunlin University of Science and Technology 
No. 123, Sec. 3, University Rd., Douliu City, Yunlin County 
640, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
Email: jcchen@yuntech.edu.tw 
Chih-Chien Hung 
National Taiwan University Hospital, Yunlin Branch 
No. 579, Sec. 2, Yunlin Rd., Douliu City, Yunlin County 
640, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
Email: btoaew@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—The flexibility of people's fingers plays a very 
important role in our daily life. Many people lose some degree 
of finger dexterity due to finger injuries. In this study, a self-
made Arduino data acquisition glove was used to collect data 
on 8 daily hand movements of healthy participants and 
patients. From the data collected on healthy participants, we 
established a norm of finger movements 
of healthy 
participants. We analyzed how people used different fingers to 
perform different movements. Furthermore, we collected data 
on some patients with finger injuries and compared their hand 
dexterity with healthy individuals. 
Keywords- sensors; hand dexterity; data glove; wearable device. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Fingers play an important role in people's lives. Many 
daily life movements require a high degree of cooperation 
and coordination of different fingers to complete. However, 
when people’s hands are injured, those seemingly simple 
daily actions might become quite difficult. In order to 
maintain the daily life movements of patients, rehabilitation 
has become an indispensable element. Rehabilitation can be 
a difficult task for patients. This is because, on one hand, it 
requires a lot of perseverance of the patient, and on the other 
hand, it takes a considerable amount of time. In addition to 
the above-mentioned factors, what is more important is 
whether the patient’s rehabilitation is moving in the right 
direction. If the direction is correct, of course, the patient's 
hand health will gradually improve over time. However, if 
the direction is wrong, it is not only unhelpful to the patient, 
but may even cause further secondary damage. 
In the process of rehabilitation, patients often face 
problems that they have no way of knowing in advance, and 
so it is difficult for them to determine whether they are 
moving in the right direction with their rehabilitation. If there 
is an objective assessment method that can provide 
appropriate information to patients in a timely manner, it is 
generally believed that it can effectively help improve the 
recovery of patients. In general, effective assessment 
methods can be roughly classified as invasive or non-
invasive. The information obtained by the former assessment 
of the patient may be more direct or accurate than the 
information obtained by the latter.  However, its 
disadvantage is that it might more or less directly or 
indirectly affect the patient’s physical health. In this case, it 
might not be suitable for long-term evaluation. In contrast, 
non-invasive assessment methods may have less impact on 
patients.  From a certain point of view, it may be more 
suitable for long-term assessment and tracking. 
Faced with the above problems, this study hopes to 
establish an economical, non-invasive method that can detect 
the finger usage of patients at any time, so as to help patients 
understand the situation of hand rehabilitation in time. With 
this information, it can also provide physicians with an 
understanding of a patient's condition and provide 
appropriate diagnosis and treatment. With the joint efforts of 
both patients and physicians, the pace of patient recovery can 
also be accelerated. Several researchers have conducted 
investigations along this line of study [1]-[4].  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows.  In Section 
II, we describe the design of this induction glove and the 
method of data analysis used in this study. The experiments 
and results are presented in Section III. Finally, we draw our 
conclusions in Section IV. 
II. 
METHOD 
As mentioned above, in order to understand the activities 
of people's fingers, a self-made sensing glove was developed. 
The glove MS-100M produced by 3M company was selected 
in this study. MS-100M is a foam-coated glove with 
excellent breathability, anti-slip, and oil-repellent properties.  
We first manually sew the curvature sensors and the pressure 
sensors on the glove. After that, we connected these sensors 
to the Arduino Mega 2560 board to capture the experimental 
data. The Arduino Mega 2560 board has 16 analog input pins 
and can accept 16 input signals. Five out of these 16 pins 
were connected to the curvature sensors while the remaining 
11 pins were connected to the pressure sensors. A curvature 
sensor was sewn on the back of each finger near the joint to 
obtain the bending degree of each finger when a person 
performed a certain action. A total of five curvature sensors 
are required for five fingers. In terms of finger pressure, each 
finger has its connections to two pressure sensors.  One is 
sewn to the DIP (distal phalange) joint and the other to MCP 
(metacarpal) joint of each finger (Figure 1). Finally, 
considering that the thumb has one more degree of freedom 
than other fingers, a pressure sensor is added to the PIP 
(proximal phalange) joint of the thumb. The entire induction 
glove design is shown in Figure 2. Each subject was asked to 
perform 8 daily life actions, as demonstrated in Figure 3.  
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
Figure 1. A homemade bending and pressure sensing glove. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. A homemade bending and pressure sensing glove. 
 
Figure 3. Eight daily life actions. 
 
In this study, the time series data of the action process 
and the data of the completed action were analyzed 
respectively. When analyzing the time series data of the 
action process, this study uses the Pearson similarity method 
to analyze the consistency of the two action curves. The 
above analysis method is for activities of people with 
healthy hand. However, for patients with hand issues, this 
approach is not very appropriate. This is because each 
patient's finger injury is different. For example, some are 
unable to bend, while others are unable to be straightened 
after being bent for a long time. The approach of this study 
is to find out the maximum of all movements of each patient 
when performing movements. Then, we compare whether 
their maximum values differ from each other. When this 
difference is relatively small, it is considered normal. 
Otherwise, it represents an exception. The minimum value 
is handled in the same way. Through the above-mentioned 
comparisons, it is possible to discover the differences 
between each patient and others.  
III. 
EXPERIMENTS AND RESULTS 
This research experiment is divided into three parts. 
The first is to establish a data norm of 30 healthy 
participants. The second is to compare and analyze the data 
of patients and healthy participants. The third part is to 
analyze the rehabilitation situation of a specific patient in 
different rehabilitation stages. The results showed that some 
patients' index fingers showed significantly lower curvature 
values in certain movements than others. In addition, in 
some patients, the curvature of the middle finger was 
significantly different from that of healthy participants. This 
result indicates that the patient may not be able to bend the 
fingers on both sides because the middle finger cannot bend 
normally. In addition, there was a patient whose little finger 
shows a fixed value in any movement, which indicates that 
the patient's little finger mobility was lost. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this study was to explore how people 
use their fingers in curvature and acupressure for daily 
activities. The method adopted in this study was to first 
make a glove with induction curvature and acupressure 
sensors. We then invited thirty healthy participants to 
perform eight daily activities. The first thing we did was to 
test whether we could use the sensors of this homemade 
glove to judge the difference between two different actions. 
After we confirmed the discriminative ability of this 
homemade glove system, our next step was to try to build a 
reference dataset from the collected data to analyze the role 
of each finger. 
There are two future research directions. The first is to 
continuously increase the repertoire of sensory data to 
establish healthy human hand activity norms. In addition to 
the 8 activities of daily living used in this study, this study 
recommends 
more 
data 
collection 
on 
other 
hand 
movements.  The second direction is to allow patients to 
compare rehabilitation outcomes at different stages under 
the guidance of clinicians.  In this way, we can see whether 
the patients have been improving clinically through the data 
provided by this system, that is, whether the patient's hand 
function is improving. This is a more objective analysis, 
which is its real practical application. Finally, in the future, 
 
 
 
 
hold a wine 
bottle 
hold a flat 
water bottle 
hold a mug 
squeeze 
toothpaste 
 
 
 
 
operate a 
mouse 
hold a ping-
pong ball 
hold a marble 
write a Chinese 
character 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

we hope to collect enough data on the use of this technology 
to integrate Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems into this 
field of research and to further capture the specific 
biological characteristics of individuals. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Ethical Approval: The study was conducted according to the 
guidelines of the Declaration of Helsinki and approved 
by the Human Research Ethics Committee of the 
National Cheng Kung University (Approval No.: 
NCKU HREC-E-110-319-2, date: July 13th, 2021).  
Informed Consent Statement:  Written informed consent has 
been obtained from the patient to publish this paper. 
Funding: This study was in part funded by Taiwan Ministry 
of Science and Technology (Grant 110-2221-E-224-
041-MY3 & Grant 110-2221-E-224-042).  
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Connolly, J. Condell, B. O’ Flynn, J. T. Sanchez, and P. 
Gardiner, “IMU Sensor-Based Electronic Goniometric Glove 
for Clinical Finger Movement Analysis,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 
18, pp. 1273–1281, 2018.  
[2] B. S. Lin, I. J. Lee, and J. L.Chen, “Novel Assembled 
Sensorized Glove Platform for Comprehensive Hand Function 
Assessment by Using Inertial Sensors and Force Sensing 
Resistors,” IEEE Sens. J., vol. 20, pp. 3379–3389, 2020.  
[3] T. Pham, P. N. Pathirana, H. Trinh, and P. Fay, “A Non-
Contact Measurement System for the Range of Motion of the 
Hand,” Sensors, vol. 15, pp. 18315–18333, 2015. 
[4] C. S Fahn and H. Sun, “Development of a Dataglove with 
Reducing Sensors Based on Magnetic Induction,” IEEE Trans. 
Ind. Electron., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 585-594, 2005. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-017-9
IARIA Congress 2022 : The 2022 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

