Direct Democracy System Architecture for Sustainable Community Participation  
 
Aderonke Thompson, Nikolaos Papakonstantinou, Dharmendra Sharma 
Safe and Connected Society 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Espoo, Finland 
e-mails: ext-aderonke.thompson@vtt.fi, Nikolaos.papakonstantinou@vtt.fi, Dharmendra.Sharma@vtt.fi 
Abstract— Active community participation without being 
tagged as hate speech contribution has been an established 
desirable element for citizens towards achieving a sustainable 
democratic process in communities across the world. 
Significant contributions to bridge this gap have been 
proposed by means of web technology adoption. Unarguably, 
in the context of free communication, anonymity is sought for 
serious contributions. Thus, in this paper, we examine four 
state-of the-art democracy platforms based on open-source 
technologies vis-à-vis their system architecture and features. It 
is observed that, while some of these platforms provide active 
democratic citizens participation, by e-voting, none of them 
adopts anonymity and full decentralization technology open-
source platform in the discussion forum, which is a pivot for 
the waned participants’ trust with the conventional centralized 
system that is inherently prone to single-point of failure 
problems; this is also prone to the vulnerabilities of data at 
rest, in transit and storage. Consequently, we propose a full 
decentralized system, based on blockchain technology that is 
capable of being integrated with the state-of-the-art system to 
ensure 
trust, 
tamper-resistance, 
sybil-resistance, 
accountability, reliability, transparency, and security, using a 
tokenization 
with 
the 
exclusive 
consideration 
of 
gas 
optimization technique to lower the cost each citizen will incur 
using the system. 
Keywords-architecture; 
anonymity; 
sybil-resistance; 
decentralization; blockchain. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Governance, an outcome of citizens’ choice, is evolving 
in organizations and communities around the world with a 
consensus that a good governance is quintessential for 
inclusion and diversity of citizens. It is a decision-making 
process among available options to select who governs. Of 
all governance types, democratic governance is the most 
embraced and sought after since every citizen has a platform 
to exercise their franchise during the electioneering process. 
Conversely, as laudable as the democratic governance is, the 
process is plagued with insincerity and mostly lacks 
credibility, in addition to a high cost; authors in [27] 
emphasize adequate fairness and transparency as a wit 
towards realizing a sustainable and smart governance that 
integrates citizens’ livelihood improvement. 
The following problems have been identified to be a 
major concern in traditional and existing electronic voting 
protocol: 
i. 
the anonymity of ballot and privacy. 
ii. 
single point of failure. 
iii. 
inefficient authentication mechanism. 
iv. 
votes are not universally verifiable.  
Elections form the basis of governance in a democratic 
setting, which is the current and most acceptable type of 
governance that enables citizens’ participation. It is a 
political process that requires citizens vote according to their 
opinion. This is done from small communities to various 
organizations, states, and the country at large. The process 
requires a high degree of trustworthiness since it is geared 
towards selection of capable officers that citizens deem fit 
for a particular position of leadership. In recent years, 
traditional voting systems such as paper-based voting have 
been heavily used, which requires voters to cast votes in 
appointed polling stations; the process should be transparent, 
secure, and reliable to ensure credibility. Since improvement 
is always sought, it is no doubt that advancement in Science 
and Technology (S&T) has impacted this increasingly 
evolving sphere. This advancement is principally the result 
of the efforts to have a secure, provable, transparent system 
with robust voter authentication and identification. Thus, 
since it is the most acceptable form of governance by 
citizens, advancement is incessantly sought on the overall 
voting system’s resilience and efficiency. 
E-voting is a method that digitizes voting and promises to 
resolve the issues and challenges related to manual voting 
elections on a software platform using an electronic device. 
Yet, the inadequacy of the e-voting systems is largely due to 
design flaws of centralization such as codebase, database, 
monitoring tools of the required infrastructure. This implies a 
single point of failure in secure design principles model in 
OWASP Software Assurance Maturity Model (SAMM) [28]. 
The overall impact that is beyond voters’ control is that, as 
soon as ballot is marked and a vote is cast, the entire trust of 
the process lies upon the organization to ensure that there is 
no fraud [1]-[3]. Therefore, voters’ trustworthiness become 
an illusion due to the non-availability of independently 
provable tools as anticipated by voters; that is, the degree of 
components compliance in relation to security characteristics 
as shown with its specified functionality [4], The highlighted 
points either hypothetically diminish voters’ participation, or 
imposes reservations on election outcome. 
Nakamoto [13] introduced blockchain technology with 
the development of the first cryptocurrency called Bitcoin. 
Blockchain stores blocks that contain a set of data such that 
every next block is linked to the previous one in the form of 
a linked list and a cryptographically secure way so that it 
becomes impossible to change anything in the previous 
blocks without rendering the blockchain invalid. It is a 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

decentralized distributed system of nodes that works in a 
coordinated way with the help of a consensus protocol. It is 
pertinent to note that blockchain technology is not sufficient 
to eliminate some of the susceptible vulnerabilities of e-
voting such as device compromise, voter coercion, identity 
verification, user error as well as network attacks [16][29].  
 This paper explores the use of blockchain and 
tokenization to facilitate secure e-voting applications with 
the ability to assure voter anonymity, sybil-resistance, 
voter’s eligibility, vote integrity, and end-to-end verification. 
This proposed system leverages fundamental blockchain 
features such as a self-cryptographic validation structure 
through hashes and public availability of distributed ledger 
of records that is accessible to everyone. Blockchain 
technology plays a key role in the domain of electronic 
voting due to the inherent nature of preserving anonymity, as 
well as maintaining a decentralized and publicly distributed 
ledger of transactions across all the nodes. This paper 
presents a detailed design of the proposed e-voting protocol, 
which can achieve an end-to-end verifiable, sybil-resistant 
and secure election process. The rest of this paper is 
structured as follows. Section II presents a review of the 
state-of-the-art architecture with related works. Section III 
describes the proposed system. Section IV highlights the 
challenges of the existing system. Section V conclusion 
wraps up the article with acknowledgement. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
All the state-of-the-art platforms considered are active 
web applications serving many communities across the globe 
- DemocracyOS, Consul Democracy Decidim and D-Cent. 
The core and common characteristic of these platforms 
leverage the benefit of open-source software for cost-
effectiveness, flexible and agile development processes, 
robust 
community-driven 
support, 
and 
easy 
license 
management. In addition, these applications hinge on the 
high degree of open-source community on responsiveness to 
information security continuous integration and deployment 
to fix emerging bugs. 
A. State-of-the-art 
DemocracyOS focuses on solving the increasing 
challenge of unsatisfactory expression of democratic issues 
through 
inadequate 
binary 
choices 
and 
decreasing 
reductionist 
proxies; 
the 
continuous 
clashing 
proxy 
representation with individual’s interest, consequential crisis 
arisen from these issues cut across the world. Then, 
government insistence of citizens’ exclusion from such 
conversations should be addressed since decisions made 
affect all the citizens. Because technology has a strong 
democratizing potential in citizens horizon; harnessing the 
collective wise, pluralistic views ensure choosing from pre-
set options to actively designing the options dynamically. 
Hence, 
DemocracyOS 
is 
developed 
to 
achieve 
construction, 
institutional-building, 
and 
productive 
participatory discussion, rather than agitation, protest and 
citizens taking to the streets, by making information 
accessible to citizens. DemocracyOS pioneered creating a 
link between two types of formal code, otherwise known as 
digital software (the net) and the legal contractual system 
currently operating in most governmental processes. The 
design is for parliaments and other institutions saddled with 
collective decision task; being a mix among direct and 
representative democracy targeting the act of voting and 
voting on their representative selection modality alongside 
these beneficiaries - Argentina netizens, non-governmental 
organizations as regulators, developers, and hacktivists 
globally for law markup language towards legislative sources 
data standardization [5]. 
CONSUL as a non-profit organization reinforces the 
quality, neutrality, and credibility of global citizen 
participation in democratic process integration with 
independence, transparency rule of law and inclusion. 
Municipalities of Madrid, Buenos, Porto Alegre New York 
among other institutions across 35 countries actively deploy 
and interact with the platform. CONSUL is designed for 
citizens to voice their concerns and participate through 
proposal development, votes for new laws, debates, crowd 
laws, participatory budgets, and consultations. Proposal and 
debates are citizen-centric considering environments are 
utilities that make life easy. CONSUL was a response to the 
2011 15M Spanish indignados for “real democracy” demand 
sequel to some prevalent issues such as financial and housing 
crises, lack of job prospects for youth, corruption as well as 
lack of political legitimacy of democratic institutions [6]. 
The platform provides democratic processes and institution 
improvement by fostering a new way of citizens engagement 
coupled with active participation, accountability and 
transparency of public issues affecting the citizens. The 
impact of the project has continued to rise across the city of 
Madrid and across the world as some organizations have 
adopted the platform for various democratic discussions and 
voting processes.  
Decidim 
contributes 
the 
societal 
democratization 
processes 
through 
the 
construction 
of 
technology, 
methodologies, practices, standards actions, narratives, and 
values in a collaborative and reflective way.  Adoption of the 
platform cuts across cities and organizations worldwide such 
as city council, an association, NGO, a university, trade 
union and neighbourhood association [7]. 
D-Cent, 
an 
acronym 
for 
Decentralized 
Citizens 
ENgagement Technologies, an EU-funded project from 
October 2013 to May 2016. D-Cent is a next generation 
open- source, distributed, and privacy-aware tools for direct 
democracy and economic empowerment. D-Cent is a 
multidisciplinary testbed platform for emerging social 
movements, new models for citizen control of personal and 
social data in addition to privacy and security by design. D-
Cent is characterized with real-time notifications about 
issues of concerns; policies and proposals collaborations; 
collective municipal budgeting and give freecoin incentives 
to citizens [8]. Table 1 gives the summary of the four state-
of-the-art. 
 
171
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
TABLE 1. STATE-OF-THE-ART PLATFORMS  
Sate-of-the-art 
Decidim.org 
DemocracyOS 
Consul Democracy 
D-Cent 
Purpose 
It ensures participatory 
democracy, that is, a platform 
for common citizens to 
participate in the 
decision/policy by submitting 
proposal and this proposal can 
be voted for/against. 
It ensures participatory 
democracy with Global rule 
of Law in 140 Countries 
It ensures participatory 
democracy 
It enables prompt 
information to the citizens 
with real-time notifications 
about issues of concern an 
open-source platform. 
Source 
Management 
Barcelona, Spain 
Argentina 
City of Madrid 
EU 
Benefits 
It can be integrated with any 
system that requires collective, 
participatory decision/policy 
making. 
It allows debate current 
legislation for robust public 
debate. 
It can be integrated with 
any system that requires 
collective, participatory 
decision/policy making 
It supports collection of 
various open-source tools to 
enable participatory 
governance. Some tools are 
blockchain based 
Features 
Strategic planning, participatory 
processes, assemblies, 
initiatives and citizen 
consultations, participatory 
budgeting, networked 
communication, accountability, 
equity and transparency, levels 
of abstraction (process and 
activities are separate, social 
contract, community 
User-friendly, Collaboration 
between citizens and 
government, simple, bill 
tracking, Standard 
repository for global public 
documents, accountability, 
and civic watchdog 
capabilities 
Customisable, secure, 
on-going support, 
proposals, participatory 
budgeting, debates 
Collaborative,  
legislation, incentive 
Open authentication and 
distributed identity 
management, Citizen’s 
control and data ownership, 
Open source and open 
standards, Blockchain trust 
Propose and draft, Decide 
and vote Incentivized usage 
Technologies 
Ruby on Rails, Vue.JS, 
Postgres, SQL, 
GitHub is not available 
Ruby on Rails, 
Postgres, SQL, 
Docker Elasticsearch 
Ruby, Docker 
Platform 
Web 
Web 
Web 
Web 
Web 
Technology 
Partial decentralization   Web 
2.0 decentralised approach to 
decision making, 
Web 2.0 
Web 2.0 
Web 2.0 
 
B. State-of-the-art Architecture 
The four states-of-the-art architecture reveals the 
functional focus and target in a unique way that suites the 
stakeholders which are the citizens. Decidim and D-Cent 
system architecture are available from their detailed system 
documentation - Figures 1 and 2 respectively, it is assumed 
that the core architecture is tailored with the general e-
voting model system-specific requirements:  
i. Multi-user: a few voters can vote simultaneously. 
ii. System Security: The overall system security is 
paramount to protect identity theft and system 
manipulation by outsiders or third parties.  
iii. Accessibility: voters can access the system from any 
location using secure Internet and/or mobile devices 
through a web browser. 
iv. Availability: the system must have high availability 
during an election campaign. 
 
C. Related Works 
This section elucidates existing studies stressing their 
motivations, objectives, methodologies, contributions to 
knowledge, and limitations.  
      [15] presents “Blockchain technology-based e-voting 
system”. The authors stated that elections become a pertinent 
occurrence during democratic process, however, distrust has 
been the bane of electioneering process from global 
perspective. Some giant economies still suffer from these 
concerns: flawed legal system, fraudulent characterized 
voting system, electronic vote machine hacking, election 
manipulation, and booth capturing square measure are the 
key challenges facing the electoral system. The authors 
preferred the e-voting solution to the highlighted challenges. 
The drawback of this research is that it does not satisfy some 
electronic voting requirements such as anonymous vote-cast. 
 
172
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

  
Figure 1.  System Architecture for Decidim Application [26]  
 
 
 
Figure 2.  System Architecture for D-Cent Application [27].  
[16] 
presents 
“An 
E-Voting 
Protocol 
with 
Decentralization and Voter Privacy”. The focus of the study 
is to adopt a blockchain-based e-voting protocol that meets 
electronic voting requirements. Additionally, editing feature 
is integrated to allow voters change of mind in case it occurs 
within a given period. Decentralization, network peers for 
voters’ control, and a degree of centralization is required to 
achieve the set objectives. Other highlights are pros and cons 
of 
blockchain 
adoption 
empirically 
in 
development/deployment and usage contexts with complex 
applications prospects. The drawback of this research is that 
there is a Central Authority (CA), as centralization point of 
the protocol with trustworthiness assumption. However, a 
malicious act from the CA brings distrust that might result to 
arbitrarily manipulation of cast votes for unaccredited voters; 
this is non-conformity to e-voting requirement.  
[17] presents a “Blockchain-based e-voting approach in 
P2P Network”. The study adopted Distributed Ledger 
Technology (DLT) to circumvent vote forging options plus 
non-repudiation and users’ one-time login. Integrating the 
techniques with the DLT and secure e-voting user 
authentication in the p2p network is proposed such that trust 
is enhanced via vote forgery circumvention.  This research 
was proposed because of the internet and information 
technologies advancement, organizations are moving from 
on-premise to cloud-based platforms.  The drawback of this 
research is that a secure device is required to cast votes. 
Although, authors stated that the system is secure, but the 
system is vulnerable and susceptible to malware attacks from 
hackers to cast or alter vote. A major strength of the system 
is voter access to vote only once with no editing feature in 
the case of unintended errors during the voting process.  
In [18], the authors explore the difficulties and uses of 
electronic voting procedures in elections, emphasizing the 
vulnerability to fraud and the demand for safe and reliable 
vote information. The paper advocates using blockchain 
technology to build a decentralized system that can validate 
voting data and guard against manipulation to address these 
problems. The decentralization of blockchain makes data 
backup and tracking simpler, hence maintaining the validity 
of the voting data. Electronic voting can use blockchain 
technology to increase the results’ authenticity and safeguard 
the vote data integrity. 
In [19], the authors aimed at establishing trust in the E-
voting system. They examined issues with current electronic 
voting systems, such as fraud, a lack of transparency, and 
security threats like intimidation and bribery. The paper 
suggests a fair and transparent electronic voting system built 
on blockchain technology to address these problems. 
Therefore, their system employs a time-release encryption 
technique to ensure voting process fairness and a receiver-
denial encryption scheme to ensure coercion resistance. 
III. 
PROPOSED SYSTEM 
Technology paradigm has continued to impact governance 
mechanisms and processes that culminate into a sustainable 
society; this study seeks to bridge the gap by adopting 
tokenization and blockchain technology. Electronic-voting 
requirements are in two parts, viz, generic, and system-
specific. The generic requirements applying to general e-
voting scheme, as presented by [20] and [21], include: 
i. 
Privacy: Anyone cannot know for whom the voter 
voted. The ballot is hidden from outside observers. 
173
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

ii. 
Individual verifiability: The ability of a voter to 
verify that the ballot has been counted. 
iii. Eligibility: Only the legal voters can enroll in the 
voting event. 
iv. Accuracy/Integrity: Every vote should be counted 
correctly. 
iv. Fairness: Nothing can influence the result of voting. If 
the system leaks the voting result or the authority 
adds a voter during the voting, the event can be 
defined as unfair.  
v. Uniqueness: Every voter can only vote once. The 
voter will have no permission to vote more if he 
votes. 
vi. Robustness: Anyone. 
A. Integrated System Approah 
Information and data are critical to technical assessment 
and decision-making in a software system development 
lifecycle; therefore, ensuring system architecture aligns with 
system 
requirements 
is 
fundamental 
to 
achieving 
stakeholders concerns towards a set of consistent views and 
models. The state-of-the-art architectures align with the 
integrated system design approach [22] from the three 
concerned perspectives - stakeholder, system, and trades; 
stakeholders being the citizens, trades being the objectives 
and capabilities of the platforms; while system is the 
technology specifications deployed including security-
driven constraints. In DDemo, emphasis is on system self-
protection against sybil attacks, and secure system 
management. A rider to the integrated system approach is 
the state-of-the-art is compliance with the OWASP Software 
Assurance Maturity Model (SAMM) of people, process, and 
technology, it is an effective approach to system design 
[23]. 
B. System Architecture 
System architecture is the fundamental concepts or 
properties of a system in its environment embodied in its 
elements, relationships, and in the principles of its design 
and evolution [24][25].  
Stakeholders’ perspective for free speech can be handled 
with the system architecture in Figures 3 and 4 to integrate 
full decentralization into the state-of-the art.  
C. Proposed System Overview 
The proposed-voting protocol implements decentralized 
data storage using blockchain technology to make the 
election procedure more decentralized, transparent, and 
secure. There are two (2) prominent group-oriented digital 
signatures that support both user-authentication and 
anonymity which are: Group signature and Ring signature. 
The signatures are modern cryptographic primitives, and 
they provide privacy preserved authentication feature. This 
type of signature preserves users’ privacy by granting users 
the ability to get verified while also hiding their identities in 
a group. Signatures can be generated by a user who belongs 
to a group by representing a group. The signer can employ 
other users public key without their consent to hide his 
identity i.e., a user adds himself into any set of his choice 
and produces a signature. The e-voting protocol uses the ring 
signatures for privacy enhancement and multi signatures to 
create consensus between groups, the system integrates 
strong identity with tokenization. and it is linked to other 
verified identities to improve the system authentication 
which is important to voting eligibility requirement and 
overall system security. The proposed system consists of 
three phases; each phase contributes to the demonstration of 
the system’s effectiveness to achieve an end-to-end 
verifiable e-voting scheme that satisfies all voting 
requirements. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  Proposed System Architecture.  
  
174
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

 
Figure 4.  Proposed protocol voting phase and identity enrollment. 
IV. 
CHALLENGES OF THE EXISTING  SYSTEM 
Hackers can compromise the integrity of the e-voting 
which is seen as a major disadvantage in the voting system. 
This could be done either physically or remotely where a 
malicious attacker changes millions of the vote data 
undetected. In the e-voting system, fraud is easier to perform. 
Identification of the voters would have to occur using 
participants’ unique credentials such as his social security 
number, drive license. Perpetrators can acquire these pieces 
of information, logging themselves in the system and casting 
a vote for someone else. If someone gets a large amount of 
such unique identifiers with a data breach, they would be 
able to cast thousands of fraudulent votes. The manufacturers 
of these e-voting machines can be bias, causing influences in 
votes. Private companies who develop and distribute these e-
voting systems would lock away their source code. Some 
companies that get hired by the government to implement 
these e-voting systems can act unbiased in inaccurately 
collecting and reporting votes. These acts do not guarantee a 
fair and unbiased election. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents the architecture of state-of-the-art 
platform for direct democracy participation and proposed a 
more secure platform with sybil resistant feature in addition 
to anonymity of participants using blockchain technology 
that meets the fundamental e-voting properties that provide 
full decentralization and places as much control of the 
process in the hands of the voters and the public. This is 
ongoing research; in which the system’s application 
development 
is 
ongoing 
using 
solidity 
and 
react 
programming languages with gas optimization integration to 
ensure a lightweight feature and reduce cost for community 
participants. Thereafter, performance evaluation will be 
conducted using standard metrics. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research is sponsored by the European Research 
Consortium for Informatics and Mathematics (ERCIM) and 
the host Institution – VTT Technical Research Institute of 
Finland. 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Z. Tharindu, and K. B. N. Lakmali, Blockchain based e-
voting system. International Journal of Soft Computing and 
Artificial 
Intelligence, 
vol. 
7, 
Issue.1, 
May-2019. 
http://www.iraj.in/journal/journal_file/journal_pdf/4-570-
15641401811-7.pdf. 
[2] S. A.-B. Salman, S. Al-Janabi, & A. M. Sagheer, A Review 
on E-Voting Based on Blockchain Models. Iraqi Journal of 
Science, 
pp. 
1362–1375, 
2022. 
https://doi.org/10.24996/ijs.2022.63.3.38  
[3] https://wentzwu.com/2021/08/02/systems-engineering-
confidence-trust-and-assurance/ Accessed April 3, 2023. 
[4] International Organization for Standardization/International 
Electrotechnical Commission/Institute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers 2011 ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010 – Systems 
and Software Engineering – Architecture description. 
https://www.iso.org/standard/50508.html 
[5] https://worldjusticeproject.org/our-
work/programs/democracyos, Accessed April 6, 2023. 
[6] https://oecd-opsi.org/innovations/consul-project/, 
Accessed 
April 6, 2023. 
[7] https://decidim.org/, Accessed April 6, 2023. 
[8] https://dcentproject.eu/about-us/, Accessed April 6, 2023. 
[9] H. Yi, Securing e-voting based on blockchain in P2P network. 
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and 
Networking, 2019 (1). https://doi.org/10.1186/s13638-019-
1473-6  
[10] C. Angsuchotmetee and P. Setthawong, BlockVOTE : An 
Architecture of a Blockchain-based Electronic Voting 
System. ECTI Transactions on Computer and Information 
Technology 
(ECTI-CIT), 
14(2), 
174-189, 
2020. 
https://doi.org/10.37936/ecti-cit.2020142.227455. 
[11] M. Bernard, The 5 Big Problems With Blockchain Everyone 
Should 
Be 
Aware 
Of, 
retrieved 
from 
https://www.bernardmarr.com/default.asp?contentID=1354 
[12] Y. Wu, An E-voting System based on Blockchain and Ring 
Signature [Master’s thesis, University of Birmingham]. 
Dgalindo, 
2017,   
https://www.dgalindo.es/mscprojects/yifan.pdf. 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

[13] S. Nakamoto, “Bitcoin: a peer-to-peer electronic cash 
system”, Bitcoin, https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin.pdf, 2019. 
[14] L. Dan, Could Estonia Be the Model for Secure Online 
Voting?. 
GovTech, 
https://www.govtech.com/blogs/lohrmann-on-
cybersecurity/could-estonia-be-the-model-for-secure-online-
voting.html, 2020. 
[15] A. L. Anita, P. Junaid, P. Talif, and P. Prathmesh, Blockchain 
technology-based e-voting system. ITM Web Conf. vol.  32, 
2020 International Conference on Automation, Computing 
and 
Communication 
2020 
(ICACC-2020). 
https://doi.org/10.1051/itmconf/20203203001. 
[16] S.H. Freya, G. Apostolos, N. A. Raja, M. Konstantinos, ”An 
E-Voting Protocol with Decentralisation and Voter Privacy”, 
2018 IEEE International Conference on Internet of Things 
(iThings) and IEEE Green Computing and Communications 
(GreenCom) and IEEE Cyber, Physical and Social Computing 
(CPSCom) 
and 
IEEE 
Smart 
Data 
(SmartData). 
https://doi.org/10.1109/Cybermatics_2018.2018.00262. 
[17] N. Shanthi, R. Suvitha, and R.C. Suganthe, “Blockchain 
based e-voting approach in P2P  Network”, Journal of Critical 
Reviews, 
vol 
7, 
issue 
9, 
2020. 
http://www.jcreview.com/fulltext/197-1590993271.pdf. 
[18] E. Febriyanto, Triyono, N. Rahayu, K. Pangaribuan, and  P. 
A. Sunarya, “Using Blockchain Data Security Management 
for E-Voting Systems”, 8th International Conference on 
Cyber and IT Service Management (CITSM), 2020, 
https://doi.org/10.1109/citsm50537.2020.9268847 
[19] M. N. Neloy et al., “A remote and cost‐optimized voting 
system 
using 
blockchain 
and 
smart 
contract”, 
IET 
Blockchain. 2023,  https://doi.org/10.1049/blc2.12021 
[20] B. Yu et al., “Platform-independent secure blockchain-based 
voting system”, In: Chen, L., anulis, Schneider, S. (eds.) ISC 
2018. LNCS, vol. 11060, pp. 369–386.Springer, Cham 2018. 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99136-8 20  
[21] H. Tsung-Chih, W. Zhen-Yu., L. Chia-Hui, and C.Yu-Fang, 
“An Electronic voting system for defending free will and 
resisting bribery and coercion based on ring anonymous 
signcryption scheme”, Sage journals, vol. 9 issue. 1, 2017. 
http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/1687814016687194 
[22] https://nvlpubs.nist.gov/nistpubs/SpecialPublications/NIST.S
P.800-160v1r1.pdf, Accessed April 6, 2023 
[23] https://www.owasp.org, Accessed April 6, 2023. 
[24] ISO/IEC/IEEE 
12207:2017(en) 
Systems 
and 
software 
engineering — Software life cycle processes, 2017. 
[25] ISO/IEC/IEEE 42010:2022(en) 
Software, 
systems 
and 
enterprise — Architecture description, 2022. 
[26] https://docs.decidim.org/en/develop/develop/guide_architectu
re, Accessed April 7, 2023. 
[27] H. J. Scholl and M. C. Scholl, ‘‘Smart governance: A 
roadmap for research and practice,’’ in Proc. IConference, 
2014, 
pp. 
163–176, 
https://dcentproject.eu/wp-
content/uploads/2014/03/D4.2-final_new1.pdf Accessed April 
7, 2023. 
[28] OWASP SAMM v2.pdf https://owaspsamm.org/, Accessed 
November 6, 2023. 
[29] R. Geetanjali, I. Razi, O. Waqar, K. B. Ali, ”On the Design 
and Implementation of a Blockchain Enabled E-Voting 
Application Within IoT-Oriented Smart Cities” IEEE Access, 
9:34165-34176, 2021, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2021.3061411 
Accessed 
November 
6, 
2023.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-089-6
IARIA Congress 2023 : The 2023 IARIA Annual Congress on Frontiers in Science, Technology, Services, and Applications

