Intelligent Project Management and Automation Systems   
 
Bin Ling, Yanyan Yang, David Ndzi 
School of Engineering  
University of Portsmouth 
Portsmouth, UK  
email: bin.ling@myport.ac.uk, {linda.yang; 
david.ndzi}@port.ac.uk  
Min Gao  
School of Software Engineering  
Chongqing University  
Chongqing, China  
email: gaomin@cqu.edu.cn
 
Abstract— Effective management of projects is becoming 
increasingly important for any type of organisation to remain 
competitive in today’s dynamic business environment due to 
pressure of globalisation. Planning a project with proper 
considerations of all necessary factors and managing a project 
to ensure its successful implementation are facing a lot 
challenges. Initial stage in planning a project is costly, time 
consuming and usually with poor accuracy on cost and effort 
predictions. On the other hand, detailed information for 
previous projects may be buried in piles of archived 
documents, which make it increasingly difficult to learn 
from the previous experiences. Project portfolio has been 
brought into this field aiming to improve the information 
sharing and management among different projects. However, 
the amount of information that could be shared is still limited 
to generic information.  In this paper, we design and 
implement a novel software system iPAS, which automatically 
generate a project plan with effort estimation of time and cost 
based on data collected from previous completed projects in 
standardised industries. To maximise the data sharing and 
management among different projects, a method of using 
product-based planning from PRINCE2 methodology is 
proposed.  iPAS has been trialed with cases in two 
organisations, which clearly shows the business benefits of 
autonomic project management. It reduced effort to plan new 
projects and manage project portfolio and decreased 
estimation bias thereby reducing operational risk. It also 
automatically benchmarked performance against company 
best practices.  
Keywords-autonomatic project management; product-based 
planning; best practice; PRINCE2. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, many engineering companies have spent 
a great deal of time bidding for Whole Life Cycle (WLC) 
projects from clients [1].  Most of the project planning and 
associated cost are developed almost from scratch, even 
when elements of projects are similar to those bid for in the 
past. Since the bidding proposal must be built around a 
sound and well-thought-out estimated project plan, which 
addresses the cost, time spent and quality to generate the 
final product to be responsive to clients’ delivery 
requirements, it will take considerable time and therefore 
incurs resource costs, which could be a big cost saving. 
Frequently, the best practice of assessing through life 
support resources in the engineering services sector is to 
benchmark against a similar and previous project [3] by 
using historical data.  Best practice is defined as the most 
efficient (least amount of effort) and effective (best results) 
way of accomplishing a task or a deliverable, based on 
repeatable procedures that have proven themselves over time 
for large numbers of people [2]. Benchmarking is considered 
as a technique to provide a systematic approach to improving 
business production efficiency and profitability through 
comparing and analysing the values from varying resources. 
Thus, benchmarking and utilising best project practice are 
the key issues for enterprises to persist in contract 
competition and project planning. 
Currently, most best project practices are made explicit in 
terms of persistent data from operational processes or 
activities, but underlying influencing factors remain implicit. 
The risk of such practice is the cost estimation will not take 
into account other factors, such as different environment, 
technology advances and different customer profiles [3].   
On the other hand, main stream project management 
methods nowadays are process or activity based. Therefore, 
the granularity of information is collected merely at the 
activity level. Project portfolios which assist the decision 
makers on corporate strategy and project management 
practices are also mainly represented based on process.  
Project information sharing happens only at the activity 
level, or at the project level, in this case. At activity level, 
information is not easily sharable due to the fact that new 
technologies, process re-engineering and different personnel 
preferences may all affect the practices of conducting project 
activities. The vast amount of information in between which 
contains the best practices of working on certain products 
(deliverables) is not even collected.  There is an emerging 
requirement from industries to have a tool to use good 
practices or lessons learned from previous projects to guide 
the new projects.   
This paper introduces a web based adaptive project 
information sharing and management system - iPAS 
(Intelligent Project Automation Systems).  iPAS is 
developed by following modern software engineering 
methodologies, PRINCE2 [4] principles and the practical 
experience of project managers.  iPAS consists of  four main 
project management functions: project planning, progress 
monitoring, project reports and human resource allocation.  It 
was designed for managing engineering projects, but its 
principles could also be applied to other project disciplines. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
introduces the state of the art of current project management 
systems. Section 3 presents the overview of the iPAS system 
and related PRINCE2 techniques, followed by introducing 
the major functions of iPAS in Section 4. Section 5 provides 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

evaluation results of the system. The final section concludes 
the whole paper.  
II. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS IN THE MARKET 
A number of commercial tools have been created for 
project information sharing and project management. These 
commercial applications have been adopted by industry at a 
remarkable rate. For example, Microsoft Project [16] is able 
to develop project plans with Gantt charts [17], assigning 
resources to tasks and tracking progress; MindManager [5] 
can easily convert brainstorm maps into process diagrams, 
create standard templates so every project has continuity and 
can easily be exported to the Microsoft Office suite; 
@TASK [6] has features such as interactive Gantt charts, 
calendar views and project group lists that are designed to 
minimise downtime and make data management easy; ASTA 
Power Project [7] is a standalone software to do the time 
planning, 
project 
progress 
monitoring 
and 
resource 
management;  Instant Business Network (IBN) Project 
Management [8] provides a cost-effective and flexible 
approach to repeating success and re-using a unified system 
to consolidate corporate information into a single web portal.  
However, the most widely used project management 
features of these applications are fairly conventional. For 
instance, the classical feature of graphical plan and critical 
path analysis, display the Gantt chart view by default 
encourages users to focus on task or activity scheduling too 
early, rather than identifying objectives and deliverables. 
Moreover, plans generated by these applications are based on 
activities, which make it difficult to perform the benchmark 
because different project users may have different 
approaches to deliver the same product. The detailed 
information collected at the activity level can be useful for 
future project planning only when the same work practices 
are followed. In addition, due to no shared central database 
to store 
historical data, these project management 
applications cannot do benchmarking from previous projects 
and use the historical data to produce an automated project 
plan. 
III. 
IPAS SYSTEM 
As mentioned previously, many engineering companies 
spent considerable time bidding for projects by developing 
project plans from scratch. It also means that bids are not 
always consistent and sometimes contain inaccuracies, which 
can be costly if the project is won and the cost profile is 
proved to be wrong. Furthermore, on contract award it is 
difficult to substantiate existing data on project success to 
improve customer confidence. 
Although benchmarking has been brought into project 
management, the risk is the effort estimation will not take 
into account other factors, such a different environment, 
technology advances and different user profiles. Companies, 
such as Dytecna [1] have previously been financially 
penalised by poor benchmarking techniques. Dytecna is an 
engineering 
company 
providing 
engineering 
service 
solutions for governments and commercial customers, both 
in the United Kingdom and overseas.  Its core business 
activities include Systems Engineering, Whole Life Support, 
Manufacturing, and Asset Management/Health Monitoring 
Systems. A research project was proposed  by Dytecna a 
couple of years ago to employ benchmarking techniques to 
improve current information sharing and management of the 
whole life cycle of projects based on the best practices from 
historical data, and find a method to analyse the completed 
and existing projects to convert Activity Based project 
information into Product Based information. The outcome of 
the project is an adaptive project information sharing and 
management system – iPAS which is based upon the 
principles of the best practices and the methodologies from 
PRINCE2 to manage the whole lifecycle of project. 
A. iPAS Overview  
The philosophy behind the design of iPAS is to facilitate 
system learning from previous projects in light of 
benchmarking criteria and present to the project manager a 
manageable amount of easily-derived information organised 
to give insight, information, or alerts about project status. 
To achieve this goal, iPAS is designed to intelligently 
assist with the through life management of projects based on 
best practice and experience from previous project profiles. 
The system is expected to automatically deliver project plans 
to match customer requirements and provides a mechanism 
for continuous monitoring of project execution via 
benchmarking and generation of project reports. 
In order to fully utilise this service, an additional 
consultancy service package is provided to help customers to 
break down their products into sub-products or work 
packages in accordance with PRINCE2 project management 
principles such as Product Based Structure and Product Flow 
Diagram. This data is stored in a central database for analysis 
and benchmarking enabling project managers to control their 
projects with greater precision. Thus, iPAS system consists 
of two main parts: a web based project management tool 
which allows users to access it anytime and anywhere, and a 
consultancy service (shown in Figure 1).   
 
 
Project Contract  
ITT 
Project Contract  
ITT 
Project Plan 
Project Plan 
Project Data   
(e.g. work package,  
KPIs , raw data) 
Project Data   
(e.g. work package,  
KPIs , raw data) 
User 
Requirement  
Document (URD) 
User 
Requirement  
Document (URD) 
Break down  
Project into  
Sub -  products 
Break down  
Project into  
Sub -  products 
Identify  KPIs 
& Ratio Formula 
Identify  KPIs 
Product Breakdown  
Structure 
Product Breakdown  
Structure 
Product Flow  
Diagram 
Product Flow  
Diagram 
Project Progress  
Monitoring 
Project Progress  
Monitoring 
Benchmark  
against previous  
Project Data 
Benchmark  
against previous  
project data 
Alert  
Exception 
Alert  
Exception 
Consultancy Service 
Software Tool 
Input 
Repeat 
? 
√ 
Project  
Manager 
Project Analysis  
Project Analysis  
iPAS SYSTEM 
Action: e.g.  
extra resources  
needed, 
amend risk  
profile or  
cancel project 
DB 
DB 
Amend 
Generate 
Repeat 
Repeat 
Exception Plan 
Exception Plan 
Produce 
 
Figure 1.  iPAS Overview. 
When a company receives Invitation To Tender (ITT) to 
submit a project bidding, the user requirement document will 
be used as an input of the consultancy service part of the 
system. With the help from project management domain 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

experts, the project will be broken into sub-products by using 
Product Breakdown Structure (PBS) [4] and Product Flow 
Diagram (PFD) [4] techniques, relevant project data such as 
work packages and identified Key Performance Indicators 
(KPIs) will be produced as an output of the consultancy 
service part. 
These raw project data then will be stored into iPAS 
software too. This tool will automatically analyse and 
provide forecasts for newly entered ITT data, by 
benchmarking it with historical project data.  The tool is able 
to produce accurate plans through analysis of entered criteria 
against benchmarked data, which helps project managers to 
decide the project plan.  If the bidding is successful and 
when the new project starts, the tool will also monitor the 
project plan by measuring identified key performance 
indicators (e.g., time, cost and quality) in produced work 
packages during the project life cycle. The project 
management team will receive alerts if any project activity 
goes wrong or beyond the controls during the project 
progress. Immediate action can be taken, such as allocate 
extra resources when needed or amend the risk profile, or 
even cancel the project, to ensure the project status is 
healthy.  A final report can then be generated to summarise 
the project.  Benchmarked data will be updated in a central 
database at the end of the project to improve the analysis 
provided to subsequent projects or biddings. 
B. Product Based Planning Technique 
Project planning is about effort estimation including 
time, cost and resources, which is based on expert judgment 
and analogy using historical data from completed projects.  
Consistency in historical data gathering is the key to reliable 
estimates [9][10]. Especially data for status report in 
business project management system should be collected 
during and after project, but in rare cases automatic data 
capture may be available [11]. 
iPAS uses product breakdown structure to delineate the 
project scope and define a list of deliverable products to be 
constructed during the project.  The products must be 
identified before the activities are defined since the object of 
the project is to produce deliverables. As mentioned in last 
section, in accordance with PRINCE2 project management 
principles, users need to break down projects into work 
package sized products (includes intermediate documentary 
products and final end-products) before fully utilising iPAS. 
Therefore, it is expected that products (or work packages) are 
identified through PBS and PFD before using iPAS tool.  
Compared to activity-based planning or process-based 
planning, a significant advantage of product based planning 
is to do with reporting. It can more precisely control the 
scope of the project and focus only on what is really needed 
to meet the business case. Products are either finished or not, 
activities can be 95% finished for a long time even though 
work is taking place [12]. One tends to forget things that 
have to be done to complete a project. This method captures 
them all, reducing the chance that any will be overlooked. 
Another significant advantage of it is that it will be much 
easier to benchmark with same or similar products because 
different project users may have different processes or 
approaches to delivering the same product, but the properties 
(e.g., quality, cost and time) used to measure the completed 
product should be the same. 
Here is an example of project plan to integrate current IT 
operations into a “Web Based Information Management 
System (WBIMS)” in Dytecna Ltd. In PRINCE2, the top 
level of products is known as “project products”. For 
WBIMS project, these are subdivided into three main 
categories, as shown in Figure 2 represented with diamond 
shape.  
Management products are those products associated with 
the planning and control of the project. They include Project 
Initiation Documents (PID), project plan, checkpoint reports 
and so on. Quality products are separated from Management 
products, they are associated with the definition and control 
of quality, quality plan, product descriptions, quality review 
reports, and project issues report. Specialist products are 
those things that the project has been setup to create. It can 
be broken down into other three sub categories [4]:  
 
Analysis Products. 
 
Development Products and  
 
Implementation Products  
 
Each category respectively includes a few products 
underneath. For example, Website is a deliverable of 
Development Products Group during the system design and 
development 
stage, 
while 
the 
Tested 
system 
and 
Implemented system (signed off acceptance system) are the 
deliverables of the Implementation Products Group in the 
implementation stage.    
WBIMS
Managem
ents 
Products
Specialist 
Products
Quality 
Products
Check Point 
Report
PID
Project Plan
Work Package 
Authorisation
Analysis 
Products
Develop
ment 
Products
Implement
ation 
Products
Requirements 
Specification
Hardware 
Specification
Software 
Specification
Website 
Interface to  
ILMS
Interface to 
Database
Management 
Information 
System
Trained IT 
Persenal
Trained User 
Group
Tested System
Implemented 
system
Quality Plan
Product 
Descriptions
Quality Log
Quality Review 
Results
Test Plans
Test Results
 
Figure 2.  Product Breakdown Structure. 
At the bottom level, the individual product is represented 
by a rectangle shape. A project product is broken down 
further into one or several activities.  The estimate of each 
activity is derived based on human judgment from the 
product estimate and the relative complexity of each activity.  
Again, the total estimated effort for the activities of a product 
should be equal to the product estimated effort.   
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Once the PBS is completed, a complete list of the 
products in that project will be generated. It is time to 
consider the work of creating a PFD. The principle is that the 
products in the relation to each other will be looked at and 
considered how one product is transformed into another. 
Each product may be consisting of one or more activities. 
Thus, the activities implied in the delivery of each of the 
products and those required to create or change the planned 
products need to be identified to give a fuller picture of the 
plan’s workload. Figure 3 is an illustration of adding the 
activities and dependencies based on the PBS of WBIMS. 
 
Train 
User
PID
Project 
Plan
Requirement 
Specification
Work 
Package 
Author
Product 
Description
Quality 
Plan
Interface to 
Database
Interface to 
WBIMS
Website 
Test Plans
Management 
Information 
System
Trained User 
Group
Trained IT 
Personal
Quality Log
Check Point 
Report
Quality Review 
Results
Implemented 
System
Test 
Results
Tested 
System
End
Set Check Point of Product
Write Quality Log
Analyse Quality Review Results
Train IT 
Staff
Test 
System
Design 
Interface
Design 
Database
Design 
Website
Plan 
Test
Analyse Test Result
Close 
Down 
Project
Sign off 
Acceptance 
System
Plan 
Quality
Describe 
Products
Analyse 
Requirement
Plan 
I.S.
Agree 
PID
Plan 
Project
 
Figure 3.  Project Flow Diagram. 
Furthermore, the basic configuration of the system 
requires the entry of top level information about the project 
such as project category, project timeline, work package 
description, tolerance level, customer, etc. 
C. Product-Based Project Portfolio 
A product-based project portfolio (PBPP), as shown in 
Table I,  was proposed in this research to contain more 
detailed information of each product apart from time, cost, 
resource and dependencies, such as quality criteria, 
constrains and activities underneath.    
TABLE I.  PROJECT PORTFOLIOS  
 
Product based project portfolio 
1 
Product name and description 
2 
Duration of completion 
3 
Man power 
4 
Cost including labour & material 
5 
Dependences & pre-requisites 
6 
Activities undertaken of each product include details of rework 
7 
Quality assessment criteria  
8 
Special technical requirements 
9 
Constrains & inheritable risks 
 
The PBPP is a top level methodology to use the product-
based approach for portfolio collection, project planning and 
project delivery.  It details processes starting from product 
breakdown until the resource arrangements during the 
planning stage. The input of PBPP is from information 
collected from all completed projects and the output is to the 
new projects.  The data repository of PBPP contains both 
project and simple product data. When a project manager 
plans a new project, the first step is to break the project into 
simple products by using PBS and PFD, then PBPP will be 
looked at and the portfolio of previous projects and simple 
products can be accessed to see whether those products have 
been done before. As long as the simple products are found 
as the same or similar, the benchmarking principle can be 
employed to choose a suitable product. The activities 
associated with the chosen product will be regarded as the 
most suitable practices to deliver the product in the new 
project plan.  
Sometimes project managers need to estimate the time 
and cost according to their experience when there is no 
information found from the system.  Actual information 
collected during the project delivery can be stored into the 
PBPP system again to cross check the accuracy of the 
previous planning to improve the calculation method for 
future references. 
The PBPP has the obvious advantages to allow maximum 
information and best practice sharing among projects at the 
product level.  It overcomes the limitation of traditional 
activity based methods when sharing information at the 
activity level. 
D. Product Portfolio Benchmarking - Automomous Process 
After breaking the final product into sub-products, the 
next step is to benchmark the sub-products to find the best 
practice among the historic data for project planning. The 
Quartile approach [14] was applied here to enhance the 
benchmark process. It shows the spread of the most popular 
representatives for non-numerical data. This concept refers to 
the subset of all data values in each of those parts. 
TABLE II.  QUARTILE LEVELS 
User Requirement 
Time (Prior) 
Cost 
Quartile 
Criteria 
Quartile 
Criteria 
Maximum 
1 
Maximum 
1 
Upper Quartile 
0.75 
Upper Quartile 
0.75 
Medium 
0.5 
Medium 
0.5 
Lower Quartile 
0.25 
Lower Quartile 
0.25 
Minimum 
0 
Minimum 
0 
 
In terms of the user requirements, the WBIMS project 
delivery time is crucial to the customer, for this reason, the 
project completion date was fixed; thus, the project time 
chosen as the higher Build Priority of the project when using 
iPAS software. In other words, the project completion Time 
is prior to Cost during the benchmarking process, the Criteria 
Expectation of project completion Time was set as Upper 
Quartile and project completion Cost was set as Maximum 
(see Table Π) when configuring the project settings in iPAS 
(Figure 4), which means all the sub-products in WBIMS 
project will be benchmarked by following steps: 
1) 
the top 25% products of all products in data 
repository that have a fairly good completion time will be 
selected firstly,  
2) 
these selected products will be put into the second 
round selection to meet the lower prior criteria - the selected 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

product must have the lowest cost among those completed 
products, 
3) 
the product that meets both criteria on Time and 
Cost will be regarded as the best practice, the completion 
Time and spent Cost as well as all activities that came with 
this product will be used for generating a new project plan. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Project Flow Diagram. 
The formula below for locating the position of the 
observation at a given percentile, y, with n data points sorted 
in ascending order is: 
 
 Case 1: If L is a whole number, then the value will be 
found halfway between positions L and L+1.  
Case 2: If L is a decimal, round up to the nearest whole 
number. (for example, L = 1.2 becomes 1). 
Through the formula above and Weighted Mean [15] 
formula, benchmarked values (Time and Cost) of products 
can be worked out. Together with the portfolio details such 
as activities, dependencies and constrains obtained from an 
identified product from data repository, all these information 
will be used and stored to create a new product portfolio in 
WBIMS project. As long as all simple products in the 
WBIMS project are found as the same or similar to the 
previous completed products, the benchmarking principle 
can be employed to choose suitable products. The activities 
associated with the chosen product will be regarded as the 
most suitable practices to deliver the product in the new 
project plan. Actual information collected during this project 
delivery were stored into the portfolio system to cross check 
the accuracy of the previous planning to improve the 
calculation method for future references.   
E. System Implementation 
The iPAS system was developed using the latest 
ASP.NET technology and deployed in Microsoft Windows 
Server 2008 and MS SQL Server 2008R2 under the 
Windows environment; it takes advantage of many features 
of the .NET framework 4.0, such as the SQL data source 
API, integrated AJAX support, Web Services, and a security 
model that protects data even in Internet applications. 
IV. 
OVERVIEW OF IPAS FUNCTIONS  
As a web-based project management system, iPAS is 
able to intelligently support project managers in project 
planning, optimising business performance and project cost. 
The other main facilities provided by the system are: reverse 
planning, resource allocation, project monitoring and project 
reporting. Each of the facilities will be introduced next. 
A. Project Planning  
iPAS enables project managers to plan a project by 
following pre-defined products (or work packages).  It is also 
the key step of the product-based planning technique in 
PRINCE2, which has emerged based upon the idea of 
considering the products that will result from the project 
rather than how to execute the work [5]. Apart from creating 
a project plan without applying historical data, users can 
create a new project plan benchmarking from previous 
practices and applying desired criteria. In terms of the chosen 
category of the new project previously matched historical 
projects will be listed; the users are able to choose the most 
desirable project(s) from the list to clone. As long as the 
products together with their associated activities are selected 
from the desirable project(s) and submitted for assembling; 
the 
portfolios 
(e.g., 
product 
name, 
activity 
name, 
dependencies and feedback) will be copied cross to the new 
project.  The effort (time and cost) of each activity will be 
calculated based on the customised benchmarking criteria 
and benchmarking algorithms.  As a result, a new project 
Gantt chart (shown in Figure 5) will be generated according 
to the time effort.   
 
 
Figure 5.  A Project Gantt Plan. 
Of course, such automatically derived plan allows 
manual 
overrides 
by 
privileged 
users 
for 
special 
considerations such as adding new products, removing 
unnecessary products or editing the statistics of the effort 
before the project starts. iPAS also enables users to amend 
the project ending date or start date after the project plan has 
been generated, the project plan and Gantt chart will 
automatically adjust to fit the new duration.   
B. Human Resource Management and Profiling 
The iPAS provides a basic management of staff resource 
allocation and activity assignment.  It has an embedded 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

feature to allow the project manager to authenticate staff’s 
work absences and record the period absent, such as 
sickness, public holidays and off-site training for all project 
team members. With the help of this feature, the project 
manager is able to assign available skilled staff into project 
products (or work packages) and activities (shown in Figure 
6).  The data of staff allocation together with other project 
portfolios stored in the database could be used for generating 
live project resource allocation reports and other analytical 
reports. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  A Product with Activities. 
C. Project Monitoring and Alert Mechanism 
iPAS provides a mechanism to automatically monitor 
and analyse product effort values and work completion status 
during the project progress according to project baseline.  
This mechanism depends on the regularly entering the actual 
effort spent by each person or team assigned to the specific 
activity as soon as that specific activity is completed.  The 
responsible person is also required to enter real effort to 
complete a task and to comment on environmental factors 
affecting the delivery result.  When the completion box of an 
activity is ticked, the activity is considered completed.  Since 
activities are associated to products, actual effort can be 
summarised at product level and even at project level.  
Senior members of the project such as project managers 
are able to check the progress status of all current running 
projects immediately through a project tolerance Grid chart 
(shown in Figure 6).  This chart provides a project alerting 
mechanism. There are two levels of alerting mechanism in 
iPAS: one is at project level and one is at product level.  
During the project progress, if the position of a project is 
inside the tolerance level frame but may be over time, over 
budget or both; the bubble colour will be shown as amber 
and means the project is still under control but needs to be 
carefully monitored.  The project manager is expected to 
analyse the problem or look for extra resources.  If the 
position of a project is outside the tolerance level frame, the 
bubble colour will be shown as red meaning it is beyond the 
project tolerance level.  This situation requires an exception 
plan to be launched in accordance with PRINCE2 processes.  
The project bubble colour will be shown as green if the 
project is on time and on budget. From this Grid view, user 
(dependent on privileges) is also able to click through the 
link of the product and find more details in a product view.  
For each product, there is also a status traffic light indicator 
designed for the project manager to understand what is due, 
what is completed and what is overdue (shown in Figure 7).   
 
 
Figure 7.  Project Tolerance Grid. 
D. Project Report 
iPAS is able to generate different kinds of reports with 
charts according to customer requirements.   These reports 
demonstrate project performance, cost analysis, trend 
analysis, resource allocation and real-time project status, etc.  
All these reports can be exported into various formats such 
as PDF, Microsoft Excel and Word. 
E. Summary  
Getting everyone consistently using the product based 
planning method and sharing project information across 
entire project team and organisation is not easy. iPAS has 
been developed to bridge the gap between PRINCE2 main 
principles and its application, providing the user with 
automated planning, monitoring, reports and human resource 
allocation. iPAS allows configurable access levels based on 
roles and rights granted that allow users to access the various 
management levels and features of the solution based on 
their individual needs. This approach ensures that each user 
need only see the functionality and information necessary to 
perform their responsibilities, thereby making the application 
easier to use for all stakeholders. iPAS also provides a 
complete project central database, storing all project data in 
one location for easy access, saving time and resources. It 
has built in deliverables' reviews and authorisations are 
granted online for multi-level granularity cooperation, and 
progress is updated in real time to reduce the need for costly 
meetings and expensive time wasting. Accessed across 
network or intranet, all project staff can share real time 
project information, best practices and learn from previous 
experiences with projects; all these enable more accurate 
future estimating and planning.  
In addition, iPAS was designed generically, thus it can be 
widely used for different industry such as manufacture, 
education, medicine, construction and rail industries, etc. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

The report formats can also be customised according to the 
requirements from specific users.  
V. 
EVALUATIONS  
Compared with the existing project management 
applications on the market, iPAS integrates project planning 
activities with product based planning and automated effort 
estimation in light of user’s criteria.  This is a more 
sophisticated project plan method, which is designed to 
efficiently support plan creation and adjustment online based 
on the practices from historical data.  With this method, 
iPAS offers a better guidance to project managers even 
program managers, because it can help in shaping the plan 
and a breakdown of global project effort estimates into 
product and activity efforts, tracking project progress with 
alert mechanisms, ensuring that the project will meet its 
goals in terms of PRINCE2 main principles.  iPAS also takes 
advantage of this fact by gathering statistics, which provides 
assistance during project management. In general, iPAS is 
specifically designed for managing projects following a well-
defined principle, which is typical in engineering projects 
(e.g., software, electrical, mechanical and construction).  
iPAS has been tested and validated mainly by a few case 
studies in manufacturing industry domain and scientific 
research domain. Major benefits were observed right from a 
case by six project managers and four domain experts from 
Dytecna, where a four years project was set under control 
and transformed into a success by researching the goals 
which established at the creation of the product based project 
plan. The iPAS has also been used in two research projects in 
UK’s National Physical Laboratory (NPL), which followed 
the PRINCE principle in the organisation. It has successfully 
assisted the program officer to plan the projects with 
available resources and monitor the progress from start to 
end. During case studies, The iPAS was applied to help 
project managers to share the project knowledge for 
generating project plan and controlling project progresses via 
product based benchmarking.  
Although it is difficult to quantitatively assess exactly 
how much time and cost were saved for project planning and 
management in the case study, users who have used the iPAS 
system summarise the following major advantages against 
the traditional project management method: 
 
It allows the company to continuously improve both 
bidding, planning and project management as well as 
reduce risk 
 
It is a novel approach to store and share information 
among different projects  
 
It is an innovative method to integrate PRINCE2 and 
benchmarking principles 
 
It reduces project starting up and initiation time, 
reduces management costs by limiting the number of 
project meetings conducted 
 
It wins more work for a customer by providing 
accurate rather than estimated information on costs 
and duration at tender stage. Thus, a company has 
more confidence in the accuracy at ITT (Invitation to 
Tender) responses, customers have more confidence 
in bids made and associated cost profiles   
 
Company is able to justify through life costs and 
plan resources to serve contracts, thus to improve 
company success and profitability 
 
Company has continuous improvement in data 
accuracy providing early identification of the 
program that is moving toward an adverse situation 
 
It’s adaptable to any other sectors such as 
construction, rail industries, health services or 
government, etc. 
TABLE III.  CULTURE CHANGES BEFORE AND AFTER USING IPAS  
Stages 
Pre iPAS 
Post iPAS 
Bidding 
Ad hoc and configuration 
No historical data, 
estimation based on 
expert judgment 
No follow up, no lessons 
learned 
Historical data are 
available to improve 
estimation 
Resonation and 
improvements of the 
process 
Planning 
Activity based planning 
Last minute identification 
of the activities 
Product based planning, 
activities can be 
referred from best 
practice  
Monitoring 
Difficult to follow the 
evolution of a activity or 
to assess the quality of 
the completed work 
Easily to monitor the 
progress of the project 
by watching the 
delivery quality of 
products and practices 
underneath 
Control 
Hard to know the failure 
reasons from project team 
level and response 
immediately 
Failure point can be 
easily spot out and then 
take necessary action 
quickly 
 
Table Ш shows the culture changes observed using 
iPAS software in NPL and Dytecna. Before introducing 
iPAS tool, the project plans were generated based on experts 
experience probably, in most cases, the lessons learned from 
previous projects are easily forgotten, and project activities 
were planned without a clear idea because there is no precise 
intention on what is going to be delivered. By recording what 
was done and how much effort was spent, project team 
members could now easily monitor and control the project 
progress, accurately assess what they were doing from an 
objective perspective, as well as learn the lessons from the 
past. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FURTHER WORK  
iPAS is a web-based project planning and management 
tool adapted to the product based planning techniques of 
PRINCE2, which can be applied to standardised industries 
such as Construction, Logistic Support, Electronic and 
Mechanical Systems Engineering. It guides the project 
manager by recycling historical data and best practices to 
estimate project resources and to cascade this into 
manageable products.  iPAS provides focus on project 
objectives, by structuring a plan based on products, by 
facilitating accurate monitoring of these products throughout 
the project.  These features assist the project team to 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

maintain programmed activities and to meet contract 
commitments, whilst reducing the management overhead.  It 
can be deduced from the above sections that iPAS already is 
capable of providing considerable added value in many areas 
of project management.  However, it has become clear to the 
development team that there are several ways in which iPAS 
could be further enhanced.  
A possible extension could be to link iPAS database with 
an organisation’s host database.  As iPAS collects more and 
more business practice data from a variety of organisations, 
there is a need to establish an appropriate knowledge base 
centre.  An external benchmarking comparison service also 
could be provided in order to coordinate with the unique 
company database system and bring in external knowledge, 
which will enable the customer to manage the business more 
efficiently. The future work can also be focused on 
enhancing human resource management, enhancing the user 
interface, perfecting the navigation and strengthening the 
statistical robustness of the system, etc. 
REFERENCES 
[1] N. Keith, “Knowledge Transfer Partnerships – Dytecna Grant 
application and proposal report” pp. 30-40, April 2010.  
[2] J. V. Hickey, and C. A. Brosna, “Evaluation of Health Care 
Quality in Advanced Practice Nursing” 2010, pp. 223-229, 
Springer 
Publishing 
Company, 
ISBN: 
0826107664, 
9780826107664 
[3] Y. S. Tang, “Product Based Project Portfolio (PBPP) for Best 
Practice and Information Sharing”  Journal of Global 
Business Development June 2009, 1(1): pp. 51-55. 
[4] PRINCE2 “Managing Successful Projects with PRINCE2” 
(2009 by Great Britain: Office of Office of Government 
Commerce) - ISBN: 9780113310593 
[5] MindManager: MindManager  [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.mindjet.com/mindmanager/platforms/ 2015.01.15 
[6] ATTASK [Online]. Available from: http://www.attask.com/ 
2015.01.15 
[7] ASTA 
Power 
Project 
 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.astadev.com/products/asta-powerproject/ 
2015.01.15 
[8] Instant Business Network (IBN):  [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.mediachase.com/ibn/projectmanagement.aspx/ 
2015.01.15 
[9] V. R. Basili and D. M.Weiss, “A Methodology for Collecting 
Valid Software Engineering Data”. IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering, 10(6), Nov 1984, pp. 728-738. 
[10] C. M. Lott, and H. D. Rombach, “Measurement-based 
guidance of software projects using explicit project plans”. 
Information and Software Technology, June/July 1993, pp. 
356-357: 407C419,  
[11] G. Adams, AW. Koop, and S. Mankotia, “Systems and 
methods for facilitating and managing business projects” - US 
Patent 7,694,270, 2010 
[12] C. Bentley, “Practical PRINCE2” Third Edition, ISBN 0-11-
703544-0, published by TSO (The Stationery Office) UK 
[13] K. Harold, “Project Management: A Systems Approach to 
Planning, Scheduling, and Controlling”, 2003, pp: 323-324, 
423-424, 8th Ed., Wiley. ISBN 0-471-22577-0.  
[14] S. Goswami, A. Chakrabarti, “Quartile Clustering: A quartile 
based technique for Generating Meaningful Clusters” ", 
Journal of Computing, volume 4, issue 2, Feb 2012, pp:50-54, 
ISSN 2151-9617 
[15] D. E. Knuth, “The Art of Computer Programming”, 
Seminumerical Algorithms, volume 2, chapter 4.2.2, third 
edition, 1998, pp: 232-233. Addison-Wesley, Boston 
[16] Microsoft 
Project 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://products.office.com/en-us/Project/project-top-features 
2015.01.15 
[17] Gantt 
charts 
 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
http://www.gantt.com/ 2015.01.15 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

