Context-Aware Authentication for the Internet of Things
Kashif Habib, Wolfgang Leister 
Norwegian Computing Center 
Oslo, Norway 
e-mail: Kashif.Sheikh@nr.no, Wolfgang.Leister@nr.no 
 
 
Abstract— Many traditional authentication and access control 
mechanisms do not use context-aware approach, i.e., those 
mechanisms do not incorporate context parameters while mak-
ing authentication and authorisation decisions. The context 
unaware mechanisms can be inadequate for the Internet of 
Things due to its dynamic and heterogeneous environment. 
The context information can be used to reconfigure security 
mechanisms and adjust security parameters. The contextual 
information can be integrated into various security mecha-
nisms such as authentication, access control, encryption, etc. 
The context-aware security is the dynamic adjustment of secu-
rity policy based on the context. In this paper, we discuss the 
context-awareness techniques for authentication and access 
control mechanisms. We present the concepts of context, con-
text- awareness, and context based security and highlight con-
textual attributes that can be used to support and enhance 
authentication and access control mechanisms for the Internet 
of Things.  
Keywords-Context; context-awareness; Internet of Things; 
authentication; access control; security. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The Internet of Things (IoT) has gained much popularity 
in recent past due to integration of smartphones, tablets, and 
sensor networks into the Internet. The IoT envisions an envi-
ronment in which sensors, recording devices, smartphones, 
tablets, and laptops are networked together and are actively 
monitoring changes in their surroundings. The contextual 
information can be monitored through various sources, such 
as sensors deployment, device status, and user’s behaviour. 
The devices collaborate with each other to further facilitate 
human computer interactions or to provide the environmental 
information. The data provided by sensors or other recording 
devices are referred to as contextual data, since they contain 
information about the context in which each entity or user is 
located. Mobile devices are one of the common platforms to 
access resources in the IoT where contextual information can 
be considered dynamic. The contextual information can be 
about user’s location and behaviour, current time, state of 
system resources, and state of network and security configu-
rations. 
The IoT faces some challenges such as security, privacy, 
trust, and context-awareness about the surrounding environ-
ment and about system state itself. The challenges are im-
portant because the IoT is dynamic in nature and does not 
have very well defined network boundaries. The IoT envis-
ages dynamic and heterogeneous environment in which a 
context-aware based security can deal with the security prob-
lems. The ubiquitous applications can utilise the environ-
mental information for decision making [1]. This means that 
the security mechanisms developed for the IoT can incorpo-
rate the contextual information while making a security deci-
sion. A security mechanism can be considered context-
aware, if it can spot the event happening in surrounding envi-
ronment. Context-awareness is an essential element for an 
authentication system while evaluating associated risks with 
a system [2].  
A. Motivation and Contribution 
Previously, we have developed an authentication frame-
work based on biometric modalities and wireless device ra-
dio fingerprinting [3]. Our framework ensures that the re-
ceived data at remote medical center belongs to correct pa-
tient and identifies the fabricated data. Incorporating context 
awareness and adaptive security in our framework are chal-
lenges because a non-match between stored and given tem-
plates always can not be treated as a threat to the system, 
rather there can be situations where environmental or sys-
tem’s context can assist us in decision making. Adaptive 
security can make template matching more flexible and we 
can adjust security level instead of blocking transmission 
during no-match due to the changed context. In this paper, 
we discuss and elaborate context, context-awareness, con-
text-aware security, and context-aware authentication con-
cepts for the IoT. While discussing the above mentioned 
concepts, our main focus is towards context-aware ap-
proaches for authentication and access control mechanisms 
and we classify the mechanisms according to context model-
ling approaches. 
The paper is organized as follow: in Section II, we intro-
duce context and context-awareness concepts. In Section III, 
we review context-aware security paradigm. The context-
aware security models, frameworks, protocols, and proto-
types for authentication and access control mechanisms are 
highlighted in Section IV. Section V contains some discus-
sions and Section VI concludes the paper followed by future 
work. 
II. 
CONTEXT AND CONTEXT-AWARENESS 
The term context-aware can be defined for different ap-
plication areas and for different purposes.  There are several 
definitions of context-awareness in the literature [4]. Accord-
ing to Schilit and Theimer [5], “a system is context-aware if 
it can provide context relevant information and services to 
users and applications from the set of context types, such as 
location, identification of nearby people, objects and changes 
to those objects.” Soon after them, Schilit et al. [6] also de-
134
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

fined a context-aware system. According to them, “a system 
is context-aware if it can adapt itself to the context.” After-
wards, many people defined context-aware systems in a 
similar way. For example, according to Dey [7], “a system 
can be context-aware if it uses context to provide relevant 
information and, or services to the user, where relevancy 
depends on users’ task.” According to Ryan et al. [8], “a 
system is context-aware if it has the ability to detect and 
sense, interpret and respond to aspects of a user’s local envi-
ronment and to the computing devices themselves.” Dey and 
Abowd [9] define context as “any information that can be 
used to characterise the situation of an entity that is consid-
ered relevant to the interaction between a user and an appli-
cation”. According to Krish [10] “context is a highly struc-
tured amalgam of information, physical and conceptual re-
sources that go beyond the simple facts of who or what is 
where and when to include the state of digital resources, 
people concepts and mental state, task state, social relations, 
and the local work culture, to name a few ingredients”.  
 
 
Figure 1. Context life cycle 
 
As depicted in Figure 1, a context-aware system follows 
the life cycle process to deliver contextual information. 
Gomez and Wrona [11] identified context information dis-
covery, context information acquisition, and context infor-
mation reasoning as main steps in a life cycle of context-
aware system. Bernardos et al. [12] identified context acqui-
sition, information processing, and reasoning and decision as 
main phases in a typical context management system. After 
reviewing the life cycles of context-aware system, Perera et 
al. [13] derived context acquisition, context modelling, con-
text reasoning, and context dissemination as four phases in a 
typical context management system.  
1) Context information acquisition: 
A context-aware system collects contextual information 
from the discovered context information providers and stores 
it in a context information repository for further reasoning. 
The context acquisition can also follow pull and push modes. 
The pull mode allows context-aware system to request 
contextual information, whereas in case of push mode, 
context information providers push context information to 
the context-aware system.  
2) Context information modelling:  
The contextual information is processed in terms of at-
tributes, characteristics, relationships, quality-of context at-
tributes and the queries for synchronous context requests. 
Afterwards, the new context information is organised and 
added to the existing contextual information repository for 
use. 
3) Context information reasoning:  
A reasoning mechanisms facilitate applications to utilise 
the available context information. In order to establish a 
reasoning mechanism, a single piece of context information 
or a collection of such information can be used. 
4) Context information dissemination:  
The applications requiring contextual information use 
context dissemination to acquire context. The context is dis-
seminated using query and subscription methods. In a query 
method, the context management system can use that query 
to produce results. In a subscription method, the applications 
subscribe the requirements with a context management sys-
tem that provides the results upon detecting an event. 
TABLE I. SUMMARY OF CONTEXT TYPES 
Context 
type 
Captured contextual in-
formation 
Available sensors 
and technologies 
Physical 
context 
 
Light, temperature, noise, 
humidity level, traffic con-
ditions. 
Photodiodes; biosen-
sors; 
thermometer; 
ultraviolet sensors.  
Computing  
context 
 
Network capacity; connec-
tivity; bandwidth; costs of 
computing and communica-
tion; resources such as 
printers, and workstations; 
available processors and 
devices accessible for user 
input and display. 
Touch sensors im-
plemented in mobile 
devices; 
micro-
phones; system log; 
user behaviour moni-
toring; device log, 
various environmen-
tal sensors. 
User con-
text 
User location, collection of 
nearby people, user profiles, 
social situation. 
Active badge system; 
GPS; camera; mercu-
ry switches; GSM; 
motion 
detectors; 
accelerometers.  
 
The three important aspects of context are: where you 
are, whom you are with, and what resources are nearby [14]. 
Based on these aspects, context can be divided into three 
parts: user context, computing context, and physical context. 
Table I provides a summary of available sensors and 
technologies to capture contextual information for each 
context type.  
TABLE II. SUMMARY OF CONTEXT ATTRIBUTES 
Attributes 
Description 
Context 
categories 
Conceptual; measurable; static; dynamic; continuous; 
discrete; internal; external; material; social; physical; 
virtual; real-time; unreal-time; natural; technology; 
social; location; identity; time; activity 
Context-
awareness 
approaches 
Active context-awareness: Contextual changes are 
discovered by detecting changes in the application’s 
behaviour. 
Passive context-awareness:  Applications present the 
updated context to a user.  
Context 
learning 
approaches 
Sensed context: Environment information; user’s 
physical information; user’s interaction habits and 
interactive historical records. 
Derived context: Computed on the go; explicit con-
text; user preferences. 
Context 
modelling 
Key-value; mark up scheme; graphical; object orient-
ed; logical; ontology. 
 
Table II provides a summary of context attributes. Con-
text is classified according to context categories, context-
awareness approaches, context learning approaches, and con-
text modelling approaches. 
135
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

III. 
CONTEXT-AWARE SECURITY  
Many existing computer networks comply with allow 
and deny based access control policies. Allow means grant-
ing access when the user or device credential matches with 
pre-stored credentials and deny means blocking access when 
the user or device credential do not match with pre-stored 
credentials. This type of system can be considered static in 
nature because it does not take into consideration other fac-
tors such as, contextual information from the user or device 
environment while making allow and deny decisions. But the 
IoT has a dynamic environment, where flexible security pol-
icies using contextual information can potentially increase 
the effectiveness of security decisions.  
 
Figure 2. Context-aware security 
 
The security context is defined by Kouadri and Brézillon 
[15] as: “a set of information collected from the user's envi-
ronment and the application environment and that is relevant 
to the security infrastructure of both the user and the applica-
tion.” Brézillon and Mostéfaoui [16] define the security con-
text as a situation where a security solution considers a set of 
information while making a specific security decision. For 
example, while detecting an intrusion during communica-
tion, security mechanism may adapt to strong authentication 
method. As depicted in Figure 2, initially the pervasive com-
puting environment is controlled by some security policy 
depending upon the initial context at that time [16] [17]. 
Context triggers refer the dynamic changes in the envi-
ronment with the passage of time. Security context refers this 
new context that is to be considered while deploying new 
security actions as a result of the change. A security policy 
indicates the rules and regulations that govern who has the 
access and who doesn’t in each type of situation. Thus, the 
security policy should be flexible enough to accommodate 
changing contexts. 
Strang and Linnhoff-popien [18] surveyed the relevant 
approaches to modelling context. The authors reviewed vari-
ous approaches, classified relative to their core elements, and 
evaluated with respect to their appropriateness for ubiquitous 
computing. Many context-aware applications based on vari-
ous context models have been developed in past for a variety 
of application domains. The existing approaches to context 
information modelling are sorted into six categories [18] [19] 
[20], which are based on the data structures used for lying 
out and exchanging context data in the respective system. 
Table III summarises the available security context model-
ling approaches.  
Halunen and Evesti [21] presented some possibilities of 
utilising context-aware systems in adaptive user authentica-
tion settings. They suggested to first use the context infor-
mation to control an adaptive security system and then linked 
to the authentication scheme via tags. 
TABLE III. SUMMARY OF SECURITY CONTEXT MODELING  
Key-value modelling: Description: simple key-value pairs to define 
the list of attributes and their values describing context; information 
used by context-aware applications. 
Strength: easy to manage; simple data structure to depict the contex-
tual information. 
Weakness: limited capabilities in: (i) capturing a variety of context 
types; (ii) capturing contextual relationships; (iii) dependencies, 
timeliness, and quality of context information; (iv) sophisticated 
structuring for enabling efficient context retrieval algorithms. 
Mark-up scheme modelling: Description: it uses a variety of mark-
up languages; hierarchical data structure consisting of mark-up tags 
with attributes and content; the content of the mark up tags is usually 
defined by other mark-up tags. 
Strength: can sort the context information by category, priority, and 
runtime process. 
Weakness: Limited capabilities in: (i) allowing consistency checking; 
(ii) supporting reasoning on context, on context uncertainty and on 
higher context abstractions. 
Graphical modelling: Description: obtained through transformation 
algorithms; graph data structures and richer data types, e.g., unified 
modelling language and object role modelling. 
Strength: generic; hierarchically structured allowing the association 
of a context with an appropriate action. 
Weakness: lack of support for distributed context model; handling 
incompleteness; lack of formalism for on line automated access. 
Object oriented modelling: Description: uses object oriented lan-
guages to design the dynamic property of the context; the context 
information is used as a method applied to an object; context pro-
cessing details are encapsulated on an object level; access to contex-
tual information is provided through specified interfaces only. 
Strength: favours the trust inside the network; partial validation but 
often not very formal; reuse can be supported through inheritance 
and composition. 
Weakness: does not provide the support for interoperability; handling 
incompleteness; has a flat information model. 
Logical modelling: Description: the context is defined with facts, 
predictions or roles; a goal is to form new expressions or facts from 
previous ones; a logic defines the conditions in which a concluding 
expression or fact may be derived. 
Strength: formalism; structuring. 
Weakness: uncertainties; time variations; validation issues. 
Ontology modelling: Description: represents a concept group in a 
given domain, and the relationship between the different concepts; 
depicts a domain with a graph of concepts; contextual relationships 
may be hierarchical or semantic.  
Strength: strong regarding the distributed composition requirement; 
partial validation is possible; comprehensive set of validation tools 
available. 
Weakness: uncertainties in handling, scalability issues in searching 
large data volumes. 
 
The different approaches to model security context pos-
sess some weaknesses as mentioned in Table III. For exam-
ple, key-value modelling based approach possesses weak-
136
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

nesses such as, distributed composition of contextual data, 
partial validation, information quality, incompleteness, and 
formalism. Graphical modelling approach also lacks in terms 
of distributed composition of contextual data. Mark-up 
scheme and logic based modelling approach can be consid-
ered weak in terms of handling incompleteness and ambigui-
ty in contextual data. Object oriented model usually require 
strong distributed composition requirements which are diffi-
cult to manage for the devices in the IoT due to limited re-
sources.  
IV. 
RELATED WORK  
The context-awareness for authentication and access con-
trol mechanisms has been an active research field among 
researchers. In this section, we classify the context-aware 
techniques proposed in the existing literature according to 
context modelling approaches discussed earlier. 
1) Key-value modelling:  
Hayashi et al. [22] introduced context-aware scalable au-
thentication using multiple passive factors by modulating 
active factors to authenticate users. The authors proposed a 
generic probabilistic framework to select appropriate active 
authentication factors, given a set of passive authentication 
factors. They developed prototypes, and investigated the 
feasibility and effectiveness of their proposed framework.  
Context-aware mobile biometric authentication based on 
support vector machines is proposed by Witte et al. [23]. 
Based on the contextual information measured from the en-
vironment, the authors constructed subject-specific context 
models in order to train support vector machine. The authors 
demonstrated the feasibility of the proposed architecture by 
developing a mobile application for data collection purposes.  
Said et al. [24] presented a context-aware security con-
troller and proposed to integrate it in the long term evolu-
tion/evolved packet system access. The authors motivated 
the integration of a context-aware security controller to min-
imize the overall security cost. They showed that the control-
ler activates security mechanisms according to the contextual 
information such as the application type and the device ca-
pabilities. 
2) Mark-up scheme modelling: 
Goel et al. [25] described an authentication framework 
for a context-aware environment. In order to support role-
based and location-based access control, the authors used a 
combination of a user's context, authentication policies and 
light weight tagging. The framework has a provision for ex-
tension to support other contextual information from availa-
ble resources, environment, and the users who interact with 
that environment.  
Hu and Weaver [26] presented a dynamic, context-aware 
security infrastructure for healthcare applications. The access 
control model extends the role based access control mecha-
nism by associating access permissions with context-related 
constraints. They described the capability of their model by 
showing authorization decisions approach based upon con-
text information in addition to roles.  
A mechanism for modelling complex and interwoven 
sets of context-information by extending ambient calculus 
with new constructs and capabilities is presented by 
Kjægaard and Pedersen [27]. According to the authors, the 
calculus is a step in the direction of making formal methods 
applicable in the area of pervasive computing. In particular, 
the authors identified the key area of the expressiveness of 
formal models of context-awareness which are represented 
as hierarchical and independent sets of information. 
3) Graphical modelling: 
Feng et al. [28] incorporated contextual information to 
improve user authentication by presenting a touch based 
identity protection service. In order to authenticate a user on 
continuous basis, they analysed real life touch data as well as 
underlying contextual information.  
Lenzini [29] presented trust-based and context-aware au-
thentication in a software architecture for context and prox-
imity-aware services. The author described context manage-
ment architecture for context-aware services. The software 
based architecture collects, arranges, and elaborates high-
level contextual information from a sensor network. The 
author used contextual information to distinguish among 
different identities, and to evaluate to which extent they are 
authentic. 
Bandinelli et al. [30] presented a context-aware security 
framework for next generation mobile networks. The authors 
introduced a context-aware security framework for address-
ing the problems of end-to-end security on behalf of end-
users in a next generation network scenario. Their security 
framework uses contextual graphs to define security policies 
encompassing actions at different layers of communication 
systems while adapting to changing context. 
4) Object oriented modelling: 
Badram et al. [31] presented context-aware user authenti-
cation, supporting proximity-based login in pervasive com-
puting environment. The authors introduced a concept of 
proximity-based user authentication in a pervasive compu-
ting environment. User identification is performed through a 
Java smart card and a context-aware system. 
5) Logical modelling:  
Zhang et al. [32] presented the context-aware access con-
trol model for pervasive applications using dynamic role 
based access control scheme. Based on the context infor-
mation, the operation of the model extends the role based 
access control model to dynamically adjust the role assign-
ments, and permission assignments. However, their access 
control scheme may not be sufficient alone until it is com-
bined with feasible authentication mechanisms to secure 
pervasive applications. 
To improve existing network security protocols in an In-
tranet environment, Wullems et al. [33] introduced context-
aware authorization architecture. The proposed architecture 
is an extension to role based access control mechanism fa-
cilitating context-aware access control policy. They de-
scribed the implementation of the architecture using dynamic 
context services and also presented the description of an ap-
plication utilising their proposed architecture. 
An adaptive access control model for medical data in 
body and wireless area network is designed and developed 
by Maw et al. [34].  They evaluated the framework using 
medical scenario in which they included a user behaviour 
137
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

trust module along with the access control module. They 
concluded that the overriding policy is useful to handle unan-
ticipated situations and showed that by incorporating user 
behaviour into access control model, one can make better 
security decisions. 
Malek et al. [35] presented a framework for context-
aware authentication services in context-aware computing 
environments. The proposed framework is capable of ena-
bling the users to take initiatives in the context-aware com-
puting environments depending on their desired confidence 
level. To establish trust and to share secrets between parties, 
the context-aware authentication service uses context-data. 
Hulsebosch et al. [36] described the theoretical back-
ground for a context-sensitive adaptation of authentication. 
The authors designed and validated the system to adaptively 
authenticate a user on the basis of the location of his sensed 
identity tokens. The authors argued that authentication and 
access control can be made less intrusive, more intelligent, 
and able to adapt to the rapidly changing contexts of the en-
vironment. 
Brosso et al. [37] presented a continuous authentication 
system based on user behaviour analysis. The system utilises 
environmental context information, user’ behaviour analysis, 
and neuro-fuzzy logic. The authors verified the system with 
tests and simulations to authenticate a person’s identity using 
behaviour analysis and trust restriction. They used contextual 
information to establish evidence of user behaviour. The 
trust levels were decided based upon user behaviour.  
6) Ontology modelling:  
To provide a security framework suitable for people with 
disabilities, Mhamed et al. [38] suggested using various con-
textual data monitored through sensors. The approach shows 
how to model trust and access control based on user behav-
iour and capabilities that can be extracted from the moni-
tored data through sensors. The proposed access control 
model is based on the semantic web technologies. 
Wrona and Gomez [11] investigated different aspects of 
security related to context information. According to them, 
security challenges in context-aware systems include integri-
ty, confidentiality, availability of context information, and 
end user’s privacy. Trustworthiness of context information is 
also an important element, which a context information re-
quester can put in the delivered context information.  
V. 
DISCUSSION 
Understanding the contextual information is an important 
element for the IoT. A context-aware system can be consid-
ered different from traditional systems because of their capa-
bilities to capture and incorporate environmental factors into 
decision making process. Particularly, in case of the IoT 
where device and user attributes such as, location, time, and 
behaviour can change rapidly, it may be very important for 
security mechanisms to react based on the changing parame-
ters and adapt accordingly. 
Authentication and access control are important security 
services for the IoT that are needed to check the identity of 
users and to decide which resources they can access to. The 
existing authentication mechanisms that are developed for 
traditional computer network environments are mostly con-
text unaware, and usually do not incorporate contextual in-
formation while authenticating a user and a device. But due 
to dynamic environment and changed context, the threat pro-
file can vary and static authentication mechanism may not be 
sufficient enough to continue securing a system. Contextual 
information can help authentication system to know user 
state and make better identification decisions. The strength 
of an authentication mechanism can be improved if we 
broaden our authentication scope beyond the identification of 
user credentials. Rather, if we can also incorporate the con-
text information, such as user location, user state, and sur-
rounding environmental state, along with user credentials. 
While adding context into authentication and access con-
trol mechanisms, sometimes incomplete or imprecise context 
can lead to false positives and false negatives. For example, 
user and environmental context may be inaccurately deter-
mined or context determination may be affected by environ-
mental conditions, etc. Thus, if context acquisition is per-
formed wrongly, it can possibly generate false positives and 
false negatives. However, if context acquisition and reason-
ing are performed correctly, and proper context composition 
techniques are used, then adding context into security deci-
sion can reduce the rate of false positives. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Although, developing authentication and access control 
mechanisms has been an active research areas among re-
searchers, but mostly the existing mechanisms work on the 
principles of user credential based approach. Context-
awareness has a tendency to enhance the effectiveness of 
those mechanisms by incorporating contextual data into a 
decision making process. In this paper, we highlighted the 
necessary concepts of context, context awareness, and con-
text based security. In addition, the approaches proposed in 
the existing literature, regarding incorporating context-
awareness into authentication and access control mecha-
nisms in the IoT are presented. 
Previously, we have developed an authentication frame-
work based on biometric and radio fingerprinting for the IoT 
in eHealth. In future, the work in this paper will be used as a 
basis for the development of context-aware authentication 
mechanisms for the IoT in eHealth. Precisely, we will carry 
out context-awareness modelling for our earlier developed 
framework. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The work presented here has been carried out in the re-
search project ASSET – Adaptive Security for Smart Internet 
of Things in eHealth (2012–2015) funded by The Research 
Council of Norway. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A-C. Pierre, “A dynamic trust-based context-aware secure 
authentication 
framework 
for 
pervasive 
computing 
environments,” PhD thesis, Computer Science, Institut 
National des Télécommunications, France, 2010. 
[2] RSA Risk-based Authentication, white paper, November 
2013, pp. 1-4.  
138
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

[3] K. Habib, A. Torjusen, and W. Leister, “A Novel 
Authentication Framework Based on Biometric and Radio 
Fingerprinting for the IoT in eHealth,” In proceedings of 
SMART 2014, July 20 - 24, 2014, pp. 32-37. 
[4] S. 
Poslad, 
“Ubiquitous 
Computing: 
Smart 
Devices, 
Environments and Interactions,” Wiley Publishing, 2009.  
[5] B. Schilit and M. Theimer, “Disseminating active map 
information to mobile hosts,” IEEE Networks, 8(5): , pp. 22-
32, 1994. 
[6] B. Schilit, N. Adams, and R. Want, “Context aware 
computing applications,” In Proceeding of 1st International 
Workshop on Mobile Computing Systems and Applications, 
1995, pp. 85-90. 
[7] A. K. Dey, “Providing Architectural Support for Building 
Context Aware Applications,” PhD thesis, Computer Science, 
Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, November, 2000. 
[8] N. Ryan J. Pascoe, and D. Morse, “Enhanced reality 
fieldwork: the context aware archaeological assistant,” In V. 
Gaffney, M. van Leusen, and S. Exxon (eds) Computer 
Applications in Archaeology, British Archaeological Reports, 
1997. 
[9] A. K. Dey and G. D. Abowd, “Towards a better 
understanding of context and context awareness,” In 
Proceedings of the (HUC '99), 1999, pp. 304-307. 
[10] D. Kirsh, “The Context of Work, Human-Computer 
Interaction,”  vol. 16, 2001, pp. 305-322. 
[11] K. Wrona and L. Gomez, “Context-aware security and secure 
context-awareness in ubiquitous computing environments,” 
XXI Autumn Meeting of Polish Information Processing 
Society, 2004, pp.255-265. 
[12] A. Bernardos, P. Tarrio, and J. Casar, “A data fusion 
framework for context-aware mobile services,” IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on 
Multisensor 
Fusion 
and 
Integration for Intelligent Systems, 2008, pp. 606 –613. 
[13] C. Perera, A. Zaslavsky, P. Christen, and D. Georgakopoulos, 
“Context aware computing for the internet of things: A 
survey,” IEEE, 16, 2014, pp. 414-454. 
[14] W. Liu X. Li, and D. Huang, “A survey on context 
awareness,” International Conference on Computer Science 
and Service System (CSSS), 27-29 June 2011, pp. 144-147. 
[15] G. K. Mostéfaoui and P. Brézillon, “Modeling Context-Based 
Security Policies with Contextual Graphs,” In Proceedings of 
(PERCOMW '04). IEEE Computer Society, 2004, pp. 28-32. 
[16] P. Brezillon and G. K. Mostefaoui, “Context-based security 
policies: a new modelling approach,” Proceedings of the 
Second IEEE Annual Conference on Pervasive Computing 
and Communications Workshops, March 2004, pp.154,158. 
[17] P. Shetty and S. W. Loke, “Context-Based Security (and 
Safety) 
Meta-Policies 
for 
Pervasive 
Computing 
Environments: the case of Smart Homes,” In the Workshop 
on Context and Safety at Context, 2005, pp. 1-14. 
[18] T. Strang and C. Linnhoff-Popien, “A Context Modelling 
Survey,” In Workshop on Advanced Context Modelling, 
Reasoning and Management, UbiComp 2004, pp. 1-8.  
[19] S. Vuppala et al., “uBiquitous, secUre inTernet-of-things with 
Location and contEx-awaReness,” BUTLER project, D2.1 - 
Requirements, Specifications and Security Technologies for 
IoT Context-Aware Networks, October 2012, pp. 1-171. 
[20] C. Bettini et al., “A survey of context modelling and 
reasoning techniques,” Pervasive Mob. Comput. 6, (2), April 
2010, pp. 161-180,. 
[21] K. Halunen and A. Evesti, “Context-Aware Systems and 
Adaptive 
User 
Authentication,” 
Evolving 
Ambient 
Intelligence, Springer International publishing, 413, 2013, 
pp.240-251. 
[22] E. Hayashi, S. Das, S. Amini, J. Hong, and I. Oakley, 
“CASA: 
context-aware 
scalable 
authentication,” 
In 
Proceedings of (SOUPS '13). ACM, Article 3, 2013, pp. 1-10. 
[23] H. Witte, C. Rathgeb, and C. Busch, “Context-Aware Mobile 
Biometric 
Authentication 
based 
on 
Support 
Vector 
Machines," In proceedings of the (EST), 2013, pp.29-32. 
[24] S. B. H. Said, K. Guillouard, and J-M. Bonnin, “On the 
benefit of context-awareness for security mechanisms in 
LTE/EPS networks,” In proceedings of the (PIMRC), 2013, 
pp. 2414-2428. 
[25] D. Goel, E. Kher, S. Joag, V. Mujumdar, M. Griss, and A. 
Dey, “Context-Aware Authentication Framework Mobile 
Computing, Applications, and Services,” Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 35, 2010, pp. 26-41. 
[26] J. Hu and A. C. Weaver, “A Dynamic, Context-Aware 
Security 
Infrastructure 
for 
Distributed 
Healthcare 
Applications,” In Proceedings of the (PSPT), 2004, pp. 1-8. 
[27] M. B. Kjægaard and J. Bunde-Pedersen, “Towards a Formal 
Model of Context Awareness,” In proceedings of the (CTSB), 
2006, pp. 1-8. 
[28] T. Feng, J. Yang, Z. Yan, E. Tapia, and W. Shi, “TIPS: 
context-aware implicit user identification using touch screen 
in uncontrolled environments,” In Proceedings of the 
(HotMobile '14),  ACM, Article 9, 2014, pp. 1-6. 
[29] G. Lenzini, “Trust-Based and Context-Aware Authentication 
in a Software Architecture for Context and Proximity-Aware 
Services Architecting Dependable Systems” VI, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 5825, 2009, pp. 284-307. 
[30] M. Bandinelli, F. Paganelli, G. Vannuccini, and D. Giuli, “A 
Context-Aware Security Framework for Next Generation 
Mobile Networks Security and Privacy in Mobile Information 
and Communication Systems,” Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
17, 2009, pp. 134-147.  
[31] J. Bardram, R. Kjær, and M. Pedersen, “Context-Aware User 
Authentication- 
Supporting 
Proximity-Based 
Login 
in 
Pervasive Computing,” Ubiquitous Computing, Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2864, 2003, pp.107-123. 
[32] G. Zhang and M. Parashar, “Context-aware dynamic access 
control for pervasive applications,” Proceedings of the 
Communication 
Networks 
and 
Distributed 
Systems 
Modelling and Simulation Conference, 2004, pp. 21-30. 
[33] C. Wullems, M. Looi, and A. Clark, “Towards context-aware 
security: 
an 
authorization 
architecture 
for 
intranet 
environments,” In proceedings of the (PERCOMW’04), 
March 2004, pp.132-137. 
[34] H. A. Maw, H. Xiao, and B. Christianson, “An adaptive 
access control model for medical data in Wireless Sensor 
Networks," IEEE 15th International Conference on e-Health 
Networking, Applications & Services, 2013,  pp.303-309. 
[35] B. Malek, A. Miri, and A. Karmouch, “A framework for 
context-aware authentication," 4th International Conference 
on Intelligent Environments, IET , 21-22 July 2008, pp.1-8. 
[36] R. Hulsebosch, M. Bargh, G. Lenzini, P. Ebben, and S. Iacob, 
“Context Sensitive Adaptive Authentication,” smart sensing 
and context,” Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 4793, 2007, pp. 93-
109.  
[37] I. Brosso, A. La Neve, G. Bressan, and W. V. Ruggiero, “A 
Continuous Authentication System Based on User Behavior 
Analysis,” In proceedings of the (ARES '10), Feb. 2010, pp. 
380-385. 
[38] A. Mhamed, M. Zerkouk, A. El Husseini, B. Messabih, and 
B. El Hassan, “Towards a Context Aware Modelling of Trust 
and Access Control Based on the User Behaviour and 
Capabilities Inclusive Society, Health and Wellbeing in the 
Community, and Care at Home,” Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 
7910, 2013, pp. 69-76. 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

