Self-Aware Industrial Control Systems through
Cloud Based Autonomic Computing
Christopher Rouff∗, Ali Tekeoglu∗, Joseph Maurio∗, Alexander Beall∗
∗Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory, Critical Infrastructure Protection Group
email: {christopher.rouff|ali.tekeoglu|joseph.maurio|alexander.beall}@jhuapl.edu
Abstract—Critical infrastructure (CI) is being attacked and
needs the ability to identify, protect and recover from attacks
automatically. Autonomic Computing can provide self-awareness
to critical infrastructure so that it can identify and continue
to operate through attacks. In this paper, we propose a cloud-
based autonomic computing manager that will give Industrial
Control Systems (ICS) self-awareness to detect anomalies in their
operation, protect themselves and self-organize with other critical
infrastructure to thwart attacks.
Keywords—Self-Aware Computing, Industrial Control Sys-
tems, Cloud Computing.
I. INTRODUCTION
Historically, Operational Technology (OT) has run on air-
gapped private networks; thus, security was achieved through
lack of public network access. With the proliferation of cloud
computing resources and the Industrial Internet of Things
(IIoT) paradigm, OT networks are now connected to enterprise
networks for remote access. The security of the ICS networks
is now based on the security of the enterprise networks.
This has left the ICS vulnerable to malicious actors who can
compromise the enterprise networks, and laterally move to
have full access to the ICSs components on the mission critical
Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) networks.
Detecting malicious activities is now left to OT operators
who must detect anomalies on the networks based on their
experience and alarms, which malicious actors often circum-
vent. The autonomic managers will be able to automatically
detect anomalies from learning normal OT network behavior
and automatically defend the ICSs against attacks, collectively,
at network speed.
There have been a number of high-proﬁle attacks on crit-
ical infrastructure, including a water treatment plant and a
pipeline [1]. If the water treatment attack had not been de-
tected, many people could have been harmed. Though shutting
down the pipeline did not cause direct injury, it did affect
the economy by reducing the supply of gasoline and keeping
people from getting to work.
If the actors wanted to make a major disruption to the econ-
omy, they could have attacked multiple facilities and caused
major harm to people and businesses. By making critical
infrastructure self-aware, these attacks could be thwarted, and
other infrastructure could be informed of the attacks. This
would cause OT to go into self-protection mode to prevent
an attack on their systems and self-organize to recover.
Autonomic Computing (AC) [2] has as its vision the cre-
ation of self-managing systems to address today’s concerns
of complexity and total cost of ownership while meeting
tomorrow’s needs for pervasive and ubiquitous computation
and communication. Providing security self-awareness to AC-
controlled ICSs that can communicate attacks to other AC-
controlled ICSs, and collectively defending against these at-
tacks, can provide a higher level of assurance to critical
infrastructure.
II. RELATED WORK
This section presents, to the best of our knowledge, closely
related work in the recent literature. In
[3], authors de-
scribe two different approaches that can provide security
assurances to cyber-physical systems: (i) Through the use
of micro-services that reconﬁgure the systems dynamically
during attacks or failures, researchers embedded ICSs with
autonomic properties to allow them to automatically detect and
recover from cyber-attacks and other failures. (ii) Resiliency
of autonomous unmanned aerial systems are tested through
intelligent agents in a modeling and simulation framework.
Researchers in [4] investigated the autonomy of individual
cyber-physical systems within a larger cyber-physical system-
of-systems (CPSoS), and they looked into potentially insecure
and unsafe situations as a result of failures in autonomy.
Another study surveyed the methods used for embodied self-
aware computing systems, in application of areas of systems-
on-chip control systems, health monitoring and condition
monitoring in industrial production systems [5]. Embodied
self-aware computing systems are compared to traditional
embedded systems. They are deﬁned as being signiﬁcantly
more ﬂexible, robust and autonomous such that they can adapt
to a wide range of environmental variation and can cope with
deterioration and shortcomings of their own performance.
In [6], authors presented a uniﬁed framework for integrating
Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) in manufacturing. They utilized
an adaptive clustering method for interconnected systems and
investigated a case study of self-aware machines by CPS
integration. Researchers in [7] surveyed potential challenges
that are important in the near future to achieve self-aware smart
city objectives. They claimed that cyber-physical systems can
extract awareness information from the physical world, thus a
holistic approach from the physical to cyber-world is necessary
for a successful smart city outcome.
III. APPROACH
In this paper, we propose a cloud-based autonomic
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Fig. 1. Cloud Based Self-Aware Autonomic ICS
manager for ICS that will allow them to be self-aware [8] of
their operating and computing environment and self-organize
with other autonomic managers. Overall system architecture
is depicted in Figure 1. Autonomic Computing provides self-
awareness properties of self-conﬁguring, self-healing, self-
optimizing and self-protecting, among others (referred to as
self-CHOP properties) [9].
The proposed design utilizes anomaly detection techniques
for ICSs to identify deviations from normal operating con-
ditions. Anomalies will be inputted to a model-base and
reasoner in the autonomic manager to identify attacks and
failures. Self-CHOP properties will also provide protection
and self-healing through reconﬁguration and re-optimization.
An autonomic MAPE-K (Manage, Analyze, Plan, Execute,
Knowledge) architecture will be implemented in the cloud.
The cloud will provide the computing resources to store
the models and perform the reasoning and computations to
implement the self-CHOP properties. The cloud will also
provide communications between ICS autonomic managers.
This will allow for communication of attacks and provide for
self-organization to protect and reconﬁgure CI components
based on the type of attack and the effects on the ICS.
The novelty of the proposed work is the design of autonomic
self-aware critical infrastructure that can identify anomalous
activity in ICSs, act based on the threat and communicate
that threat to other parts of the infrastructure to warn and
collaborate with them. Infrastructure that would not be affected
by a particular attack would only need to take minimal, or no
action. The use of autonomic self-CHOP properties by ICS
through cloud resources allows computationally constrained
systems to still take advantage of the self-awareness that auto-
nomic computing provides. Cloud-based autonomics prevents
overloading an ICS, or needing to upgrade their memory and
CPUs to handle the additional load of an autonomic manager.
The model-base and reasoning engine will implement the
knowledge component of the autonomic MAPE-K architec-
ture. It will provide the information to detect attacks, protect
the ICS, heal, re-conﬁgure and re-optimize the ICS. The rest
of the MAPE-K components provide the communications to
the ICSs, analyze alternatives when attacked, plan and execute
changes to the ICSs, communicate and self-organize with other
autonomic managers about attacks.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed a cloud-based autonomic com-
puting manager that will give ICS self-awareness to detect
anomalies in their operation, protect themselves and self-
organize with other critical infrastructure to thwart attacks. By
working together, autonomic computing enhanced industrial
control systems can provide the means for critical infrastruc-
ture to have security self-awareness and provide the needed
robustness against attacks.
REFERENCES
[1] E.
Montalbano,
“Florida
Water
Plant
Hack:
Leaked
Credentials
Found in Breach Database,” Feb 2021. [Online]. Available: https:
//threatpost.com/ﬂorida-water-plant-hack-credentials-breach/163919/
[2] R. Sterritt, “Autonomic Computing,” Innovations in Systems and Software
Engineering, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 79–88, 2005.
[3] J. Maurio, P. C. Wood, S. A. Zanlongo, J. Silbermann, T. I. Sookoor,
A. Lorenzo, R. Sleight, J. Rogers, D. Muller, N. Armiger, C. A. Rouff,
and L. A. Watkins, “Agile Services and Analysis Framework for Au-
tonomous and Autonomic Critical Infrastructure,” Innovations in Systems
and Software Engineering, pp. 1–10, 2021.
[4] M. Gharib, L. Dias da Silva, and A. Ceccarelli, “A Model to Discipline
Autonomy in Cyber-Physical Systems-of-Systems and its Application,”
Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, vol. 33, no. 9, p. e2328,
2021, e2328 smr.2328.
[5] H. Hoffmann, A. Jantsch, and N. D. Dutt, “Embodied Self-Aware
Computing Systems,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 108, no. 7, pp. 1–20,
July 2020.
[6] B. Bagheri, S. Yang, H.-A. Kao, and J. Lee, “Cyber-Physical Systems
Architecture for Self-Aware Machines in Industry 4.0 Environment,”
IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, no. 3, pp. 1622–1627, 2015, 15th IFAC
Symposium on Information Control Problems in Manufacturing.
[7] L. Gurgen, O. Gunalp, Y. Benazzouz, and M. Gallissot, “Self-Aware
Cyber-Physical Systems and Applications in Smart Buildings and Cities,”
in 2013 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition
(DATE), March 2013, pp. 1149–1154.
[8] J. C´amara, K. L. Bellman, J. O. Kephart, M. Autili, N. Bencomo,
A. Diaconescu, H. Giese, S. G¨otz, P. Inverardi, S. Kounev, and M. Tivoli,
Self-aware Computing Systems: Related Concepts and Research Areas.
Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2017, pp. 17–49.
[9] J. Kephart and D. Chess, “The Vision of Autonomic Computing,” IEEE
Computer Society, Computer, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 41–50, Jan 2003.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

