Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Maps Embedded and Classical Fuzzy Controllers Applied 
in Industrial Process  
 
Lucas Botoni de Souza 
Ruan Victor Pelloso Duarte Barros 
Márcio Mendonça 
DAELE (Electric Department)  
 UTFPR-CP - Cornélio Procópio, Brazil 
lucasbotoni@hotmail.com 
ruan_pelloso@yahoo.com.br 
mendonca@utfpr.edu.br  
 
Elpiniki I. Papageorgiou 
Department of Computer Engineering 
Technological Education Institute/ University of Applied 
Sciences of Central Greece 
Lamia, Greece 
epapageorgiou@teiste.gr 
 
 
Abstract— This research presents the application of intelligent 
techniques to control an industrial mixer. The controller design 
is based on Hebbian learning for evolution of Fuzzy Cognitive 
Maps. A Fuzzy Classic Controller and Artificial Neural 
Network was used to validate the simulation results. 
Experimental simulations and analysis in this control problem 
was made. In addition, the results were embedded using 
algorithms into the Arduino platform. 
Keywords-Dynamic 
Fuzzy 
Cognitive 
Maps; 
Hebbian 
Learning; Arduino Microcontroller; Process Control; Fuzzy 
Logic; Artificial Neural Network. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In general, some of the difficulties found in acquiring 
knowledge in different areas of engineering (such as robotics, 
control or process control) are how to recognize the processes 
/systems; how to identify important variables and parameters. 
In addition, some questions are important: how to classify the 
type of physical problem; how to identify the family of 
mathematical models that can be associated; how to select the 
method and / or tool for the search and analysis of the model. 
The ﬁnal output of modern processes is signiﬁcantly 
inﬂuenced by the selection of the set points of the process 
variables, as they fundamentally impact the product quality 
characteristics and the process performance metrics [1]. In this 
context, it is possible to define the main goal of this research: 
the development of techniques based on knowledge for the 
industrial mixer process control, a classic problem of Fuzzy 
Cognitive Maps area. It is worth mentioning this work is 
inspired by a previous work [2]. 
The article proposal is a different setup, especially the 
initial situation and a comparison with a new controller using 
Fuzzy-Logic with ANN (artificial neural network). The 
motivation of this research is developments in intelligent 
control area, expanding the adaptive concept and studying the 
feasibility of an autonomous control in practice.  
Intelligent control techniques take control actions without 
depending on a complete or partial mathematical model. In 
these cases, human beings can deal with complicated 
processes 
based 
on 
inaccurate 
and/or 
approximate 
information. The strategy adopted by them is also of imprecise 
nature and usually capable of being expressed in linguistic 
terms. Thus, by means of Fuzzy Logic concepts, it is possible 
to model this type of information [3]. 
In general, Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) is a tool for 
modeling the human knowledge. It can be obtained through 
linguistic terms, inherent to Fuzzy Systems, but with a 
structure like the Artificial Neural Networks (ANN), which 
facilitates data processing, and has capabilities for training and 
adaptation. FCM is a technique based on the knowledge that 
inherits characteristics of Cognitive Maps and Artificial 
Neural Networks [4]-[6], with applications in different areas 
of knowledge [7]-[14]. Besides the advantages and 
characteristics inherited from these primary techniques, FCM 
was originally proposed as a tool to build models or cognitive 
maps in various fields of knowledge. It makes the tool easier 
to abstract the information necessary for modeling complex 
systems, which are similar in the construction to the human 
reasoning. Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (DFCM) should 
be developed to a model that can manage behaviors of non-
linear time-dependent system and sometimes in real time. 
Classic FCM has drawback for time modeling [12]. In this 
way, examples of different variation of the classic or standard 
FCMs [4] can be found in the recent literature, e.g., [12]-[18]. 
This paper has two objectives. First objective is the 
development of two controllers using an acyclic DFCM with 
same knowledge as this of Fuzzy and Fuzzy Neural 
Controller, and with similar heuristic, thus producing 
comparable simulated results. Second goal is to show an 
embedded DFCM in the low-cost processing microcontroller 
Arduino with more noise and disturbances (valve locking) to 
test the adaptability of the DFCM. To reach the goals, we 
initially use the similar DFCM proposed initially in [13] to 
control an industrial mixing tank. As opposed to [13], we use 
the Hebbian algorithm to dynamically adapt the DFCM 
weights. In order to validate our DFCM controller, we 
compared its performance with a Fuzzy Logic Controller. This 
comparison is carried out with simulated data. 
This work is developed as follows: Section 2 discusses the 
process development; Section 3 presents controllers 
development; Section 4 presents the DFCM development; 
Section 5 discusses results; Section 6 concludes and 
addresses future works. 
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

II. 
DEVELOPMENT 
To demonstrate the evolution of the proposed technique 
(DFCM) we will use a case study well known in the literature 
as seen in [2][5] and others. This case was selected to illustrate 
the need for refinement of a model based on FCM built 
exclusively with knowledge. The process shown in Fig. 1 
consists of a tank with two inlet valves for different liquids, a 
mixer, an outlet valve for removal of the final product and a 
specific gravity meter that measures the specific gravity of the 
produced liquid. In this research, to illustrate and exemplify 
the operation of the industrial mixer, the liquids are water with 
specific gravity 1 and soybean oil with a specific gravity of 
about 0.9. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Mixer tank (Source: adapted from [20]). 
Valves (V1) and (V2) insert two different liquids (specific 
gravities) in the tank. During the reaction of the two liquids, a 
new liquid characterized by its new specific gravity value is 
produced. At this time, the valve (V3) empties the tank in 
accordance with a campaign output flow, but the liquid 
mixture should match the specified levels of the volume and 
specific gravity. 
Although relatively simple, this process is a Two Inputs 
Two Outputs (TITO) type with coupled variables. To establish 
the quality of the control system of the produced fluid, a 
weighting machine placed in the tank measures the (specific 
gravity) produced liquid. When the value of the measured 
variable G (liquid mass) reaches the range of values between 
the maximum and minimum [Gmin, Gmax] specified, the 
desired mixed liquid is ready. The removal of liquid is only 
possible when the volume (V) is in a specified range between 
the values [Vmin and Vmax]. The control consists to keep 
these two variables in their operating ranges, as: 

Vmin < V < Vmax


Gmin < G < Gmax

In this study, it was tried to limit these values from 
approximately the range of 810 to 850 [mg] for the mass and 
approximately the range of 840 to 880 [ml] for the volume. 
The initial values for mass and volume are 800mg and 850ml 
respectively. According to Papageorgiou and collaborators 
[21], through the observation and analysis of the process, it is 
possible for experts to define a list of key concepts related to 
physical quantities involved. The concepts and cognitive 
model are: 
 
Concept 1 - State of the valve 1 (closed, open or 
partially open). 
 
Concept 2 - State of the valve 2 (closed, open or 
partially open). 
 
Concept 3 - State of the valve 3 (closed, open or 
partially open). 
 
Concept 4 - quantity of mixture (volume) in the tank, 
which depends on the operational state of the valves 
V1, V2 and V3. 
 
Concept 5 - value measured by the G sensor for the 
specific gravity of the liquid. 
Considering the initial proposed evolution for FCM we 
use a DFCM to control the mixer which should maintain levels 
of volume and mass within specified limits. 
The process model uses the mass conservation principle in 
incompressible fluid to derive a set of differential equations 
representing the process used to test the DFCM controller. As 
a result, the tank volume is the volume over the initial input 
flow of the inlet valves V1 and V2 minus the outflow valve 
V3, this valve V3 and the output campaign was introduced in 
this work to increase the complexity original process [20]. 
Similarly, the mass of the tank follows the same principle as 
shown below. The values used for me1 and me2 were 1.0 and 
0.9, respectively. 

Vtank = Vi + V1 + V2 − V3


𝑊𝑒𝑖𝑔ℎ𝑡𝑡𝑎𝑛𝑘 = 𝑀𝑖 + (𝑉1𝑚𝑒1) + (𝑉2𝑚𝑒2) − 𝑀𝑜𝑢𝑡 
III. 
FUZZY CONTROLLER DEVELOPMENT 
To establish a correlation and a future comparison between 
techniques, a Fuzzy Controller was also developed. The 
Fuzzy rules base uses the same heuristic control strategy and 
conditions. 
Fuzzy logic has proved to can provide satisfactory non-
linear controllers even when only the nominal plant model is 
available, or when plant parameters are not known with 
precision [22]-[24]. Fuzzy Control is a technique used for 
decades, especially in process controlling [5]. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Fuzzy Controller Surfaces, V1 and V2. 
It is a motivation to validate DFCM, so in this study it was 
used the same approach for two controllers, with two 
different formalisms. It is not in the scope to discuss the 
development of the Fuzzy Controller, but, some details of the 
structure are pertinent: functions are triangles and trapezoidal 
and 6 rules are considered in its base. The surface of this 
controller is showed in Fig. 2. Moreover, the rules are 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

symmetric and similar by two output valves; in this specific 
case the surface of valve 2 is the same as in valve 1. The 
examples of base rules are: 
1. If (Level is medium) or (Valve Out is medium) then (V1 
is medium) and (V2 is medium). 
2. If (Level is high) or (Valve Out is low) then (V1 is low) 
and (V2 is low). 
3. If (Weight is medium) or (Valve Out is medium) then (V1 
is medium) and (V2 is medium). 
The rules and structure of the Fuzzy Controller used on its 
development was based on the DFCM heuristic. 
Figure 3 show structure with same variables input and 
output like DFCM. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Fuzzy Structure. 
A Fuzzy-ANN cascade controller had its ANN (multilayer 
perceptron) trained with the output data of the Fuzzy 
controller. The topology was empirically chosen by 
observing the learning time and output error. Therefore, 200 
neurons were used on its hidden layer. Moreover, there were 
used 6000 points from inside the control region. 
IV. 
DFCM DEVELOPMENT 
The structure of the DFCM controller is similar to the 
developed Fuzzy controller, using same heuristics, e.g., if the 
output valve (V3, in accordance to Fig. 1) increases its flow, 
the inlet valves (V1 and V2) increase too. In other hand, in 
case volume and weight of the mixture increase, the inlet 
valves decrease. For example, the relationships W54 and 
W53, in the DFCM, are similar in effects or control actions of 
the Fuzzy controller’s base rules. 
The development of the DFCM is made through three 
distinct stages. First, the DFCM is developed as structure, 
concepts and causal relationships, similar to a classic FCM, 
where concepts and causal relationships are identified through 
sensors and actuators of the process. The concepts can be 
variables and/or control actions, as already mentioned.  
The output valve is defined by a positive relationship, i.e., 
when the campaign increases, the output flow (V3) also 
increases, similarly, the input valves increase too; moreover, 
when the mixture volume and weight increase, V1 and V2 
decrease. In both cases, the flow of the valves increases or 
decreases proportionally. The second development stage is the 
well-known Genetic Algorithm [25]. The Fig. 4 shows the 
schematic graph of a DFCM controller. 
 
 
Figure 4.  DFCM Controller 
In this research, the initial values of causal relationships 
are determined through genetic algorithms. The genetic 
algorithm used is a conventional one, with a population of 20 
individuals, simple crossing and approximately 1% of 
mutation. The chromosomes were generated by real numbers 
with all the DFCM weights, individuals were random and the 
initial method of classification was the tournament method 
with 3 individuals.  
Finally, the fitness function for simplicity considers the 
overall error of the two desired outputs with 60 generations of 
the Genetic Algorithm proposed; it stabilizes and reaches the 
initial solution for the opening of the valves, approximately 
42%. 
Table 1 shows initial values of the DFCM weighs. 
Different proposals and variations of this method applied in 
tuning FCM can be found [16]. 
TABLE I.  
INITIALS CASUAL RELATIONSHIP WEIGHTS 
W23 
W24 
W13 
W14 
W53 
W54 
-0.23 
-0.26 
-0.26 
-0.26 
0.23 
0.15 
 
The third stage of the DFCM development concerns the 
tuning or refinement of the model for dynamic response of the 
controller. In this case, when a change of output set-point in 
the campaign occurs, the weights of the causal relationships 
are dynamically tuned. To perform this, function a new kind 
of concept and relation was included in the cognitive model.  
To dynamically adapt the DFCM weights we used the 
Hebbian learning algorithm for FCM that is an adaptation of 
the classic Hebbian method [4]. Different proposals and 
variations of this method applied in tuning or in learning for 
FCM are known in the literature, for example [15]. In this 
paper, the method is used to update the intensity of causal 
relationships in a deterministic way according to the variation 
or error in the intensity of the concept or input process 
variable, equations 5 and 6 show this. Specifically, the 
application of Hebbian learning algorithm provides control 
actions as follows: if the weight or volume of the liquid 
mixture increases, the inlet valves have a causal relationship 
negatively intensified and tend to close more quickly. In 
addition, if the volume or weight mixture decreases, the inlet 
valves have a causal relationship positively intensified. The 
mathematical equation is presented in (5). 

𝑊𝑖(𝑘) = 𝑊𝑖𝑗(𝑘 − 1) ± 𝛾Δ𝐴𝑖

56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Where: ∆Ai is the concept variation resulting from causal 
relationship, and it is given by ∆Ai = Ai (k)-Ai (k-1), γ is the 
learning rate at iteration k. 
This version of the Hebbian algorithm is an evolution of 
the two proposals of Matsumoto and collaborators [26].  
Causal relationships that have negative causality has 
negative sign and similarly to positive causal relationships. 
The equations applied in this work are adapted of the Hebb 
original version. 

   𝑊𝑖(𝑘) = 𝑘𝑝 ∗ (𝑊𝑖𝑗(𝑘 − 1) − 𝛾 ∗ ∆𝐴𝑖) 

Where: γ=1, and kp is different for every weight pairs. It 
has their assigned values empirically by observing the 
dynamics of process performance, recursive method, kp =40 
for (W14; W23), kp =18 for (W13; W24) and kp =2.35 for 
(W53; W54), with normalized values. 
The DFCM inference is like Classic FCM [4], and the 
inference equations are shown below (equation 7 and 8). 

Ai = ∫ (∑
(AjWji)
n
j=1
j≠i
) + Ai
previous


f(x) =
1
1+e−λx

Fig. 5 shows the results of Hebbian Learning Algorithm for 
FCM considering the variations ΔAi of the concepts 
concerning volume, weight, outlet valve state, and the weights 
of the causal relationship in the process. This figure also 
shows the evolution of the weights of the causal relationships 
during the process into a range of [-1, 1]. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Evolution of the weights in the Hebbian Learning 
 
V. 
SIMULATED EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
 
The results of DFCM are shown in Fig. 6, which shows the 
behavior of the controlled variables within the predetermined 
range of the volume and weight of the mixture. It is 
noteworthy that the controller keeps the variables in the 
control range and pursues a trajectory according to a 
campaign, where the output flow is also predetermined. In 
this initial experiment, a campaign with a sequence of values 
ranging from 7, 5 and 11 ml/min can be a set-point output 
flow (outlet valve). Similarly, the results of the Fuzzy 
Controller are shown in Fig. 7.  It is observed that the 
behavior of DFCM and Fuzzy controllers were similar when 
the tank is empty, with a slightly advantage for the Fuzzy 
controller that reached the desired result after 230 steps, 
while the DFCM needed 250 steps with the adaptation off.   
 
Figure 6.  Valver and Results of the DFCM Controller 
Table 2 shows that the simulated numeric results of the DFCM 
controller had a similar performance compared to the 
conventional Fuzzy Logic Controller, and DFCM embedded 
in Arduino with small difference in same conditions, with 
simulated small noise. 
 
 
TABLE II. QUANTITATIVE RESULTS 
 
DFCM 
DFCM-
Arduino 
Fuzzy 
Logic 
Fuzzy-
ANN 
 
 Max-
Min 
Max-Min 
Max-Min 
Max-Min 
Volume Mix 
(ml) 
13.6 
16.9 
31.2 
51.9 
Weight Mix 
(mg) 
17.1 
14.1 
27.5 
31.2 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

 
Figure 7.  Valves and Results of the Fuzzy Controller 
 
 
Figure 8.  Valves and Results of the Fuzzy-ANN Controller 
 
 
 
Figure 9.  Valves and Results of the Arduino embedded DFCM 
In order to extend the applicability of this work, the 
developed DFCM controller is embedded into an Arduino 
platform which ensures the portability of the FCM generated 
code. Arduino is an open-source electronic prototyping 
platform. Arduino was chosen because it is a cheap 
controller, and mainly because of its low processing capacity, 
to emphasize the low computational complexity of FCM [16].  
The equations for volume and weight are calculated by 
Matlab, 
simulating 
the 
process. 
Through 
a 
serial 
communication established with Arduino, Matlab sends the 
current values of volume, weight and output valve to Arduino 
that receives these data, calculates the values of the concept 
1 (valve 1) and concept 2 (valve 2) and then returns these data 
to Matlab. After this, new values of volume and weight are 
recalculated. Details on how this technique can be used are 
presented in Matlab Tutorial, Matlab and Arduino codes, by 
accessing the link [27]. The cycle of communication between 
Arduino to Matlab can be checked in [26]. 
Fig. 9 shows the results obtained with the Arduino 
platform providing data of the actuators, Valve 1 and Valve 
2, with Matlab performing data acquisition. The algorithm 
switches the sets of causal relations that operate similarly to 
a DFCM simulated with noise and disturb in the valve 1. The 
noise in Fig. 9 is the sum of the real noise, observed in data 
transference between Arduino and Matlab, and a simulated 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

white noise. Equation (9) shows the composition of the 
experiment noise. 
𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒𝐸𝑥𝑝𝑒𝑟𝑖𝑚𝑒𝑛𝑡 = 𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑢𝑙𝑎𝑡𝑒𝑑 + 𝑁𝑜𝑖𝑠𝑒𝐴𝑟𝑑𝑢𝑖𝑛𝑜−𝑀𝑎𝑡𝑙𝑎𝑏
VI. CONCLUSION 
The contribution of this study focuses on the introduction 
of Fuzzy Cognitive Maps in the embedded control area. In 
simulated data, the results are similar for the three controllers, 
with a small advantage for DFCM with or without Arduino, 
observed that DFCM controller is adaptive. The results 
obtained from both controllers were quite the same. 
However, the Fuzzy-ANN did not have any significant 
improvement, there was a slightly reduction of the noise 
which can be a major factor on industrial plants.   
From the data obtained from Arduino microcontroller, 
based on the variations of the DFCM embedded in the 
platform, it is observed that the controlled variables were in 
well-behaved ranges, which suggests that the DFCM codes 
have low computational complexity due to the simplicity of 
its inference mathematical processing.  
Thus, we can emphasize the portability and the possibility 
of developing DFCM controllers on low cost platforms. In 
short, this work showed that DFCM can be embedded in low 
cost microcontrollers.  
Future studies will quantify the computational complexity 
of the DFCM,  for a more general conclusion, results with 
real prototype. Finally, other controllers with dynamic 
adaptation, like adaptively fuzzy controllers, ANFIS can be 
used for the comparison. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Marchal, P. C.; García, J. G.; Ortega, J. G. "Application of 
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps and Run-to-Run Control to a Decision 
Support System for Global Set-Point Determination," in IEEE 
Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems , 
vol.PP, no.99, pp.1-12, 2017. 
[2] Mendonça, M.; Neves Jr, F.; Arruda, L. V. R.; Papageorgiou, 
E.; Chrun, I. Embedded Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Maps for 
Controller in Industrial Mixer. In: 8th International KES 
Conference on Intelligent Decision Technologies KES-IDT-
16, 2016, Tenerife. KES-IDT-16, 2016. P. 1-10. 
[3] Zadeh, L. A. An introduction to Fuzzy logic applications in 
intelligent systems. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publisher, 
1992. 
[4] Kosko, B. Fuzzy cognitive maps. International Journal Man-
Machine Studies, v. 24, n. 1, p.65-75, 1986. 
[5] Glykas M. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps: Advances in Theory, 
Methodologies, Tools and Applications. Springer-Velarg 
Berlin Heidelberg, 2010. 
[6] Kosko, B. Neural networks and fuzzy systems: a dynamical 
systems approach to machine intelligence. New York: Prentice 
Hall, 1992. 
[7] Lee, K. C.; Lee, S. A cognitive map simulation approach to 
adjusting the design factors of the electronic commerce web 
sites. Expert Systems with Applications, v. 24, n. 1, p. 1-11, 
2003. 
[8] Papageorgiou, E.;  Stylios, C.; Groumpos, P. Novel for 
supporting medical decision making of different data types 
based on Fuzzy Cognitive Map Framework. Proceedings of the 
29th annual international conference of the IEEE embs cité 
internationale, Lyon, France August, p. 23-26, 2007. 
[9] Papageorgiou, E.; Stylios, C.; Groumpos, P. A. Combined 
Fuzzy cognitive map and decision trees model for medical 
decision making. Annual International Conference of the IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, v. 1, p. 6117-
6120, 2006. 
[10] Huang, Y. C.; Wang, X. Z. Application of Fuzzy causal 
networks to waste water treatment plants. Chemical 
Engineering Science, v. 54, n. 13/14, p. 2731-2738, 1999. 
[11] Dickerson, J. A.; Kosko, B. Virtual Worlds as Fuzzy cognitive 
maps. Presence, v. 3, n. 2, p. 173-189, 1994. 
[12] Papageorgiou, E. I. (2014). Fuzzy Cognitive Maps for Applied 
Sciences and Engineering from Fundamentals to Extensions 
and Learning Algorithms. Springer. 
[13] Mendonça, M.; Angélico, B.; Arruda, L.V.R.; Neves, F. A 
dynamic fuzzy cognitive map applied to chemical process 
supervision. 
Engineering 
Applications 
of 
Artificial 
Intelligence, v. 26, p. 1199-1210, 2013. 
[14] Mendonça, M.; Chrun, I. R. ; Neves, F. Jr; Arruda, nd L. V. R. 
“A cooperative architecture for swarm robotic based on 
dynamic fuzzy cognitive maps”, Engineering Applications of 
Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 59. Pg 122-132, 2017. 
[15] Miao, Y.; Liu, Z. Q.; Siew, C. K..; Miao, C. Y. Transformation 
of cognitive maps. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, v. 18, 
n. 1, p. 114-124, 2010. 
[16] Papageorgiou, E. Learning Algorithms for Fuzzy Cognitive 
Maps. IEEE Transactions on Systems and Cybernetics. Part C: 
Applications and Reviews, v. 42, p. 150-163. 2012. 
[17] Mendonça, M., Arruda, L. V. R., A Contribution to the 
Intelligent Systems Development Using DCN, OmniScriptum 
GmbH & Co. KG, 2015 
[18] Miao, Y.; Liu, Z. Q.; Siew, C. K.; Miao, C. Y. Dynamical 
cognitive network - an Extension of fuzzy cognitive. IEEE 
Trans. on Fuzzy Systems, Vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 760-770, 2001. 
[19] Axelrod, R. Structure of decision: the cognitive maps of 
political elites. New Jersey: Prince-ton University Press, 1976. 
[20] Stylios C. D.; Groumpos P. P.; Georgopoulos V. C. An Fuzzy 
Cognitive Maps Approach to Process Control Systems J. 
Advanced Computational Intelligence, n. 5, p. 1-9, 1999. 
[21] Papageorgiou, E. I.; Parsopoulos, K. E.; Stylios, C. S.; 
Groumpos, P. P.; Vrahatis, M. N. Fuzzy cognitive maps 
learning using particle swarm optimization. Journal of 
Intelligent Information Systems , v. 25,  p. 95–121, 2005. 
[22] Ross, T. J. Fuzzy logic, with Engineering Aplications, 2nd Ed., 
England, John Whiley & Sons, 2004. 
[23] Konar, 
A., 
“Computacional 
intelligence, 
 
Principles, 
Techniques and Applications”, New York, Springer, 2005. 
[24] Farinwata, S. S.; Filev, D.; Langari, R. (editors), “Fuzzy 
Control, Synthesis and Analysis”, West Sussex, England, John 
Wiley & Sons, 2000.  
[25] Goldberg, D. E. Genetic algorithmos in search optimization 
and machine learning. Mass: Addison-Wesley, 1989. 
[26] Matsumoto, D. E.; Mendonça, M.; Arruda, L. V. R. and 
Papageorgiou, E. “Embedded Dynamic fuzzy cognitive maps 
applied to the control of industrial mixer”. Simpósio Brasileiro 
de Automação Inteligente – XI SBAI. 2013. 
[27] <http://epapageorgiou.com/index.php/fcm-research-group> 
Access date: 10/02/17. 
 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

