Development of Ontology Based Framework for Information Security Standards
Partha Saha
MIS Group
IIM Calcutta
Kolkata, India
shree.partha.saha@gmail.com
Ambuj Mahanti
MIS Group
IIM Calcutta
Kolkata, India
am@iimcal.ac.in
B.B. Chakraborty
Finance and Control Group
IIM Calcutta
Kolkata, India
bbc@iimcal.ac.in
Avinash Navlani
MIS Group
IIM Calcutta
Kolkata, India
avinashnvln8@gmail.com
Abstract—
E-Business
Management
and
associated
risk
mitigation of organizational resources have become a major
challenge for the organizations in light of increasingly global
and integrated digital economies.
Our research focuses on
information security in e-Business management. We consider,
in particular, the domain of banking.
The banking sector,
being highly regulated, poses plethora of challenges in terms of
compliance
of
organizational
practices
with
regulatory
standards such as Basel III, CobiT 4.1 and ISO17799.
An
automated compliance auditing solution to the existing manual
auditing is highly desirable from management’s standpoint due
to considerable savings in cost and time. In this paper, we
envisage a new paradigm where ontology based information
model
is
used
in
an
automated
compliance
auditing
application. It performs compliance checking to verify if actual
banking practices are following information security standards
and whether discrepancies between security standards and
actual banking practices call for qualified, adverse, disclaimer
or piecemeal opinion by the information security auditor, while
investigating
efficacy
of
information
security
standards
employed in banking domain.
Keywords-Information Security; Compliance Auditing; Risk
Management; Indian Banking Regulation .
I.
INTRODUCTION
Compliance Management (CM) is a business process
that concerns organizations of different magnitude and size.
It deals with the process of checking the organization
practices with the regulatory compliance policies and
business
guidelines
in
an
integrated
and
networked
environment. This process is a continuous and labour
intensive task that involves business and management’s
commitments,
time
and
resources
in
demonstrating
organizational alignment, adherence and compliance to the
prevailing regulations and best practices (such as Sarbanes
Oxley [9] , HIPPA [12], Basel III [21], CobiT4.1 [20] ). The
importance of compliance is underscored from renowned
corporate frauds like Enron and WorldCom [23]. In this
paper, we are analyzing the application of ontology to
(semi) automate compliance auditing process (a process
which is till now completely manual). We try to address the
fundamental research question of how we may segregate the
compliance rules and regulations of a standard (CobiT4.1)
and organization practice (that of a bank X in India, which
is implementing CobiT4.1) into two different ontology
layers (source and target ontology, respectively) which may
facilitate automated compliance auditing. By comparing two
ontologies, performance evaluation of the organization vis-
à-vis source regulations may be ascertained. Although here
we are applying our methodologies upon specific case of
application of CobiT4.1 in banking domain, the application
of the methodology is independent of any specific domain
or standard.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly
discusses GRC (Corporate Governance, Risk Management
and Compliance Auditing) while Section III undertakes
literature
survey.
Section
IV
briefly
expounds
methodological framework of ontology based compliance
auditing,
while
Section
V
discusses
the
compliance
measurement in information security standards. Section VI
applies the framework for an Indian bank X, while Section
VII calculates the compliance metric for the bank X and
discusses various scenarios.
The paper concludes with
Section VIII.
II.
CORPORATE
GOVERNANCE,
RISK
MANAGEMENT AND COMPLIANCE AUDITING (grc)
In this section, we will be briefly discussing about
corporate governance, risk management and compliance
auditing related to banking sector.
A.
IT Governance and Regulatory Standards
IT governance is a part of overall corporate governance
process
of
any
organization.
Aligning
Information
Technology with the strategic goals of the organization,
delivering promised value to the stakeholders, optimum
utilization
of
critical
IT
resources,
undertaking
risk
management and strict performance monitoring are some of
the cornerstone of IT governance. In this subsection, we
present two well-known regulations and standards.
1)
BASEL III
Basel III, a brainchild of BCBS (Basel Committee of
Banking Supervision) [21], (which came into effect starting
January 1st, 2013) is equipped with twin legal instruments
namely: Directives and Regulations. The Directive contains
four cardinal principals, namely: (i) Increased Governance
(ii) Capital Buffer (iii) Increased Supervision and (iv)
Sanctions. The Regulation part contains five important
sections, namely: (i) Definition of Capital (ii) Credit Risk
from Counterparty (iii) Risk of Liquidity (iv) Single Rule
Book and (v) Leverage Ratio [21]. With these set of
stipulations,
BCBS
is
trying
to
strengthen
corporate
governance, enhance banks’ risk management capability,
transparency and disclosure [21].
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-257-8
ICAS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

2)
Control
Objectives
for
Information
and
related
Technology (CobiT )
CobiT has been developed by the IT Governance
Institute and it provides reference framework for good IT
standards and practices. It is a tool that is used by the
Information Security auditors and practitioners alike. CobiT
includes a framework that responds to the management’s
need for adequate control and measurement of IT by
providing tools to standardize, assess and measure the
organization’s IT resource and capabilities vis-à-vis thirty-
four CobiT IT processes [20].
B.
Risk Management in Indian Banking Sector
Over the last couple of decades, India has emerged as
one of the fastest growing economies in the world (average
7% GDP growth). India’s banking and financial institutions
have also experienced high growth rate (18% growth in
banking sector) [14]. Rapid stride in ICT (Information and
Communication Technology) has helped Indian banking
industry to metamorphose from a ledger driven manual
activity to a pervasive, fully networked and integrated CBS
(Core
Banking
Services)
system.
But
the
undeniable
consumer benefits are often offset by techno-procedural
complexities in risk management in B2C (Business-to-
Consumer) environment. It gives rise to multifarious frauds
of alarming proportions [14]. Hence appropriate controls
(policies, procedures, guidelines, processes etc. across
organizations) need to be implemented to contain the
menace.
C.
Compliance Auditing (CA)
As evident from a recent Ernst & Young Global
Information Security Survey-2012 [18], stakeholders are
increasingly
concerned
over
frauds
endangering
confidentiality, integrity and security of the organization’s
information repository.
Consequently, organizations are
encumbered with the task of synchronizing day to day
activities
and
procedures
with
a
host
of
standards,
regulations and guidelines which are legally binding. CA or
Compliance Auditing (which is part and parcel of any
regulatory compliance process), formally states whether
mandatory controls and safeguards are employed and
function correctly. But, without automation, it becomes
difficult to manually correlate business practices with
conflicting
statutory
requirements
and
industry
best
practices.
III.
LITERATURE SURVEY
In the banking sector, information asymmetry among
cooperative/competing agents is one of the root causes of
fraud. Anonymity of agents’ actions (in different physical
and digital channels and payment avenues) results in a state
of non-equilibrium of trust and controlling power among
interacting agents. Some of these agents try to exploit
lacunae in the banking process and technology. This chain
of events gives rise to the scope for fraud [16]. Deloitte’s
fraud survey on Indian Banking sector brings some of these
disturbing trends into the open [14]. According to the survey
respondents, “lack of oversight by line managers and/or
deviations from existing process/controls” (73%), “current
business pressure to meet target” (50%), “difficult business
scenarios” (47%), and “lack of automated tools to identify
potential red flags” (37%), “collusion between internal
staffs and external agencies” (37%) are five major reasons
for fraud [14]. All these point to the cardinal importance of
automated
Compliance
Auditing
(CA)
solutions
for
information security and mitigation of fraud.
Vendor/technology
specific
computer-assisted
compliance management solutions exist which address a
small subset of problems within compliance and primarily
focus on lower-level aspects of IT governance such as
configuration
management,
change
management,
patch
management and licensing management [8] [10].
In this paper, we utilized many concepts from diverse
fields e.g. fuzzy reasoning system [6] [7] [13] and ontology,
which are adopted from ontology engineering [1] [2] and
ontology
learning
[3].
These
techniques,
along
with
linguistic tools [4], are used to (semi) automatically extract
a body of concepts, relationships and values from various
information sources (e.g. employee handbook) to form an
ontology. Fuzzy reasoning has also been applied in other
important domains such as law, healthcare and financial
engineering [5] [11] [13].
IV.
METHODOLOGY
Current research involving creation of ontology based
adaptive automated CA system belongs to the design science
[19]. Ontology, which is frequently referenced, is “an
explicit specification of a shared conceptualization of a
domain” [2] [11]. It is constructed to capture implicit,
explicit and commonsense-knowledge of a domain such that
the
knowledge may be
shared, accessed, reused
and
consumed by autonomous computing agents. In this section,
we will show how ontology may be used to capture
compliance auditing process into reference and target
knowledgebase which facilitates organization’s performance
measurement during auditing.
A.
Ontology of Information Security Concepts
The study will identify a set of notions, viewed as
important, in the context of information security. The notions
are then defined as concepts. For each concept, the intuitive
meaning is documented and the relationships between the
concepts are simultaneously derived. The concepts and the
relationships are then used to design the ontology. At the
same time, any additional attributes, required by the
ontological concepts, are categorized. In the next two sub-
sections, we divide the conceptual framework in reference
and target ontologies.
B.
Reference Ontology
Our
application,
namely
construction
of
reference
ontology, is divided into the following three steps: (i)
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-257-8
ICAS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Domain
Knowledge
Modelling
(ii)
Application
Logic
Modelling (iii) Application Logic Extension.
(i) Domain Knowledge Modeling: it can be formalized from
the following knowledge sources: Information Security
Standards and Best Practices (e.g. ISO17799 [17], CobiT4.1
[20]), Information Security Dictionaries (e.g. Glossary for
Information Security), Domain Experts Knowledge etc.
(ii) Application Logic Modelling: it can be extracted from
the following important knowledge sources: Compliance
Requirements
from
Information
Security
Standards,
Contractual
Agreements
with
Stakeholders,
Company
Policies (e.g. Employee Handbook) etc.
(iii) Application Logic Extension: it can be formalized from
the following knowledge sources: Past compliance results,
Business Impact Assessment (BIA), Analysis of financial
penalty due to non-compliance etc. Section V will elucidate
the entire approach while modelling PO9 of CobiT4.1 [20].
C.
Target Ontology
Target knowledge base is the Corporate Memory of the
organization. It contains the facts and knowledge about the
organization. The knowledge can come from the following
sources: Document Management Systems (e.g. knowledge
and Meta data), File systems (e.g. instances of documents
stored in network drives), Employee Management System
(e.g., knowledge of organization entities) etc.
D.
Compliance Rules and Metrics
In order to perform a compliance study, the agent
behaviours are to be captured and verified in a particular
scenario.
Next,
it
is
to
be
ascertained
whether
the
behavioural
trace
is
consistent
with
the
regulatory
requirements. Compliance measure is computed by first
converting the compliance rules, expressed in EC (Event
Calculus), into a set of high level language like Java. Each
node in the tree represents an event (primitive or abstract)
spread over an interval of time. Using temporal relations, an
event node is related to one or more nodes, at the primitive
level.
E.
A Fuzzy Technique for Adaptive Compliance Auditing
In the ideal world, all compliance knowledge and facts
are properly captured and stored in an ontology. Thus,
machines can confidently reason and infer results based on
the precise and complete data. However, this is not the case
in the real world, where most of the data is imprecise,
incomplete and ambiguous in nature. To capture the
imprecision and uncertainty of the real-world knowledge, we
make use of Weighted Fuzzy Production Rules (WFPRs), as
a mechanism to represent our compliance requirements.We
try to mimic the real world scenario of an auditor( who is
adjusting and tolerating numerous imprecise or missing
compliance data), while (s)he is in the process of concluding
whether compliance is achieved or not for the organization.
We propose the use of fuzzy logic techniques to address the
inherit issues of vagueness and imprecise inferencing in
automatic Compliance Auditing[1] [7] [13].
V.
COMPLIANCE MEASUREMENT OF
INFORMATION SECURITY STANDARDS
In this section, we closely follow the methodology which
was envisaged while constructing reference ontology in
Section IV B. Here, we try to model a specific part of a
principal security standard viz. CobiT4.1. Implementation of
CobiT 4.1 has become mandatory in designing information
security in most of the banks in India.
Information, along with systems, networks, hardware,
software and supporting processes, are considered valuable
assets
to
any
organization.
Protection
of
vulnerable
information assets from wide range of threats, mitigation of
business risks, ensuring business continuity, maximizing
business opportunities etc. may be formally termed as
information security. Complete modelling of a particular
security standard like CobiT4.1 is beyond the scope of the
present
paper.
Hence,
we
would
like
to
show
the
methodology by rendering a part of the CobiT 4.1(Sec. PO9
of CobiT4.1 “Assess and Manage IT Risk”) into ontology
based semantic modeling.
a) PO9
from
CobiT4.1
establishes
an
IT
risk
management framework. It is followed by establishing
particular context in which risk assessment framework is
applied. Subsequently, specific risky events (events which
are capable of producing negative impacts) are identified.
Finally, risk response, maintenance and monitoring of risk
action plan are undertaken.
b) Recommendations from PO9 from CobiT4.1. are
expressed in the following steps:

Deriving a semantic model (using ontologies from
the
view
point
of
compliance
checking)
for
information security standard. This model is derived
from control statements and auditor’s queries.

Deriving semantic rules from control statements.

Applying the rules in the ontology database for
checking consistency.

Deriving strategies for handling partial, incomplete,
erroneous and fraudulent data in the ontology.

Determining the relevance of each concept (using
fuzzy weights) for the computation of compliance.

Computing the compliance measurement.
c) As
robust
risk
management
framework
is
an
essential ingredient of Cobit4.1 security regime, the auditor
may
enquire
from
the
company
executives,
whether
following actvities have been properly performed no not.
i.
Performing risk assessment.
ii.
Evaluating strategic/tactical/ business objectives.
iii. Identifying internal/external critical IT objectives.
iv. Identifying risk context (Environment, domain,
country, regulation, size, etc.).
v.
Identifying events (business oriented, IT related).
vi. Assessing risk associated with each event (Record
& maintain risk registry, cost, benefit etc).
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-257-8
ICAS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

vii. Identifying strategic risk associated with business
(Investment, funding, technology, domain etc.).
viii. Identifying tactical risk associated with business
(Project
plans,
implementation
and
other
operational issues).
ix. Selecting, identifying, calculating risk responses.
x.
Prioritising controls for risk mitigation.
xi. Providing appropriate funding policies in place for
risk treatment.
xii. Maintaining a risk action plan.
xiii. Performing IT value management (Costs, benefits,
Strategy and Tactics).
In Fig. 1, CobiT
risk
management
framework is
illustrated for our (partial) source ontology construction.
Now, let us critically examine the methodology for the first
question (whether or not the company on its part has
undertaken proper risk assessment). In Fig. 1, CobiT 4.1
risk management framework is expressed in event based
ontology representation. Each box in the Fig. 1 represents an
event. The thirteen questions mentioned above may be
enquired using structured query language. Here, the model
is being represented using Event Calculus (EC). It is a logic
formalism used for workflow analysis [22]. In a workflow
process represented by EC, there are four major types of
activities: (a) sequential activity (b) parallel activity (c)
conditional activity and (d) iterative activity [22].
While examining risk assessment in Fig. 1, we work in a
bottom-up manner. Setting up risk portfolio is preceded by
two sub events (a) identify IT tactical risk and (b) identify
IT strategic risk. This can be represented in Event Calculus
by AND-join of concurrent activities. The formulation is
shown below:
happens (end (set risk portfolio), T)
happens (end
((identify IT tactical risk), T1), happens (end ((identify IT
strategic risk), T2), T = max ( T1, T2)
(1)
In a similar manner, risk categorization process can only
start when the two sub-processes (setting up risk portfolio
and identifying risk trends and events) are over. It is also
represented in Event Calculus by AND-join of activities.
The Event Calculus formalism is shown below:
happens (end (categorize risk), T)
happens (end ((set
risk portfolio), T1), happens (end ((identify risk trends and
events), T2), T=max (T1, T2)
(2)
Selecting
risk
commences
sequentially
after
risk
categorization is over and it is represented as:
happens (start (select risk), T)
happens (end (categorize
risk), T)
(3)
Establishing risk context is composed of three sub
processes (identifying external and internal context of each
risk assessment, selecting risk criteria and selecting goals of
risk assessment). These sub processes are also interlinked
among themselves. Event Calculus formalism of AND-join
activities is shown below:
happens (end (establish risk context), T)
happens (end
((identify internal/external context of each risk assessment),
T1), happens (end ((select risk criteria), T2), happens (end
((select goals of risk assessment), T3), T=max (T1, T2, T3)
(4)
And, finally, risk assessment is complete after its sub-
processes viz. selecting critical IT objectives, establish risk
context and selecting risk are complete.
happens (end (assessing risk), T)
happens (end ((select
critical IT objectives), T1), happens (end ((establish risk
context), T2), happens (end ((selecting risk), T3), T=max
(T1, T2, T3)
(5)
Figure 1. CobiT risk management framework (partial
source ontology)
Now,
we
discuss
the
same
question,
(i.e.
risk
assessment) in a top down manner, in finer detail. We
closely examine each of the events in Fig. 1. We try to
understand
five
processes:
(i)
temporal
and
causal
relationship between events (ii) resource consumption by
each event (iii) agents’ relationship for each event (iv) the
agents’ organization associated with each event and (v)
objectives of each event. The risk assessment event is
composed of three sub events: (a) selecting critical IT
objectives (b) establishing risk context and (c) selecting risk.
The sub-goals coming in the form of attributes, value and
relationship
tuple are associated
with each event (i)
achieving business and IT alignment, priority matching and
integration of purposes (ii) assessing business requirement
in line with particular enterprise requirement, government
regulations, relevant laws and contracts (iii) assessing
capabilities and setting of performance metrics in terms of
IT’s
contribution
to
organizations’
goals,
objectives,
functionality, scalability etc. (iv) setting up of IT strategic
and tactical plans (v) performing IT portfolio management
by analyzing program
portfolios, project and service
portfolios
(vi)
performing
IT
value
management
by
calculating project costs, benefits, strategy and tactics.
86
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-257-8
ICAS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Next, we consider establishing risk context event which
is subdivided into three sub-events, namely: identifying
internal/external context of each risk assessment, selecting
risk criteria and selecting goals of risk assessment. Internal
and
external
risk
context
is
dependent
on
specific
environment like industry, domain, area, country, rules,
regulations, best practices, financial health etc. Selecting
risk
criteria
determines
organization’s
risk
tolerance.
Selecting goals of risk assessment emphasizes that risk
mitigation
strategies
are
encoded
within
organization
culture.
IT strategic risks are concerned with interaction of
related stakeholders, strategic matching between IT goals
and enterprise vision, investment opportunities, budget and
funding, technology maturity etc. The tactical risks are
concerned
with
IT-enabled
program
investments,
IT
initiatives in different projects, resource requirements etc.
Finally identification of historical risk-trends and events are
concerned with setting up of archives of historical cases (it
records
system
failures,
that
seriously
compromised
performance).
VI.
RISK MANAGEMENT FRAMEWORK OF A
BANK X
Figure 2. Risk management framework of Bank X
(partial target ontology )
In this section, construction of target ontology is
envisaged as per guidelines in Section IV C. As per our case
study, we are surveying a bank X in India. The bank X has
over 1500 branches and offices and is having a total business
turnover of more than $20 billion. Presently, bank X is
having a three-tier organizational set-up (consisting of the
head office, over 25 regional offices and the branches).
Operations of all the branches have been computerized with
ATMs and EFTS (Electronic Fund Transfer System). Risk
management framework of the bank X closely follows risk
governance framework of Cobit4.1.
The
risk
management
process
begins
with
risk
appetite, risk tolerance level and risk exposure of the bank
X. Identifying risk, analyzing, evaluating and ranking risk
processes, controlling, monitoring and articulating risk
impact on information and electronic assets will comprise
risk governance of the bank. It is achieved by conducting
the following exercises:
(a) Performing bank X’s enterprise risk assessment.
(b) Evaluating IT risk tolerance threshold.
(c) Approving IT risk tolerance.
(d) Aligning IT risk policy with bank X’s overall risk
policy.
(e) Promoting
IT risk consciousness/awareness culture
among stakeholders.
(f)
Useful communication of IT risk.
(g) Approving/accepting IT risk analysis.
(h) Enriching strategic decision making process using IT
risk analysis.
(i)
Prioritizing IT risk response activities.
Risk register or more popularly “risk log” is used for three
specific purposes.
(a) Storing important data for accumulating, identifying,
analysing, managing and reporting IT specific risk.
(b) As part of risk profile maintenance, an up to date
inventory of known risk related events and the
attributes (disposition, probable impact and expected
frequency of occurrence) of IT resources are formed.
(c) Preparation of decision support system (with respect to
risk management framework) is composed of defining /
estimating IT risk and identifying risk response options.
Categorization of various sources of risk, is of paramount
importance in bank X’s risk governance framework.
(a) Board approved policy, procedure, guidelines.
(b) Digital signature and evidence (which is taken as legal
proof) may be the source of fraud/malpractice.
(c) Suppliers/contractors are possible sources of risk.
(d) Adherence
to
stipulated
privacy
requirements
of
customer(s), where the bank is delivering various
products/services through electronic banking channels
(here the jurisdiction is domain and country specific).
(e) Granting authorization on need based requirements.
(f)
Monitoring persons with elevated access privilege.
(g) Appropriate job profiling.
(h)
Evaluating
vendors/outsourced
services
providers
(comprehensive due diligence procedures, monitoring
performance, managing service-level agreements).
(i)
Operational risk related to e-banking and outsourcing.
(j)
Elimination/restriction on manual intervention for back
up, update and data transfer.
(k) Proper authorization of data in foreign banks having
access to bank X’s data.
(l)
Compliance with regulatory, statutory and contractual
obligations on the deployment of Information Systems.
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-257-8
ICAS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Depending on risk appetite of the bank and its
impact/significance to the business, bank X management
may take recourse to any of the following five actions:
(a) Ignoring risk (reject risk, if its impact is lower than the
risk threshold).
(b) Avoiding risk (eliminate risk by removing causes).
(c) Transferring risk (deflect/ allocate/share risk with
partners, insurance companies etc.).
(d) Accepting risk (formal acknowledgement of existence
of risk and proper redress).
(e) Mitigating risk (reduce risk by defining, implementing
and monitoring suitable procedures and safeguards).
While mitigating risk, management may choose to either
use appropriate controls or reduce risk at acceptable level
by using one or many of the following safeguards:
(a) Detailed inventory control of information and asset.
(b) Classification of new employees according to risk
profile, priority and experience.
(c) Suitable physical and environmental control.
(d) Monitoring operational alignment with risk tolerance.
(e) Awareness training program for employees.
(f) Setting up robust incidence management process.
(g) Preparation of detailed audit trail.
(h) Providing data security measures like cryptography.
(i) Optimizing system security.
(j) Checking critical functions (finance, regulation, legal).
(k) Optimizing response to risk exposure.
(l) Implementing control for malware protection.
(m)
Robust network protection strategy.
(n) Strong control for remote computing.
Communication of risk related issues to appropriate forum
involves articulation and reaction to risky events.
(a) IT related loopholes are to be communicated in timely
fashion to right forum at right time for right response.
(b) Immediate
gain/loss/opportunities from IT
related
events are to be exploited.
(c) Communicating IT risk analysis result.
(d) Reporting risk management activities and compliances.
(e) Independent IT assessments are to be interpreted.
(f) Identifying IT related opportunities.
(g) Intimating/maintaining incident response plan.
Monitoring IT risk management ensures optimizing &
integrating day to day operations with overall IT risk
strategy and business decisions.
(a) Fixing personal or individual accountability for IT risk
management.
(b) Harmonizing business & IT risk strategy.
(c) Integrating IT risk practices to enterprise risk practice.
(d) Risk based transaction monitoring surveillance process
should be kept in place.
(e) Optimizing resource allocation for IT risk management
(f) Independent risk assurance for IT risk management.
(g) A
suitable
framework
for
Business
Continuity
Management may be implemented.
VII.
CALCULATING COMPLIANCE METRIC
In this section, we will show how risk assessment metric
can be calculated for CobiT (Fig. 3) to arrive at the
compliance measurement. In this tree structure, each node
represents weight wi which measures relative contribution of
each event to the overall event assessing risk. Now, specific
weight distribution is beyond the scope of this paper, but
nominally they are proportional to fraction of total man-
hour an auditor spends in auditing each task. It is arrived
after extensive consultation with a number of information
system auditors who are engaged in calculating relative
weight distribution in risk management of an enterprise
undergoing Information Security Compliance. One auditor,
while checking for an organization claiming to be CobiT
compliant, may first want to verify whether identification of
strategic and tactical risk to be .2 and .05, respectively
making risk portfolio to be .25 out of .35. The auditor may
also give historical risk trends and events to be .1 making
categorizing risk to be .35 out of possible .5. The auditor
also gives identification of internal/external context of risk
assessment a value equal to .15 out of .2.
Figure 3. Assessing Risk (CobiT 4.1)
Selecting risk criteria to be .05 and goals of risk
assessment to be .01 makes establishing risk context to be
.21 out of possible .3 . The auditor also selects critical IT
objectives to be .15 out of .2. It makes assessing risk to be
.71 (.35+.21+.15). Normally, it passes for unqualified
opinion from the auditor. In this case, some most critical
observation regarding weight distribution and corresponding
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-257-8
ICAS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

evaluation by the auditor may not be out of place. Primarily,
two most important cases arise as follows:
(a) Perfect Organization: here, the auditor is satisfied about
the
procedures
followed
and
data
maintained
in
the
organization’s database and opine that the organization is
following the regulation, and gives an unqualified opinion.
(b) Imperfect Organization: here, the data and procedure
maintained by organization leaves much to be desired as
per auditing standard. Following sub-cases may arise:
(i) Qualified opinion: the auditor gives an opinion on the
organization performance and up-keeping of data and
records and methodology used in auditing process ( subject
to certain reservations).
(ii) Adverse (Negative) opinion: the auditor determines that
he does not agree with the affirmations to be made by the
respective organization. Based upon the material facts he
may give an adverse opinion on the conduct of the business,
resulting in legal, financial problems for the organization.
(iii) Disclaimer of opinions: when an auditor fails to obtain
sufficient
appropriate
audit
evidence
to
warrant
an
expression of opinion either on the conduct or on the
procedure of the business, the auditor may make a
disclaimer of opinion on the said organization.
(iv)Piecemeal opinion: such an opinion may be given in
case when the auditor concludes that he is hereby unable to
give an overall opinion on the statements and procedure of
the organization but he can express an opinion limited to
certain portion of the audit report of the organization.
In our example, the auditor may give unqualified
opinion as the bank compliance touches 71%.
VIII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed an ontology based model for
a particular standard (Cobit4.1) in information security
domain in Indian banking sector. We will conclude by
briefly
stating
some
limitations
of
our
work.
While
calculating compliance, proper attention was not paid about
organization (bank) groupings, culture and size. Due to
space
constraints,
designing
architecture
of
agents
performing compliance auditing as well as real life cases
involving missing/incomplete/ambiguous data could not be
undertaken.
For
future
direction
of
our
research,
completeness, redundancy and consistency of analysis of
information security model may be undertaken in a formal
manner and the comparative studies between different
security standards may be investigated in multiple domains.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. D. Preece, “A new approach to detecting missing
knowledge in expert system rule bases”, International
Journal of Man-Machine Studies, Vol. 38, No. 4, pp. 661-
668, April, 1993.
[2]
A. Gangemi, “Ontology Design Patterns for Semantic Web
Content”, In Proceedings of the 4th International Semantic
Web Conference (ISWC), pp. 262-276, 2005.
[3]
A.
Gómez-Pérez,
L.
M.
Fernández,
and
O.
Corcho,
“Ontological Engineering with examples from the areas of
knowledge management, e-commerce and the semantic
web”, London: Springer, 2004.
[4]
E. Sanchez, “Fuzzy Logic and the Semantic Web”, Elsevier,
2006.
[5]
G. Lau, K. H. Law, and G. Wiederhold, “Legal Information
Retrieval and Application to E-Rulemaking”, In Proceedings
of the 10th International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
and Law (ICAIL), pp. 146-154, 2005.
[6]
J. Li, “Robust Rule-Based Prediction”, IEEE Txn on
Knowledge and Data Eng. Vol 18, No. 8, August 2006.
[7]
L. Zadeh, “Fuzzy Sets”, Information and Control, Vol. 8, pp.
338-353.
[8]
Managesoft, “Managesoft Compliance Manager”, (http://
managesoft-compliance-manager.software.informer.com)
(Last access 17/3/13)
[9]
SEC, “Sarbanes Oxley Act 2002”, U.S. Securities and
Exchange Commission.
[10]
Symantec, “Improving IT Compliance: Guidance for Midsize
Organizations”, Whitepaper, July, 2006.
[11]
S. Ammar, R. Wright, and S. Selden, “Ranking State
Financial Management: A Multilevel Fuzzy Rule-based
System”, Decision Sciences 31 (2), pp. 449-482, 2000.
[12]
US Dept of Health and Human Services, “Health Insurance
Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)”,1996.
[13]
W. Siler and J. J. Buckley, “Fuzzy Expert Systems and
Fuzzy Reasoning”, John Wiley & Sons, Inc, 2005.
[14]
Indian
Banking
Fraud
Survey-2012-
Navigating
the
Challenging Environment (Deloitte February 2012).
[15]
Working
Group
on
Information
Security,
Electronic
Banking, Technology Risk Management and Cyber Frauds
(RBI,
January
2011)
(http://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/PublicationReport/Pdfs/WRE
B210111.pdf) (Last access 17/3/13).
[16]
P. Saha, N. Parameswaran, B.B. Chakraborty, and A.
Mahanti” A Formal Analysis of Fraud in Banking Sector”
46th Hawaii International Conference On System Sciences
(7-10 January, 2013 Wailea, Maui, HI 96753, USA).
[17]
AS/NZS ISO/IEC 17799:2006 Information Technology —
Security Techniques — Code of Practice for Information
security Management (July 2006).
[18]
Ernst & Young’s 2012 Global Information Security Survey
(http://www.ey.com/Publication/vwLUAssets/Fighting_to_cl
ose_the_gap:_2012_Global_Information_Security_Survey/$
FILE/2012_Global_Information_Security_Survey___Fightin
g_to_close_the_gap.pdf) (Last access 17/3/13).
[19]
A. Hevner, S. March, J. Park, and S. Ram (2004). “Design
Science in Information Systems Research”, MIS Quarterly,
Vol. 28, No. 1, pp. 75-105.
[20]
IT Governance Institute: Control Objectives for Information
and Related Technologies (COBIT) (www.itgi.org) (Last
access 17/3/13)
[21]
Bank for International Settlement (2011) ”Basel III: A
Global Regulatory Framework for more Resilient Banks and
Banking Systems” (www.bis.org ) (Last access 17/3/13)
[22]
N. K. Cicekli and Y. Yildirim “Formalizing Workflows
Using the Event Calculus”. Database and Expert Systems
Applications, Springer 2000.
[23]
K. F. Brickey, “From Enron to Worldcom and Beyond: Life
and Crime after Sarbanes-Oxley”, Washington University
Law Quarterly Vol. 81, pp. 357-401, 2003.
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-257-8
ICAS 2013 : The Ninth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

