A Control Method for Bipedal Trunk Spring Loaded Inverted
Pendulum Model
Jongwoo Lee1, Minh Nhat Vu1,2, Yonghwan Oh1,2
1Center for robotics research, Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Seoul 02792, Korea
Email: {jongwoo, oyh}@kist.re.kr
2HCI and Robotics, University of Science and Technology KIST Campus
Seoul 02792, Korea
Email: minh.vunhat@gmail.com
Abstract—In this paper, we present a control method for bipedal
robotic walking with compliant legs and upright trunk. The
proposed method is validated with dynamic simulation of a
planar, reduced-order biped walking model, consisting of a rigid
trunk and compliant legs. Existing literatures have found that
simple mass-spring model can describe dynamic characteristics
of bipedal locomotion, in terms of Ground Reaction Force (GRF)
and the Center of Mass (CoM) proﬁle. In order to explain trunk-
upright walking mechanics, a control method named the Virtual
Pivot Point (VPP) method based on the Virtual Pendulum (VP)
concept has been previously introduced. In this method, the axial
force of a compliant leg is redirected towards the VPP of the
model, which is located above the CoM of the model, in order
to provide restoring moment about trunk motion. The resulting
behaviour of the model would resemble a virtual pendulum
rotating about the VPP, thus upright trunk while walking is
pursued. However, we have found that for some cases this
method provides upsetting moment, instead of restoring moment,
which degrades the performance of the control. Inspired from
this analysis, we propose a new force-redirecting method as a
controller for robotic biped walking. We consider a dynamic
simulation of a simple, planar simple walking model to validate
the performance of the proposed method under random initial
condition and under the presence of force disturbance. The
proposed method shows stable and robust walking performance
compared to the VPP method.
Keywords–Bipedal walking control; compliant leg; reduced-
order walking model; force redirection rule.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Bipedal robotic locomotion has been an extensive ﬁeld
of research for many years in robotics research community.
Zero-moment-point (ZMP) approaches have been successful
in demonstrating robust and versatile bipedal locomotion due
to its mathematical tractability [1]–[4]. The joint trajectories
are planned assuming level-height motion of the center of
mass (CoM) of the robot with zero angular momentum and
fully-actuated legs (i.e., at least one foot is always ﬂat on
the ground with ankle actuation), while in practice under-
actuation is common in bipedal robot. In order to handle
nonlinear, underactuated, hybrid dynamics of bipedal robot,
a formal method such as hybrid zero dynamics (HZD)-based
approaches [5]–[7], or model-based trajectory optimization and
stabilization [8] have been studied deeply. However, these
methods usually require precise dynamic models. They also
require to compute periodic trajectories based on the model and
transition among different trajectories for versatile locomotion
is not a trivial problem [9]. On the other hand, some end
up with an idea that the bipedal walking controller does not
need to be complex and one can ﬁnd proper target physical
behaviours based on simple reduced-order models; then, joint
trajectories will be determined by dynamic interaction of the
robot, controller, and the environment [10]–[13].
Traditionally, the mechanics of walking and running have
been modelled with different paradigm, i.e., inverted pendulum
model for walking [14] and spring-mass model for running
[15]. After many evidences that the inverted pendulum model
cannot reproduce mechanical characteristics of walking ( [10],
[16], [17]), Geyer et al. [18] have suggested the spring-
mass model as a unifying template for bipedal locomotion;
both the fundamental characteristics of walking and running
could be reproduced by the same model with different set
of parameters. However, the point-mass conceptual models
cannot explain the upright posture of walking with non-zero
angular momentum. Therefore, robots based on the spring-
mass model concept controlled trunk position be zero and this
control was independent from the compliant leg behavior [9],
[19], [20].
Regarding this issue, Maus et al. [21] and Gruben and
Boehm [22] have investigated experimental results of different
animals and propose that the ground reaction forces (GRF) are
intersecting a single ﬁxed point above the CoM. This point is
called either the virtual pivot point (VPP) [21], or the divergent
point (DP) [22]. According to these studies, the GRFs directing
to this point generate uprighting torque to trunk, thus upright
posture is maintained while walking or running. As the force
direction could be calculated by geometrical property only,
without global orientation of the trunk, the upright posture
could be achieved with inherent mechanical property without
complex control algorithms. The concept affected controller
for biped hopping [23] but required a high-level stabilizing
controller around a pre-computed periodic trajectory as in the
formal method. Stable robotic walking with a simple controller
based on the VPP method seems hard to achieve yet [24].
In this paper, we propose a very simple form of control for
bipedal walking with trunk, inspired by the Virtual Pendulum
(VP) concept. We ﬁrst argue that having GRF towards a single
ﬁxed point such as VPP or DP is not sufﬁcient for maintaining
upright posture, even in a simple model with massless legs; a
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 1. BTSLIP model (a). The VPP model suggested by [21] (b).
Notations for parameters and variables are redeﬁned in this paper.
simple analysis supports this argument. Based on this analysis,
we propose a new GRF-redirecting control method for hip
torques; the law no longer constrains the direction of GRF
towards a single point but to the direction which is always pro-
viding a restoring moment to the body. A dynamic simulation
result demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed method.
Here, we only consider a planar simple bipedal model with
massless springy legs. The simulation results indicate that the
proposed method is a promising method for achieving stable
and robust bipedal walking.
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we
ﬁrst analyse the previous VPP method and propose a new
method. Section III gives the main results of this paper, i.e.,
planar bipedal walking simulation. Finally, we state concluding
remarks in Section
II.
CONTROL FOR UPRIGHT TRUNK
We seek for a control strategy for bipedal walking with
upright trunk that is compatible with the compliant leg scheme,
originated from spring-mass model. This type of model is
called a bipedal trunk spring loaded inverted pendulum model
(BTSLIP model [25]). An intriguing strategy named the VP
concept and the VPP method [21] have inspired our method
proposed in this section. We ﬁrst review the VPP method and
then proceed to a new method.
A. The VPP Model
The VPP model presented in [21] is illustrated in Figure
1. A planar bipedal walking model consists of a rigid trunk,
of which center of mass (CoM) is located above hip, and
two massless springy legs. This model is named the Bipedal
Trunk Spring Loaded Inverted Pendulum (BTSLIP) model
[25]. The springy legs are assumed to produce axial forces
dependent on leg deﬂection from its rest length, and each
leg is assumed to have hip torques that eventually generates
tangential component of the GRF, perpendicular to its axial
direction, between its point foot and the ground.
By introducing a variable β, a representative angle between
the direction of the GRF and the leg axis, two components of
the GRF (axial force Fr and tangential force Ft) are described
as

Fr = k(L0 − L)
Ft = Fr tan β,
(1)
where k is the stiffness of the leg and L0 is the rest length
of the spring. L is the length of the leg. In the VPP method,
the hip torque is controlled to generate tangential force Ft in
order to redirect the ground reaction force towards the VPP
located above the CoM,
Mh = LFt = LFr tan β,
where β is geometrically computed because the VPP is ﬁxed
on the trunk.
tan β =
rh sin ψ + rVPP sin(ψ − γ)
L + rh cos ψ + rVPP cos(ψ − γ).
(2)
Here, rh is the distance between CoM and hip, rVPP is the
distance between CoM and VPP, and γ is angle between torso
longitudinal axis and a line connecting CoM and VPP. L and
ψ are current leg length and angle, respectively. As originally
proposed in [21], we regard γ = 0 throughout this paper. The
insight behind the method is that the resultant GRF will always
provide restoring moment about body tilting and the model
can walk with upright trunk with this inherent mechanical
property. Although a direct feedback of orientation of the trunk
is not input to the hip torque controller, the trunk can maintain
upright position with small oscillation as if a pendulum has a
stable equilibrium point at its downright position. However, we
have found that having a single intersection point for GRFs is
not sufﬁcient to always provide restoring moment to the body.
In Figure 2, we present all possible postures of the
schematic model (trunk with a single compliant leg). The
trunk may be upright or tilted in clockwise/counter-clockwise
(CW/CCW) direction. At the same time, the foot of its stance
leg (leg in touch with the ground) may be located right below
or posterior/anterior the hip. Three possible postures of the
trunk and three possible locations of foot relative to hip give
eleven different postures to analyse. Mostly, as intended, the
GRF pointing the VPP provides restoring moment, or at worst,
zero moment. This allows the trunk be settle down in some
region without specifying a desired posture. However, in some
cases, the GRF pointing the VPP provides upsetting moment,
which would cause the trunk to fall. The postures correspond
to this case are depicted with red and shaded cells in the ﬁgure.
Although this is an analysis to a static posture, we interpret
that this property limits the performance of the model as will
be shown in Section III.
In order to provide mathematical criterion, we introduce
two variables ˜φ and ˜β, pitch orientation from upright posture
and the angle between GRF and a virtual line connecting foot
and CoM, respectively, as shown in Figure 3 (a). Note that
the direction of the GRFs with respect to the CoM direction
(˜β) is considered rather than β, because eventually this will
determine the direction of the moment applied. Then, it can be
shown that the cases which would destabilize the trunk, shown
in Figure 2, can be represented by the following condition,
˜φ · ˜β > 0.
(3)
For example, if we examine a posture in the left column
and bottom row of the Figure 2, the trunk is tilted in clock-
wise direction and foot is posterior to the hip in both postures.
However, if the controller tends to generate GRF towards the
ﬁxed VPP above the hip, in one model the resultant GRF
would provide moment in counter-clockwise direction, which
is a righting moment, whereas the moment in the other model
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 2. Representative possible postures of the VPP model are illustrated.
Among these, in four postures(red, shaded), GRF provides the trunk with
moments in destabilizing direction.
Figure 3. In order for analysis, a new variable ˜β and ˜φ are introduced (a). In
the domain of variables, the ﬁrst and the third quadrant are not allowed (b).
The controlled relation between ˜β and ˜φ must lie within the second and the
fourth quadrant.
in the shaded region will be in clock-wise direction, which
results in a upsetting moment.
From this simple analysis, we end up with several remarks.
First, a single ﬁxed intersection point such as that in the
VPP method is not sufﬁcient for upright trunk. Actually,
experimental ﬁndings indeed show that a single intersection
point is not necessary for a VP system and cannot always be
found [21]. Second, the direction of the GRF with respect to
the CoM is what important factor to consider, rather than the
position of the point where the GRF is redirected to, in order
to approach the fascinating VP concept.
B. Proposed Control Strategy
Although the ﬁxed VPP seems not sufﬁcient, the general
argument of the VP concept is still persuasive for us, in that,
the direction of force generated at foot is important in upright
trunk walking. Therefore, we keep the format of the controller
(1) such that the hip torque redirect the force generated by
the springy leg. It is also compatible with springy leg concept
which seems important in dynamic walking. The difference is
how to deﬁne the angle β.
Based on the above analysis, a proper GRF redirecting
controller should aim ˜φ · ˜β < 0, which is represented by the
region without shade in Figure 3 (a). We would like to argue
that if the generated GRF by a suitable redirecting controller
satisﬁes this condition, any form of control would work. The
simplest form we can propose for a redirecting controller is
the linear relationship as shown in Figure 3 (b).
˜β = −c˜φ,
(4)
where c is a positive gain which should be properly designed.
Noting that the speed and the direction of motion of the
planar robot model should also be considered in determining
the direction of the GRFs, we end up with the following control
form for force direction control.
˜β = −c˜φ − d ˙˜φ,
(5)
where d is another positive gain which should be properly de-
signed. Corresponding hip torques will be computed to redirect
axial leg force to desired direction with respect to CoM. The
angle between the actual leg and the virtual line from foot to
CoM can be computed from geometric information as well;
denoting this angle as ∠, tan β = tan(˜β + ∠) can be easily
computed.
C. Feasible Direction of Foot-ground Interaction Force
As the direction of the GRF is a target control parameter,
considering the constraints on the GRF becomes trivial in this
framework. Typical constraints on the ground reaction force are
friction cone and that the force is unilateral, i.e., it can only
push the ground. These constraints put limit on determining
˜β. In other words, the hip torques are uprighting the trunk as
much as possible within feasible region.
III.
SIMULATION RESULT
A. Model Description
In order to verify the proposed control method, we use
dynamic simulation. The model conﬁguration is illustrated in
Figure 1 (a). The model parameters are listed in Table I.
The equations of motion of the model can be described as
follows.









m¨x = P
i
Fx
m¨y = P
i
Fy − mg
J ¨φ = P
i
(rf − rCoM) × F
(6)
where rCoM = [x, y]T is the CoM position, rf is the foot-in-
contact position, φ is pitch angle in sagittal plane simulation.
TABLE I. MODEL PARAMETERS FOR THE SIMULATION
Parameter
Meaning
Value [unit]
m
total mass
80 [kg]
J
moment of inertia
4.58 [kg·m2]
g
gravitational acceleration
9.81 [m/s2]
k
leg stiffness
20,000 [N/m]
rh
distance between CoM and hip
0.1 [m]
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 4. State transition of each leg.
F = [Fx, Fy]T is the GRF at the foot in stance and can be
described as

Fx = Fr cos α + Ft sin α
Fy = Fr sin α − Ft cos α
(7)
where α is the angle between leg and the ground. i∈ [left,
right] denotes leg in stance.
The model can have double support, single support, and
possibly ﬂight phase as shown in Figure 4. Transition between
the phase and will not require additional computation nor
changing the form of dynamical equations, because we do not
consider impact dynamics when a swing leg touches down the
ground when the leg is assumed massless. We only need to
choose which leg provides forces to the body, i.e., choose i
properly. State transition of dynamical system is thus deter-
mined by the state transition of each leg, of which condition
can be described as follows, where x = [x, y, φ, ˙x, ˙y, ˙φ]T de-
note the state vector and C denote the admissible conﬁguration
space.
SSW→ST = {x ∈ C|yh − L0 sin α0 = 0}
SST→SW = {x ∈ C|Fr = 0}
In other words, swing to stance transition happens when the
swing leg touches down the ground with the predeﬁned angle
of attack α0, and the stance leg takes off the ground when
ground reaction force becomes zero. Here, yh is the vertical
position of the hip.
B. Sagittal Plane Walking Simulation
The dynamics of the bipedal walking model with trunk
and compliant legs is simulated for 20 seconds. Two methods,
the VPP approach and the proposed control approach, are
compared with the planar walking model in sagittal plane, of
which control parameters are listed in Table II. In Figure 5
(a) and Figure 6 (a), the trajectories of the center of mass
forward (x) and vertial (y) motion and pitch (φ) of the model
are presented. Both methods have periodic solutions, and the
simulation results are started from initial conditions a bit
deviated from the periodic solution. With this initial condition,
the proposed method quickly stabilize the model to its steady-
state motion, whereas the model with the VPP method does
not. The method cannot reject this errors. In the proposed
method, pitch motion of the model is directly fed back to
the controller and therefore the pitch stabilization is directly
achieved, whereas in the VPP model, the pitch oscillation is
maintained to some extent.
Figure 5 (b) and Figure 6 (b) present the models with the
same initial conditions but with external force disturbance of
Figure 5. Simulation results with planar bipedal walking model with the
VPP method on its sagittal plane. The response of the system without (a)
and with (b) disturbance. The trajectories after the moment that force
disturbance is applied are plotted with red.
Fdist = [45, 0]T [N] that is applied at the right foot of the
model during 0.2 seconds. This would affect both translational
motion and rotational motion. Both models could reject small
disturbances in the sense of not falling down, and this value is
chosen to show the difference between the two. It is clear that
the proposed method is more robust in the sense of not falling
down than the VPP method. The pitch motion is immediately
stabilized and at the same time, the translational motion is
indirectly stabilized by the self-stabilizing property of mass-
spring walking system [18]. However, in the VPP method,
destabilized pitch motion induced gait instability.
IV.
FUTURE WORK
We investigate the simple reduced-order models and de-
velop the control method in order to build and control a real
bipedal robotic platform. Regarding this, we present interesting
future works of our great interest.
First of all, we consider investigating the role of foot and
ankle is crucial in developing more comprehensive walking
TABLE II. CONTROL PARAMETERS FOR THE SIMULATION
Parameter
Meaning
Value [unit]
rVPP
distance between VPP and CoM
0.1 [m]
α0
ﬁxed leg touchdown angle in sagittal plane
107 [deg]
c
position-proportional gain
5 [·]
d
velocity-proportional gain
1 [s]
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 6. Simulation result with planar bipedal walking model with the
proposed method on its sagittal plane. The response of the system without
(a) and with (b) disturbance. The trajectories after the moment that force
disturbance is applied are plotted with red.
model. In robotics, in order for the task of standing still, the
foot and ankle seem crucial. On the other hand, in biomechan-
ics, the role of foot and ankle have been studied in variety of
perspective, including mechanical advantage of ankle push-off
[26]. In [27], the authors have analyzed the role of ankle and
foot in static posture, based on a similar trunk-upright control
scheme. A similar study regarding dynamic behaviour would
be interesting.
Second, as the model is based on a reduced-order model
with massless legs, implementing the principles gained from
the model onto more realistic articulated model is another
important task. There are many available techniques developed
in existing literatures, for example, readers are referred to [28].
We aim to apply the model to rigid-body articulated robotic
model and develop a detailed control algorithm.
Third, we seek for developing a full 3-d robot in the near
future, and therefore extending the model to 3-d would be
important. we believe that the same control strategy would be
valid in frontal plane (roll motion) balance, as the structure of
the proposed strategy consisting of compliant legs and force
redirecting hip torque is not restrained from sagittal plane
walking. Once planar model in frontal plane is investigated,
combining the sagittal and frontal plane control method in a
single 3-D model would be possible.
V.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel method to stabilize trunk
orientation of bipedal walking. The method is inspired from
the VP concept and the VPP method. We focus on the fact
that if the direction of the ground reaction force is computed
based on rotational motion of the trunk and the magnitude of
force which is computed based on axial compliance of the
leg, it is possible to realize bipedal walking with dynamic
characteristic of human walking. As for our future work, we
aim to employ the method in controlling articulated robot
simulation. Extending the simple model in 3-D is also of our
great interest.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. Vukobratovi´c and B. Borovac, “Zero-moment pointthirty ﬁve years
of its life,” International Journal of Humanoid Robotics, vol. 1, no. 01,
pp. 157–173, 2004.
[2]
Y. S. et al., “The intelligent asimo: system overview and integration,” in
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
vol. 3, 2002, pp. 2478–2483.
[3]
Y. Choi, D. Kim, Y. Oh, and B. J. You, “Posture/walking control for
humanoid robot based on kinematic resolution of com jacobian with
embedded motion,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 23, no. 6, pp.
1285–1293, 2007.
[4]
K. Kaneko, K. Harada, F. Kanehiro, G. Miyamori, and K. Akachi,
“Humanoid robot hrp-3,” in IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2008, pp. 2471–2478.
[5]
E. R. Westervelt, J. W. Grizzle, and D. E. Koditschek, “Hybrid zero
dynamics of planar biped walkers,” IEEE transactions on automatic
control, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 42–56, 2003.
[6]
E. R. Westervelt, J. W. Grizzle, C. Chevallereau, J. H. Choi, and
B. Morris, Feedback control of dynamic bipedal robot locomotion.
CRC press, 2007, vol. 28.
[7]
K. Sreenath, H.-W. Park, I. Poulakakis, and J. W. Grizzle, “Embedding
active force control within the compliant hybrid zero dynamics to
achieve stable, fast running on mabel,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 324–345, 2013.
[8]
I. R. Manchester, U. Mettin, F. Iida, and R. Tedrake, “Stable dynamic
walking over uneven terrain,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 265–279, 2011.
[9]
S. e. a. Rezazadeh, “Spring-mass walking with atrias in 3d: Robust gait
control spanning zero to 4.3 kph on a heavily underactuated bipedal
robot,” in ASME 2015 Dynamic Systems and Control Conference.
American Society of Mechanical Engineers, 2015, p. V001T04A003.
[10]
R. J. Full and D. E. Koditschek, “Templates and anchors: neuromechan-
ical hypotheses of legged locomotion on land,” Journal of Experimental
Biology, vol. 202, no. 23, pp. 3325–3332, 1999.
[11]
D. G. Hobbelen and M. Wisse, “Controlling the walking speed in limit
cycle walking,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 27,
no. 9, pp. 989–1005, 2008.
[12]
D. J. Braun and M. Goldfarb, “A control approach for actuated dynamic
walking in biped robots,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 25, no. 6,
pp. 1292–1303, 2009.
[13]
T. Geng and J. Q. Gan, “Planar biped walking with an equilibrium
point controller and state machines,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 253–260, 2010.
[14]
R. Alexander, “Mechanics of bipedal locomotion,” Perspectives in
experimental biology, vol. 1, pp. 493–504, 1976.
[15]
R. Blickhan, “The spring-mass model for running and hopping,” Journal
of biomechanics, vol. 22, no. 11, pp. 1217–1227, 1989.
[16]
C. R. Lee and C. T. Farley, “Determinants of the center of mass
trajectory in human walking and running.” Journal of experimental
biology, vol. 201, no. 21, pp. 2935–2944, 1998.
[17]
M. G. Pandy, “Simple and complex models for studying muscle
function in walking,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society
B: Biological Sciences, vol. 358, no. 1437, pp. 1501–1509, 2003.
[18]
H. Geyer, A. Seyfarth, and R. Blickhan, “Compliant leg behaviour
explains basic dynamics of walking and running,” Proceedings of the
Royal Society of London B: Biological Sciences, vol. 273, no. 1603, pp.
2861–2867, 2006.
[19]
M. H. Raibert, Legged robots that balance.
MIT press, 1986.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

[20]
C. e. a. Hubicki, “Atrias: Design and validation of a tether-free
3d-capable spring-mass bipedal robot,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 35, no. 12, pp. 1497–1521, 2016.
[21]
H.-M. Maus, S. Lipfert, M. Gross, J. Rummel, and A. Seyfarth, “Upright
human gait did not provide a major mechanical challenge for our
ancestors,” Nature Communications, vol. 1, p. 70, 2010.
[22]
K. G. Gruben and W. L. Boehm, “Force direction pattern stabilizes
sagittal plane mechanics of human walking,” Human movement science,
vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 649–659, 2012.
[23]
M. A. e. a. Sharbaﬁ, “Controllers for robust hopping with upright trunk
based on the virtual pendulum concept,” in IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems(IROS).
IEEE, 2012,
pp. 2222–2227.
[24]
A. T. Peekema, “Template-based control of the bipedal robot atrias,”
Master’s thesis, OSU, 2015.
[25]
M. A. Sharbaﬁ, C. Maufroy, M. N. Ahmadabadi, M. J. Yazdanpanah,
and A. Seyfarth, “Robust hopping based on virtual pendulum posture
control,” Bioinspiration & biomimetics, vol. 8, no. 3, p. 036002, 2013.
[26]
A. D. Kuo, “Choosing your steps carefully,” IEEE Robotics & Automa-
tion Magazine, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 18–29, 2007.
[27]
K. G. Gruben and W. L. Boehm, “Ankle torque control that shifts the
center of pressure from heel to toe contributes non-zero sagittal plane
angular momentum during human walking,” Journal of biomechanics,
vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 1389–1394, 2014.
[28]
G. Garofalo, C. Ott, and A. Albu-Schffer, “Walking control of fully
actuated robots based on the bipedal slip model,” in 2012 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, May 2012, pp.
1456–1463.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

