Enhancing Autonomous Systems’Awareness: Conceptual Categorization of Anomalies
by Temporal Change During Real-Time Operations
Rialda Spahic
Engineering Cybernetics
Norwegian University of
Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
email: rialda.spahic@ntnu.no
Vidar Hepsø
Geoscience and Petroleum
Norwegian University of
Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
email: vidar.hepso@ntnu.no
Mary Ann Lundteigen
Engineering Cybernetics
Norwegian University of
Science and Technology
Trondheim, Norway
email: mary.a.lundteigen@ntnu.no
Abstract—The Unmanned Autonomous Systems (UAS) are an-
ticipated to have a permanent role in offshore operations, enhanc-
ing personnel, environmental, and asset safety. These systems can
alert onshore operators of hazardous occurrences in the environ-
ment, in the form of anomalies in data, during real-time inspec-
tions, enabling early prevention of hazardous events. Time series
data, collected by sensors that detect environmental phenomena,
enables the observation of anomalous data as dynamic instances
of the dataset. Recent research characterizes anomalies in terms of
their patterns of occurrence in data. However, there is insufficient
research on anomalous temporal change patterns. In this paper,
we examine anomalies in relation to one another and propose
a conceptual categorization system for anomalies based on their
temporal changes. We demonstrate the categorization through a
case study of potentially hazardous occurrences observed by UAS
during underwater pipeline inspection.Analyzing anomalies based
on their behavior can provide further information about current
environmental changes and enable the early discovery of unwanted
events, simultaneously minimizing false alarms that overwhelm the
systems with low-significance information in real-time.
Keywords—anomalies, anomalous change detection, anomaly
detection, time-series analysis, autonomous systems
I. INTRODUCTION
Sensors integrated into Unmanned Autonomous Systems
(UAS), such as underwater autonomous vehicles, are reshaping
our perception of the world by detecting environmental phe-
nomena and responding to them through inputs such as graphics,
motion, pressure, and heat. Underwater UAS, particularly in the
offshore industry, are intended to replace operators in remote
and potentially dangerous locations by residing on the seabed,
collecting the data, and continuously monitoring and inspect-
ing assets and the environment. In crucial situations, real-time
data collection and analysis of the environment or assets can
provide critical information, signaling us of potentially harmful
deviations within the data, known as anomalies. Failure to
capture anomalies effectively can have a devastating effect on
the environment and result in severe financial loss.
Despite their ample presence in research and industry,
anomaly detection methods have not yet matured as they are
frequently too specialized or complex to evaluate [1]. Detecting
anomalies, particularly for time-series data, is a challenging task
that needs real-time processing while learning from analyzed
data and making predictions [2]. Most anomaly detection meth-
ods are based on statistical samples of some data regions col-
lected over time [3]. When the input data for these data regions
changes, it becomes challenging to select the most appropri-
ate strategy for detecting anomalies [3]. More compellingly,
it becomes challenging to detect anomalies and capture their
changing nature in real-time. The anomalous change detection
method searches for unusual discrepancies between measure-
ments taken at the same site at various periods [4]. These
discrepancies may be due to harmless changes in atmosphere
or sensor equipment. However, they may also be pervasive and
potentially indicative of something hazardous evolving at the
monitored site, i.e., a deteriorating material of a pipeline surface
at the offshore oil and gas platform. Unfortunately, anomaly
detection methods can have two significant drawbacks: they
can ignore anomalies for the sake of efficiency as tolerable
collateral damage [5], or they can overload the system with
low-significance data, referred to as false alarms or noise [6].
The ideal outcome of anomaly detection is to alert operators
of anomalous occurrences as soon as they are detected while
minimizing false alarms [2].
Historically, anomalies have been defined primarily by their
pattern of occurrence in data. However, there is insufficient
investigation and categorization of anomalies based on how
they relate to one another, particularly by the patterns of their
temporal change. The time-series data enables the collection and
observation of anomalies as dynamic instances of data that alter,
evolve, disappear, and reappear. Therefore, this paper’s contri-
butions is a conceptual categorization of anomalies according
to patterns of their temporal change, through an overview of the
identification of anomalies during time-series change detection.
Analyzing anomalies based on their behavior can provide more
information about current environmental changes and allow for
the early detection of anomalous, potentially hazardous occur-
rences in real-time. Consequentially, analyzing anomalies by
their behavior can assist in minimizing false alarms by allowing
for the more certain elimination of noisy data.
This paper is structured as follows: Section II discusses
related
work
exploring
anomalies’
characteristics
and
categorization, anomalous change detection methods, and
real-time anomaly detection. In Section III, we describe the
proposed anomaly categorization according to their temporal
changes. Section IV summarizes the findings and concludes
the paper. Finally, Section V discusses future research.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

II. RELATED WORK
A. Anomaly Characteristics and Categorization
Anomalies are instances in a dataset that are unusual in
some way and deviate from the dataset’s overall or predicted
trend [7]. There have been numerous attempts in the literature
to categorize anomalies based on their presence in data, the
data structures in which they arise, or even application-specific
high-level categorization.
1) Anomalies by Data Structure: In a recent review on
the nature and categories of anomalies, Foorthius [1] presents
an overview of anomaly categories from a data-centric
perspective. Because most datasets follow a well-defined,
organized format, the author [1] describes the anomalies by
examining the data structures that include them: cross-sectional,
time-series, time-oriented, sequence, graph, tree, spatial, and
spatio-temporal data structures. The author [1] then divides
anomalies into univariate, multivariate, and multivariate
aggregate anomalies, each of which includes numerical, class,
or categorical anomalies and mixed data anomalies.
2) Anomalies by Occurrence in Data: While categorizing
anomalies according to the data structure in which they occur
simplifies their detection, the literature most often refers to a
more general approach to anomaly categorization [8]:
• Global anomaly - one or more independent data points that
deviate from the rest of the data. Global anomalies are
alternatively referred to as point, and content anomalies [9]
[10].
• Collective anomalies - a group of data points that differ
from the rest of the data. When observed individually,
these points often do not constitute an anomaly. Collective
anomalies are alternatively referred to as group or aggre-
gate anomalies.
• Contextual anomalies - anomalies that deviate when an
intentionally chosen context is considered, i.e., weather,
season, or location. Contextual anomalies are alternatively
referred to as conditional anomalies [11].
3) Anomalies by Data Source: According to Erhan et al.,
[12], sensor systems have become the primary source of data.
Therefore, the authors [12] categorize anomalies according to
their origins and potential causes (see Table I). Sensor data
frequently deviate from predicted behavior. The authors [12]
underline the importance of evaluating the performance of
anomaly detection systems using physical world data, as op-
posed to virtual testing with simulators. Since anomalies occur
suddenly and are frequently unusual in physical world data,
artificially manufacturing them through simulations or data ex-
trapolation can be challenging.
TABLE I
ANOMALY CATEGORIZATION BY ORIGIN, ADAPTED FROM ERHAN ET AL. [12]
Anomaly origin
Potential cause
Environment
Unusual events, disasters, weather changes,
new objects or compounds
System
Hardware limitations, system malfunctions
Communication
Network loss or delay
Attacks
Malevolent attacks on the physical components,
malevolent interference or attack in network
Spike
Short peak in measured values,
distinct deviation from common measurements
Noise
Increase in the variance in successive data samples
Constant
A constant neutral value reported by sensor
Drift
Off-set in the measurements
4) Application-Defined and Specific Anomaly Types:
Ragozin et al. [13] approached forecasting complex time-series
within an automated industrial system by basing anomalies
on their distinct dynamic characteristics to increase the ef-
ficiency of information security management within the ob-
served system. The authors [13] developed a method based on
structural analysis of multi-component time series and digital
signal processing technology for decomposing complex multi-
component time series into several essential components for fur-
ther real-time monitoring of the industrial information system
and detecting any component-specific behavior anomaly event
or proximity to such event.
Lutz et al. [14] analyzed operational safety-critical anoma-
lies. The authors [14] argue that despite the widely-established
benefits of anomaly analysis for operational software, research
on anomaly analysis for safety-critical systems has been sparse.
Patterns of software anomaly data for operational, safety-critical
systems, in particular, are poorly known [14]. The authors [14]
describe the findings of two hundred abnormalities on seven
spacecraft systems using classification methods. The results of
their study demonstrated various classification patterns, includ-
ing the causal significance of data access and delivery issues,
hardware degradation, and unusual incidents. Anomalies fre-
quently revealed hidden software needs critical for the system’s
robust, accurate operation [14].
B. Anomalous Change Detection
In a recent review of change detection, Liu et al. [15] clas-
sify change detection methods based on their application pur-
pose, data availability, and automation degree. The authors [15]
describe anomalous change detection, and time-series change
detection as application-specific methods most frequently used
in image analysis. By suppressing background and emphasiz-
ing alterations, anomalous change detection finds anomalous
changes between images. Anomalous change detection is typ-
ically focused on detecting minor changes caused by the inser-
tion, deletion, or movement of produced small items and on
small stationary objects that exhibit spectrum shifts between
images, as with camouflage concealment and deception [15].
The authors [15] argue that the critical point is to examine the
image statistics, increase the likelihood of detecting changes
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Fig. 1. (a,b) Predictable change in image contrast and brightnes; (c,d) Interesting
change with (artificially) added vehicle, adapted from [4]
induced by human activity, and suppress background in image
scene sequences.
Theiler et al. [4] employed anomaly detection to identify
uncommon changes in images of the same scene captured at
various periods and often under varying viewing conditions (see
Figure 1). The detection of anomalous changes in imaging is
of broad general interest and is particularly useful in remote
sensing [4]. The authors [4] emphasize that anomalous change
is distinct from and more unusual than changes across an entire
scene. The authors [4] propose a framework based on a non-
flat background distribution stated in terms of data distribution,
with anomaly detection treated as a classification problem.
The proposed framework identifies anomalous changes cap-
turing meaningful differences between images while avoiding
predictable noisy information caused by the camera’s focus,
contrast, or brightness.
C. Time-Series Anomaly Detection
Although many organizations collect time-series data, Fer-
emans et al. [16] contend that automatically analyzing them
and extracting valuable knowledge, such as a comprehensible
model that flags critical anomalies, remains a complex problem,
despite decades of effort. After examining various benchmark
datasets for time series anomaly detection, the authors [16]
discovered that these datasets frequently contain univariate time
series with local or global extrema or point anomalies. By
contrast, their research concentrated on collective and contex-
tual anomalies, requiring data analysis from multiple sources
to detect anomalies successfully. As a result, the authors [16]
proposed a method for detecting anomalies in mixed-type time
series. The method uses frequent pattern mining methods to cre-
ate an embedding of mixed-type time series to train a prevalent
anomaly detection method, isolation forest. Assuming that the
anomalies are infrequent in the data, the isolation forest isolates
them by continually splitting the data with low computational
costs [17]. Experiments on multiple real-world univariate and
multivariate time series and a synthetic mixed-type time series
demonstrate that the proposed method outperforms established
anomaly detection methods such as MatrixProfile, Pav, Mifpod,
and Fpof [16].
Hannon et al. [18] used anomaly detection on streaming data
to explain a power-grid system’s real-time behavior and provide
insight to system operators. The authors examined a real-time
anomaly detection followed by a data-driven framework based
on the statistical machine learning methods (decision trees and
k-nearest neighbors) to enable the remote analysis of individual
grid components for monitoring, detecting, and classifying
anomalies that generate warnings of possible shortcomings
in the system. They [18] concluded that classification of
identified anomalies using well-defined probabilistic scores
and classification of detected anomalies using interpretable
decision trees demonstrates a high level of accuracy, as a result
enabling operators to take corrective action to avert cascading
blackouts and prevent system failures.
Previous research has established a variety of applications for
anomaly detection and a need for a more profound comprehen-
sion of anomalies. In a discussion paper Anomalousness: How to
measure what you can’t define, Theiler [19] describes anomaly
detection as target detection with unknown targets and with the
objective to differentiate anomalies (unknown targets with stub-
bornly undefined attributes) from a background that is generally
too cluttered to support an explicit model. Despite the chal-
lenges in defining and categorizing anomalies, the outcomes
and discussions of previous studies demonstrate a promising
direction in application-specific and dynamic-oriented anomaly
categorization.
III. CATEGORIZATION OF ANOMALIES BASED ON THEIR
TEMPORAL CHANGES
After decades of research on anomaly detection, selecting
anomalies to investigate and those to disregard as noise contin-
ues to be a complex problem, particularly with the pressure of a
growing need for autonomous systems. Given the poor camera
vision and ambiguous sensor inputs in the subsea environment
[20], it is only natural to assume that strange phenomena,
such as biological growth or misplaced objects, are frequently
misinterpreted. This misinterpretation can further result in the
misallocation of resources or the omission of signs indicating
a more hazardous occurrence. Using inspiration from prior re-
search on grouping time-series data [21] and integrating time-
series and event logs into itemsets [16], we open opportunities
to investigate prospects for isolating and analyzing changes
in anomalies based on their geospatial context. By combining
insights from time-series change detection on dynamic data
points [21]–[23] with application-specific anomalies [14] [24],
we observe that anomalies can display behavioral patterns such
as frequent or reoccurring, disappearing and reappearing, and
expanding.
a) Frequent or Recurring Anomalies: Feremans et al.
[16] discuss frequent patterns in data, assuming that because
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Fig. 2.
(a) Visual inspection of underwater pipeline, images taken by au-
tonomous underwater vehicle, adapted from [20]; (b) 3D scan over the under-
water pipeline, adapted from [20]
anomalous activity infrequently occurs in time series, the fre-
quent patterns represent frequently seen normal behavior. The
main advantage of frequent pattern extraction is that the ex-
tracted patterns are easily interpretable and aid classifiers and
anomaly detection methods in differentiating between normal
and anomalous behavior in data. However, it might quickly
become problematic if an anomalous event occurs repeatedly or
in patterns.Anomalies that reoccur in patterns, hence generating
a recurrent pattern in obtained data, present a concern because
they can be difficult to spot or even mistaken as part of the
normal dataset. Normal data can mask these anomalies, mak-
ing it particularly difficult to detect when using unsupervised
methods.
A practical example, seen on Figure 2, is the pipeline
with unclear surface material, provided by images collected
during a visual inspection of sea bottom infrastructure by an
autonomous underwater vehicle. Visually inspecting structures
can detect various phenomena, from object detection to material
degradation such as corrosion monitoring [25]. However, a
less intrusive process, such as biological growth, happens
frequently and can readily obscure a more intrusive process,
corrosion. Although additional measurements like ultrasonic
testing and electromagnetic mapping are used to identify
additional information about the corrosion process, the pace
of corrosion (spread over time), the exact location, and even
plausible causes [25], relying on unsupervised visual inspection
of anomalies may not be sufficient.
b) Disappearing and Reappearing Anomalies: Although
disappearing anomalies are not usually mentioned in indus-
trial anomaly detection applications, they are a fairly common
topic in stock market anomaly detection. During the analysis of
the dynamic persistence of anomalies, Marquering et al. [26]
highlighted the occurrences of disappearing and reappearing
anomalies. Since most seasonal or predictable anomalies are
well-known, they should not persist [26]. However, the authors
[26] question the persistence of such anomalies as a source of
contention. They highlight essential questions on disappearing
and reappearing anomalies in data: Are there still anomalies in
recent data? Are they just existent during specific periods, or
did they completely vanish? What is the immediate cause of the
endurance of the anomaly? The occurrence of disappearing and
reappearing anomalies may be of interest in time-series change
detection for various applications.
During a real-time inspection of an underwater pipeline,
as depicted in Figure 3, recordings of fading unusual events
may represent a low-importance environmental phenomenon
that does not require comprehensive inspection, thus saving
additional resource allocation. However, the persistence of
such occurrences may represent something of more profound
research interest [26].
c) ExpandingAnomalies: As the environment evolves and
changes over time, assuming that anomalous occurrences will
exhibit similar changes is natural. Despite anomalies’ dynamic
and evolving nature being frequently discussed in sensor net-
works, it is not often discussed in other applications. What
appears to be an innocuous anomaly may grow to affect various
regions of the inspected structure. The purpose is to identify the
onset of the anomaly as fast as feasible while maintaining a low
false alarm rate [23]. This detection problem is formulated as a
stochastic optimization problem utilizing a delay metric based
on the anomaly’s worst-case path [23]. In Figure 4, we illustrate
a point anomaly (Figure 4 (a)) expanding into a collective
anomaly (Figure 4 (b-j)). At an early stage (Figure 4 (a)), the
detected point anomaly or a smaller collection of anomalies
may not yet indicate a high-significance unusual occurrence.
However, if unexplored, the anomalous collection may develop
into a possibly hazardous state (Figure 4 (j)), leaving less time
for a reactive response. Detecting anomalies early enables pre-
ventative measures. Expanding fractures of the pipeline surface
material are a practical example of expanding anomalies during
an underwater pipeline inspection.
Fig. 3.
(a) Visual inspection of underwater pipeline, images taken by au-
tonomous underwater vehicle: Possible material degradation or biological
growth?, adapted from [20]; (b) 3D scan over the underwater pipeline, adapted
from [20]
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Fig. 4. Anomalies that expand over time
TABLE II
DESCRIBING ANOMALIES BY TEMPORAL CHANGE
Anomaly Type
Frequent / Recurring
Disappearing and Reappearing
Expanding
Point
Frequently
occurring
point
anomaly.
Disappearing and reappearing point
anomaly may be a sign of pervasive
environmental phenomena.
Point anomaly may evolve into a
collective anomaly of larger size
and impact.
Collective
Frequently occurring collection of
anomalies with similar properties
(i.e., geospatial context).
Disappearing and reappearing col-
lective anomaly may be a sign of
pervasive environmental phenom-
ena.
Collective anomalies may evolve
into a more intrusive anomalous oc-
currence of larger size and impact.
Contextual
Anomalous depending on the con-
text due to a potential risk of being
misinterpreted as normal and left
unexposed or a frequent anomaly
collection obscuring more intrusive
processes.
Context
(i.e.,
geospatial,
seasonal,
weather)
aids
in
determining
the
anomalousness
of
the
disappearing/reappearing
phenomena and finding the causes
of their persistence.
Anomalous depending on the con-
text.
The proposed conceptual categorization of anomalies accord-
ing to their temporal changes does not impede their occurrence
in data as point, collective, and contextual anomalies. Table II
summarizes the two categories that are intended to complement
one another, aiding in our comprehension of unusual events
occurring during autonomous operations. Anomalies’ behavior
is highly dependent on context, not just on their occurrence
as a single point or collection of anomalies. The criticality of
frequently occurring point and collective anomalies varies by
context, as they may be seen as normal and therefore obscure
more intrusive processes. This increases the likelihood that the
unexposed anomaly may develop into a potentially hazardous
event that could have been discovered earlier. Similarly, the
context (i.e., seasonal, weather) of disappearing and reappearing
anomalies can aid in identifying the cause of their pervasiveness
and provide additional reasoning for unanticipated environmen-
tal phenomena. Additionally, the point anomaly may expand
creating a collective anomaly of more impactable volume and
intrusiveness. Contextual information (e.g., changed material
properties due to chemical or temperature variations) can as-
sist in determining the criticality and anomality of observed
unanticipated changes. Observing and categorizing anomalies
according to their temporal changes adds context to our un-
derstanding of how anomalies relate to one another and evolve
in a normal and predictable data environment. This knowledge
enables the UAS to perceive environmental phenomena and
anomalous events in their geospatial and temporal context,
improving understanding of the significance and criticality of
anomalous occurrences.
IV. CONCLUSION
The research on time-series anomaly detection has been
application-oriented and vague. Despite decades of research and
categorization approaches, persistent obstacles prevent anomaly
detection from maturing and becoming a dependable compo-
nent of autonomous systems. While an unsupervised and data-
driven strategy is common in industry and research, it is in-
sufficient to achieve reliable autonomy. Therefore, this paper
proposes a fundamentally different perspective of anomalies
via a conceptual categorization of anomalies according to their
temporal changes. Frequent or recurrent, disappearing and reap-
pearing, and expanding anomalies describe the behavior of
anomalies and provide context for their dynamics observed
through time-series data analysis. Observing anomalies as they
evolve through time enables us to deduce the underlying causes
of anomalous occurrences, focusing on more pertinent data from
the vast collections of sensor measurements, thus allowing the
UAS to react if and when the situation requires it during real-
time operations.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

V. FUTURE WORK
We regard our approach of categorizing anomalies according
to their temporal change as a starting point for future research
to construct a framework for detecting anomalous change in
real-time by identifying practical time-series anomaly detec-
tion methods. Thus, future work involves simulating streaming
data and analyzing images collected by the UAS during visual
inspection of an underwater pipeline to validate the proposed
temporal categorization of anomalies and identify potential
shortcomings.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is a part of BRU21 – NTNU Research and
Innovation Program on Digital and Automation Solutions for
the Oil and Gas Industry (www.ntnu.edu/bru21) and supported
by Equinor.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Foorthuis, “On the nature and types of anomalies: a review of devia-
tions in data,” Int. J. Data Sci. Anal., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 297–331, 2021.
[2] A. Lavin and S. Ahmad, “Evaluating Real-time Anomaly Detection Al-
gorithms - the Numenta Anomaly Benchmark,” in IEEE 14th Int. Conf.
Mach. Learn. Appl. ICMLA 2015.
Miami, Florida, USA: Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., 2015, pp. 38–44.
[3] A. S. Alghawli, “Complex methods detect anomalies in real time based
on time series analysis,” Alexandria Eng. J., vol. 61, no. 1, pp. 549–561,
2022.
[4] J. Theiler and S. Perkins, “Proposed framework for anomalous change de-
tection,” in ICML Work. Mach. Learn. Algorithms Surveill. Event Detect.,
2006, pp. 7–14.
[5] K. Makhlouf, S. Zhioua, and C. Palamidessi, “On the applicability of ML
fairness notions,” arXiv, pp. 1–32, 2020.
[6] R. Sekar et al., “Specification-basedAnomaly Detection:ANewApproach
for Detecting Network Intrusions,” in Proc. 9th ACM Conf. Comput.
Commun. Secur. - CCS ’02.
New York, NY, USA: Association for
Computing Machinery, 2002, pp. 265–274.
[7] C. C. Aggarwal, “An Introduction to Outlier Analysis,” in Outlier Anal.
Springer, Cham, 2017, ch. 1, pp. 1–34.
[8] V. Chandola, A. Banerjee, and V. Kumar, “Anomaly detection,” ACM
Comput. Surv., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–22, jul 2009.
[9] A. Fisch, I. Eckley, and P. Fearnhead, “Subset Multivariate CollectiveAnd
Point Anomaly Detection,” J. Comput. Graph. Stat., pp. 1–51, 2019.
[10] M. A. Hayes and M. A. Capretz, “Contextual anomaly detection in big
sensor data,” in Proc. - 2014 IEEE Int. Congr. Big Data, BigData Congr.
2014.
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers Inc., sep 2014,
pp. 64–71.
[11] S. Xiuyao, W. Mingxi, C. Jermaine, and S. Ranka, “Conditional anomaly
detection,” IEEE Trans. Knowl. Data Eng., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 631–644,
may 2007.
[12] L. Erhan et al., “Smart anomaly detection in sensor systems: A multi-
perspective review,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 67, no. September 2020, pp. 64–79,
2021.
[13] A. N. Ragozin, V. F. Telezhkin, and P. S. Podkorytov, “Forecasting
complex multi-component time series within systems designed to detect
anomalies in dataflows of industrial automated systems,” ACM Int. Conf.
Proceeding Ser., pp. 1–5, 2019.
[14] R. R. Lutz and I. C. Mikulski, “Empirical analysis of safety-critical
anomalies during operations,” IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., vol. 30, no. 3,
pp. 172–180, mar 2004.
[15] S. Liu, D. Marinelli, L. Bruzzone, and F. Bovolo, “A review of change
detection in multitemporal hyperspectral images: Current techniques, ap-
plications, and challenges,” IEEE Geosci. Remote Sens. Mag., vol. 7,
no. 2, pp. 140–158, 2019.
[16] L. Feremans et al., “Pattern-Based Anomaly Detection in Mixed-Type
Time Series,” Mach. Learn. Knowl. Discov. Databases, vol. 11906, pp.
240–256, 2020.
[17] F. T. Liu, K. M. Ting, and Z. H. Zhou, “Isolation forest,” in Proc. - IEEE
Int. Conf. Data Mining, ICDM.
IEEE, 2008, pp. 413–422.
[18] C. Hannon, D. Deka, D. Jin, M. Vuffray, and A. Y. Lokhov, “Real-time
Anomaly Detection and Classification in Streaming PMU Data,” in 2021
IEEE Madrid PowerTech.
Madrid: IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[19] J. Theiler, “Anomalousness: how to measure what you can’t define,”
Fourier Transform Spectrosc. Hyperspectral Imaging Sound. Environ., p.
JT1A.2, 2015.
[20] G. L. Foresti, “Visual inspection of sea bottom structures by an au-
tonomous underwater vehicle,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man, Cybern. Part B
Cybern., vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 691–705, oct 2001.
[21] T. Rakthanmanon, E. J. Keogh, S. Lonardi, and S. Evans, “Time series
epenthesis: Clustering time series streams requires ignoring some data,”
Proc. - IEEE Int. Conf. Data Mining, ICDM, pp. 547–556, 2011.
[22] S. Guggilam, V. Chandola, andA. Patra, “Tracking clusters and anomalies
in evolving data streams,” Stat. Anal. Data Min. ASA Data Sci. J., vol. 15,
no. 2, pp. 156–178, 2021.
[23] G. Rovatsos, V. V. Veeravalli, D. Towsley, and A. Swami, “Quickest
Detection of Growing Dynamic Anomalies in Networks,” ICASSP, IEEE
Int. Conf. Acoust. Speech Signal Process. - Proc., vol. 2020-May, pp.
8926–8930, may 2020.
[24] T. Wang, C. Fang, D. Lin, and S. F. Wu, Localizing temporal anomalies in
large evolving graphs.
Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
Publications, 2015.
[25] Y. T.Al-Janabi, “Monitoring of Downhole Corrosion:An Overview,” Soc.
Pet. Eng. - SPE Saudi Arab. Sect. Tech. Symp. Exhib. 2013, pp. 108–118,
may 2013.
[26] W. Marquering, J. Nisser, and T. Valla, “Disappearing anomalies: A
dynamic analysis of the persistence of anomalies,” Appl. Financ. Econ.,
vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 291–302, 2006.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

