Simplified Fuzzy Dynamic Cognitive Maps Applied to the Maintenance 
Management of Electric Motors
Patrick P. Soares/ Lucas B. de Souza/ Márcio 
Mendonça 
DAELE (Electric Department)  
UTFPR-CP 
Cornélio Procópio, Brazil 
{p.prietosoares, lucasbotoni}@hotmail.com 
mendonca@utfpr.edu.br 
Ivan Rossato Chrun1 / Michelle E. C. Rocha2 
1CPGEI 
1UTFPR-CT / 2SEJU 
1,2Curitiba, Brazil 
{ivanchrun, melizacrocha}@gmail.com 
 
Abstract— Systems and machines must operate under 
satisfactory conditions to attest to the quality of its production. 
Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps based in concepts of the Reliability 
Centered Maintenance in order to obtain quantitative feedback 
to support the decision-making process and maintenance 
strategy, as proposed in this research, one can propose great 
reliability. 
This 
article 
presents 
Reliability 
Centered 
Maintenance (RCM) through a generic maintenance checklist for 
electric motors. Through fault and / or fault correction 
maintenance procedures, a simplified Cognitive Fuzzy Dynamic 
Map (sDFCM) that will present a quantitative diagnosis offering 
a computational tool to assist in maintenance management, 
providing upgrades to the system or machine can model it. 
 
Keywords— Reliability Centered Maintenance, Management 
Maintenance, Electric Motors, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps, Quantitative 
Analysis. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The rapid development of the industrial process, from the 
Industrial Revolution (seventeenth century), provoked within 
the industry, as a whole, the technological evolution. This fact 
has changed the importance of maintenance, aiming to provide 
greater quality and competitiveness for the manufacturing 
sector. This scenario indicates that more and more companies, 
to achieve what is called "World-Class Performance", are 
demanding great efforts to improve quality, productivity, and 
reduce costs, having a direct impact on effective maintenance 
[1]. 
Electric motors are extremely energy efficient. These 
devices, in a production system due to their importance, must 
have a maintenance schedule. Although engines have highly 
efficient parts,  like any other equipment, are still susceptible 
to failure. When the fault happens, the drive can be sent to be 
rewound or a new engine is purchased to replace the faulty 
one. Failure of the electric motor may result in loss of capacity 
as well as excessive repair and maintenance costs. 
By routinely performing corrective, preventive and 
predictive tasks, the life of an engine can be extended, and it is 
efficiency 
improved. 
Some 
companies 
describe 
their 
maintenance procedures so that each maintenance team 
follows the same methodology. On the other hand, in most 
countries of the world, electric motors consume up about 66% 
of the electricity generated. On average, the energy consumed 
by an induction motor during its life cycle is 60–100 times the 
initial cost of the motor [2]. 
For Tsang, the evolution of maintenance techniques and 
methods needs to prioritize current operational strategies, 
expectations of environmental preservation and security by 
society, technological changes, increasing environmental and 
organizational changes [3]. Thus, the main objective is to 
present the methodology MRC - Maintenance Reliability 
Centered regarding an analysis in electric motors. The specific 
objectives of this work are to present a brief rationale on 
Reliability Centered Maintenance, to suggest Fuzzy Cognitive 
Maps (FCM) to quantify maintenance reliability and provide 
maintenance 
reliability 
level 
feedback. 
However, 
the 
suggested FCM is still at the level of belief, that is, according 
to the view of experts or specialists. So, the need for 
maintenance management of this equipment becomes 
essential. Conceptually, maintenance is the activity that seeks 
to preserve the technical characteristics of an equipment at the 
level of its specified performance. 
The maintenance of equipment and machinery must include 
technical knowledge and administrative procedures to 
maintain its characteristics of functionality, safety and 
environmental. Otherwise, the maintenance must allow the 
equipment to operate ensuring the continuous production of 
the company and / or industry, besides preventing failures that 
may partially or fully harm the production line involved. 
The application of maintenance strategies focuses directly 
on the particularities of the aging stage of equipment and 
installations. According to the concept of maintenance and 
conservation of machines and equipment, it can be mentioned 
the Reliability Centered Maintenance (RCM) methodology, 
which is oriented to failures and defects of machines or 
systems. In short, RCM, in its classic form, is the application 
of a structured method to establish the best maintenance 
strategy for a given system or equipment. Thus, the concepts 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

of failure and structured analysis will be used in the 
development of this research. Even though the proposed tool 
is in an initial stage, it can be extended and applied in others 
devices, such as electrical transformers with different powers 
and specifications. 
The main goal of this work is to develop a methodology for 
the creation of maintenance indicators in industrial electric 
motors, which will be used to achieve strategic planning in 
favor of a continuous improvement in the productive process 
of goods and services. The specific goal of this work is to 
present a brief background on maintenance’s aspects to 
suggest the Simplified Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Maps 
(sDFCM) to quantify the maintenance reliability level. 
The structure of this paper is as it follows. Section 2 
conceptualizes 
aspects 
of 
maintenance 
and 
industrial 
maintenance. Section 3 discusses the main aspects of FCM and 
sDFCM, and presents the approach towards maintenance 
management inspired on RCM applied in electric motors. 
Section 4 presents the simulated results, and Section 5 
concludes the paper and suggests future works. 
II. 
MAINTENANCE MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS 
The management of maintenance systems is a complex 
activity, especially when there are several contracting 
companies acting as executors of planned and emergency 
activities. In particular, the maintenance of electrical motors, 
due to the need of uninterrupted work in factory floor [4]. 
In industrial plants, the stoppage for maintenance, in 
general, generates concern about the scheduling and production 
progress. The organization must be structured with the purpose 
of fulfilling the binding requirements, relating technics in the 
manufacturing process, the personnel involved with the 
product and maintenance of the machines used in the 
manufacturing process and the type of product to be 
manufactured. 
The adaptation of all administrative practices with technical 
and supervisory actions, which happens through direct or 
indirect equipment processes, shall be aimed at ensuring the 
safety and efficiency of the functions and standards required in 
the manufacture or service supply in which the equipment was 
designed for. 
Managing equipment requires a maintenance routine that 
must involve several actions that configure the best functioning 
and allow reliability in the process in which it is inserted, such 
as electrical motors in discharge conveyor. In this context, the 
development of a strategy that indicates reliability levels can be 
used to help in the management of the maintenance, identifying 
points of possible improvements in the quality, e.g. the 
technical knowledge of the manpower. 
It is not the scope of this work to substantiate the types of 
maintenance. Only the concepts required for maintenance 
management inspired by the RCM technique by means of an 
sDFCM will be aproached. 
The types of classic maintenance considered in the 
development of this work are: 
 Corrective Maintenance: performed when a failure 
occurs over certain equipment. It can be planned when 
the equipment indicates symptoms that its operation is 
not under normal conditions, or that the cost-benefit 
relation to Preventive Maintenance is more interesting 
and profitable. It is also identified as unplanned, where 
an unexpected failure occurs and a rapid corrective 
action is required. 
 Preventive Maintenance: indicated when it is necessary 
to replace parts or recover the equipment. This type of 
maintenance analyzes the best moment for the 
maintenance to happen in critical equipment, preventing 
the manifestation of failures. 
 Predictive 
Maintenance: 
it 
requires 
a 
constant 
monitoring 
of 
the 
equipment 
through 
more 
sophisticated instruments, which allows equipment’s 
maintenance before a break happens and it stops 
working. Some of the main methods used to monitor 
equipment, vibration analysis, thermography analysis, 
noise analysis, insulation resistance, rolling check 
among other potential problems.  
The goal of this work is to develop a maintenance strategy 
inspired by the RCM through the occurrence of faults and 
defects, and predictive and preventive maintenance levels in 
industrial electric motors, aiming the construction of a tool to 
assist on decision-making process regarding failures and 
defects, especially failures. Thereby, it is important to define: 
 Defect: an anomaly in equipment that can cause it to 
operate irregularly or below its rated capacity. If not 
corrected in time, it can evolve and cause the equipment 
to fail and be removed from service.  
 Fault: an anomaly in equipment that necessarily 
requires the interruption of the equipment in operation, 
i.e. withdrawing it from service. 
  
Failures and defects can be expanded in more complexity 
levels, but the purpose of this work is to develop a tool for 
diagnosis by the frequency of their occurrence and not intrinsic 
analysis of the causes. Thus, reliability can be defined as the 
ability of an item to perform a specified required function over 
a given time interval. Failures can be classified by their origin, 
speed and manifestation [5]. 
There are several maintenance management strategies in 
the literature [6], among them it is noteworthy citing the RCM. 
The RCM is a technique used to develop cost-effective 
maintenance plans and criteria so the operational capability of 
equipment is achieved, restored, or maintained. Its main 
objective is to reduce the maintenance cost by focusing on the 
most important functions of the system. There are several 
different formulations of RCM processes in the literature. The 
RCM analysis may be carried out as a sequence of activities or 
steps. 
The use of a checklist is usual in maintenance management 
for standardization and recording the sequence of the actions to 
be performed. The execution frequency of the check list 
procedures is of paramount importance, since some inspected 
items require annual, monthly, weekly or even daily 
monitoring and should be defined by the area experts [7]. The 
priority regarding the activity developed in maintenance should 
also be determined. Priorities are stipulated according to the 
importance and nature of the machine. A priori, suggestions of 
the main actions are presented, in a summarized way, adopted 
by the authors or specialists. This work’s proposal is to use the 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

concepts discussed and associate them to a checklist applied to 
electric motors, as presented in Table 1. 
It is expected that one of the contributions of this research 
is the modeling of a maintenance management strategy, even 
though it is necessary to define its frequency of execution 
using suitable models. Thus, the development of a cognitive 
model that represents the management inspired by the concepts 
of 
Reliability 
Centered 
Maintenance 
prioritizes 
the 
representation of the concepts of potential failure / defect and 
functional failure / defect.  
TABLE I.  
CHECKLIST MAINTENANCE IN ELETRIC MOTORS 
Item 
Maintenance actions description 
01 
Engine board data in the environment. 
02 
Check vibrations and noises outside of standard. 
03 
Grease bearings. 
04 
Measure and record voltage and current between phases. 
05 
Check status of lubricant types. 
06 
Measure and record the insulation resistance. 
07 
Measure and record temperature of the bearings and the 
wound elements. 
08 
Check and correct the condition of the seals or ring. 
09 
Vibration monitoring. 
10 
Visual inspection. 
11 
Motor circuit analysis. 
12 
Grounding situation. 
13 
Machine Reliability Level. 
 
III. 
 DYNAMIC FUZZY COGNITIVE MAPS APPLIED TO 
MAINTENANCE QUALITY LEVEL 
This research suggests the use of a sDFCM, a variation of 
the classic FCM, to assign maintenance quality levels. The 
initial version of sDFCM1 is implemented in this paper and its 
complete version (sDFCM1 and sDFCM2, in a future work) to 
assist decision making in the maintenance management area.  
A Fuzzy Cognitive Map (FCM) is a Fuzzy Inﬂuence Graph 
which is a result from the works of some psychologists. 
“Cognitive Maps” has been ﬁrst introduced to describe 
complex topological memorizing behaviors in the rats [8]. 
Since the pioneering work of Kosko [9], which extended 
Axelrod's Cognitive Maps [10] by the inclusion of Fuzzy 
Logic, several applications of FCM have emerged in the 
literature in several knowledge areas. Some applications of the 
FCM and its variations can be found in the literature in the 
areas of artificial life [11] [12], spot detection in images 
generated by the stereo camera system [13], mobile robotics 
[14], decision making in the medical field [15]. Besides, time 
series prediction [16], multi agent systems [17] [18], process 
control [19], maintenance management [20], swarm robotics 
[21], among others. Recently, some studies are using learning 
algorithms to adjust interaction weights among the factors to 
overcome drawbacks in FCM [22]. In this way, evolutions of 
the FCM has appeared, such as ED-FCM (Event Driven-Fuzzy 
Cognitive Maps) applied in autonomous mobile robotics [23], 
and DCN (Dynamic Cognitive Networks) on process control 
[24] [25]. In [18] a formal adaptation of the original FCM is 
presented, this new tool is designated as TAFCM (Timed 
Automata Fuzzy Cognitive Maps). These are just a few of 
several examples that can be found in the literature.  
Thus, Gonzalo and collaborators recently suggested that the 
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps (FCMs) are powerful tools for 
modeling dynamic systems. FCMs describe expert knowledge 
of complex systems with high dimensions and a variety of 
factors. An increased interest about the theory and application 
of FCMs in complex systems also has been noted. In short, 
FCMs are powerful tools for modeling dynamic systems. 
Although FCM are considered as neural systems, there are 
major differences regarding other types of artificial neural 
networks (ANN) [26]. In this way, according [17], the 
fundamental difference between FCM and ANN is that all 
nodes of the FCM have a strong semantic.  
In general, the FCMs can be developed in two different 
ways, in an automatic way, through historical data, or manually 
[27]. The FCM used in this research was developed manually, 
because the causal relationships weights were adjusted 
empirically, so that the desired output is a quantitative 
diagnosis through the qualitative opinion of the experts. 
Further constructions details of the classical FCM with 
different mathematical formalisms, inferences types and 
applications can be found in [28]. Recently, in [29] presents 
different evolutions of the classic FCM model and its new 
applications. In this work, especially in chapter 10, an 
algorithm based on FCM Ontology [30] is presented as 
development steps of an FCM model, as shown in Table 2. 
TABLE II.  
FCM ONTOLOGY 
Steps 
Description 
1 
Identification of elementary concepts, their roles (input, 
output, decision and level) and their interconnections, 
determining its causal nature (positive, negative, neutral) 
2 
Initial set-up of concepts and relationships. The initial 
state values of the map (nodes/edges) can be acquired 
from experts, historical data analysis and / or system 
simulation 
3 
Determination of ontological influence among concepts. 
Design of the different ontological views of the system 
4 
To each view of the system, design of fuzzy rule bases 
and time varying functions computing the values for the 
weights of the DFCM fuzzy and/or time-varying relations 
5 
Design of management level corresponding to the 
development of the rule base that are associated to and 
selection relations, and, implementation of algorithm to 
on-line learning such as reinforcement learning rules 
6 
Model Validation  
 
The DFCM development has 7 steps; the sDFCM has 
summarized it down to 6 steps, excluding the step that 
addresses information processing and dynamic tuning of the 
causal relationships. Thus, the basic difference between the 
proposed version and the former one, in this research, is the 
application of machine learning algorithms for dynamic tuning 
of the DFCM is not necessary. More information on the 
development of DFCM can be found in [12], in which it also 
discusses aspects of DFCM stability, relevant to the 
development of the cognitive model, as the one used in this 
research. 
Steps 1, 2 and 3 of this algorithm are like classic FCM 
development. Step 4 is related to the inclusion of fuzzy 
relations that model cause-effect relationships in the graph. The 
use of a fuzzy relation allows modeling a relationship with 
more than a concept as antecedent and/or consequents and 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

therefore a non-monotonic inference engine is represented. 
This step is quite common in recent models using FCM [31]. In 
step 5 the rule base associated with the strategic decision level 
is included. Finally, step 6 corresponds to the model validation.  
The FCM inference is made through concepts and their 
respective causal relationships. They are updated through 
iteration with the other concepts and with their own value. This 
is given by the matrix with the causal relations weights, and is 
represented by the weight sum, equation (1), similarly used in 
[27].. The values of the concepts evolve after the iterations, as 
shown by the function of equation (1) and (2) until they 
stabilize at a fixed point or in a limit cycle. 

)
(
(
1
ji
n
j i
j
j
i
W
A
f
A







where n is the number of nodes in the graph, Wji is the 
arc’s weight that connects the concept Cj to Ci, Ai is the Ci 
concept value in the present iteration, and the f function 
(equation (2)) is a sigmoidal type function:  

e x
x
f
 
 1
1
( )


The FCM, in some cases, may not stabilize and oscillate, or 
even exhibit chaotic behavior [32]. Generally, for well-behaved 
systems, it is observed that after a finite number of iterations, 
generally a low value, the FCM stabilizes, as shown in Fig. 3; 
for the FCM in this work it stabilize after 3 or 4 iterations. The 
concepts values reach a fixed equilibrium point or a limit cycle, 
presenting a small variation around a fixed value. In [26] it is 
analyzed the convergence of the FCM. 
 
 
Figure 1.  
Maintenance management cognitive model. 
Fig. 1 shows an overview of the decision-making sequence 
in which sDFCM is part of a maintenance strategy. It is 
observed that the FCM inference directly influences the 
decision-making, due to the reliability level found by the FCM. 
Also, according to Fig. 1, the check list processing determines 
the actions to be performed according to the maintenance 
information inputs. The initial propose of this research is to 
apply the same computational technique to different machines 
and / or equipment in the industry, such as electric motors and 
transformers. Thereby, it is intended to propose a generic soft-
computing technique to contribute in the maintenance 
management area. It can be cited some papers that uses soft-
computing techniques in maintenance management, ANN in 
[33] and in [20] it is used an FCM to assess the risks of 
maintenance outsourcing. Fuzzy Logic inference applied in 
maintenance management [34], and Mohammadreza’s work 
[35] used Fuzzy Logic for strategy in maintenance 
management. 
 
Figure 2.  
Complete sDFCM (sDFCM1 + sDFCM2) 
An important aspect for this work is to characterize some 
of these properties come from measurements and are thus 
represented by real numbers. However, in many cases (such as 
this research), a large amount of information comes from 
expert estimates [36]. 
The complete sDFCM (Fig. 2) is divided in two parts to 
contemplate the cognitive model strategy presented in Fig. 1. 
The sDFCM1 (red dashed line) uses as input concepts the level 
of occurrence and quality of preventive and predictive 
maintenance. The established criteria are: when these levels are 
above 50% they have a positive influence in the reduction of 
the faults and defects, and consequently in the maintenance 
quality level; the maintenance quality level has a weak 
negative influence on the training and qualification of the team. 
Which suggests that when the maintenance level result is under 
the 50% criteria, it is needed a higher team qualification, and 
vice versa. The selection functions (represented by the red 
squares) are used for the inversion of the causality between the 
input concepts and the faults and defects occurrence associated 
with a rule or condition, in this case the threshold value of 
50%. The discourse universe will be established by the 
maintenance policy. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

The sDFCM2 (blue dashed line) completes the proposed 
strategy with maintenance suggestions according to the input 
intensities of related concepts and the maintenance quality 
level from sDFCM1. The connections are fuzzy values 
obtained through the inference by a set of fuzzy rules. As 
example, if the maintenance quality level is high and the 
defects levels are low, the sDFCM2 may suggest preventive 
maintenance. In short, sDFCM changes its structure according 
to variations of the input concepts. As result, after the cognitive 
model development, the W matrix in the original definition 
reported in [9] is now a time varying matrix which values are 
computed per the importance (level) of the modeled 
characteristic and the relationship types. Each weight in this 
matrix can be also modeled as a tuple: 

Ci, Co, r, U, Br)

Where: 
 
 N identifies the layer or level where the relationships 
belongs, i.e., a pure causal relationship have N = 0, 
since it belongs the lowest layer level. 
 Ci represents the input concepts composing the 
inference premise. 
 Co represents the output concepts of the relationship. 
 r is the type of relationship, which can be a causal 
relation, a time varying causal relation, a fuzzy relation 
or a selection relation. 
 U describes the universe of discourse of the 
relationship, which can be a numeric value, an interval 
or a linguistic variable. 
 Br is the index representing the rule base relevant to the 
relationship, thus pure causal or time varying causal 
relation has Br = 0. 
IV. INITIAL SDFCM RESULTS 
This section will present and discuss the initial sDFCM1 
results. It is noteworthy that the results reached a limit cycle, 
due to small variations in the output, as can be seen in Figs. 3 
and 4. This paper is a work in progress, thus a comparison of 
this approach with other methodologies such as classic Fuzzy 
will be implemented and presented in future papers. 
The initial version of the sDFCM was simulated in two 
scenarios, one with favorable conditions and the other with 
unfavorable conditions. Fig. 3 shows the initial results for the 
favorable conditions, when it is provided to the sDFCM1 
considerably high levels of corrective and predictive 
maintenance, in which the system infer maintenance quality 
level over 89%. It suggests that team training need gets lower, 
and consequently, tends to lower faults and defects 
occurrences. 
On the other hand, when it is provided an unfavorable 
condition to the sDFCM (Fig. 4), the maintenance quality level 
lowers considerably to around 55%. It suggests a greater need 
of team training and higher possibility of fault and defects 
occurrence.  
 
 
Figure 3.  
sDFCM initial results, favorable conditions. 
 
Figure 4.  
sDFCM initial results, unfavorable conditions. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
According to the initial results, the sDFCM corresponded 
to the expectations of the work, assigning coherent quantitative 
values to the maintenance quality level in a favorable and 
unfavorable situation. The possibility levels of failures and 
defects occurrence were also coherent, as well the need for 
training and qualification of the team. Thus, to validate this 
tool, adjustments will be necessary in the model, which may 
occur according to different policies of each application. 
It is expected to have contributed to maintenance 
management area and to Fuzzy Cognitive Maps models with a 
computational tool to provide a quantitative feedback for 
possible decision making through an initially qualitative 
knowledge-based model of the experts.  
Future works will address a comparison of the 
computational complexity between sDFCM and DFCM, and 
the implementation of the sDFCM2. Finally, the application of 
the concepts presented in this research in a real case study to 
validate the sDFCM, as well the comparative with classic 
technique in the literature, such as classic Fuzzy. 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

REFERENCES 
[1] Swanson L. Linking maintenance strategies to performance. Int. J. 
Production Economics 70. 2001 
[2] M. Dems and K. Komeza, "The Influence of Electrical Sheet on the 
Core Losses at No-Load and Full-Load of Small Power Induction 
Motors," in IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 64, 
no. 3, pp. 2433-2442, March 2017 
[3] Tsang, A. H. C. Strategic dimensions of maintenance management. 
Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, v. 8 n. 1, p.7-39, 
jan-abr, 2002. 
[4]  D. Sherwin, “A review of overall models for maintenance 
management”, Journal of Quality in Maintenance Engineering, Vol. 
6 No. 3, pp. 138-164. , 2000. 
[5] SAE International. “SAE JA1012: A Guide to the Reliability-
Centered Maintenance(RCM) Standard”. Warrendale, USA, SAE 
Publication, 2002. 
[6] A. M. Smith, “Reliability-Centered Maintenance,” McGraw-Hill, 
New York, 1993. 
[7] J. Moubray, “Reliability Centered Maintenance,” Lutterworth, 
England, 2nd Edition, Aladon Ltd, 2000. 
[8] E. Tolman, “Cognitive maps in rats and men,” Psychological 
Review, vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 189–208, 1948. 
[9] B. Kosko, “Fuzzy Cognitive Maps,” Int.J. Man-Machine Studies, 
1986. 
[10] R. Axelrod, “Structure of Decision: The Cognitive Maps of Political 
Elites,”. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press., 1976. 
[11] J. A. Dickerson and B. Kosko, “Virtual worlds as Fuzzy dynamical 
systems,” In: SHEU, B. (Ed.) Technology for multimedia, New 
York: IEEE Press, 1996. 
[12] L. V. R. Arruda, M. Mendonça, F. Neves, I. R. Chrun, and E. I. 
Papageorgiou, “Artificial life enviroment modeled by dynamic 
fuzzy cognitive maps,” IEEE Transactions on Cognitive and 
Developmental Systems, 2016. 
[13] G. Pajares and J. M. De La Cruz, “Fuzzy cognitive maps for 
stereovision matching,” Pattern Recognition, vol. 39, no. 11, 2006. 
[14] A. G. Pipe, “An architecture for building “potential field” cognitive 
maps in mobile robot navigation,” Adaptive Behavior, v. 8, n. 2, p. 
173-203, 2000. 
[15] E. I. Papageorgiou, J. D. Roo, C. Huszka, and D. Colaert, 
“Formalization of treatment guidelines using Fuzzy Cognitive 
Mapping and semantic web tools,”. Journal of Biomedical 
Informatics, vol. 45 no.1, pp. 45-60, 2012. 
[16] W. Homenda, A. Jastrzebska, and W. Pedrycz, “Modeling time 
series with fuzzy cognitive maps,” In Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ-IEEE), 
2014 IEEE International Conference on, pp, 2055-2062, 6-11 July 
2014. 
[17] V. Rodin et al., “Multi-Agents System to Model Cell Signalling by 
Using Fuzzy Cognitive Maps. Application to Computer Simulation 
of Multiple Myeloma,” 2009 Ninth IEEE International Conference 
on Bioinformatics and BioEngineering, Taichung, 2009. 
[18] G. Acampora and V. Loia, “On the Temporal Granularity in      
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps,” IEEE Transaction on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 
19, no. 6, 2011. 
[19] M. Mendonça, B. Angelico, L. V. R. Arruda, and F. Neves Jr. “A 
dynamic fuzzy cognitive map applied to chemical process 
supervision,” Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence, v. 
26, n. 4, p. 1199-1210, 2013. 
[20] A. Jamshidi, “Dynamic risk modeling and assessing in maintenance 
outsourcing with FCM,” Industrial Engineering and Systems 
Management (IESM), 2015 International Conference on, 2015. 
[21] M. Mendonça, I. R. Chrun, F. Jr Neves and L. V. R. Arruda, “A 
cooperative architecture for swarm robotic based on dynamic fuzzy 
cognitive 
maps”, 
Engineering 
Applications 
of 
Artificial 
Intelligence. Vol. 59. Pg 122-132, 2017. 
[22] C. T. Chen and Y. T. Chiu, “A study of fuzzy cognitive map model 
with dynamic adjustment method for the interaction weights,” 2016 
International Conference on Advanced Materials for Science and 
Engineering (ICAMSE), Tainan, Taiwan, 2016. 
[23] M. Mendonça, L. V. R. Arruda, and F. Neves, “Autonomous 
navigation system using event driven-fuzzy cognitive maps,” 
Springer Science+Business Media, 2011. 
[24] Y. Miao, L. Zhi-Qiang, L. Shi, and C. K. Siew “Dynamical 
cognitive network-an extension of fuzzy cognitive map,” Tools with 
Artificial Intelligence, Proceedings. 11th IEEE International 
Conference on, Chicago, IL, 1999.  
[25] M. Mendonça, and L. V. R. Arruda, “A Contribution to the 
Intelligent Systems Development Using DCN,”  OmniScriptum 
GmbH & Co. KG., 2015. 
[26] G. Nápoles, E. Papageorgiou, R. Bello, and K. Vanhoof, “On the 
onvergence of sigmoid fuzzy cognitive maps,” Information 
Sciences, Elsevier, 2016. 
[27] E. Yesil, C. Ozturk, M. F. Dodurka, and. A. Sakalli “Fuzzy 
cognitive maps learning using Artificial Bee Colony Optimization,” 
Fuzzy Systems (FUZZ), IEEE International Conference on, 
Hyderabad, 2013. 
[28] M. Glykas, “Fuzzy Cognitive Maps Advances in Theory, 
Methodologies,” Tools and Applications. Greece Springer: 2010. 
[29] E. I. Papageorgiou, “Fuzzy Cognitive Maps for Applied Sciences 
and Engineering From Fundamentals to Extensions and Learning 
Algorithms,” Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg, 2014. 
[30] D. H. Lee and H. Lee, “Construction of holistic fuzzy cognitive 
maps using ontology matching method,” Expert Systems with 
Applications, 2015. 
[31] E. I. Papageorgiou “Learning algorithms for fuzzy cognitive maps: 
A review study,”. IEEE Trans. Syst., Man Cybern. C Appl. Rev., 
2012. 
[32] C. D., Stylios, and P. P. Groumpos, “The challenge of modeling 
supervisory systems using fuzzy cognitive maps,”. Journal of 
Intelligent Manufacturing, 1998. 
[33] M. A. F., Finochio, J. J. Lopes, J. A. de França, J. C. Piai, and J. F. 
Mangili, “Neural networks applied to the design of dry-type 
transformers: an example to analyze the winding temperature and 
elevate the thermal quality,” Int. Trans. Electr. Energ. Syst., 2016 
[34] H. O. Henriques et al., "Fuzzy Inference Method Applied to 
Georeferenced Maintenance Management," in IEEE Latin America 
Transactions, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 4043-4047, Sept. 2016. 
[35] E.Mohammadreza, 
S.S.Masoud, 
I.S.Javad. 
“Determining 
maintenance strategy by using Fuzzy Group MADM approach”. 
European Online Journal of Natural and Social Sciences 2013; 
Vol.2, No.3 Special Issue on Accounting and Management 
[36] V. Kreinovich, and C.D. Stylios. “Why Fuzzy Cognitive Maps are 
Efficient”. International Journal Of Computers Communications & 
Control. Special Issue on Fuzzy Sets and Applications (Celebration 
of the 50th Anniversary of Fuzzy Sets). 10(6):825-833, December, 
2015. 
 
 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

