A Dynamic Service Composition using Semantic Ratiocination on Integrated Home
Network System
Junsoo Kim∗1 Junya Nakata†2 Takashi Okada∗3 Marios Sioutis∗4 Azman Osman Lim∗5 Yasuo Tan∗6
∗ School of Information Science, Japan Advanced Institute of Science and Technology
1-1 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa Japan
1junsoo@jaist.ac.jp
3tk-okada@jaist.ac.jp
4s091003@jaist.ac.jp
5aolim@jaist.ac.jp
6ytan@jaist.ac.jp
† Hokuriku Research Center, National Institute of Information and Communications Technology
2-12 Asahidai, Nomi, Ishikawa Japan
2jnakata@starbed.go.jp
Abstract—Recently, the ubiquitous technologies allow gen-
eral household appliances to be connected within the network
at home. Since a number of researcher have tried to provide
these environment as their own ﬁeld such as UPnP, DLNA,
OSGi and ECHONET, The home network systems (hereafter
referred to as HNS) are comprised of a networked appliances
to provide various services and applications for end users.
Therefore, HNS has been realized with an integration of
features of multiple appliances. However, to integrate services
still has several challenges that a providing of a composed
service considering of a policy inﬂuences to composite services
because an element of the composed service are dynamically
changed by priority of the policy. In this paper, we proposed
the dynamic service composition using semantic ratiocination
on integrated home network system. Our research provided
the solution to semantically decide a service element, which
is dynamically changed according to a service objective with
considering the priority on the ground of the policy. Moreover,
our system is able to include an external ontology model by
importing its name space. Such distributed development of a
service model will improve scalability of the service model.
Keywords-Service
Composition;
Semantic
Ratiocination;
Home Network Service.
I. INTRODUCTION
For more than a decade, ubiquitous/pervasive technologies
allow general household appliances to be connected within
the network at home[1]. Since a number of researcher have
tried to provide these environment as their own ﬁeld such
as Universal Plug and Play (UPnP) [3][2], Digital Living
Network Alliance (DLNA) [4], Open Services Gateway
Initiative (OSGi) [5] and Energy Conservation and Home
care Network (ECHONET) [6]. HNS is comprised of such
networked appliances to provide various services and ap-
plications for home users. Therefore, HNS has been real-
ized with an integration of features of multiple appliances.
Especially, providing integrated services to end-user with
brieﬂy establishment of the appliances has been considered
for actualizing ubiquitous home network environment.
A service (or application) composition method for inte-
grated service in HNS can be divided into two approaches:
Figure 1.
Example of services on semantic considering
Figure 2.
Example of services with policy
Proactive (Static) service composition, and Reactive (Dy-
namic) service composition[7]. For example, ICARIS [8]
and eFlow [9] proposed a template based dynamic service
composition system that supporting applications involving
complex interaction patterns such as conditional branch or
iteration which is problem with static service composition.
Since the dynamic service composition does not depend
on a human to compose a service, it may have difﬁculty
in composing services. To compose a service dynamically
170
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

without a manipulation of the human, an agent has to
understand a meaning of an objective of the service that the
agent would provide. In addition, the agent need to recognize
what possible service does it has semantically for composing
the service.
To solve these problems, Ninja [10] and SeGSeC [11]
created an execution path from a user request by performing
interface matching based on semantics. These solutions are
considered how to matching the interface between services.
However, fundamentally, the dynamic service composition
in the home network system is needed to perform ﬂexibly
depend on home environment.
Imagine the scenarios illustrated in Figure 1. Providing
a temperature control service with cooling, when an air
conditioner is stopped with trouble, the agent has to decide
substitution such as electric fan, window and curtain even
these substitution can’t reach to target temperature. In this
case, the agent has to understand that the curtain can cooling
a temperature by excluding a solar heat. As illustrated in
Figure 2, If the agent need to consider a policy of the power
consumption during provide the cooling service, priority of
possible service is changed to the curtain before the air
conditioner.
These dynamic service compositions using the semantics
are need to resolve number of general issues that the
ontology engineering has, suitable deﬁnition every notions,
representation of extremely diverse relationship between
components and optimization of a reasoning engine. Never-
theless, the dynamic service composition has the potential to
provide ﬂexible and adaptable services by properly selecting
and combining components based on the user request and
context.
In this paper, we proposed the dynamic service com-
position using ratiocination on integrated home network
system. Our research provides a ﬂexible service composition
in various home environments by making the system to
semantically understand an objective of a service. Moreover,
it is possible to realize extendable services and priorities,
since these semantic descriptions can be built separately in
their own area by a name space. In the rest of this paper,
Section II gives background of characteristic of a home
appliance and brief of proposed idea. Section III discusses
our system model about service representation and process
annotation. Section IV describes our simple experimental
result and Section V gives our conclusions and discusses
future works.
II. BACKGROUND
Recently, functionality of an appliance has been composed
by one or more process. Moreover, these processes are
possible to used as one by one for other service by deﬁning
an interface of each process as showing Figure 3. It means
that an agent, which is centralized management system, can
use these independent processes to compose (or de-compose)
Figure 3.
Example of the Service Composition
virtual service. For example, the agent can use temperature
sensor that is included in air conditioner for measuring the
temperature of a room.
As we mentioned above, the appliance can provide mul-
tifunctional service according to an objective of a service.
However, to provide service automatically, the agent need
to understand a meaning of these service, since the home
appliance may have different meaning depending on service
objective. For example, the curtain could be included in
illumination service, temperature control service and privacy
protect service. Another important issue is that a priority
of the service is changed by policy. As we consider air
condition service with energy consumption, an electric fan
or curtain consumes less energy than an air conditioner.
However, as considering of capability, the air conditioner
may have higher priority than other elements. Hence, the
agent needs to understand various policies as many as
possible and decide a service according to the policy.
To solve above challenge, we need a knowledge based
machine-readable service representation because the agent
need to understand a semantics of services and a relation
between services. Also, we need to consider a decentralized
development setting for deﬁning many of a political matters.
Basically, our system considers that providing a ﬂexible
service composition in various home environments as follow.
• Semantical service composition – understanding an
objective of service
• Policy based composition – composed element could
be changed depend on policies
• Robust to an environment variation – when an element
in composed service is stopped, substitution could be
found
III. SYSTEM MODEL
Architecture of our proposed system is shown in Figure 4.
First, the agent registers the information of atomic process
that can’t be divided any more from appliances to the process
registration. These atomic processes have an information that
is a process description and resource type of input/output.
Secondly, when the agent gets request with composing
service, the service composition decides what elements will
be used based on the semantic representation. Finally, the
171
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

Figure 4.
System Architecture
semantic representation deﬁnes services semantically using
ontology modeling. The service model provides to consider
with various policies as importing the policy model. In this
section, we discuss speciﬁes of our system. Especially, it’ll
be focused on representing relations between services and
policies.
Figure 5 is that describes the system ﬂow of the service
composition module. The service composition module maps
a service model with policy by including outside models.
When user requests service composition, the service com-
position module queries with several conditions such as
temp, cooling and energy saving. Obtained elements from
the mapped service model will be matched with process in-
formation from the process register. Finally, process register
provides process list to service composition.
Figure 5.
System ﬂow of the Service Composition Module
A. Semantic Service Representation
To deﬁne services semantically using ontology modeling,
we used a web ontology language (OWL) that is designed
for use by applications that need to process the content
of information instead of just presenting information to
humans[12]. We discuss how to build the service model
within a temperature control service as a representative
service in this section.
1) Modeling the service structure: As a service structure
modeling, it’s needed to describe property that service has.
For example, temperature control service has a temperature
control descriptor as a property. The temperature control
descriptor has subclass of functionality of temperature as
follow.
• Heating : High, Low, Variable
• Cooling : High, Low, Variable
In addition, the service structure model has information of
relation between services. For example, the possible services
to use for temperature control are an air conditioner, electric
fan and window.
2) Modeling the Services: In the service modeling, the
services are represented by their features. the service has
property within the service descriptor that is described by
the service structure model. For example, each service has
property of heating and cooling capability as follow.
• AirConditioner
– Heating Capability High
– Cooling Capability High
• Electric fan – Cooling Capability Low
• Window – Cooling Capability Variable
3) Modeling the Policy: As we mentioned before, pro-
viding service with considering the policy is inﬂuence to
composite services because elements of composed service
are dynamically changed by priority of the policy. The
problem is that only one system could not deﬁne much kind
of these policies. We believe that ontology will solve the
problem by importing a policy, which is already deﬁned.
Hence, the policy model provide various point of view to
understand services such as following example of power
consume policy.
• AirConditioner – High Consumption of Power
• Electric fan – Low Consumption of Power
• Window – None Consumption of Power
B. Services annotation
To annotate a process of appliances, we used an OWL-S
(semantic markup for web service) that is an ontology of
services that makes these functionalities possible[13]. The
OWL-S provides to discover, invoke and composite a web
service. However, there is a difference of a characteristic
between the web service and home network service as shows
follow.
• Appliance has an area of effect or not
• Service has occupancy or not
• Service has depended on capability of a device
When the agent composites a service, service’s area of
effect has to be deﬁned, since some appliance provides
only limited area such as display service or cooling service.
These services have another characteristic of the occupancy.
172
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

Figure 6.
Description of the Serivce Model
For example, if agent already used display service, other
composited service cannot use it. Finally, the appliances
have their own capability of process. When the agent decides
element among atomic processes that performs as same
functionality, the decision will be capability of an appliance.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULT
We have designed and built a simple prototype to demon-
strate the reasoning of services elements using semantic
service representation. To build an ontology modeling of
service and policy, we used the protege that is open-source
platform to construct domain models and knowledge-based
applications with ontologies. In addition, for reasoning,
we used the FaCT++ that is the new generation of the
well-known FaCT OWL-DL reasoner. FaCT++ uses the
established FaCT algorithms, but with a different internal
architecture.
As an experiment, we gave two different queries to ﬁnd
a service element as a scenario. 1) The agent semantically
ﬁnds the service elements that are can provide cooling the
room as illustrated in ﬁgure 7. 2) The agent considers an
energy saving policy while providing same service with 1)
as illustrated in ﬁgure 8. We deﬁned number of services such
as window, electric Fan, Air Conditioner and Electric Heater
as the service model. In addition, we deﬁned the policy of
power consumption about appliances.
In case of 1), the reasoner searched possible elements
Figure 7.
A result of the temperature control serivce
such as Air Conditioner, Electric Fan and Window. Since
the window represented its functionality on the semantic, the
agent could infer that the window has functionality of the
cooling. It’s meaning that agent can understands diversiﬁed
functionality of services according to the service object.
As a result of case 2), we can see that Air Conditioner
is excepted in query results by considering of power con-
sumption. Thus, a priority of service elements could be
173
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

Figure 8.
A result of the temperature control serivce with the consumption
policy
changed by considering the policy. We believe that our
system provides to infer a relation between services and
policy.
Since there are many semantic representations according
to services, to represent all meaning in a single represen-
tation is actually impossible. The name space of ontology
solves such problems by combining the different ontology
model. Our system is able to include an external ontology
model by importing its name space. Such distributed devel-
opment of a service model will improve scalability of the
service model. In the near future, a distributed environment
for developing home service is going to be needed by service
provider. Our system provides a platform to deploy a service
that was made by an external service provider into the home
network environment smoothly.
V. CONCLUSION
As we discussed, service composition needs to dynam-
ically change according to service objective and various
policies in the home network environment. In this paper,
we proposed the dynamic service composition using Rati-
ocination on integrated home network system. Our system
provides machine-readable service representation to under-
stand the semantics of services and the relation between
these services. It is also possible to provide a distributed
developing environment using a name space.
We believe that our research provides the solution to
decide a service semantically according to service objec-
tive considering the priority on the ground of a policy.
Furthermore, since there are many semantic representations
according to services and policies, to represent all meaning
in a single representation is actually impossible. The system
that used an ontology model can solves the challenge by
importing the policy model from external service providers.
However, we still have several challenges such as suitable
ontology mapping between policy models and service mod-
els, automated collecting of a policy which is needed when
agent decide a service.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to give one’s thanks to Tan’s laboratory
members whom gave any little comment about this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] Dutta-Roy, A., (December) Networks for Homes IEEE spec-
trum 36(12):26-33.
[2] Miller, B., Nixon, T., Tai, C., and Wood, MD., Home net-
working with universal plug and play. IEEE Commun Mag
39(12):104-109.
[3] Microsoft. UPnP Forum Web site, Microsoft Corporation,
http://www.upnp.org/ [accessed: Mar 22, 2011]
[4] DLNA. digital living network alliances web site, DLNA
overview and vision whitepaper 2007, http://www.dlna.org/
[accessed: Mar 22, 2011]
[5] Marples, D. and Kriens, P., (2001,December) The open ser-
vices gateway initiative: an introductory overview. IEEE Com-
mun Mag 39(12):110-114.
[6] ECHONET. web site ECHONET Speciﬁcation Ver2.11 (En-
glish), http://www.echonet.gr.jp/ [accessed: Mar 22, 2011]
[7] Chakraborty, D. and Joshi, A. Dynamic Service Composition:
State-of-the-Art and Research Directions,Technical Report TR-
CS-01-19, Department of Computer Science and Electrical
Engineering, University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Bal-
timore, USA, 2001.
[8] Mennie, D. and Pagurek, B., An Architecture to Support
Dynamic Composition of Service Components, Proceedings
of the 5th International Workshop on Component-Oriented
Programming(WCOP 2000), Sophia Antipolis, France, 2000.
[9] Casati, F., Ilnicki, s., Jin, L., Krishnamoorthy, V and Shan,
M., Adaptive and dynamic service composition in eFlow, In
Proc. of the Int. Conference on Advanced Information Systems
Engineering(CAiSE), Stockholm, Sweden, 2000.
[10] Chandrasekaran, S., Madden, S. and Ionescu, M., Ninja Paths:
An Architecture for Composing Services over Wide Area
Networks, CS262 class project write up, UC Berkeley, 2000.
[11] Fujii, K. and Suda, T., Dynamic Service Composition Us-
ing Semantic Information, ICSOC’04, November 15-19, New
York, USA, 2004.
[12] OWL. web ontology language web site, OWL Web Ontol-
ogy Language Overview, http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/
[accessed: Mar 22, 2011]
[13] OWL-S. Semantic Markup for Web Services, a white paper
describing the key elements of OWL-S,
http://www.ai.sri.com/daml/services/owl-s/1.2/overview/
[accessed: Mar 22, 2011]
174
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

