Efﬁcient Management of Cooling Systems in Green Datacenters
Ibrahim Saﬁeddine, No¨el de Palma
ERODS - LIG
Universit´e Grenoble Alpes
Grenoble, France
email: {ibrahim.saﬁeddine, noel.de-palma}@imag.fr
Abstract—Next-generation green datacenters were designed
for optimized Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE), which is the
ratio of the total power consumption of the datacenter over
the computing consumption. Continuous improvement of these
datacenters target the reduction of PUE in accordance with
the servers’ load, to approach the minimal target, i.e., PUE =
1. Datacenters must ensure in the same time a very high level
of availability of resources and good management of failures,
thanks
to
redundant
equipments,
while
optimizing
power
consumption and cooling costs and reducing the environmental
footprint. A datacenter consists of computing, power distribution
and cooling parts. The cooling part represents the main cost
that signiﬁcantly increases the power bill and consequently the
PUE. A datacenter can be cooled using heterogeneous cooling
systems for redundancy in the case of failure. These systems
have a variable consumption depending on the load and on
external parameters, e.g., weather and external temperature.
This paper presents an efﬁcient cooling manager, which aims to
minimize the PUE while satisfying the Service Level Agreement
(SLA), by reducing the power consumption of the datacenter
and opting for the most efﬁcient cooling system according to
climate conditions and by limiting temperature variations and
cooling mode transitions. Our system uses an overview of all
datacenter parts to provide an optimal decision that complies
with regulations when using natural resources, e.g., groundwater.
Keywords—Power Usage Effectiveness (PUE); cooling systems;
green datacenter; autonomic computing; service level agreement
(SLA)
I. INTRODUCTION
The datacenter market is growing at a rate of 15% per year
globally [1]. Green computing, which aims to reduce energy
consumption and the related greenhouse effect, remains a
priority for datacenter managers due to the increase in the price
per kWh, e.g, France’s electricity bill is expected to increase by
50% in 2020 [2]. As servers become smaller without necessary
consuming less energy, datacenters which have more and more
servers generate more heat, and the cooling power needed
will grow. The concentration of computing power per m2 has
grown very quickly over the last 10 years from 15 to 30 kW
per rack, which results in signiﬁcant heat dissipation and thus
a higher cost for cooling.
Knowing that the electricity bill is the main operational
charge in a datacenter, the new challenge of datacenters is the
mastery of electrical distribution, the choice of the best cooling
technologies, e.g., air-cooled or water-air, and its optimization
for better performance. The intelligence in a datacenter relies
on sensor networks that provide real-time measurements and
Figure 1. Hybrid cooling consumption.
robust industrial automation control, to ﬁnd the best operating
point.
The objective of datacenters is to ensure near 100% facilities
availability, through redundant components which keeps the
systems up even in case of the failure of an active element
or during maintenance. Hence, the importance of optimizing
the very complex cooling system as a whole, by analyzing a
large number of parameters (ambient temperature, humidity,
weather forecast, servers load, etc.) and having an overview
of all datacenter equipments for a more efﬁcient management
of cooling. This will impact the overall consumption in the
datacenter and the cost of operation, and thus improves the
PUE and reduce costs.
There are many efﬁcient cooling systems [3] [4] [5] [6]. Free
cooling [3] is an economic method that uses low external air
temperature and less power to cool water instead of mechanical
refrigeration. Hybrid cooling [4] incorporates two cooling
modes, free and electrical cooling, with an internal system that
switches between these modes depending on the outside air
temperature. Figure 1 shows the variation of the consumption
of an hybrid cooling system with the external temperature [7].
Another cooling system that uses groundwater [5] and
rivers’ [6] water is a very economical cooling system. The
system works by pumping cool water through a heat exchanger
and then re-injecting the heated water back into the source,
resulting in no net loss of groundwater. It uses the cold water
in an open loop to cool the internal circuit water.
In this paper, we propose an autonomic solution that ef-
ﬁciently manages and optimizes the choice of the cooling
system in a high available green datacenter while satisfying the
SLA. Our algorithm can manage many heterogeneous cooling
systems with different cooling capacities to minimize the cool-
ing power consumption and can use multiple cooling systems
simultaneously for better efﬁciency. To improve our solution,
we correlated the datacenter internal measurements with other
indicators such as external temperatures and weather forecast.
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

We used a global vision on all datacenter layers, FaaS (Fa-
cilities as a Service)-IaaS (Infrastructure as a Service)-PaaS
(Platform as a service)-SaaS (Software as a Service), to avoid
conﬂicted decisions and process in a better and faster way.
We validate our algorithm on a real architecture and real
measurements from the green datacenter of Eolas1 [8] that can
host more than 13,000 servers. We then demonstrate that this
solution can be scaled to include other cooling systems and
can be adapted on more complicated environments. The rest
of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present
the state of the art on cooling system optimization algorithms.
In Section III, we describe our algorithm for optimizing the
management of cooling systems. In Section IV, we present
the architecture of a redundant green datacenter on which
our work is based. Finally, in Section V, we summarize the
conclusions and future perspectives of this work.
II. RELATED WORK
In order to reduce the power consumption of cooling
systems, several solutions are proposed. Some solutions are
based on varying water or air temperature in the servers’ room
to reduce the cooling power. This solution can be coupled
with servers consolidation to reduce the dissipation of heat.
Other global approaches aims to reduce the consumption of the
cooling infrastructure by switching between free and electrical
cooling according to external temperatures.
Shaoming et al. [9] discuss the impact of server consolida-
tion and the variation of the cold aisle temperature in a servers
room, on the cooling consumption of the datacenter. They fo-
cus on optimization of cooling consumption and maintenance
costs. Increasing the temperature by 1◦C can reduce energy
cooling consumption by 2 to 5%, however high temperature
reduce the reliability of electronic components, and increases
the cost of hardware maintenance of CPU and Memory. In
the same way, the consolidation that consists on cycles of
start/stop servers, decrease the cooling costs but in the same
time decreases the hard-disks lifetime.
While the previous paper focuses on increasing inlet tem-
perature and servers consolidation in servers room, Jungsoo
et al. [3] use servers consolidation and exploit time-varying
servers workload and external climate conditions in order to
reduce the power consumption of the entire datacenter. This
system is based on the maximum usage of the free-cooling
and preventing frequent cooling transition.
Ratnesh and al. [10] propose a framework for dynamic ther-
mal management based on asymmetric workload placement
that can promote uniform temperature distribution that reduces
local hot spots, quickly responds to thermal emergencies,
reduces energy consumption costs, reduces initial cooling
system capital costs and improves equipment reliability. This
framework is not related to cooling systems capacity.
1Eolas (www.eolas.fr) is a French company based in Grenoble, part of the
international Consulting and System Integration (CSI) company Business &
Decision
III. IMPLEMENTATION
The basic automatons implemented in most of the cooling
systems are very reliable and can manage efﬁciently the avail-
ability of cooling in case of failure. However, they are limited
to the predeﬁned priority established by the Data Center
Manager (DCM) and each automaton can manage a limited
number of cooling systems and works independently from
other datacenter layers. In our implementation, we used the
requested cooling capacity and the external weather conditions
to improve the global efﬁciency of the cooling system and
reduce the datacenter consumption. Using weather forecast,
we can limit the transition between cooling systems when
the external temperature is constant or when the temperature
decrease while using free-cooling. In hybrid cooling, we can
predict the cooling system that will be used (free-cooling,
mixed or chiller cooling) depending on the temperature fore-
casts before starting the system. In addition, the usage of the
groundwater cooling is highly regulated: the water ﬂow and
the yearly water volume is limited by the law. Our algorithm
proposes a better way to manage the groundwater cooling
system based on external temperature and servers load history
throughout the year. Knowing that it is possible to start several
cooling system simultaneously, it is important to reduce the
number of active cooling systems to reduce the consumption.
In order to prevent damage to cooling system by repetitive
start/stop cycles, we deﬁned a minimal period between two
transitions, based on the systems data manual.
To minimize the electricity cost and then reduce the PUE,
we setup the cooling power requirement of the datacenter
model which estimate the impact of servers consumption on
the cooling power needed, as presented in (1):
X
CP (kW) = 0.9 ∗
X
SC(kW)
(1)
where CP is the cooling power needed in kW and SC the
total electrical consumption of servers in kW. Almost, all the
power consumed by the server is transformed to heat.
For the optimization problem, we used a linear optimization
program, where the goal is to minimize the cooling electrical
power consumption linear function while respecting opera-
tion constraints. Linear programming is a technique for the
optimization of a linear objective function, subject to linear
equality and linear inequality constraints.
Equation (2) represents the cost in C to produce one kW of
cooling. Pelec and kC respectively denote the power consumed
by a cooling system to produce 1kW of cooling and kWh
Billing rate which comes to 6 cents/kWh in France.
C = Pelec ∗ kC
(2)
The global optimization program can be presented as fol-
lows:
Min
n
X
i=0
ai.Ci
(3)
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Subject to :





nP
i=0
ai >= CP
i ∈ 0, n
P Cmi ∈ {possible cooling modes}
(4)
Equation (3) represents the objective function of the lin-
ear optimization program where ai represent the amount of
cooling produced by the cooling system i in kW and Ci the
cost in C of 1kW of cooling using the cooling system i.
n represents the maximum number of cooling systems that
can be started simultaneously. We look to minimize the total
consumption of started cooling systems and limit the number
of started systems. While minimizing the cooling systems
consumption, we minimize the datacenter consumption and
then reduce the PUE. Equation (4) represents the constraints
of the optimization problem. We need to satisfy the SLA by
delivering as match cooling power as needed, so the total
cooling power generated must be ideally equal to the needed
cooling power. Cmi is the cooling mode of the cooling
system i. The possible cooling modes list is limited by many
parameters as the external temperature or a high temperature
of the groundwater.
Weather forecasts are used to estimate at each future period
the best cooling system to be used and then limit cooling mode
transitions with temperature variations.
IV. EVALUATION
In this section, we present the Eolas datacenter cooling ar-
chitecture used to evaluate our algorithm. The green datacenter
of Eolas is Tier 4, and therefore, designed to host mission
critical computer systems, with fully redundant subsystems.
Figure 2 shows that 3 principal cooling systems are used
for maximum redundancy. All cooling equipment is inde-
pendently dual-powered, including chillers, ventilation and
air-conditioning systems. Those systems are heterogeneous:
groundwater cooling (with two independent pumps), hybrid
cooling and chiller cooling. Eolas uses an ultimate cooling
source: city water. When all cooling systems fall down or in
case of power failure, the city water (having a temperature
of 12 - 14 ◦C) can be used to cool up to 3000 servers. This
ultimate cooling source is very expensive and increase the
WUE (Water Usage Effectiveness) of the datacenter.
Stopping the cooling system can be dramatic for this data-
center, i.e., every minute, the room temperature increases by
1◦C, knowing that the hot aisle is ﬁxed at 35◦C, thus the room
temperature may reach 60◦C in just 25 minutes.
Actually, the transition between cooling modes is done
manually in this datacenter. Using our algorithm, the transition
is full automatic and based on several external sensors for more
efﬁciency.
Figure
3 shows the automatic cooling mode transition
between groundwater and Free cooling systems, using our
optimisation algorithm, without weather forecasts in a day
of May. When the temperature is too low, the Free cooling
system is very efﬁcient, i.e., his Energy Efﬁciency Rating
(EER) is two high. When the temperature increases, the EER
start decreasing and the groundwater system became more
Heat Exchanger
Automaton 1
Automaton 2
InRows
City Water 
(Ultimate relief)
GroundWater 
Pump 1
GroundWater 
Pump 2
Chiller Cooling 
System
Hybrid Cooling 
System
Figure 2. The global cooling architecture.
-8
-6
-4
-2
0
2
4
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
Temperature (°C)
GroundWater
FreeCooling
External temperature
Figure 3. Cooling modes transitions in May in normal mode.
efﬁcient. In this example, the system switches to groundwater
cooling mode when the external temperature reaches 5◦C. This
transition is useless since the duration before returning to the
Free cooling mode is too short. Using weather forecasts, the
datacenter will be cooled using free cooling all the day, with
no cooling systems transition.
First results for a small example illustrate the potential
for a coordinated control strategy to achieve better energy
management than traditional industrial automatons that control
the cooling systems separately. We can save up to 38% of
cooling power using our algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed an autonomic optimization
system for heterogeneous cooling systems in a Tier 4 green
datacenter. Our algorithm, connects to existing automatons
and all datacenter sensors and uses external conditions
and weather forecast to choose the best cooling systems
combination to reduce the overall power consumption in
the datacenter and limiting cooling mode transitions. We
experimented this work using real data, collected from
the Eolas green datacenter at Grenoble, France. As future
enhancements of our solution, we intend to integrate a
predictive model of the datacenter activity to predict the
future cooling power needs and minimize the transition
between cooling systems accordingly, in order to reduce
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

systems failure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is partially supported by ANR INFRA under
a grant for the project Ctrl-Green (ANR-11-INFR 012-11)
[11] and by the Datalyse project [12].
REFERENCES
[1] J. G. Koomey, Growth in data center electricity use 2005 to 2010,
Analytics Press, october, 2011.
[2] La commission d’enquˆete sur le coˆut r´eel de l’e´lectricit´e, SENAT -
France, July 2012.
[3] J. Kim, M. Ruggiero, and D. Atienza, “Free cooling-aware dynamic
power management for green datacenters,” High Performance Comput-
ing and Simulation (HPCS), 2012 International Conference on, 2012,
pp. 140-146.
[4] M. K. Patterson, D. Atwood, and J. G. Miner, “Evaluation of air-
side economizer use in a compute-intensive data center,” ASME 2009
InterPACK Conference, Vol. 2, pp. 1009-1014, July 2009.
[5] M. P. 1, “Sustainable groundwater-source cooling systems for buildings,”
Proceedings of the ICE - Engineering Sustainability, Vol. 161, Iss. 2,
June 2008 , pp 123 133.
[6] P. Dalin, “Free cooling/natural cooling is crucial for a successful district
cooling development,” Teaming Up for renewable heating and cooling,
April 2012.
[7] Engineering Data Manual - Aquaﬂair, Uniﬂair, October 2011.
[8] (2015,
March)
Eolas.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.
businessdecision-eolas.com/544-green-it.htm
[9] S. Chen, Y. Hu, and L. Peng, “Optimization of electricity and server
maintenance costs in hybrid cooling data centers,” 2013 IEEE Sixth
International Conference on Cloud Computing, 2008, pp. 526-533.
[10] R. Sharma, C. Bash, C. Patel, and R. Friedrich, “Balance of power:
Dynamic thermal management for internet data centers,” Internet Com-
puting,
IEEE (Vol.9 , Iss. 1 ). Feb 2005, pp. 42-49.
[11] (2015, March) Ctrlgreen. [Online]. Available: http://www.ctrlgreen.org/
[12] (2015, March) Datalyse. [Online]. Available: http://www.datalyse.fr/
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

