Experiments with NetLogo for Distributed Channel
Assignment in Dense WLAN Networks
Vangelis Gazis, Konstantinos Sasloglou, Andreas Merentitis, Kostas Mathioudakis
AGT Group (R&D) GmbH
Darmstadt, Germany
e-mail: {vgazis,ksasloglou,amerentitis,kmathioudakis}@agtinternational.com
Abstract—Dense IEEE 802.11 networks require thorough radio
network planning to minimize the detrimental effects of channel
interference and achieve good performance. When multiple IEEE
802.11 networks operating under different administrations reside
in the same geographical area (as deﬁned by the bounds of
radio signal transmission and reception), the problem of efﬁcient
radio resource allocation arises. Particularly, in highly populated
urban environments, efﬁcient radio resource allocation can be
quite a challenge, due to the ﬁnite number of interference-
free channels available in the IEEE 802.11 family of standards.
To address this shortcoming, we have investigated how the
radio resource management capabilities provided by the IEEE
802.11k standard can support a distributed approach in channel
assignment. In this paper, we present our family of distributed
channel assignment algorithms and elaborate on their pros and
cons. Furthermore, we present our simulation environment for
simulating distributed channel assignment scenarios based on the
NetLogo agent modeling environment.
Index
Terms—Channel
assignment;
Channel
Allocation;
WLAN; Distributed Systems; Simulation; NetLogo
I. INTRODUCTION
The establishment of wireless communication as a tech-
nological commodity in modern society and the insatiable
demand for Internet connectivity paved the way to the tremen-
dous popularity and commercial success of the IEEE 802.11
family of standards. With IEEE 802.11b/g as their ﬂag-
ship and—currently—most widespread standard, IEEE 802.11
Wireless LAN (WLAN) type systems feature an ever in-
creasing footprint worldwide. Standardisation work is feverish
and the IEEE 802.11 working groups regularly publishes
improvements to existing standards and introduces additional
features to address emerging use cases.
To address the complexity associated with the manage-
ment of large scale deployments in the Future Internet (FI),
the vision of self-managing systems has been proposed and
adopted. Under the umbrella self-management concept, self-
awareness, self-conﬁguration, self-protection, self-healing and
self-optimization stand as prominent properties. The funda-
mental premise of the self-management paradigm is to con-
strain the operational expenses resulting by the current network
management practices in the Internet. To this end, three
thematic areas have converged [1] under the umbrella of the
Future Internet architecture: autonomic computing, cognitive
networking and self-organization.
A. Radio interference
In a wireless infrastructure, network management and, in
particular radio network planning, becomes a challenging task
due to the volatile and unpredictable nature of the wireless
medium and the mobility patterns of terminal devices. The
increasing footprint and diversiﬁcation of IEEE 802.11 type
components in ICT equipment suggests that a large portion of
FI devices will employ one or more types of wireless access
technology. Due to the lack of coordination that characterizes
applications in the mass consumer market segments, static
and centralized solutions to wireless network planning prove
inefﬁcient in this chaotic environment [2].
Minimizing radio interference is essential to realizing good
system performance in IEEE 802.11 networks due to the ﬁnite
number of interference-free channels available [3]. However,
the volatile nature of the wireless medium, combined with
varying patterns of trafﬁc demand, render any radio network
planning exercise a challenging task. The latter is in iteself a
sophisticated task, which, besides expert knowledge, may also
require a solid understanding of the propagation proﬁle at each
radio site [4]. In cases where IEEE 802.11 networks operating
under different administrations reside in the same geographical
area (as deﬁned by the bounds of radio signal transmission and
reception, efﬁcient radio resource allocation becomes quickly
problematic. This is due to available technology solutions
for radio resource management of IEEE 802.11 installations
supporting only a centralized model of administration (e.g.,
Cisco Uniﬁed Wireless Access [5], HP MultiService Mobility
Controller [6]). In addition, they lack support for peer-to-
peer communication between IEEE 802.11 access points in
regard to radio resource management procedures. Thereupon,
as IEEE 802.11 systems continue to increase their footprint
in the residential and enterprise market segments, efﬁcient
radio resource allocation in a dense urban environment rapidly
devolves to a chaotic situation [2].
B. Channel assignment
Channel assignment in IEEE 802.11 systems may result in
a conﬂict where more than one adjacent (in terms of radio
coverage) wireless access points use the same channel, thus
causing a substantial drop in performance. In addition, as
Fig. 2 illustrates for the case of IEEE 802.11b/g/n, adjacent
access points may use different channels but still experience
a substantial spectrum overlap [3], thus still suffering from
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-331-5
ICAS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

interference and degraded performance. Performance can also
be degraded by the so-called hidden terminal problem whereby
the transmission of interfering access points are beyond each
other’s reception range but within the reception range of client
devices, thus limiting throughput (e.g., client device D1 and
access points AP1 and AP2 in Fig. 1).
Fig. 1. The hidden terminal case in an IEEE 802.11 access point network.
The main set of IEEE 802.11 standards deﬁnes the basic
capacities of the Medium Access Control (MAC) layer that
enable wireless data exchange and mechanisms [3]. Radio
resource management concerns (e.g., measurements of the
radio channel) are addressed by the IEEE 802.11k standard [7].
The latter deﬁnes the exchange of radio resource measurement
information to facilitate network management tasks. To this
end, it provides measurements related to the physical and
the (wireless) link layer of the protocol stack [7]. In regard
to channel assignment, IEEE 802.11k deﬁnes channel load
measurements as well as noise and time histograms.
C. Research motivation
By making detailed measurements of the radio environ-
ment avaialble, several key optimizations in terms of per-
formance become feasible. Particularly deployments in harsh
radio environments (e.g., aeroplanes, factories, municipalities,
etc.) are greatly facilitated. Utilizing such measurements in
a distributed manner whereby each access point operates
autonomously in deciding which channel to assign presents
a particularly promising proposal. The challenges entailed
in distributed approaches include the engineering of conver-
gence and stability properties to the distributed algorithm
that is collectively effected by the access points. In prior
work we studied the convergence properties between different
distributed algorithms for channel assignment in dense IEEE
802.11k systems. In continuation of that work, we explore
the parameter space of these algorithms using the NetLogo
environment for multi-agent simulation.
We maintain focus on dense deployments of independently
managed IEEE 802.11k systems in an urban environment
where central coordination of radio resource management
tasks is not a realistic assumption. Independent administrations
may be insufﬁciently skilled, unable or even unwilling to
coordinate their radio resource management strategies, as-
suming they have any. Hence, dynamic distributed resource
management strategies without operator involvement are the
most realistic approach to optimize the use of common radio
resources in this chaotic environment. In developing our dis-
cussion further, we focus exclusively on IEEE 802.11 systems
operating in infrastructure mode.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II
presents the network model of our studies and outlines related
work. Section III introduces the NetLogo agent modeling
enrivonment and presents its salient features. Section IV
presents our approach of modeling in NetLogo dense IEEE
802.11 networks operating under an autonomic setting. Section
V presents the family of distributed channel assignment algo-
rithms we have integrated in our NetLogo model. Section VI
presents the experimentation settings and shares early results.
Finally, Section VII concludes the paper and sets directions
for future work.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Related work
In [8], the authors take into account the trafﬁc load at
the MAC layer and propose a heuristic method to minimize
the maximum effective channel utilization at the access point
with the highest load. In [9] each access point monitors the
number of active stations and tries to minimize the maximum
effective channel utilization. We note that the set of active
stations includes stations associated with a particular access
point as well as stations using the same channel and whose
transmission power levels is above the access point’s receiver
sensitivity threshold. The work in [10] proposes a new channel
assignment mechanism for infrastructure-based IEEE 802.11
wireless networks in decentralized scenarios. The proposed
mechanism operates at the access point level to select the
operating channel automatically based on client station mea-
surements exchanged through the IEEE 802.11k standard [3].
In [11], the authors evaluate the throughput performance of
different channel assignment strategies in an experimental trial
involving IEEE 802.11b systems while [12] proposes a set of
algorithms to simultaneously solve the channel selection and
user association problems in a fully distributed manner.
Another approach [13], [14] introduces a fully decentralised
stochastic algorithm for graph colouring and applies it to
the isomorphic channel assignment problem in IEEE 802.11
WLAN systems. Their algorithm does not require commu-
nication among WLAN access points and employs learning
to ultimately converge to a conﬂict-free channel assignment.
Given the widespread deployment of WLAN technology in
urban areas and the lack of coordination among WLAN
administrations with regard to channel assignment, we ﬁnd
this approach particularly interesting. Hence, we adopt it for
our studies and extend it to accommodate the existence of
communication among WLAN access points for purposes of
radio resource management tasks. An obvious question is
whether the performance of the learning algorithm can be fur-
ther improved by allowing for the exchange of radio resource
information among adjacent WLAN access points and what
kind of information can support such an improvement.
B. Working assumptions
The IEEE 802.11 standards deﬁne a ﬁnite set of wireless
channel resources and the respective access and usage control-
ling mechanisms [3]. For instance, IEEE 802.11b/g speciﬁes
the details of 14 distinct channels, with minor differences
between world regions due to regulatory constraints. As Fig.
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-331-5
ICAS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

2 depicts, only channels 1, 6 and 11 are interference-free to
each other and some amount of spectrum overlap occurs in
the remaining subset of the IEEE 802.11 channels.
Fig. 2. IEEE 802.11b/g channel overlap (2.4 GHz band) [3].
The extent to which interference attributed to partially over-
lapping channels in IEEE 802.11 type systems is a determinant
of system performance remains a matter of debate [15]–
[17]. Analytical and simulation studies [15] suggest that the
assignment of partially overlapping channels to neighbouring
wireless access points can be justiﬁed, depending on the rela-
tive utilization of each channel. Increasing path loss decreases
the level of interference, therefore, the actual physical distance
among wireless stations is an important performance factor
[17]. When multiple types of IEEE 802.11 systems coexist in
the same geographical area, their topological distribution will
largely affect overall performance, with proximal transceivers
experiencing dramatic degradation in their channel through-
put [16]. Nonetheless, it remains that a ﬁnite set of non-
overlapping channels is available to wireless devices, a fact
aligned to our design assumptions.
C. Channel assignment as graph colouring
Channel assignment in IEEE 802.11 type systems is equiv-
alent to the graph colouring problem [18], a well-known
NP-hard problem in graph theory [19]. For a simple graph
G = [V, E], colouring is about determining the number ψ of
colours sufﬁcient for assigning a color to each vertex v ∈ V
without any two adjacent vertices being assigned the same
colour. Several algorithms based on contraction and sequential
ordering have been developed to attack the graph colouring
problem, including Largest First (LF), Recursive-Largest-First
(RLF), Backtracking Sequential Coloring (BSC) and Degree
of Saturation (DSATUR) [20].
The channel assignment problem is isomorphically mapped
to the graph colouring problem as follows:
• The set of access points U = {u1, u2, . . . , uN} is mapped
to the set of vertices V in the graph.
• The pairs of access points {(u, v) : u, v ∈ U} within
transmission and reception range of each other is mapped
to the set of edges E.
• The set of available channels C = {c1, c2, . . . , cD} is
mapped to the set of available colours.
We note that, depending on whether cross-channel interfer-
ence is assumed to be substantial or not, the set of channels
available for assignment by an access point may or may not
include those with partially overlapping spectrum bands. The
following section discusses prior work on these issues.
III. THE NETLOGO AGENT MODELING ENVIRONMENT
A. Principles
NetLogo is an integrated modeling environment for devel-
oping multi-agent simulations in the synonymous program-
ming language. It facilitates rapid development of simulation
models with a focus on emergent behavior in systems with a
large number of agents (e.g., predator-prey relationships in an
ecosystem). As such, it has been used in developing models
in a variety of domains, such as economics, biology, physics,
chemistry, psychology and system dynamics, to name a few.
NetLogo models consist of independently operating agents
in a shared ﬁnite environment. The environment is termed
world and is composed as a grid of square patches. Thus
it provides a two dimensional model that deﬁne the space
coordinates within which agents will exhibit their behavior
and interact with each other. Within this space, distance is
quantiﬁed, but not qualiﬁed.
In NetLogo the evolution of time is modeled through a so-
called ticks counter, which is typically incremented through
integer arithmetic, though ﬂoating point increments are also
possible. Thus modeling of time supports both discrete time
and continuous time models, albeit the latter would require
additional development effort to complete.
NetLogo also supports extensions, with several extensions
being already contributed and leveraged by the research com-
munity (e.g., associative arrays, network graphs, an interface
to the R projecct for statistical computing, etc.).
B. Agents
An agent in NetLogo may comprise state information (i.e.,
state variables and their values). The set of agents that com-
prise the same set of state variables form a so-called breed.
In manifesting its behaviour, an agent may access the values
of its own state variables, as well as the values of any global
variables deﬁned in the environment. NetLogo offers powerful
ﬁltering and selection mechanisms that operate on agent sets
(i.e., breeds). These include generic primitives that allow an
agent to select the set of agents (possibly out of a breed) with
particular values in their state variables.
IV. AUTONOMIC IEEE 802.11 NETWORKS IN NETLOGO
A. Modeling wireless communication
Aligned to the autonomic networking premise, IEEE 802.11
access points map to autonomous agents that manifest their
behavior driven by their individual policies. To model system
properties resulting from the wireless nature of IEEE 802.11
networks, we employed directed links between agents. Given
that the propagation proﬁle of the radio signal varies in
space and time, we understand that topological proximity will
be determined individually for each pair of access points.
For any given pair of access points (u, v) in the IEEE
802.11 network, reception by u of a radio transmission by
v will depend on the the propagation proﬁle R(u,v) of the
radio signal paths followed between v and u, the power Pv
employed at the transmitter at v, and the sensitivity Su of
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-331-5
ICAS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

the receiver employed at u. Hence, for any given pair of
access points (u, v), the capacity to exchange information
(i.e., to receive a transmission) is determined directionally.
Consequently, for any access point, being able to receiver
another access point’s transmission does not necessarily imply
the reverse proposition. The typical disk graph model results
by relaxing the assumptions of this propagation model to the
same transmission power and receiver sensitivity for all access
points.
In the NetLogo environment, for any given pair of access
points (u, v), we model the capacity to communicate as a
link e = (u, v) between the respective agents. NetLogo
provides directed and undirected links between agents, thus
supporting both approaches in modeling radio propagation. To
control the complexity of the simulation model at this stage
of our work, we opted for the disk graph model and used
undirectional links between agents. This is supported elegantly
by NetLogo through its builtin in-radius ﬁltering primitive that
selects all agents whose center coordinates are within a given
distance of the center coordinates of the invoking agent in the
world model. Fig. 3 illustrates a screenshot of the NetLogo
model we developed for the distributed channel assignment
algorithms, including simulation parameters and monitors of
state information.
B. Modeling autonomous behavior
In our NetLogo model we leverage each agent’s state
variables (as deﬁned in Table I) to drive the autonomous
behavior of each access point. The set of available channels
and the channel in use are common resources management
variables included in the Simple Network Management Proto-
col (SNMP) Management Information Base (MIB) deﬁnitions
for an IEEE 802.11 access point. The set of neighboring
access points can be built and maintained by an access point
that is periodically surveying its known channels for foreign
Beacon management frames, a capacity that is supported by
the IEEE 802.11 standard. The remaining variables in Table
I are not standardized and would have to be included in the
state information of an autonomous access point.
Within the NetLogo environment’s control ﬂow, the be-
vahiour of each access point is invoked in its respective
state scope. When addressing a group of access point with
a particular simulation command (e.g., to scan the radio
channel and identify neighboring access points), NetLogo
randomly iterates over each access point in the group. This
simpliﬁes model development by omitting timing concerns
from its design and aligns to the real world situation where
independently operating access points do not comply to a
global timing sequence related to state changes. For instance,
an IEEE 802.11 access point is able to iterate over its known
channels and observe foreign Beacon management frames, but
the timing sequence of these observations (e.g., the order in
which known channels are observed, the amount of time spent
in observing each channel, etc.) may differ from those of other
IEEE 802.11 access points, even if those are geographically
collocated.
TABLE I
STATE VARIABLES OF EACH ACCESS POINT.
Variable
Description
Channels
The number M of channels available for assign-
ment to this access point.
Channel
The channel c currently assigned to this access
point.
Distribution
The distribution P = {p1, p2, . . . , pD} deﬁning
the probability of each channel to be assigned to
this access point by a random selection process.
Neighbor
The
set
access
points
N
=
{uw1, wa2, . . . , wan(u)}
that
are
neighbors
to this access point u (according to the disk graph
model).
Conﬂicts
The
set
of
access
points
W
=
{wb1, wb2, . . . , wbc(u)}
that
are
assigned
a
conﬂicting channel to the channel assigned to this
access point u.
Penalty
The percentage b ∈ [0, 1] by which the assignment
probability of an assigned channel is discounted
when existence of a channel conﬂicts is deter-
mined.
Stability
A boolean variable q set to true when this access
point is locked on to the currently assigned channel
and false otherwise. For convenience, an access
point locked onto its assigned channel is termed a
stable access point.
Some of the channel assignment algorithms addressed here
assume the capacity to exchange state information between
IEEE 802.11 access points in a peer-to-peer manner, subject
to sufﬁcient radio coverage of course. The format of the
Beacon Request and Radio Measurement Response manage-
ment frames deﬁned in the IEEE 802.11 speciﬁcation provides
for the deﬁnition of extension ﬁelds, thus supporting this
assumption [3]. In this regard, the IEEE 802.11k standard
provides a more efﬁcient and versatile level of support by
explicitly supporting peer-to-peer communications through
the Neighbor Request and Neighbor Response management
frames [7]. Hence, the assumptions underpinning the NetLogo
environment regarding peer-to-peer communication between
access points are properly met by the IEEE 802.11 standard
and its extensions.
V. DISTRIBUTED CHANNEL ASSIGNMENT ALGORITHMS
Herein, we detail each distributed channel assignment algo-
rithm under study, in order of increasing complexity.
Random Walk—The Random Walk (RW) algorithm pro-
vides the crudest variant of distributed channel assignment. In
each iteration, the algorithm checks if any of the neighboring
access points is assinged a channel that interferes with the
channel assigned to its hosting access point. If such a so-
called conﬂicting access point is found, the algorithm proba-
bilistically selects and assigns a channel anew; otherwise, it
takes no action.
Random Walk with Stickiness—The Random Walk with
Stickiness (RWS) algorithm differs from the RW algorithm in
that once an access point ﬁnds its currently assigned channel to
be conﬂict-free, it locks on to that channel. This is realized by
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-331-5
ICAS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Fig. 3. Settings of the NetLogo modeling environment.
setting the assignment probability for that particular channel
to one and for all other channels to zero.
Commumication Free Learning—The Commumication Free
Learning (CFL) algorithm [13], [14] provides the basic
learning-capable algorithm that uses past observations regard-
ing each channel in adapting its probability of being assinged
in the future. More speciﬁcally, whenever the channel currently
assigned to the hosting access point is found in conﬂict to the
channel assigned by a neighboring access point, its assignment
probability is discounted by the penalty factor (see Table I).
Commumication Free Learning with Stickiness—The Com-
mumication Free Learning with Stickiness (CFLS) algorithm
[13], [14] differs from the CFL algorithm in that once an
access point ﬁnds its currently assigned channel to be conﬂict-
free, it locks on to that channel.
Learning From Communication—The Learning From Com-
munication (LFC) algorithm [21] leverages communication
with neighboring access points in adapting the probability of
each channel being assigned by the access point hosting the
LFC algorithm. Each access point communicates its conﬂict
status (i.e., indicating thus whether it will probabilistically
attempt to change its assigned channel in the next iteration) to
its neighboring access points. By knowing which of its neigh-
boring access points will preserve their currently assigned
channel, an access point with a conﬂicting channel assignment
is able to render its future channel assignments less prone
to conﬂict, by zeroing out the assignment probability for all
the channels its so-called stable neighboring access points are
currently occupying.
Learning From Communication with Stickiness—The Learn-
ing From Communication with Stickiness (LFCS) algorithm
differs from the LFC algorithm in that once an access point
ﬁnds its currently assigned channel to be conﬂict-free, it locks
on to that channel.
VI. EXPERIMENTS
We establish a square world environment with an area
of 160 × 160 units and a patch size of 4 units. Within it,
we instantiate different populations of agents representing
autonomous access points distributed randomly in 2D space
according to the uniform distribution. Each access point runs
one of the aforementioned channel assignment algorithms
independently of other access points. The performance of a
particular algorithm is assessed under different radius settings
for the disk graph model which, in combination with the
coordinates of access points, determines the connectivity of
the resulting network graph (e.g., Fig. 4).
We study the performance of the CFLS algorithm by varying
the radio coverage experienced by each access point and
the number of access points in the environment. The CFLS
algorithm is a ﬁtting subject for this as it was also studied
in [13], [14]. We consider from 50 to 400 access points
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-331-5
ICAS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

in increments of 50 and a radius of 10 to 60 for the disk
graph model. We measure the number of iterations it takes
to converge the entire network to a conﬂict-free channel
assignment (Fig. 4).
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
Iterations
Number of access points
Iterations required for a conflict−free channel assignment
 
 
R = 10
R = 20
R = 30
R = 40
R = 50
R = 60
Fig. 4. Performance of the CFLS algorithm.
Aligned to our prior work in this area [21] where we
leveraged the Matlab environment for simulation tasks, we
ﬁnd that the convergence delay of the CFLS algorithm scales
nicely with an increase in the IEEE 802.11 network density.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
With the deployment of IEEE 802.11 type systems increas-
ing in density, particularly in urban areas, attention is drawn to
optimization aspects. And though the IEEE 802.11k standard
has been developed speciﬁcally to support radio resource
management applications, an understanding of radio resource
management approaches and algorithms suitable for these
settings is not fully established. To address this shortcoming,
we have developed a simulation model for distributed channel
assignment problems in an autonomic networking arrange-
ment. We intend to continue studying dense IEEE 802.11
networks under a more dynamic arrangement where a mix
of channel assignment algorithms may manifest.
REFERENCES
[1] V. Gazis, A. Kousaridas, C. Polychronopoulos, T. Raptis, and N. Alonis-
tioti, “Self-Management Capacities in Future Internet Wireless Systems,”
in The First International Conference on Adaptive and Self-adaptive
Systems and Applications, 2009.
[2] A. Akella, G. Judd, S. Seshan, and P. Steenkiste, “Self-management in
chaotic wireless deployments,” in MobiCom ’05: Proceedings of the 11th
annual international conference on Mobile computing and networking.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2005, pp. 185–199.
[3] IEEE Standards Association. (2007) IEEE Standard for Information
Technology Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between
Systems Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Speciﬁc Requirements
Part 11: Wireless Lan Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical
Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations. [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.
org/getieee802/download/802.11-2007.pdf
[4] A. Mishra, S. Banerjee, and W. Arbaugh, “Weighted coloring based
channel assignment for wlans,” SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun.
Rev., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 19–31, 2005.
[5] Cisco, “Radio resource management under uniﬁed wireless networks,”
Online, Tech. Rep., 2010. [Online]. Available: http://www.cisco.com/en/
US/tech/tk722/tk809/technologies tech note09186a008072c759.shtml
[6] HP,
“Radio
resource
management
and
spectrum
analysis
best
practices,”
Online,
Tech.
Rep.,
2012
2012.
[Online].
Available:
http://h20195.www2.hp.com/V2/GetPDF.aspx%2F4AA4-4997ENW.pdf
[7] IEEE Standards Association. (2008, June) IEEE Standard for Infor-
mation Technology Telecommunications and Information Exchange
Between Systems Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Speciﬁc
Requirements Part 11: Wireless Lan Medium Access Control (MAC)
and Physical Layer (PHY) Speciﬁcations Amendment 1: Radio Resource
Measurement of Wireless LANs.
[8] K. Leung and B.-J. Kim, “Frequency assignment for ieee 802.11 wireless
networks,” in Vehicular Technology Conference, 2003. VTC 2003-Fall.
2003 IEEE 58th, vol. 3, 6-9 2003, pp. 1422 – 1426 Vol.3.
[9] M. Yu, H. Luo, and K. Leung, “A dynamic radio resource management
technique for multiple aps in wlans,” Wireless Communications, IEEE
Transactions on, vol. 5, no. 7, pp. 1910 –1919, july 2006.
[10] M. da Silva and J. Ferreira de Rezende, “A dynamic channel allocation
mechanism for ieee 802.11 networks,” Sept. 2006, pp. 225–230.
[11] J. Riihijarvi, M. Petrova, P. Mahonen, and J. Barbosa, “Performance
evaluation of automatic channel assignment mechanism for ieee 802.11
based on graph colouring,” Sept. 2006, pp. 1–5.
[12] B. Kauffmann, F. Baccelli, A. Chaintreau, V. Mhatre, K. Papagiannaki,
and C. Diot, “Measurement-based self organization of interfering 802.11
wireless access networks,” in INFOCOM 2007. 26th IEEE International
Conference on Computer Communications. IEEE, 6-12 2007, pp. 1451
–1459.
[13] D. Leith and P. Clifford, “A self-managed distributed channel selection
algorithm for wlans,” April 2006, pp. 1–9.
[14] D. Malone, P. Clifford, D. Reid, and D. Leith, “Experimental imple-
mentation of optimal wlan channel selection without communication,”
in New Frontiers in Dynamic Spectrum Access Networks, 2007. DySPAN
2007. 2nd IEEE International Symposium on, 17-20 2007, pp. 316 –319.
[15] E. G. Villegas, E. Lopez-Aguilera, R. Vidal, and J. Paradells, “Effect of
adjacent-channel interference in ieee 802.11 wlans,” in Cognitive Radio
Oriented Wireless Networks and Communications, 2007. CrownCom
2007. 2nd International Conference on, 1-3 2007, pp. 118 –125.
[16] J. Nachtigall, A. Zubow, and J.-P. Redlich, “The impact of adjacent
channel interference in multi-radio systems using ieee 802.11,” in
Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference, 2008.
IWCMC ’08. International, 6-8 2008, pp. 874 –881.
[17] W. L. Tan, K. Bialkowski, and M. Portmann, “Evaluating adjacent
channel interference in ieee 802.11 networks,” in Vehicular Technology
Conference (VTC 2010-Spring), 2010 IEEE 71st, 16-19 2010, pp. 1 –5.
[18] J. Riihijarvi, M. Petrova, and P. Mahonen, “Frequency allocation for
wlans using graph colouring techniques,” Jan. 2005, pp. 216–222.
[19] R. Diestel, Graph Theory, 3rd ed., ser. Graduate Texts in Mathematics.
Springer-Verlag, 2005, vol. 173. [Online]. Available: http://www.math.
uni-hamburg.de/home/diestel/books/graph.theory/
[20] W.
Klotz,
“Graph
coloring
algorithms,”
Technical
Uni-
versity
of
Clausthal,
Tech.
Rep.,
2002.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.math.tuclausthal.de/Arbeitsgruppen/Diskrete/
Optimierung/publications/2002/gca.pdf
[21] V. Gazis, K. Sasloglou, N. Frangiadakis, P. Kikiras, A. Merentitis,
K. Mathioudakis, and G. Mazarakis, “Cooperative communication in
channel assignment strategies for IEEE 802.11k WLAN systems,” in
IEEE 24th International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile
Radio Communications: Mobile and Wireless Networks (PIMRC’13 -
Mobile and Wireless Networks), London, United Kingdom, Sep. 2013.
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-331-5
ICAS 2014 : The Tenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

