Novel Modular Self-Reconﬁgurable Robot for Pipe and Plant Inspection
Sergio Leggieri
Department of Advanced Robotics,
Italian Institute of Technology,
Genova, Italy 16163
Department of Management, Information
and Production Engineering,
University of Bergamo,
Dalmine, Italy 24044
Email: sergio.leggieri@iit.it
Email: sergio.leggieri@unibg.it
Carlo Canali, Ferdinando Cannella
and Darwin Caldwell
Department of Advanced Robotics,
Italian Institute of Technology,
Genova, Italy 16163
Email: carlo.canali@iit.it
Email: ferdinando.cannella@iit.it
Email: darwin.caldwell@iit.it
Abstract—In the last decades, the trend of replacing humans
with robots has increased enormously, especially in repetitive or
dangerous tasks such as inspection and maintenance. Various
inspection robots have been developed so far, but usually those
systems are designed for addressing very speciﬁc operations.
The spread of such devices is mainly limited by the lack in
adaptability to different tasks, and by the design restrictions of
these robots. Instead, modular and self-reconﬁgurable robots have
proven superior performance in different scenarios. Here, the idea
of developing a modular, self-reconﬁgurable robot for inspection
is discussed. The system consists of two modular vehicles with
docking modules for reassembling into a snake robot. Thanks to
its structure, it overcomes the challenges posed during pipe and
plant inspections.
Keywords–inspection robot; modular robots; self-reconﬁgurable
mobile robot.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Although robots are becoming very popular in industry,
nowadays most of the inspection and maintenance operations
on structures and equipments are still largely carried out by
human operators. Human-based inspection, however, may not
be the optimal solution in terms of costs and time. Preparatory
work is often required before starting the operations to access
the machinery or the assets and to ensure safety standard for
the workers. The reliability and repeatability of the results
is another major concern when inspections are performed by
humans.
To address the challenges mentioned above, robotic devices
have been developed in the last years to perform inspec-
tion, especially in industrial plants and in pipeline networks,
where major challenges need to be overcome to deal with
various problems that could be encountered. For example,
the geometrical features of the asset to be inspected may be
very demanding, setting sharp constraints in the design of
the robots. The environment, where the machinery and the
equipments reside, can be very harsh due to the presence
of dirt, mud, hazardous substances, staircases, or unexpected
obstacles. Finally, even the robot deployment, in some cases,
can be a risky operation for humans.
Considering all these issues, a novel modular self-
reconﬁgurable robot is proposed hereafter. Such system is
intended to perform inspection of pipelines and industrial
plants, travelling autonomously within the environments to
reach its targets. Moreover, this system can self-reconﬁgure
into a snake robot to deal with the most advanced tasks.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II presents
related works on inspection robots and snake robots; Section
III describes the system, analyzing its main features and
providing graphical representations of it; Section IV concludes
the paper and provides information about next steps in the
robot development.
II.
RELATED WORKS
Within industrial plants, the inspection can be divided into
two main groups: inspection of speciﬁc machinery and general
inspection and monitoring. For machinery, many robots have
been developed, such as [1][2]. These robots are very special-
ized devices, expressly designed for addressing inspection of
speciﬁc machinery. However, these systems may result ineffec-
tive even for different models of the same asset. For general
inspection, robots, such as [3]-[5], have been developed. These
latter systems show a great ﬂexibility to deal with different
scenarios. Such robots consist in assemblies of different robotic
devices like mobile platforms with robotic arms on top.
In pipe inspection, usually, robots have to deal with highly
constrained environments. In addition to the passive systems
whose motion ability is guaranteed by ﬂuid ﬂow, the active sys-
tems can be categorized according to the locomotion methods,
as in [6][7]. Some of these robots have standard structure, with
wheels or tracks for moving and cameras as visual feedback.
However, their use can be quite limited. In the same manner,
other devices have just one or two modules, but are equipped
with complex mechanisms for adapting to pipe networks [8]. In
recent years, however, the trend has shifted toward the design
of versatile robots with many articulated modules [7].
Since the ’70s, many snake robots have been developed,
such as [9]-[12]. These robots can move in complex environ-
ments coordinating the motion of their parts, using the well-
known gaits called lateral undulation and side-winding, see
[13]. Due to their slender bodies made of redundant modules,
snake-like robots are extremely suitable in performing inspec-
tion in constrained environments, as described in [14]-[16].
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

The unchallenged mobility and adaptability of these robots,
however, come at the cost of a high mechanical complexity
and a demanding motion control.
III.
THE SYSTEM
Modularity and self-reconﬁgurability are key features for
designing multipurpose robots [17][18]. Some robots that have
proven to exhibit good performance in surveillance and search
and rescue missions are described in [19]-[22]. Here, the robot
design is based on these examples, but it introduces important
novelties in its mechanical structure and features, which are
described throughout this section.
The system consists of two independent vehicles that
Figure 1. Representation of two vehicles docked at the base for recharging:
1 main base; 2 docking module interfaces.
can self-reconﬁgure into a snake robot through their docking
modules. The vehicles are intended for performing most of
the inspection tasks by themselves, so the motion control
of individual robots involves only few modules and joints.
Nonetheless, the vehicles can deal with complex scenarios or
particularly demanding tasks by coupling together and self-
reconﬁguring into a snake robot. In this way, the mechanical
and control complexities of the system increase, but the robot
can exploit its redundant kinematics to overcome obstacles,
walk through difﬁcult terrains, or climb vertical pipe segments.
The complete system includes also a main base. This base
is meant for recharging purposes, but eventually it can be
used also as a platform for travelling long distances and for
deploying the vehicles in proximity of the point of interest.
Finally, it is reasonable to assume that, after docking the two
vehicles, the main base can use them as manipulators widening
the possible ﬁelds of application of this system. A graphical
representation of the entire system is given in Figure 1.
A. The vehicles
Both vehicles consist of three main modules and a docking
module at one extreme, as shown in Figure 2. The modules are
connected through active joints that form two specular inter-
modules kinematic chains with respect to the central segment.
Each docking module is then connected to the front of each
vehicle through another kinematic chain.
The vehicle utilizes a combination of active/passive tracks
Figure 2. Representation of the vehicle: 1 central module; 2 extreme
modules; 3 docking module; 4 inter-modules kinematic chains; 5 docking
module kinematic chain.
for locomotion. The extreme modules contain all the required
electronics and the control boards for actuating the two motors
that drive the tracks. The central module has a passive track,
it stores the batteries, the sensors for inspection and the
pitch joints of the inter-modules kinematic chains. Each inter-
modules chain consists of one pitch joint, a link and an active
Cardan joint.
This kinematics allows the vehicle to steer by rotating its
extremes on the horizontal plane, as discussed in the next
subsection. On the sagittal plane, the same kinematics allows
the robot to adapt to slopes or gaps, overcome obstacles, and
climb stairs. By deﬁning proper gaits, the vehicles can perform
lateral movements or turn on the spot using its modules as
limbs. Moreover, the central part can be displaced vertically
to push against pipe walls increasing the grip on its tracks to
possibly move in vertical pipes as well.
The docking module kinematics is similar to the one
previously described, but the joints are arranged in reverse
order: an active Cardan joint, a link and a pitch joint. This
sequence is chosen to preserve the symmetry between modules
once the two vehicles join together and form the snake robot.
The symmetry is crucial for implementing typical snake gaits
such as lateral undulation, side-winding, sinus-lifting. In snake
robot form, the system can travel easily over rough terrains,
can overcome large obstacles and can lift part of its body, as
shown in Figure 3.
B. Vehicle kinematics and maneuverability
A preliminary kinematic analysis has focused only on
the vehicle, while the docking module and its connecting
kinematics have been neglected. Nevertheless, this analysis
provides useful information for identifying crucial parameters
for the robot design.
The inter-modules kinematics has been computed using the
Denavit-Hartenberg convention [23]. As shown in Figure 4,
the ﬂoating base frame {Ob} is located in the central module.
Local frames {Ori} and {Oli} are attached on each ith link
of the chain, and the additional subscripts r and l represent
the right and left chain, respectively.
In Table I, the D-H parameters of the right kinematic
chain are summarized. The ﬁrst row represents the ﬁxed
transformation from the base frame {Ob} to the ﬁrst joint
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 3. Representation of two vehicles coupled together to form a snake
robot. In this mode, the robot can raise segments of the body to overcome
obstacles or reach high points.
Figure 4. Schematic representation of the right kinematic chain. In black, the
base frame {Ob}. In red, the local frames {Ori}.
TABLE I. D-H PARAMETERS FOR THE RIGHT KINEMATIC CHAIN
Frames
ai
αi
di
θi
{Ob} → {Or0}
l0
π/2
0
0
{Or0} → {Or1}
l1
0
0
qr1
{Or1} → {Or2}
l2
−π/2
0
qr2
{Or2} → {Or3}
l3
0
0
qr3
frame {Or0}, which is translated by l0 along the x axis and
rotated by π/2 about the same axis. The successive rows
describe the translation and rotation transformations deﬁned
by the joint variables di and θi along and about the z axis.
The parameters ai and αi represent the translation and rotation
along and about the x axis. So, li is the length of the ith link,
while qri is the angle of the ith joint. Here, the Cardan joint
is modeled as two distinct joints with local frames {Or1} and
{Or2}, which are shifted by a distance l2.
Computing the homogeneous matrices from these trans-
formations allows to describe positions and orientations of
all the local frames with respect to the base frame {Ob}.
The homogeneous matrix Ab
r3 of the last frame {Or3} serves
to identify the robot workspace. The corresponding position
vector pb
r3 of the last frame is:
pb
r3
=
" l0 + l1cr1 + l2cr12 + l3cr12cr3
l3sr3
l1sr1 + l2sr12 + l3sr12cr3
#
(1)
Here, l0, l1, l2 and l3 are the link lengths; c and s refer to the
cosine and sinus functions; the subscript r3 stands for the joint
angle qr3; and the subscript r12 represents the sum qr1 +qr2.
Focusing on the third component of the vector pb
r3, it is
possible to compute the maximum height H that the extreme
module can reach, as follows:
H
=
h
2 −
h
2cr12
+ l1sr1 + l2sr12 + (l3 + l4)sr12cr3
(2)
Here, the ﬁrst term is half the central module height h; the
second is the projection of half the extreme module height
h onto the global z axis. The remaining part is the third
component of the position vector pb
r3 to whom it is added
l4, which is the length from frame Or3 to the front wheel.
Although this formula does not consider the system dynamics,
it gives preliminary information to deﬁne how the link lengths
affect the maximum height H.
The maneuverability analysis provides further information
for deﬁning further design parameters. Although the mono-
tread design reduces the number of motors in the vehicle
and makes it less sensitive with respect to debris, this feature
introduces additional challenges in steering the system. For
instance, the skid-steering technique used in caterpillars can
not be used here. However, the two active yaw joints allow to
rotate the extreme modules on the horizontal plane, as shown in
Figure 5. Assuming that all the modules lay on this plane and
have uniform tangential velocity v, it is possible to evaluate
the curvature radius rc of the system as follows:
rc
=
l3 + (l0+l1+l2)
cos qr3
tan qr3
(3)
So, the angular rate ω of the central module is:
ω
=
v
rc
(4)
Equations (2) − (4) depend on the link lengths of the
robot. So, increasing the lengths l1, l2, l3 and l4 ensures
to reach and overcome higher obstacles, but, in addition, it
increases the curvature radius of the vehicle, thus limiting
its maneuverability in constrained environments. Such dualism
reinforces the idea of designing a modular, self-reconﬁgurable
robot.
C. The docking module
Various technologies and mechanisms [24]-[27] have been
developed for connecting autonomously two or more robotic
modules. Some coupling devices are based on activation and
de-activation of shape-memory alloys, [24][25], others are
based on actuated mechanisms [26][27]. Since these latter
seem to provide a good trade-off between connection ro-
bustness and power consumption, the vehicles utilize docking
devices based on a novel actuated mechanism that is described
hereafter.
The docking modules, at the extremes of the vehicles,
have passive wheels in place of tracks. Each frame stores the
batteries and a gearbox driven by a single motor. The gearbox
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 5. Representation of the vehicle in the C-shape conﬁguration adopted
to steer.
consists of three sprockets: one in the middle, driven by motor;
and two lateral with a ﬁxed screw each. The outer faces of each
module are complementary, and on each surface there are two
tampered pins and two threaded sockets. Hence, one docking
module is rotated by ±90 deg around the global x axis with
respect to the other one. When the vehicles get in contact, the
motors drive the gearboxes. The lateral gears, besides rotating,
slide along the central sprocket pulling out the bolts that tighten
to the complementary threaded sockets. Each docking module
also includes a camera for vision, a set of infrared transmitters
and receivers, and sliding contacts.
D. The main base
The design of the main base is not completely deﬁned yet.
However, the primary purpose of this system is to recharge the
vehicles. On the base, there are two docking interfaces, which
have the same coupling mechanism as the docking modules.
These interfaces are driven by roll joints, in such a way that
the docking ports in the base can be re-aligned to properly
match the conﬁguration of docking modules on the vehicles,
as shown in Figure 1.
The roll joints can also rotate the vehicles, which can be
used as robotic arms, as in Figure 6. Moreover, it is under
consideration the possibility of mounting wheels or tracks
on the base. This additional feature can be useful to deploy
the vehicles near the point of interest, especially when the
inspection has to be performed in very wide areas.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The system described in this work aims at replacing human
operators in performing inspection in inaccessible or risky
environments, such as pipelines or industrial plants. Modularity
and self-reconﬁgurability are considered as key features to
fulﬁll this purpose.
The proposed device consists of two modular mono-tread
vehicles with active joints. The novel mono-tread design
reduces the chances to get stuck on debris, but, in turn, it
introduces some maneuverability limitations. These drawbacks
have been identiﬁed and discussed, analyzing the vehicle
kinematics and maneuverability. Notably, the motion control of
the system, in this conﬁguration, involves only a few modules
and joints.
Figure 6. Representation of the vehicles used as manipulator. Once coupled,
the roll joints within the base rotate the vehicles in the double arms
conﬁguration.
The docking modules, based on the novel mechanism
discussed, allow the vehicles to reconﬁgure into a snake robot
or to connect to the main base. As a snake robot, the motion
control increases in complexity, but the system can perform
advanced operations, such as crossing rough terrains, lifting
part of the body or travelling through difﬁcult pipe segments.
The project is still at an early stage, with ongoing simula-
tions to evaluate the performance of such system and to deﬁne
its design parameters. The deﬁnition of dynamic models for
the robot as vehicle and as snake is another crucial step toward
the development of the proposed system.
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Zwicker, W. Zesch, and R. Moser, “A modular inspection robot
platform for power plant applicationst,” in 2010 1st International
Conference on Applied Robotics for the Power Industry, Oct. 2010,
pp. 1–6.
[2]
G. Caprari et al., “Highly compact robots for inspection of power
plants,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 29, Gen. 2012, pp. 47–68.
[3]
J. Steele et al., “Development of an Oil and Gas Reﬁnery Inspection
Robot,” ASME International Mechanical Engineering Congress and
Exposition, Proceedings (IMECE), vol. 4, Nov. 2014, pp. 1–10.
[4]
I. Maurtua et al., “MAINBOT
Mobile Robots for Inspection and
Maintenance in Extensive Industrial Plants,” Energy Procedia, vol. 49,
2014, pp. 1810–1819.
[5]
S. Soldan, J. Welle, T. Barz, A. Kroll, and D. Schulz, Towards
Autonomous Robotic Systems for Remote Gas Leak Detection and
Localization in Industrial Environments.
Springer Tracts in Advanced
Robotics, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, Jan. 2014, pp. 233–247, in
Yoshida, K. and Tadokoro, S., Field and Service Robotics, ISBN: 978-
3-642-40685-0.
[6]
J. Mirats-Tur and W. Garthwaite, “Robotic Devices for Water Main
In-Pipe Inspection: A Survey,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 27, Jul.
2010, pp. 491–508.
[7]
G. Mills, A. Jackson, and R. Richardson, “Advances in the Inspection
of Unpiggable Pipelines,” Robotics, vol. 6, Nov. 2017, p. 36.
[8]
J. Park, D. Hyun, W. Cho, T. Kim, and H. Yang, “Normal-Force Control
for an In-Pipe Robot According to the Inclination of Pipelines,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 58, Dec. 2011, pp. 5304–
5310.
[9]
S. Hirose, “Snake-like locomotors and manipulators,” Biologiclly In-
spired Robots, 1993.
[10]
M. Mori and S. Hirose, “Development of active cord mechanism ACM-
R3 with agile 3D mobility,” in Proceedings 2001 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. Expanding the Societal
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Role of Robotics in the Next Millennium (Cat. No.01CH37180, Mar.
2001, pp. 1552–1557.
[11]
C. Wright et al., “Design and architecture of the uniﬁed modular
snake robot,” in 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation, May 2012, pp. 4347–4354.
[12]
P. Liljeb¨ack, K. Y. Pettersen, and Ø. Stavdahl, “A snake robot with a
contact force measurement system for obstacle-aided locomotion,” in
2010 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation, Jun.
2010, pp. 683–690.
[13]
S. Hirose and M. Mori, “Biologically Inspired Snake-like Robots,” in
2004 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics, Sep.
2004, pp. 1–7.
[14]
H. Schempf, E. Mutschler, A. Gavaert, G. Skoptsov, and W. Crowley,
“Visual and nondestructive evaluation inspection of live gas mains using
the Explorer family of pipe robots,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 27,
May 2010, pp. 217–249.
[15]
J. Borenstein, M. Hansen, and A. Borrell, “The OmniTread OT-4 Ser-
pentine Robot 1 Design and Performance,” Journal of Field Robotics,
vol. 24, Jul. 2007, pp. 601–621.
[16]
S. A. Fjerdingen, P. Liljeb¨ack, and A. A. Transeth, “A snake-like robot
for internal inspection of complex pipe structures (PIKo),” in 2009
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
Oct. 2009, pp. 5665–5671.
[17]
J. Liu, X. Zhang, and G. Hao, “Survey on Research and Development of
Reconﬁgurable Modular Robots,” Advances in Mechanical Engineering,
vol. 8, Aug. 2016, pp. 1–21.
[18]
S. Chennareddy, A. Agrawal, and A. Karuppiah, “Modular Self-
Reconﬁgurable Robotic Systems: A Survey on Hardware Architec-
tures,” Journal of Robotics, vol. 2017, Mar. 2017, pp. 1–19.
[19]
H. Zhang, G. Zong, and Z. Deng, A Reconﬁgurable Mobile Robots
System Based on Parallel Mechanism. IntechOpen, Apr. 2008, chapter
16, pp. 347–362, in Wu, H., Parallel Manipulators, towards New
Applications, ISBN: 978-3-902613-40-0.
[20]
W. Wei and T. Huilin, “Reconﬁgurable multi-robot system kinematic
modeling and motion planning,” in 2011 6th IEEE Conference on
Industrial Electronics and Applications, Jun. 2011, pp. 1672–1677.
[21]
H. B. Brown, J. M. Vande Weghe, C. A. Bererton, and P. K. Khosla,
“Millibot trains for enhanced mobility,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on
Mechatronics, vol. 7, no. 4, Dec. 2002, pp. 452–461.
[22]
P. Ben-Tzvi, A. A. Goldenberg, and J. Zu, “Design and Analysis of a
Hybrid Mobile Robot Mechanism With Compounded Locomotion and
Manipulation Capability,” Journal of Mechanical Design, vol. 130, Jul.
2008.
[23]
B. Siciliano and O. Khatib, Eds., Springer handbook of robotics.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2016, ISBN: 978-3-540-23957-4.
[24]
A. Castano, A. Behar, and P. Will, “The Conro modules for reconﬁg-
urable robots,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 7, Dec.
2002, pp. 403–409.
[25]
H. Kurokawa et al., “M-TRAN II: metamorphosis from a four-legged
walker to a caterpillar,” in 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2003) (Cat. No.03CH37453),
Nov. 2003, pp. 2454–2459.
[26]
D. Li, H. Fu, and W. Wang, “Ultrasonic based autonomous docking
on plane for mobile robot,” in 2008 IEEE International Conference on
Automation and Logistics, Sep. 2008, pp. 1396–1401.
[27]
H. Kurokawa et al., “Distributed self-reconﬁguration of M-TRAN III
modular robotic system,” The International Journal of Robotic Research,
vol. 27, Mar. 2008, pp. 373–386.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

