Fuzzy Cognitive Maps and Weighted Classic Fuzzy Applied on Student Satisfaction 
Level 
 
Lucas Botoni de Souza 
Ruan Victor Pelloso Duarte Barros 
Patrick Prieto Soares 
DAELE (Electric Department)  
 UTFPR-CP  
Cornélio Procópio, Brazil 
lucasbotoni@hotmail.com 
ruan_pelloso@yahoo.com.br 
p.prietosoares@hotmail.com 
 
Jeferson Gonçalves Ferreira  
UTFPR-CP 
Cornélio Procópio, Brazil 
goncalves_jeferson@outlook.com 
Márcio Mendonça  
DAELE (Eletric Department) 
UTFPR-CP 
Cornélio Procópio, Brazil 
mendonca@utfpr.edu.br 
 
Abstract—This research aims to develop a Fuzzy Cognitive Map 
(FCM) and Weighted Classic Fuzzy (WCF) for the satisfaction 
level of students at Federal Technological University of Parana, 
Campus Cornélio Procópio (UTFPR-CP). The FCM combines 
aspects of other intelligent techniques. This tool has inference 
capacity through concepts and causal relations among them (the 
influence level among the variables of the model). Its 
development begins with the determination of the possible areas 
that would affect or fit as indicators for satisfaction level in 
UTFPR-CP. Through online forms, it was possible to quantify 
the influence of the following initially detected areas: professor 
training, structures of laboratories and classrooms, habitation, 
library and cleaning. In general, educational institutions do not 
have tools to provide a critical analysis of its quality. This work 
proposes a tool for improving the institution in a few years. 
Thus, with the development of the FCM model, it was possible 
to identify the positive and negative points that affect the 
satisfaction level in UTFPR-CP. Finally, to validate the results a 
WCF was used with same structure and heuristic for 
comparison with FCM. 
Keywords- Fuzzy Cognitive Maps; Quantitative Analysis; Level 
of Satisfaction; Operational Research; Weighted Classic Fuzzy. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In Brazil, educational statistics show that only 9% of 
young between 18-24 years enrolled in higher education at 
the beginning of this decade. As motivation of this work, it is 
observed that in Brazil there is an evaluation policy, SINAES 
(in Portuguese, Sistema Nacional de Avaliação do Ensino 
Superior), National System for the Evaluation of Higher 
Education, which since 2004 allowed the participation of 
students in the evaluation of their university and graduation 
courses. It should be emphasized that the increasing number 
of opportunities itself does not guarantee the permanence of 
young people in higher education [1]. It is necessary to invest 
in the conditions that the student enters in the university, 
trying to understand their needs, difficulties and satisfaction. 
Currently, the evaluation of higher education, especially 
in the engineering area, is an important part of the evaluation 
of the existing educational system, which plays a key role in 
strengthening the management of higher education [2]. In 
that way, one can observe the capacity of evaluation for 
educational standard. So, the purpose of education is to help 
students create a modern consciousness to improve the 
capacity for innovation and criticism by various means, such 
as university, business and government [3].  
It is important to remember that despite the large 
expansion, many institutional managers do not give 
importance to students’ opinions to identify their level of 
satisfaction. In the case of public institutions, one has the 
impression that this aspect does not deserve attention, 
because it is a service provision. It should also be 
remembered that public institutions are paid through public 
resources, which makes it obligatory for the citizen attended 
by them to be heard and helped in their needs. 
Developing and testing methods and techniques that can 
assess reliability and results of student satisfaction levels is 
an indispensable task and a powerful tool for academic and 
financial management. Nevertheless, a statistical analysis 
cannot be done with the purpose of assessing higher scores of 
academic productions of researchers. Such data should be 
part of the management agenda of institutions that should 
listen to students, teachers and the community. 
The preceding paragraphs define the purpose and 
justification of this work, which is corroborated with the 
construction of a computational intelligence tool that, based 
on qualitative information, can quantitatively diagnose and 
identify critical points. Moreover, Decision Support Systems 
can provide assistance during the process of decision making. 
FCMs have been used successfully to develop Decision 
Support Systems (DSS). The important advantage of FCMs 
is that they can handle even incomplete or conflicting 
information. This is essential, where experts should take 
many factors under consideration before they can reach a 
decision [4]. 
Among all computational intelligence techniques, 
Artificial Neural Networks exceeds by its ability to process 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

massive data at the same time [5], or by acquiring knowledge 
from one or more experts using Fuzzy systems. About the 
Fuzzy Logic, it can be mentioned its ability to reason based 
on uncertain data through rules and membership functions 
[6]. 
In Fuzzy systems, Fuzzy Cognitive Maps can be 
highlighted by how it abstracts knowledge, mainly, when 
structured in graphs [7]. Cognitive maps are the origin of 
FCM, and they were first proposed by Axelrod [8] to 
represent words, ideas, tasks or different items connected and 
radially organized around a central concept. Graphs are 
diagrams representing connections among concepts from a 
certain theme. Those elements are intuitively arranged 
accordingly to its importance in a structured way. 
In Franco and Montibeller’s work [9], the goal is not to 
reach a consensus, but that the participants agree about the 
problem formulation. Throughout this process, the handler 
has the important duty of supporting the participants on 
exploring their thoughts on the problem and expressing their 
perspective.  
As mentioned above, in a specific manner, this paper is 
focused on estimating the satisfaction level of the university 
student body, and, also on identifying critical points or 
factors that can be improved in order to achieve better results, 
in this paper the university [10]. 
This work is developed as follows: Section 2 discusses the 
fundamentals of computational intelligence systems and 
discusses Fuzzy systems applied in correlated areas. Section 
3 presents background FCM. In Section 4 is presented and 
discussed the results. Section 5 concludes, addresses future 
works and finalize the paper. 
II. FUZZY SYSTEM APPLICATED ON EDUCATION 
Similar works can be found in literature, like the work 
proposed in [10], which presents a FCM practical use on 
modelling educational success critical factors for Control 
Engineering through case study at Istanbul Technical 
University (ITU). A survey is applied on eight academics 
and, through the results, eight FCMs are extracted and later 
aggregated in a resulting FCM. Concepts like academic and 
personal profile and teacher’s excessive work load are used 
as input concepts, and the output concept is the Control 
Engineering program success. 
One can also cite the work of Gao et al. [2], which uses a 
Fuzzy Logic method to improve the engineering courses 
tendencies, having great importance in an engineering 
professional education evaluation to reach a global 
dimension.  
The work in [11] proposes the Fuzzy Analytical 
Hierarchy Process (FAHP) to evaluate a case study at 
Nanyang Institute of Technology, with the objective of 
offering theoretic and practical orientation for the 
development of innovative education. In this work, it’s 
proposed an indices’ table for the evaluation of teaching 
quality and innovation, which includes four dimensions: 
government, society, university and student. In each one of 
these dimensions are sub-concepts included and specified. 
For the government dimension: fund entry, management 
organization, politics and measurements; the university 
dimension includes: concept and planning, curriculum 
system, professors staff, cultural environment and base 
installation; the society dimension consist of: social 
reputation and environment, company groups; lastly, in the 
student dimension: research fulfillment and capacity, 
entrepreneurship and practical activities. The work shown in 
[12] uses a Fuzzy Neural Network-based model to estimate 
the contribution of different educational levels of human 
capital (abilities and expertise). Through Fuzzy Neural 
Network (FNN) mapping, four contribution levels of 
education in human capital are estimated in China’s three 
regions, each one with different knowledge areas and 
technology levels. They are: illiteracy and primary, 
fundamental, graduation and postgraduate.   
The work seen in [13] uses a FNN in students’ emotion 
recognition, and it’s applied in smart educational systems that 
use facial recognition systems for pre-programmed teaching 
strategy adjustment or adaptation in the proposed intelligent 
system. The emotion recognition technique uses three 
characteristics from the students’ images: facial area, 
distance between eyelids, and mouth’s corner.  
At last, the work in [14] uses a FNN to map human capital 
levels in the university through two methods. According to 
the authors, the human capital concept in the university refers 
to workman knowledge and abilities, which is formed by the 
educational investment, professional formation, health and 
migration. More specifically, one can cite the Mendonça and 
collaborators work [15], which employs a Classic FCM to 
determinate the student´s satisfaction level in the university. 
III. FUZZY COGNITIVE MAPS, BACKGROUND AND 
DEVELOPMENT 
This section presents a FCM background and development 
diagnostic using FCM and classic Fuzzy. 
A. FCM Background 
Since Kosko’s pioneer work [15], which extended 
Axelrod’s cognitive maps [8] for the inclusion of Fuzzy 
Logic, countless FCM applications are reported in literature 
in several areas of knowledge. There are applications in 
artificial life [16]-[17], social systems [18], modelling and 
decision making in corporate and e-commerce environments 
[19], image point detection in stereo camera systems [20] and 
decision making in medical area [21]. The works [22]-[23] 
apply FCM evolutions in autonomous mobile robotics and 
process control, respectively Event Driven – Fuzzy Cognitive 
Maps (ED-FCM) and Dynamic Cognitive Networks (DCN). 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

In [24] a formal adaptation of the FCM is presented: this new 
tool is designed as TAFCM (Timed Automata Fuzzy 
Cognitive Maps). In addition, [17] presents a DFCM 
(Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Maps), an FCM evolution. It is 
observed that these works also present semantic variations of 
the original proposal, adapting the FCM structure according 
to the treated problem. 
This work manually develops the FCM, because the 
desired output is a diagnostic. Thus, causal relations cannot 
be adjusted by genetic algorithms, for example, because 
every causal relation has a semantic meaning. The values 
were defined by checking the student’s opinion. In another 
way, as in robotics and control applications, the FCM 
controllers must achieve objectives, as in the specific case of 
valve actuation, used in the Mendonça’s and collaborators 
works [22]-[23]. The cognitive maps technique is widely 
used in structuring complex problems in groups.  
To model the problem and obtain qualitative results, it 
was decided to use the Classic FCM, which had its structure 
modeled by concept definitions and causal relations, in order 
to establish influence between them. Thus, specialists’ 
knowledge was applied in the proposed FCM elaboration, 
which has as function to evaluate the student satisfaction 
level of the Cornélio Procópio campus of Federal Technical 
University of Paraná (UTFPR-CP).  
In general, it can be defined that FCM combines Artificial 
Neural Network (ANN) aspects [5], Fuzzy Logic [6], 
Semantic Nets [25], among other computational intelligence 
techniques. In this context, it can be conceptualized that FCM 
is a knowledge-based causality methodology to model 
complex-decision systems [15]. A FCM describes an 
unknown system behavior in concept terms, which represents 
an entity, state, variable or system characteristic [26]. A 
Classic FCM example is a graph and a synaptic weights 
matrix, which can be found in [27]. 
The FCM concepts can be updated through iteration with 
the other concepts and their own value. This is given by 
matrix (3), with the causal relations weights, and is 
represented by the sum’s weight.  The concepts values evolve 
after several iterations, as shown in equation (1), until they 
stabilize at a fixed point or limit cycle [28]. 
               
previous
i
ji
n
j i
j
j
i
A
W
A
f
A





)
(
(
1
           (1) 
Since k is the iteration counter, n is the number of graph 
nodes, Wij are the weight of the arc which connects concept 
Cj to concept Ci. Aiprevious are the concept value Ci in the 
actual iteration (previous), and f function (equation 2) is a 
sigmoid: 
                         
e x
x
f
 
 1
1
)
(
                           
(2) 
 
In some cases, the FCM may not stabilize and oscillate, 
or even show chaotic behavior [27]. Generally, for well-
behaved systems, it is observed that after a finite number of 
iterations, the concepts values reach an equilibrium point or 
a limit cycle. This can be observed in Fig. 4, in which after 4 
iterations the previously modelled concept final values stay 
fixed. Recently, the FCM convergence is investigated by 
[38]. 
 
B. FCM Development 
This paper is models a classic FCM, similar to Kosko’s, 
by identifying the relevant variables of the proposed problem, 
and the causal relations are obtained through a survey on 
electric engineering students.  
The initial development phase is the identification and 
construction of the cognitive model using expertise 
knowledge and the causal relations obtained from student’s 
opinion. Then, the FCM inference equations (2) and (3) are 
applied. The next phase consists of obtaining the quantitative 
values of the “satisfaction level of the student body” (main 
goal of this research), and the values of the other concepts. 
And finally, validating those results with the opinion of those 
interviewed. To simplify, all concepts started with score zero, 
for later evaluation of the FCM inference. 
There are many aspects that may have an effect on the 
satisfaction level. In this paper, eight aspects were chosen and 
the causal relations among them were defined through a quiz. 
A sample of students gave a score from zero to ten for each 
of the concepts connection that could actuate on the 
satisfaction level of the students of UTFPR-CP (Federal 
University of Technology – Paraná, Cornélio Procópio 
Campus), mainly from the electric engineering and control 
and automation engineering. 
Since the 1960s, many researches attempted to identify 
the students’ satisfaction levels. It’s important to mention that 
satisfaction itself is a concept of difficult analysis for being 
relative to each student perspective. The vast diversity of 
models, scales and methods to asses this concept proves that 
complexity. One of the most used methods is the College 
Student Satisfaction Questionnaire [29]. More researches 
made in Brazil on this topic can be seen in [30] and [31]. 
Altogether, this paper tries to capture how the students 
perceive the course and the education conditions propitiated 
by the institutions, that way being of major interest of 
manager and teachers. 
According to the general statistic theory [32], in the 
literature an analysis was made with a sample of 30 students, 
from the data acquired, it was obtained a 90% of reliability 
and a margin of error of 6.8%, representing a group about 500 
students [15]. Considering the Control and Automation 
Engineering course still has no graduates and have 
approximately 200 students, this same analysis can be 
applied, thus, 35 students are used in this research. 
The results and structure does not intend to classify nor 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

qualify the institution or course. However, because of its 
exploratory nature, this paper can be used to give a 
quantitative evaluation of the satisfaction level, work and/or 
study in the Campus. Another aspect of this approach is 
identifying possible improvement points on the variables of 
the cognitive model. 
Fig. 3 shows the final model with the structure and its 
causal relation. It’s noteworthy that the model applied is the 
same classic from [15] and so, does not consider time, in 
other words, all concepts take place simultaneously. In this 
context, there are improvements on FCM that deals with this 
“disadvantage”, for example: E-FCM (Extended-FCM) on 
[33], RB-FCM (Rule Based-FCM) on [34] and DCN 
(Dynamic Cognitive Networks) on [35]. There is a recent 
review of the last 10 years about other improvement 
applications and training of FCMs. The concepts chosen for 
the FCM model are shown on table I: 
TABLE I.  
FCM CONCEPTS RELATIONS 
C1: 
Student Satisfaction Level 
C2: 
Professor’s Capacitation/Performance 
C3: 
Pedagogic Structure - Library 
C4: 
Habitation 
C5: 
University Restaurant Quality 
C6: 
Cleaning - Accessibility 
C7: 
Leisure and Sports Activities 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Student satisfaction level FCM 
 
Fig. 1 shows all variable involved on obtaining the 
satisfaction level of the students. The equation (4) shows the 
cause and effect relation among the concepts. Thereby, 
according to the intensity of the causality among the 
concepts, the final values are changed, especially the C1 – 
output concept of the satisfaction level. 
 
 W = 
0 
0.46 
0 
0.6 
0 
0.20 
0.20 
(4) 
0.85 
0 
0.5 
0.25 
-0.20 
0.20 
0.1 
0.85 
0.65 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
-0.20 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.20 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.18 
0.28 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0.50 
0.10 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
 
In order to validate the FCM proposed and establish a 
possible comparison with the same heuristic, it was opted to 
use in this research a classic inference system through a 
Fuzzy system, but it’s not in the scope of this paper to 
demonstrate its development details; more information of can 
be seen in [36]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Fuzzy structure  
 
Figure 3. Fuzzy example surface 
 
Fuzzy systems are universal approximators, with 
applications in many areas, as seen on [6] and [37]. It was 
opted to use a Weighted Classic Fuzzy with weights given to 
each rule in order to vary their influence on the Fuzzy 
inference, and a similar structure of FCM.  
The Fuzzy inference method chose was Mandani’s with 6 
input and 1 output concept. Each variable had 5 membership 
functions, triangular and trapezoidal ones, and a total of 21 
rules were used, for the simplicity of the developed Fuzzy 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

system according to the FCM values. The Fig. 2 shows the 
structure and figure 3 shows an example of its surface. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
After modeling the concepts, especially the numerical 
values of the causal relations voted by the students, the model 
is calculated by equations (3) and (4) and it evolves to the 
final values, which are the objective of the work. It is 
observed that the initial values of the concepts were 
considered zero.  
The Fig.4 shows the results and evolution of each of the 
concepts modeled in a scale from zero to ten, with emphasis 
on the output concept (level of satisfaction in UTFPR-CP). 
 
 
Figure 3. Results by Fuzzy Cognitive Maps 
 
It is observed in this FCM that it stably evolved reaching 
a critical point (a short variation around the final result). It 
can also be observed that there were some critical points in 
the research and construction of the model, such as the 
parking conditions in places near the University, Quality of 
the university restaurant in relation to the small physical 
space for the demand of students causing delays in the classes 
after lunches and breaks, and others. This is due to its rapid 
growth in the last ten years and should be reviewed by its 
managers 
with 
government 
officials 
for 
future 
improvements. However, the final grade of this research was 
relatively good, close to eight, with possibilities for 
improvement with treatment of the critical points identified 
in this research.  
Since this work addresses a situation of static or time 
invariant diagnosis, it does not make sense to present an 
evolution curve of the fuzzy system, only the output with the 
inputs based on the values of the weights of the FCM causal 
relations. Thus, the output of the WCF was approximately 
79%. It is emphasized that the classic version of FCM has the 
drawback of not modeling dynamical systems, because the 
causal relations are constant [7]. 
The results are initial, therefore researches that take into 
account students' perceptions, identifying their satisfaction, 
are important tools that have the potential to diagnose 
problems and propose solutions ranging from structural 
aspects, such as the availability of current titles in the library, 
to pedagogical aspects. In this context, and according to the 
obtained results, it can be affirmed that the satisfaction level 
of UTFPR-CP students had a significant final mark of 
approval, among the items chosen using FCM and Classic 
Fuzzy. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
The results obtained from both proposals were similar 
with approximately 80% of the level of student satisfaction. 
The result was satisfactory and expected due to the relation 
with the Brazilian Ministry of Education’s evaluation of 
UTFPR engineering courses that obtained four stars in a 
domain of discourse from zero to five. To corroborate the 
final result found, a sample of 45 students was consulted to 
assign a final grade to UTFPR and the result found was 
approximately 8.45 on a scale from zero to ten. 
The techniques used the same logic or heuristic in their 
respective structures, and the objectives were reached by the 
results obtained from qualitative data of a research done with 
a sample of the university students. Future works addresses 
new checking in other UTFPR courses, apply in other 
universities or institutes. And finally, compare this approach 
with other intelligent techniques, such as ANFIS. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Sistema Nacional de Avaliação da Educação Superior (Sinaes). 
http://bit.ly/2ml4ILG access date: 10/02/2017 
[2] Gao Y., Yang, Jiwei and Liu F. The Research on the Comprehensive 
Assessment of Higher Engineering Education Based on Fuzzy 
Comprehensive Evaluation Method, in Future Information Technology 
and Management Engineering, 2009. FITME '09. Second International 
Conference on, pp.124-127, 13-14 Dec. 2009.  
[3] Pingwen L.Management Analysis & Diagnose”,Fujian: Press of 
Xiamen University, pp. 310-335, 2004. 
[4] E. Bourgani, G. Manis, C. D. Stylios and V. C. Georgopoulos, "Timed-
Fuzzy Cognitive Maps: An overview," 2016 IEEE International 
Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), Budapest, 
2016, pp. 004483-004488. 
[5] Haykin, S. Neural Networks and Learning Machines (3rd Edition), 
McMaster University, Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008. 
[6] Pedrycz, W. and Gomide. F. An Introduction to Fuzzy Sets: Analysis 
and Design, MIT Press, 1998. 
[7] Kosko. B. Fuzzy Cognitive Maps. Int.J. Man-Machine Studies, vol. 24, 
pp. 65–75, 1986. 
[8] Axelrod R., Structure of Decision: The Cognitive Maps of Political, 
Elites. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univ. Press, 1976. 
[9] Franco, L. A. and Montibeller, G. Facilitated modeling in operational 
research. European Journal of Operational Research, vol. 205, no. 3, 
pp. 489-500, 2010. 
[10] Yesil, E.; Ozturk, C.; Dodurka, M.F.and Sahin, A., "Control 
engineering education critical success factors modeling via Fuzzy 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Cognitive Maps," in Information Technology Based Higher Education 
and Training (ITHET), 2013 International Conference on, pp.1-8, 10-
12 Oct. 2013 
[11] Hezhan, Y. Application of Fuzzy Analytical Hierarchy Process in 
innovation education quality evaluation of higher education institution, 
in Information Management, Innovation Management and Industrial 
Engineering (ICIII), 2012 International Conference on, vol.1, pp.438-
441, 20-21 Oct. 2012. 
[12] Yu, S. and Zhu, K. Fuzzy Neural Network Applications on Estimating 
the Contribution of Different Education Levels on Human Capital of 
China, in Service Systems and Service Management, 2007 
International Conference on, pp.1-4, 9-11 June 2007. 
[13] Xiang, P. Research on the Emotion Recognition Based on the Fuzzy 
Neural Network in the Intelligence Education System, in Digital 
Manufacturing and Automation (ICDMA), 2011 Second International 
Conference on, pp.1030-1033, 5-7 Aug. 2011 
[14] Yu, S. and Zhu, K. Fuzzy Neural Network Applications on Estimating 
the Contribution of Different Education Levels on Human Capital of 
China," in Service Systems and Service Management, 2007 
International Conference on, pp.1-4, 9-11 June 2007. 
[15] Mendonca, M.; Chrun, I. R.; Finocchio, M. A. F. and de Mello, E. E.; 
"Fuzzy Cognitive Maps Applied to Student Satisfaction Level in an 
University," in IEEE Latin America Transactions, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 
3922-3927, Dec. 2015 
[16] Dickerson, J. A. and Kosko, B. Virtual worlds as Fuzzy dynamical 
systems. In: SHEU, B. (Ed.) Technology for multimedia, New York: 
IEEE Press, 1996 
[17] L. V. Arruda; M. Mendonca; F. Neves-Jr; I. Chrun; E. 
PAPAGEORGIOU, "Artificial Life Environment Modeled by 
Dynamic Fuzzy Cognitive Maps," in IEEE Transactions on Cognitive 
and Developmental Systems, vol.PP, no.99, pp.1- 
[18] Taber, R. Fuzzy cognitive maps model social systems. AI Expert, v. 9, 
p. 18-23, 1994. 
[19] Lee, K. C. and Lee, S. A cognitive map simulation approach to 
adjusting the design factors of the electronic commerce web sites. 
Expert Systems with Applications, v. 24, n. 1, p. 1-11, jan. 2003. 
[20] Pajares, G. and De La Cruz, J. M. Fuzzy cognitive maps for 
stereovision matching Pattern Recognition, vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 2101-
2114, Nov. 2006. 
[21] Papageorgiou, E.; Stylios, C. and Groumpos, P. Novel for supporting 
medical decision making of different data types based on Fuzzy 
Cognitive Map Framework. PROCEEDINGS OF THE 29TH Annual 
International Conference of the Ieee Embs Cité Internationale, Lyon, 
France August 23-26, 2007 
[22] Mendonça, M.; Arruda, L.; Neves, F. Autonomous navigation system 
using event driven-fuzzy cognitive maps. Springer Science+Business 
Media. Outubro, 2011. 
[23] Mendonça, M.; Angélico, B. A.; Arruda, L. V. R. and Neves, F. Jr. A 
Subsumption Architecture to Develop Dynamic Cognitive Network-
Based Models with Autonomous Navigation Application. Journal of 
Control, Automation and Electrical Systems, vol. 1, pp. 3–14, 2013. 
[24] Acampora, G.; and Loia, V. On the Temporal Granularity in Fuzzy 
Cognitive Maps. IEEE Transaction on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 19, no. 6, 
2011. 
[25] Russell S. J., and Norvig P., Artificial intelligence: a modern approach. 
Englewood Cliffs: Prentice Hall. 1995. 
[26] Kosko, B. Neural networks and Fuzzy systems: a dynamical systems 
approach to machine intelligence. New York: Prentice Hall, 1992. 
[27] Stylios, C. D.; Georgopoulos, V. C. and Groumpos, P. P. The use of 
Fuzzy cognitive maps in modeling systems. In: 5th IEEE 
Mediterranean Conference on Control and Systems, Paphos, Cyprus, 
21-23 July 1997. 
[28] Stylios, C. D. and Groumpos, P. P. The challenge of modeling 
supervisory systems using fuzzy cognitive maps. Journal of Intelligent 
Manufacturing, vol. 9, pp. 339-345, 1998.  
[29] Betz, E. L.; Menne, J. W.; Starr, A. M. and Klingensmith, J. E. A. 
Dimensional Analysis of College Student Satisfaction. Measurement 
and Evaluation in Guidance, vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 99-106, 1971. 
[30] Walter, S. A., Tontini, G. and Domingues M. Identificação de 
Oportunidades de Melhoria em IES Através do Uso Conjunto do 
Modelo Kano e Matriz de Importância x Desempenho. Available in: 
https://repositorio.ufsc.br/xmlui/bitstream/handle/123456789/97432/S
ilvana%20Anita%20Walter.pdf?sequence=3&isAllowed=y 
access 
date: 15/02/2017 
[31] Schleich, A. L. R., Polydoro, S. A. and Santos, A. A. Scale of 
satisfaction with academic experience of students of higher education. 
Avaliação Psicológica, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 11-20, (2006).  
Available in: 
<http://pepsic.bvsalud.org/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S1677-
04712006000100003&lng=pt&tlng=pt> access date: 23/02/2017 
[32] Larsen, Richard J.; Marx, Morris L. Introduction to Mathematical 
Statistics and Its Applications. 5. ed. Florida: Pearson Higher Ed Usa, 
2013. 744 p. 
[33] Hagiwara, M. Extended Fuzzy cognitive maps.  In: Proceedings of 
IEEE international conference on fuzzy system, New York, 1992. pp. 
795–801. 
[34] Carvalho, J. P. and Tomé, J. A. Rule based Fuzzy cognitive maps-
qualitative systems dynamics. In: Proceedings 19th international 
conference of the North America. Fuzzy information fuzzy processing 
society, pp. 407–411, 2000. 
[35] Miao, Y. C.; Miao, Y.; Tao, X.; Shen, Z. and Liu, Z. Transformation 
of cognitive maps. IEEE Transactions on Fuzzy Systems, vol. 18, no. 
1, pp. 114–124, Feb. 2010. 
[36] Zadeh, L. Fuzzy Sets - Information and Control, vol. 8, pp 338-353, 
1965. 
[37] Psssino, M. K.; Yourkovich, S. Fuzzy Control. Menlo Park: Addison-
Wesley, 1997. 
[38] Nápoles, G.; Papageorgiou, E.; Bello, R. and Vanhoof, K. “On the 
onvergence of sigmoid fuzzy cognitive maps,” Information Sciences, 
Elsevier, 2016. 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

