Simulated Ant-agent Aspects for Defining an Ant-bots Ontology 
Colin Chibaya 
Sol Plaatje University 
Kimberley, South Africa 
Email: colin.chibaya@spu.ac.za  
Ntsuxeko Shirindi 
Sol Plaatje University 
Kimberley, South Africa 
Email: 202112339@spu.ac.za 
 
Rifilwe Modiba 
Sol Plaatje University 
Kimberley, South Africa 
Email: Rifilwe.modiba@spu.ac.za 
 
 
 
Abstract—Swarm intelligence systems, wherein robotic devices 
encoded with collections of discrete abilities executed at 
individual levels to cause swarm level emergent behaviour are 
appealing to fields, such as nanotechnology. Such swarm 
intelligence systems are typically used to solve complex real-life 
problems at, often, minimal costs. For example, ant colony 
systems have been proposed for deriving solutions to tough 
problems by emulating the behaviours of natural ants. 
Solutions to complex optimisation problems such as the bridge 
crossing problem, vehicle routing problems, shortest path 
formation problem, and travelling salesman problem have 
been presented. This study takes inspiration from the various 
simulated ant colony systems, investigating the low-level 
actions and abilities of simulated ant-like robotic devices 
towards prescribing an ant-bots swarm intelligence ontology. 
In this context, an ant-bot is assumed to be a tiny naive 
autonomous robotic device built on the characteristics of 
simulated ants. On its own, an ant-bot would not achieve 
anything practical. However, as a swarm, ant-bots can create 
compelling emergent behaviour. We investigate the discrete 
aspects of simulated ant agents that cause emergent behaviour 
and explicitly cogitate them in the design of an ant-bots swarm 
intelligence ontology. Experimental tests connoted three such 
aspects as the building blocks of the desired swarm intelligence 
ontology. First, the swarm space captures metadata about the 
configuration of the simulated environments, targets, and any 
global swarm rules. On the other hand, ant-bot context 
emphasizes the individual abilities and activities of ant-bots. 
Last, the swarm interaction aspect apprehends the embraced 
communication mechanism, whether direct or indirect, local, 
or global, nature inspired, mathematical, biological, or 
otherwise. Commendably, the swarm intelligence ontology 
thereof is a mere formal ant-bot knowledge representation 
model. 
Keywords:  ant-bot; swarm intelligence; ant-bot ontology. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Swarm intelligence focuses on the design of intelligent 
multi-agent systems based on the collective natural 
behaviour of social colonies, such as ants, termites, birds, 
spiders, and bees [1]. It is a comparatively recent problem-
solving method that draws inspiration from nature [2]. 
However, the methods governing the behaviour of natural 
colonies remains unknown. Although cooperative colony 
behaviour 
emerges 
from 
relatively 
straightforward 
relationships between the colony members, what exactly 
does each member do to cause colony level behaviour? 
Ants are fascinating. Related ant systems have received 
much attention because of their practical application to 
combinatorial optimisation problems [4] such as shortest 
path formation [5]. However, what does each simulated ant 
agent do for swarm convergence? How do we formalize the 
representation of the knowledge insinuated in ant systems 
towards a more visible practical use in real life problem 
solving?  
An ontology is a philosophical branch that investigates 
the concepts of existence, being, becoming, and reality [6]. A 
swarm intelligence ontology, therefore, refers to a collection 
of the swarm knowledge related to swarm members 
behaviour, swarm member abilities, the environment in 
which the swarm is deployed, as well as all the other meta 
parameters of the swarm. This study seeks to understand the 
design of an ant systems inspired swarm intelligence 
ontology. 
A. Problem statement 
Creating an ant-bots ontology connotes coordination of 
homogeneous swarms. Pushing this agenda further to the 
coordination of heterogeneous swarms is an ambitious 
project which involves understanding various discrete swarm 
intelligence ontologies. For example, we would require 
independent ants, termites, bees, social spiders, fish, or birds 
ontologies before we build a generic swarm intelligence 
ontology that may tackle heterogeneity.  
Simulated ant systems are fascinating. What are the 
building blocks of an ant-bots ontology that may contribute 
to the development of heterogeneity in the swarm 
intelligence body of knowledge? 
Little has been said about ant-bots abilities to create 
emergent 
behaviour. 
Individual 
actions 
of 
ant-bots, 
communication, interaction strategies, decision-making, and 
the information they generate are blurred ingredients of 
swarm knowledge. Representation of this knowledge has not, 
yet, been formalized, which is the theme of this study. The 
article seeks to pinpoint and characterize the key aspects of 
simulated ant systems that define an ant-bots ontology. 
Achieving 
this 
involves 
conceptualization 
of 
the 
environment in which ant-bots operate, the design of the ant-
bots, and an understanding of the processes through which 
ant-bots interact, communicate, share, or create knowledge. 
In the end, we seek to demonstrate an informed 
understanding of the prospective vocabulary of ant-bots 
towards improved application and visibility of ant systems. 
To the best of our knowledge, formalized representation of 
ant systems in the form of an ontology is a creative 
intervention in the field. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

B. Overview 
The article is structured as follows: Section II presents 
literature which identifies the predominant ant system 
aspects that may inspire the design of an ant-bots ontology. 
Section III goes on to characterize the identified aspects, 
taking us closer to pinpointing the component units of the 
envisioned ant-bots ontology. In Section IV, the actual ant-
bots ontology is proposed before we conclude the study in 
Section V, highlighting the contributions we make, as well as 
pointing the direction for future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Research 
intervention 
to 
represent 
knowledge 
substantively and methodologically is visible [8]. Although 
we note attempts in the literature to create swarm 
intelligence ontologies inspired by the functionalities of ant 
colony systems, bee colony optimisation models, particle 
swarm optimisation systems, and even heuristic particle 
swarm ant colony optimization models, such specificity and 
explicitness in the representation of ant-bots knowledge is 
still blurred. This study seeks to investigate specific aspects 
of simulated ant systems to then suggest an explicit ant-bots 
ontology. 
Closest in the literature are works that investigated the 
meaning or purpose of pheromones in directing ant-like 
agents moving between two points [2]. These works 
established pheromones as indirect guides towards agents’ 
targets. 
Pheromone 
mark 
the 
paths 
ant 
agents 
probabilistically 
follow. 
Directions 
are 
selected 
stochastically  based on the levels of pheromone around a 
decision-making ant agent. We refer to direction selection by 
ant-bots as orientation. This understanding of the meaning of 
pheromone as guides to ant agents has been modified and 
optimized many times [9]. Although all the hybrids yielded 
maintain the same concept of pheromone perception for 
orientation, heuristic information is required to bring about 
optimal solutions [10][23]. For example, defining swarm 
memory abstractly as held on the environment is a heuristic 
feature to merely reducing the cost of managing ant-bots.  
Most ant systems insinuate ant agents that also possess 
some internal state in which to keep the swarm goal [19]. 
Each ant agent is always aware of its target, implying 
knowledge of which levels of pheromone are attractive or 
repulsive at the time [19]. Therefore, flipping between 
different internal states is a reward that comes with an ant 
agent finding the target or successfully returning to the nest 
[19][21]. During the search for the target or nest, it is a 
standard that ant agents drop and update specific levels of 
pheromone depending on their internal state [10][22]. 
Pheromone updates are also heuristically administered 
through dissipation processes [19] to optimize swarm 
convergence quality and speed. Summarily, most ant systems 
achieve mission planning and execution through (a) 
pheromone management policies (detection of the levels of 
pheromone around, dropping new levels of pheromone at 
current location, updating the quantities of pheromone held 
at current location, and pheromone dissipation), (b) internal 
state transitions (heuristically managing context awareness, 
and ant agents flipping between internal states when it 
becomes necessary), as well as (c) local search procedures 
(orientation and movements).  
A survey of the theoretical meaning of ant colony 
optimisation [11] has also been presented. Emphasis has 
been on understanding the theoretical basis of swarm 
convergence on optimal solutions given that stochastic 
methods drive the processes. However, trust level 
computation demonstrated in [12] notably insinuated the 
value of similar swarm aspects for recommendation towards 
an ant-bots ontology [13]. The primary goal of this study is 
to explicitly elucidate the key aspects of ant systems that 
may inspire the design of ant-bots ontology for more visible 
application of related swarm intelligence systems in real life. 
III. 
METHODS 
This study is still in the infancy towards the creation of 
heterogeneous ontologies. It focuses on understanding a 
particular homogeneous ant-bot ontology that will be 
integrated with other homogeneous ontologies towards 
addressing heterogeneity in swarm intelligence models. 
Precisely, we conduct (a) a requirements elicitation exercise 
(seeking for what matters in the design of an ant-bots 
ontology), (b) requirements specification (looking at how 
each elicited aspect fits into the problem) and (c) administer 
the ontology modelling and proposing a methodology for 
integrating these aspects.  
Design science research is adopted when the main 
computational artifacts of the study are defined [14]. In 
proposing the ant-bots ontology, emphasis is invested on 
achieving scalability, reproducibility, and adaptability. A 
positivist school of thoughts drives the study towards 
understanding the veracity of the work [15] through 
deductive means [16][17] until an ant-bots ontology ensues. 
Hopefully, the results we yield should be transferable from 
views to theory [18]. The next sub-sections give detailed 
analyses of those aspects prevalently insinuated when ant 
systems are studied. 
A. Ant-bot architecture 
An ant-bot is designed with basic memory in which to 
hold four key pieces of information pertaining to its position, 
internal state, neighbourhood, and the available instruction 
set as shown in Figure 1. Awareness of the current position 
allows an ant-bot to retrieve the levels of pheromone held on 
that position. It allows the ant-bot to be able to update 
specific levels of pheromone at its location in specific 
quantities. Positional awareness is an individual ant-bot 
property. 
The internal state keeps the ant-bot’s purpose in the 
swarm. At any point, an ant-bot is either searching for the 
target or travelling back to the nest. In each mode, an ant-bot 
places a different type of pheromone on its current position, 
thus updating the swarm’s global information. Often, an ant-
bot places pheromones attractive to other ant-bots in the 
opposite internal state mode. For example, an ant-bot 
searching for the target places pheromones that are attractive 
to ant-bots that are travelling back to the nest. Those ant-bots 
travelling to the nest places pheromones that are attractive to  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

 
 
Figure 1. Ant-bot design 
 
ant-bots searching for the target. That way, trodden paths 
emerge at swarm levels.  
Also, every ant-bot is designed with the ability to 
perceive its neighbourhood. The neighbourhood comprises 
candidate locations an ant-bot may move to. Each location in 
the neighbourhood is assigned some weight based on its 
attractiveness or repulsiveness. Such attractiveness or 
repulsiveness of nearby locations is based on the amounts of 
specific levels of pheromone they hold. An ant-bot 
stochastically decides on where to go based on the 
attractiveness or repulsiveness of the locations around it. 
Last, ant-bots follow deterministic instructions to achieve 
their goals. They are designed with the ability to follow these 
instructions at individual level towards achieving swarm 
level emergent behaviour. A collection of these instructions 
and their parameters is described further in the next section 
on ant-bots actions. This work does not dwell on the 
engineering side of the design of ant-bots.  
 
B. Ant-bots actions 
It is apparent that ant-bots drop specific levels of 
pheromone as they navigate the environment. The action of 
dropping pheromone updates the quantities of this specific 
level of pheromone held on the ant-bot’s current location. 
The quantity of pheromone held on the environment creates 
a shared memory for the swarm. Holding these quantities on 
the environment has the advantage of freeing ant-bots from 
the need to have large memory capacity. It also separates the 
ant-bot’s life from the swarm solution. When an ant-bot 
drops and updates specific levels of pheromone at its current 
location, that action also updates the swarm level shared 
memory. Listing 1 presents the concept of dropping 
pheromone in computational terms.  
 
Listing 1: dropping levels of pheromone 
 
Drop (int x, int y, int Qty) 
{ 
  update(level,Qty + read (level, x, y))
 
 
} 
Precisely, an ant-bot reads the quantity of the levels of 
pheromone, at current location, that are repulsive at the time, 
and update the same levels by a prescribed quantity. 
The next step for an ant-bot would be to relocate, after 
dropping specific levels of pheromone at the current 
position. This requires an ant-bot to, first, orientate before 
following some direction. Orientation, in computation terms, 
refers to an ant-bot detecting the attractiveness or 
repulsiveness of neighbouring locations before choosing a 
direction. This is achieved by weighting neighbouring 
locations based of the levels of attractive and repulsive 
pheromone they hold. Locations that have more attractive 
than repulsive levels are favoured while those locations with 
more repulsive than attractive levels are penalized. Listing 2 
presents the concept of orientation algorithmically.  
 
Listing 2: ant-bot orientation 
 
Orientate (int x, int y) 
{ 
  for each nearbyLocation i 
  { 
  wiqtyAtt(x±[0,1];y±[0,1])–qtyRep(x±[0,1];y±[0,1]) 
  } 
    set a scaled roulette wheel for wi 
      direction  randPick (i,wi)  
} 
The equation in the loop in listing 2 shows how the 
weight of each location around an ant-bot is calculated. Once 
these weights are known, a stochastic roulette wheel is 
established where more attractive locations are allocated 
wider spans than repulsive locations. Random selection of a 
location in such a setup favour selection of attractive  rather 
than repulsive locations. Great in this approach is that even 
very repulsive locations can still be stochastically picked to 
bring about randomness in the movement. However, it would 
be rare that a repulsive location gets picked. 
Ant-bot movement follows successful orientation.  
Movement is about relocation in the orientation direction. 
The aspect of movement is interpreted in listing 3. 
 
Listing 3: ant-bot movement 
 
Move (int x, int y, direction i) 
{ 
   x  x + direction (ix) 
   y  y + direction (iy) 
} 
In this case, an ant-bot would move from its x coordinate 
towards the x direction of the direction of orientation. It 
would move from its y coordinate towards the y direction of 
the direction of orientation. 
Eventually and at some point, a moving ant-bot will hit 
its target. This achievement triggers the flip state action. An 
ant-bot that was searching for a food target would change its 
role in the swarm to start looking for the nest. It would 
change its perception of which pheromone is attractive and 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

repulsive. Also, it would flip the levels of pheromone it 
drops on visited locations, assuming opposite phenomena 
thereafter. Listing 4 describes flipping between different 
internal states. 
 
Listing 4: ant-bot flip state 
 
state Flip (int x, int y) 
{ 
   if (x ; y) has Target 
    return homing 
   if (x ; y) has Nest 
    return searching 
} 
Precisely, this aspect conditionally returns a particular 
internal state depending on the location of the ant-bot at the 
time. An ant-bot that finds itself at the target because it was 
searching for a target should change to homing, where it 
starts the journey back to the nest. An ant-bot that finds itself 
at the nest because it has been homing should flip to the 
searching mode and commence the search trips all over. This 
function will only have effects on these two targets. 
Otherwise, a searching ant – bot that has not found the target 
would continue searching. An ant-bot travelling the nest, that 
has not reached the nest, will continue homing until it finds 
the nest. A collection of all ant-bot actions from the ant-bots 
instruction set was shown in Figure 1 earlier on. 
C. Heuristic aspects 
The ant-bot systems utilize two key heuristic elements. 
These swarms of ant-bots operate in deterministic 
environments that include specific locations, pheromone 
levels, and the context in which the ant-bots exist or navigate 
as they solve problems. The environment serves as a shared 
memory for the swarm. Figure 2 shows an example of this 
environment, depicted as a grid of locations where the ant-
bots can move and leave pheromone behind. The parameters 
of this environment are set during the simulation process. 
 
 
Figure 2. Ant-bots environments 
 
Interesting is that the pheromone levels dropped on 
different locations of the environment may virtually dissipate 
through evaporation or diffusion. Pheromone dissipation is 
an elitist approach for smoothen the pheromone paths 
formed. It is also a mechanism with which old solutions may 
be forgotten in favour of new outcomes.  Although these 
aspects are not directly associated with the life of an ant-bot, 
they contribute to ant-bot behaviours, hence required in the 
design of an ant-bots ontology.   
 
IV. 
ANT-BOT ONTOLOGY 
Figure 
3 
visualizes 
the 
integration 
of 
ant-bots 
architecture, ant-bots actions, and the related heuristic 
aspects into an ant-bot ontology. The proposed ontology 
primarily shows the locations of different pieces of ant-bot 
knowledge. The centre or core of the ontology holds the  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Ant-bots ontology 
 
widespread representation of swarm level knowledge which 
synchronizes knowledge from the supporting sub-domains. 
The heuristic aspects have to do with environmental designs 
and how the pheromone levels deposited on the environment 
are maintained and smoothened beyond ant-bot abilities. 
Also, the core is aided by the ant-bot architecture which 
captures positional knowledge, internal states details about 
each ant-bot recalling its goal in the swarm, its 
neighbourhood, and how each ant-bot uses the instructions 
held in the ant-bots actions knowledge domain. The 
Ant-bots  
Ontolog
y 
Ant-bot      
architec
ture 
Ant-
bot 
Actio
ns 
Internal state,  
Instruction set 
 
Neighbourhood, 
Position 
  
 
  
-  
Flip state 
 
Flip state,   No action 
 
Drop pheromone, 
Orientate 
Move 
 
Environment 
design 
 Pheromone 
dissipation 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

instructions include actions such as drop pheromone, move, 
orientate, and flip state.   
It is pertinent to note that the survival of an ant-bots 
swarm depends on the strength of the shared memory 
defined by the levels of pheromone held on the environment. 
Low levels of pheromone on the environment connote lack 
of swarm level knowledge of the location of the target, hence 
random movements. On the other hand, excess levels of 
pheromone would saturate the environment and deplete the 
formed paths. A balance is struck through elitist heuristic 
means, including pheromone dissipation.  
In this study, we do not concentrate on detailing 
implementational concerns. Instead, we are concerned with 
the logic for emulating ant behaviour. We want to focus on 
figuring out what each ant-bot does at an individual level to 
achieve swarm level emergent behaviour. We are concerned 
with the understanding of homogeneous swarms of ant-bots 
where each is simple and autonomous. In this case, the 
ontology connotes only stigmergic communication indirectly 
mediated via the environment [19][20]. None of the ant-bots 
can pass direct messages to others. However, it is possible 
that an ant-bot may choose not to do anything when it 
becomes necessary, hence inclusion of a No action aspect in 
the ant-bot instruction set. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This article investigated those aspects of ant systems that 
cause emergent behaviour and interpreted each in 
computational perspectives. It went on to suggest a way of 
putting 
those 
aspects 
together 
into 
a 
knowledge 
representation framework which we referred to as an ant-
bots ontology. The ant-bots ontology is envisioned to capture 
all the key aspects for coordinating swarms of homogeneous 
ant-like robotic devices. Unfolding the elements of the ant-
bots ontology is essential to providing a detailed modelling 
scenario that can be applied to other swarm formations. 
Precisely, the clarity sought in the design of the ant-bots 
ontology can propel application-specific modelling of 
solutions to practical problems. The ant-bots ontology 
presented in this article comprises three knowledge domains 
which are interrelated to the core domain. These three 
aspects, together with their relational inferences form the 
ant-bots ontology. 
A. Contributions 
Three contributions emanate from this study as follows: 
• 
The 
article 
suggested 
a 
formal 
knowledge 
representation approach for defining ant inspired 
swarm intelligence systems. This literature extends 
content in the field. 
• 
Proposals 
aimed 
at 
formalizing 
knowledge 
representation in swarm intelligence models are 
upcoming. This work is one of many studies aimed 
at understanding the key knowledge domains of 
swarm intelligence systems, focusing on ant 
systems. Although this is a discrete case, it guides 
us towards generic views.  
• 
Although the focus was on understanding an 
ontology for a homogeneous swarm of ant-bots, the 
work creates a baseline upon which heterogeneity 
may be tackled.  
B. Future work 
Four ambitious directions for future work are 
envisioned from this study as follows: 
• 
Corroboration of ant-bot knowledge representation 
through practical experimentation is upcoming.  
• 
An ant-bot ontology could be enriched through 
incorporation of applicable aspects to cover a wider 
scope of use cases. It must be tested for 
completeness, 
optimality, 
applicability, 
and 
expandability. 
• 
Integration of the ant-bots ontology with other 
swarm intelligence ontologies may, eventually, 
bring about practical heterogeneous swarms. 
• 
It is worth pursuing the extensibility of the ant-bots 
ontology to deal with fuzzy situations, uncertainty, 
incompleteness, 
inaccuracies, 
vagueness, 
or 
impreciseness. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We acknowledge both the moral and technical support 
given by the Sol Plaatje University, department of Computer 
Science, Data Science, and Information Technology. This 
research was funded by the ABSA research grant, as well as 
the CAIR project (Centre for Artificial Intelligence 
Research) grant, with the grant agreement number: 
CSIR/BEI/HNP/CAIR/2020/10, 
supported 
by 
the 
Government of the Republic of South Africa, through its 
Department of Science and Innovation (DSI). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Selvi and R. Umarani. “Comparative analysis of ant colony 
and particle swarm optimization techniques”. In: International 
Journal of Computer Applica- tions 5.4 (2010). 
[2] M. Dorigo, M. Birattari, and T. Stutzle. “Ant colony 
optimiza- 
tion”. 
In: 
IEEE computational 
intelligence 
magazine 1.4 (2006). 
[3] S. Mittal and L. Rainey. “Harnessing emergence: The control 
and design of emergent behavior in system of systems 
engineering”. In: Proceed- ings of the conference on summer 
computer simulation. 2015. 
[4] M. Dorigo and C. Blum. “Ant colony optimization theory: A 
sur- vey”. In: Theoretical computer science 344.2-3 (2005). 
[5] A. Kaveh and S. Talatahari. “An improved ant colony 
optimization for con- strained engineering design problems”. 
In: Engineering Computations (2010). 
[6] K. Moon and D. Blackman. “A guide to understanding social 
science research for natural scientists”. In: Conservation 
biology 28.5 (2014). 
[7] J. Wang and G. Beni. “Cellular robotic system with stationary 
robots and its application to manufacturing lattices”. In: 
Proceedings. IEEE Interna- tional Symposium on Intelligent 
Control 1989. IEEE. 1989. 
[8] A. Booth. “Searching for qualitative research for inclusion in 
system- atic reviews: a structured methodological review”. In: 
Systematic reviews 5.1 (2016). 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

[9] J. Wang, X. L. Fan, and H. Ding. “An improved ant colony 
optimization approach for optimization of process planning”. 
In: The Scientific World Journal 2014. 
[10] V. Maniezzo, L M Gambardella, and F. D Luigi. New 
Optimization Techniques in Engineering, ch. Ant Colony 
Optimization. 2004. 
[11] M. Dorigo and C. Blum. “Ant colony optimization theory: A 
survey”. In: Theoretical computer science 344.2-3 (2005). 
[12] K. Moon and D. Blackman. “A guide to understanding social 
science research for natural scientists”. In: Conservation 
biology 28.5 (2014). 
[13] O. Deepa and A. Senthilkumar. “Swarm intelligence from 
natural to artificial systems: Ant colony optimization”. In: 
Networks (Graph-Hoc) 8.1 (2016). 
[14] V. R. Reddy and A. R. Reddy. “Lifetime Improvement of 
WSN by Trust Level based Ant Colony Optimization”. In: 
International Journal of Computer Science and Information 
Technologies 5.5 (2014). 
[15] G. M. Sinatra and D. Lombardi. “Evaluating sources of 
scientific evidence and claims in the post-truth era may 
require reappraising plausibility judgments”. In: Educational 
Psychologist 55.3 (2020). 
[16] A. M. Novikov and D. A. Novikov. Research methodology: 
From philosophy of science to research design. Vol. 2. CRC 
Press, 2013. 
[17] G. Malhotra. “Strategies in research”. In: International Journal 
for Advance Research and Development 2.5 (2017). 
[18] A. D. Kramer, J. E. Guillory, and J. T. Hancock. 
“Experimental evidence of massive-scale emotional contagion 
through social networks”. In: Proceedings of the National 
Academy of Sciences 111.24 (2014). 
[19] M. B. Varsha, M. Kumar, and N. Kumar. “Hybrid TABU-GA 
search for energy efficient routing In WSN”. In: International 
Journal of Recent Tech- nology and Engineering (IJRTE) 8.4 
(2019). 
[20] A. J. Hepworth, D. P. Baxter and H. A. Abbass. “Onto4MAT: 
A Swarm Shepherding Ontology for Generalized Multiagent 
Teaming”. In IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 59843-59861, doi: 
10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3180032. (2022). 
[21] A. Kornrumpf and U. Baumöl, "A Design Science Approach 
to Collective Intelligence Systems," 2014 47th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, Waikoloa, HI, 
USA, pp. 361-370, doi: 10.1109/HICSS.2014.53. (2014). 
[22] S. Kazadi, A. Wen and M. Volodarsky, "Reliable Swarm 
Design," 2009 17th Mediterranean Conference on Control and 
Automation, Thessaloniki, Greece, pp. 1301-1306, doi: 
10.1109/MED.2009.5164726. (2009)., 
[23] S. Kazadi and  J. Lee. “Swarm Economics”. In: Ao, SI., 
Rieger, B., Chen, SS. (eds) Advances in Computational 
Algorithms and Data Analysis. Lecture Notes in Electrical 
Engineering, vol 14. Springer, Dordrecht. (2009). 
 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

