 
 
Empirical Investigation of Changes of Driving Behavior and Usability Evaluation  
Using an Advanced Driving Assistance System 
 
Shota Matsubayashi, Kazuhisa Miwa 
Graduate School of Information Science 
Nagoya University 
Aichi, Japan 
email: matsubayashi@cog.human.nagoya-u.ac.jp; 
email: miwa@is.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
Takafumi Kamiya, Tatsuya Suzuki 
Graduate School of Engineering 
Nagoya University 
Aichi, Japan 
email: ta_kamiya@nuem.nagoya-u.ac.jp; 
email: t_suzuki@nuem.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
Takuma Yamaguchi 
Institute of Innovation for Future Society (MIRAI) 
Nagoya University 
Aichi, Japan 
email: t_yamaguchi@nuem.nagoya-u.ac.jp 
 
Ryojun Ikeura, Soichiro Hayakawa 
Graduate School of Engineering 
Mie University 
Mie, Japan 
email: ikeura@ss.mach.mie-u.ac.jp; 
email: hayakawa@ss.mach.mie-u.ac.jp 
Takafumi Ito 
DENSO CORPORATION 
Aichi, Japan 
email: takafumi_t_itou@denso.co.jp 
 
 
Abstract—It is known that the behavior of autonomous systems 
affects users’ cognitive and behavioral aspects; however, 
further examination of sequential effects is required. We 
manipulated instructional information as cognitive guidance 
and the degree of behavioral intervention implemented by an 
advanced driving assistance system, and then assessed usability 
evaluation of the system and changes in user behavior. The 
results show that strict intervention reduces subjective 
evaluations, and the absence of instructional information 
hinders changes in user behavior. 
Keywords-usability evaluation; behavioral change; cognitive 
guidance; behavioral intervention; human-system cooperation; 
advanced driving assistance system. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Recently, many autonomous systems have become 
popular. They perform various tasks autonomously and often 
take over user activities. However, due to complexity, users 
cannot delegate all the activities and are often required to 
share activities with systems cooperatively. In automated 
driving, four levels of driving from no automation to full 
automation are defined [1]. In these levels, drivers and the 
system must cooperate closely. 
It is known that system intervention influences user 
behavior in many aspects. For example, a number of 
behavioral changes in driving are observed when an 
intelligent speed adaptation system is used. A previous study 
reported that driver behavior shifted to both safe and risky 
behaviors with various systems [2]. 
Why do users exhibit such risky behavior against 
guidance provided by such systems? Cognitive factors, such 
as user understanding of the systems, may cause these 
behaviors. A “black box problem” can arise when using 
highly intelligent autonomous systems. With the black box 
problem, users cannot recognize which systems operate 
internally and understand what those systems are intended to 
do [3]. Many experiments have verified this black box 
problem. After observing system errors but receiving no 
explanation about the errors, users tend to distrust systems, 
which reduces their reliability [4]. Adaptive cruise control 
systems that share the goal or provide assistance information 
are more trustworthy and acceptable than those that do not 
share [5]. 
Usability questionnaires have been used to measure how 
users 
evaluate 
systems. 
Recently, 
a 
new 
usability 
questionnaire was developed to evaluate autonomous 
systems that perform complex information processing. This 
questionnaire comprises six elements, i.e., effectiveness, 
efficiency, satisfaction, understandability, discomfort, and 
motivation. The latter three elements are assumed for 
autonomous systems [6]. 
Previous research has indicated that the behavior of 
autonomous systems influences users’ cognitive and 
behavioral aspects. However, further inspection is required 
to examine sequential effects on users’ cognitive and 
behavioral changes while performing tasks. 
In the present study, we manipulated two factors that are 
expected to determine the automation levels of advanced 
driving assistance systems, and we investigated the effects 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

 
 
on users’ cognitive and behavioral aspects. The first 
manipulated factor refers to cognitive guidance that provides 
instructional information concerning driving safely. The 
second is the levels of automation, where the high level 
means strict intervention with user driving behavior and the 
low level means moderate intervention. 
We address a method for the experiment in Section 2 and 
the results in Section 3. Discussion and conclusion follow in 
Sections 4 and 5. 
II. 
METHOD 
A. Apparatus 
We used a driving simulator equipped with a driving 
assistance system in an experiment (Figure 1). The driver can 
operate the steering wheel, the accelerator, and the brake in a 
same manner as an actual car. This system detects driver 
blind spots that can cause accidents. Such risk identifications 
are made based on normative behavior of expert driving 
instructors. The following two driving assistance stages are 
employed [7] [8]. 
1) Cognitive guidance: This provides information about 
the surrounding environment and gives guidance to brake or 
turn. 
2) Behavioral intervention: This intervenes in driver 
braking and steering behavior when cognitive guidance does 
not positively affect driver behavior. 
The following information is provided when cognitive 
guidance and behavioral intervention are performed. Three 
stimuli are given: a beep and notification message (e.g., 
“Caution: A Parked Car”) as auditory stimuli; a slowdown 
icon, an arrow pointing to the left/right, and an LED light on 
the steering wheel as visual stimuli; and steering wheel and 
accelerator vibration as tactile stimuli. 
The extent of behavioral intervention (i.e., the power of 
braking and steering torque) depends on the status of the car 
and the safety region monitored by the system. Braking 
intervention decelerates the car to a fixed speed when 
crossing an intersection and passing a parked car or a 
pedestrian. Steering intervention autonomously operates a 
steering wheel, but this torque is sufficiently small; therefore, 
drivers can turn the steering wheel against the system’s 
intervention. This intervention is performed when passing a 
parked car or a pedestrian, but not when crossing an 
intersection. 
This driving assistance system provides information 
about potential risks and encourages drivers to change 
behavior if necessary. Assistance (i.e., cognitive guidance 
and behavioral intervention) is not provided when driving 
safely. From an educational prospective, if drivers 
understand the system’s intent, they are expected to adopt 
safer driving behaviors. 
B. Data 
In the experiment, we collected the following data. 
• 
Usability 
evaluations: 
A 
usability 
evaluation 
questionnaire 
measured 
six 
elements, 
i.e., 
effectiveness, 
efficiency, 
satisfaction, 
understandability, comfort, and motivation. Each 
element has three questions rated on a five-point 
scale. 
• 
Behavioral changes: The driving behavior before 
and after run with the assistance system was 
measured to confirm its educational effect. 
C. Procedure 
We manipulated the following two factors of the 
system’s behavior. 
1) Cognitive guidance: Two cases were considered, i.e., 
whether or not the system provides instructual information. 
2) Behavioral intervention: Two cases were considered, 
i.e., the system intervenes in driver behavior moderately 
(minimum 
system 
intervention) 
or 
strictly 
(active 
intervention). 
Three experimental conditions were employed based on 
the above settings. A total of 89 participants were assigned to 
one of the three conditions. 
• 
Moderate assistance without cognitive guidance 
(MOD 
w/o 
GUD): 
The 
system 
intervenes 
moderately without cognitive guidance. 
• 
Moderate assistance with cognitive guidance (MOD 
w/ GUD): The system intervenes moderately with 
cognitive guidance. 
• 
Strict assistance with cognitive guidance (STR w/ 
GUD): The system intervenes strictly with cognitive 
guidance. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Driving simulator used in the experiment (left). The system autonomously provides various information for cognitive guidance (right). 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

 
 
The length of the driving course used in the experiment 
was approximately 500 meters, and the same course was 
used in all trials. Participants were required to drive the 
course while passing a parked car, at an intersection without 
a traffic signal, and beside a pedestrian. 
The flow of the experiment was as follows. 
• 
Practice run (two times): To understand the driving 
simulator, participants were allowed to drive without 
assistance. 
• 
Pre-run (three times): To measure the initial driving 
behavior without assistance, participants drove the 
course. 
• 
Practice run with assistance (two times): To 
understand the assistance, participants were allowed 
to drive the course under one of the three conditions 
mentioned above. 
• 
Run with assistance (three times): For training, 
participants drove the course in the same manner as 
the preceding practice run. 
• 
Usability evaluation: 
Participants 
answered 
a 
questionnaire (18 questions). 
• 
Post-run (three times): Participants drove the course 
in the same manner as the initial pre-run. 
III. 
RESULTS 
We excluded nine participants who experienced 
carsickness during the experiment. Therefore, 80 participants 
were analyzed. We conducted two examinations focusing on 
(1) the differences between MOD w/ GUD and MOD w/o 
GUD to investigate the effect of cognitive guidance, and (2) 
the differences between MOD w/ GUD and STR w/ GUD to 
investigate the effect of behavioral intervention. 
A. Usability Evaluation 
Figure 2 shows the usability evaluation for each 
condition. We conducted a between-participant ANOVA 
with one factor (condition: MOD w/o GUD, MOD w/ GUD, 
and STR w/ GUD) for the evaluation score for each of the 
six elements. 
The results show significant main effects for efficiency, 
understandability, and comfort (F(2, 77) = 6.81, p < .005; 
F(2, 77) = 4.85, p < .05; F(2, 77) = 3.22, p < .05, 
respectively), and a marginal effect for motivation (F(2, 77) 
= 3.03, p = .054). No significant main effects were found for 
effectiveness and satisfaction (F(2, 77) = 1.79, n.s.; F(2, 77) 
= 1.26, n.s., respectively). Ryan’s analysis for efficiency, 
understandability, and comfort showed the scores in MOD 
w/ GUD were higher than those in STR w/ GUD (t(50) = 
3.47, p < .001; t(50) = 3.11, p < .005; t(50) = 2.54, p < .05, 
respectively). There was no significant difference between 
MOD w/o GUD and MOD w/ GUD (all ps > .10). 
As a result, we found that a system that intervenes strictly 
in user behavior reduces driver evaluation of efficiency, 
understandability, and comfort. However, there was no 
significant difference between the MOD w/ GUD and MOD 
w/o GUD conditions, indicating that cognitive guidance did 
not affect usability. 
B. Behavioral Changes 
Driving with the assistance system is expected to 
encourage drivers to adopt safer driving behaviors. We 
analyzed changes in driving behavior before and after using 
the assistance system. We used a 100-meter interval, 
including an intersection, for the former analysis, and a five-
meter interval, including a parked car, for the latter analysis 
because the system was most likely to offer assistance in 
these intervals. 
 
Figure 2.  Mean of the usability evaluation of the driving assistance system. The error bar represents the standard error of the mean. 
 
Figure 3.  Changes in speed (left) and margin (right) between the pre-run and the post-run. 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Eﬀec%veness 
Eﬃciency 
Sa%sfac%on 
Understandability 
Comfort 
Mo%va%on 
Evalua%on Score
MOD w/o GUD 
MOD w/ GUD 
STR w/ GUD 
-15.0 
-10.0 
-5.0 
0.0 
5.0 
 
Changes in speed (km/h)
-0.3 
-0.2 
-0.1 
0.0 
0.1 
 
Changes in margin (m)
MOD w/o GUD 
MOD w/ GUD 
STR w/ GUD 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

 
 
Figure 3 shows changes in average speed when crossing 
an intersection from the pre-run to post-run, and changes in 
average margin between the car and a parked car. A positive 
value indicates that the value for the post-run is higher than 
that of the pre-run. If drivers follow the guidance of the 
system, changes in speed are expected to be negative and 
those in margin are expected to be positive.  
An ANOVA for changes in speed indicates a significant 
main effect (F(2, 77) = 4.61, p < .05). Ryan’s analysis 
showed the changes in MOD w/ GUD are greater than that in 
in MOD w/o GUD (t(52) = 2.78, p < .01), but there is no 
significant difference between MOD w/ GUD and STR w/ 
GUD (t(50) = 0.37, n.s.). Similarly, the results for changes in 
margin showed a significant main effect (F(2, 77) = 4.98, p 
< .01). Ryan’s analysis showed a significant difference 
between MOD w/o GUD and MOD w/ GUD (t(52) = 3.05, p 
< .005), but not between MOD w/ GUD and STR w/ GUD 
(t(50) = 0.86, n.s.). 
The results reveals that behavioral intervention without 
instructional information decreases behavioral changes for 
both braking and steering operations compared to when 
intervention is performed with instructional information. A 
surprising result is that the margin in the post-run was 
significantly smaller than that in the pre-run in the MOD w/o 
GUD condition (t(27) = 13.75, p < .001), meaning that 
participants who were not provided instructional information 
adopted risker behavior against the behavioral guidance 
offered by the system. The experimental results also show 
that, despite strict assistance, behavioral improvements in 
both braking and steering operations for the STR w/ GUD 
condition were comparable to those for the MOD w/ GUD 
condition. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
In this study, we manipulated instructional information 
provided by an assistance system as cognitive guidance and 
the degree of behavioral intervention. In an experiment, we 
verified that an advanced driving assistance system affects 
usability evaluations and behavioral changes. 
The results showed the following findings. First, the 
degree of behavioral intervention has a significant effect on 
user subjective evaluations of the system; however, it does 
not affect behavioral changes significantly. The evaluation 
scores for efficiency, understandability, and comfort with the 
STR w/ GUD condition were substantially less than those for 
the MOD w/ GUD condition. This implies that strict 
intervention implemented by autonomous systems makes 
users uncomfortable and causes disinterest in understanding 
the system. In addition, we found no significant differences 
in behavioral changes between the MOD w/ GUD and STR 
w/ GUD conditions. It is assumed that users do not intend to 
accept all interventions provided by the system due to 
discomfort with the systems. 
Second, the information provided by autonomous 
systems has a significant effect on users’ behavioral changes 
but does not have significant effect on their subjective 
evaluations. The results showed no differences between the 
MOD w/o GUD and MOD w/ GUD conditions for all 
usability elements. It was surprising that cognitive guidance 
did not influence subjective evaluations of the system. Even 
in such a case, improvements to behavioral changes in the 
MOD w/o GUD condition were significantly smaller than 
those of the MOD w/ GUD condition. This indicates that the 
absence 
of 
instructional 
information 
provided 
by 
autonomous systems reduces educational effects and, in 
some cases, hinders user behavior improvements. It is likely 
that users cannot distinguish their own behavior and 
normative behavior guided by an assistance system if the 
system does not explicitly identify the differences. 
For future research, we will consider how different 
environments affect drivers’ usability and behavior, and what 
drivers understand about the assistance system.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
We investigated how the behavior of autonomous 
systems affects users relative to cognitive and behavioral 
aspects. The results showed that the strict intervention 
reduces subjective evaluations, and the absence of 
instructional information hinders behavioral changes. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Center of Innovation 
Program (Nagoya-COI) from Japan Science and Technology 
Agency, 
and 
by 
JSPS 
KAKENHI 
Grant 
Number 
JP16H02353. 
REFERENCES 
[1] SAE International. Taxonomy and Definitions for Terms 
Related to On-Road Motor Vehicle Automated Driving 
Systems. [Online]. Available from: http://standards.sae.org/ 
j3016_201609/ [retrived: April, 2017] 
[2] S. L. Comte, “New systems: new behaviour?,” Transportation 
Research Part F: Traffic Psychology and Behaviour, U.K., vol. 
3, no. 2, pp. 95–111, June 2000. 
[3] K. Miwa, “What We Should Know When Utilizing 
Automation Systems: Issues on Cognitive Disuse Atrophy,” 
The Journal of Institute of Electronics, Information and 
Communication Engineers, Japan, vol. 97, no. 9, pp. 782–787, 
September 2014. 
[4] M. T. Dzindolet, S. A.Peterson, R. A. Pomranky, L. G. Pierce, 
and H. P. Beck, “The role of trust in automation reliance,” 
International Journal of Human Computer Studies, England, 
vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 697–718, June 2003. 
[5] F. M. F. Verberne, J. Ham, and C. J. H. Midden, “Trust in 
Smart 
Systems: 
Sharing 
Driving 
Goals 
and 
Giving 
Information to Increase Trustworthiness and Acceptability of 
Smart Systems in Cars,” Human Factors, United States, vol. 
54, no. 5, pp. 799–810, October 2012. 
[6] A. Maehigashi, K. Miwa, K. Kojima, and H. Terai, 
“Development of a Usability Questionnaire for Automation 
Systems,” Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Germany, vol. 
9731, pp. 340–349, June 2016. 
[7] T. Yamaguchi et al., “Supervisory Cooperative Control and 
Its Verification,” 2016 Society of Automoyive Engineers of 
Japan Annual Spring Congress (2016 JSAE), May 2016, no. 
65-16S, pp. 1593–1598. 
[8] T. Kamiya et al., “Experimental Verification for Cooperative 
Control by Supervisor,” 2016 Society of Automoyive 
Engineers of Japan Annual Spring Congress (2016 JSAE), 
May 2016, no. 65-16S, pp. 1599–1604. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

