Development of a Lean Information and Communication Tool to Connect and 
Digitize Company Departments in Small and Medium-Sized Enterprises 
Rainer Müllera, Matthias Vetteb, 
Leenhard Höraufc, Christoph Speicherd and Dirk Burkharde* 
Centre for Mechatronics and Automatisation gGmbH (ZeMA) 
Group of Assembly Systems and Automatisation Technology 
Eschberger Weg 46, Gewerbepark Geb. 9,  
66121 Saarbrücken, Germany  
email: arainer.mueller, bmatthias.vette, cleenhard.hoerauf, dchristoph.speicher, edirk.burkhard@zema.de 
 
 
Abstract—Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SME) see 
themselves confronted with constant challenges. Globalization, 
volatile markets and international competition require a focus 
on key topics such as customer satisfaction and delivery 
reliability. Key requirements for achieving these aims are lean 
and reactive business processes, which are obtained through 
horizontal and vertical networking. To network these business 
departments a lean shop floor information system, consisting 
of Smart Devices and a production application is developed. 
The aim of the system is the recording and needs-based 
communication of component modifications and technical 
drawings in SME special machine manufacturers. With the 
system, reduction of cycle time in projects, timely feedback of 
errors from the shop floor to the top floor, reduction of 
mistakes carried over to new projects and reduced time for the 
completion of the customer documentation can be achieved. 
 
Keywords-Lean 
Manufacturing 
Tool; 
Production-App; 
Smart Devices; Industry 4.0; Value Chain Digitization 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Small and Medium-sized Enterprises (SME) are facing 
many challenges and have to overcome these, in order to 
persist in the international competition [1], including 
challenges such as the individualization of the products and 
shorter product life cycles [2]. In response to these 
challenges in production, lean and reconfigurable processes 
are applied as a solution [3]. The required ability to react 
more frequently and flexibly can only be achieved, on 
correct and timely information [4]. 
 Verbal and paper-based information exchange is the most 
widely accepted form of communication in SMEs even 
today. In particular, SMEs must accept these challenges, 
open themselves to new technologies and take advantage of 
it [11]. The introduction of new technologies is particularly 
difficult for SMEs, due to non-existent IT capacities and 
their high specialization in manufacturing and assembly 
processes of their daily business. In order to be able to react 
adequately to time-intensive factors, such as production 
changes and disturbances, it is necessary to develop lean 
solutions and find new ways to optimize and to digitize 
production based on existing IT facilities in SMEs.  
 
The article focuses on the connection of shop floor and 
top floor, especially the connection of design/development 
department with production entities such as manufacturing 
and assembly. The presented industrial use case is the change 
of technical products and drawings during production in 
special engineering companies. Therefore, a production-app 
in combination with smart devices and lean processes was 
developed.  Use case and procedure as well as the technical 
solution are mainly related to SME – machinery and plant 
engineering companies. Especially companies, which 
produce individual and special machines, mostly with batch 
size one, are designated for using the system.  
The presented research and development is part of the 
research project NeWiP. In four different use cases the 
project analyses industry-related problems and develops 
solutions for the connection of company departments and  
production entities. Moreover, solutions for the connection 
between 
companies 
and 
information 
exchange 
are 
developed.  
This paper is structured as follows: in Section II, an 
overview of related work is given. Furthermore, Section II 
describes the use case in detail and concludes with the 
advantages and aims of the presented procedure and the 
technical solution - the shop floor information application 
(SIA). Section III describes the procedure and used tools 
during the analysis of the initial situation. In Section IV the 
resulting requirements are described. Both analysis and 
requirement were taken into account during the development 
of the optimized process and the design of the production 
application. Optimized process and technical solution are 
finally outlined in Section V. It leads to the description of 
main functionalities of the developed production-app in 
combination with the smart devices in Section VI. Finally, 
Section VI concludes with a summary and gives an outlook 
on future work.  
II. 
RELATED WORK AND PROBLEM DESCRIPTION 
Efficient management of flexible processes is hardly 
possible without supporting systems and the provision of 
decision-relevant information [3]. Cyber-Physical Systems 
(CPS), 
Manufacturing-Executive-System 
(MES) 
and 
Enterprise-Resource-Planning (ERP) systems are designed to 
bridge the media gap between the physical and virtual world, 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

providing up-to-date and comprehensive information. 
Components equipped with sensors, actuators and computing 
capacities can transfer information about themselves and 
their environment from reality to IT systems [5]. These CPS 
offer an opportunity to close the gap between the real world 
and the virtual world [6]. CPS gather physical data via 
sensors, control processing units and communication devices 
[7] [8]. By linking barcode, quick response code or RFID, 
the media gap between the object and information level can 
mostly be reduced [6]. 
The technologies associated with Industry 4.0 have not 
yet taken a comprehensive approach to production, 
especially in SMEs [9]. 
During industrial production, a variety of information, 
e.g., product-, process-, and project-related information 
occurs. For these types of information, there are several 
methods and systems of information gathering and exchange. 
At the shop floor area, information is transferred via verbal, 
written or computer-related communication. Production Data 
Acquisition (PDA), Machine Data Acquisition (MDA), Shop 
Floor Programming (SFP), Computerized Numerical Control 
(CNC) and Tool Management Systems (TMS) are the most 
frequently used computer-related applications in the shop 
floor area. Some systems have grown historically as isolated 
applications, without suitable interfaces that enable the 
integration of further systems. In addition, these systems are 
stationary and often not very intuitive. Declared goal of 
research and industry is a consistent shared use of data and a 
complete integration of all systems, as well as a uniform 
structure of information to ensure data exchange among each 
other [10]. 
The usage of CPS and digitalization is providing up-to-
date and comprehensive information, which help to optimize 
the production process, to support employees in various 
company departments and to close media gaps between the 
physical and virtual world along the value chain. The focus 
is on socio-technical systems, in which people and machines 
are networked at different levels. Information are collected 
by means of suitable technical systems and software 
solutions. These are distributed to the respective specialists 
in a context-based manner so they are able to make their 
decisions. 
 
A. Problem Description  
The use case for the communication tool is the 
connection of shop floor and top floor departments in SMEs 
special machine manufacturers, where the transmission and 
recording of information is still largely paper-bound. The 
customer-specific special machines are planned in the 
design/development 
department. 
Then, 
they 
are 
manufactured, 
assembled 
and 
commissioned 
in 
the 
company’s shop floor facility and later at the customer’s 
plant.  
During the execution of a project (development to 
commissioning of a special machine), a large number of 
employees of various business departments are involved. 
Main subject of the use case is the change process of 
technical drawings. For clarification, the process as it is 
today is described in the following: the design/development 
department creates the technical drawings, which are 
forwarded to the shop floor upon approval of the project 
leader in analogue form. Occasionally, design and drawing 
mistakes occur, which have to be corrected both on the 
product itself and the CAD data (3D and 2D data). Certain 
employees in the shop floor are qualified to make these 
alterations if it becomes necessary. These are handwritten on 
the technical drawings. At the end of the production process, 
all technical drawings of a project are transferred to the 
design/development department, in order to create the 
complete project and customer documentation. Since all of 
these 
technical 
drawings 
are 
received 
in 
the 
design/development department at the same time and after 
completion of the special machine, they have to be updated 
successively. This procedure is personal intensive and causes 
delays.  
Moreover, handwritten changes on technical drawings 
increase the risk of media breaks between shop floor and 
design/development. During these projects, mistakes and 
errors have to be reported and corrected timely, so that they 
are not repeated in new projects. The result is that these 
mistakes might be carried over to new projects running in 
parallel, if the incorrect machine modules have not been 
updated in CAD programs in time. Figure 1 shows the initial 
situation and the aim of developing and implementing a 
production-app. 
 
B. Objective  
The objective of the communication tool SIA is the 
reduction of media breaks in the presented use case. On the 
technical side, this becomes possible by using Smart Devices 
and a production-app to digitize changes on technical 
drawings 
and 
modules. 
Furthermore, 
there 
are 
changes/adaptations of the business processes.   
If technical changes and process adaptations are 
combined, new change/business processes become possible 
so that the design/development department is enabled to 
update (modules) changes simultaneously to the production 
process. This reduces the time until changes are noticed and - 
more important - corrected. So design mistakes on machine 
modules can be updated timely to their detection in shop 
floor, resulting in a reduced probability of repeating an error 
in new projects. Besides, it also improves the planning of 
required personal capacities in the design/development 
department.  
 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 1: Advantages by using the shop-floor-information-application (SIA) 
 By directly digitizing technical drawings on the shop 
floor, media breaks are avoided. The shop floor information 
application (consisting of Smart Devices and production-
app) provides necessary functionalities with the following 
advantages: 
 
Reduction of cycle time of a customer project 
 
Timely feedback of errors from shop floor to top 
floor 
 
Reduction of mistakes carried over to new projects  
 
Improved planning capacity in development and 
design/development department 
 
Reduced time for the completion of the customer 
documentation 
III. 
ANALYSIS OF THE INITIAL SITUATION 
In the development and production of special machines, 
interdisciplinary project-teams are involved. Especially in 
interdisciplinary teams, it is not guaranteed that all 
participants will understand a statement in the same way. 
Therefore, a uniform understanding of the initial problems 
and requirements is necessary.  A starting point is constituted 
by a user-story. In the development phase, the project 
objective is divided into definable and independent subgoals, 
which are described in an easy and understandable way [12]. 
Acceptance criteria should be identified and named, in order 
to increase the willingness of users for technological change. 
Acceptance criteria are for instance ergonomics, mobility, 
robustness and tolerance. During the development of the 
technological solution, these acceptance criteria must be 
noted and their degree of performance should be checked. In 
addition to these criteria, quality requirements should be 
identified and named. These requirements describe the 
features of the system to be developed according to ISO / 
IEC 9126. Characteristics such as functionality, reliability, 
usability, efficiency, maintainability and transferability have 
to be considered.  
Nowadays, information should be provided at the right 
time, in the right place and in sufficient quality to the user. 
Therefore, lean and smart production processes and short 
information flows within the organization are needed [13]. 
Real improvements in business-, core-, support- and 
management processes can only be achieved if current 
processes and information flows are analyzed. The main 
reasons for modeling of the actual state are following: 
 
The modeling of processes is the starting point for 
the detection of weak points and the elaboration of 
improvements. 
 
Without an accurate understanding of the actual 
process, fault causes and possible potentials for 
improvement cannot be localized precisely.  
 
The documentation of the actual state generates 
process knowledge, which is available to all project 
participants. 
 
Media breaks can be better recognized. 
The scope of analysis is always project-specific. There 
are among others four survey methods for analyzing the 
actual situation. In advance, by viewing and analyzing all 
process relevant documents, a high degree of information 
can be generated. Often, documents are created regarding to 
certifications DIN EN ISO 9001 and are already existing. By 
analyzing the value chain, beginning from shipping area on 
to receiving area, further process relevant information is 
gathered through observation and interview of the process 
owner. In team workshops, more detailed information about 
specific production processes and information flows can be 
acquired. Open questions and further issues can be discussed. 
In specific single interviews with employees, remaining 
questions can be answered and high detailed knowledge 
about processes, production as well as information and 
material flow can be collected. 
A variety of different languages for process modelling 
are available. Common modelling languages are for instance 
Event-driven Process Chain (EPK), Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) or Business Process Execution Language 
(BPEL) or Business Process Modeling Notation 2.0 
(BPMN2.0). BPMN2.0 was chosen for the use case because 
it is suited for the requirements of a structured and 
formalized mapping of business processes and information 
flows. In this language, activities, gateways and events are 
Design/Development
Assembly
Manufacturing
Start-Up
Design/Development
Design/Development
Creation of the complete
documentation / 
maintenance of changes
Assembly
Manufacturing
Design/Development
 Creation of the complete documentation in parallel to production processes
 Timely creation and verification of the documentation
 Better overview of necessary changes in Design/Development
 Controlling of project progress
 Reduction of design faults which are carried over to new projects
(1) Initial Situation
(2) Future Situation after SIA introduction
Changes
Project Duration
Reduced Cycle Time
Commissioning
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

represented by BPMN basic elements. Primary goal of the 
BPMN2.0 is to provide a notation, which is easy to 
understand for all participants in business process 
management [14]. During analysis of the initial situation, the 
BPMN2.0 was used to document the current business 
processes in an understandable way for the project team. 
With an analysis of the important business processes for the 
project, the future business process was developed in 
BPMN2.0, so everyone in the project team got a clear view 
of the future business process and the requirements and 
functions 
for 
the 
production-app. 
Moreover, 
the 
documentation 
in 
BPMN2.0 
is 
understandable 
and 
expressive enough to be used in future DIN EN ISO 9001 
documentations.  
Following the analysis of the current state, the 
requirements for the system and the app as well as the Smart 
Device are derived.  
IV. 
REQUIREMENTS TO THE SYSTEM 
The following fields of action, such as the mastery of 
information and communication technologies, the economic 
introduction of new technologies and processes, the 
involvement of employees in this new form of industrial 
production, have become key success factors.  
Challenge - Information Technology: IT-systems are 
developed to support business processes and production 
processes. Due to constantly changing influencing factors, an 
adaptation of these systems is indispensable. However, it is 
difficult for producing SMEs to cope with necessary changes 
in complex programs and architectures because of their own 
limited 
resources 
and 
their 
high 
specialization 
in 
manufacturing and assembly. This circumstance has resulted 
in isolated applications that are optimally suited to the 
execution of a specific business process, but can only be 
integrated into the IT infrastructure of the company in a 
highly resource-intensive manner [11]. Therefore, a 
requirement of the developed system and application was the 
integration into an existing architecture without endangering 
other systems. 
Challenge - Cost-Effectiveness: The key factors of 
production, labor, land and capital, are some of the input 
factors of any industrial production. The output, on the other 
hand, is e.g., simply valued over the product price. The 
desired transparency and responsivity, a key target of 
industry 4.0, is achieved only on the basis of information. 
Information as such is not quantifiable and does not 
represent a typical characteristic for the economic 
consideration of an investment project in producing SMEs. 
Collection of context-related information on the shop floor is 
the main function of the developed system. For the economic 
assessment of the system, quantifiable factors such as 
improved personnel utilization, reduced error avoidance of 
the same components and a shortened project running time 
can be mentioned. 
Challenge - Employees: Industry 4.0 introduces a 
paradigm shift to an enhanced network of intelligent 
production technology. The main focus of this development 
is the human being, as a link between process and 
equipment. This human-machine interface requires a 
rethinking of all existing forms of work organization and 
efficient workplace design. In order to meet the requirements 
of an efficient workplace design, factors such as user 
characteristics, 
environmental 
factors, 
social 
and 
organizational environment, factors of work tasks, as well as 
factors of work equipment were taken into account in the 
development of the system [15]. On the basis of this, a 
prototypical 
conceptual design 
(drawing, 
low-fidelity 
prototype and high-fidelity prototype) took place. Particular 
attention was paid to the creation of an ergonomic human-
machine interface and a lean integration of the system into 
existing business processes as well as a lean design of main 
functionalities for the multimodal gathering of information. 
In the design of the main functionalities, the seven principles 
of dialogue design, task adequacy, self-describability, 
controllability, expectation conformity, fault tolerance, 
individualization and learning support according to DIN EN 
ISO 9241-110 were considered. Further methods like 
discussion-, simulation-, version-, and prototyping methods 
can be of use for the participation of users in software 
development and increasing the willingness for using the 
new system. In order to evaluate the design, functionality 
and content in an early phase of the project, the solutions are 
implemented in different prototypes. With increasing project 
progress, the prototypes change in kind of their build effort. 
Therefore, low-fidelity prototypes were developed at the 
beginning of the project. This type of prototyping is 
relatively resource saving and allows short and low time 
consuming changes in the design [16]. The design was 
developed with the standard software Microsoft Visio. Even 
before programming the app, all responsible users could 
discuss the rudimentary functions. In further iterative loops, 
the design and functions could be changed with low effort. 
After the rough plan period, the application was build up in 
detail. These are high-fidelity prototypes and illustrate 
precise functionalities and structures as well as the design of 
the application. Therefore, the prototype software Axure was 
used. 
V. CONCEPT OF THE COMMUNICATION TOOL 
After an initial state- and requirements analysis a concept 
for networking shop floor and top floor area was developed. 
By using the system, employees can be supported during 
their daily work, without additional burden or additional 
processes, physical and ergonomical restrictions. The 
developed system and its application in the business process 
are shown in figure 2. The optimized process in business 
departments of the treated use case follows steps (1) to (6): 
 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Change is made and is re-
inserted into the circuit
Pr.-Nr. 27750
Znr. 27020 – 255 – 010
ID. Welding component
Bst. 27750
…..
1
2
3
4
5
6
Digital
3.1
3.2
1
4
5
Design/Development
Creation of the 
drawing
Process planning
Printing of the drawing
Production
Employee 
recognizes 
mistake/errors
Production
Evaluation of the 
error
Production
Employee carries out 
and document 
changes
3.3
Production
Transmission of the 
digital drawing change
Design/Development
Transmission of
changes
2
6
Analog
Top-
Floor
Shop-
Floor
 
Figure 2. Optimised process by using the production application 
(1) In design/development department, an auto-ID code 
(QR-Code and Dot-Paper) for the technical drawing has to 
be generated. The printed pattern consists of small dots 
whose diameter is 100 
. By the combination of these 
points and their position at the intersections of a four-sided 
right angle grid, coordinates can be formed. This allows the 
Smart-Pen to determine position on the paper [17]. In Smart-
Pen a camera is integrated, which record and protocol 
movement of the Smart-Pen. The generation of the QR-Code 
is done automatically. This is achieved by a developed plug-
in for computer aided design programs (e.g., Solidworks, 
NX, Inventor, AutoCAD). The QR-Code contains relevant 
information such as the drawing number, project number, 
name and index of the drawing and is used for identifying 
the technical drawing via Smart Device. By means of the 
QR-Code, which is printed onto the analogue technical 
drawings on the shop floor, analog technical drawings can be 
digitized by reading the machine-readable code with the 
Tablet-PC without much effort. 
 (2) The approved technical drawings are stored in the 
operational data management system and provided to the 
work preparation as a PDF file. In the work preparation 
department, the technical drawings of a project are still 
printed out and placed in a project folder. The analogue 
version is often still a must-have in shop floor. With this 
restriction several ways to document a virtual twin are 
possible, see chapter VI. This analogue project folder runs 
through the production and serves as a sole work instruction 
for the worker. The digital twin of the technical drawing is 
stored and can be used any time after QR-Code scan. 
(3) Hand-picked employees are equipped with the Smart 
Device (Tablet-PC), Smart-Pen and the production-app. 
When the employee makes a change to the components and 
to the technical drawing, as described in the application 
scenario, he/she has several functions to document the 
changes. After a personalized log-in to the application, the 
operator scans the QR-Code with the camera of the Tablet-
PC. The QR-Code scan loads the digital twin and further 
information of the technical drawing. The application 
provides the employee with four multimodal functionalities, 
to document the changes on the parts or technical drawings: 
Smart-Pen, Tablet-Pen, Take Picture, 3D-Model.  
After documentation, there are an analogue and digital 
twin of the technical drawing. The analogue version runs 
further with the modified part through production, whereas 
the digital version is forwarded to the design/development 
department for documentation and correction. 
(4) The employee finishes the changes and sends the 
digital technical drawing with its changes to the 
design/development department by using a predefined mail.  
(5) In the design/development department, the incoming 
information includes the technical drawings as well as a 
description of the problem and the priority. These are sighted 
by the manager of the department and arranged according to 
their urgency. With this information, he/she is able to 
improve capacity planning and can direct the changes to 
employees according to priorities and available capacities. 
(6) The design/development department maintains the 
modifications. After this, a new release of the mechanical 
drawing and CAD data is stored in the Operational Data 
Management System. The work preparation department has 
now access to the blueprint`s PDF-version and is able to 
attach a printed copy of it in the project`s file folder. 
Furthermore, all relevant changes are done and CAD data is 
updated for new projects. 
VI.  FUNCTIONALITES OF THE APPLICATION 
To achieve the above mentioned change process, the 
production-app is developed, offering several functions, 
which are described below: 
Through specifications and requirements as stated in the 
previous sections, several functionalities like Tablet-Pen, 
Take Picture, Smart-Pen and 3D-Model were included in the 
production-app as shown in Figure 3. After a first log-in of 
the employee on the app, the secondary function QR-Scan 
(1) is executed. The employee moves the Tablet-PC over the 
QR-Code on the technical drawing. After identification, a 
data download of the digital technical drawing (the virtual 
twin) from a server to the temporary memory of the Tablet-
PC is carried out. As a result, the previously analogue 
drawing is loaded and visualized on the Tablet-PC. At this 
point, the user has the option to choose between the main 
functionalities (2) Tablet-Pen, (3) Take Picture, (4) Smart-
Pen and (5) 3D-Model. After the information has been 
completed by one of the main functions, the changes noted 
on the technical drawing are sent to the development/design 
department. The transmission of the information is 
performed by the secondary function (6) Send Email.  
(1) Scan QR: The QR-Code is used to digitize analogue 
technical drawings on the tablet by reading the code on the 
drawings. 
The 
QR-Code 
is 
generated 
in 
the 
development/design department. It is associated with the 
technical drawing and has information about the project, 
drawing, etc. 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

(2) Tablet-Pen: With the functionality, the employee can 
process the technical drawing using a Tablet-Pen. Via a 
Tablet-Pen, the employee can perform the following 
elementary tasks according to DIN EN ISO 9241-420:2011: 
drawing, accurate pointing, fast pointing, selecting and 
pulling. After the completion of the information gathering, 
the technical drawing, including all changes, is sent to the 
design/development department via email. 
 
 
TAKE PICTURE
3D-MODEL
SMART PEN
SURFACE PEN
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
multimodal tools for data-gathering and
visualization
digitize
 
Figure 3. Main functionalities of the production-app 
(3) Take Picture: The Take Picture function module 
allows the employee to capture images from the technical 
drawing. It is conceivable that he takes a snapshot of a 
component that is still in production. The image of the 
component can thus be coupled with the technical drawing. 
After confirming the suitability of the recording, the image 
appears on the Tablet-PC's user interface. The picture is 
automatically provided with the recording date and time. 
Thus, a later termination of the recording is possible. 
Analogous to the Tablet-Pen function, alphanumeric 
information can also be recorded here.  
 (4) Smart-Pen: Handwritten changes on an analogue 
drawing are immediately digitized by the Smart-Pen. When 
the change has been completed, the specialist can view the 
change on the Tablet-PC. In turn, the digital twin can be 
further prepared with the surface pen and sent to the 
development and design department. The Smart-Pen is based 
on a common ballpoint pen. When the pen is placed on the 
paper, the ink mine leaves an ink trace on the paper. 
Simultaneously, the data is recorded as soon as the Anoto-
patterned paper is being written on. The pencil records each 
stroke and point as it is made by the employee, and then 
transfers the data to the processing system [17]. The data is 
stored on the pen until it is transferred to an FTP server via a 
docking station. If there is a need for a change in the drawing 
by the employee, the changes on the technical drawing are 
recorded (drawing is provided with Dot-pattern) with the 
Smart-Pen. After completion of the handwriting modification 
with the Smart-Pen, a digital twin of the analogue technical 
drawing is generated on the Tablet-PC. 
(5) 3D-Model: This is a functionality to provide the 
employee with additional information of the machine 
component in manufacture or assembly. This function loads 
a 3D-Model of the component onto the Tablet-PC. The 
model can be changed in size and orientation by the 
employee.  
(6) Send Email: Communication between the employee 
and the developer/designer takes place via the standard e-
mail account (Microsoft Outlook) of the employee. A 
content system is integrated into the function module in 
order to spare the employee the writing of an email and to 
ensure a standardized information content of the email. The 
employee is given the opportunity to define the responsible 
persons, the originator of the changes and the urgency of the 
change by means of two dialog windows. With this 
standardized information system, the employee can finish 
and send his report with three clicks in the production app. 
The email is received by the design/development department 
manager. The information gives him an overview on changes 
in the project. Considering all information and current 
projects, he can perform his capacity planning for his team. 
In the future, the production-app shall be extended with a 
capacity planning tool.  
VII. SUMMARY AND OUTLOOK 
The presented shop floor information application, which 
consists of Smart Devices and a production-app is developed 
to gather changes on the shop floor in real time and 
communicate these to organizational departments.   
The system targets at first the design/development, in 
which a QR-Code is generated. The QR-Code is copied on 
the digital technical drawing by a plug-in in the four 
software-supported CAD programs used. The QR-Code is a 
qualifier to digitize the analogue technical drawings on the 
shop floor without much effort. In addition, a so-called dot-
paper is created in the design/development. By the dot-paper 
a further form of digitization is provided via the Smart-Pen. 
Accordingly, the technical drawing is provided with two 
auto-ID codes for digitization. In production planning, the 
analogue technical drawing is printed for the run through 
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

reduction. If the employee has to make a change to the 
components or to the technical drawing, he uses a Smart 
Device (Tablet PC) to scan the QR-Code. A lean developed 
application is installed on the Tablet-PC, which provides the 
employee with four functionalities for gathering and 
communicate changes to the components. The aim of SIA is 
the reduction of media breaks between shop floor and top 
floor. The digitization results in improvements by timely 
creation and verification of the device documentation and 
reduction of design faults, which are carried over to new 
projects. 
Furthermore, 
creation 
of 
the 
complete 
documentation in parallel to production processes and 
controlling of project progress will be possible.  
The shop floor information application will be 
implemented 
in 
future 
in 
the 
company. 
During 
implementation phase, the system and processes will be 
evaluated and adapted iteratively. Results and experiences of 
the use case will be used to develop the system further and to 
refine methods for networking and digitizing of the value 
chain.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was written in the framework of the research 
project NeWiP, which is funded by the Federal Ministry of 
Education and Research (BMBF) and supervised by the lead 
partner PTKA-Karlsruher Institut für Technologie under the 
funding code 02P14B203. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Müller, Strategies and trends in assembly technology and 
organization, editor: C. Brecher, L. Schlapp, Apprimus 
Verlag, Aachen 2009. 
[2] G. Schuh et al., Technology roadmapping for the production 
in high-wage countries, Production Engineering, Volume 5, 
issue 4, pp. 463 - 473. 2011. 
[3] G. Reinhart et al., “Cyber-physical production systems: 
productivity and flexibility increase through networking of 
intelligent systems in the factory,” in wt Werkstattstechnik 
online - version 2-2013 special edition industry 4.0, pp. 84 - 
89, 2013. 
[4] J. Kletti, Manufacturing Execution System – MES, Springer, 
Berlin, 2007. 
[5] Acatech: 
Cyber-Physical 
Systems-Driving 
force 
for 
innovation in mobility, health, energy and production. 
[Online]. Available from: http://www.acatech.de [accessed: 
26-April-2017]. 
[6] D.-M. Lucke, Ad hoc information procurement using context-
based systems in the multi-variant batch production, 
dissertation, Universität Stuttgart, 2013. 
[7] J. Kletti, MES-Manufacturing Execution System: Modern 
production requirements, Berlin: Springer, 2015.  
[8] C. Alvaro, “Secure Control: Towards Survivable Cyber-
Physical Systems,” in the 28th International Conference on 
Distributed Computing Systems Workshops . 2008.  
[9] D. Steegmüller and M. Zürn, Reconfigurable production 
systems for the future automotive industry. in, T. 
Bauernhansl, M. Hompel, B. Vogel-Heuser, Industry 4.0 in 
production, automation and logistics. pp. 103 - 119, Springer 
Vieweg, Wiesbaden, 2014. 
[10] A. Neuschwinger, Multimodal, information-based workplace 
communication 
system, 
Dissertation, 
Ruhr-Universität 
Bochum, 2003. 
[11] A. Bildstein and J. Seidelmann, Industrie 4.0-Readiness: 
Migration to industry 4.0 manufacturing. in, T. Bauernhansl, 
M. Hompel, B. Vogel-Heuser, Industry 4.0 in production, 
automation and logistics. pp. 581 - 597, Springer Vieweg, 
Wiesbaden, 2014. 
[12] M. Cohn, User Stories Applied – For Agile Software 
Development, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2004. 
[13] G. Fischer, Context-aware systems: the “right” information, at 
the “right” time, in the “right” place, in the “right” way, to the 
“right” person, AVI '12 Proceedings of the International 
Working Conference on Advanced Visual InterfacesPages 
287-294, 2012. 
[14] P. Wohed, On the Suitability of BPMN for Business Process 
Modelling, Springer, Berlin, 2006. 
[15] J. Ziegler, Wearables in industrial applications - Capable of 
mobile IT-supported work through distributed portable user 
interfaces, TUDpress, Dresden, 2016. 
[16] M. Walkter, L. Takayama, J. A. Landay, “High-fidelity or 
low-fidelity, paper or computer? Choosing attributes when 
testing web prototypes,” in proceedings of the human factors 
and ergonomics society 46th annual meeting, 2002. 
[17] R. Boldt, T. Pietsch, Digital Pen & Paper, equbli, Berlin, 
2014. 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-555-5
ICAS 2017 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

