Convergence singularities: As man becomes machine and machine becomes man 
Carl Adams 
School of Computing, University of Portsmouth, UK 
Portsmouth, UK 
e-mail: carl.adams@port.ac.uk 
 
 
Abstract—. Within the AI domain there is discussion on the 
singularity event, the situation where machines achieve a level 
of consciousness and intelligence equal to or exceeding that of 
humans. This paper explores different perspectives on such a 
singularity. The main contentions are that a) it is a moving 
target in that using technology man is also expanding human 
capabilities – as such it is a convergence than a one sided 
movement; b) it is not one singularity but an array of 
singularities representing multiple attributes of humans and; 
c) singularities should be considered in a wider system 
perspective that takes account of organizational structures, 
individual motivations and practicalities. This paper provides 
an Information Systems and autonomic systems perspective on 
a machine-man/man-machine singularity.  The paper hopes to 
make contribution by extending the discourse on such 
singularities and raise some practical and philosophical 
questions for society and policy decision makers. 
Keywords-man-machine singularity;convergence singularity 
I. 
 INTRODUCTIONHEADING 1) 
The ‘singularity’ is the expected situation where artificial 
intelligence (AI) machines achieve a level of intelligence and 
consciousness equal to or exceeding that of humans. This 
concept has engaged many imaginations over many decades 
in both academic research and in popular science fiction 
literature and film (e.g. 2001 A Space Odyssey, I Robot, 
Terminator, Matrix). Indeed some of the main themes, 
concepts and implications of machine intelligence and 
consciousness outstripping humans are often explored in 
fiction and film better than in academic research: Academic 
research usually focuses on specifics of the ‘how to do’ 
elements of machine intelligence (such as new algorithms 
and technologies) whereas fiction explores wider sets of 
issues and takes forward particular ‘what if’ scenarios. 
 
However, the research endeavours into AI have been 
phenomenal [18], possibly tying into some underlying 
human desires for technology and advancement [15]. In the 
early computing years the possibility of machines achieving 
human level intelligence started to become a possibility as 
technological advances took place, though considerable 
challenges we identified:  
"In the future, if and when this degree of complexity is 
attained by a single computer, we shall perhaps be able to 
find out if it can be made to match the power of thought of 
the human brain. 
The problem of programming such a super-computer will 
still remain, however. The limitations of man as a 
programmer will always, in the end, set a limit to the 
intelligence that can be simulated by a machine. A 
computer's 'artificial intelligence' is prescribed by man, and a 
higher intelligence is demanded for the prescription than for 
the execution. Man, as the originator, will always be on top." 
[12] 
 
Over the more recent decades considerable effort within 
the computer science domain has been focused on 
developing AI techniques and technologies many of which 
explore ways of surmounting the 'originator barrier', 
including Logic systems, Bayesian networks, Neural 
networks, 
Simulated 
annealing, 
Swarm 
Intelligence 
algorithms and many more [18] . At the same time as 
developments in AI the processing and storage power of 
computer systems have expanded at phenomenal rates over 
the decades providing a raw processing intelligence base for 
running such AI systems. Concurrently with these 
advancements, research into consciousness has also been 
fairly active drawing upon several fields including computer 
science, neuroscience, cognitive science, psychology, 
philosophy and others [5],[3]. Seemingly the foundations for 
developing machines that ‘think’ are well in place [14],[15] 
and that we are well on the way towards a singularity event. 
 
A wakeup call to the imminent singularity was the chess 
match in May 1997 between the world chess champion 
Garry Kasparov and the Deep Blue chess-playing super 
computer developed by IBM. Deep Blue won a six-game 
match (two wins to one with three draws – though Kasparov 
claimed IBM cheated and asked for a rematch, which was 
refused by IBM who relatively quickly dismantled Deep 
Blue). In a very limited sense this was an example of a 
singularity event: a machine beat the best of humans in a 
complex thinking task – that of playing chess. 
 
Issues and concerns over a singularity event have been 
gaining ground in the wider public and academic 
communities over the previous few years with emergence of 
specialist conferences, forums and workshops focusing on 
the possible singularity event. Possibly the most prominent 
of these being the singularity summit in the US, which aims 
to: "explore the rising impact of science and technology on 
society. The summit has been organized to further the 
understanding of a controversial idea – the Singularity 
scenario” (from http://www.singularitysummit.com/). Tied in 
with the summit 
is 
the Singularity Institute (see 
http://singinst.org/) which aims to raise awareness, engage in 
research and initiate public debate on the singularity event. 
152
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

 
The singularity event is one of the big issues in future of 
computer science as well as the wider communities within 
society: A singularity event is likely to affect many 
stakeholders who may interact with and use such systems. 
Probably one of the strongest contenders for a route to 
machine consciousness is the development of sophisticated 
autonomic computer systems [2]. Such autonomic systems 
have to operate in real time in dynamic environments 
without human intervention. This paper explores an 
Information Systems (IS) and autonomic perspective on such 
singularities. The paper tries to extend existing singularity 
discourse along three main themes:-  
 
a) The singularity is a moving target in that the 
capabilities of man are also expanding, both in evolutionary 
sense and also in the adaptation and employment of drugs 
and technologies. Consequently the singularity it is more a 
convergence than a one sided movement. Man’s capabilities 
are being extended moving towards capabilities found in a 
range of technologies and machines (this we refer to as man-
machine) while machines are moving towards man’s 
capabilities, such as empathy and consciousness (this we 
refer to as machine-man).  
b) It is not one singularity but an array of singularities 
representing multiple attributes of humans and of autonomic 
system machines. For instance, human attributes cover 
socializing, empathy, creativity (and other) capabilities as 
well as intelligence and consciousness capabilities. Different 
as well as overlapping sets of attributes are likely to emerge 
from the development of sophisticated autonomic systems. 
c) Singularities should be considered in a wider 
organizational and system perspective that takes account of 
forces of change, organizational structures, individual 
motivations, economics, information flows and needs, 
practicalities and many other attributes affecting the success 
of a technology. Any likely future sophisticated autonomic 
systems that evolve into some form of consciousness will not 
operate in a vacuum: such autonomic systems are likely to 
interact with other entities (human and/or machine) and there 
is likely to be some economic, business, social or other 
imperative driving such interaction. 
 
As such, this paper extends the discourse on man-
machine singularity than found within the existing literature 
by combining an IS and autonomic systems perspective. The 
paper argues that such perspective is needed to make sense 
of the issues and implications of heading towards man-
machine/machine-man convergence singularities. 
II. 
A MOVING TARGET: MAN TO MACHINE AND MACHINE 
TO MAN 
This section examines the convergence of extending 
capabilities – those of the expanding capabilities of man 
(man-machine) and those of intelligent machines (machine-
man).  The concept of singularity becomes non static; indeed 
it may even be asymptotic if the capabilities of man subsume 
the capabilities of machine intelligence. First we will 
examine the man-machine activity then the machine-man 
activity. 
 
A. Man to machine (Man-machine) 
Man has also used tools and technology to improve and 
extend human capabilities, indeed tool making is one of the 
main attributes of man that distinguishes us from other 
animals and beings [4],[16],[9]. For instance, the use of 
throwing sticks and bow and arrows have been used to 
extend human capabilities in throwing weapons. 
 
Much of the use of technology has been to address 
weaknesses or the loss of capabilities such as when people 
grow old. For instance glasses and hearing aids (hearing 
trumpets to digital hearing aids) have been used to improve 
sight and hearing capabilities - to bring them back to a 
'normal' level for people. The support routes of technology 
development for people with medical conditions or 
disabilities often provide a base to improve human 
capabilities. Wheel chairs used to help people that can't walk 
enable wheel chair users to go faster than the normal walking 
pace or running pace of people that can walk (e.g. a 70 year 
old can trundle along at 8 mph in their electric wheel chair - 
far faster than a normal 70 year old can go without 
technology aid; a wheel chair marathon runner can often go 
faster than a normal marathon runner). 
 
There is a wide range of areas where technology has been 
used to enhance human capabilities. Man has used telescopes 
or microscopes to increase sight capabilities well beyond 
normal levels. Hearing or sensing of sound has been 
extended from very low frequencies through to high 
frequencies heard by bat. One could even include sensing all 
the way up through the spectrums extending perception 
through higher and higher frequencies to light and X-rays. 
Cars, boats, submarines, trains, airplanes and spaceships 
have extended human capability to move around enabling 
humans to travel faster, carry bigger loads and travel through 
more environments than the human body can alone. 
 
The man-machine mix can be classified into non-invasive 
and invasive. The non-invasive mix of technology with 
humans has been taking place for centuries, and would 
include all the traditional use of tools and technologies (e.g. 
hand tools, cars, production machinery). The non-invasive 
mix of technology would also include ICT, computing 
technologies and the Internet. These enable humans to 
communicate with each other almost instantly from around 
the globe as well as provide access to massive amounts of 
information. This also comes with sophisticated searching 
and processing capabilities which combined enables a 
potential step leap in cognitive capabilities providing 
understanding of and interaction with the environment from 
the micro to the macro level.  
 
The non-invasive extension of human capabilities, the 
man-technology mix, provides the base for a closer 
interaction between man and technology - the invasive 
153
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

extensions (i.e. once a technology has been produced it can 
be applied closer to the body functioning). For instance, 
invasive heart pace-makers bring normal heart functioning to 
people with heart conditions. External hearing aids can be 
replaced with ear implants and so providing a more robust, 
finely tuned and less obvious support for people with hearing 
difficulties, as well as addressing hearing problems that 
cannot be addressed by an external hearing aid. Artificial 
limbs can be used to enable leg amputees to walk again. 
Much invasive use of technology has been to address 
deficiencies and weaknesses in people, but they can also be 
used to extend capabilities beyond the normal. It is only a 
small step to improve ear implants to be able to provide 
extended hearing range well beyond the normal levels. 
Paralympics runners can use carbon fiber limbs to run faster 
than normal runners.  
 
This is the realm of the 'six million dollar man' and other 
science fiction. However, the reality has caught up with 
many of the themes in fiction. In David Rorvik’s [17] 1970’s 
book, ‘As man becomes machine’, the concepts of 
integrating machinery and computers with human biological 
functioning are well discussed, based on the current science 
and research of the time. Though Rorvik’s book seems a 
little dated now, the concepts of Electronic Stimulation of the 
Brain (ESB) and Bio-feedback Training (BFT) show the 
possibilities of closer interaction between people and 
technology. 
 
More recently, the work by Professor Kevin Warwick, at 
Reading University’s Department of Cybernetics provides an 
up to date indication of where such technology is going. 
Professor Warwick – classed as the first cyborg – 
experiments in the late 1990’s involved implanting a 
microchip into the nervous system into his arm and used it 
for direct communication with a computer to control simple 
machinery, like switching on and off a light. These 
pioneering 
experiments 
involving 
the 
neuro-surgical 
implantation of a device that can directly interact with the 
median nerves of his left arm allowed a direct link between 
his nervous system and a computer. A follow on set of 
experiments involved having a similar device connected up 
to his wife then to communicate directly from one person to 
another directly via the nervous systems.  
 
Interaction and control directly from human nervous 
system is now a reality. From past technological 
development it seems that the military and intelligence 
communities are usually at the forefront of using ‘useful’ 
technology, possibly using the technology 5 to 10 years 
before it gets to the general public. ‘Useful’ technology in a 
military context can include anything that could have a 
possible military purpose. For instance, it may be very 
desirable for generals to be able to locate and communicate 
with each troop on the ground, and to be able to receive high 
definition reconnaissance data from each of those troops. It 
would be advantageous for troops on the battlefield to be 
able to get better information on where their colleagues are, 
the terrain and obstacles around them and of course 
information about where the enemy is. Equally, it is easy to 
see where it would be desirable to have location, health and 
‘condition’ information on troops particularly when it comes 
to casualties. Much of the future of man-machine 
enhancements may already be here. 
B. Machine to man (Machine-man) Machine 
Consciousness and Autonomic Systems 
Two aspects of machine-man will be explored here, one 
focusing on autonomic computer systems and the other on 
machine consciousness. One of the main sets of trends in 
computer systems has been towards more powerful and more 
sophisticated machines that undertake more functionality. 
The result of this has been computer systems that have to 
deal with more autonomy, increasing functionality and 
consequently increases in operating uncertainties and 
inconsistencies.  This is the realm of autonomic computer 
systems. Ganek and Corbi [10], in their much quoted paper 
discussing the ‘dawning of the autonomic computing era’ 
describe the main attributes of autonomic computing systems 
as being self managing systems with self-configuring, self-
healing, self-optimizing and self-protecting capabilities. 
Ganek and Corbi’s view of autonomic systems come from a 
business systems perspective, such as large network 
operating 
systems 
within 
complex 
and 
dynamic 
environments. However, autonomic computer systems derive 
their name from biology based on autonomic nervous 
systems (also known as involuntary nervous systems) within 
the human body, and are essentially the regulatory 
mechanisms of digestion, respiration, circulation of the blood 
etc. Although biology autonomic systems cover mostly 
involuntary functions, such as heart rate, these can be 
brought under some voluntary control (for instance, 
conditioning and meditation to control heart rate). There is 
much debate within medical and biology spheres on the 
relationship between the apparent voluntary and involuntary 
control mechanisms within the body: "The fact that much 
behaviour is involuntary and conscious raises such questions 
as: Why is some behaviour voluntary, and under conscious 
control? It seems that high rates of information-processing in 
unusual situations require consciousness, and are voluntary" 
[11, p66].  
 
As a set of body operating functions becomes well 
defined with interrelated feedback systems, then this set of 
functions can operate within some autonomic control system 
[2]. Within that autonomic control system there are 
involuntary controls operating almost independently of the 
voluntary controls. However, as the amount of information 
and processing increases for functions, and variety in 
operating situations increase, then this requires more 
voluntary control mechanisms.  Applying this biology 
analogy to computing autonomic systems it seems likely that 
some form of ‘voluntary’ control will be required as the 
amount of information and variety in operating situations 
increases. Machine-man capabilities can be extended by 
taking an autonomic approach, using a mix of voluntary and 
involuntary functionality, with the voluntary capabilities 
154
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

operating at a higher abstract level. This is getting closer to 
thinking [15] – a very human attribute. 
 
Closely related to this concept of machines thinking is 
machine consciousness. Of course consciousness is a 
complex phenomenon that occupies much debate within the 
sciences and philosophy. Susan Blackmore’s [5] work 
collates together conversations from some of the leading 
philosophers, computer scientists and neuroscientists on 
what constitutes consciousness, along with the possibility of 
generating consciousness in machines. 
 
As Aleksander [3] “the strategy for designing conscious 
machines is tough but, in the end, doable. It is founded on 
unraveling the undoubtedly complex functioning of the brain 
and transferring this understanding into computational 
machinery.” (p13) and defines his own personal five tests, or 
axioms, for being conscious (i.e. to distinguish between 
appearing to be conscious and being conscious):   
“The five axioms, the five different kinds of thought 
which are important to me and I feel need distinguishing are 
the following: 
1) 
I feel that I am part of, but separate from an ‘out 
there’ world. 
2) 
I feel that my perception of the world mingles with 
feelings of past experience. 
3) 
My experience of the world is selective and 
purposeful. 
4) 
I am thinking ahead all the time in trying to decide 
what to do next. 
5) 
I have feelings, emotions and moods that determine 
what I do.” [3,p34] 
 
Aleksander brings out a common theme in discourse on 
machine consciousness that of consciousness equates to 
human consciousness. However, as with the discussion on 
autonomic 
systems 
above, 
perceptions 
within 
an 
environment must be based on the range and level of sensory 
inputs about that environment and the characteristics of the 
environment itself. Different environments and different 
sensory inputs may well results in different types of 
consciousness. Consider different animals, sharks (and other 
fish), dolphins, birds, bats, dogs – these all have different 
environments and different senses and sensory inputs to what 
people have. Any consciousness of these beings (if indeed 
they can be classed as being conscious – a philosophical 
topic that engages researchers in this area, but for this paper 
assume that they are conscious) would be different to human 
consciousness. Similar reasoning would apply to a machine-
man consciousness being the product of a different set of 
sensory inputs from a similar by likely different environment 
(say a more electronic environment). Humans from their 
blinkered human perspective have an understanding of what 
consciousness means for them; other intelligent and 
conscious being (if they exist) may well have their own (and 
possibly 
equally 
blinkered) 
perspective 
of 
what 
consciousness means for them. 
III. 
MULTIPLE SINGULARITIES 
 
One of the contentions in this paper is that there is not 
one singularity but an array of singularities representing 
multiple attributes of humans and human intelligence. For 
instance, human beings have evolved over many years 
(millions of years) to be able to explore, sense, perceive, 
learn about, move within, interact and shape their 
environment. They have evolved an imagination capable of 
creating many forms of art and complex imaginary worlds 
and contexts in stories and film. They have also evolved to 
be very sophisticated social entities developing many 
different social structures from small family groups to formal 
and informal structures to enable multiple millions of people 
to live together in the same city or country. They have 
evolved other social structures to enable production and 
distribution of food, products and services (such as markets, 
money and bartering systems). They have evolved and 
developed many forms of communication and languages. 
They have also evolved to be very adaptive and innovative 
able to populate most areas of the planet (and even off the 
plant), and develop many different types of tools and 
technologies. Perhaps one of the most significant elements of 
human attributes, or higher order of human intelligence and 
consciousness, is the ability to be humane, to have empathy 
to others (of the same and other species) and the 
environment. This is moving from self awareness to self 
responsible. 
 
Humans are temporally rich in skills, they can interpret 
and make sense of past events and look forward and make 
fairly accurate best guess predictions on future events (for 
instance predicting what another person or animal might do 
in a situation, or predict the weather or the next eclipse). 
People are quite good at learning and passing this learning on 
to other people. Even organized groups of people, say at an 
organizational level are able to learn. Humans are able to 
learn about learning and deal with multiple constructs both 
abstract and ‘real’ [8].  
 
Each of these rich dimensions of humanness and human 
intelligence provide a dimension with which potential 
singularities can emerge. The man-machine/machine-man 
singularities should really be considered as a convergence 
and synergy of capabilities mixing man and machine 
attributes that best fits a particular context. 
 
IV. 
ORGANIZATIONAL AND SYSTEM PERSPECTIVE OF 
SINGULARITIES 
A further contention of the paper is that the technological 
(and human) evolution towards singularity events should be 
considered in a wider organizational and system perspective. 
Technology impacts people, organizations and society. There 
are many forces and influences impacting the development 
and adoption of new technology and new systems. Man-
machine/machine-man singularities represent new states of 
technology 
development 
and 
understanding 
of 
that 
155
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

development requires some understanding of the underlying 
forces of change, the resulting impact on organizational 
structures, individual motivations and general practicalities. 
This is the realm of Information Systems.  
 
New 
technological 
change 
impacts 
a 
range 
of 
stakeholders, organizations, working practices and social 
interaction – which can stimulate further technological 
change. For instance, Damsgaard and Gao [7] examining the 
evolutionary innovation of the mobile telecommunications 
market, describe the process as an ‘innovation circle’ where 
the introduction of a new technology stimulates further 
innovations in the mobile market place. Similarly [1] takes a 
similar approach that includes the user in the innovation 
process and refers to this as the problem-solution space or 
innovation-space. In a dynamic environment, when 
technology changes so too does user practices and needs. As 
user practices and needs evolve further opportunity emerges 
for 
technological 
led 
innovations. 
This 
dynamic 
environment, it is argued, consists of a changing problem-
solution space which provides the ideal circumstances for 
innovation 
to 
germinate. 
When 
considering 
man-
machine/machine-man 
singularities 
to 
this 
dynamic 
evolutionary development process, particularly in identifying 
the forces of change, the corresponding changes in working 
and social practices and the likely influences on further 
technological change.  
 
A man-machine or machine-man entity would be 
resource intensive compared to say just a normal human (or 
machine). The extra resources of course would provide 
enhanced capabilities - enabling the entity to do more things, 
quicker, better or longer – but the resources consumed could 
be very significant. For instance the Garry Kasparov and 
Deep Blue chess match in 1997 involved a super computer, a 
team of programmers and computer engineers focusing on 
just that limited (but challenging) task. This raises issues of 
the economic case for development of technological man-
machine/machine-man singularities.  In what circumstances 
would such an enhanced entity be economically viable or 
sustainable? 
Would 
some 
man-machine/machine-man 
singularities be more economically, or practically viable than 
others, and if so then which ones? 
 
Further, man-machine/machine-man singularities, than 
have to be considered in the context of the already existing 
inequalities in the world [19],[21],[6]: “About one sixth of 
the world’s population – mostly in the rich countries – are 
lucky enough to live in relative wealth, and the rest – mostly 
in developing countries – live in relative deprivation, if not 
desperate poverty” [22, pv]. As [20] identifies, on one level 
there is unprecedented opulence and on the other there is 
remarkable deprivation and destitution. The enhanced entity 
of man-machine/machine-man will likely raise specter of 
new type of underclass. The rationale and motivations 
towards developing man-machine/machine-man singularities 
have to be considered within the inequalities in the world. 
 
Further questions and issues emerge around the 
development of such enhanced man-machine/machine-man 
entities and systems. For instance there is still the 'originator 
barrier' of AI systems, particularly in understanding the full 
workings and functionality of such an advance piece of 
technology. There will clearly be challenges in identifying 
the information and performance needs to develop a 
conscious intelligent system, but there will also be a further 
set of needs to consider of the actual conscious intelligent 
entity itself. With man-machine/machine-man singularities 
the number of stakeholders to be considered has been 
increased by (at least) one. 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
This paper has tried to provide a more IS perspective on 
man-machine singularity than found within the existing 
computing literature. We argue this is important since an IS 
perspective is needed to make sense of the issues and 
implications of heading towards man-machine/machine-man 
convergence singularities. The discourse on the man-
machine singularity has to move away from just the 
technology and philosophical questions: Questions also need 
to be raised on the practicalities of how such systems can be 
developed and applied and the corresponding impact on 
society, organizations and people. To help identify some of 
these important questions this paper has extended the man-
machine 
singularities 
discourse 
by 
identifying: 
the 
singularity is a moving target (in that using technology is 
helping man expand human capabilities) so it is more a 
convergence or synergistic even; that the singularity is 
actually an array of different singularities representing the 
multiple attributes of what it means to be intelligent humans 
beings and; singularities should be considered in a wider 
system perspective than just the technological and academic 
– it should take account of the practicalities of introducing 
new technologies including the economic, organizational, 
social and individual impacts.  
Considering these perspectives some key questions 
emerge including: How will society be organized with such 
enhanced beings? Would machine-man entities have the 
same status, roles, responsibilities (social, tax, voting rights) 
in society as man-machine entities, or normal people? What 
will be the legal implications of the evolvement of machine-
man entities and how will laws change to recognize this? 
Which man-machine/machine-man singularities are more 
likely than others? Which singularities have more economic 
or social benefit for society, or which will be most 
problematic. What will be the optimal or practical level of 
man-machine/machine-man entities within a population? 
Would it be one to one or one to ten? What criteria and 
metrics would make sense in identifying an optimal level? 
Which of the man-machine/machine-man singularities are 
likely to be problematic (for humans) and which are likely to 
offer benefits? These are likely to be key philosophical 
questions that will task computer scientists and many other 
people in the years to come. 
 
156
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

Would raw intelligence measures, say processing or 
storage power, be more significant (on what ever scale) than 
say social intelligence, such as empathy or social capacity, or 
creative intelligence? If the human race in the future 
encounters other intelligent species, say in space travels, then 
would good or enhanced empathy, or innovative skills be 
more beneficial than raw intelligence? 
 
Is there a natural synergy between man and machine 
(coming from either the man to machine or the machine to 
man route) that provides some form of optimal being or 
existence (however that can be measured or categorized)? 
Evolution theories suggests that successful entities will 
evolve to fulfill a niche within the wider environment – in 
which case what would a man-machine/machine-man niche 
be? 
 
As 
many 
commentators 
on 
AI 
and 
machines 
consciousness identify, designing conscious machines is 
‘tough’ calling for many breakthrough steps in computer 
science. Equally, as this paper has hoped to show, the route 
to practical and useful conscious machines has many ‘tough’ 
challenges outside of computer science and indeed many 
tough challenges across disciplines. 
 
For many of the questions raised here we can draw upon 
key thinkers throughout history that have grappled with 
similar social and ethical dilemmas. Would the world 
become an autocracy directed by one single uncontrolled 
supreme man-machine/machine-man being? This is similar 
to Plato’s ideas of a society ruled by an enlightened few – the 
enhanced man-machine/machine-man entities. Technology 
could play a role in enabling that to happen with the 
increased power of electronic monitoring systems and 
processing power to make massively informed decisions on 
how societies can be run. However, there is a strong 
argument that this would not happen. As machine-man 
systems became more autonomic and conscious then they are 
likely to adopt other human attributes, such as being 
individuals and valuing systems similar to those of humans. 
Also, democratic systems and market systems seem to have 
evolved to be an efficient mechanism for allocation of 
resources between many groups of people as well as 
providing the stimulus for technological advancement. At a 
basic level one could say they we are fundamentally human 
animals with human animal needs, such as food, shelter, 
reproduction, socialization etc. Are our fundamental human 
needs likely to be that different over time? Maslow 
developed the concept of a hierarchy of needs, sometimes 
represented as a triangle of needs with basic food and 
survival needs at the bottom, leading up to self-actualization 
at the pinnacle. Is life, the fundamentals that is, likely to be 
that much different today than several decades ago when 
Maslow first introduced it? As machine advancement 
continues to mimic human capabilities then they may have 
their own hierarchy of needs, some of which may be similar 
to humans. Indeed, the more closely the machine-man/man-
machine entities become then the closer the hierarchies of 
needs will become. They will be motivated by similar things 
and value similar things. But it is up to society in how the 
direction of technology unfolds. However the man-
machine/machine-man singularities emerge and evolve the 
arguments covered in this paper indicate that this will be a 
rich area for future IS research. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Adams C. (2007a) Can Innovation Survive Virtual Teams 
and Outsourcing? Cutter IT journal, Executive Updates, 01 
September 
2007, 
pp4-8. 
Available 
from 
http://www.cutter.com/content/innovation/fulltext/updates/20
07/ieau0701.html, accessed 12/9/07. 
[2] Adams C (2007b) Autonomic systems, coping strategies 
and dream functions. The Third International Conference on 
Autonomic and Autonomous Systems, ICAS 2007, June 19-
25. 
[3] Aleksander I. (2005) The world in my mind, my mind in 
the world: Key mechanisms of consciousness in people, 
animals and machines. Imprint Academic, Exeter, UK. 
[4] Ardrey R. (1977) The social contract. Collins Press, 
Bungay, Suffolk, UK. 
[5] Blackmore S. (2005) Conversations on consciousness. 
Oxford University Press. 
[6] Collier P. (2008) The Bottom Billion: Why the Poorest 
Countries are Failing and What Can Be Done About It. OUP, 
Oxford. 
[7] Damsgaard J. and Gao P. (2004) Analysing mobile 
telecommunications market development. IFIP TC8 working 
conference on Mobile information Systems, 15-17 September, 
Oslo, Norway. In Lawrence E., Pernici B. and Krogstie J. 
(2004) Mobile Information Systems. Springer. 
[8] Deacon T. (1997) The symbolic species: The co-evolution 
of language and the human brain. Penguin, London. 
[9] Dunbar R. (2005) The human story: A new history of 
mankind's evolution. Faber and Faber, London. 
[10] Ganek A.G. and Corbi T.A. (2003) The dawning of the 
autonomic computing era. IBM Systems Journal,  March, 
2003. 
[11] Gregory R.L. (Ed) (1987) The Oxford companion to the 
mind. Oxford University press 
[12] Holingdale S.H. and Tootil G.C. (1965) Electronic 
Computers. Pelican, Harmondsworth, Middlesex, UK. 
[13] Leakey R. and Lewin R. (1992) Origins reconsidered: In 
search of what makes us human. Little, Brown & co., London.  
[14] McCorduck P. (1979) Machines Who Think. San 
Francisco: W.H. Freeman and Company. 
[15] McCorduck P. (2003) Machines Who Think: A Personal 
Inquiry into the History and Prospects of Artificial 
Intelligence. CRC Press. 
[16] Morris D (1969) The naked ape. Corgi, London. 
[17] Rorvik D. (1973) As man becomes machine. London. 
[18] Russell S. (1998) Artificial Intelligence: A Modern 
Approach. Pearson Education. 
[19] Sen A. (2001) Development as Freedom. Oxford 
Paperbacks, Oxford. 
[20] Sen A. (1999) Commodities and Capabilities. OUP, 
Oxford. 
[21] Stiglitz  J.E. (2003) Globalization and Its Discontents. 
OUP, Oxford. 
[22] Stiglitz J.E. and Charlton A. (2007) Fair Trade For All: 
How Trade Can Promote Development. OUP, Oxford. 
157
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

