ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-712-2
21
A Robust Polyurethane Depositing System for
Deployment on Disaster Scenario Robotics
Alec John Burns
School of Engineering
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
Email: sgaburns@liv.ac.uk
Sebastiano Fichera
School of Engineering
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
Email: Sebastiano.Fichera@liv.ac.uk
Paolo Paoletti
School of Engineering
University of Liverpool
Liverpool, UK
Email: paoletti@liv.ac.uk
Abstract—Robotic platforms have been widely recognised as po-
tential tools for mitigating the aftermath of natural catastrophes.
However, their ineffectiveness in traversing highly unstable and
irregular terrains is a key bottleneck in their deployment and
usage in real world scenarios. In this work, a Polyurethane
Foam depositing system is proposed to allow ground vehicles
to overcome obstacles and navigate on challenging substrates.
The proposed system is designed as in independent modular
mechanism that can be attached to various robotic platforms
to enable material deposition and thus to increase their ability in
overcoming obstacles. The materials used are inexpensive and
their properties can be tuned on board by a simple control
system, allowing the device to vary its output type according
to situational requirements. Four different deposit types have
been characterized, with expansion ratios varying from 20× to
33×, compressive strengths from 0.16MPa to 2MPa, and full
expansion and set times below 6 minutes, allowing application in
real-time. The system has been ﬁtted to a tracked rover equipped
with some basic sensors to allow autonomous responses when
faced with obstacles. The system allows successful traversing of
previously insurmountable obstacles such as large frontal objects
and chasms. The results show that the amount of foam deposited
can be well controlled and multiple layers can be stacked on top
of each other to signiﬁcantly increase altitude.
Keywords–Robotics; Overcoming Obstacles; Disaster Scenario.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A natural catastrophe is an unexpected event caused by
nature, which results in a great deal of suffering, damage and
death. These include but are not limited to events such as,
tornadoes, hurricanes, earthquakes, etc. According to a U.N.
report [1], since 1995 over 600, 000 people have been killed,
4.1billion injured or left homeless and $2trillion in economic
damages have been caused by such natural catastrophes. When
natural disasters strike, the primary concern is human life and
therefore it is critical to reach the victims and the survivors
as soon as possible. People left stranded in the wake of
these events are often stuck for days without food, water
or medicines. They ﬁnd themselves cut off from all support,
typically due to collapsed infrastructure, making it impossible
for teams to easily and safely reach them. This results in
ﬁrst responders being some of the most at risk during any
relief efforts [2], often entering highly unstable areas with little
knowledge of the interiors.
It is widely acknowledged that robotic platforms will play
a key role in mitigating the after effects of such disasters.
Major progress has been made in the developments of aerial,
TABLE I. SYNTHETIC COMPARISON OF LOCOMOTION SYSTEM
FEATURES, TAKEN FROM [8]. LeW = LEGGED WHEELED, LeT =
LEGGED TRACKED, WT = WHEELED TRACKED, L=LOW,
M=MEDIUM and H=HIGH
W
T
Leg
LeW
LeT
WT
maximum speed
H
M/H
L
M/H
M
M/H
obstacle crossing
L
M/H
H
M/H
H
M
step climbing
L
M
H
H
H
M
slope climbing
L/M
H
M/H
M/H
H
M/H
soft terrain
L
H
L/M
L/M
M/H
H
uneven terrain
L
M/H
H
H
H
M/H
energy efﬁciency
H
M
L
M/H
M
M/H
system complexity
L
L
H
M/H
M/H
L/M
terrestrial and maritime robotic platforms speciﬁcally designed
for use for disaster relief, search and rescue and salvage
operations [3]. This is because robots can be deployed quickly
in areas deemed too hazardous for human operation. Terrestrial
platform speciﬁcally can be used to collect interior data,
deliver supplies and support ﬁrst responders. Many projects
have been developed in recent years to achieve some of these
functions, see for example [4]–[6]. However, when taking
ground based platforms from the even surface of a lab to the
unpredictable and often unstable terrain expected in disaster
zone environments, they typically encounter major difﬁculties.
Numerous robotic architectures have been developed for
the very purpose of overcoming rough terrain. Current ap-
proaches can be classiﬁed into roughly ﬁve categories accord-
ing to [7]: single-tracked, multi-tracked, wheeled, quadruped-
platforms (or biologically inspired systems) and humanoid.
Each of these unique solutions can perform well in particular
conditions, but there is no one of these categories that performs
exceptionally in every circumstance. As a result of this, more
focus has been recently put on the development of hybrid
platforms to maximise the advantages of multiple architectures.
However, such systems are expensive and their added beneﬁts
often limited. A comparison of tracked, wheeled, humanoid
and their respective hybrids was performed in [8] and is
reported in Table I. This overlooks quadruped and biologically
inspired platforms as these represent a very diverse array of
systems which are difﬁcult to generalise. Table I shows that
no architecture nor hybrid system can tackle all of the con-
sidered environments, therefore development of one particular
locomotion style will not result in a system that is the most apt
in all scenarios. Due to this, material deposition systems have
been suggested as methods for augmenting robotic platforms

ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-712-2
22
to increase their ability of navigating uneven terrain.
In this paper, a novel Polyurethane (PU) Foam deposition
system is proposed to increase a robotic platforms ability
to traverse uneven terrains and overcome obstacles. The pa-
per is structured as follows. In Section II, an overview of
Polyurethane foam and the related works are given. In Section
III, a brief description of the design for the depositing module,
a characterisation of the deposited material and the integration
with a tracked rover is reported. Section IV contains an illus-
tration of the experimental setup used to test the effectiveness
of the depositing systems, whereas the results obtained in
these experiments are discussed in Section V. Finally, some
ﬁnal remarks and suggestions for further work are reported in
Section VI.
II.
BACKGROUND
A. Polyurethane Foam
Polyurethane Foam (PU) is a synthetic resin in which the
polymer units are linked by urethane groups; when combining
the two part constituents, the mix quickly expands and then
sets rigid. The ratio between these two parts alters the ﬁnal
properties of the PU foam and therefore maximum values for
such properties are the best way to characterise the material.
Two key material characteristics for the purpose of this paper
are:
•
Compressive strengths - over 2MPa are possible,
which can easily support the weight of a human
standing thereon.
•
Expansion ratios - over 30× the original volume,
meaning 25dm3 of ﬁnal structure foam can be gener-
ated from 840cm3 of the two part liquid constituents
[9].
The ﬁnal properties depend largely on two factors: the mix
ratio and the mix style. Therefore, different mixing mecha-
nisms, such as manual stirring, syringe pumping and aerosol
deposition, will result in very different ﬁnal material prop-
erties. The importance of this will be further discussed in
Section II-B. The ﬁnal material form is a closed-cell and thus,
water-proof foam when set and all mix types are lighter than
water, yet strong enough to support the weight of a human.
Additionally, these foams attach to a variety of materials
including wood, iron, and concrete, among others. Based on
these characteristics, this material is deemed suitable for use
in disaster scenarios in real-time.
B. Related Work
Two projects have utilised a robotic PU foam depositing
system for traversing obstacles. The ﬁrst platform was pro-
posed in [10] and utilised a motorised syringe preﬁlled with
the two parts of PU. As the syringe is actuated, the two
parts are driven through a series of static mixing chambers
to increase turbulence and initiate reaction. This allows the
system to deposit small amounts of PU foam to create a
ramp which allowed it to traverse an object larger than its
original capability. There are several major drawbacks of this
system. Firstly, the style of deposition provides little mixing
and thus very low expansion ratio of the foam, meaning a
signiﬁcant amount of material extrusion was needed to create
the desired ramps. This low expansion ratio, coupled with the
single rigid nozzle deposit system, resulted in a very complex
build requirement, which would be difﬁcult to implement
autonomously and was thus manually controlled by a human
operator. Further, continuous deposition was required if the
syringe was to remain unblocked before using all of the
material. For the ramp demo shown in this project, multiple
syringe cartridges and mixing devices were manually replaced
on the system to allow continuous usage.
An alternative approach was proposed in [9], where a
robotic platform utilised an aerosol depositing system mounted
on a gimbal, with both single part and two part PU tested.
The two part PU resulted in much more effective outputs
and a more ﬂexible deposition than [10], and therefore an
autonomous ramping system was possible upon detecting an
object. However, the use of aerosol depositing system gives
little control over the material being deposited, as the mix
ratio and outlet speed are determined with the systematic
design and cannot be controlled by the platform or even altered
simply ofﬂine. Also, the use of prepackaged aerosols bring into
questions how well this system could be scaled.
To overcome the drawbacks of existing platforms, this
paper proposes an on board system to drive the two part liquids
of PU foam to reaction. The proposed approach provides
complete control over the deposition process and over the ﬁnal
material properties of the PU foam, thus eliminating the issues
described above.
III.
DESIGN
A. PU Foam Deposit System
The proposed PU foam deposit device is illustrated in
Figure 1. Separate reservoirs are used to contain the required
components: PU part one, PU part two. Pumps are used to
drive PU parts one and two to an external mixing chamber.
This chamber ensures the two parts are fully diffused without
increasing turbulence to induce reaction. This is a necessary
step when multiple outlets are required as in the platform
described in this paper, otherwise the ﬂows would not mix
and develop into separate channels due to the viscous nature
of the individual parts, see Figure 2. The now combined
PU is separated toward two different static mixers acting as
depositing nozzles.
Figure 1. Schematic representation of the PU depositing device: PU part 1
and PU part 2 reservoirs are connected to a mixing chamber (light cyan
octagon) via pumps (represented by white double triangles). The resultant
mixture is then fed to static mixers (dark blue cylinders) that act as nozzles
for depositing PU foam.
The proposed design results in a number of beneﬁts when
compared to systems available in the literature:

ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-712-2
23
Figure 2. Illustration of PU parts one and two not mixing, which occurs
without a suitable mixing chamber.
1)
Basing the system around pumping mechanisms re-
sults in a ﬁxed amount of liquid being driven at
any one time. The amount of liquid being actuated
is independent of the reservoir size from which it
is being drawn. This, unlike syringe and aerosol
driven designs [9], [10], allows signiﬁcant scaling of
reservoirs with no system alteration.
2)
The system can use pumps to independently control
the ﬂow rate of each PU part. This allows complete
control over the mix ratio and therefore the ﬁnal
mechanical properties of the deposited PU foam.
For example, increasing the ratio of PU part two
would increase expansion ratio; this could be used
to maximise volumetric output if material was low.
Conversely, if the system required a harder deposit,
it could autonomously increase the ratio of PU part
one to the mix.
3)
Flow rate control allows control of ﬂuid turbulence
within the mixing devices. Increasing overall ﬂow ve-
locity increases the turbulence with which the chemi-
cals are mixed, thus reducing the time taken to begin
expansion. This has the potential to allow outputted
material to be less ﬂuid-like and more immediately
sticky, where obvious applications would be to allow
foam deposition on vertical walls. However, making
the deposit more liquid-like on exit allows the sub-
stance to be deposited into crevices and cracks which
would not be possible for syringe or aerosol deposited
systems.
4)
Finally, the system allows two pumps to drive the
liquids to two outlets, although it is possible to
increase this number. The importance of this will be
mentioned in Section III-C.
B. Foam Characterisation
To demonstrate the control ability on the ﬁnal material
properties of the PU foam, four different PU foam types have
been characterised according to: mix ratio, expansion ratio,
initial compressive strength, ﬁnal compressive strength, rise
time and set time. Higher compressive strengths and expansion
ratios are possible from this deposition system. However,
mixes that result in higher expansion ratios, for example, result
in compressive strengths that are too low to be considered
useful for the envisaged applications, and vice versa.
PU foam is a high ductility material, hence it tends
to experience large shape deformation instead of exhibiting
brittle cracking behaviour under load. Therefore, two non
standard deﬁnitions of compressive strength are used: ini-
tial compressive strength and ﬁnal compressive strength. The
former is deﬁned as the pressure applied before permanent
plastic deformation occurs, whereas the latter is deﬁned as the
pressure at which the height of the deposit is reduced by 70%.
Beyond this value the deposit is considered to have failed.
Controlled compression tests were conducted on an extracted
cubic test sample from a free rise foam deposit. Force and
compression/tension were measured with a material testing
machine (Instron 3345) loading the specimens at a rate of
2mm/min.
Set time is measured from initial deposition until the foam
has fully solidiﬁed, and is calculated by removing multiple
samples at set times and recording their compressive strength.
Full set time is considered the point at which compressive
strength no longer increases with increased reaction time.
Whilst absolute values of the properties have been mea-
sured and are of importance per se, the relative differences
are the primary quantities of interest, as they demonstrate the
capability of the proposed system to deliver enhanced control
characteristics. A summary of properties of the deposited
foams are reported in Table
II, where each foam is deﬁned
by the mix ratio of part one to part two. Such table shows, for
example, that the proposed device can create PU foams with
compressive strengths ranging from 0.56MPa to 2MPa.
C. Robotic Platform
The modular design proposed for the depositing system
allows easy deployment on already existing robotic platforms,
enabling their increased range of operation. For the purposes
of testing, the simple low cost ground rover shown in Figure 3
was used. This platform is a two-tracked vehicle with a track
height of 100mm and a track length of 300mm. The maximum
pressure exerted by the rover on the terrain is about 0.02MPa
(15kg rover on the total surface area of its tracks), therefore
the PU foam can easily sustain the weight of the whole
platform. The rover is driven by two large stepper motors (RB-
Phi-266, Robotshop) controlled by a central Arduino Mega
2560 board which actuates the motor speeds via two Arduino
Nano boards and the pumping systems via another Arduino
Mega 2560. A digital compass is connected to the central
control board to feed orientation information back to the
controller and positional information is estimated based on
encoder information from the motors. The PU Foam depositing
system was mounted on top of the rover with the two outlets
positioned directly behind the tracks. As the rover moves,
the foam will be deposited, forming two distinct extrusions
which are aligned with the rovers tracks. Once the foam has
expanded and solidiﬁed, the rover can simply climb on said
extrusions to increase or maintain altitude. When depositing
foam in a straight line, controlling either deposit speed or rover
speed allows the platform to create ramp structures as will
be demonstrated in Section IV. This is an efﬁcent approach
compared to the complex depositing mechanism proposed in
[9] and to the complicated ramp structure required in [10].
IV.
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
Two main simulated scenarios are designed to demonstrate
the effectiveness of the proposed PU foam depositing system
in allowing ground vehicles to navigate in a disaster scenario:
obstacle climbing and chasm traversing. To this end, the

ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-712-2
24
TABLE II. CHARACTERISATION OF FOUR TYPES OF PU FOAM DEPOSITION.
Low Density
Medium-Low Density
Medium-High Density
High Density
Mix Ratio (one:two)
1 : 0.74
1 : 1
1 : 1.4
1 : 1.6
Expansion Ratio
33×
29×
25×
20×
Initial Compressive Strength
0.16MP a
0.25MP a
0.41MP a
0.76MP a
Final Compressive Strength
0.56MP a
0.74MP a
1.37MP a
2MP a
Rise Time
37 seconds
46 seconds
52 seconds
55 seconds
Set Time
210 − 270 seconds
240 − 300 seconds
270 − 340 seconds
310 − 380 seconds
Figure 3. Images of the rover platform used for testing.
Figure 4. Illustration of the frontal obstacle detection system and ramp
building process. Panels 1-5 show process used when a single ramp is
enough to allow the robot to climb on the obstacle, whereas panels 6-9 show
the procedure used to build higher ramps by depositing several PU layers on
top of each other until sufﬁcient height is reached.
robotic platform described in Section III-C was ﬁtted with
ultrasonic distance sensors (HC-SR04) pointing in the direction
of travel and toward the ground to detect obstacles and/or
chasms. If the sensors detect a scenario that would prevent
the ground vehicle from proceeding on the planned path, a PU
foam deposition protocol is initiated.
A. Frontal Obstacle Detection and Climbing
Frontal obstacles are deﬁned as objects that are placed on
the rover planned path and are too high to be overcome by the
vehicle itself. Through testing, it was determined that the rover
cannot overcome obstacles that are above half the rover track
height. The frontal ultrasound sensor was then placed at this
height and, once an obstacle is detected, the rover initiates a
ramp depositing procedure in order to climb onto the obstacle.
In particular, following detection of an obstacle, the rover will
begin to move forward at a low motor torque to align the rover
front face with the straight edge of an object upon contact. The
ramp building protocol, schematically represented in Figure 4
is then initiated, giving rise to the creation of a ramp that the
rover can use to climb onto the obstacle.
Figure 5. Illustration of the chasm detection and ﬁlling system.
B. Chasm Detection and Filling
A chasm is deﬁned as a gap in the ﬂoor that is long enough
to prevent the rover from moving over it without falling in.
Through testing it was determined that the rover can overcome
chasms of up to 100mm (one third of the total length) without
falling into said gap. Longer gaps would prevent the vehicle
to move along the planned path. Two ultrasound sensors
were then placed on the underside of the chassis, pointing
to the ground. One sensor was positioned at the front of the
undercarriage and another one was placed at one third of the
length from the front, in other words 100mm behind. These
two sensors are necessary as some gaps in the ﬂoor, of less
than 100mm in length, can be overcome by the rover without
need for material deposition. However, if both undercarriage
sensors detect a continuous gap, the rover will stop moving
and initiate a void ﬁlling procedure. At ﬁrst, the rover uses
depth measurements of the chasm to estimate the amount of
deposit required. However, if it is under deposited (for example
if the foam expanded less than expected) then it would once
again detect the chasm and repeat the ﬁlling procedure. Over-
depositing typically leads to foam overﬂowing the chasm, but
the extra amount is usually trivial for the rover to overcome.
An illustration of the autonomous response to chasms is shown
in Figure 5. Of course, chasm detection is overridden when
climbing a ramp produced by the system described in Section
IV-A.
V.
RESULTS
Three experiments were carried out with both detection
systems being operational. In all experiments, the rover is
instructed to move in a straight line and the detection systems
will determine whether or not they should activate the PU
foam deposit procedures in order for the rover to continue to
navigate along its planned path. All experiments require the
on-board autonomous decision system to:
1)
Identify an obstacle or a chasm preventing forward
movement.

ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-712-2
25
Figure 6. Small obstacle test: the stages of the rover detecting a 60mm high
block and depositing a foam ramp to climb onto the obstacle.
2)
Deposit the PU foam to overcome said obstacle
according to the procedures described in Section IV.
3)
Wait an appropriate amount of time for the PU foam
to set.
4)
Climb onto the obstacle or move over the ﬁlled chasm
using the deposited PU foam.
The mix ratio of PU Part one:Part two was ﬁxed at 1 : 1
(Medium-Low Density foam) for all three tests. The ﬁrst two
experiments consider frontal obstacles and the third considers
chasm detection. In all the scenarios the vehicle could not
navigate along the planned path without the aid of the PU foam
depositing system. For the frontal obstacles, the rover would
either topple or slip when trying to climb on the objects. In
the case of the chasm, the rover would simply fall into it.
A. Small Frontal Obstacle Test
The ﬁrst experiment considered a 60mm high block - 60%
of the 100mm rover height - blocking the rovers path. As can
be seen from Figure 6, the rover detected the object using the
embedded ultrasound sensor and initiated its ramp creation
procedure. The system created a sloped ramp by controlling
ﬂow rate according to the distance from the obstacle. The
system then waited for the foam to expand and solidify before
using the deposit to climb onto the obstacle. The total time to
run this experiment was 6 minutes and 42 seconds.
B. Large Frontal Obstacle Test
In the second experiment, a 130mm high block - 130%
times the rover height - was placed along the planned path.
Upon successfully detecting the object, the rover initiated the
ramp building procedure as in the previous scenario. However,
upon climbing the ramp, it detects the object again. The
system, knowing it has previously created a ramp, then starts
a different ramp creation procedure aimed at depositing a
second layer that is longer than the ﬁrst ramp, as shown in
Figure 7. After curing, the platform used the two-layer ramp
to climb onto the obstacle. Total time for this experiment was
13 minutes and 42 seconds.
C. Chasm Test
In the ﬁnal experiment, a 160mm long chasm was placed
along the rovers path - over half the 300mm rover tracks
length. The chasm was 80mm deep and 400mm wide. Once
the forward undercarriage sensor detected a gap, the rover
reduced its speed to ensure it had sufﬁcient time to detect
a potential chasm. Once the second sensor detected the same
continuous gap, the decision logic inferred that no ﬂooring is
present between the two sensors, hence the chasm ﬁlling proce-
dure was initiated. The material depositing system estimated
the amount of material to be deposited from the knowledge
of the depth of the chasm (measured by the undercarriage
sensors), performed the deposit and then waited for this to
expand and solidify. The rover successfully ﬁlled the chasm
and traversed the gap as shown in Figure 8. Total time for this
experiment time was 5 minutes and 50 seconds.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, an inexpensive and easy-to-use PU foam
depositing system is proposed. The system is designed as an
independent module that can easily be integrated into existing
robotic platforms to broaden their navigation capabilities on
uneven terrains. This system does not require any complicated
control systems, but it allows signiﬁcant obstacles and chasms
to be overcome. The primary beneﬁt of this system when
compared with others available in the literature is the complete
control over the mix ratio and the deposit process. This
allows control over the mechanical properties of the deposited
material, allowing the PU foams expansion ratio and ﬁnal
compressive strength to be altered autonomously according to
the situational requirement. The proposed device mitigates the
main obstacle for using ground robots in disaster scenarios:
traversing uneven terrain. Future developments may include
the development of intelligent algorithms for optimising mix
ratios according to the situation detected by sensors, scaling of
system for increased range of applications, and collaborative
robotics to tackle more complex and large scale efforts.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Apadana Management
3 Ltd. The authors also wish to thank colleagues from the
University of Liverpool who provided useful insight both
during development of the platform described here and on its
potential application to disaster scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1]
Centre for Research on Epidemiology of Distasters and United
Nations Ofﬁce for Disaster Risk Reduction, “The human cost of
weather related disasters 1995-2015,” 2016, retrieved: May, 2019.
[Online]. Available: https://www.unisdr.org/2015/docs/climatechange/
COP21 WeatherDisastersReport 2015 FINAL.pdf
[2]
D. A. Alexander and S. Klein, “First responders after disasters: A
review of stress reactions, at-risk, vulnerability, and resilience factors,”
Prehospital and Disaster Medicine, vol. 24, no. 2, 2009, p. 8794.
[3]
R. R. Murphy, S. Tadokoro, D. Nardi, A. Jacoff, P. Fiorini, H. Choset,
and A. M. Erkmen, Search and Rescue Robotics.
Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2008, pp. 1151–1173.
[4]
K. Nagatani et al., “Redesign of rescue mobile robot Quince,” in
2011 IEEE International Symposium on Safety, Security, and Rescue
Robotics, Nov 2011, pp. 13–18.
[5]
R. R. Murphy, J. Kravitz, S. L. Stover, and R. Shoureshi, “Mobile robots
in mine rescue and recovery,” IEEE Robotics Automation Magazine,
vol. 16, no. 2, June 2009, pp. 91–103.
[6]
F. Matsuno and S. Tadokoro, “Rescue robots and systems in japan,”
in 2004 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Biomimetics,
Aug 2004, pp. 12–20.

ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019. ISBN: 978-1-61208-712-2
26
Figure 7. Large obstacle test: the stages of the rover detecting a 130mm high block and depositing a two-layer foam ramp to climb onto the obstacle. Left:
side view, Right: top view.
Figure 8. Chasm test: the stages of the rover detecting a 160mm long
chasm and depositing PU foam to ﬁll the gap and traverse the chasm.
[7]
M. Brunner, B. Brggemann, and D. Schulz, “Towards autonomously
traversing complex obstacles with mobile robots with adjustable chas-
sis,” in Proceedings of the 13th International Carpathian Control Con-
ference (ICCC), May 2012, pp. 63–68.
[8]
L. Bruzzone and G. Quaglia, “Review article: locomotion systems
for ground mobile robots in unstructured environments,” Mechanical
Sciences, vol. 3, 07 2012, pp. 49–62.
[9]
R. Fujisawa et al., “Active modiﬁcation of the environment by a robot
with construction abilities,” ROBOMECH Journal, vol. 2, no. 1, 2015,
p. 9.
[10]
N. Napp, O. R. Rappoli, J. M. Wu, and R. Nagpal, “Materials and
mechanisms for amorphous robotic construction,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, Oct 2012,
pp. 4879–4885.

