Dynamic, Model-based Reconfiguration for Flexible Robotic Assembly Lines 
 
Niki Kousi, Christos Gkournelos, Sotiris Aivaliotis, George Michalos, Sotiris Makris 
Laboratory for Manufacturing Systems & Automation 
Department of Mechanical Engineering and Aeronautics, University of Patras  
Patras, Greece 
e-mail: makris@lms.mech.upatras.gr, kousi@lms.mech.upatras.gr, gkournelos@lms.mech.upatras.gr, 
saival@lms.mech.upatras.gr  
 
 
Abstract—The European industry is becoming more customer 
centric in an approach to meet the varying customers’ demand 
and minimize the costs of large inventories. The optimized 
production capacity that is achieved by the fixed production 
model can no longer guarantee the sustainability inside a 
fluctuating market that constantly requests new models. This 
creates the need to deploy flexible production systems 
exploiting the capabilities of multiple resources including both 
robots and human operators. Motivated by this need, this 
paper introduces the usage of mobile dual arm robots that are 
able to autonomously navigate in different workstations to 
undertake multiple operations, acting as assistants to human 
workers. A digital world model infrastructure for enabling this 
dynamic performance achieving process level reconfiguration, 
through robot’s behavior adaptation is discussed. This system 
is based on a multiple sensor data synthesis mechanism that 
facilitates the real time shopfloor status digital representation. 
Static objects and moving obstacles, as well as human presence 
are identified inside this model enabling the robots’ behavior 
adaptation through reasoning upon them. The suggested 
infrastructure has been deployed and tested in a case study 
from the automotive industry. 
Keywords-Mobile robots; flexibility; perception; digital 
world; sensor data synthesis. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Robots have been considered as a major enabler for 
autonomous assembly systems. However, in current robot-
based production systems, flexibility [1] and reconfiguration 
are still constrained due to [2]: a) the rigidity of the used 
stationary robotic units, b) the use of fixed and product 
model dedicated equipment, c) the use of fixed robot control 
logic and d) the absence of perception abilities that would 
allow the robots to dynamically adapt their behavior to the 
production needs.  
Overcoming these limitations may be realized through 
the introduction of flexible robot workers enabling 
autonomy and collaboration between all production 
resources (including human operators and robot resources). 
Mobility both in resources and product level can play a vital 
role towards the realization of such production concepts as 
discussed in [3]. To this end, a hybrid and dynamically 
reconfigurable shopfloor is suggested employing mobile 
dual arm workers, namely Mobile Robot Platforms (MRP), 
and human operators.  
The last decades, extensive research has been made in the 
field of mobile robotic systems, either in the field of mobile 
robot manipulators or simple mobile platforms [4]. 
However, existing applications have limited perception 
capabilities not allowing real time adaptation of the system 
and robot behavior to dynamic environments [5][6]. Most of 
the manipulators are restricted to performing off-line 
programmed tasks only when they are in fixed positions, 
thus not fully exploiting their mobility.  
On the other hand, digital representation and simulation 
of the production environment and process have emerged 
over the last decades as a means of partially handling the 
optimization of the production system performance [6]. In 
this era of digitalization in manufacturing, the Digital Twin 
concept has gained a lot of attention given the advantages 
that it may offer in terms of system autonomy [7]. The main 
principle of this concept relies on the digital representation 
of the physical world using multiple data input formats, 
such as Computer aided design – CAD files or other unified 
formats [8] as well as real time update of the virtual world 
based on real-time data (e.g., shopfloor/resource sensors, 
process related data, etc.). This is a very promising approach 
for providing perception and cognition abilities towards 
more autonomous and intelligent robotic systems [9].  
Existing applications of dynamic robot control based on 
digital modelling and sensor data for ensuring collision free 
paths are based on the functionalities provided by Robot 
Operating System (ROS) [10]. The latter provides a rich 
content of data types and formats to virtually represent 
various hardware devices and multi-sensor data as well as a 
network of services and topics for broadcasting the captured 
knowledge.  However, existing infrastructures are not 
mature enough to support the representation of the discussed 
hybrid production paradigm given the complexity of the 
various automated devices used, such as multiple mobile 
dual arm workers and products as well as human operators.  
To overcome the existing limitations, this paper 
introduces a Digital World model infrastructure for 
supporting the effective introduction of MRPs in assembly 
environments. A unified semantic representation of the 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-712-2
ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

geometrical and the workload state on top of the ROS 
provided data structures is proposed so for the model to be 
able to support real time planning and MRP behavior 
optimization based on the shopfloor status.  
The paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses 
the MRPs structure and capabilities while section III is 
focusing on the Digital World model description. In Section 
IV, the implementation of the robot’s behavior adaption in 
different levels is presented. The performance of the system 
is analyzed on an automotive case study in Section IV. The 
last section is dedicated to drawing the conclusions and 
providing an outlook towards future work. 
II. 
MOBILE ROBOT PLATFORMS (MRPS) 
The present work considers as flexible robotic assembly 
lines the production paradigm presented by Kousi et al. [3]. 
Under this paradigm, mobile dual arm workers are 
introduced as the main enables for the flexibility of the 
system. These so-called MRPs can autonomously navigate 
inside the shopfloor localizing themselves into different 
workstations 
for 
a) 
performing 
multiple 
assembly 
operations, such as handling, insertion, screwing, drilling, 
etc. and b) acting as assistants to human operators. Figure 1 
presents MRPs’ hardware structure. 
The main hardware components integrated under the 
MRPs can be summarized as follows: 
• 
Two collaborative robot arms undertaking the 
assembly tasks execution; 
• 
An omnidirectional mobile platform enabling the 
autonomous navigation; 
• 
A torso adding two degrees of freedom to the robot 
arms in terms of rotation and elevation; 
 
Figure 1.  Mobile Robot Platforms (MRPs). 
• 
Safety certified 2D laser scanners allowing the single 
plan obstacle detection, and 
• 
Depth sensors allowing the 3D environment 
understanding.  
These components aim to provide the hardware 
infrastructure allowing the safe navigation and localization 
of the robot into the different workstations as well as 
flexibility in terms of the process by dynamically 
identifying the product variants that need to be processed. 
III. 
DYNAMIC DIGITAL WORLD MODEL 
To enable the dynamic behavior and communication 
among these MRPs, the discussed Digital World model aims 
to provide the infrastructure for enabling the shopfloor data 
acquisition as well as combine them in a common 
representation to be consumed by the different decision-
making mechanisms involved in the execution. A continuous 
feedback from the actual shopfloor (using resource and 
sensor data) will enable the dynamic update of digital twin 
involving two main functionalities: 
 
Figure 2.  Digital World model-based system. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-712-2
ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

• 
Virtual representation of the shopfloor using 
multiple sensor data combination and CAD models. 
The digital shopfloor is rendered in the 3D 
environment using the capabilities provided by ROS. 
• 
A unified data model will be implemented in order 
to semantically represent the geometrical as well as 
the workload state. This data model should be 
generic enough in order to be able to address 
multiple cases as well as to be consumed by multiple 
components inside execution system. 
The overall system structure is presented in Figure 2. 
A. 3D environment constructor – sensor data synthesis 
The 3D environment constructor, composed by a set of 
sub-components, is responsible for registering the various 
entities included in the assembly, such as resources, parts, 
equipment, sensors, etc. A dedicated monitoring mechanism 
records the online location of these entities. These locations 
are used for constructing the complete working environment 
under a global world frame. This construction is performed 
based on the  ROS Tf library [11] as visualized in Figure 3. 
The involved software components were developed on top of 
ROS provided functionalities enabling the scalable network 
communication and easy integration with existing robotic 
applications. In more detail, existing ROS interfaces for 
various robot models and sensor types make the developed 
infrastructure re-usable in multiple robotic systems. 
During the set-up phase, the configuration of the 
resources, sensors and static objects takes place. In 
particular, the Resource configuration sub-component is 
managing the registration of the existing resources in the 
system. A set of attributes describing the resources have been 
defined as a universal resource model, such as transform 
configuration (.urdf format), path (.yaml format) and motion 
(.srdf format) configuration, payload, velocity, location, etc. 
These are populated for each resource instance introduced in 
the system. In a similar way, the involved Sensors are 
registered in the system through interfacing with the ROS 
drivers and recording their configuration data. The multiple  
3D 
Environment 
constructor
Camera 1 URDF
MRP 1 URDF 
file
pre-assembly 
table SDF file
 
TF topic tree 
MRP 2 URDF 
file
Camera 2 URDF file
Laser Scanner  
URDF file
Other 
resources 
URDF file
Fixtures SDF    
file
Sensors
Layout components
Resources 
 
Figure 3.  3D environment constructor.  
sensor data are shared with the robots’ motion and path 
planners though dedicated topics following a predefined 
naming convention for each new sensor.  Collecting the data 
from the available sensors, a data synthesis mechanism is 
responsible for publishing the 2D–3D combined sensor data. 
In that way, the 3D scene is reconstructed based on the 
sensors and this scene is consumed as a cost map for the 
standards motion and path planning algorithms (e.g., 
gmapping, amcl, ompl). The static objects, are loaded in .sdf 
that is uses by robot simulators, such as GAZEBO [12].  
During the real-time execution phase, a Resource 
location and status monitoring sub–component is deployed 
for regularly publishing this online information on the 
digital twin. These data are retrieved through dedicated 
interfaces in each resource controllers. Nevertheless, apart 
from the static parts whose position is defined at the 
configuration phase, there are also moving objects and 
obstacles whose position is not well fixed and need to be 
identified during the execution. 
 
Figure 4.  Unified semantic world model. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-712-2
ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

B. Unified semantic model  
To handle the complexity of hybrid production systems, 
this study suggests a structured way to model the process and 
the environment following the principles of hierarchical 
modelling as shown in Figure 4.   
IV. 
ROBOT BEHAVIOR ADAPTATION 
Under this study robot behavior is specified as the set of 
low-level actions, such as navigation, move arm actions that 
the robot needs to perform for performing a task such as 
pick and place of an object. Thus, the concept of adapting 
robot behavior relies on the realization of ad-hoc changes in 
the MRP’s planned navigation and motion paths so that it 
may perform the high-level task successfully.  
A lot of research has been done related to the avoidance 
of collisions among resources and unmapped obstacles 
inside the shopfloor environment. Exploiting existing 
algorithms, the Digital twin provides interfaces with robot’s 
path and trajectory planners, to achieve online re-planning 
based on fused real-time information from shopfloor.  The 
MRP structure has been modelled through a ROS based 
description file describing the link the inter-robot 
connections among the robot arms, the platform and the 
torso. Thus, inter-robot conflicts such as collision of the 
robot with itself are not allowed. 
A. MRP platform online path planning 
MRP online path planning is implemented based on ROS 
navigation stack for mobile robots, thence, is essential the 
use of ROS Topics for sending transforms using tf, 
publishing odometry information, publishing sensor data. 
Digital World model resource manager handles the 
appropriate information for the correct configuration of each 
MRP unit as follows:    
• 
Transform configuration: The transform tree for 
every coordinate frame of each resource is described 
inside the .urdf file. Worlds model’s repository 
contains all the URDF files for each resource.  
• 
Sensor 
and 
Odometry 
Information: 
Resource 
manager is responsible for defining which sensors 
are used by each robot. 
• 
Map: Inside world model’s repository 2D and 3D 
maps of the shopfloor are stored. In case of simple 
2D navigation as visualized in Figure 5, the 
map_server node publishes periodically the map data 
in /map2d topic.  
• 
Planner Configuration:  For the MRP’s navigation 
two planners are responsible based on the ROS 2D 
SLAM navigation module. The first is the global 
planner and is responsible for finding a minimum 
cost plan from a start point to an end point. The 
second is the base local planner, which is responsible 
for computing velocity commands to send to the 
mobile base of the robot given a high-level plan 
from global planner.  
 
Figure 5.  Digital World Model – 2D map. 
B. MRP robot arm online motion planning 
For the motion planning and controlling of the MRP 
arms ROS MoveIt! [13] is used. MoveIt! communicates with 
the MRP through ROS and it requires the existence of a 
dedicated ROS package for its configuration. The resource  
manager for the registration of a robot, such as MRP needs 
three type of information in order to setup the motion 
planning and export the MoveIt! package.  
• 
Robots Universal Robot Description File (URDF); 
• 
Robots Semantic Robot Description Format (SRDF) 
file created from MoveIt! setup assistant tool, and 
• 
MoveIt! configuration files including among others 
joint limits, kinematics, motion planning, perception. 
The digital world model through the Sensor Manager 
provides to MoveIt! the configuration for the occupancy 3D 
map created in occupancy grid using the OctoMap library as 
represented in Figure 6. This map is used as cost map with 
real time obstacles. Enhancing the environment knowledge 
with the occupancy map, the online motion planning 
component is aware of the existing objects / obstacles and 
uses this knowledge to ensure a collision-free trajectory 
planning.   
V. 
CASE STUDY 
The proposed Digital World model infrastructure has 
been implemented and tested through a case study coming 
from the automotive sector. In particular, the pilot case 
scenario involves the assembly of a passenger’s vehicle 
suspension. This assembly scenario involves a set of 
assembly operations in three different workstations: a) the 
damper pre-assembly area, b) the damper compression area 
and c) the damper assembly on the disk area.  
Following the analysis made in [3], an MRP is 
introduced in this assembly line, navigating among these 
 
Figure 6.  Digital World model – 3D map. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-712-2
ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

 
Figure 7.  Assembly enviroment simulation. 
workstations for performing a) the transferring of the 
damper from the pre-assembly to the compression area, b) 
small parts assembly on the compression area and b) the 
assembly of the compressed damper on the disk. In parallel, 
one human operator is working on the same workspace 
performing the pre-assembly of the damper as well as a set 
of cabling operations on the disk assembly area. 
To be able to test the application in a realistic robotics set 
up in terms of 3D layout, a GAZEBO ROS-based 
simulation was set up replicating the assembly environment 
as shown in Figure 7. The digital models of the MRP 
(URDF) and human (CAD) where added in the simulation 
integrating the human side interface and robot controller in 
the backend. Figure 8 visualizes the Digital World model of 
the assembly environment based on the sensor data: a) two 
laser scanners located in the mobile platform of the MRP 
and b) one Kinect located on its torso. A Station Controller 
mechanism is responsible for dispatching the assigned tasks 
to the MRP, as well as the human operator and monitoring 
their progress so to coordinate the execution.  
For the efficient execution of the scenario, the MRP 
needs to perceive the: a) damper and working tables to 
compensate the localization errors that cannot be foreseen 
offline, using a Kinect depth sensor, b) static obstacles and 
moving humans / obstacles for ensuring collision free 
navigation, using 2D laser scanner data. 
 
 
Figure 8.  Digital World model visualization. 
 
Figure 9.  MRP 2D SLAM navigation. 
Each time the robot is re-located by the Station 
Controller to a different workstation it needs to 
autonomously navigate from its current location to the new 
one. 2D SLAM based navigation is an existing solution for 
resolving the path generation aspects as visualized in Figure 
9. 
In this specific use case, the Digital World model 
provides the 2D map based on the combined sensor data 
from the two laser scanners located on the MRP platform. 
This map includes the static obstacles existing during the 
map creation procedure.  Nevertheless, as mentioned in 
Section II, apart from the static obstacles recorded during 
the map creation procedure, during actual execution several 
other moving obstacles may be in conflict with MRP’s 
navigation path. The dynamic nature of the Digital World 
model allows the real time update of the planning scene, so 
for the navigation planners to consider in the local plan 
generation the new, unmapped obstacles. Figure 10 presents 
an instance where the human operator interferes to MRP’s 
planned path. The respective visualization of the Digital 
World model instance during this case is also presented. 
 
 
Figure 10.  Collision avoidance with moving obstacles – humans. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-712-2
ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

 In that way, the MRP may avoid collision with humans in a 
dynamic way while both are in motion. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Shopfloor uncertainty is a key aspect that limits the 
flexibility potential of nowadays manufacturing systems. 
Modular robotic systems are considered as a main enabler 
for production system reconfigurability. However, their 
fixed control logic, based on pre-programmed operations, 
does not allow the effective exploitation of their capabilities. 
Robots’ perception abilities and reasoning upon the 
perceived environment so to adapt their behavior are key 
prerequisites for overcoming the existing limitations. To this 
end, this work, introduces the deployment of a dynamic 
Digital World model enabling the a) multiple sensor data 
synthesis into a common scene and the online update of the 
scene based on the real time data, b) the integration of the 
involved resources and hardware components allowing the 
robots to understand the real time environment and apply 
cognition techniques to transform the sensor based scene 
into useful information for optimizing their behavior.  
The discussed infrastructure has been tested in an 
assembly case study form the automotive sector, employing 
one MRP and one human operator. The deployment of the 
Digital World model allowed the reconfiguration of robot 
behavior by compensating the real – world uncertainty. 
Combining 2D and 3D sensor data information increases 
shopfloor’s real time knowledge and eventually leads to 
higher accuracy in robot actions. 
Considering a production system with more workstations 
and more humans and MRPs the complexity and 
unpredictability of the system increases a lot. In these cases, 
the suggested Digital World model may have a greater 
impact when applied in the completed manufacturing 
system. To achieve that, technical issues such as the 
computational requirements for processing big amounts of 
data need to be overcome as a future step. In addition, under 
the era of Industry4.0 data security is an important aspect to 
be addressed. Future version of this platform needs to be 
enhanced a secure communications framework that can 
ensure that connections between resources and systems are 
private (or secure) by using approaches such as symmetric 
cryptography. 
Nevertheless, 
the 
validation 
of 
the 
developed 
infrastructure under a physical set up involving the actual 
MRP is already an ongoing work by the authors. Future 
work should also focus on the integration of a higher-level 
decision-making 
mechanism 
that 
will 
be 
able 
to 
dynamically re-distribute the work among the available 
robot and human resources based on their capabilities and 
the production needs.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been partially funded by the EC research 
project “THOMAS – Mobile dual arm robotic workers with 
embedded 
cognition 
for 
hybrid 
and 
dynamically 
reconfigurable manufacturing systems” (Grant Agreement: 
723616) (www.thomas-project.eu/). 
REFERENCES 
[1] G. Chryssolouris, Manufacturing Systems: Theory and 
Practice. second ed. Springer-Verlag, New York , 2006 
[2] G. Michalos, N. Kousi, S. Makris, and G. Chryssolouris, 
“Performance Assessment of Production Systems with Mobile 
Robots” 48th CIRP Conference on Manufacturing Systems 
(CMS 2015) Procedia CIRP, 2016, pp. 195-200, ISSN 2212-
8271 
[3] N. Kousi, G. Michalos, S. Aivaliots, and S. Makris, “An 
outlook on future assembly systems introducing robotic 
mobile dual arm workers” 51st CIRP Conference on 
Manufacturing Systems, (CMS 2018), Procedia CIRP, 2018, 
pp. 33-38 ISSN 2212-8271 
[4] N. Kousi, S. Koukas, G. Michalos, and S. Makris, 
“Scheduling of smart intra – factory material supply 
operations using mobile robots”, International Journal of 
Production Research. Vol. 57, pp. 801-814, Jul 2018, 
doi.org/10.1080/00207543.2018.1483587 
[5] J. Váncza and L. Monostori, “Cyber-physical Manufacturing 
in the Light of Professor Kanji Ueda's Legacy”, 50th CIRP 
Conference on Manufacturing systems (CMS 2017) Procedia 
CIRP, 2017, pp. 631-638, ISSN 2212-8271 
[6] G. Michalos, S. Makris, N. Papakostas, D. Mourtzis, and G. 
Chryssolouris, “Automotive assembly technologies review: 
challenges and outlook for a flexible and adaptive approach”, 
CIRP Journal of Manufacturing Science and Technology, vol. 
2, pp. 81-91, 2010, doi.org/10.1016/j.cirpj.2009.12.001 
[7] R. Rosen, G. V. Wichert, G. Lo, and K. D. Bettenhausen,  
“About The Importance of Autonomy and Digital Twins for 
the Future of Manufacturing”, IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 48, 
pp. 567-572, 2015, ISSN 2405-8963 
[8] S. Makris, G. Michalos, and G. Chryssolouris, "Virtual 
Commissioning of an Assembly Cell with Cooperating 
Robots", Advances in Decision Sciences, vol. 2012, Aug 
2018, 11 pages, doi:10.1155/2012/428060 
[9] S. Giordani, M. Lujak, and F. Martinelli, “A distributed multi-
agent production planning and scheduling framework for 
mobile robots”, Computers and Industrial Engineering, vol. 
64, pp. 19-30, Jan 2013, doi.org/10.1016/j.cie.2012.09.004 
[10] URL Robot Operating System http://www.ros.org/, last 
accessed April 2019 
[11] URL ROS Tf library http://wiki.ros.org/tf. last accessed March 
2019 
[12] URL GAZEBO  SIM http://gazebosim.org/, last  aceessed March 
2019 
[13] URL ROS MoveIt! https://moveit.ros.org/, last accessed March 201
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-712-2
ICAS 2019 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

