A Novel System for Grasping and Handling
Flat and Deformable Objects
Claudio Gloriani
ISA - Department of Engineering
and Applied Sciences
University of Bergamo
Dalmine, Italy
Email: claudio.gloriani@unibg.it
ADVR - Advanced Robotics
Italian Institute of Technology
Genova, Italy
Email: claudio.gloriani@iit.it
Isiah Zaplana
and
Ferdinando Cannella
ADVR - Advanced Robotics
Italian Institute of
Technology
Genova, Italy
Email: Isiah.Zaplana@iit.it
Email: Ferdinando.Cannella@iit.it
Mariapaola D’Imperio
and
Emanuela Cepolina
ADVR - Advanced Robotics
Italian Institute of
Technology
Genova, Italy
Email: Mariapaola.DImperio@iit.it
Email: Emanuela.Cepolina@iit.it
Abstract—For the automated industry, it is important to develop
a new
mechatronics system, which is able to grasp and
manipulate deformable objects in a reliable way. This paper
discusses an idea for developing a concept of gripper exploiting
the physical proprieties of the objects to be manipulated such as,
for example, fabrics textile, sheets of paper or, in general, Flat
and Deformable Objects (FDOs). The idea is to build a gripper
prototype, which uses two rotational wheels, microspines placed
on the ﬁngertips, in order to buckle and lift up the ﬂat material. 
The methodology and the type of gripper used will be described
in detail.
Keywords–Flat and Deformable Objects; Grasping; Robotic
Manipulation; Friction; Buckling; Microspines; Rotational Hand.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Manipulation and grasping of rigid objects is a mature ﬁeld 
in robotics, but the study of deformable objects is not so
extensive
in
the
robotics
community.
Unfortunately,
deformable objects are extremely difﬁcult to manipulate 
because they have inﬁnite degrees of freedom [1]. The 
automation industry has faced this problem and in particular
how to manipulate Flat and Deformable Objects (FDOs) such
as, for example: garments, fabrics textile, cloths, which require
strong skills in handling and, for this reason, are performed
mainly by humans [2]. The majority of industries have a great
need for simple, reliable, versatile and low cost grippers for
grasping and handling these kinds of objects. So, endowing
robots able to manipulate FDOs for some speciﬁc industry has 
a great advantage in economic terms. For instance, using these
kind of systems reduces the labor cost [3][4] and the physical
burden on workers [5][6]. The idea starts from some papers
which deal with manipulation
of FDOs using a parallel
gripper that has two rotational wheels on the ﬁngertips [7] and 
exploits some ideas used to pick up t e x t i l e fabrics from
layers described [8] and [9]. The choice of using microspine
in the gripper is given by the fact that the study in [10]
provided very reliable results for grasping and handling ﬂat 
and deformable materials. The different approach used in this
paper exploits an intrusive method using microspines, but also
also a non-intrusive method exploiting the friction of the
wheels; it is also possible to combine them together. The main
purpose of this research is to increase the reliability of the grip
of an FDO, but at the same time to make it adaptable. This
concept of gripper exploits friction between the rotational
wheels, placed on the top of the ﬁngertips, and the ﬂat material 
to be manipulated in order to transfer the frictional force which
is parallel to the plane of the FDO (see Figure 1). This
frictional force is proportional to the force contact of the wheel
and also depends on the friction coefﬁcient. This kind of 
gripper is very useful when it is necessary to pick up, for
example, apiece of textile fabric from layers. A big inspiration
for making the new gripper comes from an interesting work
[11] where, in the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), a
lightweight robot which is able to climb rough surface using
wheels with microspines has been developed. The interactions
between microspines and asperities of the rough surface
generate the movement of the robot and, therefore, the idea is
to exploit this principle in order to grasp textile fabrics or other
FDOs. The material of the wheels that will be used in the novel
gripper is one that guarantees a good grip and also works
with smooth surfaces.
Figure 1. Frictional Force transmitted to the FDO.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

6
II.
DESCRIPTION OF THE NOVEL GRIPPER
The gripper is currently at conceptual stage and still a work
in progress, but, in the future, it will be completely developed.
Figure 4 shows the longitudinal section of the novel gripper in
a simpliﬁed version in which it is possible to identify the main 
components for understanding better its working principle.
This gripper will be mounted on the end effector of a robotic
arm taking advantage of its degrees of freedom for spatial
movement. The grasping system chosen is a parallel gripper,
widely used for handling in industries, which is simple to
build, but very reliable and useful for pinching the object to be
manipulated. The gripper will have these basic, but important
components:
•
A Body
•
Two Fingers
•
Two wheels
•
Microspines
The Body is a structural part of the
gripper
where
components such as, for example, electrical wirings, sensors,
actuators and all others movable parts ae mounted. The Two
Fingers are mounted in the Body and they are moved thanks to
a screw (see Figure 4) which is actuated with a single
electrical motor. In this way, it is possible to slide in parallel
the two ﬁngers on the Body.  At the ﬁngertips, two rotational 
wheels are placed, each one actuated with an electrical motor.
The new concept of gripper is all in the development of the
wheels which it will be the key to grasp every FDOs. Inside
these two wheels there are placed 12 microspines distributed
Figure 2. Example of different logarithmic spiral path as the ψ angle
changes.
every π radians (see Figure 4) which can be extended or
retracted rotating the reel where the wires of the microspines
are
wrapped. The
wire
of each
microspine
follows
a
logarithmic spiral path, inside a hole of the wheel, which has
the
Cartesian
coordinates
expressed
in
the
following
parametric form:
x(θ)=r(θ)(cos(θ))
y(θ)=r(θ)(sin(θ))
where θ is the angle expressed in radians and r(θ) = r0ebθ
is its polar equation. The terms of the polar equation are: r0
which is the radius where the logarithmic curve starts and b is
a parameter for determining the rate of increase of the spiral.
The parameter b is expressed in radians because b = cot(ψ),
where ψ is the angle between r(θ) and the respective tangent
of the curve. Figure 3 shows an example when ψ = 70◦ and the
interesting aspect is that this angle remains constant so it
means that it does not depend on the values of θ and r0.
Figure 2 shows different paths as the ψ angle changes. The
variable θ is very useful in order to compute the total length of
the spiral. These aspects are very important because it is
possible to test the microspines with different angles and
lengths in order to have an optimal interaction with the FDO to
be grasped and manipulated (as shown in Figure 6). The use of
this kind of gripper is particularly interesting when the FDOs
considered are textile fabrics or general materials with rough
surfaces. It is also possible to manage non rough FDOs as, for
example, sheets of paper using wheels in rubber’s material, or
only their contact surfaces, in order to exploit its high
coefﬁcient of friction. In the next section, we explain two 
methods for picking up FDOs using the gripper described.
Figure 3. Equiangular spiral path.
Figure 4. Longitudinal section of the novel gripper.
10
8
6
4
2
0
-2
-4
-6
-8
-10
-10
-5
0
5
10
Figure 5. Generation of a single microspine’s path.
base circle
wheel
microspine path
{
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

III.
METHODOLOGY USED IN THE NOVEL GRIPPER FOR
GRASPING
In this section, we explain two different approaches for
grasping FDOs using the gripper described in Section II. The
first method is very useful when it is not possible to grasp the
FDOs at the boundary. Before starting any operation, the
thickness of the FDO should be known to be able to
manipulate it in order to regulate the right length of the
microspines which have to penetrate into the material, as
shown in Figure 6. This kind of gripper is studied also for
picking up the material from a layer of materials. However, if
there is a risk of damaging the FDO by using the microspines,
these can be retracted in order to work only with the rubber of
the wheels in order to exploit the frictional force generated
between the two contact surfaces. The grasping procedure is
quite simple and could be synthesized in these few points:
1)
Gripper approaching
2)
Grasping action
3)
Manipulation
In the ﬁrst point, using a robotic arm, the gripper is moved 
above the object and its two ﬁngers are opened at an 
appropriate distance. After that, the wheels are moved down
until the wheels lightly touch the FDO and, therefore, a large
contact force is not required. In the second procedure, the two
wheels are activated to rotate at the same speed in order to
allow the microspines to penetrate into the FDO. This action
lifts and, at the same time, folds the FDO, as shown in Figure
7. The buckling generated from the torque of the wheels
depends on the material considered and it is related to the
ﬂexibility of the FDO. Therefore, if the object is too rigid, it 
will be impossible to use this method. The second method,
shown in Figure 8, is quite similar to the ﬁrst one, but there is 
a difference with the grasping point of the material. Such point
is placed quite near to the boundary. This can be an advantage
when it is impossible to grasp it in a different place and,
furthermore, it is possible to engage less material during the
grasping. The choice of methodology depends on the task that
needs to be performed.
Figure 6. Detail of the interaction between wheels and FDO.
Figure 7. First method in order to Buckle and lift up the FDO.
Figure 8. Second method in order to Buckle and lift up the FDO.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
In this work, we have explained different methodologies that
will be used in our gripper for grasping and manipulating Flat
and Deformable Objects (FDOs). In particular, we focused on the
study of the geometry for realizing the microspines. In the future,
we will also study other important aspects such as, for example,
the choice of the proper microspines material, its size, etc. This is
just a preliminary idea of a gripper and, in the future, it will be
studied
and
developed
more,
adding
all
the
necessary
components useful to produce a prototype able to work in a
reliable way. After that, it will be tested in a real scenario using
different kinds of FDOs in order to check its performance.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

REFERENCES
[1]
F. Guo, Huan Lin, and Y. Jia, “Squeeze grasping of deformable planar
objects with segment contacts and stick/slip transitions,” in 2013 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation, May 2013, pp.
3736–3741.
[2]
P. N. Koustoumpardis, K. X. Nastos, and N. A. Aspragathos, “Under-
actuated 3-ﬁnger robotic gripper for grasping fabrics,” in 2014 23rd 
International Conference on Robotics in Alpe-Adria-Danube Region
(RAAD), 2014, pp. 1–8.
[3]
S. Tokumoto, Y. Fujita, and S. Hirai, “Deformation modeling of
viscoelastic objects for their shape control,”
in
Proceedings
1999
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (Cat.
No.99CH36288C), vol. 1, May 1999, pp. 767–772.
[4]
R. Buckingham, A. Graham, H. Arnarson, P. Snaeland, and P. Davey,
“Robotics for de-heading ﬁsh - a case study,” Industrial Robot: An 
International Journal, vol. 28, 08 2001, pp. 302–309.
[5]
J. Acker and D. Henrich, “Manipulating deformable linear objects: char-
acteristic features for vision-based detection of contact state transitions,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium onAssembly and
Task Planning, 2003, July 2003, pp. 204–209.
[6]
M. Rambow, T. Schauß, M. Buss, and S. Hirche, “Autonomous manip-
ulation of deformable objects based on teleoperated demonstrations,”
in 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems, Oct 2012, pp. 2809–2814.
[7]
T. Kabaya and M. Kakikura, “Research on a service robot for house-
keeping —handling of clothes—,” Transactions of the Japan Society of
Mechanical Engineers Series C, vol. 64, 01 1998, pp. 1356–1361.
[8]
E. Ono, K. Kitagaki, and M. Kakikura, “On friction picking up a piece
of fabric from layers,” vol. 4, 01 2005, pp. 2206 – 2211.
[9]
E. Ono and Kunikatsu Takase, “On better pushing for picking a piece of
fabric from layers,” in 2007 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Biomimetics (ROBIO), Dec 2007, pp. 589–594.
[10]
A. Karakerezis, Z. Doulgeri, and V. Petridis, “A gripper for handling
ﬂat non-rigid materials,” in Automation and Robotics in Construction 
XI: Proceedings of the Eleventh International Symposium on Automa-
tion and Robotics in Construction (ISARC), D. A. Chamberlain, Ed.
Brighton, UK: International Association for Automation and Robotics
in Construction (IAARC), May 1994, pp. 593–601.
[11]
K. Carpenter, N. Wiltsie, and A. Parness, “Rotary microspine rough
surface mobility,” IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 21,
no. 5, Oct 2016, pp. 2378–2390.
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-787-0
ICAS 2020 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

