A Methodology for Household Appliances Behaviour Recognition in AmI Systems
Ovidiu Aritoni
E-Austria Research Institute
Timisoara, Romania
oaritoni@info.uvt.ro
Viorel Negru
West University of Timisoara
Department of Computer Science
Timisoara, Romania
vnegru@info.uvt.ro
Abstract—The actual research in green computing tries to
understand the human behavior and how appliances are used
in households. We propose, in this paper, a software prototype
which can be used to understand the household appliances’
behavior. Our architecture uses heuristic functions and pattern
matching mechanisms in order to achieve this goal.
Keywords-curent-cost sensor data-stream, appliance recogni-
tion,behavior recognition, heuristics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Ambient intelligent systems (AmI) are characterized by
the possibility to develop intelligent solutions for the con-
textual problems perceived from the ambient environment.
Using data from various sensors, which are collected over a
long time period, these systems can understand the ambient
environment and they try to solve problems that may appear.
The process of understanding the ambient environment does
not mean the simple collection of data from the various
sensors, this process sometimes necessitates the aggregation
of data and the recognition of certain special behaviors. The
identiﬁcation of activities is done, in most cases, using data
from several types of sensors [1]. For example, if the system
try to recognize whether a person makes a sort of physical
exercises, data from the following sensors types are used:
EKG, temperature, proximity sensors, accelerometer, light
sensors etc. To successfully recognize the human behavior,
various techniques are used, this ﬁeld of computing research
being the main target of numerous studies. The Hidden
Markov Model (HMM) is a probabilistic model used in
the process of recognizing activities with the help of data
collected from various sensors [2], [3], [4]. The activities
may also be recognized using other techniques such as
database exploration, data correlation and other data mining
techniques [5]. This article will be focused on the under-
standing of ambient environment using the identiﬁcation of
certain behaviors. In the research project DEHEMS
[6],
the contextual understanding of the ambient environment
comes from the data collected on the usage of household
appliances. This usage is being monitored by the use of a
single type of sensor namely a sensor designed to measure
alternative curent (AC) current consumption. The system
uses the data stream, from the AC sensor, to recognize and
analyze the household appliances behavior.
The paper presents an ”intelligent” current-cost sensor
which recognizes the scenario about how the appliances
from a house are running. We concentrate on the next section
to determine on positioning the paper in the research area
of intelligent curent-cost sensors. Thereafter, we present the
architecture and the main idea of our system. We conclude
the paper with the important ﬁelds of the future work and a
discussion about how to validate our system.
II. RELATED WORK
The Bit-Watt system is used to recognize the appliances
from a household, using in this process the devices power
signature (previously known) [7]. The system presented in
this article in contrast to the system presented in [7] will be
able to identify the appliances connected to the household
power grid. The Bit-Watt system’s sensor is placed between
the appliance and the electric socket, thus being able to
identify only the appliance on which the sensor is placed.
Our study uses only one AC sensor that generates one
stream of data which represents the power consumption of
all the appliances from the entire house. There are no other
sensors as in the Bit-Watt system, thus, we use only one
sensor for the entire household. The purpose of this study is
to determine the state in which all the household appliances
are at any given time with the help of the data stream from
the AC sensor.
The proposed system result is a scenario that describes
the behavior of all the appliances from a household. It is
important to know when and how often is used a speciﬁc
appliance. The purpose of the DEHEMS project
[6] is to
develop recommendations about how to improve the home
energy efﬁciency. An objective of the project is to detect the
human actions or the users habits that increase the energy
usage inefﬁciency. Using the appliances’ behavior we can
obtain information about the human behavior: the output
of our system is used for the household residents behavior
recognition. The human behavior analysis and the correlation
with the appliances behavior help us to detect the actions or
habits that reduce the energy efﬁciency. The statistics about
the appliances most used in a household, are also useful
in the recommendation process. The DEHEMS project [6]
is part of the open-living labs experience [8]. We use the
feedback of the household residents in order to improve our
175
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

system, and the sensors data received from the living-labs
houses.
III. ARCHITECTURE
Our system has to know in advance the models of all the
appliances from a household. This will enable to determine
the various scenarios of current consumption. The deﬁnition
of this scenario of current consumption is realized by iden-
tifying each appliance in turn from the single data stream
being sent by the AC sensor. Another problem that needs to
be addressed is that of subdividing the data stream from the
AC sensor into speciﬁc data sets, for each appliance.
During the process, a repository of signatures for the
different appliances present in the household will be used.
The construction of this repository of power signatures can
be made using empirical data by measuring the power
signatures for each appliance in part. A signature is de-
scribed using a ﬁnite-state machine. We build the repository
using patterns recognition techniques on the data [9]. The
discovery of a certain pattern repeating cyclically will lead
to the conclusion that we have an appliance described by
this pattern. These patterns will be stored in the system and
will be used in the process of analyzing the behavior of
household appliances.
Our system needs to know the producer and type of all the
appliances from the household. Another existing approaches
use a smart current-cost sensor to acquire data about the
individual appliance. This means that we have to install
numerous devices if we want to monitor the states of all the
appliances. In this situations the cost of current-cost sensors
network installation and maintenance will be higher than in
our proposal. Our goal is to propose an ”intelligent current-
cost sensor” which minimize the cost of deployment, using
a single sensor instead of more sensors. Each household has
a current-cost sensor that provides monthly the total power
consumed. Our system uses this current-cost sensor or a
special wrapper-sensor.
Also, our system uses a ”central” repository that stores
the signatures of all the appliances. The proposed system
is a module of a recommendation system for the energy
efﬁciency improvement. This recommender system consists
of two parts: a central-server and local subsystems for each
household. The server-side provides web-services for data-
storage about each household. A central database stores data
about each household: the number of appliances, a list of all
the appliances, appliances signatures, the current-cost sensor
datastream, and other important information. The amount
effort that is required to train our system is reduced using
the central-server. Also, the central server is useful when
we want to compare the appliances behavior and help us
to detect the devices’ malfunctions. For each household we
have an instance of the proposed system.
In order to describe successfully the power consumption
scenarios it is necessary to decompose the primary data
stream into smaller data sets which describe the state in
which a particular appliance is. To accomplish this, we use
a Greedy algorithm [10] and matching mechanisms. Every
value of the data stream will be decomposed into other
values, this process being an ongoing one within the system.
The values resulting through decomposition and the different
power signatures the matching coefﬁcient is computed which
in turn will be used to detect which appliance is in use and
what is current its state. Greedy decomposition of certain
values will be made in the inﬂexion points of the data
stream. The points situated before and after the inﬂexion
point will be used to check the conclusion reached from
the analysis of the inﬂexion point. One or more tuples will
result from the data stream decomposition. Constructing and
generating associations between these tuples will be realized
using heuristics which are determined empirically from real
world. For example some appliances can have a predictable
and linear behavior, one example are refrigerators which
switch on and off a few minutes at a time depending on
the setting and outside temperature.
The present application achieves a breakdown of the
total electric consumption of devices that can operate in
a house. We use a heuristic function deﬁned by people
at home through a questionnaire. The heuristics are used
only when there is uncertainty in the detection pattern (eg.
several matching patterns). Our model is based on heuristic
functions that help us to reduce the problem complexity. A
heuristic function returns for a speciﬁed time moment a list
of devices that can run at the moment and a probability for
each device to run at this time:
h : T 7−→ χ, h(t) = {(d1, p1), (d2, p2), ..., (dn, pn)}
where:
t is a time interval
di is a device
pi is the probability to use the device di at that moment.
χ = ∆ × P, ∆ is the ensemble of all the devices and pi is
a probability, pi ∈ P = [0, 1]
Also we use another heuristic functions, likely the associa-
tion rules:
h∗ : T × ∆ 7−→ χ
h(t, D) = {(d1, p1), (d2, p2), ..., (dn, pn)}
The h∗ heuristic inform us that if at the current moment the
device D is running, after, on the t time interval can run the
devices di, i = 1, ..., n.
The heuristic values are based on a questionnaire. The
users will answer to a lot of questions about their living
style. Using these answers we calculate the heuristic values.
The heuristic function and the use of the central ”repository”
of appliances signature provide a large scalability for our
system.
The purpose of this study is to construct scenarios regard-
ing the usage of household appliances using the data stream
from the AC sensor mounted on the household electrical
grid. These scenarios will specify: the order in which
176
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

appliances are running, the moment when an appliance
starts, the time moment when an appliance stops running
and the moment when an appliances normal functioning is
interrupted by certain events. An example of such scenario
is:
7.00 LightBedroom ON
7.02 LightBathroom ON
7.08 LightBeedrom OFF 100%
7.08 CoffeeMaker ON
7.12 LightBathroom OFF 100%
7.12 Refrigerator ON
7.16 CoffeMaker OFF 87%
..............................................
10.22 PEAK
..............................................
As one can see, the light from bedroom is ON at 7.00 and
OFF at 7.08, and we conclude that the light was run normally
100%. The coffee maker runs from 7.08 to 7.16, but it has
run only 87% normally. This coefﬁcient is calculated as the
similarity factor between the nominal time-serie (from the
repository) and the actual time-serie. At 10.22 we have a
PEAK event on the household electrical grid.
This information is necessary in a smart home, because
it enables the system to respond to the inhabitants needs.
Using these scenarios some predictions can be made by the
AmI system. Using the predictions some improvements may
be made that will increase the level of comfort and/or power
usage efﬁciency of a smart home. For example, if the time
when the user usually goes to sleep can be inferred, the
AmI system can turn off all necessary household appliances
during the time the user sleeps.
Our system uses as input the power readings stream of
a user’s device and produced as output: determination of
the malfunctioning of the device (health status) and other
statistics. Our ﬁrst goal was to deﬁne a set of rules, so
that, given a set of energy readings, would evaluate the
health of a device and pinpoint regions of faulty power
usage. A set of reading has at its core two most evident
states: ON and OFF. This information developed our ﬁrst
rule in evaluating device consumption. Thus, before going
any further, we must extract the actual usage that char-
acterizes the ON state of the device. Further information
has to be provided about each speciﬁc type of device
in order to effectively determine health status, and such
information has to be accessible. Given that, as a general
rule, the correct function of a device, as observed only by
consulting the values representing the power consumption,
has to ﬁt between some boundaries: the maximum power
consumption and minimum power consumption, the former,
as observed earlier, having to reﬂect the ON state of the
device. The device speciﬁcations sometimes include the
maximum and minimum power consumptions. However, for
the purpose of this project, these were taken from energy
usage patterns. Using our system we analyzed the power
consumptions of our laptops and successfully created charts
that show that the deviations are negative, which means
the devices operate under the minimum power consumption
speciﬁcation, making it optimal.
IV. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS
We use in our study a current-cost sensor to collect
data from usually devices such as refrigerators, computers,
multimedia devices, etc. The heuristics are extracted via a
questionnaire applied to more than 1000 inhabitants from
rural and urban areas from the Banat region of Romania.
The evaluation of the proposed prototype will be done using
intelligent current-cost sensors for each appliance. These
sensors will collect data for each appliance and in this
way we will obtain a scenario for each appliance from the
household. A sum of all these appliances scenarios will be
compared with our results (the behavior of our appliances).
We use a comparation between these scenarios for the
evaluation of our prototype. Furthermore, we can use in the
evaluation process a curent-cost sensor data simulator, in
order to compare the simulation scenario with the output of
our prototype.
Our software prototype uses ﬁnite-state machine as model
for each appliance’s behavior, and heuristic functions to re-
duce the complexity of the problem. This approach consists
in observing the speciﬁc pattern of each device. After this,
we identify these patterns in the total consumption using our
heuristics.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The research leading to these results has received fund-
ing from the European Community’s Seventh Framework
Programme FP7/2007-2013 under grant agreement N 0
No224609 DEHEMS, and by the Romanian DEHEMS-RO
project RO-PNII-20-EU/11.06.09. The views expressed in
this paper do not necessarily reﬂect those of the DEHEMS
consortium members.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Kofod-Petersen and J. Cassens, “Explanations and context
in ambient intelligent systems,” in CONTEXT’07: Proceed-
ings of the 6th international and interdisciplinary conference
on Modeling and using context. Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2007, pp. 303–316.
[2] T. van Kasteren, A. Noulas, G. Englebienne, and B. Kr¨ose,
“Accurate activity recognition in a home setting,” in UbiComp
’08: Proceedings of the 10th international conference on
Ubiquitous computing.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2008,
pp. 1–9.
[3] W. Huang, J. Zhang, and Z. Liu, “Activity recognition based
on hidden markov models,” in KSEM’07: Proceedings of
the 2nd international conference on Knowledge science, en-
gineering and management.
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag, 2007, pp. 532–537.
177
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

[4] D. Sanchez, M. Tentori, and J. Favela, “Hidden markov
models for activity recognition in ambient intelligence en-
vironments,” in ENC ’07: Proceedings of the Eighth Mexican
International Conference on Current Trends in Computer
Science.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society,
2007, pp. 33–40.
[5] S. L¨uhr, G. West, and S. Venkatesh, “Recognition of emergent
human behaviour in a smart home: A data mining approach,”
Pervasive Mob. Comput., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 95–116, 2007.
[6] “http://www.dehems.eu [retrieved: May 10, 2011].”
[7] T. Kato, H. S. Cho, D. Lee, T. Toyomura, and T. Ya-
mazaki, “Appliance recognition from electric current signals
for information-energy integrated network in home environ-
ments,” in ICOST ’09: Proceedings of the 7th International
Conference on Smart Homes and Health Telematics.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2009, pp. 150–157.
[8] “http://www.openlivinglabs.eu [retrieved: May 10, 2011].”
[9] S. E. Rombo and G. Terracina, “Discovering representative
models in large time series databases,” in FQAS, 2004, pp.
84–97.
[10] A. R. Teixeira, A. M. Tom´e, and E. W. Lang, “Greedy
kpca in biomedical signal processing,” in Proceedings
of
the
17th
international
conference
on
Artiﬁcial
neural
networks,
ser.
ICANN’07.
Berlin,
Heidelberg:
Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 486–495. [Online]. Available:
http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1778066.1778123
178
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

