Agility and Semantic Structures to Scaffold Modern Academic Education 
Supporting the Digital Transformation in Higher Education Institutions  
Karsten Böhm 
WEBTA Institute 
FH Kufstein Tirol University of Applied Sciences 
Kufstein, Austria 
email: karsten.boehm@fh-kufstein.ac.at  
 
Abstract—Higher Education Institutions (HEI) are faced with a 
number of challenges in these days: The sector is becoming more 
competitive and the education profile need to become more 
dynamic: the amount if knowledge is ever increasing and – 
especially in the technical subjects – knowledge is out-dating fast 
and new knowledge is emerging. As a consequence, the 
education system in HEI needs to become more agile and more 
modular. The current situation is reflected upon the VUCA 
paradigm and some solutions will be proposed to address those 
challenges. As education programs are carefully crafted in a 
manual but unstructured way, this contribution suggests the 
support by a scaffolding of semantic structures that helps to 
create connected, modular education items that can be used as 
Pre-built information spaces for learning environments. The 
main contribution of this paper is a concept of a simple and 
universal model to structure learning outcomes in a more 
structured form in order to create a foundation for a better 
understanding for human users and machines alike. 
Keywords—Agile Methods; Semantic Web; HEI; VUCA; 
Digital Transformation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
The digital transformation of our economies and societies 
is also a challenge for the sector of Higher Education 
Institutions (HEI). Education programs become more digital 
components; this process had been accelerated by the COVID 
pandemic but is probably also as aspect that is bound to 
remain a substantial part of the sector. Moreover, the sector is 
becoming more competitive – at least in the DACH region 
(Germany [D], Austria [A], Switzerland [CH]) – and HEI 
have to deal with new and global competitors, also coming 
from the private sector. At the same time, knowledge to be 
transferred to students becomes more in terms of volume and 
complexity and is outdated fast due to technology develop-
ments. Lifelong learning as a concept that deals with constant 
learning is also slowly becoming a reality with the direct 
consequence that part-time programs become more popular 
for secondary studies (e.g., in Masters programs). This seems 
to be especially important and demanding in all the 
engineering sciences, with the Computer Science and its 
related disciplines and cross-cutting subjects as probably one 
of the fastest evolving subjects. 
As a result, the education programs offered by HEI have 
to address these challenges by becoming more modular and 
open in order to be combined with each other and to be 
innovated faster. The demanded agility is currently hard to 
achieve an education programs are designed and accredited in 
a process that takes years instead of months and the execution 
phase usually starts yearly and has a duration of two to three 
years for one cycle. Thus, innovation in education programs 
is at the scale of 5-10 years. 
The specification of an education process is a careful and 
manual process and is usually being carried out with extensive 
text-based documentation. Qualification profiles, competen-
cies and curriculum content is being described in an 
unstructured way, which makes it hard to validate and 
aggregate the content from the program level to the lecture 
level and back. A better structural and semantically oriented 
support could be useful as a scaffolding support. This could 
be helpful in all phases of the process (during design, while 
executing and finally when assessing student results) and 
Semantic Web technologies are a promising way to support 
such a scaffolding in terms of providing additional 
information (meta-data) to trigger and to support directed self-
learning services. With that respect the textual specification 
documents evolve into knowledge-based user interface for 
students and lecturers alike that can be used for knowledge 
intensive task in the learning phase (students deciding which 
module to study next) and the teaching phase (lecturers 
designing content in a more outcome-oriented way according 
to the competences that ought to be taught).  
While a semantic structuring supports the consistency of 
programs with respect to learning outcomes and competences 
it also contributes towards the agility of the programs by 
exposing interfaces in terms of learning outcomes that could 
connect to other education programs within an HEI or outside 
of an HEI. And finally, agility might also be of interest for the 
student who is increasingly involved in Problem-Based 
Learning scenarios (PBL) in which knowledge is being 
created and used, based on the tasks given.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section II 
the current situation of HEI is analyzed with respect to the 
VUCA paradigm. VUCA is the abbreviation for a number of 
properties of certain environments: V – Volatility, U – 
Uncertainty, C – Complexity and A – Ambiguity [1][2]. A 
number of high-level suggestions for addressing those 
challenges is made, again employing the VUCA solution 
paradigm with an interpretation to the domain of HEI [3][4]. 
After that the concept of hierarchic competence matrices is 
introduced in section III with the focus on connected 
application throughout the different levels of an education 
program. The support for the creation and execution in terms 
of semantic scaffolding using Semantic specification 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

documents is introduced in Section IV. The paper concludes 
in the final Section V with an outlook at future research 
activities. 
II. 
HIGHER EDUCATION IN A VUCA-WORLD 
 
Higher Education is process that is spanning several years 
in each iteration and prepares students for their professional 
life. Consequently, long innovation cycles in their curricula 
are the result which does not suit well in a dynamic and fast 
changing environment [5]. The concept of a VUCA-world is 
commonly used to describe environments with a large degree 
of change and the required frequent adaptation to a changing 
or new environment. The current changes in the digital 
transformation of society and economy are also having an 
impact on the HEI and thus creating a VUCA-environment for 
education programs that HEIs need to address. 
In the following, the author will analyze how the different 
aspects of VUCA can be addressed in the execution level and 
the management level of education programs in HEI. Both 
levels are quite interconnected as the execution level is 
dependent on a certain flexibility of the lecturing in a certain 
while still maintaining the original learning goals of the 
curriculum. Furthermore, it is important that the novel and 
agile approaches still exhibit a wide range of scalability from 
small groups to large groups and from presence teaching to 
distant teaching as well. At management level, it becomes 
more important, that individual lectures are dynamically 
orchestrated into a curriculum, that might be more individuali-
zed that structures education programs in the past. At the same 
time, individualization and the interfacing to prior knowledge 
and post-graduate education becomes more important.  
Now each of the components of a VUCA world in the 
context of HEI are dealt with in more detail: 
(V) – Volatility in the context of HEI can be interpreted in 
terms of changing topics that are concerned relevant and/or 
interesting by the external stakeholders (students, companies), 
but also in terms of volatile group sizes due to those trends. 
As programs are designed and funded in the long run, adapta-
tion to those volatile aspects is becoming a challenge. 
(U) – Uncertainty in HEI can be interpreted as the fact that 
the education system is currently changing by external drivers 
like the digital transformation, the lasting effects of the 
COVID pandemic and changing expectations of future 
generation of students. As topics and education profiles are 
changing and new job profiles are emerging or did not even 
exist yet, education planning for the long run is difficult – 
development and financing phased is not designed for such an 
uncertain environment and thus has constantly to adapt (which 
requires resources to employ the change). Uncertainty in the 
economy also leads to an increased amount of part time 
profiles of working students. This leads to a demand of 
lifelong learning and lifelong education, that both sides 
(students and HEI) are not yet ready for. 
(C) – Complexity is a common pattern in fast evolving 
subjects as most engineering programs and can be interpreted 
in two ways: an increasing complexity of the fields in terms 
of subjects becoming broader as well as subjects having a 
deeper level of knowledge that is needed to master it. This is 
leading to the observation, that educating students becomes a 
challenge, as the time for education remains the same (2-3 yrs. 
in BA/MA) and could not be extended. Part-time students add 
to the difficulty of the problem as their time budgets are even 
more limited. For lecturers it becomes more relevant to select 
the right content and to moderate the learning process – in that 
sense they are becoming guides and curators for the 
knowledge that is transferred to the students. In order to keep 
a close contact to the practical application they need to work 
with real-world examples but also need to convey more 
general pattern that are relevant to their field.  
(A) – Ambiguity in the context of HEI can be interpreted 
in the fast-evolving knowledge domain in many subjects. 
Concepts that attain a lot of general interest like Digital 
Transformation, Artificial Intelligence and the Cloud 
technologies, for example have multiple meanings and require 
different levels of knowledge to become actionable. 
Understanding those concepts and applying them in real-life 
scenarios if often the requirement for engineering students but 
often to conflict with the expectation from the general public 
what technology could do or could not do. 
Different stakeholder groups (e.g., business, technology, 
society) have a quite different understanding and expecta-
tions. For the education this leads to the challenge of 
educating students in an informed and adequate way without 
the danger of getting too much in the complexity trap.  
 
The solution space in a VUCA-world used the same letters 
with a different meaning and in the following an interpretation 
in the context of HEI could is proposed: 
(V) – vision is adhering to the fact that an operational 
guidance is needed to navigate through changing topics and 
still retain a USP or core competence for the HEI. Here, the 
situation is similar to those of companies, but might be 
interpreted in a different way, e.g., it could be value driven in 
the sense that it is important to develop applicable knowledge, 
or to employ a guiding attitude to the education of the 
students. Such a vision needs to be employed in practice and 
is therefore more of a cultural value that is developed by 
employing a vision. 
(U) – understanding could be seen as an active and 
ongoing reflection process on the requirements of the 
application domain (business & society) but also the 
expectations and requirements of the current and next 
generations of students to act accordingly. More than in the 
past this is also an interplay and a communication of values 
between different generations: lecturers (“older generations”) 
and students (“newer generations”). That always had been the 
case, but in a VUCA world this process is being accelerated 
and in the sense of a dialogue more important.  
(C) – clarity in a VUCA world is an important role that 
HEI can play: by building on existing knowledge and by 
employing scientific methods and an objective view of the 
world HEI can help students to provide orientation in a 
complex and changing world and convey them important tool-
sets to navigate in that world at topics that they are faced later 
in their life.  
(A) – agility becomes more important on the strategic level 
(for the development of programs) and the operational level 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

(the execution of programs). While the former is required to 
develop and adapt programs faster the second aspect 
addresses the aspect on how the execution of a program is 
tailored to the specified group of students in front of the 
lecturer and even towards the individual. This leads to the fact 
that learning analytics becomes more important and that 
digitization can be used to provide additional or alternative 
learning paths.  
III. 
HIERARCHICAL SKILL MATRICES FOR SCAFFOLDING 
COMPETENCES IN EDUCATION PROGRAMS  
 
In order to address the challenges for education programs 
derived by the VUCA analysis a more structured approach on 
designing and executing education programs is needed. 
Currently those programs are specified mostly using informal 
descriptions a non-standardized structure for the curricula. 
Especially for the core concepts of competencies that are the 
result of the learning outcomes of the individual lectures of a 
program no specific support structure is being provided. This 
approach has two important drawbacks: (1) The problem of 
consistency among the different abstraction layers of a 
program and the different interpretation at design time and 
execution time. (2) a limited support for modularity, as there 
are no clearly defined interfaces among the different 
components. Modules in current programs are designed 
around its content but do not clearly expose the competences 
in a way that could act as an ‘interface’ for other modules. 
Making 
competences 
more 
visible 
and 
structurally 
comparable might help to create more consistent programs 
that provides modules, which can be reused more easily. 
In order to address those issues, the concept of hierarchical 
Competence Matrices is being created. The concept roots in 
the observation that in modern Curriculum Vitae (CV) 
competences are often presented in a more visual form of 
scales, as illustrated in Figure 1 below. Although being not 
exactly precise the representation delivers an immediate 
profile of the competencies of a person, albeit on a very 
general scale.  
 
 
Figure 1.  Template of a skills & expertise in CVs [6] 
A second observation is taken from the domain of foreign 
language competences. Here, the Common European 
Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR) established 
an accepted framework for language proficiency that encodes 
a rather complex subject in just six reference levels (A1, A2, 
B1, B2, C1, C2).  
Both models are simple to understand, and despite their 
generality widely used. This contribution builds on those ideas 
and extends it towards a hierarchical relation among different 
competence or skill matrices. A Competence Matrix (CM) is 
a set of competences that are identified with a brief description 
and are assigned an attribution according to a skill or 
competence level that could use Bloom’s taxonomy [7] or a 
similar model [8][9]. Such a taxonomy defines a number of 
levels at which a competence could be classified, such as 
remember, understand, apply, analyze evaluate and create.  
The central idea of hierarchical concept matrices (HSM) 
is the connection of different but related CMs to create a 
relation along different levels of an education program 
(general to specific) and from different parts of the life cycle 
of such a program (from design to execution) 
The following Figure 2 illustrates a number of HSM along 
three levels  
Figure 2.  Illustration of HSM along three levels that are interconnected, 
e.g., on program level (1), at syllabus level (2) and at the level of a lecture 
being held (3). Scale and structure of the HSM remain the same and a 
direct connection of C1 → {C21, C22, C23  C231 C232}} can be derived. 
The HSM could be connected in a strict hierarchic fashion, 
leading to a taxonomy of competences that are being 
constructed from more general (at program level) to more 
specific (at the level of instruction). In practice it might be the 
case that a competence is being provided or needed by 
different CMs at a deeper level, which leads to a graph like 
structure as cycles might be a part of the hierarchical structure. 
Another way of connecting the CMs would be the 
interpretation as a function that maps a set of competences (at 
a lower level) to a single competence (at a higher level), 
changing its attribution value attr: f: {C1, C2, C3, ... }→ attr(C). 
The most important feature is the connectivity of the CMs 
that resembles the HSM, because it constitutes a connected 
competence model for all phases of an education program of 
an HEI that can be used for students and lecturers alike an 
explanation model to provide guidance and structuring. In that 
sense it really provides a scaffolding for designing and 
executing education at HEI. Moreover, it lays the foundation 
for a validation of a competence model by enabling to check 
for missing links or competences that are taught but never 
used, for example. This could help to improve the education 
modules in an iterative way and to ensure quality with respect 
to didactic design and content.  
 
 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

IV. 
A PREBUILD INFORMATION SPACE FOR LEARNING 
 
The concept of HCM contribute to the notion of Pre-built 
Learning Information Spaces for Learning Environments [10] 
that are aiming at supporting students in a VUCA world to 
address the needs of the future in Higher Education efficiently. 
It provides the component to connect different specifications 
documents together that are otherwise unconnected, such as 
syllabi of different lectures or the syllabus and the learning 
content in a learning management system (LMS).  
HCM could be embedded in specification documents that 
contain semantic encoding, so called Semantic Specification 
Documents (SSD) – for a detailed description, see [10]. In 
essence, an SSD is a document that contains metadata in a 
semantic encoding that models textual descriptions in a 
machine-readable way; see Figure 3 below.  
 
Figure 3.  Semantically enriched documents as containers for HCM [10] 
The important aspect of such an SSD is the fact that the 
semantic annotation is directly attached to the document itself 
and is available to creators and viewers of the document 
without the need for an external IT-system. It is self-
contained. In order to retrieve the information that is dispersed 
over different SSDs, an aggregation step is needed. Such an 
aggregation would collect and analyze all the documents of an 
education program and collect the extracted semantic 
information in a specific database (called a triple store). 
Queries would be run against this store in order to satisfy an 
information demand; see Figure 4 below.  
 
Figure 4.  Aggregating of SSDs in a repository of documents  
to provide querying against a triple store [10] 
The combination of HCM as a conceptual model with 
SSDs as a distributed and document centric representation 
model helps to work towards a concept of semantically 
defined learning specifications that can be used to describe the 
benefits of explicit formal descriptions to structure the 
curricular content in HEI to build semantically and agile 
learning environments (“SALE”) in order to support the 
teaching and learning process at the level of meaningful 
learning objectives. It also provides interfaces to prior 
knowledge and post-graduate education, which will become 
more important in a world of true lifelong learning as it is 
required in a VUCA world.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
 
This contribution analyzed the current situation of the HEI 
with the help of the VUCA paradigm and presented how a 
more structured, modular and agile approach is needed to 
address the changes that are ahead of the sector in the process 
of digital transformation. In order to provide a more structured 
approach, it is important to involve all stakeholders in the 
process with an easy to understand and easy to use model to 
express competences at different levels. Hierarchical 
Competence Matrices are introduced for that respect and the 
concept of semantic specification documents can be used to 
implement this tool set. The main contribution of HCM to 
VUCA is the increased focus on connected and explicit 
learning outcome that are specified in a uniform way. This 
improves clarity (“C”) and helps to students and lecturers to 
understand (“U”) the intention (or vision (“V”) of the 
education program better. Due to the exposed structure it also 
helps to make missing aspects or changing topics more visible 
and provide intervention points for improving programs in a 
an agile (“A”) way, helping designers of course programs. For 
the student, however, the structure can be used to provide agile 
teaching support by considering his or her progress using 
learning analytics, derived from the interaction with the LMS.     
Based on this conceptual work the next phases of this 
research are going to provide an implementation and 
codification of the hierarchical competence matrices from the 
bottom up starting with modeling of a single lecture to a whole 
program and then potentially to the programs of a whole 
faculty. Evaluation of those implementation both in terms of 
understanding and scaffolding support will be the next steps 
in the research that is being carried out of the author who is 
both in the lecturer and the researcher role, thus being able to 
interpret findings from multiple perspective together with 
colleagues and students.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
 
The author would like to thank the Tyrolean Science Fund 
(“Tiroler Wissenschaftsförderung”), which supported this 
research under grant number F.33280/6-2021 and the remarks 
of the reviewers of this contribution that helps to improve it.  
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
A. Codreanu, “A VUCA Action Framework for a VUCA 
Environment. Leadership Challenges and Solutions,” J. Def. Resour. 
Manag. JoDRM, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 31–38, 2016. 
[2] 
C. Pangaribuan, F. Wijaya, A. Djamil, D. Hidayat, and O. Putra, “An 
analysis on the importance of motivation to transfer learning in 
VUCA environments,” Manag. Sci. Lett., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 271–
278, 2020. 
[3] 
S. Green, A. F. Page, P. De’ath, E. Pei, and B. Lam, “VUCA 
Challenges on the Design Enineering Student Sprectrum,” presented 
at the 21st International Conference on Engineering & Product 
Design Education (E&PDE 2019), 2019. doi: 
10.35199/epde2019.100. 
[4] 
G. Baskoro, “Designing a Master Program to Cope with the New 
and Next Normal (VUCA World, Industry 4.0, and Covid 19): a case 
study,” IPTEK J. Proc. Ser., no. 3, Art. no. 3, Oct. 2021, doi: 
10.12962/j23546026.y2020i3.11078. 
[5] 
V. C. Tassone, C. O’Mahony, E. McKenna, H. J. Eppink, and A. E. 
J. Wals, “(Re-)designing higher education curricula in times of 
systemic dysfunction: a responsible research and innovation 
perspective,” High. Educ., vol. 76, no. 2, pp. 337–352, Aug. 2018, 
doi: 10.1007/s10734-017-0211-4. 
[6] 
Affde Marketing, “20+ Infographics CV-templates and degisn 
suggestions to get the job.” https://www.affde.com/de/infographic-
resume-template.html (accessed Apr. 11, 2022). 
[7] 
B. S. Bloom, Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: The 
Classification of Educational Goals. D. McKay, 1956. 
[8] 
L. Anderson, D. Krathwohl, and B. Bloom, “A Taxonomy for 
Learning, Teaching, and Assessing: A Revision of Bloom’s 
Taxonomy of Educational Objectives,” undefined, 2000, Accessed: 
May 05, 2021. [Online]. Available: /paper/A-Taxonomy-for-
Learning%2C-Teaching%2C-and-Assessing%3A-A-Anderson-
Krathwohl/23eb5e20e7985fca5625548d2ee6d781a2861d41 
[9] 
V. Prikshat, S. Kumar, and A. Nankervis, “Work-readiness 
integrated competence model: Conceptualisation and scale 
development,” Educ. Train., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 568–589, Jan. 2019, 
doi: 10.1108/ET-05-2018-0114. 
[10] K. Böhm, “Towards Semantically Enriched Curricula as pre-built 
Information Spaces in Higher Education Institutions,” in ECKM 
2021 22nd European Conference on Knowledge Management, 2021, 
p. 71. 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-966-9
ICAS 2022 : The Eighteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

