Towards Autonomic Marketing 
 
Carl Adams 
University of 
Portsmouth,  
Portsmouth, 
Hampshire UK 
carl.adams@port.ac.uk 
 
Richard John 
Anthony  
Dept. Smart Systems 
Technologies 
The University of 
Greenwich 
London, UK 
R.J.Anthony@gre.ac.uk 
 
Wendy Powley 
School of Computing 
Queen‟s University 
Kingston, ON Canada 
wendy@cs.queensu.ca 
David Bell, Chris 
White 
School of Electronics, 
Electrical Engineering 
and Computer 
Science, 
Queen's University of 
Belfast, 
Belfast, UK 
da.bell@qub.ac.uk 
Cwhite06@qub.ac.uk 
Chun Wu 
Mount Marty College 
Division of Natural 
Sciences 
Mount Marty College 
Yankton, USA 
cwu@mtmc.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper explores one of the current innovation 
waves within computing technology, that of the application of 
Autonomic Computing (AC) to the marketing domain – 
termed ―Autonomic Marketing‖, the result being an adaptive, 
highly effective marketing strategy set to significantly change 
target 
marketing 
and 
a 
company’s relationship with 
customers. Marketing has often been at the forefront of 
business adoption and utilization of the latest computing 
technologies and functionality. Indeed, the marketing function 
is interlinked with technology and has been proactively using 
the capabilities of new technologies from the earliest databases 
and mail merge functionality to sophisticated Customer 
Relationship Management systems and intelligent behavioural 
marketing systems. The Autonomic Computing paradigm 
provides a framework in which marketing systems could 
become self-configuring and context-aware, using a variety of 
learning and decision-making techniques, providing the 
potential of even more refined targeting of marketing 
information to customers.  In this paper, we introduce the 
concept of Autonomic Marketing and outline some of the 
research issues involved in the implementation of such a 
system that will, indeed revolutionize the marketing world. 
Keywords-Autonomic Computing; Autonomic Marketing; 
Marketing Intelligence Systems. 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
 There has always been a close relationship between 
information and communication technology (ICT) and 
marketing where marketers are often at the forefront of 
exploiting new technological capabilities. From the early 
days of using customer databases to the later multiple 
channel 
Customer 
Relationship 
Management 
(CRM) 
systems, marketers have used technology to better target 
marketing information to customers. Each technological 
wave has resulted in a step change in marketing activity and 
capabilities [1][2].  Technology brings marketers closer to 
their customers, and new technologies bring new channels 
and approaches to marketing [3].  Database systems enabled 
the recording and collation of many data items relating to 
customers. Every interaction between a company and a 
customer could be recorded and analyzed to generate 
customer profiles which could then be used to target specific 
marketing information. Similarly, Internet technologies have 
enabled close monitoring and interaction of a user on the 
Internet where preferences, behaviour, use patterns and much 
more can be tagged and logged [1][4]. The move towards 
Web 2.0 technologies bring more advanced monitoring 
capabilities, drawing upon a wealth of personal information 
[5]. 
Mitch [6] argued that, historically, there have been three 
stages of marketing initiated by technological changes, these 
being: 
 
 
Research based that used qualitative and statistical 
data to guess what people wanted. 
 
Transaction based that used the stored transaction 
data collected by organizations to help analyze and 
profile customers. This saw the growth of database 
marketing and CRM type systems. 
 
Volunteered Personal Information, a technology 
based on customers being active participants in 
providing key data, enabled by the later Web 2.0 
technologies.  Often the data is personal and 
interlinked with a host of customer context 
information, both personal and business information. 
Companies have a far richer set of data to collect, 
collate and analyze.  
 
Each of the different stages has fundamentally changed 
marketing activity.   
We propose a new marketing approach, “Autonomic 
Marketing” (AM), which employs the fundamentals of 
Autonomic Computing (AC) to monitor the current 
environmental state (including social trends, world events as 
well as characteristics of the target consumer base) and use 
these inputs to formulate an appropriate marketing strategy 
to yield the best results given the current conditions. The 
approach is adaptable, using feedback loops to monitor, 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-187-8
ICAS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

analyze, plan and subsequently execute the new marketing 
plans on the fly.   
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  
Section II presents the overview of Autonomic Computing.  
In Section III, we introduce the Autonomic Marketing 
concept architecture.  Section IV discusses the research 
issues arising from the AM concept.  We conclude the paper 
in Section V. 
II. 
AUTONOMIC COMPUTING PRINCIPLES 
Two seminal papers, Ganek and Corbi [7] and Kephart 
and Chess [8], consolidated a theme within computer science 
- that of the practical emergence and development of 
sophisticated autonomic systems which have the ability to 
operate autonomously in remote dynamic environments with 
limited intervention from human operators. Ganek and Corbi 
discussed the „dawning of the Autonomic Computing era‟ 
describing the main attributes of Autonomic Computing 
systems as being self managing systems with self-
configuring, self-healing, self-optimizing and self-protecting 
capabilities. Kephart and Chess explored the grand 
challenges to create self-managing computing systems that 
can manage themselves according to an administrator's 
goals.  
The concepts of autonomic computer systems derive 
from the human autonomic (vegetative) nervous systems [9], 
the regulatory mechanisms of visceral functions such as 
digestion, respiration, and the circulation of the blood, etc.  
These biological systems operate autonomically, that is, 
without conscious control by the individual.   
In the past decade, many autonomic systems have been 
developed for self-management of complex systems.  For 
instance, AC has been applied to database management 
systems [10], web services environments [11], elastic 
services in the cloud [12], workload management [13], and 
complex networks [14].  Autonomic systems have the ability 
to cope with dynamic environments [15]. Autonomic 
systems have begun to reach a level of maturity with a 
variety of models, applications and techniques [16][17].  A 
further aspect of Autonomic Computing is the ability of units 
and agents to interact with each other [18]. There are many 
potential models for interaction, such as sharing resources, 
sharing environment information, collaborating on a joint 
activity or a multitude of transaction based information 
sharing models.  
Autonomic Computing brings together the advances in 
artificial intelligence, intelligent agents and autonomic, or 
self*, 
capabilities 
that 
enable 
real-time, 
contextual 
adaptability and learning that can be applied to marketing 
activities.   
We use the term Autonomic Marketing (AM) to describe 
a step-change in the sophistication of automated marketing 
systems, in which the marketing activity itself is dynamically 
configured and contextualized to suit the current market 
conditions. AM can be succinctly defined as „it knows you 
want it‟ technology, effectively the Holy Grail of marketing 
that 
provides 
previously 
unprecedented 
levels 
of 
personalization and targeting of product and service 
information to customers - just when they need it, or  when 
they are likely to be most receptive to it. The technology 
capabilities are already here and they are beginning to be 
applied in this area, however, activity is piecemeal. In 
addition, there is little consideration of the full capabilities, 
and the likely consequences, of Autonomic Marketing. 
 
III. 
AUTONOMIC MARKETING 
The Autonomic Marketing Interest Group [19] defined 
some initial concepts and promise of Autonomic Marketing, 
that of "it knows you want it" technology or, applying it to a 
real-time setting, "it knows you want it, when and where you 
want it".  Effectively, Autonomic Marketing is heading 
towards the marketing Holy Grail where marketers can 
utilize artificial intelligence capabilities to trawl through the 
mass of data and data channels to closely match customers‟ 
needs, likes and preferences.  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The Autonomic Marketing Architecture 
 
Figure 1 outlines the AM architecture. The autonomic 
management control unit monitors current state, taking input 
from various sources such as the market conditions, 
customer demographics, significant world events, trends 
emerging from social media analysis, weather, and seasonal 
information. The information is time correlated, analyzed 
and fed into prediction models to formulate the best possible 
marketing strategy.  Success metrics include sales volume 
and customer reports, which are used as feedback to the 
autonomic manager. The behaviour of the autonomic 
manager is controlled by customizable policies. 
Autonomic Marketing may take two distinct approaches:  
company-centric or customer-centric.  Company-centric is a 
more targeted “information push” approach, whereas 
consumer-centric is more of an information pull technology.  
In a company-centric approach, marketing strategies are 
defined using data that is readily accessible and targets the 
population as a whole.   A consumer-centric approach is one 
in which an individual provides context data and the system 
sifts through potential offerings to select items most relevant 
to the consumer based on the context provided.   
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-187-8
ICAS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

As an example of company-centric AM, consider an 
organization that sells sportswear.  The company wishes to 
run an adaptable marketing campaign on television with the 
ads to be aired on different networks during different 
(unpredictable) events.   The ads feature different products, 
and the content is adaptable to be appealing to different 
audiences with different demographics.  Before each ad is 
run, the current viewer demographics are analyzed (based on 
past and/or present statistics gathered by the television 
network), information about the current television show 
being aired is considered (is it a sporting event, a comedy or  
a reality television show?), if applicable, the current state of 
the show is taken into account (who is winning the game?) 
and social networking trends (such as fan favourites) are 
determined.  Different ads are run depending upon the 
current conditions.  For instance, if a football match is 
currently airing, and Manchester United is the fan favourite 
and are currently winning, Man U merchandise may be 
advertised and the ad may feature Man U fans celebrating a 
win, wearing their gear.  Conversely, if FC Barcelona is 
currently 
winning, 
more 
generic, 
non-team 
related 
merchandise may be a better choice, or perhaps the ad should 
not be run at that time.   The audience demographics may 
further refine the merchandise that is shown and the type of 
ads that are aired at any particular time.   
Alternatively, in a consumer-centric approach, the system 
would gather customer profile data (demographics and 
preferences, if available), prompt the customer for some 
additional information and then sift through offerings to 
identify products that may be of interest.   Predictive models 
would provide guidance as to what products would be 
displayed. For example, the system may know that the 
customer is 20 years of age, is located in Valencia, Spain and 
knows, from previous searches, that the customer is a FC 
Barcelona fan.  The system may prompt for more 
information, such as the fact that the customer is looking for 
a jacket.  It would then search for items from a variety of 
companies and show the customer the items he/she is most 
likely to purchase.  Predictive models would base decisions 
based on historical data (companies that the consumer has 
purchased from previously, or companies frequented by 
customers with similar demographics etc).   
The way in which the various stages of the autonomic 
control loop {monitor, analyze, plan, execute} map onto 
such use cases can be explained in terms of Figure 1. 
„Monitor‟ current market conditions, and factors directly 
influencing this including diverse information such as 
weather, seasonal, economic, as well as customer feedback 
(direct via reviews etc, and also indirect in terms of sales 
figures) and current pricing model; provide the current 
sensed „state‟. „Analyze’ takes this information, combines it 
with historical data, and searches for patterns / trends and 
thus identifies opportunities to improve the system‟s 
performance (ultimately to increase sales value or volume). 
„Plan‟ decides what changes could be made to the current 
marketing strategy and attempts to predict their impact. This 
could use a utility function or fuzzy reasoning, for example, 
to determine which of several possible adaptations yields the 
most beneficial results under the various conditions. 
„Execute‟ subsequently applies the changes by adjusting 
tuning parameters on the marketing strategy. 
IV. 
RESEARCH ISSUES IN AUTONOMIC MARKETING 
Although the principles of Autonomic Computing are 
well developed, the application of these principles to new 
domains remains challenging and a number of issues will 
need to be researched and resolved in order to make AM a 
reality.  Infrastructure must be put in place to collect, store, 
analyze and mine the data sources, adaptable models must be 
built to predict the impacts of taking particular actions, and 
feedback mechanisms must be put in place.   
AM requires data from many data sources – contextual 
information 
from 
the 
potential 
consumer 
base 
(demographics, geographical information, preferences etc), 
trends emerging from social networking sites or significant 
world 
events 
from 
news 
sources, 
weather/seasonal 
information,  market conditions, historical information, etc.   
How and, from where, will this information be collected?   
What exactly is contextual data? What tools are in place for 
collecting this data?  Who owns this data, and how do we 
deal with the privacy issues?  Will the data be stored?  If so, 
how, where, and for how long?    Can the data be collected 
and analyzed efficiently to allow for real-time AM?   Is all 
the data time-stamped to allow for time-correlation? Most 
organizations already collect part of this information, but it is 
held in disparate systems (e.g. for supply-chain management, 
logistics, stock control, and traditional marketing), and not 
used effectively in the way we propose. AM is to work 
smarter, not harder. 
The system must be able to predict the outcome of 
applying AM strategies.  How do we build and test the 
predictive models?    These models must be adaptable and 
updated regularly, based on obtained feedback.   How will 
we detect that the models are outdated and how often should 
they be updated?  As with most current AC systems, a 
human supervisor is still required for such high-level 
decisions. The key goal of AM is to manage the complexity 
of making targeted management actions with low latency, 
freeing up the marketing executives to focus on only the 
highest-level concerns. Ultimately, when dealing with situations 
that have not been met before, or when new entities are encountered 
in the application environment, plasticity and flexibility must be 
greatly enhanced beyond the present state of the art. In this way 
restrictions arising due to having only the pre-programmed 
functionality familiar in current, predominantly „playback‟, 
systems, can be overcome when dealing with novel situations [20]. 
The customer- & company-centric approaches are quite 
different, with one being an information push based on 
current knowledge and the other relying on gathering 
information from the customer in order to find relevant 
information.  In terms of technology, what are the 
requirements of each, and how do they differ?   
Along with the technological aspects of AM, we need to 
consider the implications of failure.  AC systems take action 
based on current conditions.  They are unpredictable as it is 
impossible to test all possible cases, especially with the large 
number of parameters involved in the AM system.  If a 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-187-8
ICAS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

marketing strategy employed by the AM fails, what are the 
implications?  How can trust be established? 
Some of the questions posed above have been studied 
extensively in the literature and solutions have been 
proposed or are already in widespread use.   For example, the 
storage, correlation and analysis of massive amounts of data 
using data warehouses and/or open source tools such as 
HBase [21], Hadoop [22]  and Mahout [23].  Other areas, 
however, require additional research. Our further work is to 
prototype a system and to pursue some of the open areas. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
Autonomic Marketing, making use of the powerful 
capabilities that Autonomic Computing provides, offers 
many significant changes in marketing activity. As with any 
new wave of technology, the impact could be far reaching 
for customers and companies. Marketing budgets may be 
significantly reduced as large numbers of marketers are 
replaced by intelligent Autonomic Marketing agents that 
operate 24/7 providing increasingly accurate targeting and ad 
customization.  
There are clearly challenges ahead, but Autonomic 
Computing is a key area in computer science with over 10 
years of development of principles and techniques.   We 
foresee that a natural extension of this science to marketing, 
a complex “system” that requires self-configuration and self-
optimization, is the next technological wave that will sweep 
the industry. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] C.F. Hofacker,   Internet Marketing (3rd Ed). Chichester: Wiley, 2001 
[2] W. Rowan,  Digital Marketing: Using New Technologies to Get 
Closer to Your Customers. London : Kogan pp. 2002. 
[3] A.J. Kimmel, Marketing Communication: New Approaches, 
Technologies, and Styles. Oxford University Press, 2005. 
[4] P. Martin, M. Matheson, J. Lo, J. Ng, D. Tan, and B. Thomson, B., 
Supporting Smart Interactions with Predictive Analytics. SITCON: 
The 
CAS/NSERC 
Strategic 
Workshop 
in 
Smart 
Internet 
Technologies. Ontario, Canada. 2010. 
[5] S. Agresta, and B.B. Bough,  Perspectives on Social Media 
Marketing: The Agency Perspective/The Brand Perspective. Boston: 
Course Technology, 2011. 
[6] A. Mitch, “The Rise of Volunteered Personal Information”, Journal of 
Direct, Data and Digital Marketing Practice, 12, pp. 154-164, 2010. 
[7] A. G. Ganek,  and T.A. Corbi, “The Dawning of the Autonomic 
Computing Era”. IBM Systems Journal,  March, 2003. 
[8] J.O. Kephart, and D.M. Chess, “The Vision of Autonomic 
Computing”. Computer IEEE 36(1),  2003, pp. 42-50. 
[9] E.H. Ackerknecht, “The History of the Discovery of the Vegatative 
(Autonomic) Nervous System”. Med Hist. January; Vol. 18, no.1, 
1974, pp. 1–8. 
[10] S. Elnaffar, W. Powley, D. Benoit and P. Martin, “Today‟s DBMSs: 
How Autonomic Are They?”, 1st  International Workshop on 
Autonomic Computing Systems (DEXA 03). May 2003. 
[11] W. Tian, F. Zulkernine, J. Zebedee, W. Powley and P. Martin.  “An 
Architecture 
for 
an 
Autonomic 
Web 
Services 
Environment”,   Proceedings of the Joint Workshop on Web Services 
and Model-Driven Enterprise Information Systems WSMDEIS 
(ICEIS 2005),  May 2005,  pp. 54-66. 
[12] P. Martin, A. Brown, W. Powley, J.L. Vazquez-Poletti, “Autonomic 
Management of Elastic Services in the Cloud”,  Workshop on 
Management of Cloud Systems (MoCS 2011), June 28, 2011, pp. 
135-140. 
[13] B. Niu, P. Martin, W. Powley, “Towards Autonomic Workload 
Management in DBMSs”,  Journal of Database Management, 20(3), 
July - Sept 2009, pp.  1-17. 
[14] L. W. Russell, S.P. Morgan, and E.G. Chron, “Clockwork: A New 
Movement in Autonomic Systems”. IBM Systems Journal, vol 42, 
no1, 2003, pp. 77-84. 
[15] C. Adams, “Autonomic Systems, Coping Strategies and Dream 
Functions”. ICAS 2007, The Third International Conference on 
Autonomic and Autonomous Systems, June 19-25, 2007. 
[16] K. Amina, A. Haye, M. Jahan, and S. Shamail, “Survey of 
Frameworks, 
Architectures 
and 
Techniques 
in 
Autonomic 
Computing”, Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on 
Autonomic and Autonomous  Systems, 2009, pp. 220-225. 
[17] H. Psaier, and S. Dustdar, “A Survey on Self-Healing Systems: 
Approaches and Systems. Computing 91(1), 2011, pp. 43-73. 
[18] C. Adams,  “Collaboration Within the IoT: A Self-Conscious 
Approach for Autonomic Units”. Internet of Things Workshop, 
December 3rd, 2011. 
[19] AMIG (2011) Principles of Autonomic Marketing. Autonomic 
Marketing Interest Group (Adams C., Anthony R.J.., Bell D., Powley 
W., White C. and Wu C.), International Conference of Autonomic 
and Autonomous Systems (ICAS 2011), Venice May 2011.  
[20] C. White, D. Bell, “Towards the Measurement of Plasticity and 
Innateness in Artificial Agents”. AISB 2011, The 2nd Towards a 
Comprehensive Intelligence Test (TCIT), Reconsidering the Turing 
Test for the 21st Century Symposium, York, UK, April 4-7, 2011. 
[21] Apache HBase.  http://hbase.apache.org 
[22] Apache Hadoop.  http://hadoop.apache.org 
[23] Apache Mahout.  http://mahout.apache.org/ 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-187-8
ICAS 2012 : The Eighth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

