  Enhancing Data Security in Cloud Computing Using a Lightweight Cryptographic 
Algorithm  
 
Sana Belguith  
Laboratory of Electronic Systems and 
Communication Network, Tunisia 
Polytechnic School 
Telnet Innovation Labs, Telnet 
Holding 
E-mail: sana.belguith@telnet-
consulting.com 
Abderrazak Jemai  
Laboratoire LIP2, Faculté des 
Sciences de Tunis, Tunisie 
E-mail: 
Abderrazak.Jemai@insat.rnu.tn 
 
 
Rabah Attia 
Laboratory of Electronic Systems and 
Communication Network, Tunisia 
Polytechnic School 
E-mail: Rabah.attia@enit.rnu.tn 
 
Abstract— Cloud computing is a new architecture that has 
released users from hardware requirements and complexity. 
The rapid transition toward clouds has advanced many 
concerns related to security issues which can hold back its 
widespread adoption. In fact, cloud computing’s special 
architecture has introduced many challenges especially in 
maintaining the security of outsourced data. Thus, to address 
this issue, we propose in this article, a new lightweight 
encryption algorithm which consists of combining symmetric 
algorithm to encrypt data and asymmetric one to distribute 
keys. This combination helps to benefit from the efficient 
security of asymmetric encryption and the rapid performance 
of symmetric encryption while conserving the rights of users to 
access data by a secured and authorized way. Evaluation 
results prove that the processing time of our lightweight 
algorithm is faster than 
state-of-the-art cryptographic 
algorithms.  
 
Keywords-Cloud 
computing; 
Security; 
Privacy; 
Data 
security; Cryptography. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In recent years, there has been a huge proliferation of the 
distributed computing systems use and advancement. This 
increase has produced a large amount of network distributed 
paradigms, infrastructures and architectures such as Grid, 
Pervasive, Autonomic, Cloud, etc. 
Cloud computing refers to a network of computers, 
usually connected through internet, sharing an amount of 
resources scalable to reach the user’s needs and offered by a 
service provider [1]. 
The US National Institute of Standards and Technology 
(NIST) [2] defines cloud computing as follows: ‘Cloud 
computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, 
on-demand network access to a shared pool of configurable 
computing resources (e.g., networks, servers, storage, 
applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned 
and released with minimal management effort or service 
provider interaction’.  
Cloud computing allows users to access software 
applications and computing capabilities, while using  
 
 
different service models: Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), 
Platform as a Service (PaaS) and Software as a Service 
(SaaS) [3]. These three service models are described below: 
 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) enables the 
consumer 
to 
provide 
fundamental 
computing 
resources (such as processing, storage, networks, 
etc.). The consumer can deploy and run different 
kinds of software including operating systems.  
 
Platform as a Service (PaaS): This model enables the 
consumer to deploy onto the cloud infrastructure 
applications created or acquired by the consumer.  
 
Software as a Service (SaaS): In this model, the user 
can benefit of the capability of using applications 
already deployed on the cloud environment by a 
provider.  
Four deployment models are used to deploy cloud 
computing solutions. The first model is the private cloud 
which is a cloud infrastructure available only for an 
exclusive use by a single organization. It is managed by the 
organization itself or by a third party. The second model is 
the public cloud providing the cloud infrastructure to the use 
of the general public. It is owned and managed by a third 
party who is the cloud provider. The third cloud deployment 
model is the community cloud which consists of several 
organizations, having the same interests such as security 
requirements, share the cloud infrastructure. The last model 
is the hybrid cloud composed of two or more cloud 
infrastructures (private, community, or public), which are 
independent but associated, by standardized or proprietary 
technology, in order to reach information portability.  
On the other hand, there are currently several challenges 
facing cloud computing mainly related to scalability, 
interoperability and multi-tenancy. But, the most important 
issues are related to the security since cloud computing as a 
system using internet network (such as grid computing, 
embedded systems, etc.) is exposed to a number of attacks 
[4]. The cloud computing security issues can hold back its 
widespread adoption.  In fact, sharing resources in cloud 
computing causes the problem of maintaining these 
resources secured and protected from malicious access or 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

use. This problem is particularly faced on the data 
outsourced to the cloud. 
In order to provide a novel mechanism that enhances 
data security in the cloud computing environment, this paper 
introduces a new lightweight cryptographic algorithm useful 
to encrypt data outsourced to cloud storage. This proposed 
solution is based on the combination of symmetric and 
asymmetric cryptography to encrypt data. This combination 
helps to benefit from the efficient security of asymmetric 
encryption and the rapid performance of symmetric 
encryption while conserving the rights of users to access 
data by a secured and authorized way.  The paper introduces 
a comparison of the two categories of encryption algorithms 
(Asymmetric and symmetric) using various input files. 
Then, it offers an evaluation of the proposed algorithm. 
The rest of the paper deals with the following points. 
First, Section II surveys the security problems addressed by 
cloud computing. After a literature review and a description 
of existent solutions in Section III, we provide a logical 
description of the proposed algorithm in Section IV. Then, in 
Section V, we present a comparative study of a variety of 
cryptographic algorithm and we implement the new 
algorithm. Finally, Section VI proposes some final remarks 
and future works. 
II. 
CLOUD COMPUTING  SECURITY  
A. Trust 
Trust is defined as “the act of having confidence and 
reliance on someone or something to behave as promised” 
[5]. In computer science, trust goes through many areas, such 
as security and access control in computer networks, 
reliability in distributed systems, etc. [6]. 
The fact of outsourcing data and applications, in a cloud 
environment, delegates their control out of the owner’s strict 
control to the cloud provider. As a consequence, Trust 
depends on the deployment model and on the cloud 
provider.   
B. Cloud security issues 
Due to the novel architecture of cloud computing, many 
traditional security issues are countered effectively. 
Although, its infrastructure’s singular characteristics have 
introduced a number of distinctive security challenges.  
Security in general is related to the AIC triad, namely, 
Availability, Integrity and Confidentiality. These three 
properties have become the key aspects used in designing 
secure systems, especially, in the case of cloud computing 
architecture.  
1) Confidentiality: it refers only to authorized parties or 
systems having the ability to access protected data [6]. 
Outsourcing data, delegating its control to a cloud provider 
and making it accessible to different parties increase the risk 
of data breach. A number of concerns emerge regarding the 
issues of multi-tenancy, data remanence, application 
security and privacy [7]. Multi-tenancy refers to the cloud 
characteristic of resource sharing [6]. The cloud computing 
architecture consists of sharing different kinds of resources 
to enable multiple clients to use the same resource at the 
same time which presents a number of privacy and 
confidentiality threats. 
2) Integrity: It means that only authorized parties can 
modify assets in authorized ways and it refers to data, 
software and hardware. Data Integrity refers to protecting 
data from unauthorized deletion, modification or fabrication 
[6]. Authorization is the mechanism used by the system to 
determine what level of access a particular authenticated 
user should have to secure resources [6]. Due to the rise of 
the number of parties involved in a cloud environment, 
authorization is important to ensure data integrity. 
3) Availability: It refers to the property of a system 
being accessible and usable upon demand by an authorized 
entity.  System availability includes a system’s ability to 
carry on operations even when some authorities misbehave 
[6]. To ensure availability, the system has to be able to 
operate even if there is a security threat. The user of a cloud 
environment, who is discharged of hardware infrastructure 
requirements, relies on the availability of the ubiquitous 
network.  
III. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Information security is defined by IEEE as “the degree 
to which a collection of data is protected from exposure to 
accidental or malicious alteration or destruction” [8].  
The International Standard Organization in 2005 defines 
information security by the ISO/I EC 27002 standard. It is 
specified by the standard as “the preservation of  
confidentiality (ensuring that information is accessible only 
to those authorized to have access), integrity (safe guarding 
the accuracy and completeness of information and 
processing methods) and availability (ensuring that 
authorized users have access to information and associated 
assets when required)” [9].  
To achieve data security, many techniques are used. 
These techniques can be categorized into four categories: 
masking, erasure, backup, and encryption. In an unreliable 
environment, like cloud computing, where there is not a 
physical control over our data, cryptography seems to be the 
best way to secure outsourced data. In fact, multi-tenancy 
characteristics and easy provider access to data force us to 
ensure confidentiality through innovative techniques based 
essentially on encryption techniques and access control.  
Data encryption refers to the technique that uses 
cryptography theory to encrypt data on storage devices.  
Cryptography is the study of mathematical techniques 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

related to aspects of information security such as 
confidentiality, data integrity, entity authentication, and data 
origin authentication [10]. Cryptography systems are 
classified into two basic types: Symmetric techniques (also 
known as conventional or secret key) and asymmetric 
techniques (public key). 
Symmetric encryption consists of using the same key by 
the sender and the receiver parties. This key is used once to 
encrypt the data by the sender, and then, time it is used by 
the recipient to decrypt the data. The asymmetric encryption 
is based on the use of a pair of keys: a Public key and a 
private key. The data are encrypted by the public key which 
can be published. Then, the data are decrypted by the 
private key which must be kept secret.   
In 2012, Dimitrios et al. [6] studied in depth cloud 
security while identifying security requirements. The 
authors proposed the use of a trusted third party as a security 
solution. The solution consists of using cryptography, 
specifically public key infrastructure with Single-Sign-On 
(SSO) mechanisms [11] and the lightweight directory access 
protocol (LDAP) [11], to ensure access control, data 
integrity and confidentiality and secured communications. 
This proposed solution consists of using cryptography to 
ensure confidentiality and integrity of involved data. 
However, it does not identify encryption algorithms to be 
used. 
In 2009, Cunsolo et al. [12] proposed a mechanism to 
protect data in distributed systems (grid, cloud, autonomic, 
etc.). This technique consists of the use of a combination of 
symmetric and asymmetric cryptographic algorithms. 
Although in this scheme, only the data owner can access the 
data which contradicts the concept of sharing resources in 
the cloud environment.    
Hashizume et al. [13] presented a classification of 
security issues in different service models (SaaS, PaaS and 
IaaS). This paper offers an identification of the main 
vulnerabilities in cloud computing while presenting the 
common threats and its relations to cloud layers. In spite of 
proposing some available countermeasures, this study does 
not provide technical implementation of these solutions. 
In 2013, Rahmani et al. [14] proposed Encryption as a 
Service (EaaS) as a solution for cryptography in cloud 
computing based on XaaS concept. This solution presents a 
response to prevent the security risks of cloud provider’s 
encryption and the inefficiency of client-side encryption. 
However, there is not a comparative study of cryptographic 
algorithms which can be integrated in this solution. 
Bugiel et al. [15] proposed a secured cloud architecture 
which consists of using two clouds (twins) to perform 
computations. 
This 
model 
differentiates 
between 
computations based on their security and performance 
aspects; trusted cloud performs security-critical operations 
and the commodity cloud performs performance-critical 
operations. 
In [16], Mohammad et al. evaluated the performances of 
cryptographic algorithms (symmetric and asymmetric 
algorithms) in a cloud platform. Based on key size, the 
performance and the size of the output file, the paper offers 
a study of different encryption techniques in a cloud 
environment. Finally, it proposes to use AES algorithm to 
encrypt data but it does not propose a secure way to 
distribute encryption keys. 
Dimitrios et al. was the first proposing the use of 
cryptography to secure cloud architecture [6]. Ever since, 
many authors proposed to use cryptographic algorithms in 
the cloud storage [14][16]. But, these solutions remain 
incomplete because they do not specify which algorithm is 
recommended to encrypt data and how to distribute 
cryptographic keys while maintaining adequacy with cloud 
characteristics. 
IV. 
METHODOLOGY  
In this section, we provide a logical description of the 
approach proposed to countermeasure data security issues in 
cloud computing. 
A. Proposed Solution for enhancing data security in the 
cloud 
While using cloud storage, sharing resources, especially 
sharing data between data owner and authorized clients, can 
pose the risk of data breach or leakage. In fact, securing data 
in the cloud is difficult to fulfill if the client does not trust 
the service provider. The client is obliged to blindly trust the 
provider’s mechanisms but this can be hold back by the 
threats 
of 
malicious 
insiders 
among 
them 
cloud 
administrators who can access data simply.   
To ensure data security, many techniques and 
technologies were proposed among them the most efficient 
one is cryptography. The most successful approach adopted 
to secure data is symmetric cryptographic techniques. But, 
this technique alone is not efficient in a multi-tenant 
scenario; many authorized clients have the right to access 
data so the key has to be distributed to each client. The key 
management is too difficult to perform since there are risks 
in sending keys to different clients at the same time. 
The asymmetric cryptographic techniques could be a 
suitable way to ensure data security. Although, this solution 
restricts data access to the data owner which contradicts the 
multi-users aspect of cloud computing. Besides, the 
asymmetric cryptography algorithm presents a heavy impact 
on data access. This usually does not allow the encryption of 
large amounts of data in acceptable time for users. Thus, it 
is necessary to propose a new solution that can offer a trade-
off between security requirements and system performance 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

and which preserves the multi-tenancy aspect of cloud 
computing.  
The solution we propose combines the efficient security 
of asymmetric encryption and the rapid performance of 
symmetric encryption while conserving the rights of users to 
access data by a secured and authorized way. In our model, 
the data will be encrypted by a symmetric algorithm. Then, 
the symmetric key distribution between cloud provider and 
authorized users will be performed using asymmetric 
algorithm. Our new solution is basically proposed to protect 
data 
confidentiality 
and 
integrity 
using 
encryption. 
Moreover, the cryptographic keys are stored at cloud 
provider side, to decrypt/encrypt data and share it with other 
clients. The data stored in the cloud remain available on 
demand by authorized clients and can be accessed rapidly.  
B. Enhancing data security’s  algorithm 
The data in the cloud storage are encrypted by a 
symmetric key cryptographic algorithm. 
1) Key exchange 
The first step of the algorithm is the key exchange. This 
step is composed of two phases: key generation and key 
exchange. 
The data owner generates the symmetric key used to 
encrypt data, and then, asymmetric two keys used to encrypt 
the symmetric key. He sends his public key to the cloud 
storage, which, in turn, generates his two asymmetric keys. 
Then, the cloud storage saves the cloud public key Cpub and 
the owner’s public key Upub. In the second phase, the data 
owner requests the public key of the cloud provider and he 
encrypts the symmetric key ksym with the public key of the 
cloud provider. Finally, he sends KE to the cloud storage to 
be stored. 
The step by step algorithm describing the key exchange 
phase is reported by the diagram of Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Key generation phase. 
2) Data storage  
The second step of the algorithm is the storage of the 
encrypted data in the cloud storage. In this step, the data 
owner encrypts his data by the symmetric key ksym and he 
sends it to the cloud storage in encrypted form. This phase is 
described in Figure 2.  
DE=Encrypt (Data, ksym)
Send (DE)
Receive (DE)
Save (DE)
Data owner
Cloud storage
 
Figure 2.  Data storage phase. 
3) Data access  
To access the data stored in the cloud storage, the user 
requests the data from the cloud storage as shown in Figure 
3. 
Request (Data)
KUE = Encrypt (Ksym, 
Upub)
Retrieve (KE, Upub)
Ksym =Decrypt (KE, Cpriv)
Data user
Cloud storage
Send (DE, KUE)
Retrieve (DE)
Receive (DE, KUE)
Ksym= Decrypt (KUE, 
Upriv)
Data= Decrypt (DE, 
Ksym)
 
Figure 3.  Data access phase. 
The cloud storage finds the encrypted symmetric key KE 
and the user public key. Then, the cloud storage decrypts the 
symmetric key KE with his own private key Cpriv and re-
encrypt it with the user public key Upub. Next, he finds the 
encrypted data and he sends it with the encrypted key to the 
user. The user, in turn, decrypts the symmetric key with his 
private key Upriv and he decrypts the data with the 
symmetric key. 
V. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE SOLUTION IN THE CLOUD 
ENVIRONMENT: RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. Experimental environment 
In order to study the performance of the solution 
theoretically proposed in the previous section, we have 
implemented different kinds of symmetric and asymmetric 
cryptographic algorithms in the cloud environment. Then, 
we have implemented the hybrid algorithm proposed. 
The experimental environment consists of the cloud network 
composed by the hypervisor Xen Server (6.1), the 
middleware Openstack and the client that uses Citrix 
Desktop [17] to access to the virtual machine hosted by 
XenServer. The cloud server uses the Core I5 (4.8 GHz) 
Generate (Ksym, (Upriv, 
Upub))
Retrieve (Cpub)
Generate (Cpriv, Cpub)
Receive (Cpub, Upub)
Data user
Cloud storage
Send (Cpub)
KE=Encrypt (Ksym, Cpub)
Send (KE)
Receive (Cpub)
Request (Cpub)
Send (Upub)
1st Phase: Key generation
2nd Phase: Key Exchange
Receive (KE)
 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

with 4 GB of RAM and the client machine utilizes the Core 
I3 with 4 GB of RAM.   
B. Experimental results and discussion 
In this section, the study distinguishes between 
symmetric and asymmetric algorithms by implementing 
them in the same cloud environment [18]. 
In Table I, all the symmetric algorithms such as AES 
[10][19], DES [10], 3DES [10] and Blowfish [10], and 
asymmetric techniques like RSA [10] and ElGamal [10], 
have been implemented and tested using different input text 
file sizes: 1 MB, 10 MB, 50 MB and 100MB. The results 
mentioned in the table I, are the average of the encryption 
time calculated after doing the experiments three times. 
TABLE I.  
PROCESSING TIME AND KEY SIZE 
 
AES 
DES 
3 DES 
Blowfish 
RSA 
ElGamal 
Key size 
256 
64 
192 
256 
2048 
1024 
File size 
(MB) 
1  
0,03 
0,03 
0,09 
0,03 
332.29 
2935.90 
10 
0,32 
0,32 
0,77 
0,24 
- 
- 
50  
1,61 
1,89 
4,49 
2,13 
- 
- 
100  
4,27 
5,50 
7,96 
5,64 
- 
- 
 
From this analysis, we can conclude that the symmetric 
algorithms are faster than the asymmetric algorithms. 
However, the asymmetric algorithms are the most robust 
against the code breaking thanks to the lengthy keys used. 
Among the symmetric algorithms, AES has the lowest data 
processing time. Moreover, RSA is the asymmetric 
algorithm having the longest key size as shown in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Key size of different cryptographic algorithms. 
Obviously, Figure 5 represents the processing time of 
the implemented symmetric and asymmetric algorithms in 
the cloud environment.  
Finally, using the analysis above, we choose to evaluate 
the new algorithm proposed by combining the AES 
algorithm as the symmetric technique and the RSA 
algorithm as the asymmetric technique.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Processing time of different cryptographic algorithms. 
TABLE II.  
PROCESSING TIME OF THE NEW HYBRID TECHNIQUE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Processing time of the new hybrid technique. 
The data processing time composed by the encryption 
and key distribution time of the new algorithm is faster than 
the other algorithms while having the secure key 
distribution as shown in Table II and Figure 6. By this 
hybrid technique, we can achieve a rapid performance of 
data processing and an efficient security level using the key 
distribution mechanism. This new technique enhances 
confidentiality and integrity of data stored in the cloud while 
maintaining it available on-demand.  
File size (MB) 
1  
10  
50  
100  
Time (s) 
0,06 
0,30 
1,93 
4,02 
0,02 
0,22 
1,54 
2,89 
0,03 
0,19 
1,08 
2,83 
Average time (s) 
0.04 
0.24 
1.52 
3.25 
 
 
 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Data security is an open problem in cloud computing 
environment. To ensure data security, many techniques and 
technologies were proposed among them the most efficient 
one is cryptography. 
 In this work, we propose a hybrid encryption technique 
consisting 
of 
using 
asymmetric 
and 
symmetric 
cryptographic algorithms. In our model, the data is 
encrypted by a symmetric algorithm. Then, the symmetric 
key distribution between cloud provider and authorized 
users is performed using an asymmetric algorithm.  
This paper offers a comparison of the two categories of 
encryption algorithms (Asymmetric and symmetric) using 
various input files. Based on the output analysis, we can 
conclude that the symmetric algorithms are the more 
efficient in cloud environment thanks to the rapidity of 
processing data, among them the AES is the faster one. 
Moreover, the analysis proves that the asymmetric 
algorithms are more robust thanks to the key length used 
especially the RSA algorithm. Finally, we evaluated the 
hybrid technique using the combination of the AES 
algorithm and the RSA algorithm. This analysis proves that 
the novel technique enjoys the advantages of symmetric 
algorithm in the processing time and the robustness of 
asymmetric algorithm in key length. In fact, this new 
lightweight algorithm is faster than other cryptographic 
techniques in processing data. Moreover, it is robust and 
secured thanks to its key distribution mechanism.  
This work can be enhanced by proposing a new key 
distribution scheme which aims to give every authorized 
user the encryption key without the cloud provider 
interaction.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is a part of the MOBIDOC project achieved 
under the PASRI program, funded by the European Union 
and administered by the ANPR [20]. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Koehler and S. Benkner, "VCE-A Versatile Cloud 
Environment for Scientific Applications." The Seventh 
International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous 
Systems (ICAS’11) IARIA, 2011, pp. 81-87  
[2] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST Definition of Cloud 
Computing”, National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Information Technology Laboratory, 2011.  
[3] A. Tchana, L. Broto, and D. Hagimont, “Fault Tolerant 
Approaches in Cloud Computing Infrastructures”, The Eighth 
International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous 
Systems ICAS’12), 2012, pp. 42-48. 
[4] A. Jemai, A. Mastouri, and H. Elleuch, “Study of key pre-
distribution schemes in wireless sensor networks: case of 
BROSK (use of WSNet)”, International Journal of Applied 
Mathematics & Information Sciences (AMIS’12). 2012, pp. 
655-667. 
[5]  P. I. Bhosle and S. A. Kasurkar “Trust in Cloud Computing”. 
International Journal of Advanced Research in Computer 
Engineering & Technology (IJARCET). Volume 2, Issue 4, 
2013, pp. 1541-1548. 
[6] D. Zissis and D. Lekkas. “Addressing cloud computing 
security issues”. Future Generation Computer Systems, 28(3), 
2012, pp. 583-592  
[7] Cloud Security Alliance. Top threats to cloud computing, 
Cloud Security Alliance, 2010. 
[8] The Authoritative Dictionary of IEEE Standards Terms, 7th 
ed., Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, Los 
Alamitos, CA, USA, 2000. 
[9] ISO/IEC 27002:2005 Standard: Information technology – 
Security techniques – Code of practice for information 
security 
management, 
International 
Organization 
for 
Standardization (ISO) and International Electrotechnical 
Commission (IEC), Geneve, Switzerland, 2005. 
[10] A. J. Menezes, S. A. Vanstone, and P. C. V. Oorschot, 
“Handbook of Applied Cryptography”, Boca Raton, FL, 
USA:CRC Press, Inc., 1996. 
[11] “Directories and Public –Key Infrastructure (PKI)”, VeriSign, 
2004. 
https://www.verisign.com.br/static/Directories_PKI.pdf 
[12] V. D. Cunsolo, S. Distefano, A. Puliafito, and M. Scarpa, 
“Achieving information security in network computing 
systems”, 
Eighth 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on  
Dependable, Autonomic and Secure Computing (DASC'09.), 
2009, pp. 71-77.  
[13] K. Hashizume, D. G. Rosado, E. Fernández-Medina, and E. 
B. Fernandez, “An analysis of security issues for cloud 
computing”. Journal 
of 
Internet 
Services 
and 
Applications, vol. 4, 2013, pp. 1-13.  
[14] H. Rahmani, E. Sundararajan, Z. M. Ali, and A. M. Zin, 
“Encryption as a Service (EaaS) as a Solution for 
Cryptography in Cloud”. Procedia Technology, vol. 11, 2013, 
pp. 1202-1210. 
[15] S. Bugiel, S. Nürnberger, A. R. Sadeghi, and T. Schneider, 
“Twin clouds: Secure cloud computing with low latency”. 
Communications and Multimedia Security. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 32-44. 
[16] J. Mohammad, K. Omer, S. Abbas, E. S. M. El-Horbaty, and 
A. B. M Salem, “A comparative study between modern 
encryption 
algorithms 
based 
on 
cloud 
computing 
environment”. 8th International Conference for Internet 
Technology and Secured Transactions (ICITST’13), IEEE, 
2013, pp. 531-535. 
[17] mc software company, "Cloud Lifecycle Management with 
CitrixXenServer Virtualization", manual guide, network 
partner, 2013. 
[18] «PyCrypto - The Python Cryptography Toolkit».  Available 
from: https://www.dlitz.net/software/pycrypto/ 
retrieved: 2015.03.10. 
[19] A. Sachdev and M. Bhansali, "Enhancing Cloud Computing 
Security using AES Algorithm", International Journal of 
Computer Applications, vol. 67, No. 9, 2013, pp. 19-23. 
[20] http://www.pasri.tn/pr%C3%A9sentation 
 retrieved:2015.04.06.
 
 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-405-3
ICAS 2015 : The Eleventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

