A Distributed E-health Model Using Mobile Agents
Ali A. Pouyan
School of Computer and IT Engineering
Shahrood University of Technology
Shahrood, Iran
e-mail: apoyan@shahroodut.ac.ir
Momeneh Taban
School of Computer and IT Engineering
Shahrood University of Technology
Shahrood, Iran
e-mail: m.taban@comp.tus.ac.ir
Abstract―In this paper, a 3-layer agent-based model is
proposed. The proposed model is supposed to be used as a
general framework for e-health systems to facilitate health care
processes. This 3-layer model consists of patient layer, clinic
layer 
and 
central-hospital 
layer. 
These 
layers 
are
hierarchically 
and 
horizontally 
related 
together. 
This
relationship is defined in order to establish more accuracy in
treatment recognition, quick treatment, and diagnosis. It
facilitates the relationship between different parts of e-health
procedure and reduces the workload and complexity to
connect different interfaces. Mobile Agents technology is used
to distribute the processing load as well as to support a more
flexible peer-to-peer model, scalability and decentralization of
control.
Keywords–distributed; mobile agent; modeling; e-health;
layer; workload.
I.
INTROUDUCTION
E-activities have been emerged as potential prospective
trend in almost all aspects of human life. Some of them have
become properly essential to control the huge amount of
data and information produced during daily activities. At the
same time, the introduction of e-Health represents the
commitment 
of 
information 
and 
communication
technologies to improve healthcare systems [1].
The E-health care indicates recording, measuring,
monitoring, managing and finally delivering patient-
oriented and specific-condition care services through
Internet at the real-time.
E-health provides the interaction between a patient and
healthcare 
institute, 
as 
well 
as 
institute-to-institute
transmission of data or peer-to-peer communication
between patients or doctors. Nowadays most healthcare
institutes use computer systems for record keeping. Most of
data being recorded would not be easy to understand for
average patients, and they can be solely used directly by
doctors and other practitioners. On-line tools may help
patients to better understand their condition. Furthermore, it
is of a great importance for a healthcare institute to manage,
maintain, collect, and analyze the data received by doctors,
practitioner and patients.
Sadegh Ekrami
School of Computer and IT Engineering
Shahrood University of Technology
Shahrood, Iran
e-mail: s.ekrami@comp.tus.ac.ir
Several approaches have been proposed to integrate
distributed information sources in a healthcare [2]. In one
approach [3], the focus was on providing different teams
across several hospitals with management assistance by
coordinating their access to distributed information. The
brokering architecture is centralized around a mediator
agent which is responsible for allocating an appropriate
medical team to an available operating theatre in which the
transplant operation may be performed.
In this paper, the analysis is done across distributed
system according to hierarchical and horizontal connections
among the patients, the healthcare clinic, and the central
hospital. We illustrate some benefits of these connections
which lead to reduce the complexity of collaboration
between some global queries and management of local
entities. In order to have accurate queries and efficient
analyses from distributed databases, a framework is required
in order to support interoperability mechanism to identify
and provide measures necessary to deal with the differences
in database models. This makes use of a knowledge-based
approach for information retrieval which can be provided by
defining the entities and their relationships as well as
agents’ role.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2
describes the agents reducing the complexity of the
communication and facilitating the interaction between the
layers in distributed environment. Section 3 explains the
roles of multi agent system (MAS) in three layers and its
efficiency in operating between layers, and also the
interaction between layers with emphasizing the role of
Object Request Broker (ORB) for being applied in client-
server architecture. At the end of this paper, the conclusion
and future work are presented.
II.
MULTI-AGENT SYSTEM
A multi-agent system is a paradigm for understanding
and modeling distributed systems, in which it is assumed
that the computational components are autonomous; that is
they are able to control their own behavior in the
furtherance of their own goals. During the past decade,
several agent architectures have been proposed to
implement agent-based systems, and also a few efforts have
been made to formally specify agent behaviors [4].
7
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

However, there is little research on narrowing the gap
between agent formal models and agent implementation;
and of course this paper will not focus on implementation
phase.
Because of their inherent characteristics, such as code
and state mobility, network awareness, and intelligence,
Mobile Agents are able to enhance distributed applications.
Some of them include reduction of the network bandwidth
use, distribution of processing, support for a more flexible
peer-to-peer model, scalability and decentralization of
control. In terms of processing and network bandwidth
consumption, the use of mobile agent paradigm is justified
when use of some remote resource applying traditional
approaches as client/server paradigm are more expensive
than use of the agent.
The integration of many clinical activities in e-health,
requires a wide area of e-health monitoring in which most of
the patients are usually mobile and situated in a low
bandwidth, high latency, asynchronous transaction and
unstable connection communication environment while
servers are highly distributed and heterogeneous. For this
paradigm Mobile Agent technology is more suitable as it
provides a powerful and efficient mechanism to develop
application 
for 
a 
distributed 
and 
heterogeneous
environment. Mobile agent technology offers the possibility
to execute duties in an automated way with minimal human
intervention. It allows medical staff to concentrate their
attention on other activities and consequently save valuable
time of medical resources. Also, the medical team can be
always accessible and their decisions are easily monitored
by medical staff and Central Hospital.
The mobile agent in each machine interacts with
stationary environment (e.g., service agents or other
resources) to accomplish its task. The Central, the clinic,
and the patient’s PC are three stationary agencies which are
supposed to provide an environment for the agents to
interact in the system.
A principal goal is to overcome the difficulties of
coordination and communication. The main challenge is to
identify types of agents, their tasks, goals and interfaces.
The types of the agents which are used in the whole system
are presented in Table I.
In fact, there is a large amount of patients’ data stored
in lots of databases and not translated into any knowledge
form which can be effectively suitable for consumers
whether they are patients or medical practitioners. To
customize this health information, they are required to be
retrieved and translated into a suitable knowledge. In this
model Analyzer Agent is supposed to perform such a task to
retrieve appropriate
information and convert it into
knowledge-based information.
TABLE I. AGENT’S GOALS AND TASKS.
Agent type
Goals
Tasks
interfaces
Profile
Agent
Complete
patient's
information.
Update
patient’s health
information.
Record user’s
application.
Record user’s
preference.
Record user’s
tasks.
Virtual
medical team
Advice
Agent
Care
improvement
Bring medical
suggestion to
the patient
Patient
Query
Agent
Obtain
statistical
information.
Collect
information
from distributed
DBs.
Carry and run
a request
through the
system.
Clinic
-
Central
Analyzer
Agent
Obtain an
appropriate
request and
analyze data
and convert it
into appropriate
information
Analyze data
from
information
resource
Research
team
-
Patient
There is a main resource in central hospital databases
which is consisted of any necessary information about
maladies, their drug’s side effects, statistical information,
etc. It will be easier for the agents to access the information
and compare them with the decision made by e-health team;
even in case of any collision or mistake, the system would
alert and make the team aware.
A patient who decides to join electronic healthcare
clinics will be continuously inspected by a virtual team.
Each user is represented by a mobile agent, thus the virtual
medical team is always available. Virtual team may consist
of doctors, nurses, practitioners and any department (e.g.,
laboratory, radiography, etc.) being able to make a
connection locally or globally (depending on their authority
and their connectivity).
In fact, there is a dynamic virtual team which has been
formed to response needs of any particular patient in any
point of time. The patient will be assigned to the appropriate
medical team by its Profile Agent. The Profile Agent
representing the description of a patient, his situation and
his health signs, will be sent manually or automatically to
the healthcare clinic. At the clinic side, there must be a team
or a doctor to advise the patient according to the received
condition. Once the Profile Agent is received by clinic, the
clinic agency verifies the authenticity of the received data to
detect which parts are new or maybe changed. Thus it is
able to update the information and dispatch necessary parts
to the virtual team members. This procedure is shown in the
Fig. 1.
8
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

Figure 1. The patient’s communication to the Clinic, its virtual team, and
related department like laboratory, radiography, etc.
In this case, different conditions will be supposed
depending on the structure of the clinic and their Network
Structure. For example, the sub-sections of the clinic
including laboratory, radiography, etc. are connected to the
same authority (their connection are locally authorized) or
maybe it is needed to connect other clinics with help of a
broker to connect the entity A (from one clinic) to the entity
B (another clinic).
The system is able to bring the team members together
even if they are separate of each other. As mentioned
earlier, some agents are defined to do system’s tasks. Some
of them are intelligent and able to analyze and verify the
patient’s information or team advices (As it has been
mentioned in Table I).
Agents learn how to simplify choices according to pre-
defined data rules and user-based information [5]. As a
matter of fact, the rate of human errors in this area is not
negligible; for instance in order to be sure of drugs
consumption or their side effects, the patient can send an
Agent to receive additional information on that special case.
In fact, the patient does not know how it works. The only
thing that the patient deals with is the interface and the
result. This scenario promotes the use of mobile agent in
order to decrease network usage.
This system could be used for different reasons
including long-term care, homecare, clinical search studies
and public health reporting [6].
III.
LAYERED-BASED MODELING
In this paper, 3 layers are defined interacting with each
other: the patient layer, the clinic layer and the central
hospital layer. These layers are hierarchically and
horizontally connected together. This relationship between
layers is defined in order to establish more accuracy of
treatment recognition, quick patients' treatment, and malady
recognition, and also to facilitate the relationship between
different parts of e-health procedure. As a scenario, both
connections may be verified in details. If a patient is under
cares of e-health, the doctor will visit the patient and it can
be called a hierarchical connection. The receptor fills
referral form and then sends it to the clinic’s database (DB)
and the latter will organize a new record for the patient. This
is the beginning point of the patient - healthcare clinic
interactions. After that, depending on patient's situation, an
appropriate e-health team will be organized. At the same
time, 
a 
horizontal 
connection 
between 
clinics 
or
departments can be set in order to allocate the e-health team
for the patient. A horizontal connection shows the same
range of information interaction which is accessible for
whole e-health team. Patient's information for each part of
the virtual team appears in a specified interface. According
to the responsibilities assigned to each section, some
information or prescriptions are added to DB and they are
shared with other parts to be more observed. Horizontal
connection plays an important role for e-health team. Quick
access, easy connection and quick changes of information
by e-health team is the major role of a horizontal connection
and it can lead e-health team to have a personalized
application because in spite of being strongly related to the
structure, it does not have any relation to the interface.
The access of each part of e-health team to the patient's
information does not have any overlapping and each part
can add its information when it is allowed to do.
A specific software is embedded on both sides (patients
and e-health team) with two different interfaces. On the
patient side, the patient or some tool such as an electronic
health device or a portable device being able to interact with
the patient’s PC can be applied to control and measure some
health parameters. The embedded software can analyze the
data prepared at patient side and then the result will be sent
as a Profile Agent which transmits health parameters of the
patient to the clinic.
The interaction between client and server with different
interfaces, 
program 
languages, 
hardware 
platforms,
Operating Systems, location, etc. poses a great concern that
how we can encounter with all of these parameters in the
server side. A programming model acting as a middleware
between clients and servers is needed. Object Request
Broker (ORB) is a middleware from which a client can
request a service without knowing anything about the
servers which are present on the network. ORB provides the
participating system with a consistent interface by wrapping
each software entity in the framework in order to enable
them to collaborate [7]. Various ORBs receive the requests,
forward them to the appropriate servers, and then give the
results back to the client. The structure of the ORB as well
as the relationships of the system is shown in Fig. 2.
Interoperability means the ability of diverse systems to
work together accurately. They must be able to exchange
data and information in an effective, accurate and
continuous way. Core problems with which e-health system
faces are lack of interoperability, common standards and
common architecture for their health information exchange.
9
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

Figure 2. Role of ORB and structure of whole system
Since public health agencies rely on multiple systems,
it is a hard task to provide a common framework for all
relevant parties. Moreover, a middleware is required to
connect different sides in order to omit dependency on
various 
applications 
and 
different 
architectures 
of
information exchange.
Although 
common 
standards 
such 
as 
Logical
Observation Identifiers Names and Codes (LOINC), Health
Level Seven International (HL7) have been recognized as
long term important factors, at present time it is unknown
how 
they 
shall 
be 
implemented. 
Moreover, 
their
implementation needs huge amount of funding. So beside of
this action, this paper suggests a middleware called ORB in
order to establish a connection between client side, server
side, and other different sections in different levels of
authorities across healthcare monitoring team, departments,
knowledge-based resources, etc.
Up to now, the system has established a hierarchical
connection from the patient side (client side) to the
healthcare team (server side). Diagnostic team sends some
request to the main resources of the central hospital in order
to obtain information from the knowledge-based data server.
The analyze agent is responsible to obtain necessary
information and convert it into appropriate knowledge-
based information all are to be transferred by the ORB.
Sometimes the doctor wants to know the patient’s health
information, so the system creates an Agent to retrieve the
appropriate information from different parts such as
radiology or laboratories; therefore, the doctor will not
conflict with these complexities of the system and its
procedures. There are other facilities on this system that
allow the patients to communicate directly with each other.
In fact the system can find some patients which are engaged
in the same diseases. This can be a mental help for the
patients and their relatives.
A) Patients
The patient or the electronic health care tools import
data on the patient side interface and submit it by producing
an agent containing the data and its respective function to
have more interaction with the clinic. In the next step, this
data is sent to the ORB. The ORB recognizes the agent type
and invokes the appropriate function to save the data in the
related clinic’s DB. The data is detected by practitioners or
medical teams on their screen and they diagnose the
patient’s status. If they want to prescribe the patient, the
system will make an Advice Agent which will be sent to the
patient’s PC.
The patient’s PC generates different agents to perform
the tasks, like Profile Agent as described above or Query
Agent that the patient uses it to access the medical
information collected by Analyzer Agent. To make sure of
the medical process and getting some reports, the system
needs to make Query Agent and make use of pre-defined
knowledge to analyze and send back the result.
The Analyzer Agent can update its information using
basic information, the result of a patient’s care, advices of
doctors or some new information which has been added to
the knowledge-based resources.
B) Healthcare Clinic
Once a patient connects to the e-health system, he/she
will be assigned to appropriate departments and be advised
by a virtual team. The virtual team may need to work
separately instead of being together in a place.
The Profile Agent consists of different parts which
must be divided in order to be analyzed in different
departments and to be observed by a virtual team. The
dispatcher is responsible to check Profile Agent and
distinguish each section. As the virtual team and
departments are not necessarily in the same place, the
dispatcher must use two different connections to transfer
appropriate data to appropriate department, local connection
and global connection. Global connection refers to a
connection established with the help of the ORB, while
local connection does not need the ORB for applying the
connection.
Clinics can use the other clinics’ information via the
ORB. For the sake of security and safety, there should be
some different accessibility for the personnel who want to
achieve this information. In this procedure, the clinic will
introduce itself to the ORB and also define its role. The
ORB will verify the Agent received from the first clinic and
also define the accessibility of the request depending on its
role. Then it will negotiate with the second clinic to verify
the permission of accessibility. If the second clinic confirms
the accessibility, appropriate information will be sent back
to the first one through Query Agent.
10
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

Figure 3. Role of Query Agent and Analyzer Agent to analyze the
information received from Clinics.
C) Central
In a periodic sequence, central hospital makes a Query
Agent to retrieve information of clinics’ DBs. The central
hospital can analyze this data and convert it into statistical
information usable by research teams; for example, medical
diagnoses, procedures, allergy information, medication,
patient histories, eligibility data, and so on.
The central will analyze the patient’s data and the
clinic’s one; the final output is statistical information. This
knowledge-based information is useful for the clinics and
research teams. Analyzing the patient status, based on the
illness, amount of drugs’ consumption, age, data gained
from some tools or patients itself, etc. will be useful for the
healthcare clinics to achieve some new medicine research
and also to provide better patients’ care.
It is necessary for the system to know which user is on-
line or off-line and where they are. The central also analyzes
and monitors the queries and the functions which are being
interacted among the users and the healthcare clinics
through the ORB. A global observation mechanism is
needed to monitor and analyze the status of these entities
[7].
Fig. 4 explains the functionality of the Query Agent
and the Analyzer Agent in pseudo codes. In fact the role of
Query Agent and Analyzer Agent will be detected according
to their interoperability and their functionality.
The Query function can be divided into different Query
functions. It means that a query may want to retrieve
information from many resources or make another query
from another resource by receiving especial information.
The whole information will save in Result. After that the
Analyzer Agent processes the data which has been received
by many resources. In fact it will compare the information
with the knowledge of the main resource, and it can report
the appropriate information to the requester.
Figure 4. Pseudo code of the Query Agent and the Analyzer Agent
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This paper introduced a framework for an e-health
system to facilitate health care processes. A layered-based
system and ORB are used to reduce the workload and the
complexity of the connection among different interfaces.
Mobile Agent is used for distribution of processing, support
for a more flexible peer-to-peer model, scalability and
decentralization of control. Generally speaking, there are
some specific applications which run on this platform:

Health records

Telemedicine

Tele monitoring

Agent-based transition of data

Decision support

User identification

Information accessibility in mobile state
Moreover, a common set of rules and standards should
be established for information exchange, interoperability
and making sure of data quality which could be a part of our
anticipated research. Our future work will focus on
analyzing the protocols between layers, adding some
intelligent agents to facilitate some tasks and more about the
security of agent implementation.
QueryAgent()
{
make child Query (variable type, query type); /* “variable type” is the
type of some information parameters required to obtain the appropriate
information for example what are the causes of the X disease.*/
Result=Query (variable type, query type); /* Result of the query
according to its purpose is reserved in “Result” */
if (Analyzer==true) {
Result=AnalyzerAgent(Result); /* the Query Agent can invoke the
Analyzer Agent – the Analyzer Agent can analyze the information which
has been taken by the Query Agent from different part such as
laboratory, patients, doctors, etc. */
Return Result;
}
}
AnalyzerAgent()
{
Info=Obtain (variable type); /* “variable type” is the type of some
information parameters required to obtain the appropriate information.*/
Check if (variable type is reported before) {
Info=Obtain (title); /* the necessary title which are more related
according to their subject and titles */
}
Result=Compare (Info with pre-defined knowledge); /* the obtained
information with pre-defined knowledge and make some statistical
report in a file */
Save (variable type);
Save (Result);
Return Result;
Pre-defined knowledge:
According to the variable type, will detect some necessary information
around the title of the query and some related titles (it can make use of
previous queries which were used before and will compare all of them)
}
11
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

REFERENCES
[1] M. Eichelberg, T. Aden, and J. O. Riesmeier “The Promise of
e-Health-a Canadian Perspective”, e-Health Int, 17(1), Sept 2002.
pp. 1-47.
[2] V. Shankaraman, V. Amorosiadou, and B. Robinson, “Agents
in Medical Informatics”, in Proc. Of IASTED International
Conference on Applied Informatics, Austria, 2000. pp. 489-493.
[3] A. Moreno, A. Valls, and J. Bocio, “Management of Hospital
Teams for Organ Transplants Using Multi-Agent Systems”,
Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Springer Verlag, pp. 413-416, 2001.
[4] D. Xu, J. Yin, Y. Deng, and J. Ding “A Formal Architectural
Model for Logical Agent Mobility” IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering, Vol. 29, No. 1, January 2003, pp. 31 – 45.
[5] I. Jung, D. Thapa, and G. Wang. “Intelligent Agent-Based
Graphic User Interface (GUI) for e-Physician”. World Academy of
Science, Engineering and Technology 36, 2007, pp. 442-749.
[6] A. Pitsillides, G. Samaras, B. Pitsillides, D. Deorgiades, P.
Andreou, and E. Christodoulou. “Virtual Collaborative Teams for
Home Healthcare”. Journal of Mobile Multimedia, Vol. 2, No.1
(2006) 023-036, pp. 23 – 36.
[7] K.-M. Chao, R. Anane, J. Plumley, N. Godwin1, and R.N.G.
Naguib “A Mobile Agent Framework for
Telecardiology”,
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2001. Proceedings
of the 23rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Volume
4, Issue, 2001, pp. 3484 – 3487, vol.4
[8] F. Cao, N. Archer, and S. Poehlman, “An Agent-based
Knowledge Management Framework for Electronic Health Record
Interoperability”.
Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web
Intelligence, Vol 1, No 2 (2009), 119-128, Nov 2009, pp. 119-128.
[9] A.M. Masaud-Wahaishi and H. Ghenniwa. “Privacy-Based
Information Brokering for Cooperative Distributed e-Health
Systems”.  Journal of Emerging Technologies in Web Intelligence,
Vol 1, No 2 (2009), pp. 161-171, Nov 2009.
[10] O. Ajayi, R.O. Sinnott, and A.Stell, (2008) “Dynamic Trust
Negotiation for Flexible e-Health Collaborations”. In: Mardi Gras
Conference 2008, 30 January - 2 February 2008, Baton Rouge,
USA. pp. 165 – 172, Doi: 10.1145/1341811.1341821.
[11] O.B. Henkemans, S. Bonacina, N. Cappiello, Ch. van der
Mast, M. Neerincx, and F. Pinciroli. “A Hybrid Multi-Agent
System Architecture for Distributed Supervision of Chronic
Patients in the e-Health Setting”. Euromedia 2007, pp. 119-
127, ISBN Number, 9789077381328.
12
ICAS 2011 : The Seventh International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-134-2

