Moderate Loads Handling & Transportation by COBOTs and AMRs: Discussion of 
Different Architectures to Increase Payload & Reach and to Improve Operators 
Ergonomics 
Abdellatif Bey Temsamani1, Luka Ramaekers 
Flanders Make 
Lommel, Belgium  
email1: abdellatif.bey-temsamani@flandersmake.be 
Wilm Decré2, Erwin Aertbelien, Frederico Ulloa Rios 
KU Leuven 
Leuven, Belgium  
email2: wilm.decre@kuleuven.be 
Raphael Furnemont3
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (VUB) 
Brussels, Belgium  
email3: raphael.furnemont@vub.be 
Karel Vander Elst4, Jonas Vantilt, Joris De Schutter 
Flexible Robotic Solutions (FRS) 
Leuven, Belgium 
email4: karel.vanderelst@frsrobotics.com 
Abstract — Collaborative robots (cobot) open up many 
opportunities for industrial automation where interactions 
with Operators are required. These machines focus more on 
repetitive tasks, such as picking, to help workers focusing more 
on tasks that require problem-solving skills. Parts handling & 
manipulation, in production floor, logistics centers, etc. often 
require the combination of these two skills. In this paper, we 
present different architectures where cobots can cooperate 
with Operators to handle & manipulate moderate loads 
between 10kg-60kg and where the manipulation reach is 
further than 2 meters. Performing these loads repetitively only 
by Operators are the leading causes of injury and 
musculoskeletal disorders in production workplaces. The 
paper describes innovative methods for Operators-cobots 
interactions that require the minimal efforts for the Operator 
to successfully perform a load handling & manipulation task 
and leading to improved ergonomics in a workplace. 
Keywords – Cobots, Operator’s ergonomics, load handling & 
manipulation, Gravity compensation, AMRs 
I. INTRODUCTION
Collaborative robots, or cobots, can improve the working 
conditions of humans by decreasing the workload of human 
workers and by reducing the risk of workplace injuries such 
as Musculoskeletal Disorders (MSDs) [1]. Unlike the 
current traditional industrial robots, cobots are designed to 
provide more flexibility on the work floor and work safely 
alongside humans. In the human-robot collaboration 
paradigm, repetitive and precise tasks can be shifted to the 
robot while tasks that require more dexterity or problem 
solving ability can be assigned to the human [2]. An 
application where collaborative robots are useful, is the 
assembly task and more specifically the assembly of small 
batch size products with high variability. Currently available 
collaborative systems can be roughly categorized in two 
groups. The first group consists of light and compact cobots 
with a limited payload and reach, for example the UR3-5-
10, KUKA LBR iiwa, ABB YuMi, Rethink Robotics 
Baxter/Sawyer, while the second group is formed by heavy 
and bulky devices with moderate payload and reach, like the 
Fanuc CR-35iA and Comau Aura. In between these two 
groups, there is a gap in the current commercial offers, for 
payloads ranging between 10 kg and 60 kg, and a large 
reach (> 2 meters) while retaining a compact solution. 
Market studies indeed confirm the largest growth potential 
for collaborative payloads to lie in the > 10kg payload 
range. 
In a recent project [3], a research team represented by the 
authors of this paper, explored different innovative 
architectures to extend cobots payloads and spatial reach, 
while keeping a compact solution in an industrial floor. This 
paper summarizes these architectures, their implementations 
and achieved results.  
The innovative contribution of this paper relies on 
extending a standard cobot’ s payload and spatial reach by 
presenting different architectures to augment the cobots, 
both hardware and software wise, to make them compatible 
for moderate loads handling applications where operators 
stay strongly in the loop. A decision tree is also elaborated 
to facilitate the selection of one or a combination of 
architectures for a custom handling application with specific 
technical and safety requirements.  
In Section II, studied architectures to increase cobots 
payload are described. In Section III, studied architectures 
to increase cobots spatial reach are summarized. Section IV 
discusses the experimental validation and achieved results. 
In Section V, a Decision Tree to facilitate the choice of one 
or combined architectures for moderate loads handling 
problems is presented and discussed. Conclusions are made 
in Section VI. 
II. COBOTS ARCHITECTURES FOR INCREASED PAYLOADS 
In this section, two architectures to increase cobot’ s 
payloads beyond the specified payload of the cobot are 
discussed. Both architectures allow to augment the cobot 
with an extra system that shares the payload handling 
together with the cobot. 
A.
Increased COBOT payload by gravity 
compensation  
In order to increase the payload of a cobot without 
changing its design, one solution consists of assisting the 
cobot with an additional structure that will handle most of 
the static torque due to the payload. A popular trend in 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

robotics are gravity compensators which are either passive 
[4] or active [5]. These mechanisms can be placed directly 
on the joint and compensate for a payload (generally fixed if 
passive and variable if active). When placed on a joint 
directly, they have a torque-angle characteristic only 
function of the joint angle which is their main weakness as 
only few robot configurations (especially for robots with 
several degrees of freedom) have a static torque only 
dependent on one joint angle. More complex compensators 
can be used but they will generally require a change in the 
structure of the robot and are thus not discussed. Another 
option, close to what is already done for human Operators, 
is to combine a lifting platform with a cobot such as jib 
crane or a hoist. This interestingly creates a parallel 
structure (and not an open chain anymore) with a part of the 
system which can be fully actuated or under-actuated (jib 
crane) and another part actuated or even over-actuated 
(when 7 degrees of freedom are present in the cobot). Most 
of the work-space of the cobot is still available by using 
these platforms although this can cause a reduction of the 
number of degrees of freedom at the end-effector. A 
commercial solution based on this idea (CobotLift) already 
exists and increases the payload from 16kg (of a UR-16 
cobot) to 30kg. The lifting system is a pneumatic one that 
has limitations in terms of kinematics. The first concept in 
our research proposes a passive lifting platforms using 
gravity compensators with improved kinematics [6]. A 
conceptual sketch of the combination of the proposed 
gravity compensation system and a cobot to increase the 
payload is show in Figure 1.  
This compensation system acts as an advanced cantilever 
that compensates for the excessive weight above the cobot 
payload. 
Figure 1. Sketch illustrating the proposed gravity compensation 
system to increase cobot payload 
B.
Increased COBOT payload by industrial hoist 
The second concept of our research consists of combining 
the cobot with an industrial passive hoist system. The load 
is fully handled by the hoist while the cobot / robot acts as a 
guiding system. A conceptual sketch is illustrated in Figure 
2. While the hoist compensates gravity, a robot with reduced 
payload guides a heavy load to a precise target position and 
orientation, for example during a transfer motion or an 
assembly process. A gantry supports the hoist, providing 
one or two degrees of freedom that are either passive or 
actuated. The robot could be replaced by a cobot. For 
extending its reach, the robot could be placed on a mobile 
platform (see Section III).  
Different levels of integration between the motion 
controllers of the subsystems (gantry, hoist, robot, platform) 
are possible, resulting in different implementations for the 
overall task controller. A major concern is to protect the 
robot end effector against the occurrence of high forces due 
to modelling errors or disturbances (e.g., due to 
synchronization errors) in the overall motion control system. 
To this end, the robot end effector (red box in Figure 2) 
includes, besides a gripper, a 6D force/torque sensor and a 
6D passive compliance. 
III.COBOTS ARCHITECTURES FOR EXTENDED REACH
In this section, two architectures to increase cobot’ s 
reach are discussed. Both architectures are based on setting 
cobots in a wheeled unit that allows unlimited reach. 
A.
Extended Cobot Reach by instructable AMR  
Autonomous Mobile Robots (AMRs) enable flexible and 
changeable small series production where 87% of the 
production time is going in transporting parts and 
components [7]. For parts transportation and handling in 
production floor, AMRs enable automation of these tasks, as 
they benefit of both, a flexible moving platform to 
automatically move, and a flexible manipulator, typically 
through a high degree of freedom cobot.  
While in theory, the autonomous mobile system of the 
AMR would allow an unlimited reach of the manipulator 
system, synchronizing these two high-tech systems to deal 
with complex handling of various tasks, parts & 
environments, as well as having intuitive interactions with 
Operators remain a challenge in practice. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 2. Schematic layout of robot-hoist co-manipulation
Our research platform consist of configuring a standard 
AMR by controlling individually or in synchro different 
parts of the AMR (i.e., manipulator / mobile platform) to 
physical support Operators, such that the AMR performs 
basic manipulation tasks (e.g., actively handling a part) 
while the Operators concentrate into precise actions (e.g., 
screwing parts to each other’s). The first concept (Figure 3 - 
Left)  
consists of configuring an AMR to act as a 3rd hand 
supporting Operators to assemble parts (±10kg) in difficult 
poses. While the second concept (Figure 3 - Right) consists 
of configuring an AMR as a ‘joystick’ allowing Operators 
to organically interact with the full system in order to 
transport parts with moderate loads (±20kg) in an extended 
reach within a production environment.  
Figure 3. (Left) AMR configuration as a 3rd hand to support Operators, (Right) AMR configuration as a ‘joystick’ for part’s transportation 
and handling with extended reach 
The first case challenge consists of programing the 
manipulator to achieve difficult reach while smoothly 
collaborating with Operators, while the second case 
challenge deals with accurate control to synchronize 
between the manipulator & the mobile platform while 
interacting with Operators. 
B.
Extended Cobot Reach by Double Controlled AMR 
Commercial AMRs (like the ones proposed in Section 
III.A) are provided with integrated mobile platform and 
manipulator and all safety around them. However, an AMR 
can also be achieved by combining a standard robot 
manipulator with a Wheeled Mobile Manipulator (WMM), 
designed from existing motorized wheels. On one hand, 
these WMM systems should be able to handle high 
payloads. On the other hand, they need to be able to move in 
a workspace only constrained by the environment. In case of 
shared control with a human Operator in order to carry 
heavy loads, this also requires that the platform can 
instantaneously move in all directions ("holonomic") and 
that the platform is able to quickly react to inputs of the 
human while jointly carrying a load. A typical solution is to 
use a highly powered, precise, holonomic platform, e.g., 
equipped with Mecanum wheels [8],[9]. These are however 
expensive, costly to maintain, and still limited with respect 
to the load they can carry. To avoid wheel slip, they also 
impose significant requirements on the floor on which the 
robot travels. Below, we present a control architecture that 
lessens the requirements imposed on the mobile platform 
such that a lower-dynamic platform with steered wheels can 
be used and wheel-slip can be tolerated, as long as an 
accurate pose estimate of the platform is available, even in 
cases where the platform needs to carry a heavy load. A 
control framework is proposed [10] that exploits the 
difference in the dynamics between the mobile platform and 
the robot manipulator in order to improve the accuracy and 
the bandwidth of the whole WMM. This framework uses 
two velocity-resolved constraint-based controllers using 
eTaSL [11], as shown in  
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 4.  
Both controllers use the same kinematic model of 
platform and manipulator and the same model of the human-
robot interaction for jointly carrying load. The first 
controller ('platform eTaSL') however can only adapt the 
platform control input, i.e., desired velocity set-points for 
the mobile platform. It is not assumed that the mobile 
platform can execute these desired velocity set-points 
perfectly. It is however assumed that we can obtain a good 
estimate of the mobile platform pose and velocity via 
proprioceptive or exteroceptive sensors. The second 
controller ('arm eTaSL') determines the control input for all 
of the degrees of freedom of the manipulator, taking into 
account the measured mobile platform pose and velocity. 
The above results in a control architecture with two 
constrained-based controllers, one for the platform, one for 
the manipulator, where both controllers use the complete 
model of the robot system and task. For example, the 
platform eTaSL controller will also anticipate joint limits of 
the manipulator degrees of freedom by avoiding to move the 
platform in directions that will necessitate violating these 
limits. The manipulator controller will use its knowledge of 
the platform motion to compensate the errors of the platform 
eTaSL controller. Compared to a single constraint-based 
controller, this approach does not require additional 
modeling effort for the application developer since the same 
robot and task model is used for both controller. 
Figure 4. Control architecture for Wheeled Mobile Manipulator 
IV.VALIDATION CASES AND ACHIEVED RESULTS
In this section, validation cases of all 4 architectures 
described in Section II & Section III are presented. 
A. Gravity Compensation increases Cobot payload by x2 
for light loads (<8kg) 
The 
architecture 
presented 
in 
Section 
II.A, 
is 
implemented in Kuka Franka Emika Panda (payload 3kg). 
Using a jib crane, on which our gravity compensator is 
placed (Figure 5), the payload has been increased to 5,8kg. 
In this scenario, the gravity compensator can statically 
balance payloads between 0.8kg and 8.7kg over a stroke of 
800mm which allows covering a large amount of the 
workspace of the cobot. Although the compensator can 
statically balance 8.7kg, due to internal friction, this is 
limited to 3kg dynamically as shown in Figure 6. This 
limitation is discussed in details in [6] and can be improved 
in future designs. By changing the level of compensation, 
the payload felt by the cobot can be kept minimal 
potentially allowing lower energy consumption for the 
cobot. 
Scaling up the presented concept to deal with higher 
loads 
would 
require 
the 
redesign 
of 
the 
gravity 
compensators 
and 
use 
of 
more 
powerful 
motion 
components. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 5. Jib crane with a gravity compensator (left – red dash line) coupled to a Franka Emika Panda Cobot (right). The payload of the 
cobot is initially 3kg (the gripper weighting already 0,8kg) and the manipulated load (black cylinder – green dash line) weighs 5kg 
B.
Industrial hoist + robot increases payload by x2 
for moderate loads (>15kg) 
The architecture discussed in Section II.B is implemented 
for heavy spools handling. As illustrated in Figure 2, the set-
up includes a world reference frame XYZ and a robot end 
effector frame xyz. The robot is a 6 degrees-of-freedom 
(dof) KUKA KR16, with a payload of 16kg. The hoist is 
custom-made with one passive dof (along Y). The robot is 
equipped with an ATI/Schunk FTN-GAMMA force/torque 
sensor, a custom-made 6D passive compliance and a 
custom-made magnetic gripper which provided extra safety 
for the experiments (Figure 7). Both robot and hoist 
controllers are interfaced to a control pc on which the task 
controller is implemented in the eTaSL software framework 
for task specification and control of sensor-based robot tasks 
[11]. The interface to the robot reads its joint positions and 
sends desired joint velocities at 250 Hz with negligible 
delay. The interface to the hoist can only send on/off 
commands for up/down motions to the hoist controller. 
Hence, controlling the hoist from the pc is completely open 
loop. Moreover, the executed motion of the hoist is not 
completely deterministic, showing varying velocities and a 
considerable time delay which is also variable (~80ms). The 
poor-quality 
hoist 
interface 
and 
the 
high 
acceleration/deceleration of the hoist (up to 2.5 m/s2) 
necessitated the use of the passive compliance in the 
gripper. We investigated three separate scenarios as reported 
below. 
Figure 6. balanced weights versus gear ratio of the researched 
gravity compensation system 
a) Changing height of payload (Z)
The main challenge for joint robot/hoist motion in the 
vertical direction was the synchronization between both 
motions. Our approach consisted of: 1) experimentally 
identifying the motion profile of the hoist and the 
variation of its time delay, and 2) controlling the end 
effector forces and torques to zero, while feeding 
forward the expected vertical hoist velocity profile to the 
robot. The measured vertical force for a payload of 11 kg 
and a change in height of 150 mm remains limited, both 
in executions where the open loop synchronization 
worked well (< 1N) or not (< 4N). 
b) Fast transfer motion along passive dof of hoist (Y)
The main challenges were: 1) applying a suitably smooth 
motion profile for the payload to avoid oscillatory 
behavior (due to the dynamics of the passive hoist trolley 
subjected to a varying horizontal component of the cable 
force), and 2) avoiding large moments acting on the 
robot end effector. Accordingly, our approach consisted 
of: 1) applying a desired motion profile in translation 
that was continuous up to and including the derivative of 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

acceleration, and 2) adding a desired orientation profile 
of the end effector about its y (i.e., nearly vertical) axis 
to bring the main direction of the end effector (z) more 
in line with the acceleration/deceleration force (in the 
world’s 
Y-direction.
Figure 7. (Left) Experimental set-up with annotated components, (Right) QR code of a video with the realizations 
This was inspired by how humans would ‘pull’ the 
payload while limiting the moment applied to their arm. 
The orientation profile was made proportional to the 
desired payload acceleration. The scaling factor 
determines the amplitude of the rotation. In the 
experiments we started and ended the trajectory with the 
end effector oriented perpendicularly to the translation 
direction Y, and allowed a rotation amplitude of Θ=30° 
during the motion, which reduced the moment by a 
factor (1-cosΘ), hence by 13%. The traveled distance 
was 1.5 m in 10 seconds, resulting in a peak acceleration 
of 0.11 m/s2. We used payloads up to 25kg, producing 
acceleration forces up to 28N for the payload only, but 
the moment on the end effector remained limited (< 2.1 
Nm) thanks to this approach. No significant oscillatory 
behavior was observed. 
c) Force-controlled placement into a container 
This scenario assumes the payload has been transferred 
along Y and lowered to a ‘sub-target’ position that 
represents an appropriate approach position for the final 
placement (below gantry) in a ‘target’ position (not 
below gantry) that is subject to uncertainty (Figure 2). 
This final placement consists of two force-controlled 
motions (in X- and Y-directions, respectively) towards a 
wall of the container, followed by a brief activation of  
the hoist to deposit the payload while staying in contact 
with the two walls. This scenario did not pose any 
further challenge.
To summarize, even though this case considered a simple 
set-up (passive DOFs of the hoist, poor-quality interface of 
the hoist controller with the overall task controller), it was 
shown that a robot, in combination with a hoist, was able to 
manipulate a payload that exceeded its own capacity in 
industrially relevant scenarios. 
C.
Instructable AMR allows an easy to operate mobile 
3rd hand for Operators 
The architecture described in Section III.A., allows a 
modular configuration of a standard AMR to an organic 
mobile 3rd hand for Operators in assembly stations. The 
realizations of the two concepts described above are 
illustrated in Figure 8. Both realizations have been achieved 
by the following main steps, (i) programing the AMR in a 
compliance mode for a smooth collaboration with Operators 
(ii) modular configuration using pre-programmed modules 
for basic tasks (e.g., parts pick-up & drop-off) and 
programming new modules to make the process as intuitive 
as possible (e.g., automated gripping, active load 
estimation), (iii) easy interactions and instructions with / by 
Operators such as using interactive HMI (e.g., tablet) or 
hands-free control through natural speech interaction. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 8. (Left) AMR in a 3rd hand configuration, (Middle) AMR in Joystick configuration,  
(Right) QR code of a video with the 2 realizations 
D.
Independent wheels control for illimited reach for 
heavy payloads 
A mobile platform capable of carrying heavy payloads 
was designed using four wheel units. Two wheel units 
manufactured by KELO [12] were differentially actuated 
and two wheel units were passive caster wheels (cf. Figure 
9-a). Each KELO unit has a payload of 125kg, which 
translates to a mobile platform evenly distributed payload of 
500kg. 
Although 
this 
kinematic 
configuration 
is 
theoretically holonomic, significantly high wheel velocities 
can be necessary to move in directions perpendicular to the 
wheel axes of the drive units. These higher velocities can 
exceed actuator capability and can cause wheel slip, 
especially on uneven or dirty floors. 
The architecture explained in section III.B can overcome 
the disadvantages of this kinematic design while at the same 
time being less expensive than e.g., Mecanum wheels and 
can handle uneven or dirty floors. To demonstrate this using 
an application where a load is shared between a wheeled 
mobile manipulator and a human Operator, a small Franka 
Panda 7-dof manipulator was mounted on top of this 
platform and two experimental cases were executed with 
good performance: one involving a pure positioning task 
and another involving a human-robot interaction on task. 
Figure 9-b shows the results a motion of the platform 
where a significant disturbance occurs due to wheel 
reversal. It can be seen that the accuracy of the proposed 
dual controller architecture is significantly improved 
compared to a single constrained-based controller (85% in 
the motion direction and 57% in the other direction). 
In a second case, an insertion under shared human-robot 
interaction 
has 
been 
performed 
(Figure 
9-c) 
with 
significantly reduced interaction forces due to the imperfect 
motion of the mobile platform. Compared to a single 
constraint-based controller, the interaction forces in the 
vertical direction where dominated by the insertion forces 
and remained approximately the same, while there was a 
reduction of disturbance force of 50% in the motion 
direction and 25% in the direction perpendicular to the 
motion. 
Figure 9. a) Wheeled Mobile Manipulator (WMM) set-up, b) Results for null space motion, c) Human robot interaction task.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

V.DECISION TREE FOR COBOT BASED HANDLING 
ARCHITECTURE
Depending on the handling application, a specific cobot-
based architecture can be chosen. A decision tree to 
facilitate this choice is illustrated in Figure 10.  
The decisions are made based on 3 main criteria: (i) the 
spatial distance where the load to be handled should travel 
versus the spatial reach of the cobot, (ii) the weight of the 
load to be handled versus the cobot maximum payload, (iii) 
the level of interactions with the Operators. 
If the spatial traveling distance (reach) is below 2m 
(standard cobot reach), a standard cobot can be used if the 
weight of the part to be handled is lower than the cobot 
payload. Otherwise, gravity compensation architectures 
(section IIA / IIB) can be used to augment the cobot 
payload. Selection between architecture (IIA) or (IIB) can 
be made based on the number of degree of freedoms needed 
during the handling of the load versus the design budget / 
maturity of the solution. Architecture presented in Section 
IIA can offer high degree of freedoms but requires more 
design efforts and dimensioning of the system for moderate 
loads. While the architecture presented in Section IIB offers 
a high industrial maturity but with limited degrees of 
freedom to handle the parts. 
If the spatial reach is higher than the standard cobots 
reach, a motion system will be needed to extend the reach. 
Standard AMRs can offer a direct solution if one looks for a 
plug & play solution without changing system’s control and 
where enough budget is available (typically > 50k€).  
If more flexibility is needed with regards the motion 
control of a cobot system, the architecture in Section IIIB 
presents a good decision. The mobile system can be 
configured and controlled in a custom way, with yet cost-
effective components. 
If more flexibility is needed for interacting with Operators, 
the architecture presented in Section IIIA presents 
innovative techniques to interact with a mobile cobot in 
terms of organic control and intuitive interaction. 
Finally, the presented architectures can be combined to 
generate advanced custom handling systems driven by 
specific technical requirements, as well as by safety 
requirements with Operators in the loop. 
VI.CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we presented different architectures where 
cobots can cooperate with Operators to handle & manipulate 
moderate loads between 10kg-60kg and where the 
manipulation reach is further than 2 meters.  
We explored different configurations that can be scaled-up 
for industrial usage starting from standard robots, cobots 
and mobile platforms. A summary of these configurations & 
how to select relevant one is given in the decision tree in 
Figure 10. 
The paper describes different configurations illustrating 
how to make a standard Cobot and / or an AMR, flexible & 
smart handling systems that provide systematic and relevant 
assistance to Operators. Depending on the load to handle, 
the desired reach and the level of interactions with 
Operators, one single configuration or a combination of 
different configurations would be needed. 
Future research will tackle limitations of current concepts 
and implementations to make them more suitable for large 
variety of loads & reaches, more modular in their control 
architectures to facilitate more interactions between multi-
agents (cobot, mobile platform, Operator, etc.), as well as to 
make them more robust to deal with complex assembly 
parts, tasks and missions.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This research is supported by Flanders Make, the 
strategic research Centre for the Manufacturing Industry and 
the Flemish Innovation and Entrepreneurship Agency 
through the research project 'SMARTHANDLER_ICON’ 
(project number: HBC.2018.0251). The authors would like 
to thank all project’s partners for their inputs and support to 
make this publication. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

Figure 10. decision tree summarizing selection of relevant configuration for handling industrial parts based on desired load (weight), reach 
and interaction with Operator’s 
REFERENCES
[1] A. Own-Hill, Robots can help reduce 35% of work days lost to 
injury, blog.robotiq.com, May 26, 2016. 
[2] Bauer, Andrea Maria et al. “Human-Robot Collaboration: a 
Survey.” Int. J. Humanoid Robotics 5 (2008): 47-66. 
[3] Flanders Make industrial research project: Smart Handing of 
Moderate 
Loads, 
SmartHandler 
ICON, 
VLAIO 
number: 
HBC.2018.0251, 2019-2022. 
[4] Lee, Giuk, Donggun Lee, and Yonghwan Oh. "One-piece 
gravity compensation mechanism using cam mechanism and 
compression 
spring." 
International 
Journal 
of 
Precision 
Engineering and Manufacturing-Green Technology 5.3 (2018): 
415-420. 
[5] Kim, Jehyeok, et al. "Compact variable gravity compensation 
mechanism with a geometrically optimized lever for maximizing 
variable ratio of torque generation." IEEE/ASME Transactions on 
Mechatronics 25.4 (2020): 2019-2026. 
[6] Furnémont, Raphaël, et al. "Prismatic gravity compensator for 
variable payloads." IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 7.2 
(2022): 3749-3756. 
[7] Emmi Rajala, Autonomous Mobile Robots in small batch size 
production, Master of Science Thesis Faculty of Engineering and 
Natural Sciences Examiners: Professor Minna Lanz, Dr. Eeva 
Järvenpää October 2021 
[8] B.E. Ilon, Wheel for a stable, self-propelled vehicle, German 
patent, 1974,  DE2354404A, 
https://worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/search/family/023182799/
publication/DE2354404A1?q=pn%3DDE2354404. 
[9] B.E. Ilon, Wheels for a course stable self-propelling vehicle 
moveable in any desired direction on the ground or some other 
base. US Patent US3876255A, 1975, 
https://worldwide.espacenet.com/patent/search/family/023182799/
publication/US3876255A?q=pn%3DUS3876255 
[10] U. Caliskan, F. U. Rios, W. Decré and E. Aertbeliën, "Dual 
Constraint-Based Controllers for Wheeled Mobile Manipulators," 
2022 IEEE 18th International Conference on Automation Science 
and 
Engineering 
(CASE), 
2022, 
pp. 
1001-1008, 
doi: 
10.1109/CASE49997.2022.9926679. 
[11] Aertbeliën, J. De Schutter, eTaSL/eTC: A constraint-based 
Task Specification Language and Robot Controller using 
Expression 
Graphs 
proceedings 
of 
the 
2014 
IEEE/RSJ 
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 
Chicago, 2014. 
[12] KELO Robotics GmbH. (Retrieved November 15th, 2022). 
[Online]. Available: https://www.kelo-
robotics.com/technologies/#kelo-drives 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-053-7
ICAS 2023 : The Nineteenth International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous Systems

