Restoring Information Needed for Social
Internetworking Analysis from Anonymized Data
Francesco Buccafurri, Daniele Caridi, Gianluca Lax, Antonino Nocera and Domenico Ursino
Dept. of Information, Infrastructure and Sustainable Energy Engineering
University “Mediterranea” of Reggio Calabria
Reggio Calabria, Italy
Email: {bucca,daniele.caridi,lax,a.nocera,ursino}@unirc.it
Abstract—The interaction among distinct social networks is
the basis of a new emergent internetworking scenario (called
Social Internetworking Scenario or, simply, SIS), enabling a lot
of strategic applications whose main strength will be just the
integration of possibly different communities yet preserving their
diversity and autonomy. As a consequence, studying this new sce-
nario from a Social-Network-Analysis perspective is certainly an
important and topical issue, also for the possibility of discovering
a lot of relevant knowledge about multiple aspects of people life.
However, not always the analyst is able to deal with the hard
problem of collecting data through the execution of a crawler.
In this case, she could exploit graph-based social data, collected
by another party, and usually anonymized for privacy reasons.
Unfortunately, even the most frequent and trivial anonymization
(i.e., the elimination of URLs associated to nodes), handicaps a
lot of SIS-oriented investigations, due to the lack of some relevant
explicit information. In this paper, we deal with this problem, by
proposing and by experimentally validating a clustering-based
technique able to restore part of the missing explicit information,
thus allowing the proﬁtable analysis of anonymized multi-social-
network data.
Keywords-Social Network; Social Network Analysis; So-
cial Internetworking System; Anonymized Data; Clustering
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the last years, (on line) social networks have become one
of the main actors not only of the Cyberspace but also of real
life. Indeed, an always increasing number of persons joins one
or more social networks, and large areas of economy, politics,
communication and, more in general, of all the aspects of real
life, make a large use of this innovative tool. The extraordinary
development of this phenomenon has led to the presence of
several different social networks, whose number is expected to
increase, each incorporating peculiar features making it more
or less attractive for the market. Thus, a user joins Facebook
to talk to her friends, YouTube to share her videos, Flickr to
store her photos, LinkedIn to look for a job, and so on. The
resulting scenario is not the one of single, isolated, independent
social networks, but a universe composed of a constellation
of several social networks, each forming a community with
speciﬁc connotations, but strongly interconnected with each
other.
It is a matter of fact that, despite the inherent underlying
heterogeneity, the interaction among distinct social networks is
the basis of a new emergent internetworking scenario enabling
a lot of strategic applications, whose main strength will be
just the integration of possibly different communities yet
preserving their diversity and autonomy. Clearly, social mining
and analysis approaches should not miss this huge multi-
network source of information, which also reﬂects multiple
aspects of people personal life [19], thus enabling a lot
of powerful discovering activities. As a matter of fact, this
scenario represents the natural substrate for the development
of multi-social-network applications, following a process that
is already started (for instance, think of Google Open Social
[4], Power.com [5], Gathera [3] and Friendfeed [2]), and will
lead to increasingly powerful and innovative systems, thus
increasing the importance of the so called ﬁeld of social
internetworking systems [28], [14], and determining the raising
attraction of both research and industry.
Classical social networks have been studied since several
years, initially by sociologists and, then, with the advent of
on line social networks, by computer science researchers [20].
Studying Social Internetworking Scenarios (SIS’s, for short)
[9], [11] means analyzing speciﬁc aspects (mainly concerning
the interconnection among different social networks [10]) and
adopting investigation methodologies which cannot be trivially
derived from single-social-network analyses. However, the
starting point is always the same.
In order to carry out meaningful analyses, we must have
the availability of sufﬁciently large social dataset, extracted
from real-life social networks, including as much information
as possible. However, not always the analyst is able to deal
with the hard problem of collecting data through the execution
of a crawler. In fact, this is a very time-consuming activity
also requiring highly performing hardware. In this (frequent)
case, she could exploit data made available on the Internet
by researchers who collected them in the past. For instance,
Mislove at al. [26] make available a set of 11 millions users
and 328 millions links among them referred to four different
social networks. As it typically happens also in the context of
data mining, the party that conducts the analysis on data is
different from the party that collects them.
Hence, the party that exports data has also to deal with
privacy issues, by purifying data from information which can
be related to individuals. In the context of social network
analysis, this means that collected graph-data, which represent
friendships among different users, do not allow a node of the
graph to be related with a real user of the social network [27].
Thus, URLs associated to nodes cannot be given.
Observe that an anonymization based on an alphabetic
substitution encryption done on URLs is not secure, because
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

it is well known that alphabetic substitution is vulnerable
w.r.t. frequency-analysis attacks. Therefore, in privacy-aware
contexts, anonymized social data simply consist in a graph,
with no information about the URLs associated to nodes.
However, in a SIS context, working with such anonymized
data results in the lost of relevant explicit information. As
a matter of fact, the evidence of the existence of different
social networks and their interconnections is lost. Clearly, this
problem does not occur whenever a single social network is
investigated.
In this paper, we deal with the issue of restoring part of the
missing explicit information, crucial for SIS-oriented analysis,
by partitioning the whole graph in subgraphs, each correspond-
ing as much as possible to an original social network, and, as
difference, by discovering the interconnections among social
networks. Once this task has been done, the analyst will be
able to conduct most of the SIS-oriented investigations in a
direct way, starting from the basic information concerning the
membership of two or more users either to the same or to
distinct social networks.
In order to carry our investigation, it appears reasonable to
apply clustering techniques. Clustering represents one of the
most important sectors of Data Mining. It aims at grouping
a set of objects into homogeneous groups called clusters.
In the Data Mining context, clustering has been exploited
in a very large number of application contexts, and often
extremely important results have been obtained. Despite the
seemingly high execution time, clustering has been extensively
exploited to analyze single social networks [34], [15], [12],
[30], [22], [18], [31], [35]. Indeed, there exists a great number
of clustering techniques speciﬁcally conceived to operate on
large datasets. However, to the best of our knowledge, it was
never adopted to investigate SIS’s. Nevertheless, the intrinsic
nature of a SIS makes it well suited to be investigated by
means of clustering. As a matter of fact, a SIS can be seen
as a set of social networks which cooperate each other. Each
social network can be seen as a cluster. Therefore, the analysis
of the features of a cluster can contribute to deﬁne the features
of the corresponding social network.
In this paper, we verify the effectiveness of this idea. For
this purpose, ﬁrst we applied a crawling technique (namely,
BFS [23]) on the SIS to extract a sample of data. The
considered SIS consists of 5 social networks, namely Twitter,
YouTube, Flickr, MySpace, LiveJournal. We chose these social
networks because they are compliant with FOAF [8] and XFN
[7] standards. These allow a crawler to access some not private
information stored in the corresponding social networks. Then,
we anonymized these data and we applied different clustering
techniques on them. Finally, we compared obtained clusters
with the original social networks to test the accuracy of
clustering techniques in ﬁnding clusters coincident with the
original social networks. In this activity, we did not exploit
anonymized data available on the Web since they did not report
the social network associated to each anonymized node and,
hence, they were not able to allow us to measure the accuracy
of the clustering techniques.
This paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we
examine related literature. In Section III, we illustrate in
detail the experimental analysis aimed at testing the capability
of some clustering techniques to obtain clusters coincident
with the original social networks of a SIS when data are
anonymized. Finally, in Section IV, we draw our conclusions.
II.
RELATED WORK
In the context of Social Network Analysis [12], many of the
approaches follow techniques based on clustering, analogously
to what we propose in this paper. As a matter of fact,
despite the seemingly high execution time, clustering has been
extensively exploited to analyze single social networks. In
this section, we survey the main contributions that clustering
techniques have given to the investigation of social networks.
In [34], social network users and their relationships are
modeled by means of weighted graphs, and a suitable measure
of the density of a sub-graph, which is an index of user
correlation, is deﬁned. The proposed density measure is used
to decide whether adding a node to a cluster. The clustering
task of this approach aims at detecting community structures
in a social network.
The authors of [15] use a genetic algorithm as a heuristic
search technique to cluster social networks. This algorithm
allows the social network graph to be represented in a succinct
way, thus increasing the efﬁciency of the clustering algorithm.
In order to identify clusters, it adopts a distance measure based
on random walks. The results of the experimental evaluation
show that the adoption of random-walk-based distances, in-
stead of the Euclidean ones, returns more accurate clusters.
[12] proposes a methodology to discover possible aggregations
of nodes covering speciﬁc positions in a graph (e.g., central
nodes), as well as very relevant clusters.
In [30], the authors carry out a study of temporal relation
co-clustering on directional social network and author-topic
evolution. Interestingly enough, the corresponding approach
includes the time dimension typically ignored by the other
related approaches. The analysis performed by these authors
obtains meaningful results about evolution patterns, the evolu-
tion of publication topics and the evolution of e-mail commu-
nication patterns over time.
The authors of [22] developed a model and a Bayesian
technique to infer four features in a social network. These
features are: (i) transitivity - if A relates to B and B to C,
then A is more likely to relate to C; (ii) homophily - nodes
with similar characteristics are more likely to be related; (iii)
clustering into groups - ties are more dense within groups
than between them; - (iv) degree heterogeneity - the tendency
of some actors to send and/or receive links more than others.
The authors of [18] compare three approaches devoted to
engineer a hierarchical ontology on the basis of user interests
in a social network. The ﬁrst approach uses Wikipedia to
ﬁnd interest deﬁnitions, the latent semantic analysis technique
to measure the similarity between interests based on their
deﬁnitions, and an agglomerative clustering algorithm to group
similar interests into higher level concepts. The second one
uses the Wikipedia Category Graph to extract relationships
between interests. The third one uses Directory Mozilla to
extract relationships between interests. The results of the
authors’ investigations show that, although the third approach
is the simplest one, it is the most effective in building a
hierarchy of user interests.
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

In [31], the authors investigate the use of data mining
techniques to identify intra- and inter-organization clusters
of people with similar proﬁles that could have relationships
among them. The proposed approach exploits a clustering
method, along with a link mining-based technique that uses
the minimum spanning tree to construct group hierarchies. The
authors performed their analyses on a scientiﬁc social network
in Brazil; in this network two scientists are connected if they
have co-authored a paper. As a result of their investigation, the
authors show that it is possible to derive relationships between
educational intuitions by analyzing the relationships among the
scientists working in them.
The authors of [35] propose the use of automatic text
analysis for clustering a social network. They applied their
technique to the values contained in the Enron e-mail dataset
[1] and obtained the following results: (i) individuals commu-
nicate more frequently with individuals sharing similar value
patterns than with individuals having different value patterns;
(ii) people who communicate more frequently with each other
do not necessarily all ﬁt into a particular value type.
All the above techniques discovering social communities,
despite their relationship with our approach, are not compara-
ble with it, because they need a number of information we do
not assume available in anonymized data.
III.
DERIVING SOCIAL NETWORKS FROM ANONYMIZED
DATA
In this section, we describe in detail our research efforts
devoted to verify the effectiveness of applying clustering tech-
niques to derive social networks from anonymized data. This
section is organized as follows: ﬁrst, we describe the testbed.
Then, we discuss the issues concerning the construction of
the Dissimilarity Matrix, which plays a key role in clustering
techniques. Finally, we compare several clustering techniques
against their capability of supporting our goal.
A. Experimental settings
As pointed out in the introduction, in order to perform our
analyses, we had to extract some samples from a SIS. This
last one contained social networks compliant with XFN and
FOAF, which are two standards encoding human relationships
in social networks. XFN [7] simply uses an attribute, called
rel, to specify the kind of relationship between two users.
Some possible values of rel are me, friend, contact,
co-worker, parent, and so on. In particular, rel set to me
denotes the presence of a me edge, which is an edge exploited
to link two accounts of the same user in two different social
networks. A (presumably) more complex alternative to XFN is
FOAF (Friend-Of-A-Friend) [8]. A FOAF proﬁle is essentially
an XML ﬁle describing a person, her links with other people
and the links to the objects created by her. It is worth pointing
out that the technicalities concerning these two standards are
not to be handled manually by the user. As a matter of fact,
each social network has suitable mechanisms to automatically
manage them in a way transparent to the user, who has just to
specify her relationships in a user-friendly fashion.
The social networks of the SIS into consideration were ﬁve,
namely Twitter, YouTube, Flickr, MySpace and LiveJournal.
We choose these ﬁve social networks because they have been
largely analyzed in the past in Social Network Analysis papers
devoted to study a single social network or to compare different
social networks [21], [25], [13], [33].
The crawling technique we adopted was Breadth First
Search (BFS, for short). It is the most popular and widely
used strategy for performing topology measurements at several
levels, including sampling large networks, and is preferred with
respect to other graph traversal techniques, like Depth-First
Search, Forest Fire and Snowball Sampling [23]. The crawled
samples presented both connections between the accounts of
different users of the same social network and connections
between the accounts of the same users in different social
networks. They can be represented by a direct graph whose
nodes correspond to user accounts and whose edges correspond
to the connections between these accounts.
Once samples were obtained, they were anonymized by
replacing each URL with a numeric identiﬁer unique for all
the SIS. After this, several clustering techniques were applied
on anonymized samples and the clusters obtained by these
techniques were compared with the original social networks.
As for the adopted clustering techniques, three of them (i.e.,
SimpleKMeans, EM and Hierarchical) are classical and well
known in literature [17]. The fourth one, called Sequential
Information Bottleneck (SIB, for short) integrates an agglom-
erative procedure in a sequential clustering algorithm [29]. In
our experiments, we set the number of clusters to be found
to 5, i.e., to the number of the social networks of the SIS.
Observe that this fact does not represent a real limitation since,
even when the data of a SIS are anonymized, it is always
speciﬁed which are the social networks composing the SIS
even if the membership of a node to a certain social network
has been lost during the anonymization process. We adopted
the implementations of the considered clustering techniques
provided by WEKA [6].
For our experiments, we exploited a server equipped with
a 2 Quad-Core E5440 processor and 16 GB of RAM with
the CentOS 6.0 Server operating system. We performed the
crawling tasks from February 5, 2012 to March 20, 2012. After
this task, we performed the other activities described above.
We considered 10 samples for this analysis; each sample
referred to 5000 visited nodes.
As a ﬁrst quantitative index to evaluate the effectiveness of
applying clustering techniques to derive social networks from
anonymized data, we adopted the Jaccard coefﬁcient, which
is a statistical index used to measure the similarity and the
diversity of two sets. Given two sets A and B, the Jaccard
coefﬁcient is deﬁned as J(A, B) = |A∩B|
|A∪B| [24].
As a second quantitative index, we adopted an index called
Average Cluster Partitioning (ACP) which operates at a higher
abstraction level w.r.t. the Jaccard coefﬁcient. Speciﬁcally,
ACP is computed by averaging the maximum Jaccard Coefﬁ-
cient of each obtained cluster.
Both indexes range in the real interval [0, 1]. The higher
their value, the better the performance of the corresponding
clustering technique.
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

B. Dissimilarity Matrix construction
In order to apply the clustering techniques, we had to
construct the Dissimilarity Matrix. In fact, it is the structure
which most of the clustering techniques operate on. This
matrix is n × n, where n is the number of the graph nodes.
Its generic element (i, j) represents the dissimilarity degree
between the nodes i and j. As for the dissimilarity measure
to exploit for the construction of the Dissimilarity Matrix,
we chose the minimum distance between the corresponding
nodes of the graph. This distance was computed by ﬁxing
the weight of each edge equal to 1 and by exploiting the
Dijkstra Algorithm for the computation of the minimum paths
in the graph. If it did not exist a path between two nodes, the
corresponding distance was set equal to ∞.
As for this matrix, two important decisions must be made,
namely: (i) it must be symmetric or asymmetric? (ii) how to
normalize it in such a way that its elements range in the real
interval [0, 1] (i.e., in the form taken in input by clustering
techniques)?
In order to answer the ﬁrst question, we made the following
reasoning: four of the ﬁve social networks belonging to our
SIS have asymmetrical links; this makes it natural to adopt an
asymmetric Dissimilarity Matrix.
In order to answer the second question, we considered three
different normalization strategies which weight the absence of
a path between two nodes in a different way.
In the ﬁrst one, we computed the maximum among the
lengths of the minimum paths between the pairs of the nodes
of the graph and we divided each matrix element by this
maximum incremented of 1 (this length ranged from 15 to
20 in the various samples). When the distance between two
nodes was ∞, the corresponding matrix element was set to
1. This way, the normalized coefﬁcients of the Dissimilarity
Matrix for a pair of nodes not linked by a path is comparable
with the normalized coefﬁcients of the pair of nodes linked by
the path with the maximum length. This choice aimed at not
excessively penalizing the nodes not linked by any path. It was
motivated by the idea that, actually, two nodes whose minimum
path has a high length were not in a situation very different
from the one of two nodes not linked by any path. This idea
is also substantiated by sociological theories (see, for instance,
the six-degree of separation and the small-world theories [32])
As for this normalization strategy, the ACP values obtained
by applying SimpleKMeans, EM, Hierarchical and SIB were
0.762, 0.812, 0.622 and 0.760, respectively.
In the second normalization strategy, we divided the coefﬁ-
cients corresponding to nodes linked by paths by 100 (i.e., by a
value much higher than the length of the maximum path, which
ranged from 15 to 20), whereas we set to 1 the coefﬁcients
corresponding to nodes not linked by a path. In this way, we
established a signiﬁcant difference between the coefﬁcients
associated with the nodes linked by the maximum path and
those ones corresponding to nodes not linked by a path. At the
end of this experiment, the ACP values obtained by applying
SimpleKMeans, EM, Hierarchical and SIB were 0.652, 0.812,
0.582 and 0.654, respectively. From the analysis of these values
we obtained that this new normalization strategy negatively
inﬂuenced the results of SimpleKMeans, Hierarchical and SIB,
whereas the results produced by EM were identical to the
ones obtained with the previous normalization strategy. As a
consequence, on the whole, this last normalization strategy
appears worse than the previous one.
In the third normalization strategy, we repeated this experi-
ment by dividing the coefﬁcients corresponding to nodes linked
by a path by 250, instead of by 100, in such a way as to obtain a
more signiﬁcant difference between the coefﬁcients associated
with nodes linked by the maximum path and the coefﬁcients
corresponding to nodes not linked by a path. Obtained ACP
values for SimpleKMeans, EM, Hierarchical and SIB were
0.621, 0.812, 0.567 and 0.622, respectively. At the end of this
experiment we observed that SimpleKMeans, Hierarchical and
SIB produced worse results with respect to the corresponding
ones returned by the ﬁrst two strategies. EM, instead, obtained
the same results as the ones of the previous cases; this implies
that it is not inﬂuenced by the normalization strategy.
At the end of this experiment, we concluded that the best
normalization strategy was the ﬁrst one.
In order to verify if our conjecture about the decision (i)
was correct, we applied the symmetric Dijkstra algorithm,
instead of the classical one, in order to obtain a symmetric
Dissimilarity Matrix, as it generally happens for the input of
clustering techniques. In particular, for each pair of nodes
na and nb, we computed the corresponding value of the
Dissimilarity Matrix by taking the minimum between the
distance from na to nb and the one from nb to na. Clearly, in
order to normalize the Dissimilarity Matrix, we chose the ﬁrst
strategy. Once the Dissimilarity Matrix was constructed, we
applied the four clustering techniques. Finally, we computed
the corresponding ACP values and we obtained 0.382 for
SimpleKMeans, 0.700 for EM, 0.486 for Hierarchical and
0.498 for SIB. From the analysis of these values it is possible
to conclude that the adoption of a symmetric Dissimilarity
Matrix produces worse results than the ones returned by the
adoption of an asymmetrical Dissimilarity Matrix. Interestingly
enough, choosing an asymmetric Dissimilarity Matrix is not
the standard choice to adopt in clustering. As a matter of
fact, Dissimilarity Matrixes provided in input to clustering
techniques are generally symmetric. Our reasoning about the
characteristics of the involved social networks allowed us to
make the right decision.
C. Clustering technique comparison
The ﬁrst clustering technique we applied was SimpleK-
Means. For each sample, we computed the Jaccard coefﬁcient
between each cluster generated by SimpleKMeans and each
social network of the SIS. Obtained results, averaged across
all samples, are reported in Table I. From the analysis of
this table, we can observe a correlation between clusters and
social networks. In fact, clusters are capable of identifying
the involved social networks. In particular, Cluster 3 perfectly
corresponds to MySpace since the associated Jaccard coefﬁ-
cient is 1. In other three clusters, namely Clusters 1, 2 and 4,
only nodes belonging to a single social network are contained.
Only Cluster 0 contains all the nodes of YouTube but also
nodes of Twitter, LiveJournal and Flickr. At the end of this
analysis, we may conclude that SimpleKMeans ﬁnds quite a
good correspondence between social networks and clusters.
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE I.
JACCARD COEFFICIENTS REGARDING THE CLUSTERS
OBTAINED BY SIMPLEKMEANS.
Flickr
YouTube
MySpace
LiveJournal
Twitter
Cluster 0
0.01
0.55
0.00
0.21
0.10
Cluster 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.76
Cluster 2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.00
Cluster 3
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
Cluster 4
0.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
TABLE II.
JACCARD COEFFICIENTS REGARDING THE CLUSTERS
OBTAINED BY EM.
Flickr
YouTube
MySpace
LiveJournal
Twitter
Cluster 0
0.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Cluster 1
0.01
0.80
0.00
0.01
0.05
Cluster 2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.76
Cluster 3
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
Cluster 4
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.00
We have then applied EM to the same samples and we
have computed the Jaccard coefﬁcient between each returned
cluster and each social network. Obtained results are reported
in Table II. From the analysis of this table, it is possible to see
that the results returned by EM are better than the ones returned
by SimpleKMeans. Indeed, there is an optimal correspondence
between clusters and social networks.
When we applied Hierarchical to the same samples we
obtained worse results than the ones returned by SimpleK-
Means and EM. The corresponding Jaccard coefﬁcients are
shown in Table III. This algorithm behaves as the previous
ones as far as MySpace, Flickr and LiveJournal are concerned,
whereas it shows a worse behavior for the other two social
networks. In particular, in Cluster 4, only nodes of YouTube
occur, but the Jaccard coefﬁcient between YouTube and Cluster
4 is signiﬁcantly lower than the one between YouTube and
Cluster 0. Hierarchical tends to put the nodes of YouTube
and Twitter in the same cluster. We may conclude that the
clusters generated by this algorithm reﬂect the structure of
the SIS in a less precise way than the clusters returned by
SimpleKMeans and EM. It seems that Hierarchical is incapable
of distinguishing clusters in presence of a certain number of
me edges (see below). This can be explained by considering
that Hierarchical is well suited when it is necessary to con-
struct cluster hierarchies by proceeding in an agglomerative
fashion. In our scenario, we would have a one-level hierarchy.
Furthermore, the presence of me edges would make it very
difﬁcult to proceed in an agglomerative fashion because the
corresponding aggregation process would be quite irregular
with frequent hops from a social network to another.
The last clustering technique we applied is SIB. In Table
IV, we report the Jaccard coefﬁcients between the social
networks of the SIS and the clusters returned by this algorithm.
We may observe that obtained clusters are equivalent to the
ones returned by SimpleKMeans.
At the end of this analysis, it emerged that the best
TABLE III.
JACCARD COEFFICIENTS REGARDING THE CLUSTERS
OBTAINED BY HIERARCHICAL.
Flickr
YouTube
MySpace
LiveJournal
Twitter
Cluster 0
0.01
0.31
0.00
0.16
0.45
Cluster 1
0.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
Cluster 2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.00
Cluster 3
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
Cluster 4
0.00
0.16
0.00
0.00
0.00
TABLE IV.
JACCARD COEFFICIENTS REGARDING THE CLUSTERS
OBTAINED BY SIB.
Flickr
YouTube
MySpace
LiveJournal
Twitter
Cluster 0
0.01
0.54
0.00
0.21
0.10
Cluster 1
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.76
Cluster 2
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.54
0.00
Cluster 3
0.00
0.00
1.00
0.00
0.00
Cluster 4
0.96
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
clustering technique is EM. This is also conﬁrmed by all the
values of ACP obtained in the experiments shown in Section
III-B. However, the analysis above was useful because, with
respect to ACP values, Tables I - IV provide more detailed
results.
IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have studied the effectiveness of deriving
social networks from anonymized data. We have explained that
this problem is very important when data exploited for the
analysis are taken from publicly available repositories. In this
case, a lot of data are available but they have been anonymized
in order to protect user privacy. The motivation of the work is
that the derivation of social networks from anonymized data
is needed for Social Internetworking Analysis.
As a future work, we plan to extend our research efforts in
several directions. First of all, we observe that this paper is the
ﬁrst attempt of reconstructing information from anonymized
SIS data. In order to facilitate our tasks we considered not
very large samples, even though in line with those exploited
by clustering techniques applied to Social Network scenarios
in the past literature. We plan to analyze much larger samples
in the future also considering clustering techniques speciﬁcally
conceived for large datasets [16] as well as incremental clus-
tering techniques [17]. Finally, we plan to deﬁne approaches
for SIS analysis based on other Data Mining tasks (association
rule extraction, classiﬁcation and, above all, outlier analysis).
Acknowledgment
This work has been partially supported by the TENACE
PRIN Project (n. 20103P34XC) funded by the Italian Ministry
of Education, University and Research.
REFERENCES
[1]
Enron email dataset, http://www.cs.cmu.edu/∼enron [retrieved: May,
2013].
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[2]
FriendFeed, http://friendfeed.com [retrieved: May, 2013].
[3]
Gathera, http://www.gathera.com [retrieved: May, 2013].
[4]
Google Open Social,
http://code.google.com/intl/it-IT/apis/opensocial
[retrieved: May, 2013].
[5]
Power.com, http://techcrunch.com/2011/04/21/power-com-shuts-down-
domain-name-up-for-sale [retrieved: May, 2013].
[6]
WEKA
-
Waikato
Environment
for
Knowledge
Analysis,
http://www.cs.waikato.ac.nz/ml/weka [retrieved: May, 2013].
[7]
XFN - XHTML Friends Network, http://gmpg.org/xfn [retrieved: May,
2013].
[8]
D. Brickley and L. Miller, “The Friend of a Friend (FOAF) project,”
http://www.foaf-project.org [retrieved: May, 2013].
[9]
F. Buccafurri, V.D. Foti, G. Lax, A. Nocera, and D. Ursino, “Bridge
Analysis in a Social Internetworking Scenario,” Information Sciences,
Elsevier, vol. 224, March 2013, pp. 1–18.
[10]
F. Buccafurri, G. Lax, A. Nocera, and D. Ursino, “Discovering Links
among Social Networks,”
Proc. European Conference on Machine
Learning and Principles and Practice of Knowledge Discovery in
Databases (ECML PKDD 2012), Springer, September 2012, pp. 467–
482.
[11]
F. Buccafurri, G. Lax, A. Nocera, and D. Ursino, “Crawling Social
Internetworking Systems,” Proc. International Conference on Advances
in Social Analysis and Mining (ASONAM 2012), IEEE/ACM, August
2012, pp. 505–509.
[12]
P. Carrington, J. Scott, and S. Wasserman,
Models and Methods in
Social Network Analysis. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[13]
X. Cheng, C. Dale, and J. Liu,
“Statistics and Social Network of
Youtube Videos,” Proc. International Workshop on Quality of Service
(IWQoS 2008), IEEE press, June 2008, pp. 229–238.
[14]
P. De Meo, A. Nocera, G. Terracina, and D. Ursino, “Recommendation
of similar users, resources and social networks in a Social Internetwork-
ing Scenario,” Information Sciences, Elsevier, vol. 181(7), April 2011,
pp. 1285–1305.
[15]
A. Firat, S. Chatterjee, and M. Yilmaz, “Genetic clustering of social
networks using random walks,”
Computational Statistics and Data
Analysis, Dec. 2007, vol. 51, pp. 6285–6294.
[16]
V. Ganti, R. Ramakrishnan, J. Gehrke, A.L. Powell, and J.C. French,
“Clustering Large Datasets in Arbitrary Metric Spaces,”
Proc. IEEE
International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE’99), IEEE Press,
March 1999, pp. 502–511.
[17]
J. Han and M. Kamber,
Data Mining: Concepts and Techniques -
Second Edition. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2006.
[18]
M. Haridas and D. Caragea,
“Exploring Wikipedia and DMoz as
Knowledge Bases for Engineering a User Interests Hierarchy for Social
Network Applications,” Proc. International Workshop On the Move to
Meaningful Internet Systems (OTM 2009), Springer Press, Nov. 2009,
pp. 1238–1245.
[19]
OFCOM The independent regulator and competition authority for
the UK communications industries,
“Social Networking: A quan-
titative and qualitative research report into attitudes, behaviours
and use”.
http://stakeholders.ofcom.org.uk/binaries/research/media-
literacy/report1.pdf [retrieved: May, 2013].
[20]
J. Kleinberg, “The convergence of social and technological networks,”
Communications of the ACM, vol. 51, Nov. 2008, pp. 66–72.
[21]
B. Krishnamurthy, P. Gill, and M. Arlitt, “A few chirps about Twitter,”
Proc. First Workshop on Online Social Networks (WOSN 08), ACM
Press, Aug. 2008, pp. 19–24.
[22]
P.N. Krivitsky, M.S. Handcock, A.E. Raftery, and P.D. Hoff,
“Rep-
resenting degree distributions, clustering, and homophily in social
networks with latent cluster random effects models,” Social Networks,
vol. 31(3), 2009, pp. 204–213.
[23]
M. Kurant, A. Markopoulou, and P. Thiran,
“On the bias of BFS
(Breadth First Search),” Proc. IEEE International Teletrafﬁc Congress
(ITC 22), IEEE Press, Sept. 2010, pp. 1–8.
[24]
C.D. Manning, P. Raghavan, and H. Schutze, Introduction to Informa-
tion Retrieval. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[25]
A. Mislove, H.S. Koppula, K.P. Gummadi, F. Druschel, and B. Bhat-
tacharjee, “Growth of the Flickr Social Network,” Proc. First Workshop
on Online Social Networks (WOSN 08), ACM Press, Aug. 2008, pp.
25–30.
[26]
A. Mislove, M. Marcon, K.P. Gummadi, P. Druschel, and B. Bhat-
tacharjee,
“Measurement and analysis of online social networks,”
Proc. SIGCOMM International Conference on Internet Measurement
(IMC’07), ACM Press, October 2007, pp. 29–42.
[27]
A. Narayanan and V. Shmatikov, “De-anonymizing social networks,”
Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Security and Privacy (S&P
2009), IEEE Press, May 2009, pp. 173–187.
[28]
Y. Okada, K. Masui, and Y. Kadobayashi, “Proposal of Social Inter-
networking,” Proc. International Human.Society@Internet Conference
(HSI 2005), Springer Press, July 2005, pp. 114–124.
[29]
J. Peltonen, J. Sinkkonen, and S. Kaski,
“Sequential information
bottleneck for ﬁnite data,” Proc. International Conference on Machine
learning (ICML’04), ACM Press, July 2004, pp. 82–88.
[30]
W. Peng and T. Li,
“Temporal relation co-clustering on directional
social network and author-topic evolution,” Knowledge and Information
Systems, Springer, 2011, vol. 26(3), pp. 467–486.
[31]
V. Str¨oele et al., “Mining and Analyzing Organizational Social Net-
works Using Minimum Spanning Tree,” Proc. International Workshop
On the Move to Meaningful Internet Systems (OTM 2008), Springer
Press, Nov. 2008, pp. 18–19.
[32]
J. Travers and S. Milgram, “An experimental study of the small world
problem,”
Sociometry, 1969, pp. 425–443.
[33]
S. Ye, J. Lang, and F. Wu, “Crawling online social graphs,”
Proc.
IEEE International Asia-Paciﬁc Web Conference (APWeb’10), IEEE
Press, April. 2010, pp. 236–242.
[34]
P. Zhao and C. Zhang, “A new clustering method and its application
in social networks,” Pattern Recognition Letters, vol. 32(15), 2011, pp.
2109–2118.
[35]
Y. Zhou, K.R. Fleischmann, and W.A. Wallace, “Automatic text analysis
of values in the enron email dataset: Clustering a social network
using the value patterns of actors,”
Proc. IEEE Hawaii International
Conference on System Sciences (HICSS 2010), IEEE Press, January
2010, pp. 1–10.
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

