Mobile Custom-made Handheld Chemical Detection Device  
 
Iem Heng 
Computer Engineering Technology Department 
New York City College of Technology (NYCCT) 
Brooklyn, NY, USA 
iheng@citytech.cuny.edu 
Andy S. Zhang 
Mechanical Engineering Technology Department 
New York City College of Technology (NYCCT) 
Brooklyn, NY, USA 
azhang@citytech.cuny.edu 
Raymond Yap 
Computer Engineering Technology Department 
New York City College of Technology (NYCCT) 
Brooklyn, NY, USA 
raymond.yap@hotmail.com 
 
 
Abstract— In today’s society, there is a challenge to detect and 
to avoid exposure to harmful and lethal chemicals. This 
remains an issue to public health and has not been addressed 
adequately.  To address this challenging issue, the objective of 
this paper is to provide a unique perspective in designing and 
building a custom-made mobile handheld chemical detection 
(CHCD) device that can detect harmful and lethal chemical 
gases (NO2, N2, CO, CO2, LPG, CH4, CNG, C2H5OH, NH3, H2 
and others) in public and in private gathering places.  This 
mobile handheld device can relay the information of the 
chemical concentration levels detected to smartphone or tablet 
or laptop in any place at any time.  Applications of this useful 
mobile CHCD prototyping device include detection of harmful 
gases in public and in private gathering places such as subway 
stations, shopping malls, airports, and residential houses. 
Additionally, this mobile CHCD device provides an alternative 
and affordable resource for people to have and use it as an 
advance warning system within the proximity of dangerous 
areas.    
Keywords- chemical detection; mobile communication; remote 
sensing. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Over the years, chemical gases in the U.S. and around the 
world have caused and taken many innocent lives that could 
have been prevented. Of primary concern are the human 
health effects of chemical gas, including premature mortality 
and chronic illnesses such as bronchitis and asthma.  Despite 
the tremendous economic costs and pervasive negative 
health impacts of bad chemical gas – chemical gas often 
goes unnoticed because it is largely invisible.  Much of what 
happens in our immediate environment passes without being 
noticed by the public despite the fact that there are recording 
and crowd-sourcing devices installed in some neighborhood 
that monitor the air quality.  A mobile CHCD device 
captures a spectrum of that lost reality and returns it to the 
users in real-time as the events unfold. By making these 
specific environmental events available to participants in real 
time and location, the CHCD supplements the qualitative 
information 
reported 
by 
government 
agency 
with 
quantitative information obtained from handheld sensing 
device that observes and records aspects of the environments 
that are either impossible to perceive directly (e.g., pollutant 
gas concentrations) or difficult to quantify and communicate 
in a consistent manner. A mobile CHCD device allows 
individuals to broadcast what is happening with their 
environment, crowdsource their own information with that 
from 
other 
participants, 
and 
identify 
patterns 
and 
commonalities.  Thus, this mobile CHCD device makes the 
detection of chemical gas possible by concern citizens, 
thereby empowering communities to advocate for healthy 
environments. 
Unlike the current commercial chemical detection 
devices, the mobile CHCD device is a unique and novel 
device in term of miniature size, provides an advance 
communication warning system accessed by other smart 
devices (smartphone, tablet, and laptop), and provides an 
affordable low-cost detection device for consumers.   For 
instance, comparing the commercial hazardous vapor 
warning LCD 3.3 [1] and Nose Gas Sensor [2] devices to the 
mobile CHCD device, the LCD 3.3 and Nose Gas Sensor 
devices are designed as one unit with LCD screen used for 
displaying the gas concentration levels and are not capable of 
communicating with other smart devices.  Additionally, both 
devices are not small and not cost effective for general 
consumers.  Furthermore, many other commercial detection 
devices have similar features as the LCD 3.3 and Nose Gas 
Sensor.  This is why the mobile CHCD device is a unique 
and novel detection device for an advance warning system to 
the public. 
In this paper, we are going to provide a unique 
perspective in designing and building a CHCD device that 
can detect harmful and lethal chemical gases in public and in 
private gathering places.  First, we look into how the 
chemical gas sensors work.  Then a schematic of CHCD 
device is developed.  Based on the hardware schematic of 
CHCD device, the custom-made physical prototype of this 
294
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

device is created.  The CHCD device is capable of 
communicating to portable devices such as smartphone or 
tablet or laptop through the use of Bluetooth technology.   
We then have done several tests (indoor and outdoor 
scenarios) of mobile CHCD device with those portable 
devices.  From those tests, the raw analog signal data is 
acquired and is calibrated.  This calibrated data is what 
provided for people to understand the useful benefit of 
mobile CHCD device. 
II. 
CHEMICAL GAS SENSORS 
Currently, there are many different types of harmful 
chemicals and gases (NO2, N2, CO, CO2, LPG, CH4, CNG, 
C2H5OH, NH3, and others) that can harm innocent people 
and could give serious negative environmental impact on 
the planet we live on.  To prevent the loss of innocent 
human lives, effective detection and handheld monitoring 
systems need to be developed.  The mobile CHCD is a 
state-of-the art device to detect many kinds of harmful 
chemical gases in the air and on the ground through the use 
of various chemical gas sensors.  This detection device 
provides an advance warning system and alerts the general 
public through their smart devices. This could reduce human 
casualties, environmental destruction, and property loss.  
 
How do the various chemical gas sensors work?  Many 
gas sensors use a heater to detect certain gases.   In general, 
many of these gas sensors have similar schematic diagram 
[3] as follows:  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. General Gas Schematic. 
 
According to the chemical gas sensor schematic diagram 
shown in Figure 1, there are 6 pins coming out of the gas 
sensor itself.  However, some chemical gas sensors have 
only 3 or 4 pins.  5 volts can supply to pins (A H A); 
whereas, both pins B can be used as an analog output signal.  
The other pin H, in between both pins B, can be used as a 
ground (GND) pin.  This is illustrated in Figure 2 as 
follows: 
 
Figure 2. Gas Sensor. 
 
Then the data from an analog output signal is incorporated 
into specially designed software codes capable of detecting a 
wide range of harmful and lethal chemical gases by using 
different types of gas sensors.  The sensor testing and 
calibration of analog signal data acquisition will be fully 
discussed in later Section IV. 
In term of the working principle for the gas sensor for 
CO2, as an example, it takes on the solid electrolyte cell 
principle and is composed by the following solid cells: Air 
Au|NASICON|| carbonate|Au, air，CO2 [4]. 
When the CO2 sensor exposes to the CO2 environment, it will 
have electrochemical reaction with the following equations 
[5]:  Cathodic reaction equation:  
2Li 
+ 
+ 
CO2 
+ 
1/2O2 
+ 
2e 
- 
= 
Li2CO3. 
Anodic reaction equation:   2Na+ + 1/2O2 + 2e- = Na2O. 
The overall chemical reaction equation:  
Li2CO3 
+2Na 
+ 
= 
Na2O 
+2Li 
+ 
+ 
CO2.  
As a result of electrochemical reaction, according to Neste 
equation (Nernst), the process will produce the following 
electromotive force (EMF):  EMF = Ec - (R x T) / (2F) ln 
(P(CO2)), where PCO2 is the partial pressure of CO2; Ec is a 
constant; R is the gas constant; T is temperature in Kelvin; F 
is the Faraday constant.   
From Figure 1, the sensor heating voltage supplied from 
other circuit.  When its surface temperature is high enough, 
the sensor equals to a cell, its two sides would output voltage 
signal, and its result accord with Nernst’s equation [5].  In 
sensor testing, the impedance of amplifier should be within 
100-1000GΩ，Its testing current should be control below 
1pA. 
III. 
MOBILE CHCD DEVICE 
   
In this section, we will discuss and provide more details 
on how we design the prototype of Mobile Custom-made 
Chemical Detection (CHCD) Device. 
A. Hardware Schematic of Mobile CHCD Device 
The set up pins of a gas sensor in Figure 2 provide some 
ideas of how to hook up the hardware schematic diagram of 
mobile CHCD device.  Using Fritzing [6] software program, 
the design of the overall hardware schematic for the device 
is shown in Figure 3.  
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Schematic of CHCD Device. 
 
From the schematic of Figure 3, the yellow, red, and 
black wires are used as data signal  communication, voltage, 
and ground, respectively.  The signal lines for the three 
sensors (CO gas, CO2 gas and LPG gas) are  connected to 
the Arduino microcontroller analog pins A1, A3 and A4.  In 
addition to the three gas sensors in Figure 3, temperature 
and humidity sensors are added to the CHCD device for 
monitoring the effect of data acquisition in correlation to the 
three gas sensors.  Whereas, the red and black lines across 
the breadboard in Figure 3 are connected to Arduino 5V and 
ground pins, respectively.  The yellow and white wires from 
the Bluetooth module are used as the transceivers and are 
connected to Arduino pins TX (transmitter – yellow wire) 
and RX (receiver – white wire).  The use of a Bluetooth 
module provides the wireless communication lines between 
CHCD device and smartphone (or tablet or laptop).  Also, 
for instance, the three color LEDs indicate the CO gas 
concentration levels.  Green, orange, and red color LEDs are 
indicated the least, medium, and highest PPM, respectively. 
PPM is for part per millions, and it is used to measure the 
concentrations of chemical gas.  Hence, this makes CHCD 
device as a unique embedded mobile handheld device in 
monitoring the surrounding areas of one’s present. 
B. Prototyping of Mobile CHCD Device 
Based on the hardware schematic of CHCD device in 
Figure 2, the custom-made physical prototype of this device 
is created.  The following Figure 3 shows the final prototype 
design of the CHCD device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Prototyping of CHCD Device. 
 
Currently, as seen in Figure 4 above, the custom-made 
prototype of chemical detection device has been used for 
testing the CO (Carbon Monoxide) concentration levels 
along with the temperature and humidity.  This device will 
be expanded to include the testing of CO2 (Carbon Dioxide), 
LPG (Liquefied Petroleum Gas), and among other known 
chemical gases. 
 
Figure 5 shows the progress stages in designing the 
CHCD device leading to the final prototype. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Design Stages of CHCD Device. 
 
The CHCD device cover (orange case) is for holding the 
Arduino UNO microcontroller and electronic components 
(sensors, resistors, LEDs, and Bluetooth) with breadboard.  
To accomphish this, a computer model of the CHCD device 
is created using Autodesk Invnentor [7] software. Figure 6 
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

shows a computer model of the CHCD device assembly. 
Figure 7 is a computer rendering of the device. Then a 
phyical prototype was made using 3D rapid prototyping 
machine as shown in Figure 8. The electronic components 
are soldered on the back side of the breadboard.  Upon 
completing all the electronic components soldering on the 
breadboard, we are able to slide the completed breadboard 
onto the orange case.  This completes the design stages of the 
CHCD prototype as seen in Figure 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6. Assembly View of the CHCD Device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Computer Rendering  
Figure 8. Physical  
of CHCD Device. 
Prototype 
of 
CHCD 
Device. 
C. Wireless Communication 
Figure 9 is a block diagram of Bluetooth wireless 
communication for the mobile CHCD device. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 9. CHCD Wireless Communication. 
Namely, the mobile CHCD device is capable of 
communicating to portable devices such as smartphone or 
tablet or laptop through the use of Bluetooth technology.  
Bluetooth wireless technology is based on the IEEE 802.15 
standard. Bluetooth was developed to replace the cables that 
were connect to desktop and portable computers, mobile 
phones, handheld devices, computer accessories and 
peripheral electronic devices [8]. Thus, the use of Bluetooth 
wireless communication enables the users to retreat the data 
from the chemical gas sensor and, at the same time, display 
gas concentration levels on the portable devices. 
 
To make the CHCD device to communicate and interface 
wirelessly with portable device (smartphone, tablet and 
laptop), as illustrated in Figure 9, the programming source 
codes 
must 
be 
introduced 
to 
provide 
access 
of 
communication and interface between devices.  First, the 
source codes are written in Arduino sketch [9] to 
communicate and interface with the electronic components 
such as CO gas sensor, temperature sensor, humidity sensor, 
and LEDs, as shown in Figure 5.  Upon the success of 
interfacing with the sensors and LEDs in Arduino sketch, 
the Android library MeetAndroid is import to the Arduino 
library folder, so that the data acquired from the Arduino 
Serial Monitor is sent to the Amarino Application (App) 
progam.  The Android library MeetAndroid is part of 
Amarino driver device that is required to be imported in the 
library folder of Arduino sketch. The Amarino progam [10] 
is a freeware program that incorporates a plug-in 
mechanism which allows programmers and developers to 
integrate their events into Amarino. Then, this provides a 
gateway to communicate with smartphones and tablets 
based on the Android open source operating system.  Figure 
10 illustrates the details of communication between Arduino 
Sketch , Amarino App, and Android operating system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 10. Flowchart of Wireless Interface  
and Communication. 
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

IV. 
CO GAS SENSOR CALIBRATION 
In this section, the calibration of data acquisition from 
CO gas sensor is discussed in details.  Using the CHCD 
device in Figure 4, the raw analog signal data is acquired 
from the CO gas sensor.  Then the raw data must be 
calibrated with respect to that analog data.  For instance, 
taking all factors such as the type of sensor and the 
conditions of the application into consideration, the 
proposed calibration procedure is based on the following 
block diagram: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Figure 11. Calibration Block Diagram Procedures. 
 
Based on the flowchart in Figure 11 above, 100 PPM is 
exposed and is used for calibration standard.  Applications 
of how safe and unsafe of PPM for CO gas can be seen in 
Figure 12 below.  For instance, 200 PPM would have a 
symptom of mild headache, fatigue, nausea and dizziness in 
two to three hours [11]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      
Figure 12. Gas Concentration in PPM and Symptoms. 
In addition to the block diagram in Figure 11, the gas 
concentration chart [12] in Figure 13 is used as part of the 
calibration for the CO concentration in PPM. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 13. Gas Concentration in PPM. 
 
Figure 13 represents typical sensitivity characteristics of CO 
concentration levels.  The Y-axis is indicated as sensor 
resistance ratio (Rs/Ro) [12] which is defined as follows:  
Rs = Sensor resistance of displayed gases at various 
concentrations and Ro = Sensor resistance in 100 PPM CO 
In other way of looking at Ro is the level of expose gas to 
the sensor in clean air.  For instance, if we pour 100 PPM 
gas in the container with confined space, what would Rs 
sensor read?  It may read 98 PPM or 102 PPM. 
The formula [13] for defining the sensor resistance Rs is as 
follows: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(1) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
From equation (1), Vc is the voltage input, and it is 5 
Volts from Arduino microcontroller embedded in CHCD 
device. RL is the load resistance (in this case, we use 39kΩ) 
that is connected to CO gas sensor. Vout is a voltage signal 
from the CO gas sensor, and it varies depending on the 
amount of CO concentration within PPM (parts per million). 
Then the value of Rs in equation (1) changes according the 
amount of CO gas present, and as seen in Figure 13 above, 
the typical range for CO gas concentration is from 30 to 
1000 PPM.  If Rs resistance value is the same as Ro 
resistance value, it means 100/100 = 1, which correlates to 
100 PPM in    Figure 13.  In theory, Ro represents the X 
axis in Figure 13 if conditions are perfect. 
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

V. 
PRELIMINARY TESTING AND RESULTS 
We have done several tests of mobile CHCD device with 
smartphone, laptop and tablet.  The indoor  tests were 
performed at the College as seen in Figure 14 and Figure 15.     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 14. Indoor Testing Using Laptop. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Indoor Testing Using Smartphone. 
 
And the preliminary data from the indoor tests can be seen 
in Figure 16.  The data is then tabular in Excel spreadsheet. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 16. Data from Preliminary Indoor Tests. 
Then the data in Figure 16 is plotted in Excel chart.  The 
chart can be seen in Figure 17.  And it is used to tell the 
sensitivity characteristics of CO concentration levels. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 17. Sensor Resistance Chart for Indoor Tests. 
 
Similarly, the outdoor tests of CHCD device (without the 
orange case) were performed with the tablet and 
smartphone. The test was done by placing the CHCD device 
behind the car’s exhaust pipe, while the car engine is on, as 
seen in Figure 18 and Figure 19 below.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 18. Outdoor Testing Using Tablet. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 19. Outdoor Testing Using Smartphone. 
299
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

The preliminary data from the outdoor testing scenario can 
be seen in the following Figure 20:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 20. Data from Preliminary Outdoor Tests. 
 
Then the data in Figure 20 is plotted in Excel chart and can 
be seen in the following Figure 21:   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 21. Sensor Resistance Chart for Outdoor Tests. 
 
Two scenarios had been conducted on the mobile CHCD 
device using smartphone, tablet and laptop.  Of the two 
scenarios, the worst case was found when the CHCD device 
was placed behind the car’s exhaust pipe while the car 
engine was running.  These results are encouraging and 
show that the mobile CHCD device provides a reliable data 
to determine the chemical concentration PPM levels.  Note 
that when performing outdoor tests of CHCD device, it is 
taken into considerations of wind, temperature, and 
humidity.  Clearly, this is a small preliminary sample test 
for the mobile prototype CHCD device.  More testing of this 
device will be performed in the near future.  
VI. 
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION 
"Detecting explosives is not an easy thing," said David 
Danley, a retired Army colonel and head of defense 
programs at Combimatrix Corp., a small biotechnology 
company near Seattle [14]. 
 
David Danley is right, and the goal for this research 
project is to develop a mobile and portable chemical 
detection device that will assist and provide significant 
impact to society in term of reducing the potential loss of 
human life through detection and prevention. The mobile 
CHCD device provides early warning system if there is a 
possible 
expose 
of 
harmful 
and 
lethal 
chemical 
concentration levels within distance.  This early detection 
and prevention could save many human lives from harmful 
chemical gases.  Thus, the mobile CHCD device becomes 
an analytics engine capable of picking out emergent patterns 
in human environments and biology. 
 
The mobile CHCD device is a low-cost miniature 
detection device that could provide crucial instant 
information of chemical detection and preventing the loss of 
human life.  This crucial information of sensing and 
detecting the quality of the air become possible with the aid 
of modern technologies (smartphone, tablet, and laptop).  
Hence, the mobile CHCD device, along with modern 
technologies, provides an alternative affordable resource for 
the people to have access and use it to identify the invisible 
harmful chemicals at early warning stage and could possibly 
lead to save many human lives. 
 
The current cost for producing the prototype of this 
mobile CHCD device is approximately $60 to $80. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research is partially supported by a grant from the 
National Science Foundation (NSF ATE No 1003712). The 
authors appreciate greatly the supports from NSF.  In 
addition, the authors would like to thank Michael 
Heimbinder who is involved in making mobile CHCD 
device. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Smith Detection Group, [retrieved: March, 2012] 
http://www.smithsdetection.com/1025_4601.php  
[2] University of Illinois, [retrieved: March, 2012] 
http://www.futurity.org/science-technology/sensor-sniffs-out-
shoe-bombs/  
[3] Parallax Inc., [retrieved: February, 2012] 
http://www.parallax.com/Portals/0/Downloads/docs/prod/sens
/MQ-7.pdf 
300
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[4] Parallax Inc., [retrieved: February, 2012] 
http://www.parallax.com/Store/Sensors/GasSensors/tabid/843
/CategoryID/91/List/0/SortField/0/Level/a/ProductID/598/Def
ault.aspx  
[5] 8085 Projects. Info, [retrieved: February, 2012] 
http://www.8085projects.info/default.aspx 
[6] Fritzing Inc., [retrieved: January, 2012] 
http://www10.fritzing.com/ 
[7] Autodesk, Inc., [retrieved: January, 2012] 
http://www.autodesk.com 
[8] I. Heng, F. Zia, and A. Zhang, “Wired and Wireless Port 
Communication.”  In proceedings of The 118th Annual ASEE 
Conference & Exposition, June 26 -29, 2011.   Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada. 
[9] Arduino, [retrieved: January, 2012] 
http://arduino.cc/en/ 
[10] Bonifaz Kaufmann, [retrieved: March, 2012] 
http://www.amarino-toolkit.net/index.php/home.html 
[11] About.com Biology,  [retrieved: March, 2012] 
http://biology.about.com/od/molecularbiology/a/carbon_mono
xide.htm 
[12] Figaro USA Inc., [retrieved: April, 2012] 
http://www.figarosensor.com/products/2442pdf.pdf 
[13] A. Sri-on, S. Sanongraj, and M. Pusayatanont, “A Simple 
Microcontroller Circuit for Carbon Monoxide Sensor.”   The 8th 
Asian-Pacific Regional Conference on Practical Environmental 
Technologies, Ubon Ratchathani University, Ubonratchathani, 
Thailand, March 24-27, 2010. 
[14] MSN, [retrieved: April, 2012] 
http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/8552323/ns/technology_and_science-
tech_and_gadgets/t/future-technology-could-help-thwart-terrorism/  
[15] M. Goldstein, “Carbon monoxide poisoning.” Journal of Emergency 
Nursing: JEN: Official Publication of the Emergency Department 
Nurses Association, Vol. 34, pp. 538 – 542, 2008.  
301
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

