Using Quick Response Codes For Student Interaction During Lectures 
 
Robert Law 
Computer, Communications and Interactive Systems 
Glasgow Caledonian University 
Glasgow, Scotland 
e-mail: robert.law@gcu.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper will present an ongoing project to 
encourage student interaction during lectures through the use 
of Quick Response (QR) codes and Google forms to generate 
rapid response polls and quizzes. The use of Google 
applications (Apps) software and the students’ own mobile 
phone presents a free alternative to the current clicker systems. 
The pedagogical issues associated with such a project will be 
investigated and an attempt made to incorporate these into the 
student experience. The overall process from the creation of 
the software to the roll out and use of the software in an 
interactive lecture, the issues encountered and participant 
feedback will also be described. 
Keywords- QR Codes; Student Interaction; Feedback. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smartphones in the UK, and elsewhere, have seen a surge 
in popularity over the last few years evidenced by recent 
figures showing "Over half of the British population (50.3%) 
now owns a smartphone" [1]. Edinburgh University recently 
conducted a survey of their student population determining 
that 67% had ownership of a smartphone "an increase of 
seventeen percent from those students surveyed seven 
months earlier" [2]. This uptake in smartphone ownership 
within the student population opens a new dimension for 
interaction. 
A tangible increase and use of Quick Response (QR) 
codes by many companies as a form of marketing has ensued 
on the back of this increase in smartphone popularity. This 
has allowed many companies to develop new and engaging 
ways for their customer base to interact with products in situ 
reinforcing brand presence. This potential has already been 
harnessed by Education to extend learning materials through 
the use of QR codes. Learning materials have been enhanced 
by providing "just in time support materials" [3] such as 
videos, explanatory text, Uniform Resource Indicators (URI) 
and staff details. 
Using this as a platform to build from the next logical 
step is to combine the technologies to allow students to 
interact during lectures through quick multiple choice based 
questions. The students’ responses can be compiled to show 
the result in a timely manner [4]. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II gives information about pedagogical issues related 
to interactive lectures, Section III introduces the technology 
used for implementing interactive lectures; this covers both 
hardware and software. Section IV discusses the authors 
experience of implementing interactive lectures, while 
Section V discusses issues encountered during the interactive 
lectures. Section VI offers a summary of our experience of 
interactive lectures, and concludes the paper giving proposals 
for future work. 
II. 
PEDAGOGICAL ISSUES 
Take a typical lecture; what does this encompass? 
Information is imparted upon the student in a relatively one 
way passive communication format. This traditional didactic 
approach is a format that has been used for centuries. This 
research intends to explore the possibility of improving and 
enhancing the lecture experience through the use of 
technology, and in particular, Audience Response Systems 
(ARS). The ability of such systems to encourage active 
learning through student participation and engagement 
provides an opportunity for enhancing the passive lecture 
format by introducing two way interactions with the student 
audience [7].  
Murphy and Sharma further suggest that the research 
literature available for the topic of interactive lectures and 
the related pedagogical issues are “almost non-existent, with 
major issues waiting to be examined… inadequate research 
on the pedagogical implications of the emerging interactive 
forms of learning” [7]. With this in mind there appears to be 
an opportunity to examine and suggest how ARS technology 
could be used to not only enhance lecturer-student 
interactions, but also develop the underlying pedagogical 
issues inherent with lectures. 
ARS technology provides a means for the lecturer to 
engage and interact with the students using the responses to 
offer the student audience feedback. This should lead to 
further discussion and the opportunity for student reflection. 
Other research, reported in Murphy and Sharma [7], 
identifies two pedagogical aspects of interactive lecturing: 
dialogic form of learning and active learning. 
The project intends to examine these issues and the 
resultant effects that they have on the student audience. The 
primary concern is that the interactive lecture will stimulate 
engagement and interaction with the student audience and 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the lecturer through the use of instant feedback. This 
feedback will engender in both the student audience and the 
lecturer the need for reflection on many aspects of the 
material delivered and possibly the module in general. 
Through the use of relevant and targeted questions the 
students can be cajoled into discussions that will help expand 
their understanding of the topic area. Through these 
discussions both the students and the lecturer will be able to 
better understand the level of the students understanding of 
the subject area. 
Gannon-Leary et al. [5] reported a number of other 
positive aspects to arise from interactive lectures including 
improved concentration, greater enjoyment and improved 
attendance. Simpson et al. [8] also noted that the anonymity 
provided by ARS technology played an important part in 
encouraging students to contribute to answering questions 
but suggests, as does Gannon-Leary et al. [5], that the design 
of the questions is very important to the process. 
Saravani and Clayton [9] have developed a conceptual 
framework referred to as A.C.E. This framework is 
composed of the three A’s: Awareness, Action, and 
Accomplishment; 
three 
C’s: 
Context, 
Content, 
and 
Capability; and the three E’s: Enabled, Engaged, and 
Empowered. The three E’s aspect of the framework fits the 
concept driving interactive lectures as the use of mobile 
technology enables, engages and empowers both the student 
body and the lecturer. 
Ramsden [3] suggests, amongst other things, that Quick 
Response (QR) codes can be used for “just in time 
information in a face to face lecture”; drawing on this point 
allows for the expansion of the concept to include feedback 
for both the student and the lecturer. Mooted by Law and So 
[11] is the idea that QR codes can facilitate a “trinity of 
"location 
independence," 
"time 
independence" 
and 
"meaningful content"”. Of interest in this “trinity” is the idea 
of “location independence”; being able to deliver and receive 
feedback to and from the students in the lecture hall. 
III. 
TECHNOLOGY 
ARS systems are available in many forms and price 
points. A typical classroom package can cost $1000 or more 
for software, receiver and 12 clickers [12]. Some systems 
require the student to purchase a clicker and yearly 
registration at a cost of $20/$15, respectively [12]. This 
project developed a “no cost in-house” system that was 
based on three key components: smartphones, QR codes and 
a Google spreadsheet. No proprietary software for the phone 
is required simply a standard browser and bar code reader. 
The “back-end” is relatively simple to create as the 
implementation interface is supplied by Google. 
A. Hardware 
The student participants referred to in Section IV were 
surveyed to determine the spread of handset manufacturers 
and phone operating systems. Around 50 students were 
surveyed. 
Figure 1 shows the spread of handset manufacturers and 
Figure 2 shows the spread of phone operating systems with 
the surveyed population. 
With such a range of manufacturers and operating 
systems an “app” based solution would be time consuming 
and prohibitive. With further investigation, it was discovered 
that third party barcode reading software was available for 
all the platforms, thus allowing the students to use their own 
phones for participation in the lectures. 
 
Figure 1. Spread of manufacturers 
 
Figure 2. Spread of operating systems 
B. 
Software 
The software can be split into three categories: third 
party barcode reading software, third party browser software 
and the development of the interactive engine software 
using Google spreadsheets. It was up to the students 
themselves to decide on a suitable third party barcode 
reading software, although some phones did have such 
software preinstalled. 
Three components of Google spreadsheets were used in 
the creation of the software application: the spreadsheet, the 
form and Google Script. 
The spreadsheet itself is used as a repository for the 
student responses and also to house a summary sheet which 
keeps a running total of the number of responses for each 
possible answer to the question. The work horse of the 
system is the form and the scripts generated to process the 
responses at the back end. When a spreadsheet is created 
using Google Drive, a unique identifier is generated to 
identify the spreadsheet. When the subsequent form is 
created for the spreadsheet, another unique identifier is 
generated. 
Although Google forms can handle a number of 
different inputs, the decision was taken to keep the question 
to a simple multiple choice style question, thus presenting 
the student with two or three QR codes per question. To 
create the QR codes requires the compilation of an http 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

request based on the URI for the Google spreadsheet and the 
data to be sent to the spreadsheet. Once the http request was 
constructed and tested an online QR code generator was 
used to generate the required QR codes. These QR codes 
were subsequently saved as image files for insertion into the 
lecture slides. 
Google script was used to create code that processed the 
student responses as they were received to generate a 
response summary that was visible to the student audience. 
C. Process 
The students used their smartphones to scan the QR code 
of their choice, submitting the data request via their phones 
browser. This, in turn, populated the spreadsheet with the 
students’ choices, activating the script, allowing the results 
to be observed in near real time. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. The interactive process 
 
The QR Code is an encoded representation of the Google 
URI and data that will be sent to the spreadsheet when 
student scans it. As can be seen in Figure 3 above, once 
scanned, the information encoded in the QR code is 
decrypted and becomes visible to the phone’s user. At this 
point, the participant has the ability to accept or decline the 
invite to send the data request. When the participant accepts 
the request to send the data, the next step is to invoke the 
phone’s browser (this can work in different ways, depending 
on the phone/operating system) which will send the http 
request to Google for processing. Once processed, a “thank 
you” message is displayed in the browser indicating the data 
request has been received. 
Once the data request has been received, the data is 
placed in the spreadsheet; the data will be based on the URI 
encoded in the QR Code. An example is shown below in 
Figure 4. 
It is noticeable from Figure 4 that the spreadsheet date 
and time stamps the entries as it receives them. The only data 
that the spreadsheet records is the data encoded in the QR 
Code and the date and time stamp it generates on receipt of 
the data. Hence, all entries are anonymous. 
 
Figure 4. Data sent to the spreadsheet 
 
Figure 5. Summary sheet 
 
Figure 6. Generated bar chart 
 
As each entry is received, a script is triggered, which 
counts the entries based on the predefined data set and 
populates a summary sheet which is used to generate the 
“near real time” bar charts. 
An example of a summary sheet is shown in Figure 5 and 
an example of the bar chart displayed to the students is 
shown in Figure 6. 
IV. 
EXPERIENCE 
A set of initial tests were developed to examine the 
viability of the technology and gauge the reaction of the 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

students to the use of this technology within the lecture 
environment. The aim of the tests was to introduce the 
interaction concept in a gradual staged manner that wouldn't 
over burden the student or detract from the lecture.  
A. Test Setup 
The process used to create this interactive lecture was 
based on designing a set of suitable questions that could be 
used to strategically punctuate the lecture to gain maximum 
benefit for the students [13]. 
The desired effect was to integrate the technology within 
the lecture while stimulating interaction with the students 
[13]. As such, the first set of tests was built to increase in a 
systematic manner the number of questions within the 
lecture and the number of QR codes within the questions. 
The structure of the first set of tests was designed to build 
from one question with one QR code in the lecture to four 
questions with three codes per question in the lecture. 
Suitable points within the lecture were identified such that 
the questions could be inserted to maximise their impact. An 
attempt was made to define suitable points through natural 
break points within the lecture e.g. end of a topic, end of the 
lecture, worked example. Using this principal, questions 
could be deployed with the aim of giving both the student 
and the lecturer instant feedback on the comprehension of 
the material delivered. 
B. Participants 
Both sets of participants were studying on the Games 
Software Development Degree. The first group to undertake 
the interactive lectures was a second year cohort of around 
30 students and the second group to undertake the interactive 
lectures was a final year cohort of around 20 students. 
The second year cohort had three consecutive lectures. 
The first of the three lectures had one question with two QR 
codes positioned at the end of the Lecture. The second 
Lecture had three questions, each with two QR codes 
positioned at appropriate points within the Lecture and the 
final Lecture had four questions, each with three QR codes 
again positioned at appropriate points within the Lecture. 
The final year cohort had two lectures which were non-
consecutive. The first of the two lectures had two questions 
each with three QR codes positioned at appropriate points 
within the Lecture and the second Lecture had two questions 
each with three QR codes positioned at appropriate points 
within the Lecture. 
At the appropriate point in the lecture, the slide would be 
displayed. To help minimize issues with scanning, paper 
copies of the slide were also distributed. This allowed for the 
difference within the quality of phone cameras to focus on 
the projected QR codes. It was fully explained to the students 
the nature of the experiment and the procedure which should 
be followed to correctly participate in the experiment. 
C. Feedback 
Initial feedback from both test groups has been positive 
and very informative. Feedback ranged from the ease of 
operation of the process to the size of the QR codes. In 
general a “buzz” was created within the participant groups 
generating a positive reaction from the students. This 
reaction must be tempered by the fact that the students are 
open to the “Hawthorne effect” [14] and, as such, more trials 
will need to be run to assess and define a clearer picture of 
the students reaction. 
V. 
ISSUES 
Although the overall outcome of the experiments was 
positive, a number of issues were highlighted that require 
further polishing prior to subsequent use. 
Currently, the whole process required to create and 
integrate the QR codes into a lecture are quite cumbersome 
and may prove challenging for a non-computing subject 
specialist. An ongoing project has been put in place to 
integrate and automate the creation of the QR codes through 
a Web based Google spreadsheet application. 
An issue flagged up by the participants centered on the 
size and positioning of the QR codes as this can have an 
impact on the accuracy of the scanning process. 
The student participants indicated that the size of the QR 
codes on a projected slide proved difficult to scan directly. 
Not all students were able to scan it directly. This had been 
anticipated and paper based copies of the slides were issued 
to counter that problem. The issue appears to lie with the 
quality of the camera supplied with the phone. 
Positioning of the QR Codes on the slide raised debate 
with the participants as some indicated that the barcode 
scanner software could find it difficult to focus on the 
required code. This seemed to be more prevalent when the 
codes were positioned side by side horizontally rather than 
stacked vertically. The number of QR codes on the slide also 
influenced the ease of scanning, with three codes per slide 
proving more challenging for the phone’s barcode scanner. 
This was not insurmountable, but merely added a small time 
overhead as the participants positioned their camera phone to 
optimize the scan. 
During one trial, a small number of participants 
encountered an issue with the barcode scanner software they 
were using. One student managed to automatically scan and 
send the same QR Code a number of times which did skew 
the graph for that particular question. On the lighter side, it 
did add a slice of humor, as the graph seemed to be growing 
by more than there were participants! On investigation, the 
student concerned indicated that the problem had arisen due 
to a setting in the third party barcode scanner software. 
An intermittent issue, which arose on one occasion, was 
the apparent delay/failure of the chart to update itself as the 
data was received. This led to the chart being manually 
refreshed which did have an effect on the desired impact of 
the interactivity of the lecture. 
Time management of both the interactions and the 
subsequent discussions should be built into the lecture 
timings allowing for leeway should anything go awry with 
the technology. 
This approach relies on all the students in the lecture 
having a smartphone and it is conceivable that a small 
percentage of the student audience may in fact not have a 
smartphone or even a mobile phone. The perception would 
be that this student would be disadvantaged by not being 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

able to take part in the interaction. This would be, of course, 
true. However, it could be mooted that the student is still 
engaged in the wider discussion that will come from viewing 
the generated graph. Another possibility is to rely on the 
goodwill of a fellow student to share access to their phone. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The overall trials were generally well received by the 
students serving the purpose of generating positive 
interaction between the lecturer and the students. 
Students appeared to enjoy the break in the lecture and 
the feedback and discussion generated by the visual charting 
of their responses. It also created a focus point for the 
students to reflect on their understanding of the material 
taught and to apply that understanding. By the same token, it 
proved to be beneficial to the lecturer indicating the level of 
understanding of the delivered material to the students. 
The anonymity of the whole process was cited by a 
number of students as positive. They felt comfortable with 
the fact that they could answer the questions freely, getting 
them wrong and not feeling awkward in front of their peers. 
The project is ongoing and the positive feedback received 
from the students indicates that it is a worthwhile pursuit for 
both the lecturer and the students. 
With regard to performance, this prototype system works 
well, producing the column chart of responses in near real 
time. More evaluation of the systems performance against 
other ARS systems is required. Initial use suggests promise 
with this cloud based system. Advantages this system offers 
is the fact it is free, flexible, easily tailored to suit the 
lecturer’s needs and platform independent. 
A further avenue for investigation will be the correct 
utilization and positioning of the interactive lectures within 
the overall module lecture delivery schedule. Over or under 
use will have an impact on their effectiveness. 
Further investigation will be made with regard to the 
sizing, positioning and visibility of QR Codes from projected 
and paper based slides. 
The use of the technique within the tutorial/seminar 
setting to encourage more debate on theoretical and social 
subjects is path that will be followed. 
Further investigation will be undertaken into the relative 
pros and cons of storing complex responses in the 
spreadsheet, as evidenced in figure 4, and simplistic 
responses in the form A, B, C, etc. The outcome of this 
investigation will have an impact on the future development 
of the software. 
A significant proportion of future work will be involved 
in developing a user friendly interface to the software to 
allow cross discipline use. The script code will be hidden 
from the user allowing them to concentrate on the 
development of their question bank. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Kantar Worldpanel, The smartest way to communicate: over half of 
the 
GB 
population 
owns 
a 
smartphone. 
Available: 
http://goo.gl/Z1n7u. [retrieved:  July , 2013]. 
[2] EUSA, Campus app now available for download. Available: 
http://www.eusa.ed.ac.uk/news/article/6001/290/. [retrieved:  July , 
2013]. 
[3] A. Ramsden, ”The use of QR codes in Education: A getting started 
guide for academics.” Working Paper. University of Bath., 2008. 
[4] R.Law, Using Quick Response Codes for Student Interaction During 
Lectures, ITiCSE, ACM 978-1-4503-1246, 2012. 
[5] P. Gannon-Leary, C. Turnock, and M. McCarthy, "RECAP series 
paper 15", 2007. 
[6] R.C. Lowery, "Teaching and learning with interactive student 
response systems: A comparison of commercial products in the 
higher-education market", 2005 
[7] R. Murphy, and N. Sharma, "What Don’t we know about interactive 
lectures?", Seminar. net–International journal of media, technology 
and lifelong learning, 2010, pp. 111.  
[8] V. Simpson and M. Oliver, "Electronic voting systems for lectures 
then and now: A comparison of research and practice", Australasian 
journal of educational technology, vol. 23, no. 2, 2007,  pp. 187. 
[9] S.A Saravani and J.F. Clayton, A conceptual model for the 
educational deployment of QR codes. In Same places, different 
spaces. Proceedings ascilite Auckland 2009.  
[10] V. Yfantis, P. Kalagiakos, C. Kouloumperi, and P. Karampelas, 
"Quick response codes in E-learning", Education and e-Learning 
Innovations (ICEELI), 2012 International Conference, 2012, pp. 1. 
[11] C.Y. Law, and W.W.S. So, "QR codes in education", Journal of 
Educational Technology Development and Exchange, vol. 3, no. 1, 
2010, pp. 85-100. 
[12] E. Bojinova and J. Oigara, "Teaching and learning with clickers: Are 
clickers good for students", Interdisciplinary Journal of E-Learning 
and Learning Objects, vol. 7, 2011, pp. 169-183. 
[13] A.P. Fagen, C.H. Crouch, and E. Mazur, "Peer instruction: Results 
from a range of classrooms", Physics Teacher, vol. 40, no. 4, 2002, 
pp. 206-209. 
[14] S.R. Jones, "Was there a Hawthorne effect?", American Journal of 
Sociology, 1992, pp. 451-468. 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

