Twitter Usage of German Online Retailers
Georg Lackermair, Daniel Kailer
Munich University of Applied Sciences
Department of Computer Science and Mathematics
Munich, Germany
Email: {georg.lackermair, dkailer}@hm.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the role of Twitter for
German online retailers based on an empirical study. We analyze
Tweets of the best selling German online retailers with qualitative
and quantitative methods. Based on our results, we derive a
conceptual model that can be used to classify different interaction
strategies for online retailers. We identify four different interac-
tion strategies. Three strategies are based on social interactions
either on Twitter or by redirecting users to other social networks.
The fourth strategy is applied to promote products of the
retailers’ online store. Another result is that accounts which
apply a user interaction focused strategy inside of Twitter through
User Mentions, have a signiﬁcantly higher number of followers
compared to the accounts that use other strategies.
Keywords–E-commerce; Twitter; Study; Social Web.
I.
INTRODUCTION
E-commerce plays an ever increasing role in the German
economy. With the rise of the social web, the importance
of social interactions with customers has also increased for
online retailers. Traditional tools to reach customers include
for example discussion boards, weblogs or newsfeeds. But in
recent years, more and more online retailers have turned to the
microblogging platform Twitter in order to reach out to new
or existing customers.
A lot of research is conducted to understand the usage
of Twitter. For example, the study of Java et al. investigated
the user intentions and community structures of Twitter [1].
But to our best knowledge, there is no study that explicitly
investigated the Twitter usage of online retailers. In this paper,
we contribute knowledge to this area of research by presenting
an empirical study that investigates the Twitter usage of
German B2C online retailers.
In our study, we applied qualitative and quantitative meth-
ods to answer the following research questions:
•
RQ1: How many online retailers are actually using
Twitter and how active are they?
•
RQ2: How can the Twitter interaction strategy of
online retailers be classiﬁed?
The results to research question RQ1 will show the accep-
tance of Twitter as a tool to reach new and existing customers.
Secondly, we answer research question RQ2 by analyzing
Tweets in regard to different Twitter entities, e.g., URLs or
User Mentions. We will present a conceptual model that can
be applied to categorize the used Twitter interaction strategies
of the conducted online stores.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In
Section II, we present the theoretical background. We then
explain the design of our empirical study in Section III. After
that, we show the results of the study in Section IV and
discuss them in Section V. Finally, the article concludes with
an outlook for future research.
II.
THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
The main research areas addressed in this paper comprise
the social web and e-commerce. The combination of social
media and e-commerce are often denoted as Social Commerce
[2], [3]. Most of the studies in social commerce investigate the
customers’ perspective to the platform Twitter. In this study,
we will focus on the retailers’ perspective instead.
Twitter is the most popular microblogging service in the
web. Every day, about 500 million Tweets are published on
this platform. Reasons for this success can be found in its
simplicity, scalability, ubiquity, and interactivity. Due to its
publish/subscribe capabilities, more and more users shift from
traditional newsfeeds based on RSS and Atom to Twitter.
This publish/subscribe capability is Twitter’s fundamental
pattern: Users subscribe either to other users or to Hashtags
(HTs). The use of HTs is a communication convention, that
enables authors to post a message either to a community or
to add a content information [4]. Other conventions are User
Mentions (UMs) (denoted by an @-sign) and Retweets [5].
From the Twitter API’s view, Hashtags, User Mentions and
URLs are treated as special entities. The use of those entities
are examined by [6] in a large scale study.
Previous works have investigated that Twitter is used for
various communication purposes [7], [4]. Twitter entries can be
classiﬁed in ﬁve different genres [8]: (a) Personal Updates, (b)
Directed Dialog, (c) Real-time Sharing, (d) Business Broad-
casting and (e) Information Seeking. These communication
genres are discussed below.
The genre of personal updates contains mostly “daily
chatter” [1], which means information about, what a user is
thinking or doing at the moment. According to [1] this is the
most common use of Twitter. According to [8] those posts are
mainly issued by sparsely connected users.
A directed dialog is a message that is directed to a certain
user by the use of an @-sign (User Mention). Measures to
detect UMs are not exact, since there are other conventions that
use the @-sign as well, but in Twitter trafﬁc the vast majority
of occurrences are UMs [9]. According to [10, p.21-25], UMs
are an indicator about the interactivity of online relationships
in Twitter.
In regard to business broadcasting, it is interesting to
classify and measure the inﬂuence of a user. Mainly based
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

on the ratio between followers and friends, Twitter users
can be categorized as broadcasters, acquaintances, miscreants
and evangelists [11]. The number of posts as a function of
the number of friends is increasing without any saturation
[12]. Nonetheless, the classiﬁcation of miscreants/spammers is
controversial, as this group would also include users, that use
Twitter primarily as newsfeed. The measurement of inﬂuence
was reﬁned by [13] and adopted to take Twitter’s charac-
teristic features into consideration. The indegree inﬂuence
is the number of followers of a user. This is the size of
audience a user can reach, without directing a post via HTs
to further channels. A Retweet inﬂuence indicates the ability
to generate content, that is redistributed by the followers. The
User Mention inﬂuence indicates the number of User Mentions
containing the name of the examined user, which indicates the
ability to engage the audience in a conversation.
The information seeking behavior is examined in [14].
They gathered and analyzed data for three different question
types. They found out that the most popular type of questions
are rhetorical questions with an overall very low response rate.
Another interesting aspect about the communication on
Twitter are URLs that are embedded in Tweets. URLs are
by default shortened by the platform’s own shortening service
http://t.co [15]. The targeted URLs can be categorized as
self-links, social media links and other external links. For
our study, the former two contain interesting information. A
self-link points to the own website of an online retailer and
indicates the promotion of a product. Social media URLs direct
users to discussions on other social networks, e.g., Facebook.
This indicates a more community-centric activity than links to
product pages.
III.
STUDY DESIGN
In this section, we will present the underlying design of
our empirical study.
A. Data Collection
To acquire a sample of e-commerce related communica-
tions, we used a list of the 115 best-selling online-retailers in
Germany [16]. We matched their Twitter accounts by querying
search engines. If we were not able to ﬁnd an account, we
tried to collect the information manually by examining the
online retailer’s website. We then evaluated manually, whether
their Twitter account is targeting the German market. For this
purpose we checked the proﬁles’ descriptions and timelines.
Based on the found Twitter accounts, we collected two
different datasets. First, we retrieved common account infor-
mation for the Twitter account, e.g., the lifetime of the account,
number of followers, number of friends, number of favorites
and the number of status updates issued by the account.
Second, for each account we collected the timeline consisting
of last 100 status updates. We used the Twitter REST API to
access this data.
For the analysis of Tweets, we queried the REST API for
the last 100 status updates issued by the acquired accounts (see
Section IV-A). From this sample we extracted a smaller subset
of 200 Tweets from 10 different retailers, which was used to
identify genres by a manually performed content analysis. The
data collection was carried out on 14th of February, 2014.
B. Analysis
First, we analyzed the data set containing the common
information of the accounts. The lifetime of an account in days
is deﬁned as L. To calculate the Tweet rate RT per lifetime as
an indicator for broadcasting activity, we use the total number
of Tweets since the creation of the account (T) and relate it
to L (see (1)).
RT = T
L
(1)
In order to analyze the links to other users, the number
of followers fin, the number of friends fout, and the listed
count lin can be used. As stated in Section II, those values
are considered as in- and outdegree measures. To reﬂect the
lifetime of an account, we relate those values to L and, thus,
deﬁne indregree rate Rin and Rout in (2) and (3).
Rin = fin + lin
L
(2)
Rout = fout
L
(3)
We used the timeline data set to analyze the data set
quantitatively to derive information about the communication
strategy implemented by a retailer. We were particularly inter-
ested in distinguishing between the purposes to engage users
in a dialog or to promote products directly. User Mentions and
URLs are indicators for these purposes. A UM indicates the
attempt to start a conversation with a customer or to reply to a
post issued by a user. Depending on the target, a URL serves as
an indicator for both categories: A link to a site of the retailers’
online shop follows the purpose of promoting a product,
whereas a link to the companies blog or a social network
is clearly a community management activity. To enrich the
coarse grained strategical categories, we analyzed the sample
of Tweets qualitatively to identify e-commerce related Tweet
genres, that represent common interaction activities between
retailers and consumers.
IV.
RESULTS
In this section, we will present the results of our study.
First, we present a common analysis of the investigated ac-
counts. Second, we describe the found interaction strategies
of the investigated accounts and illustrate those strategies with
Tweet genres.
A. Analysis of accounts
First, we have identiﬁed the accounts that are managed
by the online retailers. Figure 1 shows the results of the
identiﬁcation and retrieval process. As bar (a) shows, we were
able to identify 88 accounts for our list of 115 retailers. The
removal of accounts not targeting German users is represented
by bar (b). We excluded 11 accounts from further retrieval.
Bar (c) visualizes the retrieval of account information, which
depend on the accounts settings. We successfully retrieved
the information for 76 shops. As bar (d) shows, 59 of those
accounts were classiﬁed as being active in the last month.
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

(a) found
(b) DE
(c) retrieved
(d) active
Steps of the collection process
Number of accounts
0
20
40
60
80
100
Values
no
yes
Figure 1.
Identiﬁcation and retrieval of Online-Retailers’ Twitter accounts.
Most of the account names reﬂect the shop’s name, which
can consist of the company’s name or a brand name. Besides
that, many ids also include regional attribute, which can be
a country name, a region name or a country code. The latter
could also reﬂect the shop’s URL.
The variables lifetime, status updates per day, indegree and
outdegree derived from the proﬁle information are summarized
in Table I. We calculated the .25, .50 and .75 quantiles and
added Geary’s skewness indicator. The mean account lifetime
is slightly above 4 years, while the values are slightly left-
skewed. Since its creation, an account issued on average about
seven Tweets per day, whereas the data is strongly right-
skewed. The majority of accounts issued less than two Tweets
per day. The mean increase of indegree is about 1.6 followers
per day, while the data is right-skewed. For 75% of the
retailers, this value is at about 1.5 or less. The outdegree value
for 75% of the accounts is at about 0.6 or less.
B. Twitter interaction strategies
To determine the Twitter interaction strategies of the con-
ducted accounts, we ﬁrst deﬁne the following sets:
•
A: All Twitter accounts whereas each element a
represents an online retailer from the sample.
•
T: All observed Tweets.
•
TM: All Tweets that address other Twitter users, i.e.,
Tweets that contain at least one User Mention.
•
TS: All Tweets that contain at least one URL that is
referring to another social network, e.g., Facebook.
•
TP : All Tweets that contain at least one URL that is
referring to the online store, e.g., URLs that link to
certain products or special offers.
Based on the Tweets that contain User Mentions (TM),
URLs to social networks (TS) and URLs to the online store
of the account owner (TP ), we derived our conceptual model
as depicted in Figure 2. As shown in the ﬁgure, we identiﬁed
four different strategies, which will be explained below.
The ﬁrst strategy S1 is characterized by a frequent com-
munication with other Twitter users. Accounts that apply this
strategy (AS1) make use of User Mentions in at least two-thirds
of their Tweets (see (4)).
AS1 =

a
a ∈ A; TMa
Ta
≥ 0.66

(4)
Strategy S2 is applied by accounts that intend to direct
Twitter users either to the weblog of the company or to a
website of another social network (e.g., Facebook) to continue
communication there. We assigned accounts to this strategy
when at least two-thirds of their Tweets contain URLs to other
social networks or to a company weblog (see (5)).
AS2 =

a
a ∈ A; TSa
Ta
≥ 0.66

(5)
Strategy S3 is categorized by accounts that use strategy
S1 and S2 moderately, i.e., accounts that make moderate use
of User Mentions and moderate use of URLs to other social
networks or weblogs. Moderate use means that User Mentions
and social network URLs are present in at least one third, but
no more than two-thirds of the Tweets (see (6)).
AS3 =

a
a ∈ A; 0.33 ≤ TMa
Ta
< 0.66

\ 
a
a ∈ A; 0.33 ≤ TSa
Ta
< 0.66

(6)
The last strategy S4 is based on the URLs in Tweets that
refer to the website of the online retailer. An account is using
this strategy, when at least two-thirds of the Tweets contain
URLs to the retailers online store, i.e., URLs for promotional
purposes (see (7)).
AS4 =

a
a ∈ A; TPa
Ta
≥ 0.66

(7)
Finally, all accounts that did not ﬁt into the four above
strategies were classiﬁed as having no clear strategy (see (8)).
ASx = A \ (AS1 ∪ AS2 ∪ AS3 ∪ AS4)
(8)
A short summary of the above mentioned strategies, their
relative occurrences and their average number of followers are
displayed in Table II. As shown in the table, strategies S1 to
S3 can be classiﬁed as an interactive strategy, while strategy
S4 can be best described as a promotional strategy.
Based on these interaction strategies, we have qualitatively
identiﬁed Tweet genres, that represent various communication
purposes in the e-commerce. To perform that task, we have
analyzed the timeline containing the last 20 Tweets of 10
accounts (n=200). We illustrate each genre with synthetic
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE I.
VARIABLES CHARACTERIZING THE RETAILERS’ TWITTER PROFILES.
min
Q.25
Q.50
mean
Q.75
max
skewness
Lifetime in years (L)
0.893
3.748
4.563
4.139
4.822
5.777
-1.350
Tweet rate (RT )
0.057
0.418
1.208
7.711
1.894
367.300
7.345
Indegree rate (Rin)
0.055
0.482
0.987
1.575
1.471
8.258
2.209
Outdegree rate (Rout)
0.004
0.068
0.198
0.620
0.629
8.008
4.314
Fraction of Tweets 
including Usermentions
Fraction of Tweets 
including social URLs
Strategy S1
Strategy S2
Strategy S3
Strategy S4
Fraction of Tweets 
including promotional 
URLs
x >= 0.66
x >= 0.66
x >= 0.66
Figure 2.
Conceptual model derived from our exploratory research.
TABLE II.
SUMMARY OF THE IDENTIFIED TWITTER INTERACTION STRATEGIES.
Strategy
Description
Occurrences
Ø followers
Interactive
S1
On Twitter
High interaction with other Twitter users through User Mentions
19%
6048
S2
On other platforms
Redirecting Twitter users to other social network sites (e.g., Facebook) through URLs
24%
1175
S3
Mixed interaction
Moderate interaction through User Mentions and moderate redirection to social networks
5%
3097
S4
Promotional
Posting URLs to promote products of the own online store
21%
2398
Sx
No clear strategy
No clear strategy could be determined
31%
1994
TABLE III.
GENRES AND SYNTHETIC EXAMPLES FROM OUR QUALITATIVE ANALYSIS.
Genre
Example(s)
News
1
“Today would be Mozart’s 258th birthday”
2
“Report: Namm Show News 2014 http://shorten.er/URL”
Review
3
“RT @user1: very fast delivery by @retailerA”
4
“RT @user2: testing guitar manufactured by #ESP http://shortener/URL @retailerA”
5
“Test: Steinberg Cubase 7.5, Digitale Audio Workstation http://shorten.er/URL”
Promotion
6
“under #offer: #TOUCHLET X7Gs Tablet-PC for only EUR 89,90! http://shorten.er/URL”
Service
7
“@user3 Our customer service help@retailerC sure has an idea. They will contact you.”
8
“@user4 We’ve orderd 20 pieces in November, but we still don’t have a delivery date”
Dialog
9
“@user5 What exactly are you planning? #renovate ˆcm”
10
“@user5 Wow, that’s quite a project! How many squaremeters? ˆcm”
11
“@user5 You’ll certainly cope with it! ˆcm”
Recruiting
12
“#retailerD Do you need a job? Apply now! http://shorten.er/URL”
Request for collaboration
13
“To Celebrate #NationalPuzzleDay we are giving away £100 of puzzles for chance to win
just RT&Follow ends 6pm 31/01/14”
Agent
14
“@user5 You’ll certainly cope with it! ˆcm”
15
“@user6 Please send an email with your customer number to twitter@retailerE.de.
We are looking forward to help you soon as possible.ˆTom”
16
“#3: coupon book: http://shorten.er/URL”
17
“@user7 I need to ask a colleague. I’ll get back to you (ar)”
examples in Table III. Because Twitter’s terms of service
prevents republication of Tweets, we needed to create synthetic
examples of our sample for publication. Those Tweet genres
are explained below.
News: A Tweet that contains news that are related to
the business domain of the retailer. Both examples for this
category are published by a retailer for musical instruments.
Both contain news that might be interesting for their customers.
Since the Tweet contains neither HTs nor UMs, we assume
that the Tweet is intended to provide an additional incentive
to follow the account.
Review: A Tweet transporting a review for a product,
service or overall quality of service. The issuer of the Tweet
could be a customer or the retailer itself. The Tweet could be
self-contained or could link to media located on the retailers’
site or on external media. Examples 3 and 4 are retweeted by
the company and contain a review generated by a user.
Promotion: The intention of these Tweets are to promote
products or special offers. The Tweets might contain an URL
linking to product page and the respective price of that product.
Both attributes are contained in the corresponding examples.
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Service: Tweets that answer questions posted by customers
either before or after purchasing a product. Example 7 indi-
cates that the retailer answers to a message of a customer after
purchasing a technical device. Example 8 is also an answer to
a directed post by a user, but in contrast to the former the user
was asking about the availability of an article that was sold-out
at this time.
Dialog: An retailer’s agent engages in a dialog in request-
ing more information, e.g., about a project. The corresponding
example shows a dialog that consists of 5 entries and which
was initiated by customer with a directed Tweet.
Recruiting: Companies try to promote job offers online. In
the corresponding example, a URL linking to a more detailed
job description is contained. To increase the audience reached
by such an advertisement, usually HTs are added. In example
12, the author misleadingly tags the company’s name, which
is not very likely to increase the number of direct followers.
Request for collaboration: In order to enhance the at-
tention and visibility, companies try to motivate users to
collaborate in retweeting posts issued by a retailer. In example
13 the company uses a competition to motivate users to
retweet.
Tagging agent: Adding an attribute, which identiﬁes the
person issuing a Tweet on behalf of a company. The cor-
responding examples illustrate three different variations that
were found in the sample. Examples 14 and 15 use the
circumﬂex sign to mark this attribute, whereas the former uses
an abbreviation. In example 16, the issuer is identiﬁed by
a numeric id, which is annotated with a hash notation. The
example shows an abbreviated name in brackets.
V.
DISCUSSION
In Section IV-A, we analyzed the existence and activity of
online retailers on Twitter. In our sample, about 77% of the
retailers maintain a Twitter account and about 78% of these
accounts were active at the time of retrieval. According to our
data, the majority of the accounts were created since 2010,
which means that the adoption in German e-commerce started
roughly two years after the dramatic growth in popularity
in the U.S. in 2008 [9]. This reﬂects the slower adoption
of the German population [6], [17], [18]. Besides that, we
observed that the indegrees of those accounts are higher than
the outdegrees. Which means that online retailers do not
tend to follow back each of their followers, to improve the
reputation of their customers. This characteristic is consistent
with the category of broadcasters deﬁned in [11]. Surprisingly,
there are also outliers that do follow back all of their followers.
For the identiﬁcation of different communication strategies,
we have analyzed the use of URLs and UMs in Section IV-B. A
limitation of this part of our work is, that we analyzed only the
locations of the URLs and not the content behind it. We can’t
rule out the possibility that, for example, a Facebook URL
points to a post, that contains a link to a product promotion.
This was not further examined in our study.
We found out that 31% of the accounts did not follow a
clear communication strategy. These accounts are not regularly
involved in user interactions and are not using Twitter often
to promote products. The other 69% of the accounts were
following a speciﬁc strategy according to our conceptual model
(see Figure 2). Although our model allows the occurrence of
multiple strategies per account, we did not ﬁnd accounts that
actually applied more than one strategy. This shows that our
deﬁned strategies are disjunctive and clearly separated from
each other.
We found that Twitter accounts with a frequent user in-
teraction through User Mentions, have a signiﬁcantly higher
number of followers. On the other hand, Twitter accounts that
only post URLs to redirect users to other social networks (e.g.,
Facebook), have the lowest number of followers. These two
results leave room for interpretation. One possible explanation
is that a direct contact to customers through User Mentions is
a motivator for users to follow the online retailers’ account.
An interpretation for the low follower count of accounts that
only redirect users could be that the targeted users are already
connected to the online retailer in another social network (e.g.,
they are friends in Facebook). Because the interaction happens
in another social network, it could be of less value for a
customer to follow an online retailer on Twitter.
Besides that, we derived genres of Tweets from a subset
of our sample, to describe the coarse grained strategies in
detail. Those genres build a tool for classiﬁcation and analysis
of direct interaction between companies in the e-commerce
and users on Twitter. Due to the exploratory character of this
study and the relatively small data set, we did not quantify
the frequency of those genres. Our results could build the
conceptual base for such a study.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we made three contributions. First, we have
determined the share of retailers, that maintain an active
account on Twitter. Second, we have identiﬁed genres and
communication patterns used in the e-commerce for direct
communication with users. Those categories can be used as an
analytic framework for studying microblogging in the Social
Commerce. Third, we have derived basic interaction strategies
from our data set and created a conceptual model based on
these strategies. We also showed the usage of User Mentions
and URLs and their purpose inside of Tweets.
In our future work, we primarily aim at working on the
limitation of our results, as stated in Section V. An important
aspect will be the validation and reﬁnement of our approach to
classify the communication strategies as mentioned in Section
IV-B. We aim to perform an in-depth content analysis on a
subset of our data to evaluate our result. Besides that, we plan
to collect and label a larger data set and quantify the use of the
Tweet categories deﬁned in this article. Another limitation of
our approach lies within the composition of our sample with
a focus on the German market. Thus, we plan to perform a
similar study with samples focusing on different markets and
compare the results to the results of this work.
REFERENCES
[1]
A. Java, T. Finin, X. Song, and B. Tseng, “Why we twitter: Under-
standing microblogging usage and communities,” 2007, URL: http:
//aisl.umbc.edu/get/softcopy/id/1073/1073.pdf [retrieved: April, 2014].
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[2]
M. B¨achle, “Economical Perspectives on the Web 2.0 - Open Innova-
tion, Social Commerce and Enterprise 2.0 ( ¨Okonomische Perspektiven
des Web 2.0 - Open Innovation, Social Commerce und Enterprise 2.0),”
WIRTSCHAFTSINFORMATIK, vol. 50, no. 2, 2008, pp. 129–132,
URL: http://dx.doi.org/10.1365/s11576-008-0024-2 [retrieved: April,
2014].
[3]
A. Richter, M. Koch, and J. Krisch, Social commerce: An analysis of
the change in the E-commerce (Social commerce: eine Analyse des
Wandels im E-commerce).
Fak. f¨ur Informatik, Univ. der Bundeswehr
M¨unchen, 2007.
[4]
L. Yang, T. Sun, M. Zhang, and Q. Mei, “We know what @you #tag:
Does the dual role affect hashtag adoption?” in Proceedings of the 21st
International Conference on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’12.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM, 2012, pp. 261–270, URL: http://doi.acm.org/
10.1145/2187836.2187872 [retrieved: April, 2014].
[5]
A. Bifet, G. Holmes, B. Pfahringer, and R. Gavalda, “Detecting senti-
ment change in twitter streaming data,” in Workshop on Applications
of Pattern Analysis (WAPA) 2011 Proceedings, 2011, pp. 1–15.
[6]
L. Hong, G. Convertino, and E. H. Chi, “Language matters in twitter:
A large scale study.” in ICWSM, 2011, pp. 518–521.
[7]
H. Kwak, C. Lee, H. Park, and S. Moon, “What is twitter, a social
network or a news media?” in Proceedings of the 19th International
Conference on World Wide Web, ser. WWW ’10. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2010, pp. 591–600, URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1772690.
1772751 [retrieved: April, 2014].
[8]
S. Westman and L. Freund, “Information interaction in 140 characters
or less: Genres on twitter,” in Proceedings of the Third Symposium on
Information Interaction in Context, ser. IIiX ’10. New York, NY, USA:
ACM, 2010, pp. 323–328, URL: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1840784.
1840833 [retrieved: April, 2014].
[9]
C. Honeycutt and S. C. Herring, “Beyond microblogging: Conversation
and collaboration via twitter,” 2009, URL: http://ella.slis.indiana.edu/
∼herring/honeycutt.herring.2009.pdf [retrieved: April, 2014].
[10]
H.
Edman,
“Twittering
to
the
top:
A
content
analysis
of
corporate
tweets
to
measure
organization-public
relationships,”
2010,
URL:
http://etd.lsu.edu/docs/available/etd-04292010-
162453/unrestricted/edmanthesis.pdf [retrieved: April, 2014].
[11]
B. Krishnamurthy, P. Gill, and M. Arlitt, “A few chirps about twit-
ter,” 2008, URL: http://www2.research.att.com/∼bala/papers/twit.pdf
[retrieved: April, 2014].
[12]
B. A. Huberman, D. M. Romero, and F. Wu, “Social networks
that matter: Twitter under the microscope,” 2008, URL: http://www.
uic.edu/htbin/cgiwrap/bin/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2317/2063 [re-
trieved: April, 2014].
[13]
M. Cha, H. Haddadi, F. Bevevenuto, and K. P. Gummadi, “Measuring
user inﬂuence in twitter: The million follower fallacy,” 2010, URL:
http://snap.stanford.edu/class/cs224w-readings/cha10inﬂuence.pdf
[re-
trieved: April, 2014].
[14]
S. A. Paul, L. Hong, and E. H. Chi, “Is twitter a good place for asking
questions? a characterization study.” in ICWSM, 2011, pp. 578–581.
[15]
“About twitter’s link service (http://t.co),” URL: https://support.twitter.
com/entries/109623# [retrieved: April, 2014].
[16]
D. Kailer, P. Mandl, and A. Schill, “An empirical study on the usage
of social media in german b2c-online stores,” International journal of
advanced Information technology, vol. 3, no. 5, 2013, pp. 1–14.
[17]
“Twitter
reaches
half
a
billion
accounts,”
2012,
URL:
http://semiocast.com/en/publications/2012 07 30 Twitter reaches
half a billion accounts 140m in the US [retrieved: April, 2014].
[18]
“Why do germans shun twitter?” 2013, URL: http://www.economist.
com/blogs/babbage/2013/12/social-media [retrieved: April, 2014].
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

