Modeling User Experience 
An integrated framework employing ISO 25010 standard 
Maissom Qanber Abbasi, Philip Lew, Irfan Rafique, Jingnong Weng and Yunhong Wang 
School of Computer Science and Engineering 
Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics 
Beijing, P.R. China 
e-mail: maissom@cse.buaa.edu.cn, philip.lew@buaa.edu.cn, irfan@cse.buaa.edu.cn, wengjn@buaa.edu.cn and 
yhwang@buaa.edu.cn
 
 
Abstract— The concept of user experience has been given 
much importance in the contemporary human computer 
interaction research. However, modeling user experience 
requires quality evaluation schemes that are not restricted to 
the traditional concepts of usability only, where requirements 
have generally been task oriented. On the contrary, in addition 
to modeling of usability (or task oriented) requirements, 
comprehensive methodologies to model subjective user needs 
should be put forward. In this paper, we discuss and relate 
various facets of user experience in order to lay foundation for 
engineering user experience requirements. In doing so, we 
propose a model to capture temporal requirements of user 
experience. We further employ this model and integrate it with 
the existing ISO 25010 standard to build a comprehensive and 
flexible user experience modeling framework. The usefulness 
of the proposed framework is also demonstrated by outlining a 
general guideline for specifying and evaluating user experience 
requirements. 
Keywords-user 
experience 
modeling; 
user 
experience 
temporal requirements; quality in use; user satisfaction. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
User Experience (UX) is an evolving concept to the 
extent that we find lack in consensus for its definition [1]. 
ISO defines UX as a person's perceptions and responses that 
result from the use or anticipated use of a product, system or 
service [2]. As established in [3], the fulfillment of user’s 
task-oriented goals (pragmatics) is not the only thing that 
users seek; rather there are certain underlying hedonic needs 
that they look and expect the product to fulfill. While 
pragmatics (or “do-goals”) focus towards achievement of 
user needs that are objective in nature, e.g., task 
performance, effectiveness, etc., hedonics (or “be-goals”) on 
the other hand, focus on the accomplishment of user needs 
such as satisfaction, stimulation, evocation, etc. [1]. Also, 
UX is not restricted to a momentary or instantaneous 
interaction with a certain product or application. The 
boundary of UX is wider than a mere user-product 
interaction, spreading from anticipation of use to actual use 
and further motivation to use. It is over time, that users adopt 
certain products [4], retain their usage [4] and then bond 
themselves with the product/product brand [5]. UX can 
therefore be investigated during and after, even long after, 
any interaction [6]. Time dimension or temporal aspects 
together with the environment (or the context of use) are, 
therefore, among key factors that influence UX [7]. 
The “user” part of UX is the key driver towards 
achieving UX; although, the product itself has to be well-
designed to enable the user achieve his pragmatic and 
hedonic goals. Thus, modeling user experience calls for user-
centered designs (UCD); designs that take into account 
traditional user needs as well as those that are abstract and 
subjective in nature. Bevan [8] highlights this very approach 
and discusses that despite the fact that the UCDs have been 
put into practice, they still lack consistency in their 
application. He further emphasizes that the UCD processes 
need exclusive UX professions that should involve teams 
covering aspects such as ergonomics, cognitive sciences, 
information quality, etc. 
The recent ISO 25010 [9] standard outlines two 
perspectives of quality: product and in use. The product 
quality perspective relates to the core product design 
(internal and external characteristics), while the in use aspect 
of quality relates the user interaction with a product in a 
specified context of use. Recall, that the concept of UX 
bounds itself to the user-product interaction in a certain 
environment (context) as well as pre and post user-product 
interactions and therefore evolves over time. ISO 25010 
therefore can be potentially utilized for modeling UX, by 
employing product quality (PQ) and quality in use (QinU) 
for modeling respectively “product” and “user-product 
interaction” entities of UX. However, if ISO intends usability 
to cover the whole UX, it needs to encompass all of its 
aspects [10]. Therefore, as a first step towards modeling UX 
by employing ISO 25010, we need to assess the extent to 
which the current standard captures all dimensions of UX. 
Although the current ISO 25010 standard does cover 
under QinU the pragmatics and hedonics aspects of UX and 
product requirements under PQ, in order to completely 
capture and model UX, there is a need to integrate the 
temporal aspects [6] of UX along with its core pragmatics 
and hedonic dimensions. Using this as our motivation, we 
propose to define a UX temporal requirements (UXTR) 
model and integrate it with the existing ISO 25010 quality 
perspectives to develop a comprehensive and flexible UX 
modeling framework. The proposed framework and its 
models, i.e., PQ (P), QinU (pragmatics (P) and hedonics (H)) 
and temporal (T) (2PHT, for short) will represent a complete 
picture of UX requirements and thus can be put to use for 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE I.    ISO 25010 PQ MODEL 
(Sub)Characteristics 
Availability 
1. Functional Suitability 
Fault tolerance 
Functional completeness 
Recoverability 
Functional correctness 
6. Security 
Functional appropriateness 
Confidentiality 
2. Performance efficiency 
Integrity 
Time behavior 
Non-repudiation 
Resource utilization 
Accountability 
Capacity 
Authenticity 
3. Compatibility 
7. Maintainability 
Co-existence 
Modularity 
Interoperability 
Reusability 
4. Usability 
Analysability 
Appropriateness recognizability 
Modifiability 
Learnability 
Testability 
Operability 
8. Portability 
User error protection 
Adaptability 
User interface aesthetics 
Installability 
Accessibility 
Replaceability 
5. Reliability 
 
Maturity 
 
instantiating different models for understanding and 
evaluation purposes. The proposed scheme is compliant with 
the current ISO standard for quality and is in alignment with 
recent related research contributions as well. 
Ultimately, the contributions of this research are: (a) 
modeling temporal aspect of UX and (b) devising an 
integrated and flexible framework for modeling UX. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: we review 
the related work in Section II. Sections III and IV, 
respectively, specify our integrated UX modeling framework 
and its practical significance for evaluating UX for software 
applications. We draw our conclusions in Section V. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
UX has gained much attention in the field of human 
computer interaction (HCI) in recent years. Even though 
there is a lack of consensus on a unified definition of UX, we 
still find in contemporary research, various approaches in 
defining and modeling UX. In an earlier classification [11], 
an experience is understood as something with a definitive 
beginning and end, with whatever happening in between 
constituting the UX. According to Bevan [12], user 
experience can be conceptualized as: 
• 
An elaboration of the satisfaction component of 
usability. 
• 
Distinct from usability, which conventionally 
focuses on user performance. 
• 
Broader term for all the user’s perceptions and 
responses, subjective or objective in nature. 
In one of our earlier works [13], we have listed and 
categorized various UX definitions into actors and scenarios, 
where actors represent the UX touch points that include user, 
product, designer (organization) and environment, and 
scenarios represent the interaction phase (interacting, pre-
interacting, design, post-interacting) of the UX. In the same 
research a complete UX evolution lifecycle framework 
(UXEL) was presented in order to understand the diverse UX 
dynamics. In doing so, UX building blocks were identified, 
explaining how they interact in three evolution stages of UX 
namely: Designed UX, Perceived UX and Actual UX. 
As established in Section I that UX involves aspects of 
both product (PQ) and in-use (QinU) perspectives of quality 
standard put forward by ISO, it is worth analyzing how the 
two perspectives have been addressed in contemporary 
research. For example, Lew et al. [14] draw relationships 
among usability, information quality (IQ), QinU, and UX. In 
doing so, they integrate the concepts of PQ, QinU, Actual 
usability and Actual UX (2Q2U) in a flexible modeling 
framework to evaluate and improve QinU of web 
applications (WebApps). Similarly the current ISO 25010 [9] 
standard divides the concept of system/software PQ into 
eight characteristics and QinU into five characteristics as 
shown in Tables I and II respectively. However, in the older 
version of the standard (ISO/IEC 9126-1), the concepts of 
PQ and QinU were respectively classified into six and four 
characteristics. New characteristics and sub-characteristics 
have been added and/or renamed in the recent version, to 
enhance descriptiveness. 
Hassenzahl et al. [3] model UX in terms of user’s 
pragmatic (or do-goals) and hedonic (or be-goals) goals. 
Pragmatic goals or pragmatic quality refers to the user’s 
perception about the product quality in its ability to support 
carrying out certain tasks, for example completing an online 
transaction, and focuses on the product’s usability in making 
the user achieving do-goals. Hedonics, on the other hand, 
focus towards accomplishment of user’s be-goals, i.e., how 
happy or satisfied the user feels after achieving his do-goals 
through using the product. They further state that it is the 
fulfillment of be-goals over time that the users strive for and 
that do-goals are a pre-requisite in achieving user’s hedonic 
goals. 
Given the current state of research and notions 
established on UX, it is clear why UX has become the most 
sought after quality aspect in modern day products. Not only 
do we expect them to help our tasks done, at the same time 
we also expect them to be enjoyable to use and make us feel 
satisfied. In light of [3], we can correlate the current ISO 
25010 QinU model with the two dimensions of UX, i.e., 
pragmatics (do-goals) and hedonics (be-goals). For example, 
satisfaction characteristic can be correlated with hedonic 
goals (be-goals) of UX and measures of effectiveness or 
efficiency can be correlated with the fulfillment of 
pragmatics (do-goals). But since UX also involves a 
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE II.    ISO 25010 QINU MODEL 
(Sub)Characteristics 
1. Effectiveness 
2. Efficiency 
3. Satisfaction 
Usefulness 
Trust 
Pleasure 
Comfort 
4. Freedom from risk 
Economic risk mitigation 
Health and safety risk mitigation 
Environmental risk mitigation 
5. Context Coverage 
Context completeness 
Flexibility 
temporal dimension [7], it is important that while modeling 
UX requirements, we not only consider its pragmatic and 
hedonic dimensions, but also take into account its 
longitudinal aspect. 
III. 
INTEGRATED UX MODELING FRAMEWORK 
The aim of our study is twofold: first, modeling the 
temporal aspect of UX and second: integrate the proposed 
UXTR model together with the existing ISO 25010 quality 
model to build a complete UX modeling framework (as 
shown in Fig. 1). The proposed framework can then be used 
flexibly to instantiate models for achieving specific 
objectives. 
A. Modeling temporal aspect of UX 
Regarding modeling UXTR, Fig. 1.c shows the following 
two characteristics that collectively constitute our proposed 
model for longitudinal aspect of UX: 
1) Appeal: or “appealingness” (as Hassenzahl [1] calls 
it) is defined as the degree to which a user gets motivated to 
get engaged with a certain product. It involves phases where 
the user associates certain anticipations and expectations 
from the product use and is not necessarily restricted to the 
direct intercation with the product. Appeal is further sub-
characterized into: 
a) Adoption: Defined as the scale that indicates how 
many users start using a certain product or application in a 
given time period [4]. 
b) Retention: Defined as the scale that indicates how 
many of the users from a given time frame are still using a 
certain product or application in some later time period [4]. 
2) Brand Association: Defined as personal liking or 
attachment with a certain service provider or an 
organization that manufactures certain product(s), and has 
certain popularity rate in the market and among various user 
groups. 
Subsections III-B and III-C below, further develop 
understanding of the two characteristics described above and 
present reasoning for their inclusion in our proposed UXTR 
model. 
B. Appeal Characteristic 
Appeal is a product’s attribute that makes it attractive to 
the user as described above. Product characteristics such as 
“user interface aesthetics”, “soft feel”, etc. among others, 
contribute towards making the product appealing to the end 
user. On the other hand, appeal has an in use aspect which is 
triggered when the user is actually interacting with the 
product in a specific context. Achieving a certain task-
oriented goal (do/pragmatic goal), for example, that satisfies 
the user, can attract the user for exploring the product 
further. Note that appeal here does not refer to the “visual 
appeal”, which has more to do with the outlook or aesthetics 
of the product. On the contrary, appeal here refers to the 
desire for further interaction with the product. 
A third perspective of appeal is temporal in nature and is 
beyond product and in-use aspects. Take for example, a web-
based radio application that is to be launched in near future. 
There has been a lot of advertisement regarding its potential 
success among the listeners and fans of music, and this has 
led to individuals having anticipations about their interaction 
with the application as soon as it is launched and setting 
certain expectations in the form of pragmatic and hedonic 
goals. This pre-interaction phase is still motivating the user 
towards adopting a certain product, although the interaction 
has not begun yet. This form of appeal is still making the 
user go through an experience. Similarly, user’s post-
interaction scenario with the application may involve 
recounting the earlier experience over a time period and 
therefore, making him feel compelled to interact and use 
certain features, thus retaining his usage with the application. 
This example explains how the dynamics of appeal (or 
appealingness) are governed over time, thus making it an 
integral part of UXTR. This example also explains our 
classification of appeal into adoption and retention as we 
have proposed in our UXTR model. 
Our proposed addition of appeal characteristic to the UX 
temporal requirements model is in alignment with 
Hassenzahl’s [1] notion that UX changes over time; e.g., a 
product that was stimulating in the beginning might become 
less appealing with the passage of time or vice versa. 
Further, Hassenzahl classifies appealingness into motivating 
and inviting (among others). Our sub-characterization of 
appeal into adoption and retention is based upon this 
rationale. 
C. Brand Association characteristic 
Products or services that users interact with are not stand 
alone entities. Each product or service is designed by a 
certain organization and targeted for a certain user base. A 
user-product interaction is not confined to a user’s 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

engagement with the product or service, but implicitly 
encompasses a hedonic relationship (a bond or association) 
between the user and the creator of the product (the brand), 
hence the name brand association. Each time a product is 
interacted with, an unconscious engagement with its brand is 
there. Likewise, when a certain brand is heard of or a brand 
name is seen somewhere, an abstract (unconscious) 
interaction with one of the brand’s products takes place. In 
either case, an experience is triggered. 
Association with a brand is not only on a moment by 
moment basis. Loyalty with the brand evolves over time and 
is therefore, temporal in nature. Since brand association 
results in product bonding (and further product usage), thus 
affecting the overall UX, this characteristic is included as 
one of the characteristics of our UXTR model. 
D. Integrating UXTR model with ISO 25010 Quality models 
As established in the first section, modeling UX involves 
specification 
of 
product 
requirements, 
the 
in-use 
requirements covering the pragmatic and hedonic aspect of 
UX, and finally the temporal requirements. As shown in Fig. 
1, all the three constituents of modeling UX requirements 
scheme are presented, whereby, our proposed UXTR model 
(Fig. 1.c) is integrated with ISO 25010 PQ model (Fig. 1.a) 
(covering product requirements specification part) and ISO 
25010 QinU model (Fig. 1.b) (covering the pragmatic and 
hedonic dimensions of UX). Together, the three models form 
our proposed 2PHT UX modeling framework, representing a 
complete picture of UX requirements. 
ISO 25010 states that there exist relationships between 
the PQ and QinU views of quality whereby the former 
influences the later and likewise the later depends on the 
former (refer to Fig. 1). The same approach is extended 
towards our proposed UXTR model. We argue that a good 
QinU will influence the temporal aspect of UX which in turn 
depends on the QinU perspective of the UX (as shown in 
Fig. 1). 
Our proposed 2PHT integrated framework is also in line 
with our earlier work [13] where we define three phases of 
UX evolution lifecycle (UXEL), namely Designed UX, 
Perceived UX and Actual UX. The first phase (Designed 
UX) involves determining UX requirements and involves 
requirements elicitation processes leading to a UCD. This 
phase, therefore, relates to the first part of 2PHT, i.e., the PQ 
(Fig. 1.a). The second phase (Perceived UX) involves the 
product specific expectations and anticipations based on the 
advertisements, brand association, peer reviews etc. and 
therefore relates to the temporal aspects of UX (Fig. 1.c). 
 
* For sub-characteristic level details for the characteristics of PQ and QinU models, refer to Tables I and II. Further details can be found in [9].
 
Figure 1.  Proposed 2PHT UX modeling framework 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE III.    PQ UIA REQUIREMENTS TREE 
2PHT.PQ UIA requirements 
1 User Interface Aesthetics (UIA) 
1.1 sub-characteristic 1 
1.2 sub-characteristic 2 
1.2.1 attribute 1 
… 
TABLE IV.    QINU UIA REQUIREMENTS TREE 
2PHT.QinU UIA Requirements 
1 Satisfaction 
1.1 Pleasure 
1.1.1 Aesthetic Appeal 
1.1.1.1 sub-characteristic 1 
1.1.1.2 sub-characteristic 2 
1.1.1.2.1 attribute 1 
… 
The third and last phase of UXEL (Actual UX) involves user 
interaction with a product in a specific context of use 
resulting in accomplishment of pragmatic and hedonic goals. 
The in-use and context specific aspects of this phase relate to 
the pragmatic and hedonic perspective (QinU) of UX (Fig. 
1.b). 
IV. 
INSTANTIATING 2PHT FRAMEWORK FOR SPECIFYING 
AND EVALUATING UX REQUIREMENTS 
The purpose of our proposed UX modeling framework is 
to consistently evaluate UX from its three perspectives, 
namely, PQ, QinU and temporal. Through our integrated 
approach, different non-functional requirements related to 
UX can be specified in order to meet specific evaluation 
needs for improving UX. In this section we outline a general 
guideline for instantiating our proposed 2PHT framework for 
specifying and evaluating UX requirements. 
A. Specifying UX requirements employing 2PHT 
framework 
Utilizing our proposed 2PHT UX modeling framework, 
we choose “user interface aesthetics” (UIA) (a sub-
characteristic of “Usability”, refer to Table I) as an example 
and specify its requirements from PQ and QinU perspectives 
of UX. Requirements specification from both views (i.e., PQ 
and QinU) is in alignment with ISO which categorizes a 
quality construct into a collection of related sub-
characteristics providing a convenient breakdown of a 
quality concept [9]. 
1) Specifying PQ UIA Requirements 
For specifying UIA requirements from the product 
perspective, the PQ model (Fig. 1.a) of our proposed 2PHT 
framework can be employed to instantiate the UIA sub-
characteristic of usability. In light of Pham’s [15] 
categorization of aesthetic design principles, a complete 
requirement tree for PQ UIA can be specified. For the 
purpose of demonstration, a generic breakdown (sub-
characterization) of the PQ UIA sub-characteristic is shown 
in Table III. 
2) Specifying QinU UIA Requirements 
For specifying UIA requirements from the user (or in-
use) perspective, the QinU model (Fig. 1.b) of our proposed 
2PHT framework can be employed. Further, the QinU model 
can be supplemented with “Aesthetic Appeal” sub-
characteristic under “Pleasure”, which is a sub-characteristic 
of “Satisfaction” (refer to Table II). The reason to add 
aesthetic appeal under the Pleasure sub-characteristic is that 
aesthetics affects the pleasure and harmony that users 
experience while interacting with a product [16] and is a 
strong determinant of user satisfaction [17]. Based on this 
rationale, a generic breakdown of QinU Aesthetic Appeal is 
shown in Table IV. 
B. Evaluating UX requirements Employing 2PHT 
Framework 
In this sub-section, taking the same example as in 
subsection IV-A, we outline general principles for practically 
evaluating UX requirements based on the requirements 
specified in subsection IV-A. We further lay foundation to 
observe the resultant PQ and QinU evaluations effect on the 
longitudinal aspect of UX utilizing our proposed UXTR 
model (Fig 1.c) of the 2PHT framework. Further, QinU 
evaluation can involve subjective surveys asking users 
questions about their interaction with a particular product, 
whereas the PQ evaluation can be done through manual 
inspection. 
1) UIA evaluation from QinU perspective 
As per the ISO premise, PQ influences QinU (refer to 
Fig. 1). Therefore, at first, the current state of UIA of an 
application can be evaluated during real time user 
interaction. In order to carry out the subjective evaluation for 
UIA, the QinU requirement tree specified in Table IV can be 
mapped with standard subjective questionnaires for usability 
testing. Users response, for example on a 7-point Likert [18] 
scale with responses varying from “strongly disagree” to 
“strongly agree” scale labels, can be used to evaluate the 
corresponding characteristic/sub-characteristic of aesthetic 
appeal. The overall rank of aesthetic appeal can then be 
calculated by aggregating the scores of its constituent sub-
characteristics. 
2) UIA evaluation from PQ perspective 
For evaluating the UIA from the PQ point of view, 
different metrics can be developed for objectively 
quantifying UIA sub-characteristics and attributes. For the 
purpose of demonstration, we define a metric for “object 
clarity” (where object can represent text, image, or animation 
on the UI) that can be treated as a sub-characteristic of PQ 
UIA requirements outlined in Table III. This metric 
classification is shown in Table V. 
C. PQ and QinU evaluation analysis 
Evaluation results for both PQ and QinU perspectives of 
UIA will set the stage for improvement considerations. 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE V.    METRIC CLASSIFICATION FOR PQ UIA EVALUATION 
UIA PQ 
Evaluation metric 
item 
Details 
Characteristic/Sub-
Characteristic 
User Inteface Aesthetics (UIA) 
Attribute name 
Object clarity 
Metric name 
Object clarity level 
Objective 
Determine if the objects on the UI (such as text, 
image, animation, etc) are visually identifiable 
Measurement 
method 
The UI is inspected to determine the object 
clarity level rating on a scale of 0-3. Observers 
observe whether objects on the UI are visually 
identifiable. 
Scale 
Numerical percentage ratio 
Allowed Values 
(0) none of the objects on the UI are visually 
identifiable; (1) few of the objects on the UI are 
visually identifiable; (2) most of the objects on 
the UI are visually identifiable; (3) all of the 
objects on the UI are visually identifiable. 
TABLE VI.    MODEL  COMPOSITION REPRESENTING UXTR 
2PHT.UXTR 
1. Appeal 
1.1. Adoption 
1.2. Retention 
2. Brand association 
Based on the QinU UIA evaluation, improvement 
recommendations from the design perspective can be 
deduced. Improving the design on the basis of improvement 
recommendations will call for another round of PQ and 
QinU evaluations to see if the improvement from the PQ 
perspective also resulted in improvement in the QinU aspect 
of UX. 
D. Evaluating temporal aspect of UX 
Once the recommended improvements have been 
performed on the PQ side and the desired level of QinU has 
been achieved, we can assess the resultant effect of the 
improvement on the temporal aspect of UX. 
For example, we can examine our proposed UXTR 
model 
to 
specify 
the 
temporal 
requirements. This 
requirement specification is shown in Table VI. Based on 
our proposed UXTR model, adoption and retention sub-
characteristics can be measured intrusively or as outlined in 
[4], to evaluate the appeal requirement of the instantiated 
model. Similarly, the brand association characteristic can 
also be evaluated using subjective surveys. Collectively, the 
evaluation measures for appeal and brand association can 
give a measure for the temporal aspect of UX. Note that, 
since the temporal aspect evolves over time, evaluating 
UXTR will span over a specific time period, consisting of 
multiple rounds of intrusive evaluations focusing on the 
same group of users. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper we have related three perspectives of UX 
namely: PQ, QinU (Pragmatics and Hedonics) and 
longitudinal (temporal). In doing so, we have developed an 
integrated framework called 2PHT for modeling UX by 
proposing a UXTR model and integrating it with the current 
ISO 25010 standard. We have provided reasoning for our 
proposed UXTR model in which we have introduced two 
concepts of appeal and brand association as the 
characteristics defining the longitudinal dimension of UX. 
We have also characterized the concept of appeal into 
adoption and retention sub-characteristics and described 
their importance in light of the current research. A 
demonstration for a specific requirement tree instantiation 
and evaluation, based on the proposed framework is also 
given. The three constituent  models (Fig. 1.a, 1.b and 1.c) of 
our proposed UX modeling framework are intended for 
modeling UX requirements for software products as a whole 
and can therefore be used to evaluate and improve UX 
aspects for different types of software, such as WebApps, for 
example. 
Based on this research, our future work focuses on 
devising a thorough strategy that will involve experience 
requirements elicitation and recommendation processes 
combined with our 2PHT UX modeling framework for 
evaluating and improving UX of software applications with 
focus on geographic information systems and digital earth 
applications. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Authors gratefully acknowledge support from the lab of 
Digital earth and GIS, School of Computer science and 
engineering, 
Beijing 
University 
of 
Aeronautics 
and 
Astronautics (BUAA/BeiHang), P.R. China. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. Hassenzahl, "The thing and I: understanding the relationship 
between user and product", in Funology: From Usability to 
Enjoyment, M.A. Blythe, A.F. Monk, K. Overbeeke, P.C. Wright 
(Eds.) Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2003, 1-12. 
[2] 
ISO DIS 9241-210. "Ergonomics of human system interaction - Part 
210: Human-centred design for interactive systems", 2008. 
[3] 
M. Hassenzahl and V. Roto, "Being and doing - A perspective on 
User Experience and its measurement", Interfaces, vol. 72, 2007, pp. 
10-12.  
[4] 
K. Rodden, H. Hutchinson, and X. Fu, "Measuring the user 
experience on a large scale: user-centered metrics for web 
applications", Proc. CHI 2010, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, April 10–15, 
doi: 10.1145/1753326.1753687. 
[5] 
P. Ketola and V. Roto, "Exploring User Experience Measurement 
Needs", Proceedings of the  International Workshop on Meaningful 
Measures: Valid Useful User Experience Measurement (VUUM), 
Reykjavik, Iceland, 2008, pp. 23-26.  
[6] 
E. L.-C. Law, V. Roto, M. Hassenzahl, A. P. O. S. Vermeeren, and J. 
Kort, "Understanding, scoping and defining user experience: a survey 
approach", Proceedings of the 27th international conference on 
Human factors in computing systems, Boston, MA, USA, 2009, pp. 
719-728, doi: 10.1145/1518701.1518813. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[7] 
M. Hassenzahl and N. Tractinsky, "User experience - a research 
agenda", Behaviour & Information Technology, vol. 25 (2), 2006, pp. 
91-97, doi: 10.1080/01449290500330331. 
[8] 
N. Bevan, "Creating a UX Profession", Proc. CHI 2005, Portland, 
Orgeon, USA, 2005, pp. 1078-1079, doi: 10.1145/1056808.1056820. 
[9] 
ISO/IEC 25010 Systems and software engineering — "Systems and 
software Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) — System 
and software quality models", 2011. 
[10] N. Bevan, "UX, Usability and ISO Standards", Proc. The 26th Annual 
CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 2008, pp. 
1-5.  
[11] J. Forlizzi and S. Ford, "The building blocks of experience: an early 
framework for interaction designers", Proceedings of the 3rd 
conference on Designing interactive systems: processes, practices, 
methods, and techniques, New York City, New York, United States, 
2000, pp. 419-423, doi: 10.1145/347642.347800. 
[12] N. Bevan, "What is the difference between the purpose of usability 
and user experience evaluation methods?", UXEM'09 Workshop, 
INTERACT 2009, Uppsala, Sweden, 2009.  
[13] M. Q. Abbasi, P. Lew, I. Rafique, and L. Zhang, "User experience 
evolution lifecycle framework", Proc. International conference on 
Information, Systems and Engineering (ICISE) 2012, Zurich, 
Switzerland, 2012, January 15-17, pp. 947-952.  
[14] P. Lew, L. Olsina, and L. Zhang, "Quality, Quality in Use, Actual 
Usability and User Experience as Key Drivers for Web Application 
Evaluation", Proc. LNCS 6189, Springer, 10th Int’l Congress on Web 
Engineering (ICWE2010), Vienna, Austria, 2010, pp. 218-232, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-13911-6_15. 
[15] B. L. Pham, "Design for aesthetics: interactions of design variables 
and aesthetic properties", of SPIE IS&T/SPIE 11th Annual 
Symposium - Electronic Imaging '99, 1999, pp. 364-371.  
[16] G. Lindgaard, "Aesthetics, Visual Appeal, Usability and User 
Satisfaction: What Do the User’s Eyes Tell the User’s Brain?", 
Australian Journal of Emerging Technologies and Society, vol. 5 (1), 
2007, pp. 1-14.  
[17] T. Lavie and N. Tractinsky, "Assessing dimensions of perceived 
visual aesthetics of web sites", International Journal of Human-
Computer 
Studies, 
vol. 
60, 
2004, 
pp. 
269-298, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.ijhcs.2003.09.002. 
[18] T. Tullis and B. Albert, Measuring the User Experience. Collecting, 
Analyzing and Presenting Usability Metrics., 2008. 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

