Building a Color Recognizer System on the Smart Mobile Device for the Visually 
Impaired People 
 
Hsiao Ping Lee 
Department of Applied Information Sciences 
Chung Shan Medical University, 
Department of Medical Research  
Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C 
ping@csmu.edu.tw 
Jun-Te Huang, Chien-Hsing Chen* 
Department of Applied Information Sciences 
Chung Shan Medical University, 
Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C 
cy3331@gmail.com 
 
 
Tzu-Fang Sheu 
Department of  Computer Science and  
Communication Engineering 
Providence University, 
Taichung 433, Taiwan, R.O.C 
fang@pu.edu.tw
 
 
Abstract—One of the most important characteristics of a 
developed country is to take care and promote the life quality 
of handicapped people. There are more than 55,000 registered 
visually impaired people in Taiwan, and the population is 
growing year by year. The amount of the assistive devices or 
systems for the visually impaired people, which are designed 
and made locally in Taiwan, are very few. Most of the assistive 
devices and systems available to the vision-impaired people in 
Taiwan are imported and expensive. It means that more and 
more visually impaired people in Taiwan have to face various 
difficulties in life, which are difficult to handle by themselves, 
without any help from assistive devices or systems. Therefore, 
it is important to develop assistive devices and systems for the 
visually impaired people in Taiwan. It is very difficult, or 
impossible, for blind persons to identify object's color. The 
problem might cause inconvenience or further serious danger 
in life, for example, wearing wrong-color cloth or taking wrong 
drugs. The problem on color identification can be simply 
solved by the assistance from sighted people. But, it is an 
infeasible solution because of the heavy loads and cost in 
human resources. In this paper, a color recognition system for 
blind people will be developed. The system is built on the smart 
phones with a camera device, and, therefore, is very portable. 
With an accessible user interface and the text-to-speech 
technology, the blind people can easily access the color 
information from the system. The blind people can identify 
object's color anywhere and anytime by using the color 
recognizer. The developed system provides a feasible solution 
to the problem of color identification that the blind people 
faced before. Moreover, the developed system will help the 
blind people to increase their life quality and decrease their 
need for scarce sighted assistance. The color recognizing 
system can help the blind people identify object's color 
themselves. 
Keywords- Visually Impaired People; Text-To-Speech 
Technology; Color Recognizer; Mobile Assistive System. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Vision is an important and natural way for humans to 
receive information from the environment. We rely on vision 
to handle most things in daily life. Due to the defect in vision 
caused by congenital disease or accidental injuries, visually 
impaired people, especially totally blind people, have to face 
lots of inconvenience in their daily life. Therefore, it is an 
important issue to develop assistive devices or systems for 
blind people. The assistive technology for the blind has been 
developed for a long time in some developed countries, such 
as those in Europe and America. Their functions are 
appropriate and useful. However, the assistive devices for 
blind people are very few in Taiwan. In Taiwan, the assistive 
devices available to the blind people from Europe and 
America are too expensive. 
A day in our life, we often faced with many choices, such 
as pick out an object with correct color to use from many 
objects. It is really common for us which have normal vision 
function. For visually impaired people, they face the problem 
again and again every day. For example, a cup, a book, 
maybe visually impaired people can touch their shape to 
know what it is and guess function. But, the blind people are 
still unable to know the object’s color. It is too difficult to 
know what the object’s color is it if he or she wants. To solve 
the problem, listen to other people is a way to help blind 
people know whether it is a white cup, or that a book’s front 
cover is red. But they still can not complete the work by 
themselves. When blind people go to school or go to work or 
attend meetings, they need to use conveniently wear lounge 
suit, about white shirt, black suit trousers, purple tie. It is 
very easy for most people to pick it with correct color. But, 
this is very difficult for visually impaired people. As a result, 
family members must be a role of the eyes and stay with 
visually impaired people to help them. In this way, family’s 
burden will increase. The government must to prepare a 
budget and train many people who to help visually impaired 
people.  It consumes considerable money and human 
resources. This paper focuses on assisting visually impaired 
people for self-management their daily life. We develop a 
mobile color recognizer (MCR) for blind people. They can 
use it to recognize object’s color correctly. To use it 
conveniently, MCR must have portability and practicality. 
Therefore, we built the system on the smart phone which has 
a camera device. Consider the person who is usual Chinese, 
we use text-to-speech (TTS) technology [1, 2, 3, 4, 5] with 
Chinese voice. MCR will work and output Chinese voice 
message, the visually impaired people can easily control the 
system to obtain the information which they need anywhere 
and anytime. 
II. 
COLOR RECOGNIZER 
Color recognizer [6] is a software which people can use 
to identify object’s color. The recognizer is a system that 
95
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

combines the computer, camera device and recognizer 
application. There are many similar products and 
technologies nowadays, such as face recognition system, 
picture recognition. Image identification applications have 
been used universal in daily life. However, building a color 
recognizer in the computer or laptop still has some problems. 
It is too large and weight to take along. Therefore, some 
products have built the color recognizer on the smart device. 
In this paper, we refer to the color recognizer developed by 
CodeFactory company [7]. Provide a new way for visually 
impaired people to obtain colors information around. But, 
this product also has some shortcomings, for example, it just 
work on nine kind of cell phone which use Symbian system. 
Moreover, the assistive system uses the English voice text-
to-speech engine. It is inconvenience for many visually 
impaired people which use others language. 
III. 
STATE OF ART 
The color recognizer from the CodeFactory company is 
a mobile assistive software which developed for blind 
people to recognize object’s color. It uses a camera device 
to capture images and feedback voice to user. The 
software’s main functions have: 
 
It can recognize eleven kinds of colors. 
 
It has a simple function that determines with the light 
level, such as bright, dark or normal. 
 
Support voice feedback, the software can read the 
recognition results by voice. 
However, the color recognition system from the 
CodeFactory has the following drawbacks: 
 
The software just can work on few phones which use 
Symbian OS. It is inconvenience, if I use others 
platform, such as Android, Windows Mobile. 
 
The software is too expensive, for Taiwan people, the 
blind people must cost 4000NTD to buy it. And, it just 
can use on the only one phone. 
 
It is only available for English voice output; for 
visually impaired people who usual Chinese, maybe it 
is unfriendly for them. 
Ours system can reduce the expenses for blind people 
who use Chinese. Because we can product this assistive 
system ourselves, it is cheaper than import it from other 
countries. 
The MCR system uses the text-to-speech engine with 
Chinese voice. For people who are Chinese, they can accept 
and control the MCR system easily.  
IV. 
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE 
The mobile color system is a convenience assistive 
device for blind people. The blind people can use the 
camera device which is on the smart phones to take photos 
from the object and save it in memory. It could be a JPEG 
or a BMP format file. When the system gets a picture, it will 
analyze the picture automatically and identify the object’s 
color. Then output the text-based messages to the TTS 
 
Figure 1. The system architecture 
 
engine. TTS engine transforms the text-based message that 
becomes an audio-based message, and play it, providing the 
blind people another way to get information of colors 
without other people’s help. 
The MCR system is composed of three modules: the 
smart device, color recognizer and TTS. The MCR system is 
implemented in Java-based technology. We use the TTS 
with Chinese voice, which can be on the smart phones. The 
system architecture is presented in Figure 1. 
The smart devices must have the camera because the 
users need to control the camera device to take photos. 
Considering the assistive devices’ price and the available 
tools for blind people, we choose the smart phones from 
NOKIA to be the platform for our system. The smart phones 
use the Symbian S60 series operating system [8,9,10]. The 
Mobile Speak for Symbian which is a widely known screen 
reader software, which works on the Symbian operating 
system. This software can access most of information in 
operating system. On the other hand, the blind people can 
use this software to control the system easily.  
We use the Java language to develop the MCR system. 
Java ME [11, 12, 13] is a kind of language which provides 
the developers with programming tools for the mobile 
devices. We can implement a program to drive the camera 
and take object’s photos. When users take the photos, the 
system will save them in JPEG or BMP format in the 
memory. 
The MCR system gets the images from memory and 
recognizes the color information automatically. Then the 
MCR system output the text-based message to the TTS 
engine with Chinese voice. TTS engine handles the text-
based message and convert it to the audio-based message. 
As a result, the blind people can hear the audio-based 
message to know what the color of the objects is. In fact, 
they can identify the object’s colors by themselves. 
When this system is implemented, we hope to achieve 
the following results: 
 
Because we use Java language, the MCR system can 
easier transplant to other smart phones which unused 
Symbian operating system.   
96
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

 
Color recognition is the main function of this system, 
and the visually impaired people can use the system to 
identify their cloths color. 
 
Have a special and easier user interface for the blind 
people to control the MCR system, and they can use 
the system without other people’s help. 
 
The price is cheaper, so the blind people can reduce 
expenses to buy the MCR assistive system. 
 
We hope the system is able to reduce human resources. 
 
The system is able to work on the mobile devices. Let 
the system has provided with portable property and 
make the life be convenience for the visually impaired 
people. 
 
With the text-to-speech function that the MCR system 
can output recognition result in Chinese voice 
message. It lets the visually impaired people who use 
Chinese to easily to control this system. 
V. 
REAL IMPLEMENTATION 
When we get pictures from a camera device and save 
them in memory, the developers are able to use the Java 
APIs that number JSR-135 package to drive the camera 
device. The MCR system will access memory to take the 
pictures and call the program of color identification. After 
that, the color recognition algorithm analyzes the pixels 
which a block in the pictures, and compute the RGB values. 
Because we hope the MCR system can work on the different 
platforms, we use the Java language to develop it. After 
obtaining the computed RGB values (which can compare 
with color space to know the colors information), the system 
provides the text-based results, and then, the Mobile Speak 
for Symbian screen reader software (which runs on the 
background) is able to access the text-based messages and 
provide them to TTS engine. The TTS engine converts the 
text-based messages to the audio-based messages, and 
feedback to the users. 
VI. 
RESULTS 
We are going to implement a mobile color recognizer 
prototype with Chinese TTS on the smart phones to support 
and solve the difficult problems of object’s color 
recognition. Via the camera device, we can take the photos 
and save them in smart phone’s memory. The color 
recognizer will analyze when it got the photos. Last, the 
text-based recognition results will be output to the TTS 
engine. The TTS converts the text-based message to the 
audio-based in Chinese voice, and play it.  
We have driven the camera device successfully. Using 
the camera device to take photos and save them in smart 
phone’s 
memory. 
Currently, 
we 
focus 
on 
the 
implementation of the color recognition algorithm. We 
survey some literatures about image processing or color 
identification. We should to know how to apply these 
technologies? 
 In the future, we face some problems when we 
designing the MCR system; we must to solve these 
problems: 
 
Because the assistive system is designed in Java 
language, we must search some APIs that the smart 
phones support (to read the APIs documents to know 
the functions and how to use them). 
 
We must to understand the property of the smart 
devices. And attempts to drive the camera device. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
In the paper, we use the NOKIA’s smart phones, 
NOKIA 5800 to equip the MCR system. We have been 
completed to drive the camera device which use the JSR-
135 package, and a really simple color recognition function. 
The color recognition algorithm analyzes the pixels and 
compute the RGB values to compare with the color space. 
At now, the color recognition function has been completed 
to recognize red, blue, green three basic colors. On the other 
hand, the screen reader software, we can download the 
Mobile Speak for Symbian from the Internet and use it. 
Currently, we survey literatures about image processing and 
color identification. We fix the programs and enhance the 
color recognition ability. When the color recognition 
algorithm is implemented, the MCR system is able to work 
well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the National Science 
Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan R.O.C, for 
financially supporting this research under Grants NSC99-
2218-E-040-001. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Prahaliad and J. Zhejiang. A Text to Speech Interface for 
Universal Digital Library Univ SCI, vol. 6A, no. 11, pp. 1229-
1234, 2005. 
[2] M.S Yu and N.H Pan. A Statistical Model with Hierarchical 
Structure for Predicting Prosody in a Mandarin Text-To-
Speech System, Journal of the Chinese Institute of Engineers, 
vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 385 -399, March 2005. 
[3] M. Mihkla. Modeling Speech Temporal Structure for Estonian 
Text-to-Speech Synthesis: Feature Selection, Institute of the 
Estonian Language, Tallinn, vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 284-298, 2007. 
[4] A. Black and K. Lenzo. Building Voices in the Festival Speech 
Synthesis System. http://festvox.org/bsv/. 2000. Retrieved 
2011-02-11. 
[5] G. Bruce and M. Horne. Timing in speech: a multilevel 
process. In Prosody: theory and experiment, Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, pp. 281–334. 2000. 
[6] Erocos 
International 
Mobile 
Color 
Recognizer, 
http://www.low-vision.be/HTML/mobile_Colorrecognizer.htm, 
Retrieved 2010-11-10. 
[7] Code Factory. Making mobile phones and PDAs accessible to 
the 
blind 
and 
visually 
impaired, 
http://www.CodeFactory.es/en/products.asp?id=315, Retrieved 
2011-1-25. 
[8] NOKIA. S60 5th Edition SDK for Symbian OS Release 
Notes， 
97
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

http://www.forum.nokia.com/info/sw.nokia.com/id/e2211487-
db31-49c0-a862-
a770397d7a2c/S60_5th_Edition_SDK_Release_Notes.html, 
Retrieved 2011-2-9.  
[9] NOKIA. 
Symbian 
SDKs, 
http://www.forum.nokia.com/info/sw.nokia.com/id/ec866fab-
4b76-49f6-b5a5-
af0631419e9c/S60_All_in_One_SDKs.htm，Retrieved 2010-
10-27 
[10] NOKIA. 
ActiveState 
ActivePerl, 
http://www.forum.nokia.com/info/sw.nokia.com/id/08714ccb-
f405-4ec6-b8ec-80ad83942d50/ActiveState/ActivePerl.html, 
Retrieved 2010-10-27. 
[11] R. Ben, Mason, Sam, Rocha, Daniel, Litovski, Ivan, and 
Cartwright, Java Me on Symbian OS: Inside the Smartphone 
Model, Hayun, John Wiley & Sons Inc，April 2009. 
[12] Oracle Sun Delevolpers Network. Mobile Media API - JSR135 
http://java.sun.com/products/mmapi/，Retrieved 2011-5-15. 
[13] Wiki 
Pedia. 
Java 
Mobile 
Media 
API, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Java_Mobile_Media_API, 
Retrieved 
2011.5.15.
98
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

