Benefits of an Integrated Hierarchical Data Structure   
for Automotive Demand and Capacity Management 
 
Konrad Pawlikowski 
Faculty of Business Economics 
Bochum University of Applied Sciences 
Bochum, Germany 
email: konrad.pawlikowski@hs-bochum.de 
 
Katja Klingebiel 
Faculty of Business Studies 
Dortmund University of Applied Sciences and Arts 
Dortmund, Germany 
email: katja.klingebiel@fh-dortmund.de 
Daniel Fruhner 
Faculty of Business Studies 
Dortmund University of Applied Sciences and Arts 
Dortmund, Germany 
email: daniel.fruhner@fh-dortmund.de 
 
Michael Toth 
Faculty of Business Economics 
Bochum University of Applied Sciences 
Bochum, Germany 
email: michael.toth@hs-bochum.de 
 
Axel Wagenitz 
 Faculty of Business & Social Sciences 
Hamburg University of Applied Sciences 
Hamburg, Germany 
email: axel.wagenitz@haw-hamburg.de 
 
 
Abstract— The demand and capacity management (DCM) is an 
essential 
component 
of 
the 
automotive 
supply 
chain 
management. DCM synchronizes resource requirements with 
capacities and restrictions of the supply chain and production 
system. Those requirements result from future or already 
realized market demands. One major challenge of the DCM is 
the uncertainty and volatility of the market demands. Other 
challenges are product variety and supply chain complexity. 
Here, efficient data management increases transparency and 
can support the DCM processes effectively. In this context, this 
contribution analyses the benefits of an integration of 
distributed product data into a hierarchical tree structure 
against the background of complexity reduction. The results of 
this study prove that a hierarchical integrated information 
model provides an optimized basis for a scenario-based DCM 
planning 
process. 
Data 
from 
a 
German 
automotive 
manufacturer served as basis for this evaluation. 
Keywords- product structure; automotive production; demand 
and capacity management; optimization; complexity. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
To compete in international markets, 
automobile 
manufacturers, i.e., original equipment manufacturers, OEMs, 
tend to offer their customers buying incentives, a huge variety 
of models which can be further individualized by several 
hundred options, i.e., colors, assistance systems, etc. 
Furthermore, OEMs constantly update their product range in 
an increasing frequency [1]. Though customers have to deal 
with the variety of models, they tend to expect that vehicle 
orders can still be customized shortly before actual production 
and that the produced car is rapidly delivered on the planned 
date [2][3]. 
Here, logistics plays an important role. Nowadays, 
suppliers do not only produce simple components, but also 
develop complex modules [4]. The competence of the car 
manufacturer has shifted to product marketing, the 
coordination of suppliers, assembly of supplied parts, and the 
distribution of the end product [5]. Therefore, the integrated 
management of the automotive production and supply chain 
is critical for the OEM. The anticipation of the future market 
demand, the timely derivation of resource and component 
requirements as well as the integrated and coordinated 
capacity planning are indispensable prerequisites [6]. Most 
critical, resource requirements resulting from anticipated or 
realized market demand need to be synchronized with 
resource capacities and restrictions of the production and 
procurement system by an effective demand and capacity 
management (DCM). DCM processes identify demand- and 
capacity-asynchronies 
and 
implement 
appropriate 
countermeasures in a timely manner. DCM acts as an essential 
interface between market, production and supply chain 
processes [7][8]. Nevertheless, it is obviously impossible to 
predict the exact future vehicle orders, as customers can 
choose from billions of possible configurations for each car 
type [9][10]. Today, regional and central sales departments of 
the OEM forecast sales volumes for the models offered in the 
different sales regions (e.g., number of VW Golf Trendline 2.0 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TDI) and sales quotas for the selectable options (e.g., ratio of 
vehicles with xenon light or navigation system).  
Fig. 1 depicts the interdependences of demand and capacity 
information. The compatibility of options for a respective car 
is described by a complex set of technical rules, while the 
relationship between the fully-configured car type and the 
corresponding parts is described by the bill of material 
(BOM). Capacity constraints and restrictions exist on sales 
level, production level and supply chain level. To balance 
volumes and quotas with constraints and restrictions in order 
to identify possible bottlenecks, it is necessary to bridge the 
gap between demand information and capacity information 
[11][12][13]. Forecast uncertainty, demand volatility, rapid 
product changes, as well as changes in the supply chain 
complicate this task significantly. 
 
Figure 1. Bridging the gap between demand information and capacity 
information 
Furthermore, the relevant data is typically kept in a highly 
fragmented information landscape. For example, part demand 
is typically gradually derived from sales figures in a number 
of sequential processes taking into account a variety of 
systems [14][15]. Since automated processes only allow the 
identification and reporting of formal inconsistencies, 
typically an experienced human planner has to review the 
process.  
As it is easily understood, an integrated information base 
could reduce the complexity and increase transparency of the 
DCM processes immensely. So, highly innovative systems 
integrate all related data from sales to supply chain into a 
consistent and integrated information structure, thus providing 
the essential basis for a continuous DCM process. In this 
context, this paper analyses the benefits of a hierarchical tree-
based data structure for the integration of distributed product 
data against the background of complexity reduction and 
transparency increase.  
In the next Section, the state of the art of information 
structures for automotive DCM is presented. Afterwards, an 
introduction to specific data optimization methods is given in 
Section 3. Section 4 analyses the complexity reductions 
gained by these optimization methods. A conclusion including 
a summary and a perspective on future research and 
development is given in Section 5. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART IN AUTOMOTIVE DCM 
PROCESSES 
This Section illustrates the state of the art in automotive 
DCM processes. The DCM process is initiated by the sales 
department predicting medium-term and future market 
demands [16]. Here, model volumes and option quotas for 
hundreds of sales regions worldwide must be planned. These 
figures are integrated with order volumes and translated into a 
production program for all sites. The planning complexity of 
this step is tremendous due to the variety of products. For 
example, a typical mid-class series (e.g., VW Golf, BMW 1 
Series, Audi A3) offers about 30 to 50 different car models 
(car type of a specific series with typically body type, engine 
and gear system specification) with about 400 to 800 options. 
This results in several thousand volumes to be planned for car 
models in sales regions in a specific time period (e.g., month, 
week or day depending on planning granularity) and some 10 
million option quotas. Furthermore, technical restrictions 
prohibit options for specific models (e.g., no 17’’ tires for 
convertibles), force specific combinations of options (e.g., 
LED head light only in combination with LED back lights) or 
prohibit combinations (e.g., a navigation system rules out all 
other radios). In addition, sales constraints and customer 
preferences need to be included.  This complex planning can 
often only be handled by the integration of human experience 
and intuition (cf. [17]). 
Even more so, a huge amount of the resulting resource 
requirements for production or logistics (supply of parts) are 
not only depended on single model volumes and quotas for 
options, but on a particular combination of model, options and 
sales region. Therefore, some part volumes are hard to predict 
until the exact configuration of the vehicle, i.e., the order, is 
known. Nevertheless, as lead times in global supply networks 
can be long, a certain amount of vehicle parts has to be ordered 
long before customer orders are known (cf. [16]). 
Consequently, the DCM process is challenging and 
characterized by conflicting goals: because of market 
dynamics, a huge number of possible vehicle configurations 
and correlations among vehicle models, options, and parts, the 
planning itself is already complex [18]. Sales departments are 
forced to react to volatile markets, increased global 
competitions, and changing customer requirements: flexibility 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

and reactivity is requested. Production is interested in a stable 
production program, which guarantees both high capacity 
utilization and optimal operating results. Material planning 
wants to fix part requirements as early as possible to avoid 
bottlenecks proactively as well as to negotiate the flexibility 
of suppliers appropriately.  
This conflict can be named the dilemma of automotive 
DCM. Typically, it is solved by planning cycles of four to six 
weeks, which are based on numerous workshops and 
committee meetings between sales, programming- and 
material planning [18][19]. The consequence is insufficient 
flexibility in reaction to market changes. Furthermore, the 
program is adjusted manually between program approvals and 
even after program freeze, within the so-called frozen period. 
However, these adjustments cause a lack of program stability 
and poor transparency on future demand for parts on supply 
side. The probability of bottlenecks increases and induces 
additional internal costs, as well as deterioration of the 
delivery service to the customer. 
There are two theoretical approaches for the integration of 
these sequential planning processes in an effective holistic 
DCM process.  
The first one is the early inclusion of selected critical 
resource restrictions into the sales and program planning. The 
planning variables, i.e., model volumes and option quotas, 
typically include several million variables. Furthermore, 
technical rules and BOM rules relate these planning variables 
to part demands and thus capacity restrictions. For example, a 
capacity restriction may exist which limits the number of a 
specific powerful battery. Unfortunately, the selection of this 
battery may depend on several combinations of options, e.g., 
the battery is only selected if specific electronical options are 
chosen. To derive restrictions on model volumes and option 
quotas all BOM rules and technical rules that relate directly or 
indirectly to that battery have to be analyzed. In the worst, case 
this amounts to a significant proportion of the overall number 
of rules, for a midrange model about 15,000 technical and 
600,000 BOM rules. Even more so, partially unmanageable 
correlations exist between option quotas and model volumes. 
These result not only from technical restrictions, but also from 
product strategy, customer preference, and marketing 
strategies. A customer preference as the choice of navigation 
system and hands-free module shall be given as an example 
for such correlations. These two options are independent from 
the viewpoint of the customer. But historical data has shown 
that most customers (80%) who choose the navigation system 
also select the hands-free module; customers who do not 
select the navigation system rarely choose the hands-free 
module [20]. 
As a result, not all restrictions may be deterministically 
traced back to the decision variables. This is aggravated by 
ramp-ups and run-outs (continuous change in options, models, 
etc.), dynamic changes in capacity information, multiple use 
of parts, parts commonality strategies and other restrictions 
that may change daily. The complete derivation of restrictions 
on planning variables harbors an immense complexity and is 
not deterministically feasible. The selection of historically 
critical restrictions is not sufficient. 
Consequently, the most promising perspective of an 
effective holistic DCM process is seen in scenario-based real-
time planning. Starting from a planning scenario, resources 
and component requirements are derived and capacity 
bottlenecks are identified and disclosed.  
The basis for this is a consistent and holistic information 
model, which consists of all planning information for the 
planning process. The simplest form of the DCM information 
model is divided into three data partitions: the planning 
scenarios, the resource information, and the product 
structures. Resource and part requirements are then derived 
from planning scenarios by propagation of the product 
structure from models and options to parts. Typically planned 
orders are applied here.  
To make fast and qualified statements about the feasibility 
of a scenario, the integrated DCM requires the application of 
smart quantitative methods to derive future resource 
requirements from market requirements. 
In [17], an evaluation of a number of publications has been 
performed, that have introduced innovative processes and 
methods for DCM (e.g., approaches of [11][21][22][23]) and 
developed an approach that applies planned orders that are 
applicable for calculation of part demand for the automotive 
industry.  
These algorithms have been implemented and validated at 
several German OEMs. The respective tool suite is now 
known under the name of OTD-DCM, where OTD refers to 
the basic instrument OTD-NET (order-to-delivery and 
network simulator, cf. [23]). To reduce the amount of data of 
BOM rules and to optimize their terms, the next Section 
presents optimization methods that are partially used in this 
approach. 
III. 
HIERARCHICHAL PRODUCT STRUCTURE AND 
OPTIMIZATION METHODS USED IN THE DCM 
As described in Section 2, the possible number of BOM 
rules for a fully specified car amounts to over 600,000. Hence, 
it is necessary to assure consistency and avoid redundancy in 
and between all data entities when integrating data into one 
data structure. Inconsistencies occur for example when 
subsets of technical rules contradict each other so that orders 
cannot be specified fully. Hence, it is necessary to adapt 
planning-relevant 
information 
regarding 
structural 
requirements and to verify their consistency before they are 
processed. As a result, the implemented data processing in 
OTD-DCM has been based on the principle of generating a 
hierarchically-linked structure of variant clusters (cf. [24]). 
Here, a variant cluster contains by definition a subset of 
allowed vehicle variants (typically car models), that have 
common properties (example: sales region=Germany, 
body=medium 
class 
sedan, 
engine=150hp 
diesel, 
transmission=automatic, and trim=comfort). The first pre-
optimization of the product structure is the generation of a 
hierarchical data tree where tree levels are based on 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

subsequently detailed variant cluster specifications. The tree 
structure is an intuitively attractive approach because of its 
proximity to car design principles. Tree levels may be defined 
based on for example the model type, target country, engine 
type (see Fig. 2). 
 
  
Figure 2. Extract of the generated tree structure 
Each level can have one to several nodes, depending on the 
level and type of car (e.g., gasoline, diesel, electronic for the 
fuel nodes). As all product information have a specific 
temporal validity, these dynamics have to be handled within 
this tree structure [17].  
This paper especially focuses on the processing and thus 
complexity reduction of rules when integrating product data 
into this hierarchical structure. Technical rules represent the 
technical feasibility by Boolean expressions, e.g., “if motor = 
90 kW then suspension = 6-speed manual gearbox“.  BOM 
rules follow the same Boolean schema but link options to part 
demands, e.g., “if motor = 90 kW and radio = “Radio Basic” 
then parts 5678973 and 5678974”. The mentioned 
optimization has been subdivided into three optimization 
steps.   
 
The first objective has been to identify all forced 
options, i.e., the options that have necessarily to be 
chosen for a specific variant cluster (e.g., every car for 
the German market has necessarily a specific exhaust 
system). Therefore, principally allowed options for 
one variant cluster are reduced by non-feasible 
options. This is done by checking intelligently 
selected, partly specified theoretical configurations 
against all applicable technical rules. If a contradiction 
occurs, the option will be deleted from the set of 
allowed options. When this process leads to only one 
possible option from a set of alternative options, this 
option is set as forced.  
An inner inconsistency is identified if the last 
identified forced property violates a technical rule. An 
outer inconsistency is identified if a positive demand 
quota for an option has been planned, but the option 
itself is technically not allowed. Another outer 
inconsistency is identified, if the sum of all planned 
quotas for all allowed options within a subset of 
alternative options in a specified time period does not 
equal 100%.  
 
The second optimization step reduces the number and 
the length of rules by application of the Identity Law 
of the Boolean algebra (cf. [25]). It should be noted 
that these steps are valid only for one variant cluster 
and a specified, fixed time period. Therefore, these 
steps need to be executed for each variant cluster and 
all 
relevant 
time 
periods. 
The 
OTD-DCM 
implementation is able to shorten rules by merging 
several BOM or technical rules that belong to more 
than one resource, i.e., workstations, assembly lines 
and more [17][26][27]. Next, this second optimization 
step aims to further reduce the actual length of all rules 
by Boolean simplification of terms. In contrast to the 
first step, it is used for each rule separately. If the 
optimized length of the rule is shorter than the original 
one, it is replaced by the new representation. Example: 
The Boolean expression “¬ ( ¬A ∧ B ∧ ¬C)“ will be 
reduced to “¬B ∨ A ∨ C”.  
 
The third and last optimization step tries to identify 
commonalities for nodes in the hierarchical product 
structure. For example, rules which are valid for each 
child node of one variant cluster are moved upwards to 
the parent node and deleted from all children. The 
preliminary condition for this step is that all derived 
variant clusters share this rule over the same time 
period. Example: The forced option “Owner’s manual 
in German language” may be valid for all variant 
clusters within the sales market = Germany. Hence, it 
can be transferred upwards to the variant cluster 
"variants - German" [17].  
The analysis of the complexity reductions which these 
methods provide, will be presented in the next Section.   
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF COMPLEXITY REDUCTIONS 
The evaluation of the previously described optimization 
steps has been executed on real data for two middle class 
series from a German OEM. It should be noted that these two 
car series represent only a small fraction of the OEM portfolio 
and the analysis is limited here on BOM rules only. In the 
following the parameter n(l) is defined as the number of tree 
nodes on a level. A tree node represents a variant cluster as 
described in the previous Section. The respective sum of 
BOM rules before optimization are defined as rpre(l) and after 
optimization as rpost(l). The number of average rules per tree 
node within a level is defined as  

apre(l)= rpre(l) / n(l)

and 

apost(l)= rpost(l) / n(l)

23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

A null-entry rule characterizes a rule without condition, 
i.e., this rule is valid for the whole variant cluster. 
Accordingly, the total number of null-entry rules on a specific 
level l before optimization is defined as vpre(l) and on a 
specific level l after optimization as vpost(l). 
The results in Table 1 illustrate, that the lowest level of the 
hierarchical product structure contains all existing BOM rules 
rpre(l) before all optimization steps. Levels 1 to 11 do not 
contain rules because these levels have been added artificially 
to the product structure in the first pre-optimization step in 
order to construct the primary tree structure. After 
optimization, several BOM rules have been hoisted to higher 
levels resulting in rpost(l). 
Furthermore, the overall number of rules is reduced from 
1,076,428 to 111,070, which amounts to a reduction of 89.7% 
in relation to the original number.  
The reduction as well as the average ratio of rules per node 
are recognizable by comparing apre(l) and apost(l). The 
weighted average considers the number of nodes of the whole 
tree per level, where the reduction in this case also results in 
89.7% coincidentally. This analysis proves the immense 
complexity reduction by application of the OTD-DCM 
hierarchical product structure.  
TABLE I. INDICATORS WITHOUT OPTIMIZATION (PRE) AND WITH OPTIMIZATION (POST) 
level l 
𝒏(l) 
rpre(l) 
rpost(l) 
apre(l) 
apost(l) 
vpre(l) 
vpost(l) 
1 
1 
0 
38 
0 
38 
0 
35 
2 
2 
0 
4,389 
0 
2,194 
0 
2,554 
3 
3 
0 
1,204 
0 
401 
0 
425 
4 
3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
5 
4 
0 
1,293 
0 
323 
0 
498 
6 
4 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
7 
5 
0 
1,047 
0 
209 
0 
111 
8 
8 
0 
4,101 
0 
512 
0 
845 
9 
8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
10 
8 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
11 
12 
0 
1,501 
0 
125 
0 
416 
12 
184 
1,076,428 
97,497 
5,850 
529 
287,841 
7,324 
 
sum 
sum 
sum 
weighted 
average 
weighted 
average 
sum 
sum 
 
242 
1,076,428 
111,070 
4,448 
458 
287,841 
12,208 
 
Nevertheless, rules at parent nodes are valid for all child 
nodes. When a specific variant cluster at lowest level is 
regarded (for example, for generation of fully specified 
planned orders) it is necessary to take into account all valid 
rules for this specific node. Thus, rules on the upper levels 
need to be propagated downwards to all child nodes and have 
to be considered when calculating the total number (sum) of 
valid rules for one variant cluster.  
TABLE II. PROPAGATED RULES PER VARIANT CLUSTER            
AT LOWEST LEVEL (LEVEL 12) 
propagated rules - 
level 12 
pre-
optimization 
post-
optimization 
sum 
1,076,428 
813,823 
average ratio 
5,850 
4,423 
median 
6,734 
4,725 
minimum 
3,007 
2,653 
maximum 
7,522 
5,344 
 
Table 2 shows that the propagated number of rules on the 
lowest level. The total number is still significantly smaller 
than the original number. The reduction of the number of rules 
is still about 24.4%.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
An integral component of the automotive supply chain 
management is DCM, where resource requirements, resulting 
from future or already realized market demands, are 
synchronized with capacities and restrictions of the supply 
chain and production system. Because it is impossible to 
predict the exact future vehicle orders, part demand is 
typically gradually derived from sales figures in a number of 
sequential processes involving a variety of systems as well as 
experienced human planners. In this paper, the integration of 
the respective distributed product data into a hierarchical tree 
structure has been analyzed against the background of 
complexity reduction.  
It has been demonstrated that by choosing a hierarchical 
tree structure the total number of BOM rules could be reduced 
by a factor of 10 (reduction of 89.7%). Furthermore, the 
number of BOM rules relating to a variant cluster could be 
reduced by 24.4% in the current case. In summary, the 
hierarchical integrated information model provides more 
transparency as redundant and surplus information is 
dramatically reduced. Thus, it proves to be an optimized basis 
for a scenario-based DCM planning process for the 
automotive industry which relies on transparent and 
consistent data. A sound DCM process will increase program 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

stability and transparency on future part demand. Bottlenecks 
and the resulting deterioration of delivery service levels will 
be decreased. Furthermore, all applications using the 
information model will save computation time and memory 
space [17]. 
Since only a small information model of two car series has 
been considered here, an analysis of a full product spectrum 
may be necessary to provide greater insights into the effects 
of the optimization steps. The chosen tree structure is an 
intuitively attractive approach because of its proximity to car 
design principles. Nevertheless, when targeting an integrated 
product structure, product characteristics from other 
departments like sales, productions and logistics need to be 
taken into account. Here, a more generalized graph structure 
instead of the applied tree structure may hold further benefits 
in terms of complexity reduction. Against this background, 
generic graph structures will be analyzed in the near future.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Special thanks to the German “Bundesministerium für 
Forschung und Bildung” (BMBF) for making this study 
possible by providing funding to the ILogTec project. The 
funding 
of 
BMBF 
was 
granted 
with 
Funding-ID 
03FH008IA5. 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Schuberthan and S. Potrafke, “Die Anforderungen des 
Kunden…,” in F. Gehr and B. Hellingrath, eds. Logistik in der 
Automobilzulieferindustrie: 
Innovatives 
Supply 
Chain 
Management 
für 
wettbewerbsfähige 
Zulieferstrukturen. 
Springer, p. 9, 2007. 
[2] D. Alford, P. Sackett, and G. Nelder, “Mass customization -  an 
automotive perspective,” International Journal of Production 
Economics, vol. 65(1), pp. 99-110, 2000. 
[3] E.-H. Krog and K. Statkevich, “Kundenorientierung und 
Integrationsfunktion der Logistik in der Supply Chain der 
Automobilindustrie,“in H.Baumgarten, ed. Das Beste der 
Logistik: Innovationen, Strategien, Umsetzungen, Springer, p. 
187, 2008. 
[4] A. Trojan, “…und die Auswirkungen auf den 1st-Tier-
Lieferanten,” in F. Gehr and B. Hellingrath, eds. Logistik in der 
Automobilzulieferindustrie: 
Innovatives 
Supply 
Chain 
Management 
für 
wettbewerbsfähige 
Zulieferstrukturen. 
Springer, p. 12, 2007. 
[5] S. Meißner, “Logistische Stabilität in der automobilen 
Variantenfliessfertigung,“ 
Lehrstuhl 
für 
Fördertechnik 
Materialfluss Logistik, Technische Universität München, 
Germany, p. 1, 2009. 
[6] R.T. Yu-Lee, ”Essentials of Capacity Management,” John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc., p. 3, 2002. 
[7] E.-H. Krog, G. Richartz, R. Kanschat and, M. Hemken, 
“Kooperatives Bedarfs- und kapazitätsmanagement der 
Automobilhersteller 
und 
Systemlieferanten,“ 
Logistik 
Management, vol. 4(3), p. 47, 2002. 
[8] D. Arnold, H. Isermann, A. Kuhn, H. Tempelmeier, and K. 
Furmans, Handbuch Logistik, 3rd ed., Springer, p. 472, 2008. 
[9] M. Holweg and F. K. Pil, “The Second Century: Reconnecting 
Customer and Value Chain through Build-to-Order”, MIT 
Press, p. 165, 2004. 
[10] F. Klug, “Logistikmanagement in der Automobilindustrie: 
Grundlagen der Logistik im Automobilsbau“, Springer, Berlin, 
Germany, p. 49, 2010. 
[11] T. Stäblein, “Integrierte Planung des Materialbedarfs bei 
kundenbeauftragsorintierter Fertigung von komplexen und 
variantenreichen 
Serienprodukten,“ 
Aachen, 
Germany, 
Shaker, 2008.  
[12] T. 
Zernechel, 
„Gestaltung 
und 
Optimierung 
von 
Unternehmensnetzwerken: Supply Chain Management in der 
Automobilindustrie,“ in F. Garcia, K. Semmler, and J. Walther, 
ed. Die Automobilindustrie auf dem Weg zur globalen 
Netzwerkkompetenz: Effiziente und flexible Supply Chains 
erfolgreich gestalten“, Berlin, Germany, Springer, p. 372, 
2007.  
[13] J. Gebhardt, H. Detmer, and A.L. Madsen, “Predicting Parts 
Demand in the Automotive Industry — An Application of 
Probabilistic Graphical Models,” Proc. Int. Joint Conf. on 
Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI’03, Acapulco, 
Mexico), Bayesian Modelling Applications Workshop, 
Morgan Kaufman, San Mateo, CA, USA, 2003. 
[14] H. Meyr, “Supply Chain planning in the German automotive 
industry,” OR Spectrum, vol. 26(4), p. 453, 2004. 
[15] T. Stäblein, “Integrierte Planung des Materialbedarfs bei 
kundenbeauftragsorintierter Fertigung von komplexen und 
variantenreichen 
Serienprodukten,“ 
Aachen, 
Germany, 
Shaker, p. 35, 2008.  
[16] T. 
Zernechel, 
„Gestaltung 
und 
Optimierung 
von 
Unternehmensnetzwerken: Supply Chain Management in der 
Automobilindustrie,“ in F. Garcia, K. Semmler, and J. Walther, 
ed. Die Automobilindustrie auf dem Weg zur globalen 
Netzwerkkompetenz: Effiziente und flexible Supply Chains 
erfolgreich gestalten“, Berlin, Germany, Springer, pp. 367-
378, 2007.  
[17] A. Wagenitz, K. Liebler, and S. Schürrer, “A Holistic 
Approach to Demand and Capacity Management in the 
Automotive Industry,” in Proceedings of tge 21st International 
Conference on Production Research, Stuttgart, Germany, p. 
101, 2011. 
[18] H. Meyr, “Supply Chain planning in the German automotive 
industry,” OR Spectrum, vol. 26(4), pp. 447-470, 2004. 
[19] J. Diercks. IT verliert Kontrolle über Geschäftsprozesse. 
[Online]. Available from: : http://heise.de/-1244454 [last 
accessed 17 May 2016], 2011. 
[20] K. Liebler, “Eine prozess- und IT-gestützte methode für die 
Produktionsplanung in der Automobilindustrie,“ Dissertation, 
Dortmund, Germany, Praxiswissen Publications, p. 105, 2013. 
[21] S. Ohl, “Prognose und Planung variantenreicher Produkte am 
Beispiel der Automobilindustrie,“ Düsseldorf, Germany, VDI, 
2000. 
[22] H. 
Wagner, 
„Kollaboratives 
Bedarfs- 
und 
Kapazitätsmanagement am Beispiel der Automobilindustrie: 
Lösungsansatz zur Sicherstellung der Wandlungsfähigkeit,“ 
1st ed., Huss, 2006. 
[23] A. Wagenitz, “Modellierungsmethode zur Auftragsabwicklung 
in 
der 
Automobilindustrie,“ 
Dissertation, 
Technische 
Universität Dortmund, Germany, 2007. 
[24] K.-U. 
Meininger, 
“Abstraktionsbasierte 
Bereitstellung 
bereichsübergreifender 
Planungsdaten 
für 
die 
Produktionsplanung bei Serienfertigung variantenreicher 
Erzeugnisse,“ 1st ed., Idstein, Germany, Schulz-Kirchner, p. 
32ff, 1994. 
[25] R. L. Goodstein, Boolean Algebra, Mineola, New York, Dover 
Publications, 2007. 
[26] K. Liebler, “Eine prozess- und IT-gestützte Methode für die 
Produktionsplanung in der Automobilindustrie,“ Dissertation, 
Dortmund, Germany, Praxiswissen Publications, p. 101, 2013. 
[27] K. Liebler, “Eine prozess- und IT-gestützte Methode für die 
Produktionsplanung in der Automobilindustrie,“ Dissertation, 
Dortmund, Germany, Praxiswissen Publications, p. 110, 2013. 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

