Cancer and Deadly Infection in Institutions: Developing Use Cases  
for an MBE Application to Prevent another Enron or Barings 
 
Thang N. Nguyen 
Department of Information Systems 
California State University Long Beach 
 CA, USA 
Thang.Nguyen@csulb.edu 
 
 
Abstract— One of the deadly diseases in human is cancer. A 
human cell becomes abnormal when its DNA is mutated and/or 
its genes are damaged for one reason or another. The 
abnormal cell produces other cells by division or mitosis. The 
uncontrollable growing collection of the abnormal cells, called 
tumor, when invading nearby tissues, is classified as malignant. 
Malignant tumors eventually proliferate to other organs 
throughout the human body via the blood and/or lymph 
circulation, a process called metastasis. Tumors cause serious 
threats to human health and potentially death. If we think of 
an institution as a human body, then its employees can be 
analogously considered as the body’s cells. In that sense, the 
group of “abnormal” or “special” employees led by Jeff 
Skilling, Andrew Fastow and others in Enron can be 
considered  as a malignant “institution tumor”. The group has 
influenced other organizational units and brought collapse to 
Enron. Human can also die due to infections caused by a single 
cell hosting a virus. It is analogous to the case whereas Nicholas 
Leeson single-handedly brought Barings bank to bankruptcy. 
We investigate these extreme deadly cases in humans, namely 
cancer and deadly infection, for insights into the construction 
of six use cases towards the development of an enterprise-wide 
MBE-based (management by exceptions) application for the 
prevention of another Enron or Barings bank.  
Keywords-Management by Exceptions; biologically-inspired 
system; bankruptcy prevention  
I. 
 COLLAPSES OF BUSINESS INSTITUTIONS DURING THE 
LAST TWO DECADES 
In February 26, 1995, Barings bank in the UK 
bankrupted because its asset was in the $635 million while 
its liability was around $27 billion [1]. The bank collapsed. 
It was sold to ING for £1. It started with the last margin call 
on SIMEX on February 23, 1995. It requested an amount of 
$835 million, higher than Barings asset, for transfer from 
Barings London to Barings Singapore due to futures and 
options positions in Nikkei 225 and SIMEX. It was found 
that the collapse was due to a single employee of Barings 
bank, Nicholas Leeson [2]. 
In October 2001, Enron announced $618 million loss for 
the 2001 third quarter.  During the preceding 9 months, 
Enron revenues were estimated to be roughly $138 billion 
[3]. Followed the restatement of 2001 third quarter were the 
1997-2000 financial statement reconsolidations. Enron stock 
went down quickly to 28 cents from roughly $90. Enron 
filed for protection was December 2, 2001. It was 
determined that the wrongdoings were done by a group of 
executives in Enron, led by primarily Jeff Skilling and 
Andrew Fastow [4]. 
In March 2002, Adelphia stock dropped 18% from $20+ 
per share of the day before, after it was disclosed that 
Adelphia has cosigned a $2.3M loan to the Rigas family 
business but it did not report in Adelphia books [5]. A few 
days later, Adelphia acknowledged a possible debt of 
$500M. During May, Adelphia attempted to sell its assets to 
reduce debts while reworked its 1999, 2000 and 2001 
statements to correct off-the-book debts. Stock price went 
down to 75 cents in early June. More troubling news 
surfaced: change of external auditor and more debts 
revealed. The company filed for bankruptcy on June 25, 
2002. It was determined by SEC that the Rigas family 
committed an elaborate and extensive accounting fraud [5]. 
In June 2002 WorldCom announced restatement because 
its expenses were posted as capital expenditures in prior 
financial statements.  The company further admitted 
irregularities in its reserve accounts in August. WorldCom 
accounting fraud was found to amount to $11 billion [6]. On 
July 21, 2002 WorldCom filed for Chapter 11 Bankruptcy 
Protection. The fraud was committed by a group of 
executives headed by Bernie Ebbers and Scott Sullivan.  
In February 2003, CFO Fuasto Tonna announced a 
€500M bond issue. He was fired by CEO Calisto Tanzi and 
was replaced by Alberto Ferraris. Ferraris resigned in 
November. He revealed he was unable to get access to some 
of the corporate books. Del Soldato replaced him and only a 
month later also resigned. In the same month, Parmalat 
forged paperwork to show it had €3.95B in its Cayman 
Islands subsidiary, claiming it was back by Bank of 
America. Bank of America denied. Subsequently, Parmalat 
defaulted €150M bond. This led to Parmalat bankruptcy on 
December 24, 2003 [7]. 
In 2008, Lehman Brothers incurred a substantial loss due 
to subprime market crisis. Between August and September 
2009, Lehman failed to sell its assets to Korea Development 
Bank, Bank of America and Barclays. The talk with New 
York Federal Reserve Bank for the possibility of an 
emergency liquidation of Lehman’s assets also failed. In 
September 15, 2008, Lehman filed for Chapter 11 [8]. 
After 
Enron, 
there 
were 
investigations 
after 
investigations. They resulted in multiple articles, reports, 
books, lessons learned as well as a number of proposed 
139
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

solutions and recommendations based on who did what, 
why, when, where and how. One of the main objectives was 
to arrive at the prevention of future Enron-like as well as 
Baring-like institutions from bankruptcy.  
Among the solutions and recommendations proposed 
and implemented, there were Sarbanes-Oxley Act in 2002 
[9] for stricter accounting standards, Higgs report [10] on 
non-executive directors, and resolutions from AICPA [11]. 
At the US House Energy and Commerce Committee 
Hearing, B. Dharan suggested several recommendations to 
SEC and FASB (Financial Accounting Standard Board). 
The latter involved pro-forma earnings reporting, a 
complete set of financial statements and modifications to the 
mark-to-market (MTM) accounting methodology, among 
others. Also others investigators have proposed changes to 
the roles, processes, practices, controls, reporting, and the 
like.  
One would think that it would be very hard for another 
Barings or Enron to occur. The reality is that (1) 13 years 
later, Jerome Kervial single-handedly over three days of 
trading drove Societe Generale to a loss of €3.9 billion, and 
(2) the list of wrongdoings grew longer for two decades 
since the Barings case. The latter included some important 
scandals: Madoff, Tyco International, HealthSouth, HIH 
Insurance in Australia, Daiwa Bank in Japan, Liu Qibing in 
China, and others [12]. A few of them escaped bankruptcy, 
however.  
Nevertheless, one cannot help wonder whether all the 
proposed solutions and recommendations have been 
collectively effective and/or enough. It appears that they are 
all good but obviously not enough since the collapses of 
institutions continued to persist. One can speculate that 
either the problems were rooted too deep that the prevention 
measures became ineffective or regardless of any new rules, 
regulations etc. somebody was able to break it. 
Our work approaches the solution from a perspective 
different than most. The idea is to look at the collapses in 
institutions in a fashion analogous to the death caused by a 
cancer in humans. The main thrust is to address prevention 
from collapse by detecting early symptoms much like in 
cancer prevention. This in turn suggests a known scheme of 
enterprise-wide management by exceptions (MBE) [13] to 
be revisited for the detection of significant symptoms of 
wrongdoings in time to take appropriate decisions. To that 
end, we propose in Section 2 a partially biologically-
inspired MBE solution for prevention. Section 3 is reserved 
for the development of use cases, the topic of this paper, 
towards such a solution. We include a discussion and 
present our concluding remarks and future work in Section 
4. 
II. 
APPROACH TO PREVENTION AND SYNOPSIS OF A 
PARTIALLY BIOLOGICALLY-INSPIRED MBE SOLUTION  
We start with the assumption that symptoms of 
wrongdoings in an institution are always there, just as 
cancerous symptoms in a human body. They are either 
ignored, or went undetected. When the symptoms surface 
the situation is that it will be commonly too late. In effect 
when cancer is detected, it is already in later phases, and 
therefore quite often death is practically unavoidable.  
Cancer is one of the deadly diseases in humans. Cancer 
is generally described as follows. The human body is made 
up of many types of cells. These cells grow and divide in a 
controlled way to produce more cells as the body needs to 
keep it working and being healthy. When cells become old, 
they die and are replaced with new cells, except maybe 
brain cells [14]. A human cell becomes abnormal when its 
DNA is mutated and/or its genes are damaged for one 
reason or another (internal or external).  
The abnormal cell produces other cells by division or 
mitosis. The uncontrollable growing collection of the 
abnormal cells, called tumor, when invading nearby tissues, 
is classified as malignant. Malignant tumors eventually 
proliferate to other organs throughout the human body via 
the blood and/or lymph circulation, a process called 
metastasis. Tumors cause serious threats to human health 
and potentially death [15].  
When an institution is considered as analogous to a 
human then the institution’s employees can be analogously 
considered as similar to biological cells. “Institution 
tumors” in turn can be viewed analogously as groups of 
employees in the organization which grow uncontrollably 
and start some wrongdoings. When funded to do their way, 
they can influence other organizational units and may 
become “malignant”. They could become seriously harmful 
to the institution health, and potentially lead it to 
bankruptcy. The analogy to cancer is elaborated for Enron 
case as follows.  
We equate Jeffrey Skilling and Andrew Fastow and 
other Enron executives as “special” or “abnormal cells” in 
the institution body. Skilling used an accounting practice 
which he convinced SEC to approve. In a sense, Enron’s 
MTM practice to accounting is analogous to a mutation to 
general accounting practices much like a mutated 
DNA/gene of a cell; therefore it is affecting its growth. The 
360-degree review [16] is analogous to a mutation to human 
resource hiring/firing policy/process. Special purpose 
entities (SPE) and accounting schemes can be viewed as 
mutations (changes or deviations) to commonly practiced 
SPEs and GAAP. 
When 
Arthur 
Anderson 
was influenced in the 
mishandling accounting audits [17], due to its dual role of 
external consultant and internal auditor, the institution 
“tumor” in fact has proliferated to the other institution’s 
“organs and organ systems” (i.e. finance division, 
accounting, legal counsel, etc.). Cancerous symptoms 
started to surface: Skilling’s replacement of Lay as CEO, 
followed by Skilling’s resignation after only 6 months, 
followed by the cancellation of deals with Blockbusters and 
later with Dynegy [18]. SEC began its inquiries and the 
revision of financial statements from 1997-2000 was 
initiated [19-21].  
140
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Discoveries of wrongdoings in SPEs required Enron 
statements to include Chewco consolidations as well as 
those of other projects. Enron stock prices slipped. The 
consolidations showed Enron debts and liabilities were 
previously off balance sheets. This caused additional stock 
price slips and cash shortfalls. Within just 60 days, the 
company’s stock went down to 28 cents per share. Enron 
filed for bankruptcy protection [11]. 
 
Figure 1. An analogy between human body and institution 
 
The analogy to cancer motivates us to look into Enron 
structural, functional and behavioral organization within its 
business model and its underlying operations, in a fashion 
analogous to the human body for insights into cancer 
prevention. At the top-level of Figure 1 (top box), the first 
guiding principle in human is derived from the concept of 
“milieu interieur” (or internal environment) of the body in 
which all cells bath as stated by Claude Bernard [22]. 
Analogously, there exists an information environment in 
which all employees of an institution live in and act upon.  
Next is the principle of cybernetics dealing with 
feedback and control, a concept owned by Norbert Weiner 
[23]. This concept is further exploited and applied to 
business 
management 
discipline, 
termed 
managerial 
cybernetics by Stafford Beer [24]. Cybernetics is to 
maintain homeostasis (equilibrium) in the human body. 
Homeostasis is a principle by Walter Cannon [25] 
originated from Ernest Starling [26] and expanded by 
Sherwin Nuland [27]. We can equate business stability as 
analogous concept to homeostasis. 
The human tissues, organs, organ systems made up the 
structure, functionality and behavior of a human (mid-level, 
middle box) are determined by the constituent cells. 
Likewise, the employees are grouped into professionals, 
departments and divisions, across which run the business 
processes.  
At the lower level (bottom box), it appears that the 
biological processes involve the basic constructs created by 
the cell’s organelles: the protein synthesis. Analogously, the 
tasks performed by the employees in the institution are 
much like the proteins created in the cells. The transactions 
created between employees are like the cellular exchanges 
at the cell membranes. Similarly the tasks to the projects and 
the transactions to the accounts in an institution are like, 
respectively, the proteins to macro molecules and cellular 
exchanges to the chemical products.  
The organizational analogy in Figure 1 does not suggest 
how we can address prevention, however. Therefore, we 
rearrange the guiding principles linking them to the 
supporting entities in terms of activities, events and control 
mechanisms (shown in the right side of Figure 2). The green 
dotted box shows business entities analogous to those 
entities in the human body. The red dotted lines and red 
entities exhibit the basic elements involved anomalies or 
wrongdoings. 
 
Figure 2. Institution model 
 
More specifically, the operational, tactical and strategic 
activities of an institution are realized in the tasks 
(biologically analogous to proteins produced by cells) of 
projects (analogously carried out by macromolecules in 
tissues, organs, organ systems) to be executed following 
predefined business processes (biological processes) by the 
employees (cells). Transactions (amounts or volume of 
exchange or release of chemicals in cellular exchange) of 
various accounts (chemical products) are related to tasks 
(proteins 
produced 
by 
cells) 
within 
the 
projects 
(macromolecules) and among them.  
Lastly, policies are statements that govern all entities and 
guiding principles. They can be specific, detailed, and 
measurable at the operational level of the organization. In 
fact, there is an operational process/procedure defined on 
anything and everything such as evaluating a loan 
application, startup a server, make a reservation for meeting 
room, etc. These processes grew from simple procedures 
defined at the start-up of the institution and become mature 
as the institution grows.  
The policy can become sketchy, unstructured and robust 
at higher level (strategic level). The high-level plan and 
process (we call it strategy) for defining and achieving 
company’s business objectives can be considered as policy 
since it is about how to compete within a predefined scope.  
We present above how a set of concepts are identified 
towards the formulation and realization of an approach to a 
partially biologically-inspired MBE solution. In the 
141
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

following, we focus on the development of use cases for 
such application, 
III. 
DEVELOPING USE CASES FOR DETECTION OF 
CANCEROUS SYMPTOMS: ENRON CASE 
In this paper, we show only the Enron case in our 
example implementation: We review the chronological 
wrongdoings (as we now known) in Enron for the capturing 
and detection of symptoms indicating wrongdoings which 
could lead to bankruptcy. For inputs, we classify them under 
the business entities defined in the MBE model: project, 
policy, account, task and transaction. Outputs are the 
exceptions detected by the said MBE.  
A. Strategy (business plans) and projects 
The first strategy was Jeff Skilling’s MTM strategy with 
the concept of gas bank. MTM as a trading model was new 
in the sense that it was an energy derivative where Enron 
would act as an intermediary “bank”. As such, Enron 
assumed the risks to buy gas from suppliers and to sell it to 
consumers at contractual fixed prices and service fees [3]. 
Skilling and Fastow used MTM to achieve two successful 
Projects: Cactus 3 with GE Credit Corp and other banks as 
partners, and JEDI with CalPERS partnership [28]. 
There were other strategies, e.g., the shift from Asset-
heavy to Asset-light [29] and those nicknamed Death Star, 
Load Shift (creating appearance of electric power 
congestion), Get Shorty (buy low, sell big, buy back low, 
etc.), Fat Boy and Ricochet (California’s energy market) 
[30] [31], and a diversification strategy. The latter was to 
extend Enron to businesses other than gas and electricity 
(water, broadband, etc.). The said strategies were realized in 
many subsequent projects: Dabhol, Bolivia, Azurix, 
Blockbuster, etc. Funds from Chewco, JEDI II, LJM 
Cayman, LJM 2 and LJM 3, Braveheart, Raptors, etc. in 
SPEs partnerships were used to off-balance its liabilities. 
Many of these projects were managed mainly by Fastow 
with SPEs created to avoid consolidation in financial 
statements.  
B. Policy and regulations 
To support the MTM strategy and others further, Skilling 
set out to hire the best and the brightest traders. Skilling 
devised a new policy on performance review called “360-
dregree review” and a new mantra (RICE) for Respect, 
Integrity, 
Communication 
and 
Excellence. 
Skilling 
successfully convinced the internal counsel, Andersen 
accounting audit and SEC to approve the MTM change to 
accounting practices. The Enron Board of directors also 
approved Fastow to have a dual role: Enron CFO and SPE 
manager in 1999. The above are considered as mutations to 
policy and regulations on common practices. 
C. Finance and Accounting 
All together, the MTM trading model, the group of top 
traders, the expansion to all other businesses, the bull 
market during 1990’s facilitated investment opportunities. 
Also included was the use of the Enron Online (EOL) 
developed by Louise Kitchen and promoted by Michael 
McConnell since the end of the 1999. The EOL was an 
electronic, real-time trading site. At its peak in 2000, EOL 
was handling $335 billion in online commodity [11]. Until 
then, there were all success stories, at least on the surface. 
Since 1997, however, Enron profits were squeezed due 
to new entrants and other smaller competitors: Dynegy, 
Duke Energy, El Paso and Williams, etc. [3]. Enron began 
to lose the competitive advantage. To be financially able 
and to maintain high credit ratings, Enron started to devise 
the use of SPEs to access capital and hedge funds as they 
entered into new mergers and acquisitions. The company 
has become more a hedge fund than a trading company [11].  
SPEs were the shell partnerships sponsored by Enron, 
supposedly 
funded 
by 
independent 
financing. 
Two 
conditions must be satisfied in order to keep the SPEs 
separate from Enron: at least 3% equity and 50% or more 
control of financial interest given to the independent 
investors. SPEs were used to purchase forward contracts 
with producers and to sell under long-term contracts to 
consumers [18]. However, in Chewco for example 3% was 
owned and actually controlled by Enron executives. Fastow 
began to hide losses in SPEs, thousands of which were 
created for that purpose. 
D. Deals and Transactions 
The introduction of SPEs model and practice had 
brought successful results to the two first projects: Cactus 3 
and JEDI [28]. SPEs became problematic in subsequent 
projects [32]. 
As we know now, Fastow, the master mind behind all 
SPEs, used them as a way to transfer losses off Enron’s 
books. Thus, he was able to book profits, and maintained 
good credit ratings by reducing debt-to-total-assets ratio. He 
used thousands of SPEs in subsequent projects, e.g. 
Chewco, LJM Clayman, LJM 2 [11]. Using SPEs, Enron 
was able to obscure disclosures on Enron financial 
statements by taking advantages of the non-consolidation 
requirements.  
It was reported [32] that in a deposition, Fastow 
confirmed that by transferring assets and loss off balance 
sheet, risks of the transactions were transferred to investors, 
therefore investors earned a return from the risks. As such, 
Enron rating would not be hurt. Fastow assured that he 
worked very closely with outside accountants to not 
violating any rules.  
As later discovered and reported in various sources [18], 
starting from October 2001, $287M for Azurix (acquired in 
1998), $180M for broadband with Blockbuster, and $544 
for others, a total of 22% of Enron expenditures from 1998-
2000 were write-offs. Portland General Corp (acquired in 
1997) was sold for $1.9B at $1.1B loss.  
142
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

E. Wrongdoings and symptoms 
Some symptoms leading to wrongdoings can be 
accounted as follows, extracted from happenings of (A-D): 
1) The initial success with Cactus 3 and JEDI with 
hedge fund from CalpPERS, as shown in financial 
statements of 1992 did not go unquestioned. Toni Mack, in 
her Forbes’ article “Hidden Risks” in 1993 has pointed out 
some risk issues related to MTM strategy.  
2) The next symptom was the lawsuit by Bernard 
Glatzer in 1997 that his business model was stolen by Enron 
in moving assets of Enron into partnerships via SPEs.  
3) The symptom which followed and should be noticed 
was the Enron’s Board’s approval of Fastow’s dual role in 
1999, with the condition that the task of monitoring the 
deals was given to Skilling, COO, Causey (CAO – 
accounting, and CRO - risk). There were also concerns 
raised by David Duncan and Thomas Bauer of Andersen’s 
Houston office in February 2001 however these were not 
disseminated outside of Anderson.  
4) Another (now known) symptom was a confidential 
memo from Jordan Mintz in May 2001 to Skilling, but Mintz 
got no response. The next major symptom was the 
resignation of Skilling citing personal reasons 6 months 
after he became Enron CEO. Ken Lay resumed the CEO 
position on August 2001. 
5) Followed was the anonymous letter to Ken Lay in late 
August (later known as being written by Sharon Watkins, an 
Enron VP) in August 2001, and subsequently a meeting was 
held between Lay and Watkins on accounting irregularities. 
Following the anonymous letter, Vinson and Elkins, Enron 
legal counsel, who helped draft the documents of some 
partnerships, was advised not to look into accounting by 
Arthur Andersen when the heart of the problem was really 
there [32]. It was known that an Andersen lawyer advised 
the Houston office not to retain documents which were no 
longer needed. Andersen auditors shredded documents 
subsequently by order of David Duncan of Andersen.  
6) Meanwhile there were other symptoms during the last 
part of 1990’s:  
• 
Top management’s large amounts of compensation, 
Excessive executive compensation as a result of financial 
successes as stock options reached almost 100M shares by 
end of 2000,  
• 
Huge amount of management fees for Enron 
executives (Fastow alone was paid $30M)  
7) Arthur Andersen’s conflict of interest acted both as 
external auditors and consultants. Corporate Audit 
Committee failed to recognize those symptoms. 
8) Two days after Lay stepped down as CEO, Clifford 
Baxter, Vice Chairman committed suicide. 
The first official wrongdoing which brought everybody’s 
attention was the press release of Q3 2001 (October 16, 
2001) without the balance sheet disclosure until after the 
markets closed. It revealed a $1.2B charge against equity 
[33]. Breakdowns of footnotes were detailed in Chatterjee 
[29]. Roughly one week later, SEC inquired about the SPEs. 
Also, faced the pressure from Wall Street, in November 
2001, Enron admitted buried hidden losses in the SPEs, and 
posted the re-statements for 4 years (1997-2000). They were 
accounting fraud. 
The discovery of wrongdoings, re-statements of financial 
report in the third quarter of 2001, accounting frauds, and 
financial consolidations resulted in the Enron stocks from 
$90+ to the 28 cents within a couple of months [34]. It 
brought the company to collapse in November 2001.  
The classification of the above entities (A-D) was to 
summarize and to suggest that if attention was paid to these 
entities as entries to the MBE, the symptoms in (E) would 
have yielded important indicators of wrongdoings. The 
summary we cite here is not be a complete and totally 
accurate account of what really happened and how they 
happened but we thought it is sufficient for us to illustrate 
the possible discovery of wrongdoings based on observed 
symptoms. 
We show a typical output produced by our initial 
prototypical MBE application in Figure 3 (at the end of the 
paper after references). If such exception report is produced 
and made transparent to all responsible parties, some 
attention would be given, and some decisions be reached. 
IV. 
DISCUSSIONS AND CONCLUDING REMARKS 
Recall that our proposed model in Section 2 is employee-
centered much as an organism is cell-centered.  Everything 
in the institution is considered as product of the employee’s 
tasks much as everything in the human body is the product 
of the cell’s organelles as proteins. The products are 
described not only in terms of tasks but also projects, 
transactions or accounts, and are not limited to other entities 
the institution might use.  
Secondly, the system is policy-driven across all level of 
organizations much like gene-driven in a human body, to 
measure results against “faulty strategy, managerial 
mishandlings, intended wrongdoings, diverted tasks within 
projects, out-of-the-ordinary transactions hidden in financial 
accounts and underreporting statements”. These are either 
supported by existing policy and/or regulations or 
questionably violate them as we mentioned earlier in Enron 
case.  
Thirdly, the system is geared towards evaluating and 
labeling exceptions in terms of severity level as a set of 
relevant symptoms for diagnostics of wrongdoings as shown 
in Figure 3. All records have drill-down and roll-up 
capability, and sideway links. Thus, the MBE system is 
capable of displaying the set of information on a particular 
issue as complete as possible including all analyses (as 
background calculations or evaluations, not addressed here) 
substantiating it, and all actions/decision for or against it 
(overriding decisions). Such transparent MBE scheme, with 
highly vertical and horizontal integration and correlation 
among the business entities can help detect symptoms 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

towards wrongdoings. Implementation of this MBE 
enterprise-wide is difficult, time consuming and complex 
because it will involve many existing applications. 
However, it can be done in increment.  
The six collapses we consider for the development as use 
cases are complex. They all had sophisticated strategies and 
processes, huge projects, complicated transactions in 
numerous areas of business from trading to CDO’s, from 
SPE to Repo 105, and the like. The Enron illustration shown 
here is highly simplified to convey the idea. There are a lot 
more in each and in future cases. We believe however it 
does suggest an improved internal control toward 
prevention. Future work is on the mechanisms, partially 
biologically-inspired for the detection and reporting of 
symptoms leading to collapses, for managerial decisions. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Edwards, (2004). “Barings – A Case Study in Risk Management 
and internal Control. The Risk”  Regulatory Forum. 2004  
[2] S. J. Brown, and O. W. SteenBeek (2001). “Doubling: Nick Leeson’s 
trading strategy”. Pacific-Basin Finance Journal. 2001. 
[3] B. G. Dharan and W. R. Bufkins (2002). “Red Flags in Enron’s 
Reporting 
of 
Revenues 
and 
Key 
Financial 
Measures”. 
www.ruf.rice.edu/~bala/files/dharan-bufkins_enron_red_flags.pdf,   
[4] B. G. Dharan, and N. Rapoport, Eds., (2009). “Enron and Other 
Corporate Fiascos”, Foundation Press 2009 
[5] K. V. Peursem, M. Zhou, T. Flood and J. Buttimore (2007). “Three 
Cases of Corporate Fraud: An Audit Perspective”, Number 94, 
University Of Waikato, June 2007. 
[6] W. Lyke and M. Jicking. (2002). “WorldCom: The Accounting 
Scandal”. CRS Report for Congress, RS21253, August 2002 
[7] C. Celani. (2004). “The Story behind Parmalat’s Bankruptcy”. 
Executive Intelligence Review. January 2004. 
[8] A. Azadinamin. (2012). “The Bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers: 
Causes of Failures & Recommendations Going Forwards”, Swiss 
Management Center, 2012. http://ssrn.com/abstract=2016892. 
[9] Sarbanes-Oxley Act. (2002). http://www.soxlaw.com, 2002 
[10] D. Higgs. (2003). “Review of the role and effectiveness of non-
executive directors"”. Department for Business, Enterprise and 
Regulatory Reform. http://www.berr.gov.uk/files/file23012.pdf.  
[11] C. W. Thomas, (2002). “The Rise and Fall of Enron”, Journal of 
Accountancy, April 2002. 
[12] L. Davies (2013) “Classic Financial and Corporate Scandals”. 
http://projects.exeter.ac.uk/RDavies/arian/scandals/classic.html 2013 
[13] J. A. R. and R. R. Nelson (1987). “Management-by-exception 
reporting: An empirical investigation”, Information & Management, 
Volume 12, Issue 5, May 1987 
[14] B. Alberts, D. Bray, A. Johnson, J. Lewis, M. Raff, K. Roberts and P. 
Walter. (1998). Essential Cell Biology, Garland Publishing, 1998. 
[15] R. J.B. King, (1996). Cancer Biology, Longman, 1996. 
[16] K. Eichenwald (2005). Conspiracy of Fools: A True Story, 
Broadway, 2005 
[17] C. N. Smith and M. Quirk. (2004). “From Grace to Disgrace: The rise 
and fall of Arthur Andersen”, Journal of Business Ethics Education, 
1(1), 2004 
[18] P. M. Heally and K. G. Palepu, (2003). “The Fall of Enron”, Journal 
of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 17, Number 2, Spring 2003.  
[19] EnronAnnualReport1998. 
(1998). 
picker.uchicago.edu/Enron/EnronAnnualReport1998.pdf 
[20] EnronAnnualReport1999. 
(1999). 
picker.uchicago.edu/Enron/EnronAnnualReport1999.pdf 
[21] EnronAnnualReport2000. 
(2000). 
picker.uchicago.edu/Enron/EnronAnnualReport2000.pdf 
[22] C. G. Gross. (1998) "Claude Bernard and the constancy of the internal 
environment". Neuroscientist 4 (1) 
[23] N. Weiner  (1948). Cybernetics or Control and Communication in the 
animal and the machine, The Technology Press, 1948 
[24] A. S. Beer (1972). Brain of the firm: Managerial Cybernetics of 
Organization,  
[25] W. Canno, (1963). The wisdom of the body, The Norton Library, 
Norton & Company, 1963 
[26] E. Starling  (1923). The wisdom of the body, 1923. 
[27] S. Nuland (1997). The wisdom of the body, Alfred A Knoff, 1997  
[28] K. Eichenwald and M. Brick, “Enron Collapse: The Strategy”, NY 
Times, 2002 
[29] S. Chatterjee and B. Fellow. (2002). “Enron’s Asset-Light Strategy: 
Why It went Astray”, 2002 
[30] A. 
Haglund 
(2011). 
“Failed 
Strategies 
of 
Enron”, 
http://mg312.wordpress.com/2011/09/02/failed-strategies-of-enron/, 
2011  
[31] R. A. Oppel Jr., (2002). “Enron’s Many Strands: The Strategies”. NY 
Times May 8, 2002 
[32] K. Eichenwald and M. Brick, “Enron Collapse: The Strategy”, NY 
Times, 2002 
[33] B. G. Dharan (2002). “Enron’s Accounting Issues – What We Can 
Learn to Prevent Future”. Prepared Testimony. US House Energy and 
Commerce Committee’s Hearing on Enron Accounting. 2002.  
[34] S. Deakin, and S. J. Konzelmann. (2003). “Learning from Enron”, 
ESRC Centre for Business Research, University of Cambridge, 2003 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Partial exception list in Enron Rhythms NetConnections project 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

