A Net Courseware for “Image Processing” 
Yu Jin ZHANG 
Department of Electronic Engineering 
Tsinghua University 
Beijing 100084, China 
zhang-yj@tsinghua.edu.cn 
 
 
Abstract—To help the teaching and learning of the 
undergraduate course named “Image Processing”, and to take 
the advantage of the progress of network for improving the 
education efficiency, a new and particular corresponding net 
courseware has been developed. This courseware is developed 
to support the education, to provide a vivid complement for the 
textbook, while not to replace the textbook. This paper 
introduces some design considerations and principles related to 
pedagogical requirements, the framework and structure for 
the organization and arrangements of contents, as well as the 
characteristics of the web-pages and interfaces of the 
courseware. In addition, some typical web-pages of this net 
courseware are shown to illustrate the results of different 
efforts in the design and development. Parts of the courseware 
have been used by professors and students, and some good 
feedbacks have been obtained. 
Keywords-computer assisted instruction, net courseware, 
knowledge component, image processing. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Computer Assisted Instruction (CAI), as a powerful 
technique, plays an important role in modern education. The 
progress of computer and communication technology as well 
as multimedia equipments and network infrastructures have 
greatly enhanced the quality of teaching and learning in 
recent years [1]. 
One of the most important tasks to make educational 
learning effective is the designing of courseware. From the 
pedagogical point of view, the use of courseware can greatly 
thrust the interest of learner and stimulate their subjective 
motivation, which would have significant influence both on 
the course conducting performance and educational effects. 
Different media, such as image/picture, animation, audio, 
and video have been employed in various coursewares to 
give students some vivid and dynamic representations to 
stimulate their deep thinking and to push student's 
motivation in active participation.  
With the wide utilization of networks, net coursewares 
become popular. They organize the education materials with 
the help of well organized web-pages [2]. Learners can use 
network technology to access remotely the contents in 
courseware. 
Net 
courseware 
becomes 
an 
important 
educational resource. In this paper, a net courseware has 
been used for 3 years are presented. 
“Image Processing” is an important course in image 
engineering [3]. As a basic course for the discipline, it is 
conducted for the third year undergraduate students in our 
university. To help the teaching and learning, the 
development of a corresponding net courseware has been 
taken. Three key factors in developing such a courseware 
are the content selection, the courseware structure, as well 
as the interface and web-page layout. 
The construction of web courses should take into 
consideration, besides the general pedagogical demands, the 
particularity of course and learning style, satisfy the 
condition of operating with the help of Internet, and profit 
from the advantage of a network environment. 
The rest part of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 introduces the selection criteria in choosing the 
relative contents. Section 3 gives the framework for 
organizing the contents and media in the courseware. Section 
4 provides a number of typical web-pages in courseware to 
show the layout and form of interface and contents. Finally, 
Section 5 summarizes the good points of the courseware. 
II. 
CONTENT SELECTION 
The content of courseware is the core of the courseware. 
Some criteria should be respected. The current trend in the 
development of discipline under question should be 
reflected in selecting the sources of information. The 
courseware should cover the subject matter of the course. In 
one side, it should correspond to the substance in the 
textbook. On the other side, it should be complementary to 
the contents of textbook.  
The selection of contents for this courseware has been 
made in accordance with the goal and function of this course. 
As this course is given in campus for full time students with 
a textbook specially written for it, the courseware is designed 
as an assistant to help the students for extended self learning 
and reviewing. The following considerations and actions 
have been made: 
• 
To help the process of course conduction, the 
material selected and the script designed should be 
correspond to the materials in the textbook. Taking 
this factor into consideration, the number of chapters 
in the courseware has been made to be equal to the 
number of chapters in the textbook. In addition, for 
each chapter, the correspondence between the 
143
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

sections in the courseware and the sections in the 
textbook is also maintained. 
• 
There is a significant difference between self-
learning and the learning by following lecture. In 
addition, the first learning and the reviewing after 
learning are also quite different. Therefore, the 
courseware should provide some variations and 
supplements. From one side, the courseware can use 
its advantage in capacity to provide more examples 
and even more materials than printed textbook. From 
other side, based on the existing explanation in the 
textbook, the courseware can just list the compact 
definitions for a number of concepts to facilitate the 
sum up and remember. 
• 
The modern theory for education and psychology 
emphases on the various learning styles to help 
acquiring knowledge. It is believed that combining 
different learning styles would greatly improve the 
efficiency of learning. Considering this factor, the 
courseware provides a number of demonstrations for 
illustrating the procedure and for displaying the 
process results. Such a dynamic manner provides a 
vivid impression. 
III. 
COURSE STRUCTURE 
The structure of courseware is related to the internal 
organization of contents. From one side, the structure should 
match the strategy of education, connect different course and 
learning parts, and make the study easy. From other side, the 
structure should fit the network environment and the 
characteristic of computers. 
The contents of courseware are to be organized in 
modules. In particular, it is better to use knowledge 
component (KC) as a learning/studying unit, and to arrange 
contents around knowledge points. 
The structure of course has provided a guide to learners. 
A dynamic and layered structure supporting association of 
related KCs is important. These KCs should be linked to 
support cross-reference, which is normally enabled by 
numerous inter-links between related text notes and 
demonstrations [4]. However, getting lost in hyperspace 
should be avoided [5]. 
The following measures have been made: 
• 
A combination of dynamic tree-structure and graph-
structure has been adopted in the courseware. The 
tree-structure can provide a layered outline for the 
courseware as well as a fast and logical access route 
for different branches. The graph-structure can 
provide a cross-grid relationship for the content, and 
make the browsing and navigation inside courseware 
easy and intuitive. 
• 
A module implementation has been conducted for 
the concrete contents. The section has been taken as 
the logical module of courseware, which has been 
named “knowledge component”. Each knowledge 
component corresponds to an independent learning 
unit, which consists of four groups of contents 
corresponding 
to 
specialized 
knowledge: 
the 
Concepts (for principles and definitions), the 
Examples (for processing methods and explanations), 
the Demonstrations (for dynamic process and result 
displaying), and the Key-points (for summary and 
references). Each knowledge group has been made 
quite independent, to perform connected study. 
• 
The web-page has been taken as the physical 
unit/module corresponding to the section of 
courseware. The contents in web-page are arranged 
according to the lecture/study order. On the web-
page, not only some concrete contents are directly 
shown (for compactly representing the concepts and 
key-points), 
but 
also 
other 
related 
contents 
(examples and demonstrations) are connected by 
using the hyperlink functionality of web-pages. 
The overall framework of the courseware is shown in 
Figure 1. It can be seen from Figure 1 that the learners have 
two choices once getting into the courseware. The first is to 
select the chapter from the Chapter List, and follow the pre-
determined learning order. The second is to go to the 
classified KC lists. From the outline to knowledge 
component, a tree-structure provides an access mode like 
using the table of content in a book. While from the list to 
learning term, a graph-structure supplies a visit mode like 
using the index of a book. 
 
Figure 1.  Framework of courseware. 
Figure 2 shows the access paths from KC Class Entry to 
individual KC, via respective lists. All knowledge 
components are classified into four groups (modules): 
Concepts, Examples, Demonstrations, and Key-points. The 
titles of different groups of knowledge components are listed 
in four corresponding lists. From the concept list, learners 
can access the definitions of several hundreds of concepts. 
From the example list, learners can view more than hundred 
examples with pictures or drawings. From the demonstration 
list, learners can manipulate a number of dozens of dynamic 
illustrations. From the key-point list, learners can look over 
the summary of each section and related reference 
introductions for further study. 
 
Figure 2.  Access from KC class entry. 
Concept KC 
Concept List 
KC Class Entry 
Example List 
Demo List 
Example KC 
Key-point List 
Demo KC 
Key-point KC 
KC Class Entry 
Chapter List 
Knowledge Components 
Courseware 
144
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

Figure 3 shows the organization of a chapter in 
courseware. Getting into a chapter, the summary of this 
chapter, with four title lists for concepts, examples, 
demonstrations and key-points in this chapter, is displayed. 
Beside, a list of sections in this chapter is also provided. A 
section is a study unit that is formed by a number of KCs 
arranged in learning order. 
 
Figure 3.  Chapter organizations. 
IV. 
INTERFACE AND WEB-PAGES 
The interface of net courseware provides a way for 
communication between the computer and users. The net 
courseware is composed of a number of linked web-pages, 
in which the interface for the learners to use the net 
courseware is resided. The web-pages convey the 
information to the learners and receive the control from the 
learners via interface.  
Some careful considerations in the design of web-pages 
are as follows: 
• 
The form and appearance of courseware should take 
the advantages of computer capacity, provide 
intuitive visual effect, encourage the participation of 
learners in the studying procedure, and make the 
abstract concept more concrete and more visible to 
help the understanding. 
• 
A flexible and user-friendly interface is an important 
criterion to judge the usability of courseware. It 
should provide fast access to different parts of the 
courseware. 
To 
fulfill 
this 
requirement, 
the 
hyperlinks between the four lists and the study unit 
have been established as shown Figures 1, 2 and 3. 
• 
Interactivity plays an important role in courseware. 
Many interactions among different forms, such as 
image, video, animation, dialog box, have been 
included. The styles for each knowledge component 
and the operating interface have been unified. 
• 
In general, different interfaces in the web courseware 
should be concise (such as the interface layout), 
uniform (such as the window locations) and easily 
operable (such as the keys for interaction). Thus, 
users could be concentrated more on the course 
contents themselves than on the learning of how to 
use the interface. 
• 
Dynamic demonstrations are added in courseware, 
which would be impossible in textbook. Many tools 
exist, such as Adobe Acrobat, Macromedia FLASH, 
Microsoft EXCEL, MATLAB, LabVIEW, and 
WebCT [6]. By considering various factors such as 
the security, the data volume, the quality of products, 
and the effect of demonstration, the demonstrations 
have been developed with Macromedia FLASH and 
embedded in web-pages. 
Some typical web-pages are given below for examples: 
• 
Web-page for courseware entry (Figure 4) 
This page has been divided into three regions: on the left 
is the table of contents which gives the titles of chapters and 
sections in order; on the top right are the hot-key for four 
class lists (Concepts, Examples, Demonstrations and Key-
points); and on the low right is the content display region 
which provides an introduction to the courseware. The top 
part of Figure 1 is implemented in this page. 
 
Figure 4.  Web-page for courseware entry. 
• 
Web-page for KC class entry (Figure 5) 
This page will pop out after clicking the concept list on 
the top of the web-page for courseware entry. Such a page 
displays the list for concept titles (here the list for concepts is 
an example, similar pages with other lists can also be 
obtained), and the definition of every concept is linked 
behind, as shown in Figure 2. 
 
Figure 5.  Web-page for list entry. 
• 
Web-page for chapter entry (Figure 6) 
This page appears after clicking the chapter title on the 
left of the web-page for courseware entry. The region on the 
low right provides a summary of the chapter by giving the 
title lists of each knowledge component in four groups. From 
here, all knowledge components in this chapter can be 
randomly accessed as shown in Figure 3. 
Section 1 
Chapter 
Section 2 
Ch. Summary 
Knowledge Components 
145
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

 
Figure 6.  Web-page for chapter entry. 
• 
Web-page for section and content (Figure 7) 
This page appears after clicking the section title, which 
will appear after clicking the book-logo at the left of chapter 
title (the closed book-logo changes to opened book-logo) on 
the left of the web-page for courseware entry. From the 
section list, a selection of a particular section will provide the 
contents of this study unit on the low right window (as 
shown in Figure 3), in which different knowledge 
components are arranged according to the learning order. 
 
Figure 7.  Web-page for section and content. 
Note in Figure 7, the contents of concepts and key-points 
are directly displayed, while the contents of examples and 
demonstration will be shown in new popup windows. 
• 
Web-page for examples (Figure 8) 
This page will pop out after clicking the example title in 
the low right region of web-page for section and content. It 
can also be obtained if one clicks the same title from the 
example list on the top right of the web-page for courseware 
entry, or from the example list in chapter entry (see Figure 6). 
Examples are illustrated by a number of pictures showing the 
procedure and the result of particular techniques. 
It is often said that “one picture is worth more than ten 
thousand words”. Using pictures for teaching and learning 
image courses has great advantages [7], especially for 
showing pictures on the computer screen with courseware, as 
the quality of images is much better than that on the printed 
textbook, and the details caused by noise and the removing 
effect, for example, could be readily visible. 
 
Figure 8.  Web-page for examples. 
• 
Web-page for demonstrations (Figure 9) 
This page will pop out after clicking the demonstration 
title in the low right region of web-page for section and 
content. It can also be obtained if one clicks the same title 
from the demonstration list on the top right of the web-page 
for courseware entry. Demonstrations are made by using 
Flash to achieve interactivity between learners and the 
courseware. Figure 9 shows a demonstration for color 
processing. Learners can use the function keys (forward, 
backward, circle/rewind) in the low right to control the 
process order and can also click on the web-pages to start the 
interaction with the demonstration. 
 
Figure 9.  Web-page for demonstrations. 
Various demonstrations have been developed. Some of 
them display the dynamic drawing procedure; some of them 
provide the image operation gradually with sequential 
pictures, and some of them interactively and selectively 
perform actions according to learner’s request. Learners 
could not only view the middle results but also get more 
impression on the course and flow. Those demonstrations 
can be used by teachers on the class lecture and by students 
after the lecture for self-learning. 
V. 
CONCLUDING RMARKS 
A new net courseware for “Image Processing” has been 
designed and developed. The three important factors, the 
selection of content, the course structure, and the interface 
and web-pages, have been explained in this paper.  
146
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

The design process was performed before the start of the 
course, and the development was made in similar pace with 
the conduction of the course. Therefore, the professor and 
students have already the chance to use it once and to 
provide some useful feedback for improvement. 
Some feedbacks from students are: with this courseware, 
they feel that the course and the subject are more interesting, 
some abstract concepts become easily understanding, and 
the emphases are simple to catch in the reviewing. 
Some feedbacks from teachers, related to students side, 
are: less students pose questions on the concepts and 
process of techniques after class, and more students 
accomplish their homework with more visual forms [7] 
(some of them are made by students with their own 
programming) now. 
Some good points of this net courseware include: 
• 
Comprehensive contents: Cover the whole textbook 
and provide complementary information. 
• 
Combined structure: Both layered and cross-linked 
structures are employed.  
• 
Uniform outer shell: All materials are embedded into 
web-page and can be viewed by a net browser 
• 
Interactive demonstration: Push learner’s learning 
interests and motivate learner’s visualize thinking 
The principle and techniques used in this courseware 
should be also suitable for use in other coursewares. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the Grant “TH-985-
Second Term of Textbook and Teaching Resource (TH-985-
STTTR)”. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. S. Chee. “Networked Virtual Environments for Collaborative 
Learning,” Proc. of International Conference on Computer in 
Education’01, 2001, Vol.1: pp. 3-11. 
[2] J. Tiffin. “The HyperClass: Education in a Broadband Internet 
Environment,” Proc. of International Conference on Computer in 
Education’02, 2002, pp. 23. 
[3] Y. J. Zhang. Image Engineering: Processing, Analysis, and 
Understanding. Cengage Learning, 2009. 
[4] Y. T. Sung, S. K. Chiou, and K. E. Chang. “Use of Hierarchical 
Hyper Concept Map in Web-based Courses,” Proc. of International 
Conference on Computer in Education’01, 2001, pp.1133-1137. 
[5] M. Hall, and D. Robinson. “Lost in Hyperspace: Linearity Versus 
Exploration in the Design of Multimedia for Independent Learners,” 
Proc. of International Conference on Computer in Education’98, 1998, 
Vol.2: pp. 9-13. 
[6] N. Shahnam. “Application of Technology in Engineering Education,” 
Computers in Education Journal, 2006, Vol.16, No.3: pp. 100-111. 
[7] Y. J. Zhang. “Teaching and Learning Image Courses with Visual 
Forms,” Encyclopedia of Distance Learning, 2nd Edition,, 2009, 
Vol.4: pp. 2044-2049. 
 
 
147
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

