Semantic Approaches for Cognitive Data Processing 
 
Lidia Ogiela 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: logiela@agh.edu.pl 
Urszula Ogiela 
AGH University of Science and Technology 
30 Mickiewicza Ave, 30-059 Kraków, Poland 
e-mail: ogiela@agh.edu.pl 
 
 
Abstract— This paper describes a semantic-based technique for 
intelligent data processing and cognitive analysis. The described 
methods are used to create knowledge extraction procedures, 
which apply the semantic content and meaning for data 
handling. Such methods are designed for efficient data 
management and protection in cloud environment. 
Keywords-Cognitive 
reasoning; 
data 
processing 
and 
management; semantic description. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Modern security protocols very often use semantic content 
description of secured data and involve it in creation of 
security algorithms. Such methods were proposed in the new 
area of cognitive cryptography in [1][2]. In such methods the 
semantic content should be evaluated and applied in the 
security protocol, which finally results in the encrypted data 
being dependent on its semantic meaning. Such protocols 
define an important extension of traditional security 
procedures, which usually do not make any connection 
between semantic content and final encryption results.  
Similar connections to the ones mentioned in the previous 
paragraph between semantic content and protocols can be 
implemented in data management techniques as well. Such 
techniques will be described in following sections, in which 
we will define semantic-based secure data management 
approaches. The main idea of such procedures is to create a 
new class of strategic data management procedures oriented 
for information splitting and distribution in complex, 
hierarchical management structures. Information splitting and 
distribution will be strongly dependent on the content of 
shared data [3]-[5]. The main action of such techniques will 
be connected with a semantic content evaluation, which will 
provide the data feature vector. Feature parameters from this 
vector will be used in the information division task. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section II, 
we present the concept of data management using semantic 
information. In Section III, we mention some applications of 
management protocols. We conclude the paper in Section IV. 
 
II. 
DATA MANAGEMENT USING SEMANTIC 
INFORMATION 
In 
order 
to 
define 
semantic-based 
management 
algorithms, it is necessary to introduce two different types of 
protocols. The first type of protocols includes techniques 
which allow to evaluate the semantic content of encrypted 
information. The second type of protocols contains efficient 
data division protocols which allow to share secret data into a 
particular number of parts, which can then be distributed 
among users in management procedures. In such techniques, 
the distribution of secret parts should be connected with the 
content and implemented with the application of semantic 
parameters extracted at the beginning of the procedures. 
For extraction of semantic description, we can use the 
cognitive information systems defined in [1][6]. In the past, 
several different classes of cognitive procedures were defined, 
which focused on the evaluation of different types of data, 
from visual patterns, to economical or secret data. 
Cognitive systems are aimed at extracting the semantic 
content from analyzed data and evaluating some important 
knowledge which is present in the data. Very often, this 
requires extensive analysis, including the application of 
advanced Artificial Intelligence (AI), or cognitive resonance 
procedures. As a result of cognitive analysis, it is possible to 
build a data record which contains the semantic description of 
the analyzed information. Such semantic record can contain a 
large number of parameters describing different global or 
local features. Depending on the goal of the information 
splitting in management procedures, it is possible to select the 
most important parameters from this information, which can 
then be applied to perform the data splitting and distribution 
tasks in an efficient and secure manner. 
When we select several semantic features, we can 
implement them using a division and management protocol. 
To perform such task, first, it is necessary to select a data 
sharing technique [3][5] and apply it for complex hierarchical 
management structures. To do this, it is necessary to 
determine the number of levels and layers in the hierarchical 
structure, as well as the number of participants at each level. 
Having selected the parameters and having evaluated the 
semantic features of the divided information, we can start the 
division procedures with the following input parameters: 
• 
semantic factors, 
• 
defined numbers of layers and participants, 
• 
secret information that needs to be splitted, 
• 
starting parameters for sharing procedures. 
 
After finishing secret data division sequences, we obtain a 
particular number of secret parts, which can then be 
distributed to each level in the hierarchical structure. 
Distribution can be done in different ways depending on the 
number of persons and the access privileges. We can consider 
a specially defined distribution topology for the obtained 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-972-0
ICCGI 2022 : The Seventeenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

secret parts, which can be placed in an irregular manner over 
different levels in the hierarchical structure. 
 
III. 
APPLICATION OF MANAGEMENT PROTOCOLS 
The defined semantic-based sharing and management 
procedures have several possible areas of application. Such 
techniques extend classical management procedures towards 
including semantic content. Such techniques are dependent on 
features, and the information can be splitted and distributed in 
different ways. The possibilities of selection of semantic 
parameters introduce an additional security level because the 
whole protocol allows to reconstruct the original data only in 
the situation when the input parameters are known. The 
knowledge about the procedure will not be enough to perform 
unauthorized data reconstruction from the generated parts. 
The security feature allows to apply these types of 
protocols in different management or security areas. In 
particular, they may be applied in secure and trusted data 
management in distributed systems, like cloud structures 
[7][8]. It can be also implemented in distant services 
management, as well as secure data storage and distribution. 
Performing analytics tasks with the application of semantic 
feature on the analyzed data makes such protocols also 
applicable in predictive analysis towards prognosis of user 
trends or behaviors [9][10]. 
 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we described a new idea of creation and 
application of semantic-based protocols in security areas. 
Such methods can be used in a broad range of management 
activities, especially connected with secret data division in 
complex and distributed structures. The main idea of such 
protocols lays in the extraction of the semantic meaning of 
encrypted data and the application of such information in 
security protocols. The extraction of semantic meaning can be 
done with the application of cognitive information systems, 
and the extracted features can decide about the way of 
information encoding and distribution. Such techniques can 
be widely applied in cloud computing and distributed services 
management, as well as secure data distribution in complex 
structures. Such methods enrich traditional management 
approaches and have influence in the creation of new security 
protocols in cognitive cryptography [1][11]. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been supported by the National Science 
Centre, 
Poland, 
under 
project 
number 
DEC-
2016/23/B/HS4/00616.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] L. Ogiela and M. R. Ogiela, “Cognitive security paradigm for 
cloud computing applications,” Concurr. Comput.: Pract. Exp. 
32(8), e5316, 2020, doi: 10.1002/cpe.5316. 
[2] M. R. Ogiela, L. Ogiela, and U. Ogiela, “Biometric methods 
for advanced strategic data sharing protocols,”. In: 2015 9th 
International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet 
Services in Ubiquitous Computing IMIS 2015, pp. 179–183, 
2015, doi: 10.1109/IMIS.2015.29. 
[3] M. R. Ogiela and U. Ogiela, “Secure information splitting 
using grammar schemes,” New Challenges in Computational 
Collective Intelligence. Studies in Computational Intelligence, 
vol. 244, pp. 327–336. Springer, Heidelberg, 2009, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-642-03958-4_28. 
[4] S. Nakamura, L. Ogiela, T. Enokido, and M. Takizawa, 
“Flexible Synchronization Protocol to Prevent Illegal 
Information Flow in Peer-to-Peer Publish/Subscribe Systems,” 
in: Barolli, L., Terzo, O. (Eds.), Complex, Intelligent, and 
Software Intensive Systems, Advances in Intelligent Systems 
and Computing. 611, pp. 82-93, 2018. 
[5] N. Ferguson and B. Schneier, “Practical Cryptography,” Wiley, 
2003. 
[6] L. Ogiela, “Transformative computing in advanced data 
analysis processes in the cloud,” Inf. Process. Manage. 57(5), 
102260, 2020. 
[7] R. A. Ancheta, F. C. Reyes, J. A. Caliwag, and R. E. Castillo, 
“FEDSecurity: implementation of computer vision thru face 
and eye detection,” Int. J. Mach. Learn. Comput., 8, pp. 619–
624, 2018. 
[8] S. Gil et al., “Transformative effects of IoT, Blockchain and 
Artificial Intelligence on cloud computing: Evolution, vision, 
trends and open challenges,” Internet of Things, 8, 100118, 
2019. 
[9] C. Guan, J. Mou, and Z. Jiang, “Artificial intelligence 
innovation in education: a twenty-year data-driven historical 
analysis,” Int. J. Innov. Stud. 4(4), 134–147, 2020. 
[10] S. J. H. Yang, H. Ogata, T. Matsui, and N.-S. Chen, “Human-
centered artificial intelligence in education: seeing the invisible 
through the visible,” Comput. Educ.: Artif. Intell. 2, 100008, 
2021. 
[11] M. Del Giudice, V. Scuotto, B. Orlando, and M. Mustilli, 
“Toward the human – Centered approach. A revised model of 
individual acceptance of AI,” Human Resource Management 
Review, 2021, 100856, doi: 10.1016/j.hrmr.2021.100856. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-972-0
ICCGI 2022 : The Seventeenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

