A Kinetic Light Shelf Unit as an Integrated Intelligent Control Device 
for Optimizing Interior Illumination
 
 
Ok-Kyun Im 
School of Architecture 
Chonnam National University 
Gwangju, Korea 
ilmeil@naver.com  
 
 
 
 
Kyoung-Hee Kim 
School of Architecture 
University of North Carolina Charlotte 
Charlotte, NC, USA 
kkim33@uncc.edu 
 
 
 
 
Seung-Hoon Han 
School of Architecture 
Chonnam National University 
Gwangju, Korea 
hshoon@jnu.ac.kr 
(Corresponding Author) 
 
 
Abstract - This study suggests a Kinetic Light Shelf Unit 
(KLSU) which is possible to change the function intelligently 
according to information for the altitude of the Sun. When the 
Sun’s altitude is high, the kinetic shelf unit works as the light 
shelf that can improve the interior illumination. Also, when the 
Sun goes down, the kinetic shelf unit operates as the vertical 
louver which blocks the direct rays of the Sun. 
 
Keywords - Kinetic Building Facade; Light Shelf Unit; 
KLSU; Optimized Louver; Integrated Intelligent Control Device 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, building energy management is more 
important than ever. Especially, lighting energy used in the 
building occupies 30% of the whole consumed energy. This 
amount increases continuously. [1] Therefore, the solution to 
reduce the energy consumption is needed in these days. If 
appropriate method for providing of daylight in interior 
spaces was applied, it would help in energy saving. Light 
shelf is well known as the eco- friendly lighting technology. 
Furthermore, building design including light shelf is 
acceptable for the Leadership in Energy & Environmental 
Design (LEED). 
The light shelf system has two major functions; it can 
reflect light deeper into interior space and block the direct 
light as well. When the reflected light on light shelf comes 
into the deeper interior space, the lighting energy will be 
decreased during a day time. Moreover, the solar radiation 
will be blocked by the light shelf as a shading device. These 
two functions are deeply related to the use of energy. [2] 
For this reason, this proposed device is considered as a 
promising and practical skill. But this device is significantly 
affected by the altitude and motion of the sun, so it may have 
a limitation about the range of use. Accordingly, the purpose 
of  this study aims at suggesting a kinetic light shelf makes 
the functions to be formed  according  to the altitude of  the 
sun. 
 
II. KINETIC LIGHT SHELF UNIT 
A.   State of the art 
A light shelf is an architectural technology that makes 
light to penetrate deeper into the inner space.  Figure 1 that 
shows light shelf is reflecting the light. This reflected light 
reduces the needed energy for artificial lighting to keep on 
acceptable indoor illumination in buildings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The second function of the light shelf is to block the 
direct solar radiation that considered the major factor of heat 
gain inside indoor spaces. [3] Hence, the cost of keeping the 
indoor environment comfortable is going to decrease. 
 
B.   Limitation of the light shelf associated with the altitude 
of the Sun 
In oder to the function shown by ‘Figure 1’, the position 
of the sun should be located between AM 11 and PM 1 (See 
Figure 2). This is because the light generated from the higher 
Reflecting Light 
Blocking Light 
Figure 1. Concept and Function of the Light Shelf 
 
 
295
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

altitude of the sun can be reflected by light shelf. [4] But 
when the sun set down into the ground, this function of light 
shelf will become dwindle. [5] And the sunlight that 
penetrate window will have an impact on the indoor 
environment. 
 
 
C.   Concept of the Kinetic light shelf which can adapt to 
altitude of the Sun 
The most important feature of the KLSU is possible to 
adjust in the altitude of the sun. When the sun is located 
between a and b including meridian transit altitude (lower-
left corner), KLSU works as a light shelf. Through this a to b 
course, indoor space can get the natural light reflected by 
surface of the light shelf. 
 
 
 
The surface of the shelf is covered with high reflectivity 
material. And when the sun is located between b and c (red 
part, lower-left corner), KLSU operates as a vertical louver 
to block out the direct light. Two types of the function are 
shown by Figure 3 which represents the changing course 
from horizontal (light shelf) to vertical (louver). Like this, 
KLSU can be changed light shelf into vertical louver and it 
works to fit in each situation. 
 
D.   Design process of KLSU 
In this part, we have looked at the first step of the KLSU 
design. First, a main frame that contains a light shelf is 
designed as a modular. So it can be installed to match the 
scale of the building. [6] [7]  Design process Ⅱ shows the 
course about removing conflict parts. 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 4. Design Process Ⅰ (up) and Ⅱ (down) 
 
When connected KLSU elements are moved along the 
rotation rail, the edge of the shelf conflicts each other (Red 
dotted line). Thus the shelf design is decided by this process. 
 
E.   System components and operating steps 
 
1)  System components 
In this part, it shows that components of the KLSU and 
operation steps. Consists of  following elements (See Figure 
5). 1st is main frame fixed to the axis of rotation. 2nd is the 
Figure 3. Conversion Process of KLSU 
Light Shelf 
Vertical Louver 
Considering rotation radius 
Removing the conflict part 
Figure 2. Performance Section of Light Shelf 
296
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

light shelf reflecting the light. 3rd is the circle rod that 
penetrate the center of the shelf, so it makes possible to 
change horizontal into vertical. 
 
 
Figure 5. Components of a KLSU 
 
4th through 6th are the key of this mechanism. 4th is 
rotating gears which are connected each other and one is 
bonded to the end of the rod. 5th is connecting belt that 
connect the gear with the rail wheel. 6th is the rail frame and 
rail wheel; the main frame is moved along this rail line 
around the axis. 
 
2) Operating steps (from horizontal to vertical)  
Step 1) KLSU works as the light shelf; Step 2) Rail 
wheel moves along the rail road; Step 3) Connecting belt is 
operated by the rail wheel; Step 4) Light shelf is turned into a 
vertical position by the movement of the gear that is affected 
by belt. 
 
 
 
In sum, the suggested intelligent light shelf unit has been 
successfully responsible to the altitude of the sun, and the 
following is the flowchart showing a series of procedures 
towards its optimized functionality. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Flowchart of the Optimizing Process 
Figure 6. Operating Process 
297
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
KLSU proposed through this paper has been testified by 
multiple simulations such as Project Vasari and Autodesk 
Ecotect with Desktop Radiance and its adaptability remains 
as ongoing issue  for future studies. 
 
III. CONCLUSION 
Through this study, KLSU was introduced. This system 
is a new mechanism that is operated by interlocking main 
frame and light shelf. So, the kinetic shelf unit works as the 
light shelf and the kinetic shelf unit also operates as the 
vertical louver when the sun goes down. Based on this study, 
next research will proceed about the energy efficiency as 
well as the functional elements by using scale model. 
 
 
 
It will focus on the solar energy accumulation method 
associated with the altitude. The effect of variation in façade 
also can be offered in aspect of design. The kinetic façade 
changing from horizontal to vertical gives rise to the value 
such as building cognition. Advantages in all things will 
increase the possibility of eco-friendly technology.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by the Basic Science 
Research 
Program 
through 
the 
National 
Research 
Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of 
Education, Science and Technology (2011-0010519). 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Park, I. Yang,  and M. Na, “An Analysis of 
Daylighting Performance of Light Shelf in Office 
Building,” Journal of the Korean Institute of 
Illumination and Electrical Installation Engineers, Vol. 
22, No. 8, pp. 1-11,  August 2008. 
[2] Y. Cho, B. Kim, and J. Lee, “Visual Performance 
Evaluation Study of a Scaled Light-Shelf Model,”  
Journal of the Korean Solar Energy Society, Vol. 23, 
No. 3, pp. 63-71, September 2003. 
[3] H. Song, J. Lee, and K. Song, “A Study on the 
Application Methods Characteristics of Daylighting 
Systems to Building,” Korean Institute of Architectural 
Sustainable Environment and Building Systems, Vol. 2, 
No. 1, pp. 236-241, 2008. 
[4] S. Kim, H. Kim, G. Han, R. Kwak, and J. Lee 
“Integrated System of Light Shelf and Venetian Blind 
for Improving Daylight Performance,” The Regional 
Association of Architectural Institute of Korea, Vol. 
2011, No. 1, pp. 505-510, October 2011. 
[5] J. Kim, K. Kim, and G. Kim, “Development and 
Performance Evaluation of a Sloped Lightshelf 
Daylighting System,” Journal of the Korean Solar 
Energy Society, Vol. 24, No. 2, pp. 39-50, 2004. 
[6] T. Seo, H. Lee, and Y. Kim, “A Study on Light-Shelf 
System Using Context Awareness Technology for 
Energy Saving in Housing Space,” The Architectural 
Institute of Korea, Vol. 28, No. 11, pp. 357-365, 2011. 
[7] Y. Yorozu, M. Hirano, K. Oka, and Y. Tagawa, 
“Daylighting Performance of a Light Shelf within 
Partitioned Space,” Korean Institute of Architectural 
Sustainable Environment and Building Systems, Vol. 1, 
No. 3, pp. 30-37, 2007. 
 
Figure 8. Application to the Building Façade 
298
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

