RISK-DET: ICT Security Awareness Aspect Combining Education and Cognitive 
Sciences 
Guillaume Schaff, Carlo Harpes, Matthieu Aubigny 
itrust consulting (Luxembourg) 
{schaff, harpes, aubigny}@itrust.lu 
Marianne Junger 
University of Twente 
m.junger@junger.nl 
Romain Martin 
University of Luxembourg 
romain.martin@uni.lu 
Abstract— This paper explains the main innovation of a risk 
assessment tool, called RISK-DET, which will include an ICT 
risk awareness aspect supported by a specific application: 
Voozio 2.0. The design of the RISK-DET tool considers the 
implementation of the emergent ICT (Information and 
Communication Technology) Risk Detection Skill (IRDS) 
concept. Today, the users’ inability to detect a risk situation is 
a real security problem and represents a societal challenge. 
According to the results of a security experiment based on a 
malicious smartphone application called Voozio 1.0, the main 
reason for this problem is the absence of effective ICT security 
awareness training programs adapted to users’ needs. To 
prove and confirm this hypothesis, we aim to evolve the Voozio 
application in the 2.0 version. This new version will be able to 
determine the ability of ICT users to detect a risk situation and 
improve it by combining cognitive sciences and education 
technologies. We will describe here the specifications of the 
new version of Voozio. We also present the Voozio 2.0 
implementation framework.  
Keywords-E-learning; 
ICT 
security 
awareness; 
social 
engineering; cyber-security; cognitive sciences; risk perception; 
education science; human-computer interaction. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The rising use of new Information and Communication 
Technologies (e.g., smartphones, digital tablets, laptops, etc.) 
in our daily life has increased our vulnerability to new cyber-
attacks 
[1][2][3]. 
With 
the 
cyber-criminal 
professionalization, the ICT threats (virus, phishing, 
scamming) are more sophisticated and their impact can be 
very significant on our lives [4][5] (personal data theft, 
ransomware). In parallel, the current security mechanisms 
are not yet sufficiently adapted to face these new types of 
ICT attacks. To limit their impacts, several researchers have 
developed 
anti-phishing 
training 
programs 
[6][7][8]. 
However, these programs are not sufficient to limit an ICT 
attack and that is why the ICT users’ ability to detect a risk 
situation (ICT Risk Detection Skill (IRDS)) should be 
improved. To improve their ICT Risk Detection Skill 
(IRDS), users should be able to adopt good security practises 
when faced with cyber-threats. Here, an ICT risk is the 
probability that a threat exploits ICT vulnerabilities (e.g., 
malicious email, phishing link, etc.) which impacts the 
confidentiality, integrity or availability of information. To 
limit these impacts, we propose to develop a security 
awareness aspect to improve the users’ ICT Risk Detection 
Skill level. Research has been done to develop, for instance, 
security awareness and education programs [9]. A few 
experiments have been executed. They show that, through 
training, ICT users develop new skills improving their ability 
to detect ICT attacks (detect false/malicious email, malicious 
spam). Still, a lot of work needs to be done in the field of 
cybercrime prevention, in particular ways to prevent users 
becoming victims of social engineering [10][11].  
Accordingly, the present paper aims to present a new tool 
which has two aspects: firstly, a measurement aspect to 
determine the users’ ability to detect a risk situation (IRDS); 
secondly, an ICT security awareness aspect to improve 
IRDS. This global ICT security awareness solution will not 
be an isolated solution, but will be integrated into a set of 
several tools, developed in the framework of the FP7 
TREsPASS project [18]. This European project aims to 
combine technical and social sciences in order to develop 
methods and tools to analyse and visualise information 
security risks in dynamic organisations. The expected 
outcome of this project is an “attack navigator” indicating 
which attack opportunities are possible in a targeted 
organisation, which of them are the most critical, and which 
countermeasures are most effective. To identify potential 
attack opportunities, the RISK-DET tool contributors (who 
are also participants of the TREsPASS project) aim to 
develop an additional risk assessment tool focused on social 
sciences.  
The present paper first explains the role of cognitive 
sciences in ICT security awareness. Secondly, it presents the 
security awareness aspect (represented by the Voozio 2.0 
application) of the RISK-DET tool. Thirdly, it describes the 
implementation framework of the Voozio 2.0 application. 
Finally, we conclude by describing the next steps, the 
research hypothesis and expected results. 
II. 
COGNITIVE SCIENCES IN ICT SECURITY AWARENESS 
With a lack of ICT security awareness, users are strongly 
susceptible to social engineering and phishing attacks [13]. 
As part of our previous research [12], we created a malicious 
application on Google Play and used it to test the ability of a 
representative sample of informed users to detect a risk 
situation on their smartphones. Our results show that more 
than half of the targets submitted their personal information 
to our malicious smartphone application called Voozio. It 
seems feasible to conclude that the majority of ICT users are 
relatively susceptible to IT attacks. We concluded that the 
cognitive aspect has an impact on the ICT users’ reaction 
when faced with risk situations.  
In general, cognitive sciences are based on the study and 
modelling of users’ perception and particularly the risk 
perception. That is why we have decided to integrate 
cognitive sciences a.o. in Voozio 2.0, to obtain more in-
depth results. In general, scholars have argued that ICT users 
have a major role to play in enhancing global ICT security 
[14]. The purpose of the present study is to present an 
evolved version of Voozio that will integrate cognitive, 
social and education sciences. As users are one key element 
to avoid ICT attacks, the cognitive aspect of the ICT users 
should be strongly developed thanks to efficient security 
awareness solutions. The development of Voozio 2.0 will be 
based on the cognitive sciences, in line with our IRDS 
concept. What do we mean when we use the term “cognitive 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

sciences”? Cognitive sciences are a set of scientific 
disciplines dedicated to the description, explanation, and 
appropriate simulation mechanisms of human thought [13]. 
Based on the approach of cognitive sciences applied to ICT, 
the design of Voozio 2.0 should include two following 
properties: firstly, a function for evaluating the IRDS of the 
users whilst considering several psychological factors 
(character, personality, reason ability), and secondly, a 
function for generating a relevant training program in line 
with users’ needs. Cognitive science is tied with Educational 
Technology, and we believe that this discipline should be 
integrated into the new version of our application by 
incorporating an education program which can be adapted 
for individual users. For Voozio 2.0, the cognitive science 
integration will consist of collecting test subjects’ 
psychological factors (character, personality, reason ability) 
with a dedicated questionnaire, validated by an expert panel. 
The psychological factors will allow the Voozio 2.0 
administrator to establish subjects’ psychological profile. 
This profile will be used in the IRDS measurement phase and 
refined continuously in the next phase.  
III. 
ICT SECUTIRY AWARENESS ASPECT PRESENTATION 
The Voozio 2.0 application is composed of a Computer 
Assisted Test (CAT) based on identified ICT risk situations, 
e.g., malicious email and/or website. The risk situations will 
be presented to the tested users through short videos, 
pictures, or games. The users’ aim is to identify what level 
of risk the ICT situation presents. During this CAT, the 
researchers will analyse the users’ behaviour based on 
several factors, such as time taken to answer, uncertainty, 
etc. In order to obtain an accurate way of scoring, the risk 
situations will follow a precise graduation depending on the 
level of danger based on their impacts. The analysis of 
users’ reactions when faced with an ICT risk scenario will 
be scored and analysed according to a pre-defined scale. 
After the IRDS measurement phase, Voozio 2.0 will 
introduce an educational program composed of e-learning 
modules. The e-learning modules will be adapted to the 
users’ risk perception ability and reactions. Here, we aim to 
improve the IRDS level of the users. As shown in Figure 1, 
the increase in IRDS level is supported by six disciplines.  
 
Figure 1. Disciplines of the IRDS increase phase 
A sustainable improvement of the IRDS requires as 
many interactions as possible between these six disciplines. 
Therefore, Voozio 2.0 will integrate the Cognitive and 
Social sciences, as well as Human-Computer interaction in 
the IRDS level measurement phase. These disciplines will 
consider test subjects’ psychological profiles in the IRDS 
measurement. Moreover, the researchers aim to include E-
learning, Education and Cyber-crime science [14] in Voozio 
2.0 conception to increase the users’ IRDS level. 
Furthermore, the ICT security awareness aspect will allow 
Voozio 2.0 administrators to provide training programs 
adapted to users’ training needs depending on the IRDS test 
results and subjects’ reactions (user behaviour). The social 
sciences play an important part in the Voozio 2.0 general 
process by bringing an additional precision level to the 
IRDS measurement. 
IV. 
VOOZIO 2.0 IMPLEMENTATION 
An adapted IRDS measurement test should be integrated 
in Voozio 2.0 to determine users’ training needs. This test is 
intended for a group of users and necessitates a preliminary 
requirement; the agreement between “the trainer” and the 
management team of the organisation (e.g., Managing 
Director, IT Manager, etc.). Here, the trainer corresponds to 
the Voozio 2.0 administrator who will submit the IRDS 
measurement and the training program to the targeted staff. 
The test will consist of sending an email which proposes to 
install the Voozio 2.0 application to the entire staff of a 
private/public organisation. After installation, Voozio 2.0 
will generate several risk situations (e.g., malicious email 
and spam). We stress that the risk situations generated will 
not present any danger for the users’ devices. The test will 
only measure how many of the users are unaware of the 
threat and “fall into the trap”. Once the data has been 
collected and interpreted, the trainer will be able to establish 
a first IRDS level evaluation for all staff. After the test, 
Voozio 2.0 will send a training program composed of e-
learning modules focusing on good ICT security practices to 
all the employees. A short time (one or two weeks) after the 
ICT security awareness program, an additional risk situation 
will be generated by the Voozio 2.0 application to evaluate 
the reliability of the provided training programs. A 
comparison study will be performed by the trainer to note 
the difference between the IRDS test results obtained before 
and after training program. Thanks to this test, we will be 
able to measure the efficiency of the ICT security awareness 
aspect based on any improvements. To have relevant results, 
application implementation will be on a large organisation 
to measure and improve the ICT Risk Detection Skill level 
of their employees (pool of testers).  
If we succeed to reach the critical mass for the test pool, 
we will be able to collect relevant results needed to establish 
a statistical study. According to a precise and automatic 
analysis of the results, the solution will create a user 
classification depending on their ICT attack vulnerability 
and will generate dedicated ICT training programs specific 
to different user groups to enhance ICT Risk Detection 
Skill. As in our previous research, no personal data will be 
retained during this test and test subjects’ privacy will be 
strictly respected.  
V. 
MODEL ANALYSIS 
The preliminary work of researchers consisted to 
identify related works [15][16][17] and establish a formal 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

state-of-the-art in risk perception domain. Before the 
experimental phase, we aim to submit Voozio 2.0 to an 
expert panel which have been worked on the same domain 
to analyse the proposed model and give their feedback on it. 
The expert panel feedback will allow us to refine the 
prototype to be adapted to users’ needs. The expert panel 
will be selected by the Voozio 2.0 designers and will group 
experts from industrial and academic organisations.  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In the FP7 TREsPASS project framework, we aim to 
develop the RISK-DET risk assessment tool which will 
include an ICT security awareness aspect based on 
Cognitive and Education Sciences called Voozio 2.0 (based 
on the results of the previous experience conducted with the 
smartphone application Voozio 1.0). Analysis of similar 
works will allow us to define the Voozio 2.0 technical and 
functional specifications and implement our IRDS concept. 
After the Proof of Concept development phase (planned 3rd 
trimester 2014), we suggest that the Voozio 2.0 beta version 
could be validated by an expert panel and tested on an 
organisation of 1000 employees during an experimental 
phase. This phase will allow us to test our innovative IRDS 
measurement methodology and make our research work 
(results interpretation and model analysis). In the long term, 
Voozio 2.0 could provide a commercial ICT risk awareness 
solution. However, we should keep in mind that the effect of 
training can decrease over time. Due to this fact, the tool 
shall be based on a core system using versatile contents 
which will be set up over time, depending on the context of 
the ICT threat and on the security maturity of the 
organisation. Voozio 2.0 will enable us to propose a 
permanent IRDS measurement and security awareness 
solution. The first result of our work is the Voozio 2.0 
technical and functional specifications document which will 
be published during the ICCGI 2014 conference.  
AKCNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The research leading to these results has received 
funding from the European Union Seventh Framework 
Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n° 
318003 (TREsPASS). This publication reflects only the 
author’s views and the Union is not liable for any use that 
may be made of the information contained herein. 
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Choo, “The cyber threats landscape:Challenges and 
future research directions”, Computer & Security, vol. 
30, iss. 8, 2011, pp. 719-731 
[2] M. Yar, “The novelty of Cybercrime, an Assessment in 
Light of Routine Activity Theory”, European Journal of 
Criminology, vol. 2, iss. 4, 2005, pp. 407-427 
[3] P. Williams, “Organized Crime and Cybercrime: 
Synergies, Trends and Responses”, Global Issues, vol. 
6, iss. 2, 2011, pp. 22-26 
[4] T. Jagatic, N. Johnson, M. Jakobsson, and, F. Menczer,, 
“Social phishing” Communication of the ACM, vol. 50, 
iss. 10, 2007,  pp. 94-100 
[5] A. 
Gazet, 
“Comparative 
analysis 
of 
various 
ransomware virii”, Journal in Computer Virology, vol. 
6, iss. 1, 2010, pp. 77-90 
[6] S. Sheng, et al, “Anti-Phishing Phil: the design and 
evaluation of a game that teaches people not to fall for 
phish”, Proceedings of the 3rd symposium on Usable 
privacy and security, 2007, pp. 88-89, ISBN: 978-1-
59593-801-5.  
[7] P. Kumaraguru, et al, “School of phish: a real-world 
evaluation of anti-phishing training”, Proceeding of the 
5th Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security. Iss. 3, 
2009, ISBN: 978-1-60558-736-3.  
[8] X. Luo and, Q. Liao, “Awareness Education as the key 
to Ransomware Prevention”, Publishing models and 
article dates explained, vol. 16, iss. 4, 2007, pp. 195-
202. 
[9] M.E. Thomson and, R. von Solms, "Information 
security awareness: educating your users effectively", 
Information Management & Computer Security, vol. 6 
iss. 4, 1998, pp.167 – 173 
[10] B. Claverie, “Cognitique, Science et pratique des 
relations à la machine à penser”, Revue des sciences de 
l’éducation, vol. 34, iss. 1, 2005,  pp. 227-228 
[11] Hartel, P.H., Junger, M. and, Wieringa, R.J. “Cyber-
crime Science = Crime Science + Information 
Security”, Technical Report TR-CTIT-10-34, Centre 
for Telematics and Information Technology University 
of Twente, Enschede, 2010 
[12] G. Schaff, C. Harpes, R. Martin and, M. Junger, “An 
application to estimate the cyber-risk detection skill of 
mobile device users”. Sixth International Conference on 
Advances in Human oriented and Personalized 
Mechanisms, Technologies, and Services, CENTRIC 
2013, November 2013, Venice, Italy. 
[13] E. Albrechtsen. “A qualitative study of users’ view on 
information security”. Computer & Security, vol. 26, 
iss. 4, pp. 276-289  
[14] T. Vidas, E. Owusu, S. Wang, C.Zeng, L. Faith and, N. 
Christin. “QRirshing: The Susceptibility of Smartphone 
Users to QR Code Phishing Attacks” Financial 
Cryptographie and Data Security, 2013, pp. 52-69,. 
[15] L. Sjoberg, B-E. Moen, and, T. Rundmo, “Explaining 
risk perception. An evaluation of the psychometric 
paradigm in risk perception research”; Trondheim, 
2004. 
[16]  N. Pidgeon, “Risk assessment, risk values and the 
social science programme: why we do need risk 
perception research”. Reliability Engineering & System 
Safety, vol. 59, iss. 1, 1998, pp. 5-15. 
[17]  B. 
Fischhoff, 
et 
al. 
“Risk 
perception 
and 
communication”. Oxford textbook of public health, vol. 
2, iss. 5, 2009, pp. 940-953 
[18]  P. Hartel and, W. Pieter; “FP7 project TREsPASS 
press release”, January 2013 
 
 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

