An Interactive Game Using Wii Remote for Visually Impaired People  
 
Huai-Yong Deng 
Department of Applied Information 
Sciences 
Chung Shan Medical University, 
Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C 
gloria10074@hotmail.com 
 
 
Hsiao Ping Lee 
Department of Applied Information 
Sciences 
Chung Shan Medical University, 
Department of Medical Research 
Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C 
ping@csmu.edu.tw 
 
Jun-Te Huang * 
Department of Applied Information 
Sciences 
Chung Shan Medical University, 
Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C 
yaya9438@hotmail.com 
 
Abstract— Number of visually impaired people around the 
world is increasing year by year. However, companies that 
develop the games for visually impaired people are very few.  
For the visually impaired people, we have to create a fair 
environment, and enhance their entertainment. In recent years, 
somatosensory device has been introduced. Through the body 
to control the game is more attractive than the traditional 
joystick. In this paper, we design an interactive game for the 
visually impaired people, through somatosensory device and 
infrared-gun, and combined with Text-to-Speech technology to 
implement a flash game for the visually impaired people's to 
enhance entertainment quality of daily life. We invited five 
subjects to play this game, and complete a questionnaire and 
interview after the experiment. Our questionnaire divided into 
three parts: interested, audio guide and novelty of the game. 
The results showed that most subjects were very interested in 
interactive games. Through Text-to-Speech technology, most 
of the subjects were able to smoothly play the game with audio 
guide. A lot of subjects feel the game is very useful and 
innovative. 
Keywords - Visual Impairment People; Somatosensory 
Device; Interactive Game; Text-to-Speech. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Vision is the most important and the natural way for 
humans to receive the message from the environment. We 
rely on vision to handle most things in daily life. Not only 
are the assistive devices, the amount of the games for the 
visually impaired people, are very few, too. Currently, 
most entertainment activities for the blind people are static, 
such as e-book. Moreover, most are have inconvenience 
user interface. For these reasons, considering the demands 
of visually impaired people, and design an interactive 
game for the visually impaired people is very important.  
The “Wii” has been introduced by the Nintendo 
company in 2006 [1, 2]. Different to the traditional games, 
Wii uses the wireless controller to control it. In this way, it 
is providing a new way to play the games. Moreover, the 
wireless controller has a friendly user interface; the player 
is able to control instinctively. For these properties, the 
Wii’s controller can be used in other domains, such as 
education and physical therapy. 
In this paper, we are going to develop an interactive 
game for visually impaired people. The game can assist 
them to play the game by wireless controller, audio and 
text-to-speech technology (TTS). In addition, this game   
will improve and be more interesting for the visually 
impaired people. For the game testing, we invite five 
persons to provide us assistance, such as play this game 
and give some suggestion. Finally, we got some data 
which about game testing from these people. So far, it is 
perceived that this game “very interesting”, "have a good 
voice and sound guidance", and "has novelty" The paper is 
going to introduce related work about our game and how 
we implement this game.  
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK  
We should to know some sensors and development kit 
before implement the game. First, the Wii’s controller that 
named “Wii Remote [3, 4].” In the shape of Wii Remote 
is look like a bar, it is a small and light handset. It can be 
divided into three modules: the G sensor [5, 6], CMOS [7] 
IR receiver and Bluetooth module [8]. The G sensor can 
calculate X, Y and Z axis acceleration. Next, determine the 
player's actions on real time. The CMOS IR receiver can 
receive the infrared from the sensor bar. Then, we find the 
different position of infrared point to determine 
controller’s movement. After, Wii or computer handles 
these data which receive from Bluetooth.  
Secondly, if we to drive the components which on the 
Wii Remote, and communicate with computer, it should 
use the Wiiflash [9] API to do that. The Wiiflash API is an 
open source development kit; it is good for designer to 
write the flash program which linked the computer and 
Wii Remote. About this development, the kit includes: (1) 
Wiiflash API library, (2) Wiiflash Server: providing a way 
and the computer is able to communicate with Flash, (3) 
examples, and (4) documents. 
III. 
STATE OF ART 
Today, the studies for the Wii Remote are more than 
before. Some people have used the Flash to develop many 
fun games, and control by Wii Remote [10]. Yi-nung Lin 
designs a pantomime games for children with cerebral 
palsy.  They wear the simply IR transmitter on their wrist, 
and lead those children to do rehabilitation with the 
interactive teaching materials. Children were felt 
interesting in these teaching materials. So they learn how 
to play this game really hard. 
 About the research of the infrared sensor on the Wii 
Remote, Johnny Lee’s Wiimote whiteboard [11] is the 
first study. Since the Wii Remote can track the sources of 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

infrared light, Johnny Lee make a pens that have an IR led 
in the pen’s tip. Wii Remote can combine with IR pens, 
rear-projected, and notebook, it will become a low-cost 
interactive whiteboards. 
Chien-Yu Lin et al. [12] wore a simple infrared 
emitter for children who is a cerebral palsy usually. It is 
very interest for her to use interactive teaching materials, 
so she works hard to raise her hand and do some exercise. 
The most current study on the Wii Remote is research in 
education and rehabilitation. In this paper, we design set of 
interactive games for the visually impaired people and our 
purpose is to increase the quality of entertainment for the 
visually impaired. We combine the Wii Remote with Flash, 
and designed a game like "Whac-A-Mole". We redesign 
the mode of operation of the game. We consult the concept 
of infrared pen, to design an infrared gun, so that the 
visually impaired people have more immersive in play his 
game. To allow for the visually impaired can play game 
alone. Interactive game system that we purpose also has 
the following function and characteristics: 
 
Easy to use, visually impaired people can operate 
independently without others help. 
 
Use speech in the game to identify the location of 
hamster through audio. 
 
Everyone can adjust the scope of the game to 
increase the applicability of system fitness. 
IV. 
SYSTEM  DESIGN 
We develop an interactive game for visually impaired 
people that use the Wii Remote and infrared-gun. For the 
visually impaired people to have interest in the game, we 
add the audio and speech. 
A. 
Experimental Equipment  
1) Wii Remote: Unlike most operate method of Wii   
Remote general; we use the CMOS sensor camera and 
Bluetooth to receive the location data from infrared-gun. 
Then CMOS sensor camera can send the data to the 
computer. 
2) Infrared-gun: The  process of making infrared-gun: 
a) Soldering the wire with the infrared LED's 
positive pin and negative pin. 
b) Add a button in the middle of the negative wire 
to control the flow of the circuit.  
c) Connect the power with wire.  
d) Complete. The infrared-gun image is presented 
in Figure 1. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  The infrared-gun. 
B. 
System Architecture 
In this paper, the computer is our data server. When 
visually impaired people move the infrared-gun, Wii 
remote will send the location value to data server through 
Bluetooth technology. Then Wii Flash server can interpret 
a position value and transmit the value into flash. Flash 
can process the data and display in computer screen. The 
position value can determine whether the gun hit the 
mouse. The system architecture is presented in Figure 2. 
 
C. 
Game Flowchart  
We designed a game like "Whac-A-Mole" and use 
Flash CS3 as our development environment tool. 
Therefore the code written is ActionScript3.0 [13, 14]. 
Because of this game is design for visually impaired 
people, we use audio and speech in game as the main 
navigation tool to help the visually impaired people to 
operate the game. The game flow chart is presented in 
Figure 3. 
 
 
Figure 2.  The system architecture. 
 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 3.  Game flow chart. 
The screen of game beginning is presented in Figure 4. 
After entering the game, that will enter calibration mode 
first, and assisting visually impaired people to stand the 
best place and to confirm the game through the speech. 
Then, let visually impaired people to set the range of the 
game. When calibration is completed, the system will 
explain how to play the game by audio message, in this 
way, visually impaired people can choose the game mode 
and into the game. 
Game screen is divided into nine blocks with squared, 
is presented in Figure 5. When the hamster appears, the 
visually impaired people can identify the site of hamster 
through the different voice, then the visually impaired 
people use infrared gun to shoot hamster. If successfully 
shoot, the system will make a sound, and increase the 
score.  
The game were divided notes, such as “Do, Re, Me” 
and music two modes. In the notes mode, hamster will 
randomly appear; in the music mode, the system will 
choose a song, then the hamster will follow the song’s tone 
appearing. When the visually impaired people shoot 
hamster successfully, the system will make the next one to 
appear. When the visually impaired people shoot 
completely all the tunes, the system will calculate the time 
it takes and convert into the corresponding scores. 
When the game is over, the system will calculate the 
scores and read out, and then, asked the visually impaired 
people whether playing again. If the answer is yes, the 
game will back choose the game mode. The over screen 
see the Figure 6. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Start of the game. 
 
Figure 5.  Game screen. 
 
Figure 6.  End of the game. 
D. 
Experimental Design 
Visually impaired people are the main user for this 
game. In addition, the blind people are harder to interview 
than the sighted people. When the game testing, we ask the 
subjects to wear goggles or close the eyes to making 
simulation. Before the game starting, we tell to user why 
we designed this game. And then, the user enters and plays 
the game. 
Another important is, we want to know whether the 
users are able to follow the audio message to play the 
game or not. Therefore, we record the time when the users 
starting the game until the game over.  
 
V. 
RESULTS 
In this paper, we use the questionnaire and the user's 
experiences as a basis for experimental analysis. We 
invited five persons to be user and test the game. Theirs 
age from 11 to 50 years old. The average test time is 252 
seconds and only one user restart the game, because he 
forgot the range which he set, and the other users caught a 
game complete. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

A. 
Questionnaire 
Table I is the results which investigating by 
questionnaire from five users. Our questionnaire is 
using Likert scale and it has three questions. The first 
one, there are 80 percent users fell that this game is 
funny and very interesting. The second, about 
guidance, the game has audio message and voice to 
guide user, there are 60 percent feel that this game is 
smooth. And the third, all users are thinking this game 
is very novelty. 
 
TABLE I.  
RESULT OF QUESTIONNAIRE 
 
B. 
Experience 
Besides the questionnaire, we also asked the user 
about the experience or suggestions in this game.  
We found that the most of the users had a high degree 
of interest in this game. After the end of the experiment, 
the users will be asked to play again. A few users share 
the experience with others. 
Most of the users believe that this game is novel 
because they never had an experience to play game like 
that. However, a few users expressed that they did not 
find the scope of games when game is started. And they 
cannot continue the game.  
In the future we may refer to these comments, and fix 
the game problems to remind users who cannot find the 
scope of game. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we developed an interactive game for 
visually impaired people. The game is equipped on the 
computer, and let the Wii Remote be an IR receiver. The 
blind people just need taking an infrared-gun target at Wii 
Remote’s CMOS receiver. The communication between 
the computer and Wii Remote, the game used WiiFlash 
API to drive the sensors which on the Wii Remote. And 
then, we also send the position information that got from 
CMOS receiver. On the other hand, we have designed a 
friendly user interface which using text-to-speech and 
voice to guide the blind user. After the game prototype 
was completed, we invited five users to play and test game. 
In the results, 80 percent users think the game is funny and 
interesting, 60 percent think the audio message and voice 
guide let game smoothly, and all users think the game is 
really novelty. In the future, we are going to improve the 
game’s quality and let it work well. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank the National Science 
Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan R.O.C, for 
financially supporting this research under Grants NSC 
100-2218-E-040-001. 
 
REFERENCES  
[1] Nintendo of America Inc, http://www.nintendo.com/wii, Retrieved 
01, 2012. 
[2] WII, http://zh.wikipedia.org/zh-hk/Wii, Retrieved 12, 2011. 
[3] Farkas, Bart G., The Nintendo Wii Pocket Guide, CA: Addison-
Wesley,  April 2007. 
[4] Elaine Pearson, Chris Bailey, Evaluating the potential of the 
Nintendo Wii to support disabled students in education, 
Proceedings ascilite, Singapore, 2007. 
[5] Accelerometer, 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Accelerometer, 
Retrieved 01, 2012. 
[6] A. Miskam, S. Korakkottil, M. Zaidi and O. Sidek, “Development 
of a Tilt Measurement Unit Using Microelectromechanical System 
Accelerometer,” Journal of Applied Sciences, vol. 9, 2009, pp. 
2451-2456, doi:10.3923/jas.2009.2451.2456. 
[7] CMOS, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/CMOS, Retrieved 12, 2011. 
[8] Bluetooth, http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bluetooth, Retrieved 01, 
2012. 
[9] Wiiflash, http://code.google.com/p/wiiflash/, Retrieved 07, 2011. 
[10] Perkins, Todd. Nintendo Wii Flash Game Creator’s Guide: Design, 
Develop, and Share Your Games Online. McGraw-Hill Osborne 
Media,  April 2007. 
[11] Low-Cost Multi-point Interactive Whiteboards Using the Wiimote, 
http://johnnylee.net/projects/wii/, Retrieved 01, 2012. 
[12] Chien-Yu Lin, Shu-Hua Chen, Min-Ju Wu, Yi-Shan Liao, Shu-
Ling Hsien, and Chian-Huei Guo, “Application of Interactive 
Interface Design on Rehabilitation for Children with Cerebral 
Palsy,” 
Future. 
Communication. 
Computing. Control 
and 
Management, vol. 142, pp. 361-367, 2012. (references) 
[13] Smith, Ben, AdvancED ActionScript 3.0: Design Patterns, CA: 
Springer-Verlag New York Inc, September 2011. 
[14] Rosenzweig,Gary ， Gary Rosenzweig's Actionscript 3.0 Game 
Programming University ，  CA: Macmillan Computer Pub ，
August 2007. 
 
Strongly 
agree 
Agree 
Neither 
agree 
nor 
disagree 
Disagree 
Strongly 
disagree 
Do you 
think this 
game can 
catching 
your eye 
1 
3 
1 
0 
0 
Do you 
think the s
peech 
and sound 
can 
guidance 
you play 
the game 
smoothly 
2 
2 
1 
0 
0 
Do you 
think the 
game is 
novelty 
4 
1 
0 
0 
0 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

