Encouraging Students to Document Software Development Projects using Blogs 
 
Robert Law 
Computer, Communications and Interactive Systems 
Glasgow Caledonian University 
Glasgow, Scotland 
e-mail: robert.law@gcu.ac.uk 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract— This paper will present an ongoing project to 
encourage students to document Software Development 
Projects using Blogs. The use of blogs in the documentation of 
software development projects is gaining acceptance within the 
industry itself. As such the use of blogging within the industry 
will be examined to identify the potential areas of use. The 
pedagogical issues associated with such a project will be 
investigated and an attempt made to incorporate these into the 
student experience. The aim is to increase the student’s 
engagement with the documentation process by using a 
medium that is familiar, media rich and gaining acceptance 
within the industry. 
Keywords- Blogs; Documentation; Software Development. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Quality documentation is an integral part of any software 
development project. This is true for both students’ software 
development assignments and industry projects. Within the 
author’s institution a trend towards a steady decline in the 
volume and quality of documentation submitted as part of 
these assignments has been detected. One hypothesis for this 
is the modularization of subject areas within the curriculum 
paints a disjointed view of the syllabus as a whole, leading 
students to miss the connection between analysis, design and 
programming. In the author’s institution teaching of these 
subject areas tends to be as separate modules. Students 
perception of programming modules is such that their focus 
is mainly on the programming leading to assignment 
submission with no or extremely sparse documentary 
evidence of the analysis, design and development of the 
software product. 
Since the inception of blogging, circa 1994, the past two 
decades have seen an almost meteoric rise in their popularity 
leading to academics across many disciplines incorporating 
blogs into their teaching [1]. Blogging, in this context, can 
also be used to enhance the students’ capacity for reflection, 
opening the door to active learning [3]. 
Thus, the concept of using a blog was employed to 
engage the students in the process of recording and reflecting 
on their progress during the production of a software 
product.  The hope was that the informal nature of blogging 
would forge a relaxed environment, in which the student 
could convey their thought processes. Blogs also allow for 
the Lecturer to monitor the student’s posts offering 
constructive feedback in a timely manner. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: 
Section II will give an overview of the author’s use of blogs 
within teaching; indicating the nature of the cohort and the 
subject are studied. Section III gives information about 
pedagogical issues related to blogging, Section IV introduces 
the uses of blogging within the industry of software 
development. Section V presents the results from the use of 
blogging with the student cohort. Section V discusses the test 
results, while Section VI attempts to draw conclusions from 
the data and the ideas presented in Sections III and IV. 
Section VII discusses issues encountered during the use of 
blogs. Section VIII offers ideas for future work based on the 
synthesis of Sections III, IV and VI. 
II. 
STUDENTS DEVELOPMENT BLOG 
The author predominately teaches Games Programming 
using C++, DirectX and OpenGL to Year 2 and Year 4 
Degree students. Thus, the participating students for this 
research are Year 2 and Year 4 students on the BSc 
Computer Games Software Development degree. The 
students 
were 
undertaking 
the 
modules 
Games 
Programming 1 and Games Programming 3 respectively. 
Since the initial test group, in academic year 2009-2010, the 
number of participants has reached 218.  
The inherent nature of game software development is the 
production of a multi-media rich artifact. As such the multi-
media rich environment of blogs is an ideal partner for 
students to express their analysis, design and software 
development progress in a vibrant and colourful manner. 
Thus, the belief was that the students would engage with the 
documentation process more avidly as the ability to produce 
a media rich online portfolio of their software artifact. 
Both cohorts of students were issued with course work 
that involved the development of a game of their choosing. 
Such an open brief makes it crucial that the students embark 
on the proper analysis, design and planning before 
attempting to write any code. 
The coursework was assessed in three main parts: 
coding (40 marks), documentation (40 marks) and extension 
work (20 marks). The study has been set-up to integrate into 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the documentation section of the course work. The 
documentation section is subdivided into the following 
components: traditional paper based Code Explanation (10 
marks), Class Diagram (5 marks), Storyboards (10 marks), 
References & Documentation formatting (5 marks) and 
Development Blog (10 marks). The expectation on the 
student was to blog regularly building a development log. 
This development log would demonstrate the student’s 
ability to analyse a problem, define a solution to the 
problem and implement the defined solution. Thus, blog 
entries would detail the processes the student undertook to 
develop their game. A typical set of blog entries would 
include: a user specification, a proposed solution, class 
diagrams, storyboards, code snippets, screen captures and 
the final post should include a video demonstrating their 
game being played. 
III. 
PEDAGOGICAL ISSUES 
A number of pedagogical issues have been identified as a 
justification for incorporating blogging into the curriculum, 
irrespective of the subject area. 
Zinger and Sinclair identify the property of blogging 
tools to have the ability to be “enjoyable yet educational” 
[4]. In the setting outlined above this is a key factor in the 
attainment of engagement with the software development 
process. 
Zinger and Sinclair observe that blogging engages the 
student in a cognitive process transforming education from 
its fact based approach [4]. 
An important observation (by Zinger and Sinclair) notes 
that students’ use of blogs exhibited the students “abilities to 
apply the knowledge and skills learned in one setting to 
another” [4]. This helps address the hypothesis postulate in 
the introduction about the disjointed nature the student 
possess of the curriculum. 
A vital soft skill for any student is the ability to 
communicate clearly and effectively. This is particularly 
important in the production of technical documents such as 
that produced in the software development process. Using 
blogs has been identified as means to enhance and improve 
the student’s communication skills [4][8]. 
Griffith et al. observe the blogs potential to offer an 
environment for collaboration, participation, interaction and 
writing skills as such implementing blogging within their 
own institution to enhance student engagement [8]. Again a 
list of soft skills that is essential for any graduate. The 
outcome of their study has resulted in their idea of the “5C’s: 
Conversations, Creativity, Community, Collaboration and 
Connections”, which can be mapped by the use of blogs both 
educationally and by the software development industry [8]. 
Game programming in itself is a very creative process so 
the fact that blogs lend themselves well to this is a definite 
boon for the student. This can be utilized by the student to 
produce feature rich and multi-media rich documentation. 
Collaboration and community are interlinked and 
blogging plays a major part in this cohesion become engaged 
within the software development community through 
collaboration [8]. 
Griffith et al. also implement the idea of blogs as an e-
portfolio [8] confirming the author’s identification of this 
possibility. Chong identifies the usefulness of blogs as a just 
in time diary with a peer and lecturer feedback mechanism 
[2][5][9][13]. 
Two issues identified by Chong as positives of using 
blogging software educationally are “RSS delivery” and the 
ability to archive posts [5] these are also key components in 
the use of blogs in the software development industry. 
Feedback in the form of comments are seen by Chong as 
vital to the “interactive nature of blogs” [5]. Von Krogh 
reiterates the tenants of blogging as the ability to share 
efficiently and effectively knowledge [11]. 
Chu, Kwan and Warning agree that blogs can support 
and facilitate communication, self-reflection, idea sharing 
and information organization [15]. Hsu and Lin suggest 
“blogs can be considered as one of the major ways of 
knowledge sharing” [14]. 
IV. 
BLOG USE IN INDUSTRY 
Storey et al. notes that software developers make use, in 
general, of social media and in particular blogs and as such 
“the use of these mechanisms influences software 
development practices” [7]. This reinforces the author’s 
decision to implement blogging as part of the student’s 
documentation process. 
Storey et al. identifies collaboration as a key component 
of software development; the synergistic nature of software 
development and the crucial role communication plays 
“when designing large scale modern software systems” [7]. 
Pagano and Maalej also indicate that the software 
development community has seen the potential of blogging 
and 
social 
media 
to 
improve 
collaboration 
and 
communications within software development projects [12]. 
Developers appear to use blogs for a number of different 
documentary processes: new release features, “how to’s” and 
requirements engineering [7]. 
Begel, DeLine, and Zimmermann identify the fact that 
“social media has changed the way that people collaborate 
and share information” stressing how this can aid software 
development teams to find new ways to work together [9]. 
The idea that social media can play its part in the 
conception, design, development and successful deployment 
of software products is stressed by Begel, DeLine, and 
Zimmermann [9]. 
Noted by Begel, DeLine, and Zimmermann is the use of 
blogs by Microsoft to share “technical information and 
opinions with their employees” providing a synchronous 
communication channel and the ability to react to new 
information quickly [9]. 
Parnin and Treude indicate that software development 
blogs “are changing the way software is documented” 
allowing developers the ability to create and communicate 
their knowledge and experiences [10]. 
A crucial observation made by Parnin and Treude is “all 
too often documentation is absent or incomplete” this is 
borne out by the student population too [10]. 
Pagano and Maalej analysis of the content of developers’ 
blog posts identified “functional requirements and domain 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

concepts” as the most favoured posts [12]. From their study, 
they have drawn the conclusion that the blog posts made by 
developers tend to be based around high level concepts [12]. 
Black, Harrison and Baldwin study singles out 
communication as the prime benefactor in the software 
development process of blogging and social media [15]. 
Reinicke and Cummings show that blue chip companies 
such as “IBM, Cisco and Sap” are leading the way with the 
use of blogs and social media as a communication and 
collaboration tool in software development projects [2]. An 
interesting observation they make is the connection between 
software development projects using agile methodologies 
and the importance of blogs and social media to the success 
of such projects [2]. 
V. 
RESULTS OF STUDENT BLOGGING 
The results were determined by recording the data in a 
two stage process. Firstly the frequency of each student’s 
blog posts is recorded in a spreadsheet on a weekly basis. 
The content of the student’s weekly blog entries is reviewed 
and feedback is provided to the student based on the 
following subjective criteria: length of entry, quality of 
English, relevance, and ability to use technical terms in the 
correct context. 
Secondly to determine an individual student’s final mark, 
the previously collected data on frequency and content is 
reviewed and combined to arrive at a subjective mark. 
The first cohort to undertake the integration of blogging 
within the Year 2 module Game Programming 1 was in 
academic year 2009-2010. The results from this initial test 
showed promise and a decision was made to integrate the 
blog concept into the Year 4 module Game Programming 3. 
It has since been used in other modules that the author 
teaches thus, covering 218 students since its initial inception. 
 
Figure 1. Frequency of Posts. 
Figure 1 gives an indication of the frequency of posts 
made. Unfortunately 32 students from the 218 failed to 
engage with the process and made no post. Anecdotally, this 
translated to a very lightweight submission of the remaining 
documentation required and a low overall mark for the 
documentation section of the assignment. 
The majority of the posts were in the range 3 to 8 with 
around 125 students in this range. Only around 33 students 
engaged to a level that could be deemed enthusiastic.  
 
Figure 2. Frequency of Marks. 
Figure 2 shows the frequency of marks gained by the 
students. Marks were awarded based on the number of posts 
and the level content of the posts. It was not sufficient to 
make a number of single sentence posts therefore it is 
conceivable that the number of posts does not match the 
amount of marks awarded. 
Drilling down into the data, reveals the ability to 
compare a cohort’s performance in Year 2 against their 
performance in Year 4. This in itself can be revealing. The 
first cohort to undertake the blogging assessment can be 
compared again in academic year 2011-2012. 
 
Figure 3. Comparison of posts for same cohort in Years 2 & 4. 
Figure 3 indicates a comparison of posts for the same 
cohort in Year 2 and Year 4. Year 4 is the final year of their 
Degree. It is quite evident the stark drop in the number of 
posts being made. 
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 4. Comparison of posts for same cohort in Years 2 & 4. 
Figure 4 indicates how the cohort for academic years 
2010-2011 faired when compared again in academic year 
2012-2013. On this occasion, it can be seen that there has 
been a positive increase in the number of posts. 
 
Figure 5. Comparison of posts for same cohort in Years 2 & 4. 
Figure 5 indicates how the cohort for academic years 
2011-2012 faired when compared again in academic year 
2013-2014. On this occasion it can be seen that there has 
been a positive increase in the number of posts. 
Comparing the marks for each cohort in the same fashion 
as the posts should yield a similar pattern. 
 
Figure 6. Comparison of marks for same cohort in Years 2 & 4. 
Figure 6 indicates how the cohort for academic years 
2009-2010 faired when compared again in academic year 
2011-2012. On this occasion it can be seen that the marks 
have decrease in line with the decrease in posts shown in 
figure 3. 
 
Figure 7. Comparison of marks for same cohort in Years 2 & 4. 
Figure 7 indicates how the cohort for academic years 
2010-2011 faired when compared again in academic year 
2012-2013. On this occasion it can be seen that the marks 
have increased marginally following the increase in posts 
shown in figure 4. 
Figure 8 indicates how the cohort for academic years 
2011-2012 faired when compared again in academic year 
2013-2014. On this occasion it can be seen that the marks 
have increased marginally following the increase in posts 
shown in figure 5. 
Table 1 shows the correlation of marks and posts for each 
of the pairs of years. All pairs show a positive correlation 
between the number of posts made and the marks gained. 
 
Figure 8. Comparison of marks for same cohort in Years 2 & 4. 
TABLE I 
CORRELATION BETWEEN MARKS AND POSTS 
Module 
 
Module 
 
GP1 09/10 
0.790539 
GP3 11/12 
0.927967 
GP1 10/11 
0.954243 
GP3 12/13 
0.967233 
GP1 11/12 
0.88226 
GP3 13/14 
0.745314 
In the following section, an attempt will be made to draw 
conclusion between the results obtained and the literature 
review in Sections III and IV. 
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The pedagogical issues revealed in Section III would 
indicate that the use of blogs should engage the student. 
However, in the data sample present around 15% of students 
did not engage at all, registering no posts. This was higher 
than expected and very disappointing.  
Although the quality of the posts could be deemed to be 
subjective, it was surprising at the number of students that 
conspired to do the minimum content that they could. This 
complements the evidence suggested by Chu, Kwan and 
Warning [13]. 
From the data presented, it was difficult to quantify if 
there had been any improvement from Year 2 to Year 4 in 
the quality of written English. The blog posts in Year 4 did 
indicate a wider range of content than the previous posts in 
Year 2. 
The drop in posts within the same cohort shown in figure 
3 is interesting and unexpected. Our expectation was for the 
posts to increase in Year 4, as the maturity level of the 
students has increased and they have experienced the 
benefits of previous exposure to blogging. 
Figures 4 and 5 offer the expected result of an increase in 
posts from Year 2 to Year 4. 
By the end of the module, the blog that the student had 
created should have been in a fit state to be considered a 
reasonable example of an ePortfolio of their work. 
Unfortunately, only a small percentage of the blogs created 
by the student sample discussed here could conceivably be 
regarded as in a fit state to be a presentable ePortfolio. This 
was disappointing, as game programming is a very creative 
area awash with rich multi-media artifacts that could have 
been used to create rich content blog posts. 
Figure 9 gives an example of the content from one of the 
better blog posts. 
 
Figure 9 Example Blog Post 
Table 1 shows the correlation between the mark awarded 
and the number of posts. All are highly positive. Thus, 
indicating that the students that put in the effort to post 
regularly and their posts contain a level of content that can 
be deemed acceptable they will in turn receive a mark 
commensurate with the number of post they have made. 
The one aspect of the blog that worked very well was the 
chronological aspect as the author was able to monitor and 
note the periods of effort applied to the assignment. The 
typical student tended to have top heavy posts clustered 
around the final few weeks of the assignment. A good 
student tended to have an even spread of posts illustrating 
good time management. 
For us, the data is an indicator that there are positives in 
continuing to ask students to blog during software 
development projects. This is evidence in Section IV which 
highlights that Blue chip companies and independent 
developers are turning to the use of blogs and other social 
media for collaboration, communication and sharing of 
technical knowledge. 
VII. ISSUES 
Incorporating blogging within the curriculum leads to a 
number of issues including feeding back to students in a 
timely manner [8]. The author set aside approximately two 
hours a week to read and feed back to the students posting 
comments on each blog post. This creates an additional load 
[8] for the member of staff involved but the feeling of the 
author was that it was worth the extra effort. 
Picking the correct environment for the blog is crucial as 
there is some indication that this has a bearing on how often 
the student posts. If the environment is perceived to be too 
difficult to use then the student will procrastinate on its use. 
At our institution, the Virtual Learning Environment 
created by Blackboard tm is used. For future presentations of 
the module, a change of blogging environment will be 
sought. 
Our expectation was for students to engage with the 
multi-media rich environment making use of the ability to 
post images, code fragments and video clips instead most 
students produced rather bland vanilla heavily text based 
posts. 
VIII. FUTURE WORK 
We will investigate expanding from blogs to include 
other forms of social media to encourage a range of skills. 
From the literature reviewed the software developers in 
industry use a number of diverse social media including 
wiki’s, micro-blogging and social networking sites for 
creating, maintaining, communicating and collaborating. 
This will lead to the student creating and maintaining the 
documentation required for a software development project 
in a purely electronic format. 
The literature reviewed indicated the rise of tools that can 
be integrated or plugged in to popular Integrated 
Development Environments (IDE) to enable developers to 
use social media direct from their IDE. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. McDermott, G. Brindley, and G. Eccleston, “Developing tools to 
encourage reflection in first year students blogs,” in Proceedings of 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the fifteenth annual conference on Innovation and technology in 
computer science education, 2010, pp. 147–151. 
[2] B. Reinicke and J. Cummings, “Can Social Media Aid Software 
Development?” in Proceedings of the Conference for Information 
Systems Applied Research ISSN, vol. 2167, 2013, p. 1508. 
[3] C. Safran, “Blogging in higher education programming lectures: an 
empirical study.” in Proceedings of the 12th international conference 
on Entertainment and media in the ubiquitous era, 2008, pp. 131–135. 
[4] L. Zinger and A. Sinclair, “Using Blogs To Enhance Student 
Engagement And Learning In The Health Sciences,” Contemporary 
Issues in Education Research (CIER), vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 349–352, 
2013. 
[5] E. K. Chong, “Using blogging to enhance the initiation of students 
into academic research,” Computers \& Education, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 
798–807, 2010. 
[6] H. N. Kim, “The phenomenon of blogs and theoretical model of blog 
use in educational contexts,” Computers \& Education, vol. 51, no. 3, 
pp. 1342–1352, 2008. 
[7] M.-A. Storey, C. Treude, A. van Deursen, and L.-T. Cheng, “The 
impact of social media on software engineering practices and tools,” 
in Proceedings of the FSE/SDP workshop on Future of software 
engineering research, 2010, pp. 359–364. 
[8] M. Griffith, D. Simmons, W.-L. Wong, and S. Smith, “The 5 C’s of 
Literacy 
and 
Literary 
Skills 
Development: 
Conversations, 
Community, 
Collaboration, 
Creativity, 
and 
Connection,” 
in 
ASCILITE-Australian Society for Computers in Learning in Tertiary 
Education Annual Conference, vol. 2012, no. 1, 2012. 
[9] A. Begel, R. DeLine, and T. Zimmermann, “Social media for 
software engineering,” in Proceedings of the FSE/SDP workshop on 
Future of software engineering research, 2010, pp. 33–38. 
[10] C. Parnin and C. Treude, “Measuring api documentation on the web,” 
in Proceedings of the 2nd international workshop on Web 2.0 for 
software engineering, 2011, pp. 25–30. 
[11] G. Von Krogh, “How does social software change knowledge 
management? Toward a strategic research agenda,” The Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 154–164, 2012. 
[12] D. Pagano and W. Maalej, “How do developers blog?: an exploratory 
study,” in Proceedings of the 8th working conference on Mining 
software repositories, 2011, pp. 123–132. 
[13] S. K. Chu, A. Kwan, and P. Warning, “Blogging for Information 
Management, Learning, and Social Support during Internship.,” 
Journal of Educational Technology \& Society, vol. 15, no. 2, 2012. 
[14] C.-L. Hsu and J. C.-C. Lin, “Acceptance of blog usage: The roles of 
technology acceptance, social influence and knowledge sharing 
motivation,” Information \& Management, vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 65–74, 
2008. 
[15] S. Black, R. Harrison, and M. Baldwin, “A survey of social media use 
in software systems development,” in Proceedings of the 1st 
Workshop on Web 2.0 for Software Engineering, 2010, pp. 1–5. 
 
 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

