Innovation as a Structural Attribute of Company Competitiveness 
Oswaldo Luiz Agostinho  
School of Mechanical Engineering – FEM, University of Campinas , UNICAMP 
 Campinas, SP, Brazil  
e-mail : agostinh@fem.unicamp.br  
Abstract-Innovation does not occur spontaneously in an 
organization. 
Instead, 
structural 
conditions 
providing 
methodological support to the innovation process must be 
established, thereby ensuring the competitive edge required to 
respond to market demands. Organizations should therefore 
be designed with attributes, i.e., internal characteristics that 
provide structural conditions aimed at meeting these external 
demands. This paper aims to characterize the innovation 
process as one of the structural attributes of company 
competitiveness. Innovation, which is considered an attribute 
aimed at meeting customer needs, is shown to be a prerequisite 
for organizations to gain a competitive edge in the market. The 
methodology adopted here consists of identifying the structural 
attributes of the organization, being innovation one of them, 
establishing the conditions required for the innovation process 
to prosper. Sub attributes that support the innovation 
attributes are presented and linked to the innovation process. 
The main result is a model that considers the cause-and-effect 
relationship between external demands and the structural 
attributes of innovation, providing methodological support for 
innovation processes, enabling companies to meet the needs of 
competitiveness in their market segment.This model facilitates 
the design of innovation characteristics, creating guidelines for 
the company’s strategic positioning in its market segment. This 
approach, linking concepts of competiveness and innovation , 
is not usual in the existing literature and business practices .  
The limitation of this research is mainly the design of this 
generic model for the specific organization application.  
Keywords-Innovation; organization attributes; competitiveness; 
business models.
I.
INTRODUCTION 
Competitiveness is a critical success factor for 
organizational survival in the turbulent 21st century. 
Competitiveness can be understood as a company’s ability 
to continuously review its competition strategies in order to 
gain a favorable position in its market segment. It is 
triggered in response to external pressures resulting from the 
demands of market, science and technology and society, 
which are the main actors of the external environment. 
These demands are expressed through continuous and 
intermittent stimuli produced by these actors, e.g., shorter 
product life cycles, increasing product diversification, 
reduction of time to market, rapid obsolescence of existing 
products and organizations, swift emergence of new 
products, and the need to update the knowledge base. These 
factors exert different levels of influence, according to their 
geographic location (county or municipality, state, region, 
country, or continent) and economic activity (health, 
education, durable or non-durable consumer goods, capital 
goods, etc.) [3][10][12] 
Company 
competitiveness 
means 
that 
the 
organization’s working conditions enable it to generate 
higher than average profits in its market segment, operating 
sustainably, with quality, speed and flexibility. Moreover, 
the organization must satisfy stakeholders and comply with 
environmental requirements. Competiveness can be divided 
into External competiveness, which means the company has 
the ability to persuade consumers to buy its products rather 
than those of its competitors – in other words, the ability to 
shift the consumer’s brand loyalty. External competitiveness 
is calibrated and controlled by qualitative standards. This 
ability, in turn, drives so-called Structural competitiveness,
which is seen as a set of harmonious and synergic 
methodological and technological factors that induce the 
external market to shift its product loyalty from the brand it 
previously 
purchased 
to 
the 
new 
one. 
Structural 
competitiveness, which is calibrated and controlled by 
quantitative standards, is achieved through the use of 
structural attributes. Figure 1 shows a schematic diagram of 
the competitiveness model, identifying the actions of each 
of its components and their respective relationships [1].  
This paper is structured with the following sequence :I-
Introduction: This section presents the more wide concepts 
like Competitiveness and its influence in the organization 
structure ;II – Structural attributes presents the concept of 
Structural competitiveness , its quantitative standards and 
the 
relationship 
with 
qualitative 
standards, 
and  
characteristic 
of 
the 
external 
competitiveness 
main 
attributes; III – Innovation : this section provides the 
Innovation definitions , its classification and the its 
respective sub attributes, information flow needed for 
innovation; IV-Relationship between innovation and other 
structural attributes: this section establish the relationship 
between innovation and the other structural attributes as 
Organization driven attributes and Human capital driven 
attributes; Conclusion and future work: this section presents 
the main conclusions and the proposed future works. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

II.
STRUCTURAL ATTRIBUTES 
This section presents the competitiveness model, 
showing the concepts in the external environment and the 
organization environment; it also presents the relationship 
between the external and organization environment. 
Figure 1.Competitiveness model 
Companies achieve structural competiveness as a result of 
their market, organizational and human capital management 
structures. These are defined as structural attributes, which 
are characteristics of the management system, manifested by 
ongoing practices composed of methods that make up the 
organizational 
and 
technological 
management. 
The 
attributes and subattributes of competitiveness are classified 
according to the range of applications described below.  
A.
Market driven attributes:  
 
Characteristics 
inherent 
to 
the 
organization’s 
management 
system, 
expressed 
by 
an 
ongoing, 
comprehensive and integrated set of methods aimed at 
providing the conditions required to meet consumer market 
demands. Market driven attributes can be divided into the 
following subattributes: 
1)
Innovation - The process of technological innovation 
consists of a complex set of activities that transforms ideas 
and scientific knowledge into physical products employed in 
the real world [5][12]. Innovation also comprises existing 
technology and inventions to create a new product, service 
or process. Innovative companies search for all kinds of 
ideas, and their organizational culture encourages the 
development of these ideas into feasible business programs. 
The subattributes of innovation can be divided as follows: a) 
focus on consumer needs; b) enterprise-wide quality; c) 
enterprise-wide planning; d) use of core knowledge; and e) 
continuous upgrading of products and processes. 
2)
Agility - An agile company is one whose 
technological and administrative infrastructures are flexible 
and can be rapidly created, set up, and rearranged to meet 
external business needs. Among other things, this attribute 
favors faster time to market of new business initiatives. The 
subattribute of agility can be divided into: a) technological 
independence; b) reuse of solutions; c) suitable business 
infrastructure; d) system-wide response capacity, not just of 
individual processes; e) existence and implementation of 
strategies; and f) enterprise-wide business architecture, 
including supply chain and marketing processes. 
3)
Responsiveness - An organization’s ability to respond 
to market demands in a timely manner, also called “time to 
market.” This ability includes proactive search for customer 
and supplier feedback, fast cycle organization, flexible 
thinking, and doing things in short periods of time. The 
subattributes of responsiveness can be divided into: a) 
business process optimization, with the elimination of 
activities that do not add value to the product or business; b) 
adoption of proven technology; c) integration of business 
strategies; e) fast response time from Engineering and 
Marketing processes; and f) supply chain network 
optimization.  
B.
Organization driven attributes 
 
Characteristics 
inherent 
to 
the 
organization’s 
management system, which are indicated by ongoing, 
comprehensive and integrated methods aimed at providing 
favorable conditions for its organizational structures to meet 
external needs. Organization driven attributes determine 
how the business administration and management process is 
applied throughout the organization. These attributes can be 
divided into: a) information flow synergy; b) structural 
integration; c) information infrastructure; and d) knowledge 
management. 
C.
Human capital driven attributes  
Characteristics inherent to the organization management 
system expressed by a continuous, comprehensive and 
integrated set of methods aimed at providing favorable 
conditions for the development of selection, education, and 
training programs that enable the organization to reach the 
level 
of 
human 
capital 
needed 
to 
support 
its 
competitiveness. Human capital driven attributes can be 
divided into: a) Teamwork design; b) project clusters; c) 
virtual teams; d) human networking; and e) assumption-to-
knowledge ratio.  
It can be stated that a company’s structural attributes 
enable it to be organized, resulting in a state of structural 
competitiveness that should be unambiguously aligned with 
external competitiveness. To reinforce this mindset, the 
organization must have internally structured attributes 
whose implementation enables the company to meet the 
demands of external competitiveness in response to 
continuous and intermittent stimuli. Given the limited scope 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

of this article, however, our discussion will focus solely on 
the 
innovation-related 
portion 
of 
the 
complete 
competitiveness model.  
Figure 2 schematizes the attributes and subattributes of 
competitiveness, split in market driven, organization driven 
and 
human 
capital 
driven.
Figure 2.Structural attributes 
III.
INNOVATION 
Any discussion about innovation must include the 
subject of technology and their interrelatedness [5]. 
Technology involves the design, production and distribution 
of goods and services in response to market needs. 
Invention, on the other hand, is limited to expressing a new 
idea, a new concept, or sketching a new path without 
considering real technical or market feasibility. Hence, 
innovation bridges the gap between ideas and their actual 
implementation to meet human needs. There is a natural link 
between technology and innovation. Technology is 
improved continuously through a flow of incremental 
innovations that build and shape its course.  
Before discussing structural aspects, some concepts of 
innovation will briefly be reviewed [14]. Innovation 
involves the creation of a product, service or process that is 
new to an organization. It is introduced on the market 
through the use or sale of a new product, service or process. 
Innovation can also be defined as the creation of something 
new. It does not have to be new to the world; rather, it is 
seen as the first use of an Idea within an organization, 
whether or not this Idea has been adopted by other 
organizations. The technology (or product) must be novel or 
ground-breaking. An innovation may be a change in an 
industrial practice, which improves productivity. The 
innovation process involves integrating existing technology 
and inventions to create a new or improved product, 
process, or system. Although invention and innovation are 
closely related, they are not the same thing. An invention 
can be considered an event, while an innovation can be 
thought of as a process. Innovation is less common, while 
an 
invention 
usually 
precedes 
several 
innovations. 
Innovation represents the important link between an Idea 
and its exploitation or commercialization. The bottom line 
of innovation is the market, which will buy it or ignore it, 
thereby dictating its success or failure. The relationship 
between innovation and the need of competitiveness is a 
partially solved task. This paper intends to identify a 
significant, challenging, not yet solved, relationship , and 
propose the way to reach it 
A.
Classification of Innovation 
Innovation can be classified as radical or revolutionary, 
or as incremental or evolutionary. Radical breakthrough 
innovations are usually based on inventions. They are 
relatively rare and typically start outside the boundaries of a 
firm. When such innovations are developed within the 
boundaries of a firm, they signify the introduction of 
something that is not only new to the organization but also 
drastically different from existing practices. An example of 
radical 
innovation 
is 
the 
substitution 
of 
chemical 
photographic processing for computational photography. 
The second category, which comprises incremental or 
evolutionary innovations, involves small but important 
improvements in a product, process, or service. Incremental 
innovations are relatively common and are created in-house, 
helping companies maintain their competitive edge in the 
market. An example is the Kaizen method, a process of 
continuous improvement which is typical of this type of 
incremental innovation.  
Routine innovation is another category occasionally 
used to refer to the introduction of something new, albeit 
very similar to what an organization had in the past. An 
example of this is the redesign of an item for a new one in 
the manufacturing operation of a product component. 
B.
 Innovation as a structural market driven attribute 
As Figure 2 indicates, innovation is a market driven 
structural attribute. This means that, for an innovation to be 
of interest to the business, it must be part of the concepts 
that underpin the company’s management model and be 
included in its strategic issues and plans. Hence, it must be 
linked, via cause-effect relationships, to the various 
components of the business model. Considering the above 
described definitions and implementation of the concepts of 
innovation, they can be contextualized as a market attribute 
that is an integral part of the competitiveness model. 
Moreover, innovation can be classified as a structural 
attribute of the organization, whose aim is to satisfy 
customer needs.  
C.
Innovation subattributes  
The innovation subattributes are characteristics of an 
organization that creates favorable structural conditions for 
the development of innovation processes [12][14]. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

1)
Focus on consumer needs 
Meeting the requirements of this subattribute involves 
changing an organizational culture that is often deeply 
embedded. Such changes consist of: i) shifting from an 
internal and often functional approach to a customer-
oriented matrix management system; and ii) searching for 
customer input about products and services and remaining 
constantly 
attentive 
to 
ensure 
that 
this 
input 
is 
communicated throughout the organization instead of only 
to marketing and Research and Development staff. Several 
surveys have revealed that most of the development of new 
ideas and products comes from listening carefully and 
working with clients, rather than from new ideas for 
developing new products created separately in Research and 
Development laboratories. Hence, innovation efforts should 
preferably be aimed at meeting customer needs. 
2)
Enterprise-wide quality  
The cost of entry for companies in the 21st century is 
the highest possible quality. To this, they end, will have to 
adopt the broadest possible vision of quality. The concept of 
total customer satisfaction must be a goal. The company’s 
entire management team must be fully committed to the 
zealous pursuit of this goal. This quality mindset must be 
applied to both the tangible and intangible services 
pertaining to the company’s physical products. Quality has 
to do with how people focus on the customer, i.e., the next 
person in line responsible for the subsequent activity of the 
company’s business processes (the internal customer) or the 
all-important end user. It is essential for customer supplier 
relationships to be established within each company’s 
business process. The innovation process must be imbued 
with the company’s quality concepts to ensure that its 
products and services meet customer needs and expectations 
with the highest possible level of quality.   
3)
Enterprise-wide planning  
To ensure its success, the innovation process must be 
included in the full enterprise-wide planning at the various 
strategic, tactical and operational levels. In other words, the 
company must formulate innovation strategies, i.e., tactical 
plans for innovation originating from its innovation 
strategies, operational plans for innovation originating from 
its tactical plans, and specific projects originating from its 
operational plans. Large organizations have a natural 
tendency to create internal mechanisms that hinder 
innovation. It is a major strategic challenge to reduce as 
much as possible these mechanisms that favor operations, 
i.e., efficiency of current activities in detriment to creativity, 
idea generation and the launch of innovative projects. 
Innovation is initially seen as a disruption that interferes in 
the operations of existing activities. In traditional and 
conservative organizations, the difficulties arising from the 
introduction of a new software program (e.g., an ERP 
system), a new method (Group technology, Simultaneous 
Engineering), or a new organization model (Business 
Process Management), etc., are well known. Such 
organizations were designed to last. Rational decision-
making and operational pressures depend on many layers of 
reporting and control. This obviously tends to favor the 
amortization of heavy investments in existing activities. In 
this regard, organization and innovation are on opposite 
sides of managerial concerns. Companies need not only to 
operate but also to evolve. Hence, the inclusion of 
innovation processes among the company’s issues, and thus, 
of innovation strategies in its long range strategic plan, is a 
high level decision that is usually made by the Board of 
Directors and conveyed as a top-down decision. Therefore, 
the company must be convinced, at the political and 
strategic level, that investing in innovation is a business 
decision resulting from the realization that it has to maintain 
and exceed its current competitive edge in order to satisfy 
customer needs and expectations.  
4)
Use of core knowledge 
Regardless 
of 
their 
organizational 
structure, 
considerable duplication of efforts and management 
fragmentation are common issues in companies. In large 
companies, 
in 
particular, 
opportunities 
to 
achieve 
operational synergy are rare, since these companies tend to 
focus on purely financial aspects. Thus, it is essential to 
define core competencies, representing unique corporate 
capabilities, i.e., the company’s “collective knowledge.” 
Companies normally have only two or three core 
competencies. These core competencies and expertise 
should be defined by the strategic positioning of the 
company, which should allocate the corresponding funds. 
Moreover, top management should use the company’s core 
knowledge as basis not only to build strategic alliances, but 
also to create sourcing and vertical integration strategies. 
Clearly, organizations must offer innovative products and 
services if they operate in external environments where 
product lifecycles decrease continuously and which are 
characterized by ever increasing product diversification and 
by the demand for products with highly differentiated 
functionalities and performance. In such organizations, 
innovation is essential for them to maintain their 
competitive advantage. Therefore, innovation must be part 
of the “collective learning” process, which is considered a 
core competency.
5)
Continuous upgrading of products and processes 
The process of ongoing improvement and of adapting to the 
environment of continuous change, ideas and plans that 
make up for continuous upgrading of processes and 
products is a constant demand. In this context, incremental 
and routine innovations in products and manufacturing 
processes, and the elimination of activities that add no value 
to the company’s business processes are some examples of 
these innovative practices. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

D.
Innovation information Flow   
The diagram in Figure 3 illustrates the company’s 
response to external demands for new products and services, 
and the reaction of its innovation process with new products 
and services. The external flow illustrates how the external 
environment activates the organization, calling for new 
products and/or services.  Enterprise flow takes place in the 
opposite direction, reacting through the innovation flow or 
process by supplying the products or services required by 
society, science and technology or the market.  
The 
attribute 
and 
subattributes 
of 
innovation, 
considered a market driven structural attribute, uses the 
external needs as input and develops new products and 
services, following the connections between its subattributes 
and other structural attributes, such as organization and 
human capital. These relationships between innovation and 
other structural attributes are discussed below. Figure 3 
shows the information 
flow between the external 
environment and structural attributes, detailing this flow in 
the innovation process. 
Figure 3. External environment and enterprise flow for innovation 
processes 
IV.
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN INNOVATION AND
OTHER STRUCTURAL ATTRIBUTES 
The attribute of innovation depicted in Figure 2 is 
correlated with other structural attributes, as follows: 
A.
Organization driven attributes 
Organization driven attributes determine how the 
business administration and management process is applied 
throughout the organization. The innovation process is 
supported by these attributes, so that its concepts and 
process activities can be applied continuously. Organization 
driven attributes are divided into the following subattributes.
[1][12] 
1)
Information flow synergy 
The company’s business processes, including its 
innovation process, should involve activities that add as 
much value as possible to the business.  
2)
Information infrastructure 
The existence of a unified information system that 
includes most of the company’s business processes 
facilitates interactions between its innovation process and 
other business processes, such as product design, product 
manufacturing, 
marketing 
and 
sales, 
manufacturing 
planning and control, etc. 
3)
Knowledge management  
The innovation process will be facilitated if is linked to 
the knowledge base required for selected technologies, 
internal developments, R&D partnerships or acquisitions.  
4)
Structural integration 
The structural integration of the organization’s business 
processes enables the innovation process to be involved in 
the management of research activities, development 
feasibility 
studies, and more 
generally, in project 
management. Therefore, structural integration becomes part 
of the implementation and improvement of subsequent 
product and process technologies integrated in the 
company’s portfolio. 
B.
Human capital driven attributes  
Like the company’s other processes, the innovation 
process is supported by the skills of human capital[17]. 
Ultimately, it is people that distinguish successful 
companies from those that fail to provide the means for their 
human resources to develop. People create and implement 
strategies, design information systems and make them work. 
Hence, it is obviously people that create inventions and 
develop 
innovations. 
However, 
for 
people 
to 
be 
differentiators, they must be educated and trained in a 
continuous learning environment. Education is only part of 
the solution. People can also be encouraged by performance 
related ideas and metrics, and empowered to get the job 
done. The creation of an innovative environment must 
follow the abovementioned parameters, with the added 
premise that an innovative product or service that fails when 
initially introduced on the market should not be considered a 
failure, but rather, an opportunity to review ideas and 
designs and use these reviews in the next innovative project. 
The structural sub attributes driven by human capital are as 
follows.
1)
Teamwork design 
The innovation process is facilitated and accelerated 
when people involved in innovation engage in teamwork, 
exchanging ideas and concepts without putting up self-
protective barriers. Teamwork design is the opposite of 
peer-to-peer organization, which is a frequent feature in 
traditional organizations. The innovation process may be 
slower in peer-to-peer organizations because the top down 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

management style often hinders the free expression of 
creative minds. 
2)
Virtual organization and virtual teams 
These subattributes are feasible when the information 
technology 
infrastructure 
enables 
knowledge 
to 
be 
exchanged through available networks, and innovation 
groups 
are 
formed 
in 
organizations 
located 
in 
geographically different regions or countries within the 
same extended enterprise [5][17]. 
Figure 4 illustrates the main relationships between 
innovation and the organization driven and human capital 
driven attributes. It shows the relationship between external 
environment, structural attributes, innovation and the 
organization 
driven 
and 
human 
driven 
attributes 
components. 
V.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Organizational 
competitiveness 
is 
essential 
for 
companies operating in their different fields of activity. In 
the turbulent environment of the 21st century, with product 
life cycles decreasing and product diversification increasing 
continuously, the demand for innovative products and 
services is growing apace. 
Innovation does not come about spontaneously in 
organizations. In fact, the innovation process requires 
methodological support provided by structural conditions, 
which in turn must be tied to the competitive requirements 
manifested by external markets. This article discusses 
innovation as a process rather than as an event. Hence, it 
should be seen as an organizational process and included as 
a structural market driven attribute in the competitiveness 
model. In this proposal, the sub attributes of the innovation 
process are presented as the basis for its development and 
ongoing feasibility. The logical connection of innovation 
sub attributes to the organizational and human capital 
driven, internal attributes of competitiveness (Figure 4), and 
actors of the external environment (Figure 3) is considered 
understandable and feasible solution to connect Innovation 
with external Competitiveness, as proposed in Figure 3. 
Nevertheless, this process should be supported by other 
organization driven and capital driven structural attributes as 
well. The various workflows that comprise the innovation 
process as part of the competitiveness model are presented 
in this paper by means of cause-effect relationships between 
external requirements and the structural attributes of 
innovation. As proposed, a logical relationship was 
developed between the innovation process as market driven 
attribute  and its competitiveness, necessary to the company 
survival in the third millennium. This approach is presented 
through a model that considers the cause-and-effect 
relationship between external demands and the structural 
attributes of innovation. 
Figure 4. Main relationships between innovation and organization driven 
and human capital driven attributes.  
Lastly, in view of the above described concepts, it can 
be stated that it is advantageous for an organization to 
include 
the 
innovation 
process 
in 
the 
structural 
characteristics of its management system, provided this 
process meets external needs, thereby boosting the 
company’s competitive edge. 
As future work, we are planning to address the 
following: 
a) 
determination 
relationships 
between 
innovation and organization driven and human capital 
driven attributes that are more relevant to competitiveness 
that are preponderant to reach the necessary competitiveness 
level; b) use focus methodologies to establish these 
prevailing attributes. The lessons learned that in this article 
are: innovation cannot be seen as an independent 
characteristic of an organization or company, but as a 
market driven attribute that contribute to the company to 
reach the competiveness level; it is important to carefully 
establish its relationships with other characteristics and 
attributes of the enterprise  that are not clear at first view. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This article was developed based on a series of surveys 
conducted by the author and his students at the University of 
Campinas, SP, Brazil. These surveys involved several 
Brazilian and multinational companies operating in the 
region of São Paulo. The application of the competitiveness 
model, and particularly, the innovation processes was 
emphasized in the students’ master’s and doctoral thesis. 
The author would like to thank all these students. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

REFERENCES 
[1] 
O.L.Agostinho,”Sistemas 
de 
Fabricação”,Editora 
da 
Universidade de São Paulo, 2018 
[2] O.L.Agostinho,”Engenharia de Fabricação Mecanica,”  
Editora   Elsevier  , 2018 
[3] O.L.Agostinho, “Business Processes as basis of organization 
framework to support organization driven organization”, 
ECIME,“7th 
European 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Management and Evaluation,2014 
[4]  F.Betz,”Managing Technological Innovation”,John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc . New Jersey , 2009  
[5] C.M.Christensen,”The  Innovator’s Dilemma”,Harvard 
Business School Press . Boston , USA,1997 
[6]  M.A.Cusumano,”Thinking Beyond Lean”,The Free Press ; 
New York , 2005. 
[7]  J.J .Donovan ,”The Second Industrial Revolution;Business 
Strategy and Internet Technology”, Cambridge Technology 
Group, 2013 
[8]  Harvard Business Review on Knowledge Management ,The 
Harvard Business School Press ; Boston , USA , 2004 
[9]  R.McDowell and W.LSimon,” In Search of Business Value: 
Ensuring a Return on Your Technology Investment”, Select 
Books Inc.,New York, New York , 2007  
[10] European Institute for Technology and Innovation 
Management ,”Bringing Technology  and Innovation into 
the Boardroom”,Palgrave Macmillan,New York,USA, 2006 
[11] R.C. Gomes,and S.V.R.Galina,”Inter Organizational 
Innovation 
Networks 
of 
Brazilian 
and 
Spanish 
Biotechnology Companies” , International Journal of 
Engineering Business Management, vol. 9., 2017 
[12]  T.G. Gunn ,”21st Century Manufacturing”, Harper Collins . 
New York , USA.-  2004 
[13] J.Jeston,and J.Nelis,”Business Process Management” 
,Elsevier Ltd, London , 2006. 
[14] T.Khalil,” Management of Technology”,Mc Graw Hill , 
New York, USA. (2000 
[15] M.Rivastava and A.Franklin,”Building a Sustainable 
Competitive 
Advantage,”,Journal 
of 
Technology 
Management and Innovaton,LLC. San Francisco, CA
95050, USA.- 2013 
[16] I.S.Rampazzo and L.H.Mendonça,“Selection of 
Methodologies to be applied in the market driven attribute 
of Competitiveness” ( in portughese ) – University of 
Campinas, São Paulo, Brasil.
[17] C.M.Savage,”5th Generation Management”,Butterworth- 
Heinemann. Boston , USA-2009 
[18] R.J.Schonberger,” World Class Manufacturing; The Next 
Decade”, The Free Press , New York , 1999  
[19] T.Toivonen,” Continuous Innovation,Combining Toyota 
Kata and TRIZ for sustained innovation”, TRIZ FUTURE, 
TF 2011-2014, Procedia Engineering. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

