Does Chaos Exist in Social Network Components? Role of Evolutionary Dynamics
and Tool
Hameed Al-Qaheri
Soumya Banerjee
Goldina Ghosh
Department of Quantitative
Methods and Information Systems,
Kuwait University, Safat, Kuwait
alqaheri@cba.edu.kw
Department of Computer Science,
Birla Institute of Technology,
Mesra, India
dr.soumya@ieee.org
Department of Computer Science,
Birla Institute of Technology,
Mesra, India
goldinag@gmail.com
Abstract-Chaos and chaotic optimization is a global trend of
optimization, customized for several engineering applications.
This paper explores the behavior of chaos under social
networking sites. Recalling chaotic dynamic characteristics
emerging evolutionary network, the News Feed behavior of
Facebook has been modeled for optimization. The research
challenge is to address the emphasized presence of chaotic
behavior under the social network paradigm. Subsequently,
modeling could be collaborated with a class of evolutionary
network, e.g., vaccination network. The outcome of investigating
such non linear attribute could be of emerging relevance to
demonstrate how far this will affect social network participants
to be influenced over a specific social inference.
In order to
address the results obtained through evolutionary dynamics
with clarity, the same problem has been tested through Genetic
Algorithm components for different visualization and open
access to this new research frontier using contemporary
evolutionary algorithms.
Keywords - Social Networking; Evolutionary Dynamics; Genetic
Algorithms; Chaos.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Chaos [1] is a general nonlinear phenomenon that
sustains in the linear system. Chaos exhibits certain main
characteristics such as quasi-randomness, ergodicity and
sensitive dependence on initial conditions.
Furthermore,
ergodicity could be considered as an effective mechanism to
avoid trapping into local minima in the searching process.
As such, chaos could be considered as a novel and potential
optimization tool of interest [12]. Since the inception of Web
2.0, different forms of social network have been envisaged
and raised the relevance of chaos and chaotic optimization.
A social network is basically represented as a graph, with
individual persons represented as vertices, the relationships
between pairs of individuals as edges, and the strengths of
the relationships represented as the weights on edges (for the
purpose of finding the shortest weighted distance, we treat
lower-weight edges as stronger relationships). It has been
suggested that there is amalgamation of social chaos model
and evolutionary network noticed in its vaccination strategic
behavior [10]. It is general practice that in any system of the
evolutionary design, the intelligence emerges from a chaotic
balance between individuality and sociality. The chaotic
balances are the characteristic features of the complex
system. For a given energy or cost function, by following
chaotic ergodic orbits, a chaotic dynamic system may
converge towards a targeted global optimum.
Considering the broad hybrid evolutionary and chaotic
behavior of social media services, (which are the direct or
indirect function of user’s participation via feeding of
content and tagging) this paper explores the possibility of the
existence of chaos in the functionality of Facebook social
components, such as posts and news feed, which has the
possibility of demonstrating non linear scales and being
sensitive to initial condition. Subsequently, the paper also
discusses the relevance of optimized function to distinguish
the chaos on these components. This will help to achieve an
optimized social container both from the users and social
network service provider’s space and time complexity
perspective.
The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows.
Section II introduces elementary background material, the
problem
statement
and
the
relevance
of
evolutionary
approach
of
visualizing
chaos
within
social
network
components. In Section III, we present a news feed modeling
technique coined from Facebook. Section IV presents the
proposed algorithm of chaos modeling. In Section V, the
implementation and results are presented, followed by the
conclusion in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND, PROBLEM STATEMENT AND
RELEVANCE OF EVOLUTIONARY DYNAMICS
Facebook
introduced
the
News
Feed
feature
on
September 5, 2006. This feature gradually becomes clearer
to the user, as he/she posts items to personal profile or wall.
These items may be visible to friends or acquaintances
connected to the Facebook connection. Both culturally, and
technically, privacy of such news feed propagation has been
questioned and the corresponding impact of the user after
those news feed has also been scrutinized with a significant
survey [3]. Such investigations also reveal the factors that
are related to news, used on Facebook, and also demonstrate
the other contemporary factors such as gender participation,
emotional stability and so on [4]. News formation and
distribution for various social networking sites could be
analyzed by Exponential Random Graph Models (ERGMs),
which show the importance of link and their non linear value
of centrality [5]. In particular, it has also been observed that
Facebook has several self-organized features like status
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

updates,
wall
posts,
pokes,
tagging
and
commenting,
subscription services, games and applications (developed by
external agencies). Among these user-oriented features, the
majority of them are news feed or post related activities.
Thus, Facebook becomes a well defined dynamic brand,
referred to and maintained by its users [6]. The content feed
subscription in Facebook follows dynamic distribution of
content to all the subscribers, who are having common
membership of the same service provider or of same interest.
The most current content of two users can be shared when
they meet to extend and optimize network coverage with
lower cost of service. This could be another reason to be
concerned with in social networking sites, especially when
accessed through mobile devices [7]. Envisaging different
news feed and content generation options, Facebook keeps
the option open by forming similar opinion of clusters,
which can be derived from the user’s activities. Recent
research emphasizes the model of opinion formation from
social network [8], but the research challenge is to keep the
contents and feed free from final chaotic behavior. Present
Facebook structure has the option to subscribe or non-
subscribe to certain content page or posts from a particular
subscriber, but their trend of linearity and broadcast will still
remain ambiguous.
Hence, the concept of optimization has been proposed in
social networking sites, such as Facebook, from different
perspectives. Developers are always thriving to ensure that
their sites and apps are publishing stories that make the lead
profitable and popular, which has pioneered the concept of
“News Feed Optimization” (NFO) in Facebook.
A. Background on Evolutionary Dynamics
Evolutionary dynamics is an emerging concept, evolved
from the realm of game theory. Evolutionary game dynamics
is conceived from a set of deterministic differential equations
capable of addressing infinitely large and
well-mixed
populations [2]. In a well-mixed population, the chance of
two individuals interacts is equally alike. Some recent
approaches consider stochastic evolutionary dynamics in
populations of finite size. Evolutionary game dynamics are
also influenced by population structure [14]. Analogically, a
well-mixed
population
typically
opposes
evolution
of
cooperation, but a structured population can promote it. The
whole idea is to determine the strategy of two present
strategies deployed by several sets of common or different
players, then based on their interaction, the session calculates
certain payoff. The payoff actually gives the effectiveness of
any such propagated and linked approaches among those
players. The trend of the evolutionary dynamics has been
characterized through diversified mathematical treatments,
and the utility of such treatments are of typical importance
on social networking structure. The individuals finally try to
converge and optimize certain deterministic measures at the
end of a social session. We explore Fermi’s equation [10]
under this paradigm. Interested readers are advised to go
through
the
references
mentioned
to
get
a
broader
understanding on this emerging concept. Figure 1 shows a
diagrammatic view of a Facebook screen shot, where the
users of the particular community share or refer to a
particular new item. The view will enable the implantation
followed in the model.
Figure 1. Passive Mode of Information Sharing on Facebook Screen shot
B. General Mathematical Model
There is a generic mathematical model of the spread of
messages and it follows a complex socio-psychological
process. An adequate modeling of this process requires both
a correct description of the underlying social networks, along
which messages propagate, and a quantitative formulation of
various behavioral mechanisms that motivate individuals to
participate in the spread of any messages. The formal model
comprises of a set of plausible rules. Generally, irrespective
of any social network, we consider a population consisting of
N individuals with respect to the propagation of messages,
that is subdivided into different classes of participants.
Inspired by Maki and Thompson [15], we can also assume
that any messages propagate by direct contact of the
participants with others in the population. However, these
contacts can only take place along the links of an undirected
social interaction network G = (V, E) where V and E denote
the vertices and the edges of the network, respectively. The
negotiation of contacts between the message originator and
the rest of the population are governed by the different set of
rules
to
define
the
originator,
follower,
and
neutral.
Assuming that a node j has k links, g can be considered as a
stochastic
variable
which
has
the
following
binomial
distribution-
 
k g
g
g
k
t,k ))
(
1(
)t,k
(
)t,g
(





(1)
where, ( k, t) is the probability at time t that an edge
transmitting from a neutral node with k links points to the
other effected nodes.
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

III. NEWS FEED MODELING PERSPECTIVE FROM FACEBOOK
During Facebook’s developer conference, f8, on April
22, 2010, EdgeRank, a formula which determines the
likelihood of an object appears in a News Feed, was
introduced [11]. The formula is discussed below. However,
two important Facebook concepts need to be defined prior to
introducing the formula, and these are as follows-
(1) An Object is any item, such as a post, a status update or
a change to a profile picture that appears in News Feed.
(2) An Edge is an interaction with an object, such as a
comment or a tag, by another user.
Having
defined
these
concepts,
the
New
Feed
Optimization (NFO) or the Edge Rank formula can be
expressed mathematically as follows [11]:
New Feed Optimization (EdgeRank) =
e
edges
d

e
e we
u
(1A)
where, ue is the affinity score between the viewing user and
edge creator (a user gets higher affinity score if he/she sends
more messages to friends or check their profiles often), we is
the weight for this edge type (create, comment, like, tag,
etc.) and de is time decay factor indicating how long ago the
edge was created (the older an Edge is, the less important it
becomes). The score returned by the formula indicates Edge
rank of the object, the higher the value of the Edge rank
score the more likely the desired object is to appear in the
user’s feed. It is also worth pointing out that the act of
creating an object is considered an Edge, which is what
allows objects to show up in user’s friends’ feeds before
anyone has interacted with them.
A. How Chaos exists in Facebook: Functional Validation
Inspired by the evolutionary dynamics of social network
of new propagation, where we consider the analogy of
process of Page diffusion via Facebook’s News Feed, the
diffusion followed leads to chaotic behavior while feeds
towards optimization. EdgeRank is similar in semantics to a
fan page structure. As such, analytically, diffusion of pages
occurs when a user becomes fan of the page and finally their
friends of friends become fans of the same page as well.
Therefore, the question is raised as how to accomplish
optimization in terms of feed option. We model diffusion
approximation for large populations of size N under
Facebook.
Let m/N be the fraction of targeted individuals, who are
interacting in that propagation of news network of Facebook.
Facebook participants follow each others broadcast based on
the group presence, which preferentially copies others with
higher influential impact friend or friends of friends. In each
round, a randomly chosen individual i selects another
random individual j as cascaded friend, and compares his/her
position of influence to that of the actual pivotal friend.
Individual i adopts the strategy of individual j with the
probability of feeding the particular post given by the Fermi
function [10].
)
(
exp[
1
1
)
(
)
(
i
j
i
j
j
i
p
p
p
f p
s
s









(2)
where, β represents the intensity of selection of probability
of most acclaimed post. The population can change, only if
individuals
i
and
j
have
different
strategies.
Hence,
subsequently, the probability that the number of news fed
individuals increases from m to m + 1 (denoted T+
m) and the
probability that the number decreases from m to m – 1; this
statistics will influence news feed and thus the linear
behavior of page rank will not sustain any more. We model
the affect of chaos, for some emergency and popular pages
under these typical phenomena of vaccination network. It
has been observed that, for some popular pages, more than
90% of the fans can be part of a single group of people who
are all somehow connected to one another. We solicit our
prepositions through an example taken from “Facebook of
August 21, 2008, 71,090 of 96,922 fans (73.3%) of the
NastiaLiukin (an American Olympic gymnast) Page were in
one connected cluster” [9]. The chain data feed existing in
this page and several parameters could also exist analogous
to our validation of vaccination network.
Based on the cited instance, we prepare a shadow data
set as detailed in Section V.
IV. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
The paper explores an elementary, yet evolutionary,
optimized approach to minimize the chaos associated with
the social network site.
The ambiguity of posts and other
shareable activities is also partially addressed. The model
contains certain variables in the algorithm. The algorithm
describes the flow of message among different friends and
even to the friends of friends. This flow of message leads to
chaos, when propagated to friends of friends. The flow of
messages is restricted among the friends, only if there is a
decrease in chaos, but the rate of message flow remains the
same. Different variables and their corresponding semantics
as used in the algorithm are detailed below.
TABLE I. Facebook News and wall Variables with semantics post
Category
Semantics
Message
existing ‘message received’ record of the
friends
u message
new messages with different point value
sent by a person to his friends
Link
presence or absence of friend of a friend
Nm
message , but no representation of chaos
rec1
summation of all the values of the
maximized function
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

rec 2
summation of all the values of the
minimized function
Rank list
News feed
The summation of age, Facebook age
and activity count denoting the active
user’s rate. A scale from 1 to 100
The different types of newsfeeds with a
specific value ranging from 1 to N
Table I summarizes the different parameters associated with
variables, pertain to the semantic post of the user and it also
solicit the same to devise the proposed algorithm.
1 Begin
2 Initialization of values to the variables link
present or not present
3 Link present =1
4 Link Not present=0
5 Values for variables like Age, FaceBook
age, Activity count and message received
are generated on the user’s access report
6 Generating Rank List
7 Rank list = ∑ Age, FaceBook Age, Activity count
8 Generating different valued Newsfeed
9
Newsfeed =1, 2… N
10 Delivering Newsfeed without any restriction
11
for i=1 to a do
12
for j= 1 to c do
13
rec (i) = message (i) + umessage(j)
14
end
15
end
16 Delivering Newsfeeds with a restriction
17
for m=1 to c do
18
if link(m) = = 0 then
19
for i = 1 to a do
20
for j= 1 to c do
21
ch(m)=message(i) +
umessage(j)
22
end
23
end
24
else
25
ch(m) = message(i)
26
end
27
Separating Chaos and Newsfeed
28
for i = 1 to a do
29
for m = 1 to e do
30
nm(i) = rec(i) – ch(m)
31
end
32
end
33
Generating Maximization and Minimization value of
the Function
35
f(x)=x2 - 10 cos(2x) + 10
36
value of cos (x) lies between -1<= cos(x) <=1
37
while cos (x)<= -1 do
38
cos(2x) = -1 = cos 1800
39
2x = 1800
40
x = 0.5
41
end while
42
while cos (x)>= 1 do
43
cos(2x) = 1 = cos 0
44
2x = 0
45
x = 0
46
end while
47
if x == 0.5 then
48
f(x)= (-x2 + 10 Cos(2x) – 10)
49
end if
50
if x == 0 then
51
f(x)= x2 - 10 Cos(2x) + 10)
52
end if
53
Maximizing Newsfeed and Minimizing Chaos
54
mf= maxfun(x)
55
mif= minfun(x)
56
for i = 1 to a do
57
rec1(i)= rec(i) + mf
58
end for
59
for m = 1 to e do
60
rec2(i) = rec(i) + mif
61
end for
62
Plotting the graph
63
Transfer of newsfeeds to all
64
Tracking of chaotic behavior due to transfer of
newsfeed
65
Maximization of message flow
66
Minimization of chaos
67 End Begin
______________________________________________
V. IMPLEMENTATION AND RESULTS: PREPARATION OF
DATA SET FOR THE PROPOSED MODEL
A list of 40 different friends of a specific person from
Facebook is used as sample. These individual friends have
their own identity, nature of behavior, and activities. Some
of the friends in the list are also interrelated with a few other
friends in the list. This signifies the community of that
person’s common friend circle. The messages transmitted by
the person to all his friends at some point in time are also
cited.
The attributes of Table II are operationally defined as
follows:
Friend List- The friends are denoted by F1 to F40.
Age- It is the age of the individual friends. Based on the
age the nature of activity of an individual is also reflected.
Facebook Age- It denotes that since how many years
they are connected to this Social Network site.
Activity count- It includes the information like message
sent, photo uploaded or Facebook’s Wall post.
Any such
activity done is kept as a count in the record set.
Link present/Not present- This denotes the idea of
friend of a friend. Link present=1 and Not present=0
Received Messages- This is a count, which is based on
the number of messages, accepted by the friends from the
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

person, denoting the depth of the connectivity. Based on all
these attributes we generate a Rank list to judge the liveliness
of a member. This is the summation of age, Facebook age,
and activity count denoting the active user’s rate. A scale
from 1 to 100 is provided to plot the rank.
TABLE II. List of Friends and their Associated Attributes
The data set shown in Table II has been considered, for
the proposed validation using MATLAB and C++. In
Figure 2, the plot represents the message transferred to all
friends along with friend of friends and it leads to chaotic
behavior. The different valued messages that are transferred
via the newsfeed are plotted along the x-axis. Whenever a
new message is received by the friend its “received
message” record in the database is updated. The friend’s rate
of activity is judged on the basis of the rank. This is plotted
on the y-axis. The lines in graph denote that any valued
message that is sent is received, in each range of ranks in
between 10 to 80. The arrow marks denotes the flow of
information in every direction, i.e. is, first to the friends and
then to the ‘N’ number of links connected to each
friend.
Figure 2. Random Message passing lead to chaos
As it becomes difficult to identify the message sent and
the chaos that is generated, a filter is used to distinguish only
the chaos, where conditions for link = = 1, i.e. presence of
immediate link is checked to identify friends of friends.
Based on this condition, the graph is plotted in Figure 3. This
figure demonstrates the different message values along x-
axis after updating it in the “received message” section to
only those who are linked. The y-axis is the rank. The
multiple parallel straight lines in the graph denote that any
valued messages that are received each time by all the linked
friends create a meshed structure.
Figure 3. Chaos Present in messages
Hence, the concept of minimizing the chaos arises and
maximizing the message transfer takes place. Without
affecting the message transfer, we try to reduce the chaos
and maximize the message flow, (number of news feed
points) which implies no transferring to the friends of
friends. By maximizing, we mean transferring all different
valued messages to all different ranked users, who do not
have any link. This is achieved by maximizing the message
chaos function:
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 










n
i
i
i
x
x
x
f
1
2
1
10
10cos 2
(3)
where, 0 < (x) <0.5 and 0 < f(x) <19.75. The graphical
representation is given in Figure 4, where the x-axis gives
the representation for all the different messages uploaded for
only the unlinked friends with respect to the y-axis that
represents the rank. In this graph it is observed that the
multiple straight lines are much distinct. The directions are
indicated by the arrows.
Figure 4. Maximizing the message flow out of chaos
Similarly, after minimizing the function application of the
result for the chaotic control is shown in Figure 5. Here the
graph denotes the presence of chaos in much lesser number
of locations.
Figure 5. Minimizing the Number of recipients and chaos
A. Observation of news feed using Genetic Algorithm (GA)
for similar objective function
To compare the efficacy and implication of the present
proposed
module
for
the
same
optimization
problem
concerned with Facebook news feed and post, the idea of the
natural selection process that drives the biological evolution
is applied through Genetic Algorithm (GA).
MATLAB
7.0.4, toolbox has been utilized on the current population set.
Genetic Algorithm considers potentially huge search spaces
and navigates them looking for optimal solutions. If we are
intending to search for a solution to a problem, we look for
the best among possible solutions. The space for all possible
solutions is called “Search Space”. “Looking for a solution”
signifies
looking
for
extremes
(either
maximum
or
minimum) in the search space. Fitness function quantifies
the optimality of a solution. Fitness function is derived from
objective function and then used in the successive genetic
operations. After obtaining the suitable values from the
fitness function, we go to the next step of Genetic Algorithm
which is selection procedure. In this procedure, an individual
called ‘parent’ that combines the population at the next
generation. Cross Rule helps in forming children in the next
generation and hence obtaining only the optimized solutions.
Here, by applying equation (3), the maximization
function is used to represent the maximum amount of
message transfer only to the friends without link. After
maximizing the function, a graph is plotted as shown in
Figure 6. X-axis in the graph represents the range of ranks
of the friends who receive the message and y-axis represents
the maximum number of the messages with different values
that are transferred (measured by the fitness value).
Figure 6. Rank of the Friends with fitness
The blue dots in the scattered graph represent the best fitness
value and the black dots represent the mean fitness value. In
Figure 7, the average distance between the messages
transferred among each individual is shown, where x-axis is
the range of ranks of the friends, who receive the message
and y-axis is the average points calculated based on the
fitness value of the different valued messages that are sent.
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Figure 7. Distance between the messages with rank of friends
In Figure 8, the graph plotted represents the range, Best,
Worst and Mean, of the fitness function value of each group
of rank in each generation due to the transfer of different
valued messages.
Figure 8. Diversified Fitness Function
Similar
to
the
previous
proposed
module,
the
minimization function is used for reducing the chaos, but the
message transfer is kept as is with regards to the friends
without links. Hence, after minimizing the function, a graph
is plotted as shown in Figure 9.
X-axis in this graph
represents the range of ranks of the friends who receive the
message and y-axis as the minimized chaos and maximum
number of the messages with different values that are
transferred (measured by the fitness value).
Figure 9. Minimization of chaos
In Figures 10 and 11, the average distance between the
messages transferred
among each individuals
and
the
minimized fitness value generated are plotted in the graphs
that represent Best, Worst and Mean of the fitness function
value of each group of rank in each generation due to the
transfer of different valued messages respectively.
Figure 10. Average Distances of Messages
Figure 11. Diversified Fitness values for different Propagated Messages
B. Implication on the Results
Careful observation of two sets of graphs generated for
observing chaos, rank of friends and link of message
propagation
using
different
evolutionary
methodologies
reveal certain interesting observations. Firstly, set of results
generated on the basis of Fermi’s equation model and its
associated evolutionary dynamics concept (equation 2,
section 3.1), demonstrates
more clarity on the chaos
optimization
as
shown
in
Figure
4.
The
counterpart
evolutionary tool through GA produces more scattered and
distributed optimization index. Moreover, the choice of
fitness also requires certain heuristics across all diversified
message values and rank of friends. Hence, the first set of
evolutionary dynamics paradigm could be considered a
better choice for social networking sites to develop software
plug-ins in the form of optimization function.
C. Major Observation on Figure.6-Figure.11
Figures 6 to 11 represent the alteration in tendency of
message propagation of friends depending on the value of
message and distribution strategy. Figure 10 specifically,
gives an estimation of distance of message transferred to the
individuals. The work discusses about rank list of the shared
group messages among the members, reflected in Figure 8.
181
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

From Figure 9 to Figure 11, the status of the plots has been
revisited and significant minimization of chaos, while
incorporating Genetic Algorithm has been observed. This is
only possible, if distributions of objective function of
messages have been optimally configured. The optimization
could assist the social network message distribution and
privacy scheme in a more validated processes and more such
optimal function could enhance design space flexibility of
social network.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This paper investigates the presence of chaotic behavior
under Facebook’s news and post events.
The paper also
suggests an optimized solution from the perspective of
evolutionary network, e.g., vaccination network. Real life
Facebook instances have been envisaged and different
observational points of chaotic behavior were studied with
an evolutionary optimization function.
Several research
directions have been evolved out of the present initiatives:
particularly,
the
extraction
of
Facebook
data
and
its
associated crawling, or graph visualization which could be
made simpler.
We came across an unbiased sample of
Facebook users by crawling its social graph using certain
popular algorithms e.g., Metropolis-Hasting random walk
(MHRW) and a re-weighted random walk (RWRW) [13].
Similarly, other evolutionary heuristics like Particle Swarm
Optimization (PSO) or Differential Evolution (DE), could be
tested on the same data set of Facebook to quantify the
chaotic behaviour. The present study can also facilitate
Facebook application developers to intricate certain smarter
and optimized mechanism for wall and message post events.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Y. Li and J. A. Yorke,
Period three implies chaos, Amer. Math.
Monthly, 82 , 1975, pp. 985-992.
[2] Martin A. Nowak, Corina E. Tarnita, TiborAntal,
Evolutionary
dynamics in structured populations Phil Trans R Soc B, 365, 2010, pp,19-
30.
[3] Christopher M. Hoadley, HengXu, Joey J. Lee, Mary Beth Rosson,
Privacy as information access and illusory control: The case of the
FaceBook News Feed privacy outcry
in Electronic Commerce Research
and Applications Elsevier, Vol. 9, 2010, pp. 50–60.
[4] Carroll J. Glynn, Michael E. Huge, Lindsay H. Hoffman All the news
that’s fit to post: A profile of news use on social networking sites,
Computers
in
Human
Behavior,
2011,
Elsevier,
doi:10.1016/j.chb.2011.08.017.
[5] Sandra Gonzalez-Bailon Opening the black box of link formation: Social
factors underlying the structure of the web, Elsevier Social Networks Vol.
31 2009, pp. 271–280.
[6] Patterson A, Social-networkers of the world, unite and take over: A
meta-introspective perspective on the FaceBook brand, J Bus Res, 2011,
Elsevier, doi:10.1016/j.jbusres.2011.02.032.
[7] Stratis Ioannidis, AugustinChaintreau and Laurent Massouli´e, Optimal
and Scalable Distribution of Content Updates over a Mobile Social
Network, in proceedings of IEEE INFOCOM, 2009, pp.1422-1430.
[8] Gerardo Iñiguez, Rafael A. Barrio, JánosKertész, Kimmo K. Kaski,
Modeling opinion formation driven communities in social networks,
Computer Physics Communications, Elsevier, Vol.182, 2011, pp.1866–
1869.
[9] Eric Sun, ItamarRosenn, Cameron A. Marlow, Thomas M. Lento,
Gesundheit!
Modelling
Contagion
through
FaceBook
News
Feed,
Association
for
the
Advancement
of
Artificial
Intelligence,
2009,
www.aaai.org.
[10] Feng Fu, Daniel I. Rosenbloom, Long Wang and Martin A. Nowak,
Imitation dynamics of vaccination behavior on social network, Proc. R. Soc.
B 2011, 278, pp. 42-49 first published online , 28 July 2010.
[11]. http://www.facebook.com/f8 (Facebook Developers Conference
September 22, 2011)
[12] Wei Gong, Shoubin Wang.
Chaos Ant Colony Optimization and
Application.2009 Fourth International Conference on Internet Computing
for Science and Engineering. DOI 10.1109/ICICSE.2009.38, pp. 301-303.
[13] M. Gjoka, M. Kurant, C. Butts, and A. Markopoulou. Walking in
facebook: a case study of unbiased
sampling of OSNs. In Proceedings of
the 29th conference on Information communications, pp.2498. 2506, IEEE
Press, 2010.
[14] Taylor C, Fudenberg D, Sasaki A, Nowak MA, Evolutionary game
dynamics in finite populations. B Math Biol 66: 2004,pp. 1621–1644.
[15]
D.P. Maki, Mathematical Models and Applications, with Emphasis on
Social, Life, and Management Sciences, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ, 1973.
[16]
S. Boccaleti, V. Latora, Y. Moreno, D.-U. Hwang, M. Chavez,
Complex networks: structure and dynamics, Phys. Rep. 424 , 2006.
182
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

