Continue to Use Mobile Applications of Low-Cost Carriers 
Edward C.S. Ku 
Department of Travel Management 
National Kaohsiung University of Hospitality and Tourism 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan 
edwardku@mail.nkuht.edu.tw 
Abstract— The goal of this research is to determine how the 
firm reputation of a Low-Cost Carriers (LCCs) affects the 
compatibility and quality of a mobile device application. 
Increasing their firm reputation among passengers has 
become an important issue for LCCs; for an LCC to be 
successful, it must get rid of the impression of being cheap. 
In addition, LCC apps provide emotional support that is 
related to an individual’s ability to recognize and describe 
his/her own or others’ emotions. From the perspective of 
firm, LCCs need to understand the needs and analyze and 
behaviors of their passengers, who rely on extensive panels 
of instrumentation that must be checked regularly to detect 
updates on flights. Passengers face the same route with more 
than two LCC service competition. LCCs will create a 
process that could function as a model for their additional 
high-quality services. 
Keywords- low-cost carrier; apps; continue to us;, 
perceived compatibility 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
The emergence of Low-Cost Carriers (LCCs) has 
been one of the most significant developments in the 
aviation industry in recent years [1][2]. Additionally, 
transportation providers, including LCCs, now utilize 
mobile technologies for activities as diverse as ticketing, 
reservation, customer relationship, and providing real-
time travel updates for their passengers [3]. However, 
relatively little is known about the extent to which 
different business strategies have adopted and integrated 
apps into their businesses. 
LCCs emphasize e-commerce as the main channel 
for sales. Passengers are given access to online services 
and brought into a physical environment, allowing them 
to purchase products online and at the same time receive 
the products or services in a real-world environment. 
LCCs’ apps contribute to ease of use, improve search 
effectiveness, and save both time and effort [3][8]. From 
the perspective of service-dominant (S-D) logic, LCC 
apps provide the customer service as the primary value, in 
contrast to traditional products, which offer the firm 
reputation as the primary value. Passengers use LCC apps 
to facilitate the customer–firm interactions. On the other 
hand, LCC business models have changed by allowing 
passengers to engage more interactively than ever through 
the use of apps. In LCC apps with an excellent navigation 
system, the novel, interactive information, services, and 
tasks offered to passengers represent either totally new 
experiences; these include the use of LCC apps to know 
about the in-flight requirements or to market existing 
products/services in novel ways, such as by personalizing 
traditional products/services. 
The goal of this research is to determine how the 
firm reputation of an LCC affects the compatibility and 
quality of a mobile device application. Further, this work 
aims to evaluate passengers’ continued app usage 
considering the moderating effect of service process fit. A 
model of the continuous use of LCC apps is presented, 
which, along with the hypotheses, is tested by structural 
equation modeling. Following the above discussion of the 
motivation for this study, Section 2 of this report presents 
the theoretical background of the research. Section 3 then 
provides a review of previous works, and Section 
discusses the research design. Finally, the research 
ﬁndings and conclusions are reported in Sections 5 and 6, 
respectively. 
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Based on the uses and gratifications (U&G) 
perspective and service-dominant logic (S-D logic), we 
examine three major classes of persuasion determinants 
that are directly related to the cognitive evaluation by 
passengers, 
namely, 
firm 
reputation, 
perceived 
compatibility, and confirmation of apps.  
A.
Firm reputation 
Firm reputation refers to how customers view 
business services and engage in all activities, resulting in 
a more subjective impression of personal feelings and 
spread in the market stability. For LCCs, firm prestige is 
also based on passengers’ past experiences with the 
airline, considering such factors as whether the LCC 
records the different needs of each passenger, actively 
cares for its passengers in a timely manner, and provides 
various service programs [7][11]. According to his or her 
relevant 
experiences 
and 
personal 
feelings, 
each 
passenger makes a comprehensive evaluation of the 
airline, and based on the consistent evaluation made by 
different passengers, the firm reputation is then created. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-571-5
ICCGI 2017 : The Twelfth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

B.
Cognitive evaluation 
Cognitive value for passengers in the purchase of 
products, comprehensive experience, the characteristics of 
the product, the need to pay the time and money to do 
comparison will impact passenger buying behavior. 
Cognitive evaluation occurs most frequently and most 
strongly during consumption [12]. The relationship 
between corporate reputation and cognitive evaluation has 
been previously pointed out; that is, in assessing corporate 
reputation, it is not only the subjective understanding of 
business characteristics that is considered but also the 
impact of these features on human cognitive evaluation. 
In addition, the impact of word of mouth among 
passengers cannot be ignored in cognitive evaluation, 
because third-party opinions from outside the firm are 
more acceptable and believable to other passengers, 
especially those with experience who are more persuasive 
than the marketing of the company, and the effect of the 
web. Rational evaluation can be used as an important 
indicator of passengers’ perceptions to determine the 
reputation of LCCs, which affects passengers' purchase 
decisions [9][13]. Thus, if the company has a good 
reputation, it will have a considerable competitive 
advantage. This leads to Hypothesis 1. 
Hypothesis 1: The firm reputation of LCCs is positively 
associated with the cognitive evaluation of passengers. 
C.
Perceived compatibility 
Compatibility refers to the extrinsic advantages of 
product or service consumption and usually corresponds 
to non–product-related attributes, especially user imagery. 
LCCs expect apps services to attract a large number of 
passengers who eventually become loyal to that mobile 
service; these passengers install the apps as a means to 
fulfill their communication and service requirements [6]. 
Previous research has shown that benefits exert an 
indirect positive influence on passengers’ intention to use 
a mobile service by improving passenger commitment. 
However, reaping such benefits from apps services is 
possible only when the passengers are loyal to the mobile 
service. This leads to Hypotheses 2. 
Hypothesis 2: The perceived compatibility of apps is 
positively associated with the cognitive evaluation of 
passengers. 
D.
Confirmation capability of apps 
Confirmation refers to a practical or technical 
advantage that users can obtain by using a specific 
product or service [14]. Apps enable passengers to make 
online reservations and to search for available trains 
according to departure/arrival station and date and time 
segment; this creates a good impression to those phases of 
the personal lifestyle where insignias are more valued. 
Similarly, Apps can assist with the distribution of 
information across various units of the LCC and between 
different levels of passengers. Passengers are more 
willing to use apps when they recognize the tremendous 
value that can be obtained from their usefulness. This 
leads to Hypotheses 3. 
Hypothesis 3: The confirmation capability of apps is 
positively associated with the cognitive evaluation of 
passengers. 
E.
Continued usage intention 
Continued usage reflects the motivational influences 
that drive an individual to perform a behavior [9]. From 
the LCC perspective, when a passenger has experienced 
finding inaccurate information on an app, his or her 
perception of the information quality of that website will 
certainly hamper his or her intention to use that website 
again when a similar need arises. In other words, the 
perception of whether a particular website is qualified to 
help with certain tasks will influence the continuance 
decision. Similarly, when a passenger feels that an app is 
cumbersome to use or that the staff behind the LCC 
website are unwilling to provide sincere help, he or she 
may prefer to use alternative online channels. This leads 
to Hypothesis 4. 
Hypothesis 4: The cognitive evaluation of apps is 
positively associated with the continued apps usage 
intention of passengers. 
F.
The moderating effect of service process fit 
Service process fit refers to the configuration of 
technologies by which service providers sense and 
respond to the dynamic and complex needs of passengers 
through information technology or online [5][10]. LCCs 
should analyze passengers’ experiences and problems and 
then respond and support their needs accordingly. Apps 
must conform to the needs of passengers based on 
integrated and reliable passenger information. Therefore, 
we argue that congruity must exist between what 
individuals search for and their evaluations of the apps. 
Hence, we propose that passengers use apps as a support 
instrument when they buy tourism products and that the 
service process fit of an app will moderate their 
evaluation toward the behavioral intention use the apps. 
This leads to Hypothesis 5. 
Hypothesis 5: The service process fit moderates the effect 
of the cognitive evaluation of passengers on the continued 
usage of apps.
III.
METHODOLOGY 
Stratified sampling was used in data collection, 
which was done through a field survey; we confirmed that 
the selected passengers had downloaded and used the 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-571-5
ICCGI 2017 : The Twelfth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

apps which they take LCC in advance, and then we asked 
them if they were willing to fill in the questionnaire; 
passengers that did not have LCC apps usage experience 
were excluded from the study.  
We confirmed that the selected passengers had 
downloaded and used the apps which they take LCC in 
advance, and then we asked them if they were willing to 
fill in the questionnaire; passengers that did not have LCC 
apps usage experience were excluded from the study. A 
total of 1,500 passengers were invited based on the 
sampling strategy used in the airports; 888 of them 
completed the questionnaires (59.2% return rate). The 
questionnaires were developed based on a literature 
review on related topics.  
IV.
ANALYSIS AND RESULTS 
The measurement items were taken from the 
literature, and the constructs in the study were measured 
with a multi-item scale; the internal consistency 
(Cronbach’s alpha) of the construct was greater than 0.9 
[15]. The LISREL 8.50 software was used in the analysis. 
An AVE estimate of 0.50 or higher indicates acceptable 
validity for a construct measure. The results show that the 
square root of all AVE estimates for each construct is 
greater than the inter-construct correlations, as shown in 
Table I, thus, discriminant validity is supported. The 
overall goodness of fit was assessed in terms of eight 
common model fit measures: GFI, 0.92; AGFI, 0.92; 
RMR, 0.051; RMSEA, 0.058; NFI, 0.92; PNFI, 0.72, CFI, 
0.91; and PGFI, 0.66. The χ2 degrees of freedom ratio 
was 1.69. Overall, the data indicate a good fit for our 
hypothesized model, and the results provide meaningful 
support for the research hypotheses. Among the five 
hypotheses, five are fully supported. 
TABLE I MODEL ESTIMATION 
FR 
PCO 
Con 
CE 
SPF 
CUI 
AVE 
FR 
0.714 
0.51 
PCO 
0.487 
0.843 
0.71 
Con 
0.251 
0.307 
0.943 
0.89 
CE 
0.456 
0.407 
0.290 
0.781 
0.61 
SPF 
0.442 
0.480 
0.295 
0.471 
0.938 
0.88 
CUI 
0.451 
0.231 
0.326 
0.364 
0.441 
0.872 
0.76 
The main diagonal shows the square of the AVE (averaged 
variance extracted). 
Significance at p <0.05 level is shown in hold. 
FR stand for firm reputation, PCO for perceived compatibility, 
Con for confirmation, CE for cognitive evaluation, SPF for 
service process fit, CUI for continued usage intention. 
The results indicated a good ﬁt, overall, and the data 
indicate a favorable fit for our hypothesized model. Table 
II shows the structural model shows all hypotheses are 
accepted. 
TABLE II HYPOTHESES AND RESULTS 
Hypothesis 
T-
value
Results 
H1 
Firm Reputation -> Cognitive 
Evaluation 
4.5** 
Supported 
H2 
Perceived Compatibility -> 
Cognitive Evaluation 
11.75*
** 
Supported 
H3 
Confirmation -> Cognitive 
Evaluation 
6.92*
* 
Supported 
H4 
Cognitive Evaluation -> Continued 
Usage Intention 
15.63
*** 
Supported 
H5 
Cognitive Evaluation* Service 
Process Fit -> Continued Usage 
Intention 
3.93* 
Supported 
p<.05, p<.01, p<.001 
V.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS 
The use of structural equation modeling to test the 
theoretical model of continuous usage could lead to a 
better understanding of the nature and determinants of 
choices and decisions related to LCCs. The present study 
focused on continuous LCC apps usage by applying a 
multidimensional measure of factors that influence 
continuous usage, with the said measure being both 
intuitively appealing and reliable. The analysis of the 
measurement model indicates that the proposed metrics 
have an acceptable degree of validity and reliability. 
First, increasing their firm reputation among 
passengers has become an important issue for LCCs; for 
an LCC to be successful, it must get rid of the impression 
of being cheap. As the LCC increases its service quality, 
for example, by improving the punctuality rate of flight, 
the mechanical maintenance, and the image formed by 
word of mouth, its reputation will become satisfactory to 
passengers; accordingly, the LCC will improve its 
business performance, market share, shareholder returns, 
and passenger service.  
Most passengers believe that LCCs focus on cost-
oriented segmentation; however, given the growth of the 
LCC market, LCC need to boost their reputation and gain 
passengers’ recognition. As the LCC increases its service 
quality, for example, by improving the punctuality rate of 
flight, the mechanical maintenance, and the image formed 
by word of mouth, its reputation will become satisfactory 
to passengers 
Second, the interface design of the apps provide a 
personalized presentation that reflects the preferences of 
the passengers. Moreover, emotion-related compatibility 
can be characterized as a combination of psychological 
tool demands and the tasks to which passengers can 
decide for themselves how to do their usage behavior. 
Thus, LCCs should enhance the design of their apps to 
attract more passengers to use them.  
LCC apps provide emotional support that is related 
to an individual’s ability to recognize and describe his/her 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-571-5
ICCGI 2017 : The Twelfth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

own or others’ emotions. Moreover, emotion-related 
compatibility can be characterized as a combination of 
psychological tool demands and the tasks to which 
passengers can decide for themselves how to do their 
usage behavior. Thus, LCCs should enhance the design of 
their apps to attract more passengers to use them. 
Third, the confirmation capability of apps that work 
in dynamic environments continually monitor systems; 
LCCs have been described as producing a broad range of 
service quality improvements. LCCs need to analyze the 
needs and behaviors of their passengers, who rely on 
extensive panels of instrumentation that must be checked 
regularly to detect updates on flights. Similarly, keeping 
an open channel for communication with passengers, 
providing information during periods of apps usage, and 
encouraging two-way communication lead to higher 
passenger satisfaction. Thus, the provision of service 
processes in the apps makes passengers experience the 
value of apps usage. 
LCCs 
need 
to 
keep 
an 
open 
channel 
for 
communication with passengers, providing information 
during periods of apps usage, and encouraging two-way 
communication lead to higher passenger satisfaction. 
Thus, the provision of service processes in the apps makes 
passengers experience the value of apps usage. 
Finally, service process fit in operations is necessary 
to make apps functions consistent with the service-
oriented work process. Similarly, LCCs can create a 
process that could function as a model for their additional 
high-quality services. For example, the system can 
automatically generate the two-dimensional bar code for 
baggage within the apps, and the apps can record the 
baggage weight information for passengers, which will 
help passengers in the fare on the expenditure judgement. 
In addition, LCCs can estimate the overbooking by 
applying system analysis, as well as develop a unique 
overbooking and transit service strategy. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
T. Buaphiban, and D. Truong, “Evaluation of passengers' 
buying behaviors toward low cost carriers in Southeast 
Asia.” Journal of Air Transport Management vol.59, 
2017, pp.124-133. 
[2]
L.Y. Chang, and S.C. Hung, Adoption and loyalty toward 
low cost carriers: “The case of Taipei–Singapore 
passengers.” Transportation Research Part E: Logistics 
and Transportation Review, vol.50, 2013, pp. 29-36. 
[3]
S. C. Chiu, C. H. Liu, J. H. Tu, “The influence of tourists' 
expectations on purchase intention: Linking marketing 
strategy for low-cost airlines.” Journal of Air Transport 
Management vol.53, 2016, pp.226-234. 
[4]
A. Y. L. Chong, “Understanding mobile commerce 
continuance intentions: an empirical analysis of Chinese 
consumers.” Journal of Computer Information Systems 
vol.53, 2016, pp.22-30. 
[5]
Y. W. Fan, and E. Ku, “Customer focus, service process 
fit and customer relationship management profitability: 
the effect of knowledge sharing.” The Service Industries 
Journal vol.30, 2010, pp.203-223. 
[6]
X. Fu, Z. Lei, K. Wang, and J. Yan, “Low cost carrier 
competition and route entry in an emerging but regulated 
aviation market–The case of China. Transportation 
Research Part A: Policy and Practice vol.79, 2015, pp.3-
16. 
[7]
H. Han, “Effects of in-flight ambience and space/function 
on air travelers' decision to select a low-cost airline.” 
Tourism management vol.37, 2013, pp.125-135. 
[8]
C. I. Ho, M. H. Lin, H. M. Chen, “Web users’ 
behavioural patterns of tourism information search: From 
online to offline.” Tourism Management vol.33, 2012, 
pp.1468-1482. 
[9]
H. Hoehle, X. Zhang, and V. Venkatesh, “An espoused 
cultural perspective to understand continued intention to 
use mobile applications: a four-country study of mobile 
social media application usability.” European Journal of 
Information Systems vol.24, 2015,  pp.337-359. 
[10]
E. 
Ku, 
“Functional 
integration 
and 
systems 
implementation of customer relationship management in 
hotel industry: A multilevel analysis.” International 
Journal of Information Technology & Decision Making 
vol.13, 2014. Pp.175-196.. 
[11]
K. Seo, J. Moon, and S. Lee, “Synergy of corporate social 
responsibility and service quality for airlines: The 
moderating role of carrier type.” Journal of Air Transport 
Management vol.47, 2015, pp.126-134. 
[12]
I. Vlachos, and Z. Lin, “Drivers of airline loyalty: 
Evidence from the business travelers in China.” 
Transportation 
Research 
Part 
E: 
Logistics 
and 
Transportation Review vol.71, 2014, pp.1-17. 
[13]
Y. Wang, K. K. F.So, and B. A.Sparks, “What 
technology-enabled ServiceS do air travelerS value? 
inveStigating the role of technology readiness.” Journal of 
Hospitality 
& 
Tourism 
Research, 
2015 
1096348014538050. 
[14]
T. Zhou, “An empirical examination of users' post-
adoption behaviour of mobile services.” Behaviour & 
Information Technology vol.30, 2011, pp.241-250. 
[15]
R. Brown, “A cautionary note on the use of LISREL'S 
automatic start values in confirmatory factor analysis 
studies. Applied psychological measurement,” vol.10, 
1986, pp.239-245. 
. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-571-5
ICCGI 2017 : The Twelfth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

