Towards Implementation of Ethical Issues into the Recommender Systems Design 
Olga Levina  
Technische Hochschule Brandenburg 
University of Applied Science 
Brandenburg, Germany 
e-mail: levina@th-brandenburg.de 
 
Abstract—In the last two decades, an increasing number of 
companies have adopted a business model based on digital 
services attained from user data. Accompanying these 
developments are not only the changes in the processes but also 
the attention that is brought by the society towards the effects 
and the constitution of these services. Moral and ethical 
demands are steadily rising and requests for regulation are 
getting louder in public discussions. In this paper, a scenario of 
a Machine Learning- based System (MLS), a fictional 
recommender system for food delivery, is used to identify 
potential ethical issues that occur during the composition and 
usage of the artifact. Based on the scenario and its real-life 
counterparts, suggestions of what ethical aspects can be 
implemented into the design of the information system are 
derived. This approach is used to argue that MLSs are socio-
technical systems that have an impact on the system user, but 
also on the receiver of the MLS-based result. Hence, the focus 
on the social aspect of the system design needs to be put early 
in the development phase of such a socially aware information 
system. 
Keywords- socio-technical systems; information systems 
design; machine learning based systems; ethical analysis. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The pervasiveness of algorithmic systems in our daily 
lives is stimulating public and research debate about their 
potential effects on the individual behavior and also on the 
society as a whole. Several companies and governmental 
initiatives react to this development by publishing ethical 
principles on how their Information Technology (IT) 
artifacts that involve Machine Learning (ML) components 
are created, leading to the so called “principle proliferation” 
[1]. Evidently, Information Systems Research (ISR) should 
manifest its leading role in pursuing practices for the 
creation of IT artifacts that are not only technically 
innovative but also socially acceptable. This paper provides 
a contribution by presenting and discussing the outcomes of 
the ethical analysis of a paradigmatic case of a Machine 
Learning-based System (MLS) application. Here, an MLS is 
an Information and Communication Technology (ICT) that 
is composed of one or more algorithms working together 
and capsuled into one or more executable software 
components [2].  
The results of the applied analysis approach lay the 
ground for theoretical development of a mixed method 
approach that is focused on ethical reasoning in ISR. 
The presumption here is that ethical compliance of an 
IT-system is an integral part of the design process, as well 
as the product use. The linkage to ethical questions and the 
design of an IT artifact can be historically established in 
several ways. First of all, the core of the engineering 
activities, such as software engineering and IT systems 
design, is the solution to the design problem [3]. Since there 
are multiple possibilities to solve a problem, (software) 
engineers weight one alternative against another. The 
decision criteria for the design alternatives can be financial 
restrains, user requirements and functional fit of the 
alternatives. Once the chosen alternative is realized as an 
artifact, it will have good and bad effects. Hence, one 
obvious moral obligation of a (software) engineer in the role 
of the solution creator is to pick a design alternative that 
does not induce harm [3]. 
Thus, to create an IT system that takes into account the 
effects of its application on the business processes, users, as 
well as the affected parties, theses potential effects need to 
be taken into account in its design [4][5]. It is e.g., the case, 
when digital systems such as a recommender or a digital 
assistant system provide a service for its user. A service, in 
the physical world, as well as digital, comes with costs that 
are not only monetary. It entails partial loss of autonomy in 
the realm it is being offered as a service. A user accepts the 
service if the assessed amount of the autonomy loss is 
acceptable and thus the user provides a consent to this loss 
by agreeing to use the service instead of performing the 
offered function him- or herself. The engagement with the 
service can furthermore be associated by the user with loss 
of autonomy due to opaque processes of result generation. 
Social reluctance of these practices is evident. Only 19% of 
surveyed users of digital services believe that tech 
companies design their services with people’s best interests 
in mind and 47% feel they have no choice but to sign up to 
services despite having concerns [6]. Identifying and 
complying to ethical issues in the MLS design can thus 
enable autonomous decisions for the user within the 
interaction with the service. In addition, this quality can 
provide a distinctive feature on the market of IT products. 
Following this reasoning, the goal of this research is to 
identify the potential ethical issues of MLS in the example 
presented in Section III using the data process centered 
ethical analysis [7] in Section IV. Suggestions about how 
the identified ethical issues can be integrated into the IT 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

system are provided in Section V. Using the offered 
scenario, the process and supplementary effort to include 
these aspects into the artifact design can be assessed by the 
system designer or business engineer, providing an 
actionable radius to create socially acceptable IT products, 
as well as to lay the ground for future research questions. 
Conclusion and outlook on the future work finish the paper. 
II. 
THE SOCIO-TECHNICAL ASPECTS OF RECOMMENDER 
SYSTEMS 
Socio-technical systems are described by Baxter and 
Sommerville [7] as systems that involve a complex 
interaction 
between 
humans, 
machines 
and 
the 
environmental aspects of the work system. Machine 
learning-based systems incorporate this interaction already 
in their input, i.e., the data from which patterns are derived 
and test data sets for the mathematical models are the result 
of an interaction between a human in an organizational 
context and a business information system. Thus, their 
implementation into the organizational processes has an 
intermediate effect on the actors on the outside and inside of 
the organization. Specifically, in this context, socio-
technical considerations are not just a factor within the 
systems development process, but they have to be 
considered at all stages of the development life-cycle.   
For MLS, the development life-cycle includes the 
development life-cycle includes data processing. Data 
processing is furthermore divided into phases of data 
collection, data processing, model definition, model training 
and calculation of the results. The socio-technical factors are 
triggered when the MLS results are implemented into a 
business process, requiring a human decision or a decision 
that concerns human actors. To address these challenges, the 
ALTAI principles were established by the European 
Commission [8] to help evaluate a socially aware MLS 
design. These are: Participation, Transparency, Human 
Autonomy and Auditability. These principles are considered 
here as facilitators for the software design approach that 
focuses on the person affected by the software result rather 
than the direct user of the software.  
Identifying any ethical issues that might occur during the 
system design is considered here the first step of the 
incorporation of these values into the systems design. 
Hence, a scenario for an MLS, a recommendation 
application, is described here and used to demonstrate an 
approach to identifying ethical issues. 
III. 
AN EXAMPLE APPLICATION: FOODAPP- THE 
APPLICATION FOR MEAL DELIVERY 
The FoodApp is a fictional application based on a three-
sided digital platform that is implemented as a mobile app. 
It is a branch of a fictional large company Acima that offers 
on-demand 
individual 
transportation 
provided 
by 
freelancing drivers. To further explore the transportation 
market, Acima started FoodApp, a fast growing food 
delivery platform connecting the customer, restaurant owner 
and the delivery partner. It allows the customer to choose 
from a large database of participating restaurants and order a 
menu to be delivered to the customer’s address via delivery 
partners. The eater can choose a specific delivery partner 
based on the ratings of the currently available partners. The 
payment process is integrated into the platform as is the 
real-time tracing of the order delivery.  
The platform business goal is the “fast and easy food 
delivery whenever, wherever”. To achieve this goal, an 
MLS, namely a recommender system, is used to provide the 
best food suggestions for the user in accordance to the 
indicated preferences and the order history. The business 
performance indicators for the FoodApp include the return 
and re-order customer rates, as well as customer number 
growth rates. The implemented ML-model is thus optimized 
to drive user’s re-ordering on the platform.  
To use the FoodApp, the customer downloads it on the 
mobile device granting permissions for it to access the 
location of the device. Further, a profile including 
information on delivery address, name, e-mail and phone 
number is required. Payment methods and login to the 
payment 
provider 
is 
further 
required. 
No 
manual 
modifications concerning the data collection by the app is 
possible. Then, the meal preferences such as preferred 
cuisine or menu item need to be indicated or a meal can be 
chosen from the provided suggestions. The first suggestions 
are based on the historical frequency of the orders made 
within the community in the area of eater’s location. A 
rating 
system 
for 
restaurant 
and 
delivery 
partner 
performance is implemented.  
The platform gains revenues from the customer via 
convenience charge, fixed commissions and marketing feeds 
from the restaurants, while providing the assignments and 
the payment to the delivery partners, as well as the technical 
infrastructure for the platform participants. The application 
is a key driver of Acima’s revenue and is a fast-growing 
meal delivery service with over 15 million users worldwide 
(this estimation is made based on the data from other food 
delivery companies such as e.g., Uber Eats).  
Additionally, the platform includes an app for delivery 
partners that provides the possibility to accept or decline a 
specific delivery job, monitor the revenues, rate the 
restaurant’s delivery process, as well as provide directions 
to the restaurant and to the eater. This app is out of scope for 
this research. 
 
IV. 
IDENTIFYING ETHICAL ISSUES 
To identify ethical issues, data process-oriented analysis 
[9] has been conducted. Since the core component of the 
FoodApp MLS converts (user) data into a food 
recommendation, the data process as described by [10] is 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

referenced to structure the identification of ethical aspects. 
These aspects are derived using a hermeneutic approach 
from basic values such as human rights and are rooted in the 
basic principles and moral considerations of ethics and data 
ethics, see [1][11]. The ethical analysis looks at the data 
process within the system’s design and identifies some of 
the relevant aspects, where ethical questions arise and give 
direction to the system’s design. 
FoodApp’s business goal is to engage the user in the re-
ordering of the food via FoodApps’s digital platform. The 
user interacts with the app aiming for a comfortable 
provision of the favorite food in an efficient way. Therefore, 
as described above, the user is inclined to give up some 
autonomy within this process. Nevertheless, in the digital 
realm, the user is often not aware of what elements of 
his/her autonomy are jeopardized when the digital service, 
here food selection and ordering via a digital platform, is 
created [12][13].  
FoodApp’s user profile provides the information that is, 
among others, needed for the algorithms in the MLS to 
derive food recommendations. The user does not have any 
information about the exact purpose of the provided 
datasets, the data lifecycle, nor about who has access to the 
(possibly) un-anonymized profile or historical data and 
about the data state timeline, i.e., when the data are 
transferred or deleted. These aspects can be categorized as 
“transparency issues”, since the user does not have the 
information about FoodApp’s processes s/he might need or 
would like to have.  
On the home screen of the FoodApp, the most frequent 
orders for eater’s automatically identified location are 
presented. The user can filter the suggestions using the 
provided filter categories. These categories, defined by the 
MLS-engineers and designers, include cuisine and menu 
item names, as well as the ratings of the accordant 
restaurants. In future interactions with the FoodApp its 
home screen offers the meals and food items that are most 
frequently ordered by the eater or users that were identified 
to have a similar ordering behavior, thus nudging the eater 
to order the same or similar kind of food [14].  
The ordering process is organized in a way that no 
extended explanations or additional information are given so 
that the user does not have to choose, decide or react during 
the interaction process. This design allows a fast phase-out 
between opening the FoodApp and ordering the food. This 
effect can be expected to contribute to user satisfaction and 
thus 
re-visiting 
the 
platform 
for 
the 
next 
order. 
Nevertheless, 
consequences 
of 
the 
provided 
recommendations based on historic behavior could lead to 
decisional de-skilling [5] or, in this case, potentially 
homogeneous food preferences for the eater.  
The process efficiency offered by the FoodApp is also 
built on to the lack of decision possibilities and a limited 
items selection that is based on the historic and profile 
preferences for the user. Such an automated decision 
support can also potentially result in the de-skilling of the 
evaluation abilities [15] for the eater in the given context. 
Additionally, the gained comfort for the user in terms of 
food selection and delivery has implications on the 
ecosystem of the FoodApp. The restaurant partners will be 
faced with the increased amount of reviews from the 
delivery customers, potentially forcing them to concentrate 
on robust packaging to ensure the sound condition of the 
meal for delivery. More or more robust packaging means 
more damage to the environment but potentially better 
ratings from the FoodApp users [16].  
Furthermore, the food recommendations based on historic 
and similar orders might lead to the homogenization of the 
food offered and prepared in the participating restaurants, as 
menu items that are ordered less often might not be prepared 
by the restaurants anymore, potentially leading to the 
decreasing of the skills of the cooking staff. The individual 
delivery of the food orders requires reliable and efficient 
delivery partners. Acima relies here on its network of 
drivers for personal transportation that are also incentivized 
to transport food orders via reward programs.  
Additionally, efficient and effortless process of ordering 
food for individual consumption can and does cause 
significant environmental damage in terms of air pollution 
through traffic and waste [16]. The eater rates the restaurant 
on the food quality and the delivery partner on the quality of 
the delivery. The rating is based on eaters’ satisfaction with 
the end result, whereat the traffic situation and other 
eventualities are not considered. This relationship pattern 
also causes societal effects.  
The rating of the delivery partners results in an increasing 
number of orders for high ranked drivers and in a reduction 
of delivery orders for the worse ranked drivers. This 
transforms the reviews into the main factor for job 
acquisition, and thus income, for the drivers. This type of 
job market is known as the gig economy [17]. It provides 
income potential for the workers while creating an 
interdependency between the platform customer and the gig 
worker. This relation seems to remain unclear for the 
platform customer and is often debated by the platform 
owners [18][19]. Consequently, the Organisation for 
economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) stated 
that digital platforms need social values to be reflected in 
the platform governance [19].  
V. 
INTEGRATING THE ETHICAL ISSUES INTO THE SYSTEM 
DESIGN 
Based on the ethical analysis of the previous section, 
Table 1 provides a synthesis of the identified ethical issues. 
Also, an example how the identified issue can be integrated 
into the IT system is provided.  
The recommendations are structured along the following 
levels: business level, User Interface (UI) and system level. 
While business level addresses the definition of the business 
model and business goals, the system level considers the 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

systems design, including the design of the algorithms. The 
UI aspects can be used to balance the business goal, i.e., 
eater’s re-ordering behaviour, and the eater’s interaction 
expectations with the digital platform. This paradigmatic 
nature allows an insight into the application of the ethical 
analysis during the MLS design. A more detailed analysis 
would be needed to provide specific insights into the 
algorithm level. 
TABLE I.  
ETHICAL ISSUES OF THE FOODAPP AND SUGGESTIONS FOR 
THEIR IMPLEMENTATION 
Ethical issues 
Suggestion for implementation 
No explanation on 
the  data storage 
System/UI: Include clear and transparent 
information for the user about the data 
storage, in e.g., in individual contracts or in 
general terms and conditions.  
System: Develop a concept for deletion 
routines if the purpose of the data processing 
is no longer applicable. Accordant selection 
of the storage location. 
No explanation on 
the 
purpose 
of 
data collection 
UI: Provide information, e.g., via mouse 
hover, about the purpose of the data collected 
in the field, as concrete as possible 
System: To collect data that are not essential 
for the provision of the service, provide opt-
in options by asking the user directly, e.g., 
“Would you like to help us to improve our 
service by providing your automated location 
data?” 
Lack of an opt-out 
for specific data 
type collection 
System/UI: Privacy friendly default settings, 
e.g., opt-in function for every data item 
collected instead of the implementation of the 
“required” fields. 
Lack 
of 
the 
possibility 
to 
manually 
adjust 
the collected data 
System: Possibility to add or correct data 
manually, e.g., to type the address for 
delivery. 
Establish a reporting system for customers if 
they wish to have data corrected. 
The 
fact 
that 
stakeholders have 
access 
to 
the 
collected data by 
FoodApp 
Business: No data exchange between other 
stakeholders without agreements; user can be 
asked if s/he wants specific data to be shared 
for a specific purpose with the specific 
partner (a reimbursement could be offered) 
 
Implement an accordant opt-in or rewarding 
mechanisms for the user in the settings. 
Data life cycle is 
unclear 
for 
the 
user 
System: Describe the data life-cycle to the 
user, e.g., on the FAQ page. 
 
Integrate an automated deletion routines after 
the needed data are collected; inform the user 
about the routine in the FAQs, provide opt-
ins for further data collection if needed; 
implement a reward system for additional 
data collection. 
Data state: Is the 
data anonymized 
before 
the 
analysis? 
System: Make clear in FAQ that data is 
processed anonymously. If this is fulfilled, 
the GDPR does not apply for the processing.  
Implement anonymization process via e.g.,  
distributed data bases. If anonymization is not 
possible, secure data by pseudonymisation 
and encryption. 
Lack of feedback 
from stakeholders. 
System/business: 
Provide 
a 
transparent 
feedback system from and to every actor in 
the ecosystem; provide an explanation of the 
ratings and their effects for the actors on the 
FAQ. 
Eliminate 
one-sided 
rating 
mechanisms. 
Lack of tracing of 
(e.g., 
societal) 
changes 
induced 
by the app. 
Business: Schedule surveys regularly with 
eaters, restaurants and delivery partners to 
assess 
the 
changes 
induced 
in 
those 
ecosystems; perform simulations to define 
potential changes to the traffic in the delivery 
area; establish contact to the traffic agency; 
include actionable changes suggestions, e.g., 
provide contact to a sustainable packaging 
producer for the restaurant partners; make 
these actions transparent on the FAQ. 
Optimizing 
the 
algorithm for user 
re-ordering 
System/Business: Include other stakeholders 
such as restaurants, delivery partners and the 
environmental effects with similar weights 
into the recommendation algorithm; evaluate 
the systems on a regular basis. 
UI: Provide different recommendations foci 
for the user, e.g., focus on preferences, focus 
on restaurant convenience, etc. 
Lack of a test 
phase about the 
effects 
of 
app 
usage 
on 
the 
society 
Business: Include a laboratory phase, where 
the app is tested by the users and stakeholders 
with evaluation of the UI, UX, legal and 
ethical aspects plus relevant simulations on 
the ecosystem e.g., food and restaurant 
landscapes before release. 
Definition of the 
parameters 
for 
food selection by 
the engineers 
Business/system: Include a customer survey 
on which categories they would like to have; 
change categories or filters for sorting and 
extend these cate-gories regularly. 
Live roll-out of 
changes 
to 
the 
MLS, i.e., online 
experimentation 
Business: Perform changes roll-out during the 
laboratory phase and simu-lation; when 
approved, roll-out for the whole community. 
Usage of power 
resources to train 
the (modifications 
to) 
ML- 
model 
recommendations 
are based on a 
selection of pre-
set parameters 
Business: Change and train the model as 
rarely as possible, e.g., once a year. 
UI: 
Provide 
information 
why 
the 
recommendation was generated and what 
impact the change of the parameters (e.g., 
delivery time) would have on the results;  
Provide possibilities to have parameters 
adjusted or included into the list. 
 
Lack 
of 
understanding 
of 
the 
rating 
mechanism 
UI: Provide an explanation of the rating 
mechanism containing a relative comparison 
to other ratings, as well as potential 
consequences (e.g., in a dialog: “Your rating 
will decrease the number of suggested orders 
to this delivery partner by 0.2% per cent”). 
Tendency of the 
user to accept the 
MLS suggestions 
UI: Include a “surprise me” function, where a 
product is suggested to the eater that does not 
adhere to his/her top preferences; add a 
reminder function: “you have already ordered 
this meal n times this month. Would you like 
to try Y (second choice) today instead?”.  
System: Perform an assessment on how ML 
might impact user behaviour and present the 
results on the website. 
Effects on the eco-
system of the app 
are not clear for 
the user 
Business: Make the results of the conducted 
surveys and traffic analysis accessible to the 
users on the website. 
System: Carry out an impact assessment on 
the rights of users and also on those of the 
stakeholders.  
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Individual 
food 
delivery 
System: Include environmental concerns into 
the algorithm evaluation;  
Business: 
Provide 
rewards 
for 
environmentally friendly behaviour of the 
partners (using e-vehicles, e.g., or using 
environmentally friendly packaging). 
Recommendations 
presentation 
to 
optimize 
the 
business goal 
UI: Change the UI to be more intuitive for the 
user with the goal of finding favourite food 
selection. 
 
The suggestions provided in Table 1 are centred around 
mainly two aspects: providing information about every data 
element collected by the FoodApp, i.e., the facet of 
transparency, and establishing a reward system for the user 
in return to providing data to the company, i.e., a reward. 
The implementation of a reward system would implicitly 
make the data life-cycle more transparent for the user, as 
well as provide the user with more autonomy within the 
engagement with the service. It would also help the user to 
understand that the data is a resource that is traded and thus 
has a value. 
Identified issues that go beyond the business processes 
might be subject to the interpretation of the regulation or the 
business ethics. Furthermore, due to the context of the 
example, some identified ethical aspects are due to the 
example being positioned in the platform economy and 
therefore are not specific for every MLS. Nevertheless, 
bigger negative effects such as the effects on the 
environment or the society are part of the social awareness 
and responsibility that are not (and maybe should not be) 
regulated, but can be supported by socially acceptable IT 
artefacts. 
The term of socially acceptable IT has been introduced to 
describe a system that considers and integrates ethical 
requirements into its design. The added effort but also the 
value of the implementation of the suggestions of the ethical 
considerations in Table 1 could lead to socially acceptable 
IT products and thus a realization of a socio-technical IT 
systems. To ensure the remaining and homogeneous quality 
adherence, inter-company assessment mechanisms, i.e., 
ethical quality audits, could be put in place. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Here, a scenario of a fictional food ordering platform that 
uses an MLS for item recommendations was used to 
perform an ethical analysis of an MLS. This scenario was 
chosen as a realisation of a socio-technical system that 
incorporates the system designers, users and stakeholders 
affected by the system design and process implementation. 
The results showed that users of digital services need to 
be integrated into the design of a socio-technical system as 
they may have expectations that rely on the ethical 
awareness of the company and thus need to be implemented 
into the workflow. The examples of how to address these 
issues demonstrated that changes in the UI, system design 
but also in the business model can be realistically made to 
accommodate these challenges. Hence, designing socially 
acceptable socio-technical IT systems can be a chance to 
find a niche on the growing and competitive market of 
consumer-oriented digital services.  
Although the provided approach needs validation and 
verification in a rea-life environment, it can already be used 
by the designers and architects of information systems, 
business developers considering a data-based business 
model, as well as ISR scientists as it shows how ethical 
aspect can be incorporated into the context of IT design. 
Future work will aim at establishing the criteria for the 
definition of the quality requirements for the social 
acceptable IT, evaluation of the suggested measures, as well 
as developing methods for the assessment of the effort of 
their implementation. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] L. Floridi and M. Taddeo, “What is data ethics?,” Philos. Trans. A. 
Math. Phys. Eng. Sci., vol. 374, no. 2083, Dec. 2016, doi: 
10.1098/rsta.2016.0360 (online). 
[2] Comission on data ethics: "An assessment of the comission on the data 
ethics" 
(in 
German: 
Datenethikkommission, 
“Gutachten 
der 
Datenethikkommission,” 
), 
https://www.bmi.bund.de/SharedDocs/downloads/DE/publikationen/theme
n/it-digitalpolitik/gutachten-
datenethikkommission.pdf?__blob=publicationFile&v=4 (Accessed, July 
12 2021), 2018. 
[3] W. L. Robison, Ethics Within Engineering: An Introduction. 
Bloomsbury Academic, 2016, pp. 281 
[4] V. Dignum, “Responsible Artificial Intelligence: Ethical Thinking by 
and about AI,” 2019. Accessed: June. 07, 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://icps.gwu.edu/sites/g/files/zaxdzs1736/f/downloads/Virginia 
Dignum_ Responsible Artificial Intelligence (1).pdf. 
[5] Doteveryone, “People, Power and Technology: The 2020 Digital 
Attitudes Report,” 2020. Accessed: May 13, 2021. [Online]. Available: 
https://www.doteveryone.org.uk/2020/05/people-power-and-technology-
the-2020-digital-attitudes-report/. 
[6] G. Baxter and I. Sommerville, “Socio-technical systems: From design 
methods to systems engineering,” Interact. Comput., vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 4–
17, 2011, doi: 10.1016/j.intcom.2010.07.003. 
[7] European Commission, “Assessment List for Trustworthy Artificial 
Intelligence (ALTAI) for self-assessment | Shaping Europe’s digital 
future,” 
2020. 
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
market/en/news/assessment-list-trustworthy-artificial-intelligence-altai-
self-assessment (accessed June 07, 2021). 
[8] O. Levina, “A Research Commentary- Integrating Ethical Issues into 
the Data Process,” in WI2020 Community Tracks, GITO Verlag, 2020, pp. 
321–330. 
[9] R. Schutt and C. O’Neil, Doing Data Science- Straight Talk from the 
Frontline. O’Reilly Media, 2013, p.51 
[10] J. Cave, “The ethics of data and of data science: An economist’s 
perspective,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A: 
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences, vol. 374, no. 2083. Dec. 
28, 2016, doi: 10.1098/rsta.2016.0117. 
[11] A. Rao, F. Schaub, N. Sadeh, A. Acquisti, and R. Kang, Expecting the 
Unexpected: Understanding Mismatched Privacy Expectations Online. 
Proceedings of the Twelfth Symposium on Usable Privacy and Security 
(SOUPS 2016). June 22–24, 2016. 
[12] M. Hatamian, A. Kitkowska, J. Korunovska, and S. Kirrane, ““It’s 
shocking!": Analysing the impact and reactions to the A3: Android apps 
behaviour analyser,” in Lecture Notes in Computer Science (including 
subseries Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lecture Notes in 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Bioinformatics), Jul. 2018, vol. 10980 LNCS, pp. 198–215, doi: 
10.1007/978-3-319-95729-6_13. 
[13] R. Zhou, S. Khemmarat, and L. Gao, “The impact of YouTube 
recommendation system on video views,” in Proceedings of the ACM 
SIGCOMM Internet Measurement Conference, IMC, 2010, pp. 404–410, 
doi: 10.1145/1879141.1879193. 
[14] S. Vallor, “Moral Deskilling and Upskilling in a New Machine Age: 
Reflections on the Ambiguous Future of Character,” Philos. Technol., vol. 
28, no. 1, pp. 107–124, 2015, doi: 10.1007/s13347-014-0156-9. 
[15] R. Zhong and C. Zhang, “Food Delivery apps are drowning china in 
plastic,” New York Times, pp. 1–8, 2019, Accessed: June. 25, 2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/28/technology/china-food-delivery-
trash.html. 
[16] G. Friedman, “Workers without employers: Shadow corporations and 
the rise of the gig economy,” Rev. Keynes. Econ., vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 171–
188, Apr. 2014, doi: 10.4337/roke.2014.02.03. 
[17] J. Staufenberg, “Deliveroo courier strike: Employers cannot ‘simply 
opt out of the National Living Wage’, says Government,” The Independent, 
2016. 
[18] M. Dewhurst, “Deliveroo couriers are right to strike: the company’s 
claims 
of 
freedom 
are 
a 
sham,” 
The 
Guardian, 
2016. 
https://www.theguardian.com/commentisfree/2016/aug/16/deliveroo-
couriers-strike-freedom-william-shu (accessed June 11, 2021). 
[19] OECD, “Protecting Consumers In Peer Platform Markets: Exploring 
The Issues Background report for Ministerial Panel 3.1,” Nov. 2016. 
 
 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

