Adapting LEACH Algorithm for Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks  
Djamel Mansouri, Malika Ioualalen 
MOVEP Laboratory 
USTHB  
Algeria 
e-mail: {dmansouri, mioualalen}@usthb.dz  
Abstract— The design of routing protocols for both terrestrial 
and underwater wireless sensor networks (WSNs and UWSNs) 
presents several challenges. These challenges are mainly due to 
the specific characteristics (limited battery, limited processing 
power and limited storage) of this type of networks. However, 
saving energy consumption is a real challenge that should be 
considered. Clustering technique is one of the methods used to 
cut down on energy consumption in WSNs and UWSNs. It 
consists of dividing a network into subsets called clusters, 
where each cluster is formed of cluster head and nodes. Low 
Energy Algorithm Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) is 
the most popular protocol for clustering in WSNs. Using 
TDMA based MAC protocol, LEACH allows significant energy 
conservation by balancing energy consumption of network 
nodes. In this paper, we propose an approach based on 
LEACH algorithm for routing in Underwater Wireless Sensor 
Networks. The proposed approach profits of the advantages 
offered by LEACH algorithm for WSNs in terms of energy 
conservation. Simulation results show that the proposed 
approach can reduce the total energy consumption and 
prolong the network lifetime compared to the direct 
transmission.  
Keywords-Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks; Acoustic 
Communication; Clustering Algorithm; LEACH Algorithm; 
Energy Consumption. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Oceans and seas comprise over 70% of the earth’s 
surface. However, Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks 
(UWSNs) are deployed through different applications such 
as oceanographic data collection, pollution monitoring, 
undersea 
exploration, 
disaster 
prevention, 
assisted 
navigation, tactical surveillance and mine reconnaissance [1].  
UWSNs are formed of miniaturized self-alimented 
entities called sensor nodes, which are interconnected using 
wireless acoustic links. In UWSNs, communications are 
established by acoustic waves, which allow a very well 
propagation through water and require much less power 
compared to the radio signal, which delivers very poor 
performance in underwater areas since it provides 
transmission ranges of only a few meters. A challenge in 
underwater acoustic communication is limited bandwidth 
caused by high absorption factor and attenuation, long 
propagation time, and the fading of the resulting signal, 
which should attract much interest. Another challenge is the 
sensor node failure due to environmental conditions.  
One major problem related to the UWSNs is the energy 
conservation which the network lifetime depends on. Since 
UWSNs are deployed in harsh environment, it is often 
impossible to recharge or replace battery nodes after their 
exhaustion. However, the issue of energy conservation for 
these networks is to develop routing techniques which take 
into account the different problems of underwater 
communications such as: limited bandwidth, throughput, 
long propagation delay (high latency), high bit error rates 
and 
signal 
attenuation. 
Therefore, 
regarding 
the 
characteristics of underwater communications, UWSNs have 
recently 
motivated 
a 
growing 
interest 
in 
studying 
architectures and networking protocols.  
In this paper, we propose an approach based on Low 
Energy Algorithm Adaptive Clustering Hierarchy (LEACH) 
[2] for Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks. The proposed 
approach is an adaptation of LEACH algorithm which is one 
of the most well-known energy efficient clustering 
algorithms used in terrestrial Wireless Sensor Networks. We 
implement this proposition on Matlab in order to perform 
experiments according to many parameters such as the 
network lifetime.  
This paper is structured as follows: A brief introduction 
on underwater wireless sensor networks and the deal of these 
networks regarding their constraints and limits, particularly, 
in acoustic communications are given in Section I. Section II 
is dedicated to the related works that treat security issue and  
routing protocols used in UWSNs. In Section III, we present 
the proposed approach. In Section VI, we present simulation 
results. Finally, we summarize the main contribution of this 
study and we give indications on future works in Section V. 
II. RELATED WORKS 
In recent years Underwater Sensor Networks have 
attracted a significant interest of the scientific community. 
Thus, different works that address design issues related to the 
characteristics of these networks were introduced in the 
literature [3][4][5]. The energy resource limitation is an 
important issue that must be taken into consideration in order 
to maximize the network lifetime. Generally, routing 
collected data in the network affects directly the energy 
consumption. Another aspect related to the energy 
consumption and smooth functioning of UWSNs is the 
safety and security of these networks. Therefore, routing 
protocols must be designed from the beginning with the aim 
of efficient management of energy resources. Also the 
proposed security solutions must consider the energy 
conservation. In this section, we present some works which 
address the security of acoustic communications and some 
proposed routing protocols used in UWSNs.   
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

In [6], the authors introduced a novel approach to secure 
both unicast and multicast communications in underwater 
acoustic 
sensor 
networks. 
This 
approach 
provides 
confidentiality and message integrity. 
Ming et al. [7] proposed a CLUster-based Secure 
Synchronization (CLUSS) protocol. It is based on the time 
synchronization for secure clusters formation. CLUSS is 
executed in three phases: the first phase consists of the 
authentication process, where each sensor nodes is 
authenticated to the cluster head which it belongs and the 
cluster heads are authenticated to beacons. In this phase, the 
identified malicious nodes will be removed from the 
network. 
The 
inter-cluster 
synchronization 
phase 
corresponds to the synchronization between cluster heads 
and beacons. The intra-cluster synchronization phase is 
where ordinary nodes synchronize themselves with cluster 
heads. The performance evaluation demonstrates that 
CLUSS can reduce the number of transmitted packets. Thus, 
it allows saving energy consumption in the network. 
A Cluster based Key management Protocol (CKP) was 
proposed in [8]. CKP is a new key management protocol for 
clustering 
hierarchical 
networks, 
used 
to 
secure 
communication inside and outside a cluster. CKP operates in 
four phase: Key generation and distribution phase, Cluster 
setup phase, Data gathering phase, Data forwarding phase. 
Simulation results show that the CKP is energy and storage 
efficient. 
In [9], the authors proposed a k-means based clustering 
and energy aware routing algorithm, named KEAR for 
underwater wireless sensor networks that aim to maximize 
the networks lifetime. The proposed algorithm is based on 
two phases: cluster head (CH) election and data 
transmission. In the CH election phase, the election of the 
new cluster heads is done locally in each cluster based on the 
residual energy of each node. In the data transmission phase, 
sensing and data transmission from each sensor node to their 
cluster head is performed, where the cluster heads in turn 
aggregate and send the sensed data to the base station. 
Carmen et al. [10] proposed a distributed energy aware 
routing protocol called Distributed Underwater Clustering 
Scheme (DUCS), which is based on clustering techniques 
and supports energy consumption. In DUCS, firstly, the 
network is divided into clusters, where each cluster head is 
selected through a randomized rotation among different 
nodes in order to allow equitable energy dissipation between 
nodes in the network. Secondly, to reduce the amount of 
transmitted data to the base station, the cluster heads 
aggregate the collected data by the member nodes that 
belong to their own cluster, and send an aggregated packet to 
the sink. While this algorithm is efficient, it presents some 
limitations regarding the nodes mobility, which is not 
considered. However, it can affect the structure of clusters. 
Also, exchanged data between CHs can be interrupted in the 
case where ocean currents move the cluster heads [11].  
Seah et al. [12] introduced a hierarchical clustering routing 
protocol architecture called Multipath Virtual Sink (MVS). 
In MVS, CHs use many local aggregation points which are 
connected to local sinks. Using a high-speed communication 
channels, local sinks are linked to each other through 
multiple paths. 
In [13], the authors proposed a distributed Minimum-
Cost Clustering Protocol (MCCP), where clusters are 
selected by considering the total energy consumption of the 
cluster, the residual energy of the cluster head and cluster 
members and the distance between the cluster head and the 
underwater sink. Firstly, all sensor nodes are candidate to be 
cluster heads (CHs) and cluster members. In order to form a 
cluster, each candidate constructs its neighbor set and 
uncovers neighbor set. Secondly, the average cost of that 
particular cluster is calculated, and the one with the 
minimum average cost is selected as a cluster head. We note 
that the cost of a cluster represents both energy 
consumptions: to send the packet from a member to the CH 
and from CH to the base station. Finally, an ”INVITE” 
message is sent by selected CH, to all the other cluster nodes 
to become its cluster’s member, otherwise, it sends a ”JOIN” 
message to the specific cluster head. We note that MCCP 
protocol improves the energy efficiency and prolong the 
lifetime of the network. 
III. PROPOSED APPROACH 
The hierarchical routing based on clustering is a very 
efficient technique used to resolve the problem of energy 
consumption in both WSNs and UWSNs. Thus, the goal of 
clustering is to extend the lifetime of a network by providing 
a good load balancing.  In the following, we present 
proposed approach, which consists in integrating into the 
LEACH algorithm, the energy model used in submarine 
networks for data transmission. Firstly, we introduce 
LEACH algorithm, which is a hierarchical routing protocol 
most widely used in wireless sensor networks (WSN). 
Secondly, we present the energy models used for data 
transmission in both WSNs and UWSNs. Finally, we 
substitute the energy model associated to LEACH algorithm 
and used in terrestrial sensor networks, by the energy model 
dedicated to the acoustic communications and through 
numerical results obtained by simulations, we show the 
behavior of this algorithm in term of energy conservation. 
A. LEACH Functioning  
LEACH is a dynamic clustering algorithm which uses a 
randomized periodical rotation of cluster heads among the 
nodes in order to distribute equitably the energy load 
between sensor nodes in the network. Thus, all nodes have 
the same probability to be elected cluster head. However, the 
CH election is updated in each iteration. LEACH is divided 
into rounds. Each round consists of two phases: Set-up 
phase, where cluster heads are elected and clusters are 
formed; Steady-state phase, where the data are transferred to 
the sink node. 
In set-up phase, the electing process is started by 
considering a percentage “P”, which is the desired 
percentage of cluster heads for a given round. Each node “i” 
chooses a random number between 0 and 1. If the number is 
less than a threshold T(i), the node declares a cluster head for 
the current round. The CHs inform their neighbors of their 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

election and each remaining node decides to choose the 
closest CH.  
In steady-state phase, the CHs receive sensed data from 
cluster members, and transfer the aggregated data to the BS.  
Thus, using the Time Division Multiple Access protocol 
(TDMA, which, is used to ensure transmission packages 
within collision and less costly in energy) [2], each node 
send its collected data to CH at once per frame allocated to 
it. After this transmission, the nodes cut off its transmission 
and goes to sleep mode until next allocated transmission slot.
1. Detailed principle 
Let P be the average desired percentage of clusters in 
our network at an instant “t”. LEACH is composed of 
cycles made of   
ଵ
௣   rounds. 
Each round “r” is organized as follows: 
1)
Each node “i”:  
•  computes the threshold T(i) such as: 
T(i) = ቊ
௣
ଵ–௉∗ቀ௥௠௢ௗభ
ುቁ
0
• chooses a pseudo-random number 0 ≤  xi ≤  1. 
• If xi ≤ T(i) then “i” designates itself as a CH for 
the current round. T(i) is computed in such as 
every node becomes CH once in every cycle of 
ଵ
௣
rounds we have T(i) = 1, when  r =  
ଵ
௣  - 1. 
2)
The self-designed CH informs the other nodes by 
broadcasting an advertisement message with the 
same transmitting power (using carrier sense 
multiple access, CSMA MAC). 
3)
Based on the received signal strength of the 
advertisement message, the rest of nodes choose its 
CH for the current round. Thus, they send a 
message back to inform the considered CH (using 
the same protocol as in the last step, CSMA MAC). 
4)
CHs set up a “transmission schedule” based on 
Time Division Multiple Access) to the nodes that 
joined their clusters. They inform each node at what 
time they transmit its data. 
5)
CHs keep listening for the results. Normal sensors 
get measures from their environment and send their 
data. When it is not their turn to send, they stay in 
sleep mode to save energy (Collisions between the 
transmissions of the nodes from different clusters 
are limited thanks to the use of code division 
multiple access (CDMA) protocol). 
6)
CHs aggregate, and possibly compress the received 
data and send it to the base station in a single 
transmission. This transmission may be direct, or 
multi-hopped, if it is relayed by other CHs. 
7)
Steps 5 and 6 are repeated until the last round. 
LEACH can be extended such as LEACH-C introduced 
in [14]. Thus, in LEACH-C, the location information and the 
residual energy value of the nodes are considered as 
additional parameters for the computation of the T(i).  
Since each node decides whether to designate itself as a 
CH or not, without considering the behavior of surrounding 
nodes. Therefore, for a given round, a number of CHs can be 
very different from the selected percentage “P”. Also, all the 
elected CHs may be located in the same region of the 
network, leaving “uncovered” areas. For this reason, In that 
case, one can only hope that the spatial repartition will be 
better during the next round.  
B. Energy model 
A sensor consumes energy to perform three actions: 
acquisition, communication and data processing. The energy 
consumed to perform data acquisition and processing 
operations is not very significant compared to the energy 
used for communications. However, communications 
consume much more energy than other tasks. They cover 
communications in transmission and reception. 
The radio model of energy consumption in terrestrial 
sensor networks associated to LEACH algorithm and 
proposed by Heinzelman et al. in [2] is defined as follows: 
The energy to emit ETx (k, d) and receive ERx (k) data are 
given by: 
•
 To emit k-bit through a distance ”d”, the transmitter 
consumes: 

ETx(k, d) = ETxelec(k) + ETxamp(k, d) 

ETx(k, d) = (Eelec * k) + (Eamp * k * d2) 
•
To receive k-bit message, the receiver consumes: 

ERx(k) = ERxelec(k) 

ERx(k) = k * Eelec 
Eelec and Eamp represent respectively the energy of electronic 
transmission and amplification.  
Usually, acoustic communications are used in UWSNs.  
We use the same energy model as introduced in [15], which 
was proposed for underwater acoustic networks. According 
to this model, to achieve a power level P0 at a receiver at a 
distance “d”, the transmitter power   Etx(d) is : 
Etx(d) = P0 d2 (10α(f)/10 )d                     (1) 
where ∞(݂), is the absorption coefficient depending on 
the frequency range under given water temperature and 
salinity. ∞(݂) is measured in dB/m and is used for 
frequencies above a few hundred KHz can be expressed 
empirically using Thorp’s formula introduced in [16]. 
ߙ(݂)=0.11∗
ଵ଴షయ∗௙మ
ଵା௙మ + 44 ∗
ଵ଴షమ∗௙మ
ସଵ଴଴ା௙మ + 2.75ݔ10ିଶ ∗ ݂ଶ +
3 ∗ 10ି଺                           (2) 
if i has not been CH yet  
if i has already been CH 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

where “f“ is the carrier frequency for transmission in 
KHz. The reception power is assumed to 1/3th of the 
transmission power. 
After having presented the functioning of LEACH and its 
conventional energy model used in WSNs, we adapt the use 
of LEACH in UWSNs by associating the energy model (see 
the formula 1) dedicated to acoustic communications and the 
technical analysis of the proposed approach is presented in 
the next section.  
IV EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
In order to evaluate proposed approach and show the 
interest of using LEACH algorithm in underwater sensor 
networks, we have done simulation by considering an 
underwater sensor network based on a static 2D architecture 
type, where the underwater sensor nodes are deployed and 
anchored to the bottom of the ocean. Underwater sensors 
may be organized in a cluster-based architecture, and be 
interconnected to one or more head sensors (underwater 
gateways) by means of wireless acoustic communication. 
 The head sensors are network devices that transmit data 
from the bottom of the ocean network to a surface station 
[17] (see Fig. 1). Firstly, we implemented LEACH algorithm 
with the energy model (presented in formula 1) used to 
transmit data in UWSNs. Simulations are done using Matlab, 
by considering parameters given in Table 1 and the 
following assumptions: 
•
Sensor nodes and the underwater sink are 
stationary. 
•
All sensors nodes are homogeneous and have the 
same initial energy. 
•
The underwater sink has no limitation in terms of 
energy, processing and memory. 
•
The sensors performed periodical measurements at 
fixed intervals. 
Secondly, by considering the lifetime and residual 
energy, we compare the proposed approach (data is 
transmitted to the underwater sink via elected cluster head 
sensors) to the direct communication approach (each 
underwater sensor transmits directly its data to the 
underwater sink). 
TABLE I. 
SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter  
Value 
Field Dimension x, y, maximum 
(Network size) 
50m, 50m 
Number of Nodes 
100 
Optimal Election Probability of Cluster 
Heads (percentage of desired clusters) 
5 
Power level P0 at a receiver 
0,1 * 10-7
Initial Energy 
5J 
Frequency of carrier acoustic signal  
25KHZ 
Rounds (Time) 
200  
Figure 1. Network Model  
Fig. 2 shows the residual energy in the network. We note 
that using direct communication, the residual energy in the 
network decreases quickly and reaches 0 values at rounds 
175. Compared to LEACH algorithm, the residual energy 
decreases progressively and it equal to 150 J at rounds 200. 
However, due to the clustering approach applied on the 
network, LEACH algorithm retains more energy comparing 
to the direct communication.  
Regarding the histogram in Fig. 3, we note that after 50 
rounds, using direct communication algorithm, the first 21 
nodes are dead, while, compared to the LEACH algorithm, 
there is no dead node. After 100 rounds, in direct 
communication algorithm, we observed that 61 nodes are 
dead, while in LEACH algorithm the number of dead nodes 
is 37. Also, after 150 rounds, we note that the number of 
dead nodes is very important in direct communication 
compared to LEACH algorithm. At the end of the 
simulation, all nodes are dead in direct communication, 
while 21 nodes remain alive in LEACH algorithm. 
Therefore, in this set of simulations, we note that LEACH is 
about 21% more efficient in terms of network lifetime 
compared to the direct communication. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Figure 2. Residual energy vs. Number of rounds 
.
Figure 3. Percentage of dead nodes 
V. CONCLUSION 
In both underwater and terrestrial sensor networks, each 
node is powered by a limited energy source. However, 
energy conservation is an important issue that must be taken 
into consideration in order to build mechanisms that allow 
users to extend the lifetime of the entire networks. LEACH 
algorithm is one of the most well-known energy efficient 
clustering algorithms for WSNs. In order to profit of 
advantages provided by LEACH algorithm in WSNs, we 
propose in this paper an adaptation of LEACH algorithm for 
underwater acoustic sensor networks. Our proposition 
considers the residual energy in the cluster head selection 
and uses an energy consumption model dedicated to acoustic 
communications. The experimental results show that 
compared to the direct communication proposed approach 
can effectively reduce the energy consumption and extend 
the networks lifetime. As a future works, we will compare 
proposed approach to other clustering protocol used in 
underwater sensor networks and improve it by considering, 
other parameters such as data rate, throughput, and 
propagation delay. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
M. Mohsin, S. Adil. A,  M. M. Asif,  F. Emad and Q. Saad “A Survey 
on Current Underwater Acoustic Sensor Network Applications”, 
International Journal of Computer Theory and Engineering, volume 7, 
number 1, pages 51--56, 2015, IACSIT Press. 
[2]
W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H. Balakrishnan, "Energy-
Efficient Communication Protocol for Wireless Microsensor 
Networks", Proceedings of the IEEE Hawaii international conference 
on system sciences, pages. 10-xx, 2000.  
[3]
I. F. Akyildiz, D. Pompili and T. Melodia,“Underwater acoustic 
sensor networks: research challenges”, Ad hoc networks journal, 
volume 3, number 3 , pages 257--279, 2005. 
[4]
J. Heidemann, M. Stojanovic, and M. Zorzi, “Underwater sensor 
networks: applications, advances and challenges”, Phil. Trans. R. Soc. 
A journal, volume 370, number 958, pages 158–175, 2012.  
[5]
C. Peach and A. Yarali, “An Overview of Underwater Sensor 
Networks”, CWMC 2013 The Ninth International Conference on 
Wireless and Mobile Communications, pages. 31--36, 2013. 
[6]
G. Dini and A. Lo Duca, “A secure communication suite for 
underwater acoustic sensor networks”, Sensors, volume 12, number 
11, pages 15133--15158, 2012. 
[7]
X. Ming, L. Guangzhong, Z. Daqi and W. Huafeng, “A Cluster-Based 
Secure Synchronization Protocol for Underwater Wireless Sensor 
Networks”, International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, vol. 
2014, pages  1--13, Apr 2014. 
[8]
S. Verma, et al. “A Cluster based Key Management Scheme for 
Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks”, International Journal of 
Computer Network and Information Security, volume 7, number 9, 
pages 54, 2015. 
[9]
S. Souiki, M. Hadjila and M. Feham “Power Aware Cluster Based 
Routing Algorithm for Underwater Wireless Sensor Network”, 9th 
Conference on Electrical Engineering EMP, Algiers, pages 67--72, 
2015.  
[10] D. M. Carmen and P. Ruia, “Distributed Clustering Scheme For 
Underwater Wireless Sensor Networks”, IEEE 18th International 
Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 
pages 1--5, 2007.  
[11] K. Rakesh et. al, “A survey on data aggregation and clustering 
schemes in underwater sensor networks”, International Journal of 
Grid and Distributed Computing, volume 7, number 6, pages 29--52, 
2014.  
[12] W. K. G. Seah and T. Hwee-Xian, “Multipath virtual sink architecture 
for underwater sensor networks”, IEEE OCEANS 2006-Asia Pacific, 
pages 1--6, 2007. 
[13] P. Wang, C. Li, and J. Zheng, “Distributed minimum-cost clustering 
protocol for underwater sensor networks (UWSNs)”, IEEE 
International Conference on Communications, pages 3510--3515, 
2007. 
[14] W. R. Heinzelman, A. Chandrakasan, and H, Balakrishnan “An 
application-specific protocol architecture for wireless sensor 
networks”, IEEE Transaction on Wireless Communications, volume 1 
number 4, pages 660--670, 2002.  
[15] E. Sozer, M. Stojanovic, and J. Proakis, “Underwater acoustic 
networks”, IEEE journal of oceanic engineering, volume 25, number 
1, pages 72--83, 2000. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
0
50
100
150
200
Residual Energy
Number of Rounds
LEACH
DIRECT
COMMUNICATION
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
50
100
150
200
Pourcentage of Dead Nodes
Number of Rounds
LEACH
DIRECT COMMUNICATION
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[16] H. W. Thorp, “Analytic description of the low-frequency attenuation 
coefficient”, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, 
volume 42, number 1, pages 270--270, year 1967, Acoustical Society 
of America. 
[17] D. Pompili, T. Melodia and L. F. Akyildiz, “Deployment analysis in 
underwater acoustic wireless sensor networks”, Proceedings of the 1st 
ACM international workshop on Underwater networks, pages 48--55, 
2006.Type Style and Fonts. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

