An Overview of the Student-to-Student Chinese Language Learning Lab  
 
Lilia Cai-Hurteau 
Educational Theory and Practice 
University at Albany, SUNY 
Albany, NY, USA, 12222 
liliacai@hotmail.com 
Peter Shea 
Educational Theory and Practice 
University at Albany, SUNY 
Albany, NY, USA, 12222 
Pshea@albany.edu
 
 
Abstract— This paper represents a report of mid-term results 
of a United States Department of Education funded 
International Research and Studies Program project: The 
Student to Student Chinese Language Lab.  This paper gives a 
summary of the Lab, a brief assessment of related theory and 
research, measures of learning, as well as a critical evaluation 
of other existing resources. We conclude that the lab provides 
critical additional benefits beyond similar, existing resources. 
Keywords - Language; Chinese; Online Technology; Language 
Lab. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Our Lab is a novel Mandarin Chinese language and 
cultural resource for primary and secondary schools that 
offers curricular structure, dynamic multimedia content, 
opportunities for teacher and student input, and mechanisms 
for interaction. The Lab also offers the distinctive 
motivational factor of learning from age-matched peers who 
speak the target language as a first language.  This student-
to-student feature creates a powerful learning nexus that 
creates a personal and meaningful context critical for second 
language acquisition.  The Lab  also provides an ‘indirect 
communication’ approach that allows teachers to bypass 
typical difficulties associated with ‘direct communication,’ 
such as time differences, cultural differences regarding value 
and expectations, inappropriate student input and a tendency 
to stray from the curriculum. At the same time, the Lab is 
associated with opportunities for direct teacher-monitored 
student interaction.  Furthermore, the project pioneers a new 
learning model that utilizes modern communications 
technology 
to 
promote 
mutual 
understanding 
and 
cooperation, and can potentially be replicated at different 
levels and with different languages.  
This paper is organized as follows; first we review the 
intended audience of the lab, then we discuss the overarching 
goals of the project, related research, metrics of learning and 
a critical comparison of similar efforts to support Chinese 
language learning with online resources. 
II. 
INTENDED AUDIENCE 
The Student to Student Chinese Language Lab is 
designed for and made available to all Internet-connected 
schools offering Mandarin Chinese Language classes.  
Extensive review of curriculum in k-12 US schools provided 
alignment between common content and materials available 
through the Lab. Some Lab sections may be used by teachers 
teaching about contemporary life in China. Colleges, 
universities, adult and community learning institutions, after-
school programs and summer education programs teaching 
Beginner and Intermediate Mandarin Chinese or Chinese 
culture may also find the Lab useful.  The Lab will also be 
available for teacher training, research purposes and as a 
resource for informal learning across many contexts. The 
project is managed by the Research Foundation of the State 
University of New York at Albany, and hosted by OneWorld 
Classrooms, a non-profit organization that promotes 
curriculum-based international exchanges.  
III. 
GOAL OF THE PROJECT 
The primary goal is to develop a total of 60 curriculum-
based Lab modules, each centering on a cultural theme and 
grammatical element; containing a primary vocabulary list; 
audio and video featuring students from China speaking in 
Mandarin Chinese and sharing different aspects of their lives 
and cultures as well as video of students writing the Chinese 
characters on the vocabulary list.  
Each module also includes vocabulary flashcards 
featuring student artwork. Some modules include a related 
PowerPoint featuring photos of students and video of 
students introducing themselves in Chinese and English. 
Another main objective is to develop an attractive, dynamic 
and intuitive Flash-based multimedia interface to present Lab 
modules to Mandarin Chinese students. 
A corresponding goal of the project is to develop an 
electronic format through which all teachers who use the Lab 
may complete Lab evaluations, submit feedback, suggest 
future modules that match their curricula, and interact with 
other teachers. 
IV. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
The Student to Student Chinese Language Lab (Lab) 
model addresses needs highlighted in contemporary foreign 
language acquisition research in a number of ways.  The Lab 
promotes cultural and linguistic competence, simulates 
socially mediated activity, utilizes multiple modalities, offers 
multiple ability tasks, and represents a platform for authentic 
language use.  Each of these affordances is discussed in more 
detail below. 
The Lab helps students to develop cultural and linguistic 
competence. Cultural competence, the ability to interact 
effectively with people of different cultures [1], and 
linguistic competence, the ability to speak and understand 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

language in the context of its culture [2], are indisputably 
integral to foreign language learning. By presenting skits 
focusing on specific cultural themes, Chinese students 
introduce cultural knowledge into Lab modules. Students 
using this content in the US will discover cultural similarities 
and differences, which, in turn, will stimulate higher order 
thinking and positive attitudinal responses that benefit 
language acquisition.  
The Lab also simulates socially mediated activity. 
According to sociocultural constructivism [3], learning is a 
socially mediated activity and peer interaction is central to 
knowledge 
construction. 
Through 
active 
interaction 
“language 
learning 
activity 
mirrors 
genuine 
human 
communication, the chief locus for understanding the world 
and self” [4]. 
In addition, the Lab lowers the learner’s affective filter 
and utilizes multiple modalities. The Lab simulates a total 
immersion environment, introducing students in China who 
model natural conversation as “comprehensible input” [5]. 
The Lab’s intrinsic interest, challenge and reward improve 
learners’ motivational level and lower the anxiety of learning 
a foreign language, thus lowering students’ “affective filter” 
[5].  The engagement of multiple modalities (image, audio, 
video, etc.) is also a highly positive contributing factor for 
the language learning process [6]. 
The Lab is also an example of Computer-Assisted 
Language Learning (CALL) that offers multiple ability tasks. 
[7], in addressing socio-collaborative language learning,  
terms “multiple ability tasks” as tasks that drive conceptual 
work and are intrinsically interesting and rewarding; allow 
different students to make different contributions; use 
multimedia; involve sight sound and touch; and are 
challenging. 
Finally, the Lab is a platform for authentic language.  
Computer-mediated communication leads us to rethink the 
authentic, the authorial, and ultimately, the communicative 
itself [8]. “Proper” textbook language was artificially 
modeled to ensure “correct” if obviously staged input, with 
the result that language learning materials provided highly 
contrived pattern practice, yielding unnatural and boring 
dialogues [9]. The Lab features K-12 students in China 
speaking in naturalistic contexts, offering linguistic input that 
is up-to-date and true-to-life. 
 
V. 
METRICS OF LEARNING 
With regard to metrics of outcomes of learning, our plan 
is to continue to develop related assessment and skill testing 
tools, including: a game and quiz generator that incorporates 
module content, and an interactive Lab component through 
which students may record their own voices, save original 
audio files, and compare their spoken Mandarin with that of 
their native-speaking peers. Other objectives include a Lab 
search function that allows teachers and students to locate 
Lab content that matches their criteria by language 
proficiency level, cultural theme, grammatical element and 
vocabulary.  We are also seeking to disseminate information 
about availability of the Lab broadly through various related 
newsletters, listservs, publications, associations, conferences 
and networks, and, upon completion of the Lab in Year 3, 
marketing materials that will be mailed to schools. Finally 
we plan to assess the impact of the Lab on K-12 student 
learning of Chinese language and culture and to disseminate 
results of this initiative to the language teaching and learning 
community.   
VI. 
CRITICAL COMPARISON 
A table comparing well known existing resources, e.g. 
SCOLA, Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and 
Assessment (MIMEA), University Online Multimedia 
Chinese Courses (UNIV), General Internet Chinese 
Resources (INT), common Web 2.0 resources (W2R) and the 
Lab (LAB) by the features is provided below. In the table, 1 
indicates YES, ½ indicates IN SOME CASES and 0 
indicates NO. As the table indicates, the Lab is the only 
resource that offers all 15 features; the next closest (UNIV) 
offers an aggregate of seven. 
 
TABLE I. COMPARISON OF THE LANGUAGE LAB AND SIMILAR 
RESOURCES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A. Account of Related Materials 
The following existing resources, offering hypermedia 
units for foreign language instruction and assessment, are in 
some ways similar to the Student to Student Chinese 
Language Lab.  
SCOLA [10] receives and retransmits television 
programs from around the world in various languages and 
offers them to schools on a subscription basis. Its Insta-
Lessons are hypermedia modules that include a video and an 
audio clip of a news broadcast segment. Students watch or 
listen to clips while viewing a transcript, translation, quiz or 
vocabulary window. 
Multimedia Interactive Modules for Education and 
Assessment (MIMEA) [11] offers a series of language 
modules in Arabic, Chinese, Korean, Russian, German and 
Vietnamese. The modules center on video clips that show 
native speakers and non-native speakers interacting in 
natural, unscripted situations. Each module also features 
cultural notes, a quiz and ideas for classroom activities.   
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

University Online Multimedia Chinese Courses (UNIV), 
such as the California State University’s Conversational 
Mandarin 
Chinese 
Online 
[12], 
Western 
Kentucky 
University’s Audio Tutorials of Basic Chinese  [13], the 
University of Oxford’s Chinese Multimedia Course [14], 
Connecticut College’s Chinese Video Exercises [15], the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Open Courseware 
Learning Chinese [16], and others like them, offer free 
online theme-based Beginner or Intermediate Level Chinese 
courses with series of audio and/or video clips and practice 
activities and grammar explanations. 
General Internet Chinese Resources (INT), such as Zap 
Chinese [17] Language Guide BBC Real Chinese, and others 
like them, offer lessons in Chinese grammar, vocabulary and 
the writing system; units on Chinese characters with videos 
showing how the characters are written, grammar and 
vocabulary units organized by theme (Zap), audio clips and 
video (BBC only). ‘Web 2.0’ Resources (W2R), such as 
podcasts - like ChinesePod blogs and Popup Chinese, and 
social networking Websites – like Live Mocha, Mango 
Languages, and Ning, offer podcast audio and in some cases, 
opportunities to communicate and interact via the Internet 
with people who speak Chinese as a first language. 
B. Critical Commentary 
SCOLA’s Insta-Lessons and MIMEA’s interactive 
modules are similar to the Student to Student Chinese 
Language Lab in that they feature video and/or audio, 
transcripts and assessment. They differ in that they do not 
feature students who are native speakers or encourage peer-
to-peer interaction and connection. SCOLA’s videos feature 
professional newscasters and MIMEA’s dialogues cater to 
college students and adults. Online University courses, while 
free of charge and very valuable for university Beginning 
and Intermediate Level Chinese students, are not designed 
for use in K-12 classrooms and do not feature K-12 students 
from China in the audio and video sections. The other 
Internet resources are typically word and sentence-based 
‘audio-lingual’ foreign language teaching resources. With 
the exception of BBC Real Chinese (which only offers only 
ten short units), the units do not have dialogues; instead, 
theme-based sentences are written in Chinese characters 
and/or pinyin and translated into English. Audio is typically 
the only interactive feature. Some of these also have outside 
advertising or require payment for advanced lessons. While 
podcasts, blogs and social networking Web sites offer 
independent learning opportunities, a high level of student 
input and opportunities to communicate via the Internet with 
people who speak Chinese as a first language, they are 
typically not designed for K-12 classroom use and therefore 
do not follow national standards or K-12 Chinese curricula. 
Likewise, they do not encourage focused and structured 
learning and do not permit teachers to monitor student 
communication for appropriateness. While they are a 
valuable resource for language classes, the do not typically 
follow scaffolded activities and sequential learning patterns. 
In some cases, advanced or complete resources are only 
available for a fee. 
The Language Lab can be accessed (for free!) at [19] and 
[20]. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper was sponsored in part by the US Department 
of Education International Research and Studies Program. 
Additional support was provided by the Office of the 
Provost, State University of New York.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Diller and J. Moule Cultural Competence: A Primer for Educators. 
Florence, KY: Wadsworth, 2005.  
[2] D. Hymes Language in Culture and Society. New York, NY: Harper 
& Row, 1964. 
[3] L.D. Vygotsky,  Mind and Society: The Development of Higher 
Mental Processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1978. 
[4] C. Meskill, C.Computer as tools for sociocollaborative language 
learning. In CALL: Media, Design and Applications K. Cameron 
(Ed.) (pp. 141-162). The Netherlands: Taylor & Francis, 1999, pp. 
141-162. 
[5] S.D. Krashen, The Input Hypothesis: Issues and Implications. United 
Kingdom: Longman Group. 
[6] C. Meskill, “Listening Skills Development Through Multimedia,”. 
Journal of Educational Multimedia and Hypermedia. vol. 5,pp.  179-
20. 
[7] E. Cohen,  Designing Groupwork: Strategies for the Heterogeneous 
Classroom. New York: Teacher's College Press, 1994 
[8] C. Kramsch, F. A’Ness andW.S.E. Lam,“Authenticity and Authorship 
in the Computer-Mediated Acquisition of L2 Literacy,”. Language 
Learning and Technology, vol. 4,  pp. 78-104. 
[9] H. Lotherington,Authentic language in digital environments. In 
CALL research perspectives J. L. Egbert & G. M. Petrie Eds.. New 
York: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2005, pp. 109-127. 
[10] SCOLA (http://www.scola.org) [retrieved: April, 2012] 
[11] MIMEA (http://mimea.clear.msu.edu/) [retrieved: April, 2012] 
[12] California State University’s Conversational Mandarin Chinese 
Online 
(http://www.csulb.edu/~txie/ccol/content.htm) 
[retrieved: 
April, 2012] 
[13] Western Kentucky University’s Audio Tutorials of Basic Chinese  
(http://www.wku.edu/~yuanh/AudioChinese/) [retrieved: April, 2012] 
[14] University 
of 
Oxford’s 
Chinese 
Multimedia 
Course 
(http://www.ctcfl.ox.ac.uk/Chinese/lessons.htm) 
[retrieved: 
April, 
2012] 
[15] Connecticut 
College’s 
Chinese 
Video 
Exercises 
(http://www.conncoll.edu/academics/departments/chinese/mhu/videos
2/index/index.html) [retrieved: April, 2012] 
[16] Massachusetts Institute of Technology’s Open Courseware Learning 
Chinese 
(http://ocw.mit.edu/OcwWeb/Foreign-Languages-and-
Literatures/21F-101Spring-2006/CourseHome/index.htm) [retrieved: 
April, 2012] 
[17] ZAP Chinese (http://www.zapchinese.com/) [retrieved: April, 2012] 
[18] http://www.oneworldclassrooms.org/Lab/chinese/app/webroot/index.
php/lessons/welcome [retrieved: April, 2012] 
[19] http://bit.ly/x0JY9q [retrieved: April, 2012] 
 
 
 
 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Language Lab Interface 
 
                 Figure 2.  Module View of the Lab  
 
 
 
 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

