Implementation of Cloud Computing in Albania and Related Security Concerns 
 
Ergest Alite 
Faculty of Information Technology  
Polytechnic University of Tirana 
Tirana, Albania 
e-mail: ergest.alite@albtelecom.al 
Olimpjon Shurdi 
Faculty of Information Technology  
Polytechnic University of Tirana 
Tirana, Albania 
e-mail: oshurdi@fti.edu.al 
 
 
Abstract—Cloud Computing Technology is one of the 
Information and Communications Technologies (ICTs) which 
was given the most attention to during this recent decade. 
Since the trend of Cloud Computing Technology is already 
well-oriented in the World, we will see how this trend is 
affecting Albania and how this technology has been adopted in 
the local market. To identify this, we have conducted a 
research method based on two theories: the diffusion of 
innovation (DOI) model, and the technology organization 
environment (TOE) framework. This paper will present three 
Cloud Technologies’ cases implemented in Albania by public 
and private companies, as well the technical challenges and 
economic opportunities these implementations caused to the 
respective organizations. In the end, we will briefly present the 
results of the research, impacted factors, and the approach 
that should be followed by each player in order to have such 
technology more present in the Albanian market.  
Keywords- Cloud Computing; Security Concern; Regulation 
Normatives; Technological Challenges; Diffusion of Innovations 
(DOI); Technology Organization Environment (TOE). 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
     Cloud 
Computing 
technology 
is 
revolutionizing 
Information Technology (IT) services nowadays. Almost all 
major IT hardware and software companies are focusing on 
delivering these services. Following Amazon's $ 2 billion 
investment in IBM infrastructure-based services in March 
2006 [15], all other global companies have followed this 
strategy by offering various services, such as Infrastructure 
as a Service (IaaS), Platform as a Service (PaaS), Storage as 
a Service (StaaS) or Software as a Service (SaaS) [17]. As 
per such development, we can mention the services 
provided by Microsoft with Azure, or Google with G Suite 
and Oracle with Oracle Cloud [16]. All application 
development companies are trying, through customer 
requests, to switch all their services from their offices to the 
cloud platforms of their respective companies. Microsoft is 
performing this through pushing its customers to get Cloud 
Services during respective Enterprise Agreement renewal 
[19]. SAP has already announced that it will provide support 
for on-premise platforms up to 2025, and after this time it 
will interupt support services for customers who still have 
on-primise platforms. Consequently, all customers running 
SAP applications will have to migrate their on-premise 
services to the cloud by 2025 [18].  
The focus of this paper is primarily to identify the 
adoption, and Implementation of Cloud Computing in 
Albania. In section 2, it is provided a general overview of 
Cloud Computing trend in the world, and in Albania. 
Section 3 is depicting a general overview of Cloud 
Computing implementations which happened in Albania in 
both public and private sectors. Section 4 explains the 
research method, based on the DOI model, and on the TOE 
theory framework. In section 4, the survey results, and the 
main reasons of low adaptability, and implementations in 
Albania have been provided. In the end, conclusions and 
future works have been depicted accordingly. 
II. CLOUD COMPUTING TRENDS AND APPROACHES 
    Considering the above mentioned important and fast 
technological and commercial developments, all existing IT 
services will be shifted towards a centralized hardware and 
application development for all clients. Although the strategy 
from global companies and technology leaders is clear, most 
clients and local companies are not yet aware, and do not 
own a strategy on how to approach accordingly. Most 
national companies are attempting to primarily pursue the 
first two approaches; the 1st approach, being based on 
establishing a partnership with global companies, and 
become resellers of their services; and the 2nd approach, 
being based on making own investments and operating 
independently for similar services. Both ways have their pros 
and cons. Basically, becoming a reseller of a global company 
has its benefits because you do not have to invest in 
infrastructure, maintenance, human resources, or in the field 
of products and marketing, for the reason that all these items 
are granted from the provider. On the other hand, a 
disadvantage of this approach is the fact that the client is 
always the provider’s client. In order to illustrate this case 
we can mention one example from 3G Ireland. This 
company became Microsoft Cloud Service Provider (CSP) 
and started selling Office 365 products. After a period of 1 
year, it was identified that the revenue trend generated by 
this service was quite as low as not even covering the 
investment performed for marketing campaigns, or other 
product operations expenditures. In this regard, it was much 
evident that such service was not profitable enough for the 
company. As a result, the company's board of directors made 
the decision of terminating the service, and no longer 
marketing it. However, the existing 10,000 customers were 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

not affected by this decision at all, as they were secured 
uniterrupted service, with the only understandable difference 
that the service provider was no longer 3G Ireland, but 
Microsoft. Another major disadvantage of this method are 
the small profit margins, which make such service in small 
markets to result as non-profitable, just like 3G Ireland did. 
In the second approach, companies decided to invest 
themselves for providing such services, which substantially 
has its own benefits raleted to the fact that: service is local, 
customers remain with the company, and there exists higher 
trust from customers, and faster access to services. The 
disadvantages of this method though are related to the fact 
that investment costs are very high, leading to the need of 
more resources, and higher operational costs (maintenance, 
and support staff). Furthermore, when it comes to small 
market countries, this kind of approach is explicitly not 
profitable because products will have expensive prices 
compared to global providers due to high TCO. 
However, despite the overall above picture, many 
telecommunication companies such as Deutche Telekom, 
Telefonica, 
Telecom 
Italia, 
etc., 
have 
extensively 
implemented their cloud services platforms in many 
countries around the world. Moreover, upon UK’s exit from 
the EU, such companies have accomplished to make USA-
based companies like Microsoft, Google and Amazon host 
their Cloud infrastructure on their premises for services they 
provide in the European Union market. Most of Google, 
Microsoft or Amazon platforms are now hosted at 
Telefonica’ Data Centers or Deutche Telekom’ Data Centers 
all across Europe. 
A. World trends 
Cloud Computing is winning a huge significance 
nowadays 
by 
influencing 
almost 
all 
technological 
developments in the field of information technology. All 
countries are experiencing quite a significant and explosive 
situation where international companies established in the 
USA, such as Amazon, Google, Microsoft, etc., strongly 
operate in the markets around the world with their Cloud 
Computing services. Worth mentioning is the fact that after 
the substantial investment realized by Amazon back in 
March 2006, the current $100 billion Cloud Computing 
market is controlled by Amazon at 33% and they are 
generating $33 Billions of revenue a year from Cloud 
Computing services. Additionaly, this market is followed by 
Microsoft Azure with 18% and Google Cloud with 8%. We 
can clearly distinguish the created advantage from such 
companies in global market share. In the top-8 list there are 
as well two Chinese companies such as Alibaba Cloud and 
Tencent Cloud, where both own 7% of the widespread 
market. The Chinese case is clearly related to the potential of 
the domestic market which is reflecting in such positioning 
on respective global market shares [1].  
B. Situation in Albania 
    It is worth noticing that in Albania Cloud Computing 
technology is not yet finding widespread support and 
application among users and providers of information and 
telecommunication services. This situation is characterized 
by several factors that directly influence the development of 
such technology:  
 
Firstly, the Albanian market is considered small and 
therefore demand is extremely trivial.  
 
Secondly, required investments (CAPEX) for Cloud 
Computing technology are relatively substantial and 
do not justify the low market demand.  
 
Thirdly, there is no legal regulatory framework in 
place to protect and stimulate the development of 
such technology within the Albanian territory. 
Despite the above mentioned, in Albania some 
improvement is needed to be done when it comes to Internet 
Services. At first, the Albanian Government has to call for 
the development of broadband internet access from all 
licensed operators throughout the country. This is a key 
component for the provisioning of Cloud Computing 
services. Although the number of Fixed Telephony lines has 
almost doubled from 2015 to the 4th quarter of 2019, this is 
still not enough, as many houses, and rural areas have no 
internet access at all [2].  
Significant progress has been carried out by Mobile 
Telephony operators with the implementation of 4G 
Services, but even such development lacks full coverage of 
the entire territory. Such services were only deployed in high 
density residential areas, mainly in the big cities. Regarding 
5G Technology, licenses have already been acquired by all 
operators, but its implementation has not started yet. There is 
no information regarding any implementation start-up, nor 
any timeline on when all the country’s territory will be 
covered by the 5G technology. Furthermore, noteworthy is 
the fact that the absence of broadband fixed-line telephony 
services in rural and remote areas has made it impossible to 
offer private Wi-Fi services. To support our claim we can 
mention the fact that in one of the most important tourist 
attraction located in the northern part of country, the 
Albanian Alps, called Tamara, the mobile telephony signal 
coverage, and the 3G were enabled as late as the end of year 
2016 [3]. Although the fiber optic infrastructure is being 
established altogether, for this area, fixed broadband 
telephony services are not yet present. To sum up, without 
spread developmet of Internet Access and Broadband 
Services we cannot pretend to have high demand, and need 
for Cloud services in Albania.   
Although the indicators of providing Cloud Computing 
services are not at their optimum in the current domestic 
market, there is an expectation of market reaction and 
interest for the upcoming years. This will come as a result of 
the Albanian businesses' own demand for such services 
(example Hotels, Agricultures Companies, etc.). This spirit 
will be further intensified by the current brain drain situation 
(the migration of IT specialists to European Union 
countries), and this lack in Human Resources will drive 
businesses to choose such services as a feasible, and 
effective option. However, globalization and pricing policies 
set by big players are negatively affecting developing 
countries, like Albania and are not favorizing respective 
demand coming from these countries. Price differentiation 
for these countries is imperative in order to boost service 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

request as well as to extend usage of Cloud Computing 
technology throughout the country.   
In a time when in the region, and around the world it is 
largely articulated that Cloud Computing is the technology 
of the future, at a summit organized in Zurich, Switzerland 
by HP company in October 23rd, 2012, it was claimed that 
the income generated from Cloud Computing for Swisscom 
(the largest IT company in Switzerland) was 5-6% of the 
total revenue, and the forecast for the following three years 
was that this figure would go up to 7-9%. So, this figure is 
viewed as very small, and the investment return for this 
technology is very low in comparison with other 
technologies such as NGN New Generation Networks 
(Voice-Internet-TV), with a rough estimation of 20% [14]. 
III. CLOUD COMPUTING IMPLEMENTATIONS IN ALBANIA 
Currently some ongoing investments are being made in 
Albania.  These investments are related to both public and 
private sectors. In the following sections we will depict 
general information for every case and some high level 
information respectively: 
A. Public Sector – Services provided by National Agency 
for Information Society 
In 2008, the Albanian Government started the 
implementation of Cloud Computing technologies for its 
purposes. This implementation was designed, and followed 
by the National Agency for Information Society (NAIS) [4]. 
The project implementation was carried out in partnership 
with the Infosoft Systems Company; the hardware systems 
devices used were those produced by HP Company, and the 
softwares used the applications platforms of Microsoft 
Company [6]. The Cloud Computing model implemented in 
this project was that of Private Cloud. The main objectives of 
this project consolidated the government IT resources into a 
single agency, reduced costs and improved the IT services of 
state agencies and ministries.  
Although initially it was thought of a little structure and 
minimal use, it has already turned into a big and very 
important platform, which holds more than 100 different 
applications, such as public websites, intranets, government 
existing applications, etc. [7]. This implementation was 
enabled in order to centralize, and standardize the 
infrastructure used before in all state institutions of the 
country. In this regard, all ministries and state agencies 
receive better, and more qualitative service, and moreover it 
makes them only focused on services to citizens, not to the 
infrastructure, and its maintenance.   
B. Private Sector – Services provided by ALBtelecom 
Regarding the private sector, it is worth mentioning the 
most significant implementations to have attempted to join 
the global trend, and provide Cloud services locally in 
Albania. In April 2013, for the first time in the Albanian 
market, the implementation of a real public cloud 
infrastructure was launched. This implementation was 
carried out by ALBtelecom, and it was aimed for the entire 
range of businesses in Albania; starting from SOHOs, and 
ending with large businesses. This infrastructure was 
providing guarantee, quality, and faster delivery time of the 
given service through two data centers, one in Tirana, and 
the other in Elbasan, (as stated by Mr. Vahap Yeroglu, CIO 
of ALBtelecom) [12]. According to the publications [9], 
[13], this platform offered hosting of all kinds of 
applications, to all customers, ranging from websites to 
specific applications, such as those for the sales 
management, human resources management, Customer 
Relations Management (CRM) and finance management. 
Through this infrastructure ALBtelecom is able to offer 
private cloud services as well, customize the types of 
services for specific customers. It is reported that 
infrastructure can hold up to 30,000 clients [10]. The 
offering of this technology makes ALBtelecom the first 
private company in Albania to give this service recipients the 
opportunity to keep the data service within the Albanian 
territory. 
C. Private Sector – Services provided by Vodafone Albania 
On April 19th, 2013, Vodafone launched its new service, 
called Vodafone Cloud, in the Albanian market. This 
service enabled all prepaid and postpaid subscribers saving 
their personal data such as photos, videos, contacts and 
various files containing important information for these 
customers. This type of service could be accessed from 
different devices, such as computers, or smartphones, with 
various 
operating 
systems 
installed. 
The 
initiative 
undertaken by Vodafone became an ongoing strategy of 
Vodafone Group, offering the cloud Services to all its 
subscribers in all subsidiaries of the company. It is worth 
mentioning the fact that although Vodafone Albania has 
implemented some initiatives to provide the Cloud 
technology, they have been group-borrowed efforts from 
other countries rather than direct investments made in 
Albania. In this context, at group level, Vodafone has signed 
a contract with Microsoft for the provision of cloud 
services. As a result, Vodafone becomes Cloud Services 
Provider of Microsoft. Moreover, recently Vodafone has as 
well signed an agreement with Amazon to be Amazon Web 
Services Provider, at group level [8].  
IV. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 
The most well-known theories about technology adoption 
at company level are the DOI model, and the TOE 
framework [20]. Although there are studies where some 
authors have conducted respective research in one of such 
methods, or both of them, we will consider the second 
option to be more effective, and accurate [21], [27]. 
A. Diffusion of innovation (DOI) 
DOI is a theory that examines how, and in which way 
new technologies, especially IT ones are adopted, and 
accepted among different communities and cultures [22]. 
This theory suggests that it is principally based on features 
of the technology, and on the perception of users regarding 
the system. Roger analyses the spreading of innovation, and 
has suggested some characteristics which influence the 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Innovation 
Characteristics
P1. Relative Advantage
P2. Complexity
P3. Compatibility
P4. Security Concerns
Cloud Computing
Adoption
Organizational Context
P6. Top Management 
Support
P7. Company Size
 
Environmental Context
P8. Competitive Pressure
P9. Regulatory Support
 
 
adoption of innovation, such as: relative advantage, 
complexity, and compatibility [24]. 
Relative advantage is the degree to which an innovation 
can bring benefits to an organization. Compatibility refers to 
the degree to which an innovation is consistent with existing 
business 
processes, 
practices, 
and 
value 
systems. 
Complexity considers the degree to which an innovation is 
difficult to use [25]. 
B. Technology, organization, and environment (TOE) 
framework 
The process by which a company or organization adopts 
and implements technological innovations is influenced by 
the technological context, the organizational context, and 
the environmental context [23]. 
The technology context refers to characteristics of the 
technologies which are available for possible adoption by 
the organization, and the current state of technology in the 
organization. The organizational context consists of the 
organizational structure, the presence of innovation – 
enabling processes such as informal communication, and 
strategic behavior of top management, as well the size, and 
slack resources of the organization. The environmental 
context mixes nearby market elements, such as competitive 
pressure and regulatory support [26].  
V. RESEARCH METHOD 
We will base our research method by combining the DOI 
model, and the TOE framework, once they complement 
each other, which seems to be a better solution to this 
analysis, since it combines different contexts, as previously 
mentioned [29]. 
Figure 1.  The research method. 
The research method Fig. 1 includes the context of 
innovation defined in the DOI theory, and the two contexts 
presented on the TOE framework. The technology context 
was not included in our study due to the fact that such 
domain is quite complete, and easily deployable.  
A.  Inovations Characteristics  
Considering the adoption, and implementation of Cloud 
Computing, we believe there are 4 variables in the context 
of the characteristics of innovation: relative advantage, 
complexity, compatibility, and security concerns [30]. 
 
Relative advantage 
Rogers [22] has defined relative advantage as the 
degree to which an innovation is perceived as being 
better than the idea it supersedes. In our analysis we will 
propose: P1. Relative advantage will positively influence 
Cloud Computing implementation.  
 
Complexity 
Rogers has defined complexity as the degree to 
which an innovation is perceived to be relatively difficult 
to understand and use. In the same spirit, we will 
propose: P2. Complexity will negatively influence Cloud 
Computing implementation. 
 
Compatibility 
Rogers has defined compatibility as the degree to 
which innovation fits with the potential adopter’s existing 
values, previous practices, and current needs. In this 
regard, we will propose: P3. The high compatibility will 
positively influence Cloud Computing implementation. 
 
Security concern 
With shared computing resources, security is a 
critical issue in Cloud Computing. Moving to cloud, a 
new security layer will convince companies or not. In 
this regard we will propose: P4. Security concerns will 
positively influence Cloud Computing implementation. 
[28] 
B. Organizational Context 
The organizational context is defined in terms of 
resources available to support the adoption of the innovation 
[31]. 
 
Top Management support  
Top management plays an important role because 
Cloud 
Computing 
implementation 
may 
involve 
integration of resources, and reengineering of processes. 
In this regard, we will propose: P5. Top management 
support will positively influence Cloud Computing 
adoption. 
 
Company size 
A 
determinant 
factor 
in 
Cloud 
Computing 
implementation is company size. It is understandable that 
big companies have more advantages than smaller ones, 
considering the big number of resources, from human 
and technological aspects. In this regard, we will 
propose: P6. Firm size will positively influence Cloud 
Computing adoption. 
C. Organizational Context 
Environmental 
context 
includes 
the 
company’s 
competitors, and the regulatory environment.  
 
Competitive pressure  
Competitive pressure has long been recognized in 
the innovation diffusion literature as an important driver 
on the technology diffusion. It refers to the level of 
pressure felt by the firm from competitors within the 
industry [20], [32]. With the implementation of Cloud 
Computing, companies greatly benefit from a better 
understanding of market visibility, greater operation 
efficiency, and more accurate data collection. In this 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

regard, we will propose: P7. Competitive pressure will 
positively influence Cloud Computing implementation. 
 
Regulatory support 
This refers to the support given by the authority in 
order to encourage the increase of Information Systems 
(IS) innovations in companies. Governments could 
facilitate the adoption of Cloud Computing by creating 
rules to protect businesses in the use of this system. In 
this regard, we will propose: P8. Regulatory support will 
positively influence Cloud Computing implementation 
[30].  
VI. SURVEY RESULTS, SECURITY AND PRIVACY 
CONCERNS AND MISSING REGULATORY SUPPORT 
In order to verify this research method, a survey was 
taken, among 250 IT community members all around 
Albania. 55% of the people were from the private sector, 
30% from public sector, and the rest, i.e. 15% freelancers, 
and employees of non-profit organizations.  
The main result from this survey was the fact that Cloud 
computing is not usually adopted, and implemented in 
Albania. One of the main reasons according to outcomes was 
the fact that there exists a big concern regarding security, and 
privacy.  It consist of the fact that users think their data may 
be used for unknown purposes, without them being aware, 
without prior consent, or approval. Due to this concern, it is 
worth noting that the security and privacy of users’ data on 
cloud platforms is regulated differently in different countries. 
Currently, in Europe the law on the protection of personal 
data, called General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) 
applies to all US companies operating in Europe. By this 
law, all these companies are obliged to store, process and 
transmit the data of European users within the bonderies of 
the European Union. Consequently, all companies have been 
forced to build and operate their own computing 
infrastructures in the European Union countries for the 
services provided to European citizens.  
In Europe, the general structure related to data protection 
and freedom of movement was established by Regulation 
(EU) 2016/679, (General Data Protection Regulation) [6]. 
National displacements realized by each Member State, 
assume considering national law as a guiding criterion. The 
European Commission, and the European Institutions have 
taken decisions, and carried out informative campaigns 
through explanatory, and orientation documents. The content 
of these documents (as in the case of the European Network 
and Information Security Agency (ENISA), [15] which 
speaks for the basic nature of the legal structure) have been 
adapted by all global companies operating in Europe. 
In Albania, the law does not predict exactly what 
obligations (processing, transfer, and security) should be 
applied to the data located in the cloud. Currently there is 
only the law on personal data protection [9] which does not 
contain, nor treat the above mentioned features for Cloud 
Computing. Albanian legislation on personal data protection 
does not make it mandatory to process, store, and transmit 
data of Albanian users within the territory of Albania, but is 
more in line with the European laws on personal data 
protection, allowing Albanian users to use the services of 
international providers operating under the terms of the 
European Union. In this way, the economic activity of the 
Albanian operators as well as the revenues that the state 
institutions can benefit from providing, and receiving these 
services within the territory of the country are directly 
affected. In this regard, Albanian legislation has a huge 
missing regulatory framework which doesn’t help adoption, 
and implementation of Cloud Computing inside the 
country’s territory.  
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
Although Cloud computing can be seen as the new 
phenomenon which is set to revolutionize the way we use the 
Internet, there is much to be cautious about. There are many 
new technologies emerging at a rapid rate, each of which 
embracing technological innovations, with the potential of 
making humans lives easier. However one must be very 
careful to understand the limitations, and the security risks 
posed in utilizing these technologies. Cloud computing is no 
exception. 
Almost 
all 
large 
information 
technology 
companies such as Microsoft, Google, Amazon, Oracle, 
IBM, etc. provide opportunities of cooperation with local 
companies in order to use local cloud platforms of these 
companies for meeting legal obligations in the respective 
countries. With their support, local companies realize 
spending cuts, taking subsidies for infrastructure, and 
increasing the base number of customers consequently 
generating more revenue. 
We have shown here that Albania has already hit the road 
towards 
the 
Cloud 
Computing 
era. 
Although 
implementations are few in number, they are very important 
from the technological and economic viewpoints. 
In the Albanian legislation, currently there exists an open 
space for legal obligations to be met by companies for 
storing, processing, and securing of data that are residing in 
cloud computing platforms.  
The lack of national laws for personal data protection has 
made the provision, and development of cloud computing 
services even less demanding, and with a shift towards 
Europe’s service, mainly in Germany. The government’s 
approach damages both corporations, and consumers. It 
creates an unfavorable climate for the provision of cloud 
computing services in the country by not providing legal 
obligations, and national security. Being in such conditions, 
Albanian customers prefer to get Cloud Computing services 
outside of Albania, for the sole reason that foreign 
companies are not interested in the Albanian data. But on the 
other hand, they do forget something crucial: data are the 
future gold, and should be taken care of as such. 
This study was intended to explain the process of 
technology adoption, and to identify factors that affect the 
adoption of Cloud Computing in Albania. The model was 
designed based on the DOI and the TOE theory framework. 
The theoretical research carried out resulted in a set of 
contexts that may influence the adoption of Cloud 
Computing: characteristic innovations, organizational, and 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

environmental context. The study is a contribution in 
defining the model of research, and development in the 
dimensions that constitute it, as well it is a resource for all 
companies, and researchers that may use the conclusions of 
this study to expand their knowledge in this field, eventually 
developing other externalities for such emerging technology 
in Albania. 
REFERENCES 
[1] F. Richter “Amazon Leads $100 Billion Cloud Market”, 
Statista, 
Feb 
11, 
2020. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.statista.com/chart/18819/worldwide-market-
share-of-leading-cloud-infrastructure-service-providers/, 
[retrieved: 04, 2020]. 
[2] Electronic and Postal Communications Authority (AKEP) 
“Statistical Indicators of Electronic Communications Market”, 
Q4, 2019, Published on 11.02.2020. [Online]. Available from: 
https://akep.al/wp-content/uploads/2019/01/Raport-
T4_2019.pdf, [retrieved: 05, 2020].  
[3] M. Cakmak, ALBtelecom, and Eagle Mobile CTO “Work on 
fiber optic coverage, telephone signal and 3G services in the 
Kelmend area begins” ALBtelecom Mag, pp. 2-4, Jul 2016. 
[4] E. Alite and J. Imami, ISTI 2014 “Technical Challenges and 
Economic 
Opportunities 
of 
Cloud 
Computing 
Implementations in Albania”, Tirana, pp. 2-5, Jun 2014. 
[5] E. Hasa “Albania consolidates government IT with HP and 
Microsoft cloud solution” HP Case Study – Government of 
Albania, pp. 1-3, January 2013.  
[6] E. Hasa “Albania Standardizes Government IT with Cloud 
Services, Lifts Productivity 70 Percent” Microsoft Case Study 
– Government of Albania, pp. 2-5, February 2012. 
[7] Albtelecom Press Release “Interview with Deputy General 
Director of Albtelecom and Eagle Mobile, Mr. Vahap 
Yeroglu”, Tirana, Albania, pp. 1-2,  January 20, 2014. 
[8] A. Mucobega “ALBtelecom Unique Services E-Cloud”, 
Tirana, Albania, pp. 1-2, April 8, 2013. 
[9] Eagle Magazine “Albtelecom’s Cloud Computing”, Tirana, 
Albania, pp. 1-4,  April, 2013. 
[10] Telecompaper.com “Albtelecom brings cloud computing 
services to Albania”, Tirana, Albania, April 10, 2013. 
[11] Official Document, Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the 
European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on 
the protection of natural persons with regard to the processing 
of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and 
repealing Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection 
Regulation). 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-
content/EN/ALL/?uri=celex%3A32016R0679, [retrieved: 05, 
2020].   
[12] E. Alite and O. Shurdi, ISTI 2015 “Implementation of Cloud 
Computing platforms in Albania. Data Security and financial 
impact for storing them within national boundaries”, Tirana, 
pp. 2-5, June, 2015. 
[13] Act, No. 9887, date 10.03.2008, changed with Act No. 
48/2012 “For protection of personal data”, [Online]. 
Available 
from:    
http://www.inovacioni.gov.al/files/pages_files/ligji_nr_9887_
date_10_03_2008_i_ndryshuar_me_nr__48__2012__per_mbr
ojtjen___.pdf, [retrieved: 05, 2020].   
[14] J. Joseph, "PSTN services migration to IMS are SPs finally 
reaching the tipping point for large scale migrations?," 2010 
14th International Telecommunications Network Strategy and 
Planning Symposium (NETWORKS), Warsaw, 2010, pp. 3-6, 
doi: 10.1109/NETWKS.2010.5624927. 
[15] M. Siegel, F. Gibbons “Amazon enters the Cloud Computing 
business” - Standford University School of Engineering, pp. 
8-9, May 2008. 
[16] E. Jones “Cloud Market Share – a Look at the Cloud 
Ecosystem 
in 
2020” 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://kinsta.com/blog/cloud-market-share/, [retrieved: 05, 
2020].   
[17] N. Drake and B. Turner “Best cloud computing services of 
2020: for Digital Transformation” [Online]. Available from: 
https://www.techradar.com/best/best-cloud-computing-
services, [retrieved: 05, 2020].   
[18] D. Howlett “SAP announces critical changes in maintenance 
policy post 2025 - is it enough?” [Online]. Available from: 
https://diginomica.com/sap-announces-critical-changes-
maintenance-policy-post-2025-it-enough, 
[retrieved: 
05, 
2020].   
[19] Metrix Data 360 “Negotiating a Microsoft Enterprise 
Agreement: What to Expect” [Online]. Available from: 
https://metrixdata360.com/negotiate-microsoft-enterprise-
agreement/, [retrieved: 05, 2020].   
[20] T. Oliveira and M. F. Martins “Literature Review of 
Information Technology Adoption Models at Firm Level”. 
The Electronic Journal Information Systems Evaluation, 14, 
pp.110-121, 2011. 
[21] T.R. Leinbach “Global E-Commerce: Impacts of National 
Environment and Policy” edited by Kenneth L. Kraemer, 
Jason Dedrick, Nigel P. Melville, and Kevin Zhu. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. The Information Society, 24, pp. 
123-125, 2008. 
[22] E.M. Rogers “Diffusion of Innovations, 5th Edition”, Free 
Press, 2003. 
[23] L. G. Tornatzky and M. Fleischer “The Processes of 
Technological Innovation”, Massachusetts, Lexington Books, 
1990. 
[24] K. Zhu, S. Dong, S.X. Xu and K.L. Kraemer “Innovation 
diffusion in global contexts: determinants of post-adoption 
digital transformation of European companies”, European 
Journal of Information Systems, 15, pp. 601-616, 2006. 
[25] S.K. 
Lippert 
and 
C. 
Govindarajulu 
“Technological, 
Organizational, and Environmental Antecedents to Web 
Services Adoption” Communications of the IIMA, 6, pp. 146-
158. 2006. 
[26] K. Zhu, S. Xu, and K.L. Kraemer “Internet Technology 
Diffusion at the Firm Level: Empirical Evidence from Asia-
Pacific Region, Europe, and North America” In: International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Systems: 
International 
Symposium on Asia-Pacific, Washington DC, 2004. 
[27] H.F. Lin and S.M. Lin “Determinants of e-business diffusion: 
A test of the technology diffusion perspective” Technovation, 
28, pp.135-145, 2008. 
[28] R. Schneiderman “For Cloud Computing, the Sky Is the 
Limit”, Signal Processing Magazine, IEEE, 28, pp. 15-18, 
2011. 
[29] M. Espadanal and T. Oliveira “Cloud Computing Adoption by 
firms”, MCIS 2012 Proceedings. 30, pp. 3, 2012. 
[30] M. Espadanal and T. Oliveira “Cloud Computing Adoption by 
firms”, MCIS 2012 Proceedings. 30, pp. 4-6, 2012. 
[31] C. Low, Y. Chen and M. Wu ‘Understanding the determinants 
of cloud computing adoption” Industrial Management & Data 
Systems, 11, pp. 1006-1023, 2011. 
S. C. Misra and A. Mondal “Identification of a company’s 
suitability for the adoption of cloud computing and modelling 
its corresponding Return on Investment” Mathematical and 
Computer Modelling, 53, pp. 504-521, 2011. 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

