Data Fusion Integrated Mobile Platform for Intelligent Travel Information 
Management 
 
Marius Minea 
 
University “Politehnica” of Bucharest 
Transports Faculty, T.E.T. Dept. 
Bucharest, Romania 
Marius.Minea@upb.ro 
 
Martin  Böhm 
 
Austria Tech – Gesellschaft des 
Bundes für technologiepolitische 
Maßnahmen GmbH 
ITS Deployment  
Vienna, Austria 
Martin.Boehm@austriatech.org 
Sorin Dumitrescu 
 
Electronic Solutions Ltd. 
ITS and Communications consultants 
Bucharest, Romania 
Sorin.Dumitrescu@elsol.ro
 
Abstract — This paper presents the concept and initial results 
of an European research project called In Time, regarding the 
integration via unified interfacing and the intelligent 
management of Multimodal Real time Travel and Traffic 
Information 
(MRTTI). 
The 
cooperation 
of 
different 
technologies, telematics applications and data fusion is used to 
produce more efficient travel management, with the final goal 
to reduce the energy consumption and emissions in urban 
areas, across the different modes of transports, by changing 
the mobility behaviour (modal shift) of the single traveller. 
Keywords – mobile real-time traffic and travel information; 
services; reliability; operability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Efficient transport and travel are two components without 
which a modern society cannot be conceived. Recently, the 
increased growth of traffic demand in major urban areas lead 
to increased usage of intelligent transport systems and 
technologies, especially those related to traffic management 
and information systems [2] (pp. 1-2). Different applications 
were developed lately for modern mobile devices, running 
on different operating systems (e.g., Windows Mobile, 
Windows Phone, Android, Symbian, Apple iOS etc.). These 
help people in finding their location, points of interest, routes 
or nearby facilities. But these applications only relate to the 
producer’s software, quality of maps and/or static 
information. The idea of the In Time project [1] (Description 
of Work, pp. 9-38) was to develop a standardised interface, 
as a start point in conceiving a unified platform for the 
management of global mobile, real-time travel and traffic 
information for urban areas. The common interface will help 
a traveller across Europe to easier find his way and needed 
travel information, based on real-time information, no matter 
what the traffic information service provider would be. The 
usage of real-time information adds a lot of value to the 
efficiency of the information system, due to its possibility to 
re-configure routes, helping the user to avoid congested 
areas. One of the benefices is that it also helps users to 
change their modal transport behaviour, improving the usage 
of the public transport versus private cars. These actions 
finally produce less emissions and energy consumption in 
traffic, helping in obtaining greener cities. The In Time 
solution, with the commonly agreed standardized interface is 
now under testing in six European pilot sites to ensure the 
easy access of real-time multimodal traffic data for external 
Traffic Information Service Providers (TISPs) and to check 
several impacts: users’ impact, traffic impact or the 
environmental one. This model already ensures the easy 
access to all urban traffic-related data within a larger region, 
resulting in the distribution to the end-users via several 
consistent information channels and in parallel enhancing the 
user acceptance.   
The paper presents the concept and architecture of the 
system, the benefits, initial results of the first tests and 
possible future development of the applications. 
II. 
THE NOVELTY OF THE IN TIME CONCEPT 
The mobility is one of the attributes of a modern person. 
This is why the project In Time is focused on increasing the 
mobility of people in urban areas. In Time (acronym for 
Intelligent and Efficient Travel Management) is an EU 
funded project that aims at drastic reductions of energy 
consumption in urban areas, employing dynamic information 
for improving route guiding, transport and traffic information 
(using information related to multiple modes of transport). 
Until present, no such wide-scale system and service for 
collecting, integrating, converting and delivering real-time 
traffic information has been implemented. This system is 
required to ensure interfacing with different information 
systems, collection, processing and effective transport of 
data to final, either mobile or fixed users. Due to the fact 
that, at the present moment, there are no standardised 
interfaces to traffic and travel information systems or local 
relevant authorities (such as Traffic Control Centres, Road 
Police, parking management, weather information providers, 
port, airport or railway operators etc.), the In Time platform 
had to face a consistent challenge of how to unify the 
formats and contents of relevant information from these 
various sources. Requirements related to mobile real time 
travel and traffic information services [1] (WP3.2.1, pp. 10-
38) have been identified on the basis of previous research 
projects (such as eMOTION, i-Travel, LINK, KITE etc.) and 
89
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

were grouped in several categories, that helped the design of 
the system architecture, presented further in Figure 1.  
Legal
Policy
System 
architecture
Data
Format & 
Contents
Service 
features
User needs
Service interaction and design
Organisational 
aspects
Users
Regulations
Standards
Security
 
Figure 1 Factors that influenced the In Time system architecture design 
 
Based on large market studies performed [1] (WP2.2, pp. 
45-49 and WP.3.4.1., pp. 11-33) in the first stage of In Time 
project, on the interviewing with the relevant stakeholders 
and users, a set of services has been identified. A selective 
list, containing the most relevant of them, is the following: 
 
Table 1 List of main services developed in the In Time project  
Crt. 
No. 
Services 
Service name 
Service type 
1 
Static road traffic information 
Static, core 
2 
Dynamic 
road 
traffic 
information 
Dynamic, core 
3 
Static parking information 
Static, core 
4 
Static 
public 
transport 
information 
Static, core 
5 
Walking information  
Static, core 
6 
Dynamic road traffic routing 
information 
Dynamic, core 
7 
Dynamic 
public 
transport  
information 
Dynamic, core 
8 
Dynamic 
public 
transport 
journey routing 
Dynamic, core 
9 
Dynamic parking information 
Dynamic, core 
11 
Dynamic cycling planning 
Dynamic, core 
14 
Dynamic 
traffic 
event 
information 
Dynamic, add-on 
15 
Dynamic weather information 
Add-on 
17 
Comparative pre-trip dynamic 
multimodal journey planning 
Core, main mobile 
application 
 
 
Taking into consideration the above services mentioned, 
a set of quality indicators related to the service itself and the 
connected meta-data have also been analysed. On its initial 
launch, the data management platform of the In Time 
services is able to process various information and data from 
various sources. Therefore, the quality of some meta-data 
categories is particularly important (as presented in the 
following Table 2):  
Table 2 Meta-data categories of the unified data platform and service 
quality indicators 
 
Crt. 
No. 
Meta-data categories 
1 
Availability of information in 
time 
Always/seasonal/on 
request 
2 
Geo-referencing availability 
Y / N 
3 
Regional-related 
information 
availability 
Y / N 
4 
Content/service type 
Static / dynamic 
5 
Max. update rate for dynamic 
content 
Time interval 
6 
Content / service availability 
Public / restricted 
Crt. 
No. 
Service quality indicators 
1 
Dynamic 
data 
update 
time 
accuracy 
[s] 
2 
Geo-referenced data quality 
[lat/lon] 
3 
Data completeness 
- 
4 
Matching with existing interface 
standard 
- 
5 
Failure 
/ 
error 
handling 
capability and reporting 
- 
 
As described above, the In Time data-fusion platform 
needs information from heterogeneous sources, with 
different timelines, formats, standards or interfacing 
requirements. Therefore, the design of the system’s 
architecture had to take into account all these requirements. 
It is a difficult task to adapt into a single system so many 
components and to make it usable in an efficient manner. 
Therefore, it is expected that the services provided by this 
unified platform will achieve: 
 Business-to-business services, enabling European-wide 
TISPs1 to get access to regional traffic and travel data 
and services in pilot cities via a harmonised 
standardised open interface; this will also enable the 
TISPs to provide interoperable and multimodal real-
time traffic and travel services (e-services) to their end-
users; e-services will influence the on-trip travel 
behaviour by optimising journeys, taking into account 
the energy consumption; typical users foreseen: all 
persons employing mobile navigation devices; 
 Web-based interoperable and intermodal pre-trip 
information will be provided by the pilot operators and 
will have the potential to influence the travel behaviour 
in the trip planning stage by taking into account the 
environmental aspects. Typical users foreseen: persons 
planning an urban trip for short term. 
The initial research and design phase has now presently 
come to end and the integrated platform architecture has 
been successfully developed in six European pilot cities: 
Vienna, Munich, Florence, Bucharest, Brno and Oslo. The 
current phase is designed to perform wide testing of the 
system and its impact, both on social and environmental 
aspects.   
                                                         
1 Traffic Information Service Providers 
90
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

III. 
IN TIME PLATFORM ARCHITECTURE 
A. Building the In Time platform architecture 
 
Due to its complex tasks, the In Time integrated data 
management platform has to rely on a concept such as the 
multimodal Regional Data/Service Server (RDSS), which 
has to act as a service-oriented middleware infrastructure, 
providing a specific set of services and data management 
operations 
designated 
to 
cover: 
individual 
traffic 
information, public transport information, location based 
services, intermodal transport planning and/or weather 
information. The core of this concept is the design of a 
commonly agreed standardised interface that must satisfy all 
the requirements of standards and data formats, permitting 
the management of various types of information from 
various providers. Using such a unified interface, the users 
are expected to gain access to real-time multimodal data 
from external traffic information providers. The principles of 
interoperability are shown in the figure below (Figure 2): 
Commonly agreed interface
TISP 1
Data format 1
TISP 2
Data format 2
TISP 3
Data format 3
TISP n
Data format n
Internet
RDSS 1
RDSS 2
RDSS 3
RDSS m
Wireless access 
points
GPS
Travel/traffic static/dynamic info
Location services
Mobile users
(On trip)
Fixed user (pre-trip info)
In Time portal
 
Figure 2 Principle of interoperability  
 
The designed structure of the Commonly Agreed 
Interface (CAI) and the related reference standards and 
protocols took into account specific requirements of 
integration and harmonisation: 
 Harmonisation of standards used by each TISP for each 
single domain of the integrated data management platform; 
 Harmonisation across domains. 
The first element means that each of the domains of In 
Time platform (traffic, public transport, parking etc.) in 
existing pilot systems usually make use of proprietary 
standardised interfaces. In the most common cases the 
situation is different from pilot to pilot and therefore the need 
for harmonisation. The second item means that, in order to 
achieve the goal of providing data and services really 
suitable for the implementation of the applications by TISPs 
(which integrates those data and services coming from 
different domains and different RDSSs) it is necessary to 
take into account the dependencies between the different 
domains.  
 
Figure 3 The “bi-dimensional” harmonisation of technical standards 
 
Using a Model Driven Architecture (MDA) approach the 
specifications of the system have been designed based on the 
following operations:  
 Modelling of data and services based on existing 
domain standards; 
 The existing domain standards are selected and 
harmonised for the design of a conceptual model; 
 A Geography Markup Language (GML) Application 
Schema and Web Service Definition Language 
(WSDL) 
were 
generated 
for obtaining 
exact 
specifications. 
The CAI includes a single information space, based on a 
conceptual data model obtained by harmonising several 
international and European standards along ISO 19100 
Geographic Information Standards. It includes domains such 
as: individual traffic (based on DATEX II2), public transport 
(Transmodel 3 , IFOPT 4 , SIRI 5 , TPEG 6 ), location based 
services, weather reporting, inter-modal transport planning.  
 
B. Ensuring the Path for Information Provision and Use 
 
The internal services of the application must ensure the 
correct 
information 
flowing 
between 
the 
different 
architecture entities and terminals. Amongst these, the Data 
Services and the Mapping Services are the most often used 
resources, due to the intensive employment of location based 
and routing information in the application. These services 
expose In Time standard interfaces for the provision of data 
(WFS7) and the maps (WMS8).  
                                                         
2 DATEX II – a standard for the exchange of traffic related data. 
3 Transmodel – a reference data model for the public transport. 
4  IFOPT (Identification of Fixed Objects in Public Transport) 
defines a model and identification principles for the main fixed 
objects related to public access to public transport. 
5 SIRI (Standard Interface for Real Time Information) – an XML 
protocol which allows distributed computers to exchange real-time 
information about public transport vehicles and services. 
6  TPEG (Transport Protocol Experts Group) – a standard for 
delivering traffic information via digital formats such as DAB, 
DMB, DVB or over the Internet. 
7 WFS – Web Feature Service – a standard interface for providing 
requests for geographical features over the Internet 
 
8 WMS – Web Map Service – a standard protocol for serving 
georeferenced map images generated by a map server over the 
Internet 
91
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

Figure 4 below shows this process. 
 
Figure 4 Integrated platform components for information provision and use 
 
IV. 
LOCAL PILOT CITY IMPLEMENTATION AND INITIAL 
TESTS 
 
Bucharest (Romania) is one of the pilot cities to 
demonstrate the In Time integrated platform functionalities. 
Here, the road traffic signalling and the public transport are 
managed by a common system [5] (pp.3-4), the Bucharest 
Traffic Management System (BTMS). This infrastructure 
incorporates local equipment and outstations (traffic 
detectors, traffic controllers, WiFi hotspots, CCTV, fibre 
optic communication network etc.) and central computers in 
the traffic control centre. The In Time system interfaces with 
BTMS and collects dynamic information from this 
traffic/travel information provider. As expected, the BTMS 
employs proprietary and in general different standards from 
the systems in other cities (Tables 3 and 4). The service 
provider (TISP) can request an In Time service already 
available at the RDSS or in case this In Time service is not 
available at the RDSS, it can request the required content 
from the RDSS, to allow him to create this In Time service 
himself. The quality of the services offered is one of the most 
important factors that define the utility of the system. This 
feature may be considered from a dual point of view: the 
quality of the information offered by local systems and the 
quality of service offered by the In Time system. Only the 
second one is important for this analysis. Of course, in the 
quality of the In Time service also has to be considered the 
delay in delivering real-time information from the local 
systems. The local tests performed in Bucharest showed the 
critical influence of traffic congestion in estimating the 
correct time of arrival at destination (ETA), especially for the 
“car” and “public transport” modes. Thus, the quality of the 
dynamic information delivered to the In Time system proved 
crucial. For example, Table 5 shows differences in ETAs and 
time lags recorded for some tests performed in Bucharest. 
 
Table 3 Availability and interfacing with services in Bucharest, compared 
with other pilot cities 
Service 
Bucharest 
Brno 
Florence 
Vienna 
Routing 
Proprietary 
(+WDSL9) 
TMC10 
Proprietary 
Proprietary 
Location 
Proprietary 
TMC 
WFS 
WFS 
Messaging 
Proprietary 
(+WDSL) 
TMC 
WFS 
Proprietary 
(XTIS11) 
Mapping 
WMS 
Proprie-
tary 
WMS 
WMS 
 
Table 4 Contents and standards available in BTMS compared to other pilot 
cities 
Content 
Bucharest 
Brno 
Florence 
Vienna 
Traffic 
Data 
DATEX 
Alert-
C12 
DATEX 
TICXML 13 , 
DATEX 
Public 
transport 
Proprietary 
Proprie-
tary 
Proprietar
y 
Proprietary 
Map data 
Images  
through  
OGC WMS 14  
Proprie-
tary 
Images 
through 
OGC 
WMS 
Images 
through OGC 
WMS 
 
As it can be observed from the above Tables 3 and 4, 
different formats and standards had to be feed in a single 
database, via a commonly standardised interface. The 
Bucharest system’s architecture is presented in a simplified 
manner in the Figure 5. The main sub-systems of the BTMS 
are PTM (Public Transport Management) [3] (pp. 2-5) and 
UTC (Urban Traffic Control). These sub-systems form an 
integrated component for obtaining dynamic traffic/travel 
information. The BTMS is connected to the RDSS via a 
VPN tunnel, in order to protect the information and the 
traffic management system. Traffic messages and other 
information is converted into the needed format by the CAI 
and then delivered to the users via RDSSs.  
These tests of the In Time system include: 
 
 Checking the existence and correct operation of all 
available services in the pilot city (functional testing); 
 Checking the quality of the services provided 
(validation testing); 
 Checking the impact of the services: 
o 
Social impact over the users; 
o 
Traffic impact; 
o 
Environmental impact. 
                                                         
9 WDSL – Web Service Definition Language – a specification for 
describing network services as a set of endpoints operating on 
messages, containing either document-oriented or procedure-
oriented information 
10 TMC – Traffic Message Center 
11 XTIS – Extended Tool Integrated Services 
12 Alert-C – European standard for language independent exchange 
of traffic information via a RDS-TMC channel 
13  TIC-XML – common XML schema containing already 
translated and coded data from a traffic information centre (TIC) 
14 OGC (WMS) – Open GIS (Geographical Information System) 
for the web 
92
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

 
Specific applications
Bucharest/Turin  
RDSS
COMMONLY AGREED STANDARDISED INTERFACE
BTMS
PTM 
subsystem
UTC 
subsystem
VPN – data transfer interface
 
Figure 5 The Bucharest pilot In Time physical architecture  
 
After the successful testing of the existence and correct 
operation of the In Time system functionalities, one of the 
most difficult problems is to determine the quality 
parameters. This is particularly difficult as the test operator 
has to determine if the poor response time, for example, is 
due to the In Time system or to the data service provider. 
Generally speaking, the existing quality concepts are close to 
the quality model of ISO 19113. This concept is 
unfortunately not exactly usable in this case, because the 
scope of that procedure is to use a quality model within the 
whole information chain and not only for a dataset from data 
producers. The quality characteristics availability, up-to-
datedness, 
completeness 
and 
correctness 
define 
the 
connection between the geographic data and the final mobile 
user. The computation of availability can be effected by 
failure rate in the physical support. It indicates that the 
degree of probability of a failure of a dataset within an 
assumed period and can be measured by the function: 
 
 
(1) 
where the quotient is the number nzv
  of missing entities at the 
moment t and the number N of entities in the system.  
The concretion of the “up-to-dateness” can be effected 
by comparing the rate of update with the rate of change: 
comparison of how the dataset is changing and how the 
content in accordance with the universe of discourse is 
changing. This quality parameter can describe whether the 
geo-information is actually valid or not. 
The omission rate is a quality parameter for completeness 
and can be described by the following equation: 
 
 
(2) 
where N is the number of entities in the modelled reality and 
nIC the number of correspondent missing entities in the 
database. In a similar way can be defined the other quality 
parameters of the model. Beside the quality parameters of the 
model itself, when testing such a complex system it is 
important to also determine, from the users’ point of view, 
the responsiveness of the information chain. Because the In 
Time system and services have been started very recently, 
only preliminary tests have been carried on in Bucharest. In 
the table below there are shown some of the time lags 
determined on different mobile devices (time measured 
between sending the command and receiving the answer – 
tested on 3 devices, information updated via GPRS/3G 
network) and estimations of arrival time at destination, that 
the mobile application delivers to the user. 
 
Table 5 Initial results for time lag measured at the information request 
Test type / mobile 
platform 
Apple iOS 
 
Symbian OS 
5th edition 
Windows 
Mobile 6.x 
Time 
lag 
for 
presenting selected 
dest. 
 
1-2 s 
 
1-2 s 
 
1-2 s 
Max. time lag to 
determine routes to 
destination 
 
14 – 80 s 
 
20 – 82 s 
 
17 – 55 s 
Max. ETA error, 
“Pedestrian” mode 
5 min 
5 min 
5 min 
Max 
ETA 
error, 
“Car” mode 
10 – 18 min 
10 – 15 min 
n/a 
Max 
ETA 
error,  
“Public Transport” 
mode 
- 5 min... + 
25 min  
- 5 min... +40 
hours (!) 
 
n/a 
 
The maximum ETA error for “Public Transport” mode 
for the Symbian application showed strange figures in some 
isolated cases (see Table 5), due to possible mistakes in 
selecting the public transport lines, but this is probably a 
software issue that is to be solved in the next project steps.  
 
V. 
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS 
The services that the In Time integrated platform is 
providing include a large number of physical and virtual 
entities: local systems/interfaces, local software applications, 
fixed or mobile communication networks, data processing 
and converting etc. Therefore, in order to ensure a good 
operation time and presence of these services especially to 
mobile users, several communication methods are to be 
taken into consideration. Moreover, for obtaining a good 
“visibility” of these services, they have to be expanded in the 
near future, integrating more and more applications from the 
transport field: expansion to other transport modes 
information/routing (trains, airplanes, ferries etc.) and 
coverage expansion (covering not only urban areas, but also 
interurban). In the local pilot of Bucharest city, several tests 
have also been performed in order to determine the usability 
of different WiFi hot spots for obtaining dynamic MRTTI 
also in bus stations, parks, street junctions etc. In this spirit, 
the tests took into consideration also the usability of some 
WiFi special hot spots, such as the ones used by the public 
transport. The local BTMS communication infrastructure is 
comprised of 150+ Access Points installed in intersections of 
Bucharest and WiFi clients installed on each public transport 
vehicle. Therefore, several tests were performed in order to 
93
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

determine the availability and some communications’ 
parameters, like delay and throughput, by using these WiFi 
Acces Points, on the 2,4 GHz and 5 GHz bands [4] (pp.3-5). 
The measurement area was selected in central Bucharest. 
There were chosen two types of intersections: busy ones 
(from the RF communications point of view) and free ones, 
with few interference and usage of WiFi spectrum. We 
present further the results in the junction with the most busy 
RF environment (many governmental buildings and 
public/private Access Points) – Victoriei Square. Spectrum 
analyses in both bands have also been performed, seeking for 
an observation regarding the usage of WiFi protocol in the 
mentioned locations. While both 2.4 GHz and 5 GHz bands 
are installed, the most significant activity was detected in 2.4 
GHz band. This is why we considered presenting only the 
results regarding this band. The Victoriei Square area of 
study had the following characteristics (Figure 6): 
 
High usage of the 2.4 – 2.5 GHz spectrum, very low in 
5 GHz spectrum; beside the WiFi and Bluetooth, high 
power CW continuous carrier transmitters have been 
detected; 
 
A large number of Access Points (over 40) have been 
identified in the area; WiFi channel utilization reaches 
in some moments 90%, especially in the zone of 
channels 1 to 5.  
 
There have been identified many interferences due to 
adjacent WiFi channels and also to the powerful RF 
continuous carrier transmitters in the area; 
 
 
Figure 6 Spectrum analysis for the 2.4 GHz band 
 
The next diagram presents the channel utilisation for the 
2,4 GHz band in this area (Figure 7): 
 
 
Figure 7 Channel utilisation for Victoriei Square WiFi hot spot 
 
Regarding the WiFi protocol, the test results determined 
that even in this area, considered the worst case scenarios, 
the IP communication is possible. The maximum measured 
delay was about 1,2 seconds and data throughput din not 
decreased under 1Mbps. 
In the future it will be also possible to deliver In Time 
content via any other WiFi access points in urban areas.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The analysis of In Time system’s performances 
performed in Bucharest showed several critical aspects: 
 
The errors in the ETAs depend more on the quality of 
the real-time traffic information (for the car and public 
transport modes) and less on the mobile communication 
network quality, although it is important to have good 
GPS and communication channels coverage [4] (pp. 2-
3); 
 
The accuracy of the real-time information delivered by 
local traffic information providers is crucial for the 
precision of ETAs. 
 
The tests demonstrated the concept is valuable also for 
fuel consumption / pollutant emissions reductions, 
delivering better routes and therefore diminishing 
congestion in traffic. 
It is expected that the usage of the In Time services will 
increase in the future, employing also available urban hot 
spots in support of the information broadcasting. The 
integrated services that the In Time project introduces will 
increase in usefulness and will constitute a tool to easily find 
traffic/transport related information anywhere. In the future, 
the expansion of these services will help the urban society in 
reducing the emissions and fuel, or energy consumption by 
choosing more appropriate modes for urban transport or 
saving time and fuel when travelling.   
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank all the In Time project 
partners for their fruitful cooperation. They hope that the 
concept of the system and the services provided will 
continue to be developed via new research projects and a 
common, harmonised European standard in the next future. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] * * * - CIP ICT PSP 2008-2, Research Project 238880 “Intelligent 
and Efficient Travel Management for European Cities (In Time)”, 22 
partners, DESCA FP 7, ICT PSP Support Programme European 
Union; 
[2] M. Minea, Carmen Eleonora Stan, R.S. Timnea. “Integrated Platform 
for Road Traffic Safety Data Collection and Information 
Management”. IARIA ICCGI Conference, IEEE, Valencia 2010; 
[3] S. Dumitrescu, M. Minea. „Wireless Communication System for 
Public Transport Management as part of Bucharest Traffic 
Management System”. ITS World Congress 2010, Busan, South 
Corea; 
[4] M. Minea, S. Dumitrescu. „Vehicle to Infrastructure Communications – 
Technologies and EMC Problems in Public Transport Management 
System”. IEEE 9th International Conference on Telecommunications in 
Modern Satellite, Cable and Broadcasting Services. TELSIKS 2009, Niš, 
Serbia, 7- 9 October 2009; 
[5] M. Minea. „Implementation of the Bucharest Traffic Management 
System – solutions to problems and In-Time Project” – Invited speaker at 
16th World ITS Congress, Special Interest Session SIS 33, Stockholm, 
Sweden, 21-25 September 2009;  
94
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

