Development of Teacher Competencies in a New Learning Environment in
Higher Education
András Benedek
Department of Technical Education
Budapest University of Technology and Economics
Budapest, Hungary
e-mail: benedek.a@eik.bme.hu
György Molnár
Department of Technical Education
Budapest University of Technology and Economics
Budapest, Hungary
e-mail: molnargy@eik.bme.hu
Abstract— The development described in this paper aims to
form a service-oriented teaching-learning model supporting
the modernization of education, which can be the pillar of a
gradually established university specific Competence Centre.
The goal of the programmes of the Competence Centre
conceived last year and being developed is to ensure that
university lecturers and teachers, as well as research workers
can fulfil the demands of an extending international/European
higher
education
learning
environment.
The
competence
development necessary for 21st century university lecturers
focuses on such key areas as Lifelong Learning approach and
Information and Communications Technology literacy. The
authors
present
the
practical
realization
of
the
above
mentioned development at Budapest University of Technology
and Economics following the emergence of a concrete demand.
Specifically,
the
service-oriented
organizational
and
operational frameworks of teaching-learning were established
in a way that allows the actual use per organizational unit or
respectively person, the success of the participants as well as
the
satisfaction
of
those
initiating
the
training
to
be
determined. The main conclusion is that the results of the e-
learning-based
training
programs
developed
within
the
framework of the research are a good pedagogical indicator of
the transformation process when the further training of
teachers in an institution of higher education of significant
traditions, an „up-to-date training of trainers” is being
developed, and based on the experiences the process is getting
institutionalized. The concrete use of the research is the
development
of
the
trainers’
professional
competencies,
attitude formation and efficient knowledge transfer. The
innovation frameworks necessary for the development of the
lecturers’ competences were provided by the learning and
development
environments
of
the
Institute
of
Applied
Pedagogy and Psychology as well as the e-learning material
developers of the co-department.
Keywords- Competence; e-learning support systems; Moodle
system; teacher training.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The specific, final form of the Technology Transfer
Project as a training program was initially proposed as a
concept of a training framework within the process of
modernizing education, characterized as follows:
It was recommended to develop of an in-house training
system relating to the BME (Budapest University of
Technology and Economics) Research University Program,
with the emphasis on its horizontal elements (human
resources development, support for the recruitment of
teaching
staff,
raising
standards
of
educational
achievement), which would provide a suitably flexible
learning framework for innovatively minded teachers.
The innovational background was to be provided by the
Department of Technical Education (MPT) and the Centre
for Learning Innovation and Adult Learning of the GTK
Institute of Applied Pedagogy and Psychology (APPI), as
well as by the current “Trainer Training” TAMOP project,
while the Institute of Continuing Engineering Education
(MTI) would provide the infrastructural organizational
background at university-wide level.
The
institute’s
specialised
e-learning
environment
development server also has such software packages as
Wimba Creator and Adobe eLearning Suite Extensions,
along with electronic learning environments which vary
across the training forms and programmes, while providing
similar services (Moodle- Modular Object - Oriented
Dynamic Learning Environment, Mahara [11], LimeSurvey
[12]).
Progressive
methodological
developments
(the
introduction of on-line forums and online examinations) are
realized
in
the
Institute
of
Applied
Pedagogy
and
Psychology framework in conjunction with the operation of
the
Moodle
e-learning
system.
The
experience
thus
accumulated is important for implementing and broadening
the range of opportunities for autonomous learning and for
ICT
supported
teaching
applicable
in
teacher’s
own
practice. The Institute of Applied Pedagogy and Psychology
is at the forefront of current practice in education innovation
and
open,
distance
learning
and
information
and
communication technology assisted learning (e-learning), as
well as other innovative training employing unconventional
methods [1]. In developing a training program which meets
these requirements, the internationally successful Web 2.0
model, was found to provide a good fit, as depicted in the
jigsaw below. It is obvious that the web 2.0 content
management is provided by a special content creation tool
(CCT) in addition to the content management systems
(CMS). A student management system (SMS) is also
applied to help student activity, while a financial-accounting
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

system (AS) has been formed to manage administration and
statistical tasks.
Figure 1. Web-Education system in Europe, Source [8]
II.
BODY OF PAPER
A.
Antecedents
The aim of the development was to establish a service
oriented teaching-learning model, furthering the process of
the modernization of education, upon which a BME-specific
Competence Centre could gradually be built – responding to
the needs of departments, institutes and faculties. The
objective of the programs offered by the Competence Centre
is for the university’s teachers and researchers to be able to
meet the challenges arising from expansion into the
international,
European
Higher
education
sector.
The
training covers the following major fields of competence
required to function as university teachers in the 21st
Century:

Lifelong learning

Teaching in a modular system

Developing
student
centred
methodologies
and
materials

The use of alternative teaching methodologies

Effective
learning,
and
applying
presentation
techniques which support individual study

The use of collaborative and networked study methods

The application of suitable styles of verbal and non-
verbal communication

Using modern presentation techniques

Familiarity with methodological opportunities afforded
by ICT and incorporating them into the teaching
process

The development and application of new evaluation
methods

The
application
of
ICT
based
information
and
knowledge management systems

The
practical
application
of
modern
forms
of
educational organization
In the medium term, the basic system of the in-house
continuing vocational training recognized at university-wide
level is a flexible 100 hour program, adaptable to the needs
of the individual, which current plans indicate is to be
reviewed and revised at 5 year intervals. A third of the
program hours (30-35) are contact hours of theoretical and
practical work in small groups, assisted by an electronic
learning environment (Moodle), while the other two thirds
of the course (65-70 hours) are to be realised individual
preparation and professionally supported consultation. The
Moodle [3] system to be used – which is used by more and
more university departments – is according to international
sources can be applied to “blended learning” type support
for students and teachers. Currently, within our institute,
with nearly 50 courses and 10000 users we have several
years of experience in supporting online training, combined
tutoring, online examinations and consultations, operating
forum systems and E-portfolio applications.
The integration of the developed e-learning course
modules into the Moodle system did not imply either
content, or methodology, or technology problems. The
Moodle is ready for the management of the course
materials, so it is developed in accordance with the
methodological structure of e-learning. The course materials
were prepared in SCORM format, making possible the
integration of the video elements as well.
The service oriented teaching-learning organizational
and operational frameworks were designed to allow the
monitoring at the level of organizational units and of
individuals
of
course
participants’
usage
levels
and
achievements, and the degree to which the courses satisfied
their needs. The evaluation and financing models of the
development take this as their basis. Any given time period
– over a whole academic year – can be employed flexibly,
and, depending on the subject chosen, its nature and
complexity may comprise 5-20 contact hours. The actual
achievement of course objectives per academic
year,
measured against an internal credit system is recognised by
the issue of certificates. Course participation alone is not a
sufficient criterion – students’ progress is also relevant, as is
the measurement and evaluation of their acquisition of the
target competences, along with effective support for the
teacher’s self-development.
B.
The process of electronic teaching materials
development
As an atypical form of teaching, e-learning requires that
teaching materials go beyond the traditional digitalised or
digitally authored materials, and that they be authored in an
e-learning environment. In the course of preparing these
electronic materials many factors play a role, which do not
arise when creating simple written documents. Electronic
teaching
materials
contain
multimedia
elements
(e.g.,
spoken narration, animation, simulation tasks, highlighted
notes etc.), which are difficult to express in writing alone.
Furthermore, in many cases electronic teaching materials
are produced by personnel who are not in fact competent in
the details of the subject matter presented. A major problem
arising from this is that of how a specialist in a particular
field – the content provider – can convey to the personnel
who are producing the materials – the materials developers -
what should feature in the teaching materials. The creation
of electronic teaching materials – due to the factors outlined
above – requires an effective quality control process:
Firstly, the materials developers show the content
authors
what
possibilities
are
available
in
electronic
teaching materials, and give them a written description of
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the development environment. For this, it is necessary to use
the appropriate terminology and review the range of
available options. Following this they jointly write the so-
called script (synopsis) of the teaching materials, on the
basis of which the materials are produced. The most
important attribute of the script is clarity; that is to say, the
material developer should know exactly where the materials
will be used, and what will feature in them. The next stage
is the process of checking and editing, professionally, in
terms of content, and linguistically. It is important that even
at this stage the script be precisely written enough that the
editors will know, even without having produced electronic
materials, what will feature in the materials and how. The
professional and linguistic edits are then reviewed by a
further editor, who accepts or rejects them as appropriate.
Next, the rough materials are produced, which comprise the:

Written texts,

Images,

Studio recordings,

Video materials and animated sequences required for
the teaching materials.
The best solution is for the rough materials, or a large
proportion of them, to be prepared by the content authors /
script writers themselves, or for them to supervise this
preparation. This also greatly aids the work of editors and
proofreaders, and there is less chance of the type of mistakes
which arise when materials are being developed. During the
next stages of the process one of the most notable tasks is
tackled,
pedagogically
speaking,
that
of
curriculum
development. In the last stage in the process, the electronic
material is subjected to the further editing and testing, to
determine how much it conforms to the script.
It can be seen in this process that the key to materials
development is an appropriate script. The script has to be in
all regards exact and unambiguous, especially as its narrator
may in many cases have little idea of what he is saying. He
will thus be scarcely able to correct or supplement any
unclear or questionable material. The diagram below gives a
general overview of electronic teaching materials. This kind
of overview is vital, to make the content developer aware of
the possibilities and limitations of electronic teaching
materials.
Figure 2. Electronic Study Material, Source: Internal teaching resource
Once the electronic teaching materials have been
uploaded the lesson screen appears in a new window, which
is composed of several parts:

Frame, other lesson-related information (1.)

Notes on content (2.)

Text (theoretical) information (3.)

Video window (flash animation, interactive task(s))
(4.).
C.
Real world realisation
The strategic aims of the program were achieved in
several developmental phases. The first phase, in mid-2011
(April-August) the topic areas of the Technology Transfer
Project – with the agreement of the participants – were set
out in brief training modules (maximum 10 hours). These
courses partly consisted of contact hours with full or partial
e-learning support (for individual preparatory work and
practice). 6 of the 11 modules present and order the general
characteristics of innovation, which then link into a module
on product development. The technology development
projects being pursued at the BME (Budapest University of
Technology and Economics) serve as case studies of
innovation in the other 4 modules demonstrating how
innovation can be supported by knowledge transfer. The
modules focus on the application of the results of innovation
and the establishment and development of suitable business
models for practical application of innovation. The topics of
e-learning modules actually developed were:

Fundamentals of Project Management

Starting businesses, spin-off firms, Raising capital,
Economic Analysis of investments

Syntactic metal foams -
metal matrix composites
reinforced by special particles

Laser soldering

Fundamentals
of
Product
Development
Management

Intellectual Property Rights, industrial copyright,
patents

Preparing and managing tenders/applications

Innovation management

Marketing, business, image building
The specific tasks were devised in the following process:
1.
Finalizing the task specification and clarifying its
financial aspects
2.
Selection and recruitment of technical writers/course
advisors collaborating on the project
3.
Skills training for technical authors
4.
Collection of professional materials necessary for E-
learning material development
5.
Creation of E-learning modes: early summer pilot stage
(4 modules)
6.
Moodle framework development and downloading of
pilot course materials
7.
Briefing course advisors on on-line consultations and
tests
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

8.
Announcing and initiating pilot courses
9.
Uploading the complete course materials onto Moodle
and commencing the training – the final test and
validation of the teaching materials
10.
A brief (6-8 minute) video (in VCAM format) was
prepared for each module, functioning as a
freestanding lesson, supplementing the written
materials, which together make up an individual work
(downloadable, executable), which is embedded in the
e-learning materials.
11.
The supporting framework for the courses was
completed (Moodle) [4]
12.
. The teaching materials were uploaded onto this,
connected to the Google Analytics statistical services,
which allows the courses to be monitored. The visual
interface:
http://visibleexpression.co.uk/mythemes/aardvark_mak
eover.zip
13.
Information relating to the course applicant, and the
relevant application form was placed on the electronic
learning environment delegated for educational
support of the project, which can then be used to help
draw up an adult education contract.
An average of 2 A0 sheets worth of “course materials”
are prepared per module, and these e-learning study
materials, which are suitable for individual study, are
accessible to registered users in an inclusive manner on the
electronic framework,
along with 10-20 related test
questions per module. Course participants and teachers alike
will have access to Forums for the duration of each module,
which are moderated by the technical author and provide
opportunities to conduct consultations and to exchange
experience.
This
links
in
with
the
course
ending,
examining/knowledge
checking
process,
allowing
for
evaluation of the course and statistical analysis. Co-
ordinating activities are included in the above processes, as
are monitoring and evaluation (quality control), along with
administration required for the course (course registration,
approval, signing contracts, certificates of achievement,
collating statistics). The figure below shows the opening
page of the Moodle system which facilitated this e-learning.
Figure 3. Opening page of the Moodle LMS of the Technology Transfer
Development, Source: own photo
The study pages of the individual modules can be found
under the course category headings, and within them the
lessons. The screenshot below shows the contents of one
lesson.
Figure 4. First lesson of the course of the Moodle system, Source: own
photo
The following screenshot shows the video recordings
embedded in a lesson, which the student can stop or replay
at will.
Figure 5. Opening page of the Moodle LMS of the Department, Source: own
photo
III.
CONCLUSION
Students who have successfully completed any one of
the 9 e-learning-based training modules gain skills which
will
afford
them
greater
mobility
and
measurable
knowledge, as well as in future years supporting the
Lifelong Learning concept. 1466 out of 1965 students
successfully completed the selected module. A notable
outcome of the programmes was the co-operation between
teachers from different faculties and the effort the put in to
develop an effective way of conveying knowledge. The
participants were able to select the most appropriate training
programme for their particular competency set, and to
immediately apply the knowledge and practical experience
thus gained in their teaching practice. The success of the
training programmes of this project is also evinced, from a
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

pedagogical standpoint by the process of transformation in
which a higher education institute with long traditions is
moulded by the further professional training of its academic
staff, and on the principle that experience is systemized
suggests that this may lead to this process becoming
institutionalised. Beyond allowing teaching materials to be
downloaded,
the
Moodle
system
also
facilitates
communication between students and teachers, measuring of
their activity levels, the functioning of public forums, and
implementation
of
monitoring
and
evaluation
in
an
electronic environment. The patterns of usage of the system
are shown in the following two diagrams, from November
2011 – February 2012, which clearly shows, for instance,
the peak date of online test completion on December 12
2011. It can also be established on the basis of Google
analytics statistics, that on December 5 2011, 1023 people
visited the courses’ study pages to study the online study
materials contained therein, preparing for the final exams.
Figure 6. Student and teacher activities of Technology Transfer course,
Source: own photo
Figure 7. Statistical indicators of TT modules with the aid of Google
analytics.
REFERENCES
[1] András Benedek, Multimedia Sensors in Learning by Mobile
Communication. In: Alan Tait, András Szűcs (ed.): EDEN
Annual Conference: Media Inspirations for Learning. What
makes the impact? 9-12 June 2010, Valencia. Book of
Abstract, ISBN 978-963-06-9429-2, European Distance and E-
learning Network, 2010, pp. 60-65
[2] György Molnár, The requirements and development areas of
the ICT aided learning environment. In: Dr. András Benedek
(ed.): Digital pedagogy – Typotext Budapest 2008, pp. 225-
255
[3] András Benedek and György Molnár, The empirical analysis
of
a
Web
2.0-based
learning
platform,
In:
Constantin
Paleologu,
Constandinos
Mavromoustakis,
Marius
Minea
(ed.): ICCGI 2011, The Sixth International Multi-Conference
on
Computing
in
the
Global
Information
Technology,
Luxembourg, June 19-24, 2011., ISBN: 978-1-61208-008-6,
pp. 56-62, retrieved: 05.2012
[4] http://ttp.moodle.appi.bme.hu, retrieved: 03.2012
[5] András Benedek, György Molnár and János Horváth Cz.,
Moodle-based E-portfolio used in teacher training. (In: Sixth
EDEN
Research
Workshop,
User
Generated
Content
Assessment in Learning. Enhancing Transparency and Quality
of Peer Production. Emerging Educational Technologies and
Digital Assessment Methods, 24-27 October, 2010, Budapest,
Hungary. Edited by Morten Flate Paulsen and András Szűcs,
Budapest, 2010. ISBN 978-963-87914-4-3, pp. 131-133
[6] András Benedek, György Molnár and János Horváth Cz., Jump
over the shadow? From the traditional education to the non-
typical one or the experiences of an electronic learning
environment. IADIS Multi Conference on Computer Science
and Information Systems, Freiburg, Germany, 26-29 July,
Proceedings of the IADIS International Conference e Learning,
Volume II (Ed. Miguel Baptista Nunes, Maggie McPherson)
ISBN:978-972-8939-17-5, pp. 243-246
[7] György Molnár: Flashes or steady light? Or the potentials of
developing networked learning, In: Miguel Baptista Nunes,
Maggie
McPherson
(ed.):
Proceedings
of
the
IADIS
International Conference e Learning, IADIS international
conference E-learning 2011, Volume II. Rome, Italy, July 20-
23, 2011, ISBN: 978-972-8939-38-0, pp. 405-408
[8] Morten Flate Paulsen, Online Education Systems: Definition of
Terms, In: Web-Education Systems in Eu, ZIFF Papiere 118,
FernUniversität Hagen, Okt. 2002, pp. 23-28, retrieved:
03.2012
[9] M.A. McPherson and J.M. Nunes, “Critical Issues for e
Learning Delivery: what may seem obvious is not always put
into practice”. JCAL, 24(6), 2008, pp. 433-445, retrieved:
03.2012
[10]Piet Kommers, ICT as explicit factor in the evolution of life-
long learning. International journal of continuing engineering
education and life-long learning, 20(1/2010), pp. 127-144.,
retrieved: 03.2012
[11]
http://e-portfolio.appi.bme.hu/, retrieved: 04.2012
[12]
http://appi.bme.hu/survey/admin/admin.php, 05.2012
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

