E-business and Strategic Management: E-valuation Quality Performance 
 based on ADAM Methods  
 
Alexandra Lipitakis  
Kent Business School , University of Kent  
Canterbury, Kent CT2 7PE, England l 
aial2@kent.ac.uk 
    Evangelia A.E.C. Lipitakis  
Kent Business School,University of Kent  
Canterbury, Kent CT2 7PE, England  
eael2@kent.ac.uk 
 
Abstract— 
E-business 
and 
strategic 
management 
problems in Digital Information Management (DIM) 
methodologies, Smart Environments (SE) and e-services 
can be efficiently solved by using a class of adaptive 
algorithmic modeling (ADAM) procedures. A class of 
implicit and explicit relationships and attitudes in 
strategic management and performance in DIM is 
presented by considering the proposed adaptive 
algorithmic 
approach. 
The 
adaptability 
and 
compactness of the proposed algorithmic schemes 
combined by the proper choice of singular perturbation 
parameters allow the (near) optimum solution of a wide 
class e-business and strategic management problems in 
Digital 
Information 
Management 
and 
e-services 
environments. This research work is based on key-field 
concepts of four interrelated sciences, i.e., Computer 
Science 
(adaptive 
algorithmic 
theory), 
Applied 
Mathematics (singular perturbation theory and partial 
differential equations), Management Science (strategic 
management and e-business) and Economic Science 
(performance). The proposed adaptive algorithmic 
approach has been applied to a class of case studies of 
characteristic e-business and strategic management 
problems 
and 
their 
corresponding 
dynamical 
algorithmic schemes have been presented. The ADAM 
technique has been used for constructing the basic 
questionnaire containing the “Phillips-Lipitakis” model, 
methodology and assumed hypotheses. 
Keywords 
- 
adaptive 
algorithms; 
digital 
information 
management; 
e-business; 
e-services; 
quality 
performance 
evaluation; strategy management; the ADAM methods. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
In recent years, extensive research has been directed to 
the dynamic fields of e-services computing, digital 
information management and context management for smart 
environments [3, 6, 11, 14, 20, 29, 32, 34, 35]. Intense 
investigations have been also focused in various challenging 
issues related to the above fields, resulting from the usage 
and application of other important technological and 
scientific 
branches, 
such 
as 
e-business, 
strategic 
management, knowledge management, algorithmic theory 
and computational methodologies, in order to  identify 
novel concepts, theories, methods and techniques that 
enable their efficient application in the new emerging hybrid 
technological and scientific environments [2, 7, 10, 13, 16, 
29, 31, 40, 42, 43]. 
In this research study, we present an alternative 
approach for evaluating certain e-business performance and 
strategy management methodologies based on a class of 
Adaptive Algorithmic Modeling (ADAM) procedures.  
Specifically, we consider the so-called “Philips-
Lipitakis” (PL) model for e-business strategy planning and 
performance measurement [22] and the corresponding basic 
algorithmic 
procedure 
(in 
the 
form 
of 
a 
special 
questionnaire) for the PL methodology and assumed 
hypotheses. The PL model, in conjunction with the ADAM 
methods, by using the fundamental principles of adaptivity 
(adaptive algorithms) and uncertainty (singular perturbation 
parameters), is presented in a parameterized dynamic 
algorithmic form, which for a suitable selection of the 
considered parameters leads to an (near) optimum solution 
of the e-business performance evaluation problem. In 
comparison to other related research methodologies, it 
should be noted that the main advantages of our proposed e-
valuation quality performance methodology, in conjunction 
to ADAM methods, allow the efficient applicability for e-
business strategic planning and performance measurement 
problems in e-business and e-service environments [22].   
The basic principles of ADAM methods with their 
advantages and limitations have been presented in [20, 23]. 
A synoptic general description of the functionality and 
applicability of these methods is given in the next sections.  
II. 
THE ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMIC APPROACH AND 
SINGULAR PERTURBATION CONCEPTS 
The basic concepts of the adaptive algorithmic approach 
on 
e-business 
problems 
and 
strategic 
management 
methodologies have been presented in [19, 20, 21, 23]. It is 
known that an algorithm can be simply defined as a finite 
set of rules which leads to a sequence of operations for 
solving specific types of problems, with the following 5 
important characteristic features: Finiteness, Definiteness, 
Input, Output and Effectiveness, as described in [16, 20, 39].  
The algorithms can be easily presented by the so-called 
‘pseudo-algorithmic’ 
form, 
that 
is 
also 
called 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

‘pseudoalgorithm’ or ‘pseudocode’ in the case of 
preparation computer programs/codes. 
The usage of the pseudoalgorithms, with the additional 
important features of compactness, adaptiveness and 
incorporation of singular parameters that allow the 
computation of (near) optimum solutions, can be extended 
for the efficient solution of e-business and Strategic 
Management (SM) problems and in a wide area of 
corresponding applications, a part of which is presented in 
the references and bibliography section [2, 10, 17, 19, 25, 
38, 41]. It should be noted that the stated second basic 
feature of the algorithm, i.e., the definiteness as described by 
Knuth [16], in the case of our proposed algorithmic 
approach for solving e-business problems can be ‘loosely’ 
interpreted, i.e., certain computational steps can be 
described in an approximate way. This is particularly useful 
for the qualitative nature of certain variables and procedures 
involved in the given e-business problems. 
The 
concept 
and 
application 
of 
algorithms 
(algorithmization) can be defined as ‘The Art of Designing 
and Practicing Algorithms’, while the term ‘adaptive 
algorithm’ denotes here an algorithm which changes its 
behavior based on the available resources. The adaptive 
algorithm functions provide a way to indicate the user’s 
choice of adaptive algorithm and let the user specify certain 
properties of the algorithm. The concept of adaptive 
algorithm is closely related to the corresponding concept of 
‘adaptive’ or ‘variable’ choices of the parameters (input 
elements) of the algorithm. Adaptive algorithms are 
algorithms that adapt to contention, often have adjustable 
steps that repeat (iterate) or require decisions (logic or 
comparison) until the task is completed, are simple and easy 
to program. The general technique of adapting simple 
algorithmic methods to work efficiently on difficult parts of 
complex computational problems can be a powerful one in 
the algorithm design, evaluation and practice [18, 19, 20, 
21, 23].  
According to a recent McKinsey Global Institute research 
study [26], today’s business leaders need to incorporate 
algorithmic decision-making techniques to successfully run 
their organizations. This exploratory study attempts to 
investigate and bridge the gap between e-business strategy 
and algorithmic procedures.  
In the last decade, research has been directed in the 
study of a class of initial/boundary-value problems and the 
behavior of the approximate solutions of the resulting linear 
systems by considering a small positive perturbation 
parameter, affecting the derivative of highest order [42, 24].  
The singular perturbation (SP) parameters have been 
firstly used by Tikhonov [42] for solving numerically 
certain 
classes 
of 
initial/boundary 
value 
problems. 
Following this approach, a class of generalized fully 
parameterized singularly perturbed (sp) non-linear initial 
and boundary value problems can be considered and the 
way that the SP parameters variation affects their numerical 
solution can be studied [24]. 
In this article, adaptive algorithmic modeling (ADAM) 
methods are used for providing proper data input for 
algorithmic modeling verification of implicit/explicit 
relationships and attitudes in strategic management and 
performance in Digital Information Management (DIM) 
methodologies and e-services environments. Furthermore, it 
can be shown that suitable adaptive algorithmic procedures 
can be efficiently used for solving a wide class of complex 
computational problems, including e-business and strategic 
Management problems [22]. We also point out that the 
selective usage of both algorithmic and SP-concepts, i.e., 
the usage of ADAM methods in combination with the 
dynamical choice of SP-parameters, can lead to (near) 
optimized solutions. The applicability of the proposed 
adaptive algorithmic approach and SP-concept methodology 
is demonstrated by considering a characteristic case study in 
e-business and strategic management applications. 
The main advantage of the proposed algorithmic 
approach for solving e-business and strategic management 
problems is twofold. Firstly, the adaptive algorithms can be 
efficiently used for solving a wide class of e-business and 
SM problems [19, 21, 21A, 22A]. Secondly, the dynamical 
choice of the SP-parameter values, which can be related to 
both quantitative and qualitative nature of the input 
parameters (data) of the given problem, can lead to (near) 
optimum solutions. The efficient application of such adaptive 
procedures requires extensive numerical experimentation 
[20, 22]. 
 
III. ON CERTAIN ADVANCES IN E-BUSINESS AND 
STRATEGIC MANAGEMENT 
A. E-business concept 
The term e-business was initially used by IBM 
marketing and Internet teams in 1996 referring to strategic 
focus of business with emphasis on several functions that 
occur using electronic capabilities. E-business is the conduct 
of business on-line including global communication media 
(Internet or other electronic networks). In general e-business 
can be defined as the transformation of key business 
processes through the use of Internet technologies and is 
concerned with the application of information and 
communication technologies in support of all activities of 
business [1, 4, 27]. 
E-business can be also defined as the administration of 
conducting business via the Internet, including the buying 
and selling goods and services with providing technical or 
customer support through the Internet, collaborating with 
business partners on sale promotions and doing jointly 
research with business partners. It should be noted that e-
business refers exclusively to Internet businesses, but also 
refer to any business that use Internet technologies in order 
to improve productivity and profitability [8, 12, 37]. 
B. E-business adoption 
The e-business adoption can be defined as the readiness 
of the organization by having appropriate attitudes, skills, 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

knowledge 
and 
technology 
to 
facilitate 
e-business 
operations. The e-business adoption can be achieved 
through 
the 
TOP 
(technology-organization-people) 
dimensions, which are closely inter-related in such a way 
that a change to one of these components could have (great) 
effect on the others [36]. A value chain model has been 
developed by Porter [34] with independent activities in 
business, where competitive strategies can be best applied 
and information systems are likely to have strategic impact. 
Porter pointed out that the important issue is how to deploy 
e-business to take advantage of the Internet technology 
(Porter [35]) and the competitive advantage requires 
building on proven principles of effective strategies either 
by operational effectiveness or strategic positioning. In his 
latter paper Porter characteristically mentioned: ‘…the next 
stage of the Internet evolution will involve a shift in thinking 
from e-business to business, from e-strategy to strategy. 
Only by integrating the Internet into overall strategy will 
this powerful new technology become an equally force for 
competitive advantage’. 
C. Quality measures of e-business  
The assessment of quality in e-business is a challenging 
subject of research studies. In a recent paper by Mohanty et 
al., [28] the existing quality measures of e-business are 
reviewed to include the emerging success dimensions of 
service 
quality, 
work 
group 
impact 
and 
provide 
comprehensive methods for organizing various measures. A 
comprehensive set of quality assessment measures are 
presented that could provide managers with the guidance 
necessary to develop their own assessment systems. The 
authors indicate that such assessment systems have the 
potential 
to 
provide 
the 
required 
feedback 
for 
competitiveness’ enhancement of the e-business. 
 
 
The study presents a review of quality dimensions in e-
commerce, in order to provide the following: 
• 
Better understanding about the value of quality at a 
conceptual level, 
• 
Deep insight to quality management processes and 
practices in e-commerce, 
• 
The basic relationships between quality and e-
commerce in such a way that it will enable future research 
for constructing developments. 
It is pointed out that quality is a multi-dimensional 
construct and the contributions of different quality 
dimensions to business performance are related to 
customer’s satisfaction. Note that quality has properties 
which are measurable or non-measurable. 
The study presents a review of quality dimensions in e-
commerce and their possible measures. Specifically, the 
following class of different quality dimensions with their 
attributes and corresponding measures are considered [28]: 
• 
Reliability, Time and timeliness, Transcendence, 
Serviceability, 
• 
Security and System Integrity, Accessibility, 
Accuracy/Clarity, 
• 
 Responsiveness, Courtesy/empathy, Communication & 
Feedback, Retrievability, 
• 
 Structure, Reputation/Brand, Website Intractability, 
Customization,  
• 
Usability/Navigability, 
Availability 
of 
Website, 
Integrity & Trust, Functionality & Features,  
• 
Performance, Service Differentiation, Objectivity and 
Flexibility. 
It is also stated that the process of building an 
integrated e-commerce quality strategy is a dynamic, 
relentless and iterative procedure [28]. 
D.  
Metrics and e-Business 
Researchers often require metrics in order to build 
analytical models and conduct empirical research studies on 
the impact of e-business strategies on organization and firm 
performance. Since the importance of metrics in all fields of 
studies is increasingly accepted, researchers rely on 
accepted metrics to construct analytical models of the 
impact 
of 
managerial 
strategies 
on 
organization 
performance and to validate empirical field research on 
specific managerial tactics 
In the same lines managers engaged in net-enabled 
business planning look for appropriate metrics to help them 
analyze the success of their business investments. Managers 
are also relying on established metrics to validate several 
assumptions about their business environments and to 
evaluate the results of the related managerial practices.  
It has been reported that recent development of metrics 
in several scientific fields, such as finance, management 
information 
systems, 
marketing, 
human 
resources, 
accounting etc., has been mainly motivated by the 
traditional management saying ‘You cannot manage what 
you do not measure’ (International Center for Information 
Technology [13], Kaplan et al., [14, 15], Hauser et al. [11], 
Straub et al., [40]).  
Managers, in the framework of the new net-enabled 
business strategic planning approach, are using metrics in 
order to easily analyze the success of their online initiatives 
and the old traditional saying has been accompanied by a 
recent report related comment ‘You cannot measure what 
you do not define’ (NetGenesis [29]. This particular 
comment actually is closely related with the ancient Greek 
mathematical and geometrical theories about measurements, 
metrology and definition of measure unit [22]. 
  A thorough examination of the existing e-commerce 
and e-business literature reveals the fact that it relies almost 
exclusively on several selected case studies and conceptual 
frameworks. Few research studies use empirical data to 
characterize the Internet based initiatives and indicate their 
impact on organization performance (Brynjolfsson et al., 
[3], Zhu et al., [44]). Furthermore, there is a lack of theory 
to guide the empirical work (Wheeler [43]), and an 
increasingly number of researchers argue that the literature 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

is weak in making the linkage between theory and measures 
apart from subjecting proposed measures for empirical 
validation for reliability and validity (Straub [40]). 
Towards these lines and in order to make such a linkage 
between theory and measures, a new algorithmic treatment 
of e-business, e-commerce and strategy management in 
digital information management methodologies, based on an 
adaptive algorithmic approach, has been proposed by 
Lipitakis [19, 20, 21], Lipitakis and Phillips [23]. 
Recent advances in e-business applications and 
technologies offer many opportunities for contemporary 
businesses to redefine their basic strategic objectives, 
transform services, products, markets and improve their 
work processes, business communications etc. In a recent 
research study by Coltman et al., [7] the drivers of the e-
business strategy and performance are examined by 
considering the perspective of strategy content and the 
perspective of strategy process. By integrating these two 
perspectives the authors explain why, when and how certain 
firms are successful with e-business systems, while others 
remain unwilling or unable to change. A class of modeling 
techniques is used to show that the considered variables are 
heavily influenced by the unobservable heterogeneity across 
firms.  
It is noted that a single model cannot explain the 
relationships between critical e-business factors such as 
structure, environment, feasibility, managerial beliefs and 
performance [6, 7]. 
A general model of e-business performance is used and 
the basic questions why and how the adoption of e-business 
should lead to operational and competitive advantage are 
explained. Four basic hypotheses have been developed and 
their importance has been tested by using a survey of 293 
organizations and field interviews. A cross-sectional survey 
of senior managers has been conducted and this survey was 
mailed to 2,000 organizations selected from a random 
sample of firms across main industry sectors, such as 
business services (including IT and telecommunications), 
financial services, manufacturing, primary industries, 
transport/ distribution, government. Experimental results 
and statistical analysis for the proposed class models on 
business performance are presented [7]. 
An extended literature review on recent advances in e-
business and strategic management can be found in 
Lipitakis [22]. 
 
IV. 
ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMS FOR E-BUSINESS 
PROBLEMS AND DIGITAL INFORMATION STRATEGY 
MANAGEMENT METHODOLOGIES 
 
In the following sections, we consider a class of 
certain 
characteristic 
case 
studies 
concerning 
the 
investigation of implicit and explicit relationships and 
attitudes in strategic management and performance in 
Digital Information Management methodologies and e-
services environments [22]. 
Case Study 1: a research survey of strategic management 
of e-business and performance 
 
In the framework of a research study in e-business 
strategy and performance [22] a pilot survey, including a 
dynamic 
adaptive 
algorithmic 
procedure, 
has 
been 
conducted aiming to investigate implicit and explicit 
relationships and attitudes in strategic management and 
performance. This case study is the main basis of the survey 
formulation that has been conducted in a related doctoral 
research programme [22]. In the following, we present the 
corresponding adaptive algorithmic procedure (in pseudo-
algorithmic 
form) 
of 
the 
considered 
questionnaire 
containing certain basic information, according to our 
proposed model, methodology and assumed hypotheses [21, 
22, 23]: 
 
Algorithm ALQUE-1 (QOI, BUS, LOA, FOR, THO, PAR, 
SOP, PER, QUE) 
Purpose: This algorithm constructs the corresponding 
Questionnaire to the proposed model, methodology and 
assumed hypotheses.  
Input: Questionnaire’s optional information (QOI), Business 
sector (BUS), level of online activities (LOA), Formality 
(FOR), 
Thoroughness 
(THO), 
Participation 
(PAR), 
Sophistication (SOP), Performance (PER) 
Output: Finalized form of Questionnaire (QUE) 
Computational Procedure 
   Step1: Set up Questionnaire’s optional information (QOI):  
      Step1.1:  Company/Organization Name,  
      Step1.2: Answering Person’s Name,  
      Step1.3: Position in Company,  
      Step1.4: Postal Address,  
      Step1.5: Telephone/Fax number,  
      Step1.6: E-mail 
   Step2: Define the Sector the Company/Organization does 
business in (BUS),  
      Step2.1:  Business sector 
         Step2.1.2:  Banking/ Financial services 
         Step2.1.3: Tourism/ Hospitality 
         Step2.1.4: Publishing 
      Step2.2: Industry sector 
      Step2.3: Other Public or Private sector 
   Step3: define the level of online activities by using   a 
five-point scale (LOA) 
      Step3.1: determine the Business to Business (B2B) 
activity 
      Step3.2: determine the Business to Customer (B2C) 
activity 
      Step3.3: determine the Business to Government (B2G) 
activity 
   Step4:  Compute Operational measures by using a five-
point scale 
 
      Step4.1: Determine Formality (FOR) 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

         Step4.1.1: usage of Total Quality Management (TQM) 
programs 
         Step4.1.2: determine level of company’s formality by 
using a five-point scale 
            Step4.1.2.1: explicit goals 
            Step4.1.2.2: written long term plan 
            Step4.1.2.3: assign implementation responsibility 
            Step4.1.2.4: commit to long range plans 
      Step4.2: Determine Thoroughness by using a five-point 
scale (THO) 
         Step4.2.1: utilize experience 
         Step4.2.2: employ a number of external & internal 
source 
         Step4.2.3:  follow appropriate time scheduled for 
plan’s development 
         Step4.2.4: utilize a umber of organization & 
motivational factors 
      Step4.3: Determine Participation by using a five-point 
scale (PAR) 
         Step4.3.1: Senior Manager participation in planning & 
implementation of strategy 
         Step4.3.2: personal participation in planning & 
implementation of strategy 
         Step4.3.3: evaluation of personal participation in 
planning & implementation of strategy 
   Step4.4: Determine Sophistication by using a five-point 
scale (SOP) 
      Step4.4.1: company as informal planner 
      Step4.4.2: company as operational planner 
      Step4.4.3: company as long-range planner 
      Step4.4.4: determine company’s strategic planning 
activities by using a five-point scale 
         Step4.4.4.1: short range profit plan 
         Step4.4.4.2: final plans era accepted by the responsible 
persons  
         Step4.4.4.3: coordinator person or group 
          Step4.4.4.4: planning effort supported by top 
management 
 
         Step4.4.4.5: decision of what business the company 
follows is taken by top management 
         Step4.4.4.6: judgment of managerial performance by 
company’s plan  
         Step4.4.4.7: usage of Strengths-Weakness/Limitations, 
Opportunities and Threats (SWOT) analysis  
         Step4.4.4.8: usage of benchmarking techniques 
         Step4.4.4.9:  usage of investment appraisal techniques 
      Step4.4.5: determine degree of competitive method 
Stage-1 
   Step4.4.5.1: pricing below competitors  
   Step4.4.5.2: new product development 
         Step4.4.5.3: broad product range 
         Step4.4.5.4: extensive customer service capabilities 
         Step4.4.5.5: efforts for highly experienced personnel 
         Step4.4.5.6: product quality procedures 
 
 
Stage-2 
         Step4.4.5.7: concern for lower cost per unit 
         Step4.4.5.8: high inventory levels 
         Step4.4.5.9: narrow limited range of products 
         Step4.4.5.10: build brand identification 
         Step4.4.5.11: refine existing products 
Stage-3 
         Step4.4.5.12: influence over channels of distribution 
         Step4.4.5.13: effort for availability of raw materials 
         Step4.4.5.14: expenditure on production process 
oriented R&D  
         Step4.4.5.15: serve specific geographic markets 
         Step4.4.5.16: promote advertising expenditures 
Stage-4 
        Step4.4.5.17: manufacture of specialty products 
       Step4.4.5.18: build reputation within industry  
       Step4.4.5.19: innovation in manufacturing process 
       Step4.4.5.20: products in higher priced market 
segments 
       Step4.4.5.21: products in lower priced market segments 
       Step4.4.5.22: Innovation in marketing 
Stage-5 
       Step4.4.5.23: Innovation in marketing 
       Step4.4.5.24: expectations in return on investment (after 
tax) 
      Step4.4.5.25: expectations in return on assets (after tax) 
      Step4.4.5.26: expectations in return on equity (after tax) 
     Step4.4.5.27: expectations in return on sales (after tax) 
Step5:  Compute Organization’s Performance by using a 
five-point scale (PER) 
   Step5.1: determine Profitability 
     Step5.1.1: return on investment 
     Step5.1.2:  return on assets 
     Step5.1.3: return on equity 
     Step5.1.4: return on sales 
   Step5.2: determine Growth 
     Step5.2.1: expectations in terms of market share 
     Step5.2.2: expectations in terms of sales 
   Step5.2.3: expectations in terms of cost of transactions 
with customers 
   Step5.2.4: expectations in revenue growth 
Step6: Finalize the requested Questionnaire (QUE) and 
apply the data to your model for verification  
 
Note that the e-business strategic planning key-
variables of our proposed model, namely (Formality, 
Thoroughness, Participation, Sophistication), the business 
performance main components (Profitability and Growth) 
and the 5 stages for the determination of the competitive 
method are indicatively marked in the above pseudo-
algorithm with bold characters.  A single execution of the 
above algorithm can express the corresponding views of 
each participant of the research survey on the computation 
of the operational measures of the considered e-business and 
the organizational performance by determining both 
profitability and growth factors. Furthermore, on the 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

completion of the required execution of the ADAM methods 
combined with our proposed model for all the research 
survey participants the e-valuation quality performance of e-
business can be achieved.   
The algorithm ALQUE-1 provides a research survey 
(questionnaire) for the proposed model and strategic 
methodology under the assumed conditions and hypotheses, 
Lipitakis [22].  
It should be noted that, in the framework of our 
proposed adaptive algorithmic approach, the given pseudo-
algorithms 
describe 
the 
corresponding 
successive 
algorithmic steps in a general descriptive form and each of 
the used input (output) parameter variable names, depending 
on the complexity of the original considered problem, could 
be a (complex) computational procedure or a set of such 
computational procedures, which in turn may contain 
several 
other 
related 
computational 
modules 
and 
submodules. The algorithmic scheme can be further refined 
including several iterative and control computational 
procedures according to the specifications of the original 
problem.  
 
V. TOWARDS OPTIMIZED ADAPTIVE ALGORITHMIC SCHEMES 
FOR E-BUSINESS AND DIM METHODOLOGIES 
 
A special class of the ADAM methods, i.e. optimized 
adaptive algorithmic procedures for the research survey of 
strategic management of e-business and performance 
leading to optimized questionnaire forms, can be obtained 
by using the singular perturbation concept with appropriate 
values of SP-parameters [20, 21]. 
Case Study 2: an optimized research survey of strategic 
management of e- business and performance 
A (near) optimized adaptive algorithm can be designed 
by calling the corresponding dynamic algorithmic procedure 
OALQUE-1 in the following manner: 
Algorithm OALQUE-1 (εQO QOI, εBU BUS, εLO LOA, εFO 
FOR, εTH THO, εPA PAR, εSO SOP, εPE PER, εUF QUE) 
where  εQO , εBU , εLO , εFO , εTH , εPA , εSO  , εPE  are singular 
perturbation parameters applied respectively to the input 
parameters and εUF  the uncertainty factor parameter applied 
to the output of the algorithm ALQUE-1 of section 3. These 
SP-parameters are determined in the course of the 
computational procedure. The computational procedure of 
the algorithm OALQUE-1 can be easily constructed by 
following the corresponding part of the algorithm ALQUE-1 
The values of the singular perturbation parameters 
affecting the corresponding input variables of the optimized 
algorithm OALQUE-1 can be determined experimentally or 
approximately 
from 
corresponding 
appropriate 
mathematical model. Note that the algorithm ALQUE-1 of 
Section 3 can be considered as a special case of the 
algorithm OALQUE-1 for the choice of SP-parameters  
εQO = εBU = εLO = εFO = εTH = εPA = εSO  = εPE  = εUF  = 1 
 
The selection of the appropriate SP-parameters leading 
to (nearly) optimized solutions is dependent on the nature of 
the considered problem and often requires extensive 
numerical experimentation [20, 24]. 
Finally, it should be noted that in the framework of e-
valuation quality performance by ADAM methods the 
dynamical choice of the SP-parameter values, which can be 
related to both quantitative and qualitative nature of the 
input parameters (data) of the given problem, can lead to 
(near) optimum solutions of a wide class of e-business and 
strategic management problems. 
 
VI.       CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
 
In the framework of the application of basic sciences 
(computer science, applied mathematics, economic science) 
by combining several of their key-field topics (adaptive 
algorithmic 
theory, 
singular 
perturbation 
theory, 
performance) in certain important topics of the general 
management science (e-business performance and strategic 
planning) and in the search of new efficient methodologies 
and techniques of improving e-business strategy planning 
and performance management, we consider the usage of 
innovative 
extendable 
models 
incorporating 
certain 
independent variables and measures in combination with the 
ADAM methods.  
The proposed adaptive algorithmic approach has been 
applied to a class of case studies of characteristic e-business 
and strategic management problems and their corresponding 
dynamical algorithmic schemes have been presented. The 
proposed algorithms with the main advantages of their 
compactness, adaptability [16, 20] and by incorporating the 
proper singular perturbation parameters that allow the 
efficient computation of (near) optimum solutions can be 
extended for solving efficiently a wide spectrum of e-
business and strategy management problems and related 
applications in DIM and SE [22].   
Future research work is focused on the dynamical 
choice of the singular perturbation parameter values of 
adaptive algorithmic schemes representing a wide area of e-
business problems in Digital Information Management 
applications. This choice that is closely related to both 
quantitative and qualitative nature of the input parameters 
(data) and computable variables/ procedures/ modules, can 
lead to (near) optimum solutions of e-business problems and 
strategic planning management methodologies by optimized 
ADAM methods. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

REFERENCES 
 
[1] D. Amor, The e-business (r)evolution, Upper Saddle River, Prentice 
Hall, 1999 
[2] I.H. Ansoff (1980), “Strategic Issue Management”, Strategic 
Management Journal, vol. 1, pp.131-148. 
[3] P. Beynon-Davies., E-Business, Basingstoke, 2004  
[4] E. Brynjolfsson (1993), “The Productivity Paradox of Information 
Technology”, Comm.  of ACM , vol. 36, pp. 67-77 
[5] E. Brynjolfsson and L. Hitt (1996), “Paradox lost? Firm-level evidence 
on the returns to information systems spending”, Management Science , 
vol. 42, pp. 541-558 
[6] T.R. Coltman, T.M. Devinney and D.F. Midgley (2005), “Strategy 
Contents and Process in the Context of e-business Performance”, vol. 22,  
pp. 349-386, JAI Press, NY, 
[7] T.R. Coltman, T.M. Devinney and D.F. Midgley (2007), “E-business 
strategy and firm performance: a latent class assessment of the drivers and 
impediments to success”, Journal of Information Technology, vol.  22, pp. 
87-101 
[8] A. Farhoomand, Managing (e)Business Transformation: A global 
perspective,  Palgrave Macmillan, Basingstoke, 2005 
[9] L. Gerster (2002), Who says Elephants Can't Dance? Inside IBM's 
Historic Turnaround, pg 172.  
[10] S.G. Green., M.B. Gavin and L. Aiman-Smith (1995), “Assessing a 
multidimensional measure of radical technological innovation”, IEEE 
Transactions in Engineering Management, vol. 42, pp. 203-214 
[11] J. Hauser and G. Katz (1998), “Metrics: You are what you measure!”, 
European Management Journal, vol. 16, pp. 516-528 
[12] Jelassi, Tawfik  and A. Enders., “Strategies for E-Business: Creating 
Value through Electronic and Mobile Commerce”, Pearson Education Ltd, 
Harlow, 2005 
[13] International Center for Information Technology (1988), Measuring 
business value of Information Technology, ICIT, Washington DC 
[14] R.S. Kaplan and D.P. Norton (1992), “The balanced scorecard: 
Measures that drive performance”, Harvard Business Review, vol. 70, 
pp. 71-80 
[15] R.S. Kaplan and D.P. Norton (1992), “The balanced scorecard- 
Measures that drive performance”, Journal of Service Industry 
Management, vol. 7, pp. 27-42 
[16] D.E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming-Volume 1: 
Fundamental 
Algorithms, 
Addison-Wesley 
Publ. 
co., 
Reading, 
Massachusetts, Amsterdam-London-Tokyo, 1968 
[17] S.C. Lee, B.Y. Pak and H.G. Lee (2003), Business value of 
Business-to-Business (B2B) Electronic Commerce: the critical role of 
inter-firm 
collaboration, 
Electronic 
Commerce 
Research 
and 
Applications.  
[18] A. Lipitakis (2003), “Managing E-Commerce aspects of small and 
medium sized Publishing Houses”, HERCMA 2003 Conf. Procs, Vol. 2, 
pp.788-794, LEA Publishers, Athens, Greece 
[19] A. Lipitakis (2005), “On certain Strategic Management methodologies 
of E-Business in contemporary micro-medium sized Publishing firms”, 
HERCMA 2005 Conference Procs, LEA Publishers, Athens, Greece  
[20] A. Lipitakis (2007), “Adaptive Algorithmic Methods and Dynamical 
Singular 
Perturbation 
Techniques 
for 
Strategic 
Management 
Methodologies”, HERCMA 2007 Conference Procs, LEA Publishers, 
Athens, Greece  
[21] A. Lipitakis (2007), “Adaptive algorithmic schemes for e-service 
strategic management methodologies: Dase studies on Knowledge 
Management”, ICEBE/ SOKM 2007 Conference Procs, IEEE Intl. 
Conference on E-Business Engineering, October 2007, Hong Kong, China 
[21A] A. Lipitakis (2009), “Computational Modelling Methods in e-
business and Strategic Banking Management: The case of Banking Sector”, 
2nd IEEE International Conference on Business Intelligence and Financial 
Engineering (BIFE 2009 Conference), Beijing, China 
[22] A. Lipitakis, E-Business Strategy Planning and Performance: A 
Comparison Study of the UK and Greece, Doctoral Thesis, KBS, 
University of Kent, England, 2011  
 
 
 
 
 
[22A] A. Lipitakis and Ev. Lipitakis (2009), “Adaptive Algorithmic 
Modeling in e-Business and Strategy Management: The Case of e-Health  
Services”, 14th Intern. Symposium for Health Information Management 
Research (ISHIMR 2009 Conference), Kalmar, Sweden  
[23] A. Lipitakis and P. Phillips (2007), “E- Business Strategies and 
Adaptive Algorithmic Schemes”, HERCMA 2007 Conference Procs., LEA 
Publishers, Athens, Greece  
[24] E.A. Lipitakis, “A universal iterative solver based on the Euclid’s 
algorithm for the numerical solution of general type Partial Differential 
Equations”, in ‘Computer Mathematics and its Applications’, pp. 597-642, 
LEA Publishers, Athens, 2006. 
[25] A.M. Lyles (1981), “Formulating Strategic Problems: Empirical 
Analysis and Model Development”, Strategic Management Journal, vol.  2, 
pp. 61-75. 
[26] McKinsey Global Institute (1998), Driving Productivity and Growth in 
the UK Economy, London: Author 
[27] T.L.  Mesenbourg (2004), Measuring electronic business: Definition, 
underlying concepts and measurements plans, Reseach report, Assistant 
Director for Economic Programs, Bureau of the Cencus, US Government, 
Washington DC.  
[28] R.P. Mohanty, D. Seth  and S. Mukadam  (2007), “Quality dimensions 
of e-commerce and their implications”, Total Quality Management, vol. 18, 
pp. 219-247 
[29] NetGenesis Corp. (2000), E-metrics- business metrics for the new 
economy, 
Net 
Genesis, 
MA 
(Online)   
http://www.spss.com/downloads/papers.cfm 
[30] P. Phillips, e-Business Strategy: Text and Cases, Maidenhead, 
McGraw Hill, 2003 
[31] P. Phillips (1996), “Strategic planning and business performance in the 
UK Hotel sector: Results of an exploratory study”, International Journal of 
Hospitality Management, vol. 15, pp. 347-362 
[32] P. Phillips and L. Moutinho (2000), “The Strategic Planning Index 
(SPI): A tool for measuring strategic planning effectiveness”, J. of Travel 
Research, vol. 32, no. 2, pp. 369-379   
[33] M. Porter., Competitive Strategy, Free Press, New York, 1980 
[34] M. Porter., Competitive Advantage: Creating and Sustaining Superior 
Performance, Free Press, New York, 1985 
[35] M. Porter (2001), “Strategy and the Internet”, Harvard Business 
Review, vol. 79, pg. 62 
[36] M. Porter and V.E. Millar (1985), “How information gives you 
competitive advantage”, HB Review, vol. 63, pp. 149-160 
[37] C. K. Prahalad  and V. Ramaswamy, The Future of Competition, 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 2004 
[38] H.J. Sapienza, E. Autio, J. Almeida and T. Keil (1997), Dynamics of 
growth of new technology based firms: Towards a resource based model, 
Annual meeting of Academy of Management Conference, Boston, USA 
[39] R. Sedgewick, Algorithms, Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., 
Massachusetts-London, 1984 
[40] D.W. Straub, D.L. Hoffman,  B.W. Weber and C. Steinfield (2002), 
“Toward new metrics for net-enhanced organizations”, Information 
Systems Research, vol. 13, pp.227-238 
[41] D. Teece., G. Pisano and A. Shuen (1997), “Dynamic Capabilities and 
Strategic Management”, Strategic Management Journal, vol. 18, pp. 509-
533. 
[42]  A.N. Tikhonov and V.Y. Arsenin (1963), Methods for solving ill-
posed problems, Doklady AN SSSR, vol.  153, 1 
[43] B.C. Wheeler (2002), “NEBIC: a dynamic capabilities theory for 
assessing Net-enablement”, Information Systems Research, vol.  13, pp. 
125-146 
[44] K. Zhu, K. Ken,  X. Sean and D. Jason  (2004), “Information 
Technology payoff in e-business environments – an international 
perspective on value creation of e-business in the financial service 
industry”, Journal of  Management Information Systems (JMIS), vol.  21, 
pp. 17-54 
 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

