Quasi-physical Model of Knowledge 
In the search for a unified basis of integration of technology and society 
 
Maxim Polyakov 
Managing Partner 
Noosphere Ventures Inc. 
Menlo Park, USA 
email: mvpolyakov@i.ua 
 
Igor Khanin 
Professor 
National University of Water 
Management and Nature Resources Use 
email: khanin.ig@gmail.com 
Nikolai Bormatenko 
Scientist 
Noosphere Ventures Inc. 
Dnipropetrovsk, Ukraine 
email: bormatenko@segater.com 
 
 
Abstract — The domain of research is the process of 
understanding the field of information phenomena, including 
its practical level, in solving problems such as fragmentation of 
data, which is due to their diversity and variability. The 
solution to such problems requires immersion in the ontology 
(essence) of information phenomena and a relevant cognitive 
model.  The problem of creating such a model is interesting, in 
particular, in that reducing the fragmentation of data will 
make data, including Big Data, and then programs and 
organizations, more unified in form, more diverse in content, 
in general - more useful. To solve the problem, the following 
conditions had to mature: an empirical base, formed by 
digitizing information practices; principles of convergence of 
heterogeneous 
fundamental 
ideas; 
reconstruction 
of 
understanding how cognition occurs in various fields of 
phenomena. The presence of conditions made it possible to 
develop a Quasi-Physical Model of Cognition (QPMC), where 
the object of cognition is the result of the convergence of the 
physiosphere, 
biosphere 
and 
infosphere 
(Vernadsky’s 
noosphere); the method of cognition is the embodiment of 
forms of consciousness in artifacts; the ontology of the bodies 
of knowledge and innovation is signs constructions (programs, 
databases and knowledge, organizations. The QPMC model is 
addressed to those who in the field of information phenomena 
solve practical and theoretical problems of information and 
communication technology, cognition, semiotics, economics, 
knowledge 
management, 
which, 
unlike, 
for 
example, 
“digitization” or modeling, require reflection as a better 
understanding of the innovator’s own actions.  
Keywords- infosphere; noosphere; model of knowledge; 
conscious 
phenomena; 
quasi-physical 
effects; 
innovation 
development; sign ontology; data ontology; organization 
ontology; noosphere ontology; convergence of knowledge. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Albert Einstein formulated the principle that a problem 
cannot be solved within the framework of the belief system 
(one might say the “model of knowledge”) in which it arose. 
Literally: “We can't solve problems by using the same kind 
of thinking we used when we created them.” 
In the 20th century, scientific knowledge faced a series of 
crises in physics. Overcoming them was akin to a “drama of 
ideas”. There was a need to form new models of cognition 
that correspond to the new realities brought forth by special 
and general theories of relativity, atomic and nuclear physics 
and quantum theory. This forced researchers to turn to 
philosophy and ask questions of knowledge. In addition to 
Einstein were Niels Bohr, who received physical and 
philosophical education, Max Born, Werner Heisenberg, 
Louis de Broglie, Erwin Schrödinger, Peter Kapitsa and 
others. 
These were new areas, but they belonged to the well-
known world of physical phenomena. Solutions were found, 
but many did not agree with them at the time and still 
disagree today. Kirilyuk [12] evaluated the status of sciences 
where mature cognition of the physiosphere has faced many 
of the problems specific to the sphere of informational 
phenomena (infosphere), which is yet at the infancy of the 
path of cognition. According to Kirilyuk, the desire for a 
commercial result at the expense of understanding the 
essence of the phenomena studied (fundamental science) 
leads to the accumulation of unresolved problems. Nobel 
Laureate Geim [8] also acknowledges the insufficient 
productivity in basic research: “Finally, in my dream, 
humans realize social media can make some people very rich 
but cannot save the planet. The latter requires new 
fundamental discoveries.” The Manifesto of the Slow-
Science movement [38] supports this: “Don’t get us wrong—
we do say yes to the accelerated science of the early 21st 
century… However, we maintain that this cannot be all. 
Science needs time to think.” 
Kirilyuk cites other factors that also slow down the 
processes of cognition. Among them is what can be 
interpreted as a violation of the Hegelian rule of ascent from 
the abstract to the concrete. In our interpretation, it consists 
in applying mathematical and other high-level abstractions 
directly to empirical material. Cognition skips requisite steps 
of fundamental and applied theories. Ascent is replaced with 
risky leaps from deep-lying mathematical abstractions to 
concrete empirical material on the surface. 
This article differs from previous articles developing the 
same topic by adapting the idea of sign bodies in 
combination with the idea of cognition as the embodiment of 
forms of consciousness. Due to this, the categories of 
noospheric thinking formed an integral system of categories 
embodied in the architecture of the QPMC, models of the 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

noosphere, Paradigm Innovative Development (PIDev) and 
Vertical Integration of Knowledge (VIK). As a result, the 
architecture of QPMC and the graphic representation of each 
model included in the QPMC, are a combination of basic 
ideas through abduction and induction methods Thus, the 
framework of the mental structure of the article is formed by 
its drawings: the architecture of the QPMC model, the 
structure of the object of cognition, phylogenesis and 
ontogenesis of knowledge, ontology of the sign. It is 
convenient to start from these drawings. The presence of 
synonyms for some terms in the article is a temporary 
phenomenon. For example, the term “quasi-physical” is 
borrowed from philosophy. In QPMC it is specifically 
programs, 
databases 
and 
knowledge, 
projects 
and 
organizations, 
as 
sign 
(hyperphysical) 
constructions. 
Synonymy preserves the continuity between the carry over 
idea and its concretization. This is necessary for 
understanding and the subsequent development of QPMC. 
The establishment of rigid terminology would mean that the 
development of knowledge in the corresponding direction 
has been completed. 
Article is dedicated to cognitive model. Section 2 
describes the problem of infosphere cognition and 
background information of QPMC. Next Section gives a 
description of fundamental principles of QPMC in role of 
method and agenda of cognition of infosphere. Section 4 
presents explanatory power and prognostic ability of QPMC. 
Finally, Section 5 contains salient points of QPMC and real 
contribution of implementing of this model. 
II. 
PROBLEM STATEMENT 
Vernadsky [33] classified "noosphere" as a completely 
different sphere of phenomena. Today it requires scientific 
knowledge. The concept is open to question. Most often, the 
noosphere is associated with information phenomena, that is, 
the infosphere. Vernadsky’s creative researcher Gruzman 
[10] specified that Vernadsky’s philosophical and meta-
scientific studies should be considered in the context of his 
works on the theory and history of science. 
Due to the lack of an empirical base, Vernadsky was 
unable to formulate his views on the noosphere into a 
constructive model of cognition. He used the concepts of 
matter and energy. He did not have a sufficient base of 
empirical knowledge of information, more precisely, of 
signs. At the same time, however, Vernadsky managed to put 
the whole world into one word (noosphere) as an object of 
knowledge. LaRouche [6] is one who managed to appreciate 
the significance of this step.  
The work of philosopher physicists at the level of 
reflection in terms of the cognitive process was continued by 
Kuhn [14]. He focused on the phylogenesis of knowledge 
and the social aspects of cognition. His “Structure of 
Scientific Revolutions,” in particular the concept of 
paradigm, precipitated a lively discussion. Popper [25] was 
particularly interested in drawing a demarcation line between 
scientific and non-scientific knowledge. But the primary 
source of scientific knowledge is not scientific, but rather 
empirical knowledge. Losev [15] wrote: “What is science? A 
systematic representation of knowledge gained from 
experience (through the medium of external feelings), i.e. 
exposition and explanation of empirical phenomena.” Popper 
should have taken Kuhn's [14] position in order to think 
more broadly in terms of logical transitions from pre-
scientific knowledge to paradigmatic (meta-scientific) and 
then to scientific. Perhaps it was psychologically difficult for 
an ambitious person such as Popper. As a result, attention 
has been concentrated on important, but limited questions of 
the truth and social role of paradigms (scientific 
achievements), rather than the structures of scientific 
revolutions (model of the genesis of knowledge).  
Most likely Mamardashvili was under the influence of 
these discussions when he wrote the book “The Arrow of 
Knowledge”. Mamardashvili [18] formulated the principle of 
“destruction-reconstruction of understanding”, which in a 
more categorical form corresponds to a paradigm shift, that 
is, to a change in the cognitive model during the scientific 
revolution. 
A detailed picture of cognition was given by Losev [16], 
using the concept of a name (which is actually a sign and 
information as a message). It can be considered as the most 
complete picture of the world as a noospheric object of 
cognition, in which there is substance, energy, and signs 
(information) in their relationship and development. It is 
difficult to work within this picture - it should be illustrated 
in relation to the current moment and the actual tasks of 
cognition. 
The use of computers in economics and society has 
exposed and exacerbated the problems of the development of 
the infosphere, whose main features determine the structure 
of the noosphere. Under these conditions, Einstein's 
cognitive principle gains particular relevance. Today, the 
infosphere uses inherited and not always conscious models 
of cognition. It can be said that today’s knowledge of the 
infosphere is conveyed through inherited and poorly 
formulated models of knowledge. These interpretations then 
establish the nomenclature of scientific specialties, the 
standards for teaching scientific disciplines, as well as the 
methods of conducting scientific work and writing articles 
and books, etc.  
Inherited models reflect the specificity of cognition in the 
post-paradigmatic phase of the development of natural 
sciences 
or 
the 
pre-paradigmatic 
phase 
in 
which 
humanitarian or practical knowledge is found. The question 
arises: is it possible to bring together the spheres of 
phenomena which are studied by the natural and 
humanitarian sciences? These are generally considered 
irreducible to a common basis. To solve this problem, one 
can apply Marx’s theories on transformed forms of 
consciousness. These thoughts were further developed by 
Mamardashvili. He introduced the concept of “quasi-
physical effect of non-physical (conscious) phenomena” into 
philosophical discourse [18]. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Today, knowledge of the infosphere is approaching the 
paradigm phase and it needs a model that covers all phases 
of the development of cognition, including pre-paradigmatic 
(empirical-heuristic), paradigmatic (scientific revolution) and 
post-paradigmatic (scientific). Such a model is necessary, 
especially in order to solve the problem of the ontology of 
information (more precisely, the sign). This problem has a 
thousand-year history. Examples of attempts to address this 
in the context of modern cognition may be found in the 
efforts of the scientific axiom of Stamper [31] and the 
monograph Tanaka-Ishii [32].  
Knowledge of the ontology (essence) of data is necessary 
for the development of the applied paradigms of computer 
programs, data, business organizations, and economics. 
Knowledge of these ontologies aims to optimize and unify 
the structure of programs, data and business organizations. 
These results will serve as a tool for optimizing the 
information (more precisely, sign) infrastructure of the 
economy, from the enterprise level and higher, by reducing 
its rigidity (resistance to changes) and fragmentation, both of 
which are caused by the presence of a complexity barrier due 
to semantic diversity and data variability [24]. 
Moreover, according to Martens [20], the essence 
(ontology) of the economy can be defined as an information 
(or rather, a sign) machine for the production of materialized 
knowledge. Saussure, Hayek, and Coase [27] also noted the 
similarities of economics and sign systems, including 
language. Therefore, from both a practical and theoretical 
perspective, optimization of the sign structure is the primary 
task of the economy. 
For a long time, continuous attempts have been made to 
create models of practical work in the infosphere, including 
elements of cognition. 
Some 
of 
these 
are called 
methodologies. Examples include Object Oriented Analysis 
and Design (OOAD) [3]. The subject of this methodology is 
software systems. Furthermore, these are: Theory and 
Practice of Business Processes (TPBP) [28]; Enterprise and 
System Architecture (ESA) [35]; and Semantic Technologies 
(ST)  [1], as well as other tools . 
Each is typically based on some significant and more or 
less adequate and principled position. For OOAD, this is “a 
program as an object, not an algorithm”, TPBP is “a program 
is a tracing-paper from business processes”, ESA is 
“overcoming 
the 
disintegration between technologies 
(information) and business,” ST - “technologies must take 
into account the semantics of data.” These tools have not 
become cognitive models that ensure the transition of the 
infosphere from pre-scientific to scientific knowledge. 
Obviously, such a model needs a comprehensive and well-
integrated basis of the empirical, philosophical and scientific. 
It would not be an exaggeration to mention cognitology 
or cognitive sciences (of knowledge). However, the attention 
of these disciplines is mainly the manipulation of 
knowledge-bearing data, or the processes of formalizing 
knowledge expressed in natural languages [9]. 
In fact, there are many models designed specifically for 
the knowledge of humanitarian phenomena or in claiming 
universality. These include the tektology of Bogdanov [2], 
the cybernetic approach of Wiener [34], the praxeology of 
Slutsky [30] and Kotarbinsky [13], among others. These and 
similar works can be considered as experiments in the search 
for a real model of cognition of non-physical phenomena. 
They have fulfilled their tasks and today they are potential 
subjects of an instructive history of knowledge and sources 
of positive and negative experience. 
The “philosophy of information” by Floridi [7] focusses 
directly on the application of philosophy to explain the 
phenomena of information. Its default object, practically 
without restrictions, is any phenomenon to which the word 
“information” can be attributed. Such phenomena form the 
empirical basis of Floridi’s philosophy of information. 
However, according to Losev’s definition (“What is 
philosophy? — A worldview compiled by synthesizing 
scientific information”), philosophy is not directly connected 
to empirical foundations, but rather to the achievements of 
science. Moreover, science is “A systematic exposition of 
knowledge gained from experience (through the medium of 
external feelings) [15].” 
Thus, the development of science relies on achievements 
of empirical knowledge and the development of the 
philosophy of scientific achievements. More precisely, the 
dependence is stepwise and mutual.  
The activities of the research community of The 
International Federation for Systems Research (IFSR) [37] 
are directed at forming the foundations of the information 
sciences, as in the case of the cognitive model. Its members 
working on the Fuschl Conversations project state: “We 
want to build a general theory that conceptualizes reality as a 
field containing meaningful human social interactions, as 
well as technology and nature [4].”  
The goal is ambitious, but is it achievable? Indeed, the 
history and current state of cognition show that cognition of 
the whole is effected in parts, due to the limited capabilities 
of a person. In this case, the knowledge of each part is 
divided into stages. Periods of continuous evolutionary 
development of cognition are replaced by discrete transitions 
between areas and stages of cognition. This means that a 
single object (synchrony) and the process (diachrony) of 
cognition require a rational decomposition that corresponds 
to the current values of development. It is doubtful that a 
“theory of everything” could be created, but it is possible and 
necessary to build a model of cognition, according to which 
a large whole is divided into parts in a certain way, and the 
processes of their cognition are divided into phases. At the 
same time, the procedures for knowing each part in each 
phase should be regulated with universal terms. 
The article may seem abstract, and therefore complex. 
Indeed, one can engage in the digitization of simple 
information practices without realizing how this is done. But 
in order to learn how information processes, characterized by 
a higher diversity, work, it’s necessary to understand how 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

cognition of these processes works. In this case, their mutual 
abstraction is a tool to simplify the problem. 
The subject of the article (model of knowledge) is self-
sufficient. However, it is part of a broader plan and aims to 
achieve practical goals. Based on the QPMC, a solution to 
the problem of the ontology (essence) of the sign is proposed 
[23]. Based on the ontology of the sign, applied ontologies of 
programs and data are developed [24]. They are used as a 
basis for the development of data infrastructure, architecture 
of programs and organizations. The QPMC model relates to 
the theory and practice of cognition. As a practice, it is 
needed when it becomes impossible to cognize and create 
without reflecting. So far, there are enough analogies, 
conjectures and associations for creativity, its practicality is 
not obvious. QPMC is necessary for solving problems such 
as a barrier of semantic diversity (fragmentation) of data and 
the tasks of developing a data infrastructure, architecture of 
programs and organizations resulting from them.  
It should be understood that this article is devoted to the 
self-sufficient topic of knowledge of the sphere of 
information phenomena. At the same time, it describes the 
problems of this sphere, for the solution of which the QPMC 
is intended, and provides links to articles where this is 
discussed in more detail. Section 4 of the article provides 
schematic examples of explanatory, prognostic, and 
productive strengths of the QPMC model. In subsequent 
works, each area of application of the QPMC is supposed to 
be considered from the perspective of the final economic 
result. 
III.  
THE ARCHITECTURE OF THE QUASI-PHYSICAL 
MODEL OF COGNITION 
In order to apply Einstein’s above-mentioned cognitive 
principle to the infosphere, the Quasi-Physical (Noospheric) 
Model of Cognition (QPMC) is proposed, as shown in 
Figure 1. Vernadsky’s noospheric thinking is embodied and 
transformed in this model, taking into account the 
characteristics of current times. 
The main sections of the model depicted in Figure 1 are 
as follows: Consciousness, Cognitive-Creative Activity 
(CCA) of consciousness, the sphere of phenomena, the 
totality of CCA effects of consciousness, the model of 
knowledge ontogenesis (Vertical Integration and the 
Parabola of Knowledge), the model of knowledge 
phylogenesis (Paradigm Innovative Development), the 
ontology of phenomena, and transformation of the sphere of 
phenomena. The definitive structure of noospheric thinking 
consists of these and other QPMC concepts. 
The scientific activity of consciousness occurs within the 
framework of actual being, which grows out of potential 
being (meon, meonal environment) as a result of the 
cognitive and creative practical activity of consciousness. 
CCA of consciousness triggers phenomena and forms pre-
scientific knowledge about them. They are fixed in 
consciousness, specifically in natural language. These 
descriptions can be varied, integrated, differentiated, 
formalized by digitization, etc. Problem-oriented lexicons 
can be derived from natural language, and can be called 
ontologies. These operations, as a connection by association 
and fact rather than by essence and meaning, can be 
attributed to modeling. However, the scientific knowledge 
modeled after natural sciences is different. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture of quasi-physical Model of Cognition. 
Pre-scientific 
knowledge 
corresponds 
to 
their 
embodiment in the effects caused by CCA. These can be 
natural or artificial objects (artifacts). First of all, they should 
be distinguished by their nature (ontology), which is 
established by way of acts of scientific knowledge (Figure 
1). The cycles of knowledge can be repeated many times. In 
this case, each block can be connected to any previous block 
through feedback loops. 
Thus, the consciousness arising from life continues the 
practical (not yet theoretical) cognitive-creative development 
of a potential being. The result of this activity is the 
formation of an empirical knowledge base in the form of a 
targeted combination of physical and quasi-physical effects.  
On this basis, it is impossible to deny the existence of the 
empirical roots of mathematical knowledge, even though 
some researchers may at times have difficulty trying to 
establish them. There can be no science for science. The 
deepest abstractions should be the quintessence of infinitely 
diverse empirical phenomena. 
Scientific knowledge begins with immersion from the 
concrete (many effects, that is, the results of activity) into the 
abstract, and continues through the ascent from the abstract 
to the concrete. This provides the opportunity to optimize 
existing and create fundamentally new and more effective 
(optimal) artifacts. This is the principle of ontogenesis, that 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

is, the Vertical Integration of Knowledge (VIK). The 
ontogenesis of knowledge involves individual phenomena 
and their structures, forming a hierarchy up to the sphere of 
phenomena. The phylogenesis of the sphere of phenomena 
and its structures depends on the breadth of coverage and 
completeness of the ontogenesis of knowledge of the 
phenomena. One might say that phylogenesis is a change in 
the degree of paradigmization of these structures. 
With the accumulation and ordering of practical 
knowledge, the studied and transformed sphere of 
phenomena passes from the empirical-heuristic (pre-
paradigmatic) to the paradigmatic, and then to the scientific 
(post-paradigmatic) phase of development. The ontology of 
sign phenomena is the result of these processes in the 
infosphere. It enables subjects of innovative activity to think 
and act based on an understanding of the essence of 
phenomena, that is, essentially. Today, natural sciences are 
close to this. QPMC implies the convergence of the natural 
sciences and the humanities. Therefore, the construction of 
the ontology of the subject area is a fundamental requirement 
of this model. 
The fundamental principles of QPMC are the well-
known laws of philosophical logic. Mamardashvili [24] 
formulated them in a generalized form as fundamental 
philosophical abstractions. There are Plato’s embodiment of 
cognition, Descartes’s cogito and Marx’s criterion of truth 
(practice). Similar principles, upon which the world is built, 
are contained in the principle of sufficient reason as amended 
by Losev [17]. These are also Peirce’s [21] categories of 
“Firstness,” “Secondness,” and “Thirdness,” and particularly 
the relationship between them. 
The classical principles in QPMC are supplemented by 
ideas about transformed forms of consciousness and the 
quasi-physical effects of non-physical phenomena [19]. 
These give QPMC its quasi-physical nature. The connection 
between the fundamental traditions of cognition and its 
development and the convergence of natural science and 
humanitarian knowledge is a fundamental feature of QPMC 
against 
the 
background 
of 
such 
teachings 
as 
Shchedrovitsky’s [29] “methodology”. This methodology at 
its core breaks with the traditions of scientific knowledge. 
The foundation for it is thinking and activity [29]. But it is 
not Peirce’s “Firstness”, that is, this is not the ontology as 
“quality” [21]. 
A. 
Quasi-physical model of the object of knowledge  
The objects of knowledge for QPMC are phenomena 
(manifestations of unknown entities yet to be determined) as 
well as the structures in which they consist, up to the world 
level which contains all of the phenomena. World structure is 
divided into spheres, each of which consists of phenomena 
of one nature (one quality, one ontology). Their incarnations 
(effects) are physical bodies and living organisms. Since 
ancient times, signs have been called the fundamental 
essence. Peirce [21] gave this thought a definitive form. His 
“firstness” (simply “quality”) can be compared with ratio 
fiendi, that is, the need to become, or the “physical” 
necessity. “Secondness” (relations) is the need for 
mathematics, that is, relations in space and time (ratio 
essendi), especially the need for action, or activity of 
consciousness (ratio agendi). Peirce's “thirdness” means a 
universal connection, including consciousness. One can 
compare the ratio cognoscendi of the law of foundation with 
thirdness. 
According 
to 
Peirce 
[21], 
thirdness 
is 
accomplished by signs, which are studied by semiotics. 
Peirce provides a concise and accurate answer to the 
question “What function does signs perform?” Firstness and 
secondness can be interpreted as the signified, with thirdness 
as the signifier part of signs. We can then say that the 
objective world, that is, the world as a result of scientific 
knowledge, is constructed of signs. 
Vernadsky paid little attention to the words “sign” or 
“information”. 
The 
idea 
of 
the 
world 
phenomena 
interconnection is expressed by the word “noosphere”, i.e., 
sphere of mind and thought. It would be naive to assume that 
his point of view maintained confidence in human 
intelligence. Most likely, he implied that thoughts, and 
subsequently the signs they produced, were, are, and always 
will be elements of the world order. 
At the same time, Vernadsky was a researcher of the 
geosphere and biosphere, and has achieved a great deal in his 
field. Exploring and acting, he represented the world as a 
whole. His thinking was global and historical. “Social 
history,” he argued, “is a continuation of natural history 
[33].” From Vernadsky’s point of view, it follows that the 
biosphere contains the geosphere, but is not reduced to it. 
This is not accidental, considering they each consist of 
different entities. Similarly, the noosphere must also contain 
the biosphere and not be reducible to it. It should be a sphere 
of sign, or informational phenomena (if we understand 
information as messages).  
The idea of the noosphere is encoded in Peirce's frame of 
reference, and the idea of the Peirce’s sign likewise in 
Vernadsky’s system. Their belief systems can serve as 
answers to each other. The biosphere is the whole world as it 
was yesterday in the scope of its scientific knowledge, but 
the noosphere is the further development of the world today. 
The main features of the described model are presented in 
graphical form in Figure 2.  
In Figure 2, the vertical structure of the noosphere is 
superimposed on the vertical of integrations and a parabola 
of knowledge, which are discussed below. The full circle 
corresponds to the noosphere. It covers a segment that 
corresponds to the biosphere. In turn, it contains a segment 
symbolizing the physiosphere (an extension of the concept of 
the geosphere). Concentric rings and parabolas of knowledge 
show that a unified model of cognition is applied to the 
knowledge of various spheres. It is characterized by levels of 
abstraction and the asynchronous nature of the development 
of scientific knowledge of various fields. The most 
developed is the physiosphere, followed by the biosphere. 
The scientific knowledge of the noosphere is just beginning.  
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

It should be noted that phenomena differ from effects 
(objects) in their uncertainty, as do objects from phenomena 
in their more complex structure. We can say that objects are 
phenomena that have found their embodiment and 
application. 
 
Figure 2.  Quasi-physical model of the object of cognition. 
By comparing the views of Peirce and Vernadsky, we 
can draw a conclusion about the fundamental role that signs 
play in the noosphere and in the world. The pansemiotism of 
Peirce and Vernadsky’s belief in the power of knowledge is 
also justified by the hidden potential within information 
technologies so far. Therefore, it is important to know the 
ontology of signs. For this it is necessary, first of all, to 
separate non-physical phenomena from physical ones and to 
find out how they differ in principle from each other.  
The 
practical 
basis 
for 
addressing 
non-physical 
phenomena is information. In natural language, the word 
information is synonymous with message words. However, 
since Claude Shannon applied it in the sense of one of the 
measures of the recipient's attitude to the message, in science 
it has been used as a homonym. Therefore, in order to avoid 
ambiguity, particularly in fundamental matters, non-physical 
phenomena can be called signs or sign bodies, since 
messages (information) actually consist of signs.  
In order to not limit knowledge to philosophizing, only 
strongly formalized sign formations ought to be included in 
the empirical base of integral knowledge. Let these be called 
sign constructions. Today, computer programs and the data 
they process are maximally formalized. 
Thus, the physical effect is a fragment of the meonal 
environment (potential being). Consciousness perceives it as 
a whole, consisting of physical components interconnected 
by physical connections. Physical effects can be natural or 
artificial (artifacts) objects. Natural objects are also products 
of at least cognitive activity, although cognitive and creative 
activities are difficult to separate. An example of creative 
activity alone can be the replication of patterns. 
Consciousness in the process and as a result of cognition 
transforms 
being. 
Biological 
phenomena 
and 
their 
corresponding effects possess all the properties of physical 
phenomena and effects. Therefore, by skipping the biological 
effects, one can immediately switch to the quasi-physical 
effects. 
A quasi-physical effect is a fragment of actual being. 
Consciousness only perceives it as a whole, consisting of 
two physical or quasi-physical components, which, unlike 
physical effects, are connected in the mind by a collaborating 
relation. Between physical and quasi-physical effects 
(objects) there is no insurmountable gap. For example, in the 
case of a computer program, by connecting parts (by loading 
program text and data into a computer system), an object 
created as a quasi-physical thing is transformed into an 
autonomous physical thing. This is a computer that operates 
under the control of the signals within the text of the 
program, printed on a machine-readable medium. Of course, 
in order to take liberties to think and speak this way, it is 
necessary to postulate the existence of temporal objects 
(things-processes), which are characterized by structure and 
states. 
Thus, a quasi-physical object consists of physical objects 
that fall into two parts, interconnected by means of 
consciousness with a collaborating relation. In certain phases 
of its existence, a quasi-physical object can become a 
physical object. 
B. 
Model of Paradigm Innovative Development (PIDev) 
The PIDev model (Figure 3) resembles Kuhn’s structure 
of the scientific revolutions, but with fundamentally different 
characteristics. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Model of Paradigm Innovative Development (PIDev). 
First, PIDev is an integral model. Its objects of 
knowledge are macrostructures. These are the spheres of 
phenomena or their components. The PIDev model allows us 
to differentiate and compare them according to the degree of 
maturity of knowledge. In addition, the PIDev model 
combines several phases of cognition within the sphere of 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

phenomena. As an integral model, PIDev could be called a 
model of the phylogenesis of knowledge. 
Figure 3 compares the PIDev models, one relating to the 
physiosphere and the other to the infosphere. The wavy line 
indicates the empirical-heuristic (pre-paradigmatic) phase, 
the oblique does so to the paradigmatic, and the double line 
represents the scientific (post-paradigmatic) phases.  
The diagram shows that computers emerged in the 
physiosphere in the scientific phase of its development. They 
are applied to information practices (effects of sign 
phenomena) which are related to the empirical-heuristic 
phase of the development of the infosphere. The knowledge 
of the infosphere falls behind that of the physiosphere. 
Therefore, IT is a physical data processing technology 
applied to information practices. To solve the problem of the 
disintegration of IT and business, it is necessary to bridge the 
gap between the development of knowledge of physical data 
processing technologies and information practices. 
Secondly, the fundamental features of cognition 
identified by Kuhn were based on the experiences of matured 
natural sciences in the scientific phase of development. In 
contrast, the PIDev model begins with the formation of 
objects of knowledge and the science corresponding to it. In 
this case, the knowledge of such a sphere of phenomena 
emerges in the form of innovative development, and this 
depends more on innovative business than on official 
science. Business forms the empirical base needed for 
scientific knowledge of the infosphere. Business may not, 
however, be aware that this clears the path to knowledge. If 
the integration of knowledge and business is done 
purposefully, it can serve as the archetype of innovative 
development, termed the “knowledge economy”.  
Thus, thirdly, the PIDev model is an integration of 
knowledge and management (business). The cooperative 
development of management and knowledge is innovative 
development. In the empirical-heuristic phase, its main 
driving force is enterprise personnel, from workers to top 
managers. Vernadsky [33], who studied the history of 
knowledge in Europe, drew attention to the important role of 
the masses in preparing the natural-science revolution. 
Fourthly, the main task of the pre-paradigmatic phase of 
innovative development is to formalize existing practices. In 
doing so, they use methods based on experience (analogies) 
or guesses (heuristics). An example is the digitalization of 
information practices through data processing technologies. 
Although IT is called information, it still exists without 
proper philosophical and scientific justification in terms of 
information, more precisely, signs. Moreover, attempts to 
form it are constantly repeated. However, we are not able to 
solve this problem within the new conditions of the 
development of the infosphere using existing humanitarian 
models of cognition, whether explicit or hidden, or with 
models borrowed from the natural sciences. For the scientific 
revolution of the infosphere to be possible, an act of 
“destruction - reconstruction of understanding” must occur 
[18]. Only then can a cognitive model relevant to the 
problems of developing the infosphere be formed. 
The model mentioned above may consist of known parts, 
while at the same time give an unexpected overall picture of 
what is happening. Cognitive structures such as Marx’s 
transformed forms of consciousness, quasi-physical effects 
of non-physical phenomena [19], ascent from the abstract to 
the concrete [11], Firstness, Secondness and Thirdness [21], 
information, sign, knowledge, innovation, etc., can be 
viewed in a new light, pose questions and suggest answers, 
in accordance with graphic representation of QPMC, PIDev, 
VIK, ontology of sign and corresponding references. Such a 
model can become an effective tool for strengthening 
innovation. A striking example is evidenced in Mendeleev’s 
periodic table of the elements. 
C. 
Vertical Integration and Parabola of Knowledge 
Phylogenesis, or macroscopic development of knowledge 
regarding the sphere of phenomena, occurs as a result of the 
accumulation of “micromutations” in the bodies of the 
infosphere, including programs, data and knowledge bases, 
enterprises. These are individual innovative acts. They can 
even use deeply abstract philosophical or scientific 
innovations, but at the same time they must result in a 
concrete practical, including commercial, result. The logic 
behind the development of an empirical knowledge base is 
crucial.  
The process of formation of innovations, which can be 
called the “ontogenesis of knowledge”, is presented in Figure 
4 by the model of Vertical Integration and the Parabola of 
Knowledge (VIK).  
 
 
Figure 4.  Model of Ontogenesis of Knowledge (VIK). 
The zone of the upper half of the figure is reserved for 
specific (practical, materialized) knowledge. In this case, 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

specific processes are considered to be temporal things. This 
upper half corresponds to the zero level of abstraction.   
The lower zone is reserved for abstract knowledge, which 
does not refer to individual things but to their sets, ignoring 
the uniqueness of each elements within the set. The zone is 
divided into five levels of abstraction: structures and 
technologies; 
applied 
theories; 
fundamental 
theories; 
mathematics; and philosophy, including methodology.  
The zone of the left half is occupied by problems, and on 
the right are solutions. The right branch of the parabola 
symbolizes the ascent from the abstract to the concrete [11]. 
Moreover, the shape of the parabola (the left branch) 
suggests the need to supplement the Hegelian figure of 
knowledge with a symmetrical figure, which is an immersion 
from concrete to abstract. 
The inline rectangles in the figure are innovative cycles. 
If innovative changes only affect practical knowledge, then 
innovation is characterized by a zero level. The digitalization 
of information practices is at such a level. It is based on 
physical data processing technologies, the formation and 
development of which is within the responsibility of the 
physiosphere, and not the infosphere. 
Figure 4 shows inline innovation cycles of different 
depths. In these cycles analysis (immersion from the 
concrete into the abstract) alternates with synthesis (the 
ascent from the abstract to the concrete). The Ranganathan 
model [26], called the spiral of knowledge, reduces to a 
similar 
alternation. 
The 
concurrence 
reinforces 
the 
fundamental importance of this pattern. Additionally, both 
the VIK graphic model and Hegel's “ascent” depict the 
concrete above the abstract. This coincidence, which also 
manifests at the figurative level, is not accidental. The 
empirical base of knowledge is inexhaustible and is 
constantly expanding. At the same time, levels of abstraction 
are limited to one center. 
As illustrated in Figure 4, the VIK model expands the 
interpretation of the term “innovation”. According to the 
model, innovations are changes that can occur at any of the 
six levels of abstraction shown in the figure. The depth of 
innovation is determined by the maximum level of 
abstraction. 
Innovations 
that 
influence 
philosophy, 
methodology, mathematics and/or fundamental theory are 
paradigmatic. VIK is not so much a classification of 
knowledge as it is a unit of knowledge with meaning, 
fullness and completeness. It is not pertinent to divide 
knowledge into scientific, educational and professional 
subjects until the vertical of knowledge is formed in 
accordance with the levels of abstraction. 
Scientific revolutions can occur in fields both old and 
emerging. As development accelerates, the time intervals 
between them ought to be reduced. Prior to a scientific 
revolution, problems are constantly arising that need to be 
addressed. Old sciences struggle with them, creating new 
scientific subjects. We are then to wait until some “invisible 
college” finds a radical solution to address the problem. In 
this case, the inevitable question is the formation of 
organizational structures to carry out the vertical integration 
of knowledge. The prototypes of such structures may be 
research networks where appropriate vertically oriented 
associations can be created. 
The VIK model clearly demonstrates the usefulness of 
QPMC. It is an alternative to elemental empirical, heuristic 
and associative cognition. The VIK model shows that 
abstractions are the result of simplification of practical 
knowledge and, in turn, are used to systematize them. 
IV.  
THE INNOVATIVE POTENTIAL OF NOOSPHERIC 
THINKING 
Considered by Polyakov et al. [24], Marx's thesis on 
practice as the main criterion of truth in a series of 
fundamental philosophical abstractions takes the last place 
(in order, but not in meaning). Consequently, noospheric 
thinking (such as QPMC), like any model or theory, should 
be evaluated in terms of its innovative potential. 
The explanatory power and prognostic ability of models 
and theories are closely associated. The explanatory power 
of the cognitive model allows us to understand what is 
happening with the knowledge of today’s sphere of 
phenomena. Predictive ability helps anticipate what events 
may occur in the development process.  
As a communal (common) intellectual capital, the 
cognition model should have theoretical and practical 
productivity and serve as an environment for the formation 
of fundamental and applied theories, as well as for the 
development and application of structures and technologies 
that can be of a physical, combined or sign nature. 
A. 
Examples of explanatory power of noospheric thinking 
Noospheric thinking uses well-known abstract statements 
and formulations of practical problems. The use of many of 
them is not limited to the infosphere. In this case, QPMC 
clarifies their meaning. 
1) Plato's allegory of the cave. 
Plato’s Cave is often used as an argument in defense of 
idealism. Mamardashvili [24] saw in it the formulation of the 
problem of the fundamental philosophical abstraction of the 
embodiment of the understood. From the QPMC standpoint, 
this allegory is a paradigm of knowledge that has not yet lost 
its relevance. It is linked to the zero-innovation cycle as part 
of the VIK model and parabola of knowledge. 
2) Hegel's ascent from the abstract to the concrete. 
In the VIK model Hegel’s imaginative vision and logic 
are explained and developed. If concreteness is an ascent, 
then abstraction is an immersion in the essence of things, and 
not a separation from them. Therefore, in the VIK model, 
abstraction is also a movement toward the foundation, an 
immersion in depth. Indeed, it is a method of immersing 
from the concrete into the abstract. This method, based on 
the empirical basis, forms paradigms, systematizing the 
results of empirical-heuristic knowledge. Thus, in the VIK 
model, Hegel’s imaginative vision and logic are explained 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

and developed. Indeed, abstraction is an immersion in the 
essence of things, and not a separation from them. Then 
concretization can only be an ascent. 
3) Unnatural modeling is a simplified version of the 
Hegelian ascent from the abstract to the concrete 
The VIK model and the parabola of knowledge enables 
us to see a simplified version of the Hegelian ascent from the 
abstract to the concrete in non-natural modeling methods, 
particularly in the mathematical modeling of information 
phenomena. The simplification consists of the absence of 
transitional steps between abstractions and practice 
The use of QPMC as a tool to move from modeling to 
cognition based on understanding is considered by Polyakov 
et al. [22]. 
4) IT status today 
The logical-conceptual apparatus of QPMC can be used 
to determine the status of IT today. It follows that IT can be 
called technology if it is data processing technology. It is 
also possible to apply the term “information” to IT, if we 
mean information practices. Thus, IT today is a physical 
data processing technology applicable to informational 
(noospheric) practices. 
5) What is a program? 
A program is a well formalized sign effect of a non-
physical programming phenomenon. To understand the 
program, one must understand the sign. To understand the 
sign, one need to understand the program. It is therefore no 
wonder that after hundreds of monographs and dissertations 
on the topic of “what is a program”, this problem does not 
disappear from the registers of scientific papers [36]. It 
should be noted that to understand in this case means to find 
a suitable abstraction - the key to each of the many diverse 
objects. Such an abstraction should make the diverse and 
complex array of objects uniform and simple. 
6) 
What is data? 
Within the structure of the sign paradigm from the 
QPMC model, data is defined as the designating part of sign 
construction [23]. This, above all, allows to eliminate the 
perception of data as local phenomena, inalienable from 
consciousness. 
7) What is an organization? 
Organization, in particular, business can be determined 
through the program. Indeed, a software application for 
economic purposes is a model of a fragment of an economic 
organization. All agreed upon programs for all fragments of 
the organization would form a complete model of the 
organization. The data structure reflects the architecture of 
the organization. The data processing algorithms correspond 
to the organization management function implemented by 
data users. A similar idea about the similarity of programs 
and organizations was expressed by Brödner [5]. The Quasi-
physical Model of Cognition opens the possibility for its 
application. 
8) What is the economy? 
Today’s answer to this question is ambiguous. Martens 
worked with many emerging economies in the world. To 
better understand how they will respond to external 
influences (assistance, loans or investments), he represented 
them through the abstraction of a knowledge-producing 
information machine. He considered such an abstraction to 
appear productive [20]. 
Indeed, the economy is controlled through information, 
and all that it accomplishes is knowledge embodied in things 
or processes. Institutional science in this case can be 
considered as outsourcing. QPMC actually implements this 
idea in a detailed and in-depth format. It offers a 
convergence of cognitive and economic activities. 
B. 
Examples of prognostic ability QPMC  
Based on QPMC (noospheric thinking), we can make the 
following predictions: 
1) A decrease in the intensity of innovative ideas in the 
physiosphere may occur, which may require the search for 
new areas of phenomena suitable for intensive innovative 
development. One such area is the infosphere. Opinions that 
its potential has been exhausted do not correspond to facts; 
2) 
The stocks of semantically simple, rarely changing 
information practices suitable for digitization by existing 
data processing technologies are near exhaustion; 
3) 
There is both a need and an opportunity to create an 
ontological theory of signs on the empirical basis of 
programs and data for economics and business; 
4) 
In the near future, it is possible to develop 
(“upgrade”) existing IT to a state of truly informational, that 
is to say, sign technology; 
5) 
Creating methods to increase the flexibility of data 
structures and to bring them closer to the status of an 
infrastructure resource in the near future is likely to happen; 
and 
6) As the quasi-physical approach develops, modeling as 
a tool for the innovative development of the infosphere will 
give way to inventions based on ontological theories. 
C. 
Noospheric thinking (QPMC) as the intellectual 
capital of a knowledge corporation. 
When 
there 
are 
scientific 
revolutions, 
business 
organizations that claim to be the “knowledge corporation” 
cannot tarry. They accumulate empirical knowledge, thus it 
must be systematized. To accomplish this, corporations must 
have relevant cognitive models capable of solving the current 
theoretical and practical problems in the development of the 
infosphere. 
D. 
Examples of possible theoretical productivity QPMC: 
1) Formation of the paradigm of ontology of the sign and 
the theory of sign construction on the empirical basis of 
computer programs, databases and business organizations; 
2) Formation of the paradigm and theory of computer 
programs based on the paradigm of ontology of the sign; 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

3) Formation of the paradigm and data theory based on 
the paradigm of ontology of the sign; 
4) Formation of a paradigm (architecture) and the theory 
of economic organization based on the paradigm of ontology 
of the sign; and 
5) Formation based on the theory of knowledge 
economy as a semiotic machine that produces knowledge in 
sign and reified form. 
E. 
Examples of QPMC practical productivity should be: 
1) The 
development 
of 
flexible, 
unified 
data 
infrastructures that reduce fragmentation of a single data 
field, from the enterprise level to the global economy scale; 
2) The development of information and software tools to 
support intellectual activities in terms of imparting meaning 
to textual works; 
3) The optimization and integration of computer 
program architectures; and 
4) The optimization and integration of business 
organizations architectures. 
V.  
CONCLUSION 
QPMC is based on the concepts that form a hierarchical 
structure. The peak of this hierarchical structure is the 
architecture of the QPMC, followed by: the structure of the 
noosphere; PIDev and VIK models. Further, VIK, for 
example, is based on the division of objects of knowledge 
according to the levels of abstraction and integration of 
levels within the framework of the Hegel’s concept of ascent 
from the abstract to the concrete, which is supplemented by 
immersion from the concrete to the abstract.  
The real contributions of QPMC are:  
- 
to establish a connection between many ideas from 
literary sources. (The generality of these literary 
sources is not obvious); 
- 
to establish a connection between these ideas with 
the empirical base of the infosphere.  
The implementing of QPMC consist in controlling the 
transition of infosphere cognition from the pre-paradigmatic 
to the post-paradigmatic phase of development. 
The main result of the formation of QPMC is the creation 
of tools for the theoretical and practical solution of the 
problems of the infosphere; for example, the architecture of 
programs and organizations and the usefulness of ICT 
depends on the problem of fragmentation of data. For this, 
with the help of QPMC a paradigm of ontology of a sign has 
been developed, the concept of data and programs have been 
defined. See section IV of this article as well [22] [24]. 
The first iteration of the formation of QPMC, which can 
be considered as an independent topic, is completed, but in 
this case it is considered only as one of the stages in 
understanding the sphere of information phenomena. 
From the point of view of cognitive activity, QPMC 
represents a fairly complete core (paradigm) of the theory of 
knowledge, connecting the empirical base of information 
phenomena and a number of basic ideas. The sources of its 
further development will be the results of practical 
application (replenishment of the empirical base) and the 
deepening of ties with basic ideas. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Berners-Lee, J. Hendler and O. Lassila, “The 
Semantic Web,” Scientific American, vol. 5, pp. 34–43, 
2001. 
[2] A. A. Bogdanov, Tectology: Universal Organizational 
Science. Moscow: Economics, 1989. 
[3] G. Booch, Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with 
Applications. Redwood City, CA: Addison Wesley 
Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2004.  
[4] S. Brier, The Necessity of Trans-scientiﬁc Frameworks 
for Doing Interdisciplinary Research. [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/237477137_Fu
schl_Conversations_Foundations_of_Information_Scien
ce_Towards_a_New_Foundation_of_Information_Cogni
tive_and_Communication-Science 2020.06.12 
[5] P. Brödner, “Software is orgware – a semiotic 
perspective on computer artifacts,” Proceedings of the 
International Conference on User-driven IT Design and 
Quality Assurance, vol. 5, pp. 1–8, 2005.  
[6] Current Strategic Studies: The Vernadsky Strategy by 
Lyndon H. LaRouche, Jr. [Online]. Available from: 
https://larouchepub.com/eiw/public/2001/eirv28n18-
20010504/eirv28n18-20010504.pdf 2020.06.12 
[7] L. Floridi, The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of 
Computing and Information. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 
2003. 
[8] A. Geim, Be Afraid, Very Afraid, of the Tech Crisis. 
[Online]. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.scienzainrete.it/files/Andre_Geim__Be_afra
id%2C_be_very_afraid_of_the_world%27s_tech_crisis_ 
_Financial_Times.pdf 2020.06.11 
[9] G. Gorman, The Uniqueness of Knowledge Management 
– or the Emperor's New Clothes? [Online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/librarians/info
/viewpoints/unique.htm 2020.06.10 
[10] H. Gruzman, Dogged Genius of Russia. [Online]. 
Available from: http://lit.lib.ru/g/gruzman_g/genii.shtml 
2020.06.12 
[11] G. W. F. Hegel, Science of Logic. Vol. 1. Moscow: 
Musl', 1970.  
[12] A. P. Kirilyuk, “The Last Scientific Revolution”, in 
Against the Tide: A Critical Review by Scientists of 
How Physics & Astronomy Get Done, M. Lopez 
Corredoira and C. Castro Perelman, Eds. Boca Raton: 
Universal Publishers, pp. 179–217, 2008. 
[13] T. Kotarbinsky. A Treatise on Good Work. Moscow: 
Economics Publ., 1975. 
[14] T. Kuhn, The Structure of Scientific Revolutions. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2012. 
[15] A. F. Losev, Higher Synthesis. Unknown Losev. 
Moscow: CheRo, 2005. 
[16] A. F. Losev, The Philosophy of Name. Moscow: Pravda, 
1990. 
[17] A. F. Losev, Music as a Subject of Logic. Moscow:  
author's edition, 1927. 
[18] M. Mamardashvili, The Arrow of Cognition: Sketch of 
Naturally-Historical Gnosiology. Moscow: School “The 
languages of Russian culture,” 1997.  
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[19] M. 
Mamardashvili, 
The 
Experience 
of 
Physical 
Metaphysics. Moscow: Progress-Traditsiya, 2008.  
[20] B. Martens, The Cognitive Mechanics of Economic 
Development and Institutional Change. New York: 
Routledge, 2004. 
[21] W. Nöth, “Charles Sanders Pierce,” in Criticism and 
Semiotics, vol. 3-4, I. Silantyev and V. Shatin, Eds. 
Novosibirsk: Institute of Philology SO RAN, pp. 5–32, 
2001.  
[22] M. Polyakov, I. Khanin, and N. Bormatenko, “From 
modeling to technologization of conscious phenomena 
based on understanding,” 9th International Conference 
on Information and Social Science, 2019, pp. 468-477, 
doi:10.18848/1832-3669/CGP/v14i03/27-45. 
[23] M. Polyakov, I. Khanin, and N. Bormatenko, “Quasi-
physical approach to solving the semiotics practical 
productivity 
paradox,” 
4th 
Annual 
International 
Conference on Philosophy: Yesterday, Today & 
Tomorrow (PYTT 2016), Singapore, November 28–29, 
2016, pp.1-10, doi:10.5176/2382-5677_PYTT16.3 
[24] M. Polyakov, I. Khanin, N. Bormatenko, and S. 
Kosenchuk, “Ontology of sign: a key to information and 
technological advancement of the knowledge society,” 
The International Journal of Technology, Knowledge, 
and 
Society, 
vol. 
14, 
2018, 
pp. 
27–45, 
doi:10.18848/1832-3669/CGP/v14i03/27-45.  
[25] K. Popper, “Science: conjectures and refutations, 
philosophy of science: a personal report,” in British 
Philosophy in the Mid-Century, C. A. Mace, Eds. 
London: George Allen and Unwin, pp. 155-191, 1957. 
[26] S. Ranganathan, “Library science and scientific method,” 
in Annals of Library Science, vol.4. India: NISCAIR-
CSIR, pp. 19–32, 1957. 
[27] E. Saburov, “Economy as drama of ideas,” in Social 
Sciences and Contemporary World, vol. 3, S. Valentey, 
Eds. Moscow: Nauka, pp. 83–89, 2010.  
[28] A. Scheer, ARIS: Business Process Frameworks. 
Moscow: Vest-Meta Technologia, 1999. 
[29] G. P. Shchedrovitsky, Sign and Activity. Moscow: 
Vostochnaja literature, 2005. 
[30] E. Slutsky, “Etude to the problem of building formal and 
praxeological foundations of the economy,” Economic 
thought. Reader. Kiev: Knowledge, pp. 498–509, 2007. 
[31] R. Stamper, Exploring the Semantics of Communication 
Acts 
[Online]. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.vits.org/konferenser/lap2005/Paper%2014-
LAP.pdf. 2020.06.09 
[32] K. Tanaka-Ishii, Semiotics of Programming. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2010. 
[33] V. Vernadsky, Works on the History of Science. 2nd 
edition. Moscow: Science, 1988. 
[34] N. Wiener, Cybernetics: Or Control and Communication 
in the Animal and the Machine. 2nd revised ed. Paris: 
Hermann & Cie, Camb. Mass. (MIT Press), 1961. 
[35] J. A. Zachman, “A framework for information systems 
architecture,” IBM Systems Journal, vol. 26, pp. 276–
292, 1987.  
[36] https://anr.fr/Project-ANR-17-CE38-0003 2020.06.11 
[37] http://ifsr.org/ 2020.06.11 
[38] http://www.slow-science.org/ 2020.06.12 
 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-793-1
ICCGI 2020 : The Fifteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

