Instructional Approach in Adult Education using Mobile Devices 
New chances for lifelong learning 
 
Félix Buendía, Angel Perles, Juan-Vte. Capella 
Computer Engineering Department 
Universitat Politécnica de Valencia,  
Valencia, Spain 
e-mail: {fbuendia,aperles, jcapella}@disca.upv.es 
 
 
Abstract—Mobile technologies are currently present in many 
instructional areas from basic levels to higher education. This 
work is focused on studying the impact of these technologies in 
lifelong learning contexts, and more exactly, concerning adult 
education. To this end, an approach is proposed to organize 
the different items involved within an instructional process 
with the purpose of taking advantage from the use of mobile 
devices. Such approach has been applied in a course addressed 
to people older than 55 years where the potential of mobile 
technologies has been assessed to promote a more customized 
learning adapted to the adult learner profile. 
Keywords- Mobile devices; Instructional design; Life-long 
learning; Adult education 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile technologies are currently present in many 
instructional areas from basic levels to higher education. The 
UNESCO work [1] about Mobile Learning or the Horizon 
Report [2] recognize the broad extension of tablets, 
smartphones and similar devices in different learning 
scenarios. Other initiatives also show the application of these 
technologies in basic education levels [3], instruction for 
academic physicians [4] or mobile learning trends for 
postgraduate students [5]. The current work is focused on 
studying the impact of these mobile technologies in life-long 
learning contexts, and more exactly, concerning adult 
education. 
Lifelong learning comprises a wide period of time in 
which people remain engaged in the process of learning 
either in formal or informal contexts, by means of training 
procedures or motivated by personal interests. Therefore, 
there are many individual situations and circumstances that 
characterize this kind of learning so instructional and 
teaching methods have to fit them [6]. Mobile technologies 
are able to offer special support to these methods and this 
research work intends to integrate such technologies in a 
general instructional approach.  
In the case of adult education, there are additional aspects 
to be addressed including those barriers that burden the 
incorporation of elder people in lifelong learning processes 
[7]. Such barriers can be removed or lowered by applying 
technology applications and sound instructional methods.  
This paper proposes an instructional approach to guide 
the application of mobile technologies in adult education 
contexts. These technologies provide several interface 
features that allow users to deal with mobile devices in an 
easier and intuitive way compared to traditional desktop or 
laptop-based applications. Even, handicapped people or 
adults with special needs have diverse mechanisms to 
interact with these devices. This circumstance contributes to 
a more customized and adaptive learning. Nevertheless, this 
diversity 
of 
interface 
options 
provided 
by 
mobile 
technologies makes also difficult to organize or manage their 
instructional potential. Moreover, the continuous arrival of 
new mobile devices and those educational contents and tasks 
based on them is also a factor that complicates the generation 
of guidelines and procedures to take advantage of such 
technologies. This situation is particularly critical for adults 
who are not used to face quick and disruptive changes in 
their learning process. 
The instructional approach presented addresses several 
issues that range from the technical opportunities offered by 
mobile devices to the special learning needs that adult users 
require. All these issues can be framed in a context of 
Instructional Design as the discipline that provides a 
systematic and rigorous process of managing resources and 
activities in learning processes [8]. Ozdamli [9] and Park 
[10] described several pedagogical frameworks in mobile 
learning contexts to drive technology deployment in an 
effective way. Sharples et al. [11] proposed a learning theory 
that fit mobile environments and Elias [12] formulated 
several instructional principles in the design of such 
environments. More recently, Dillard [13] collected a set of 
recommendations to instruct adults by means of mobile 
technologies. The current approach intends to formalize 
some of these guidelines and recommendations, and it has 
been evaluated in the context of a course about Mobile 
Technologies oriented towards adults older than 55. The 
remainder of the work is organized as follows. Section 2 
introduces the instructional approach proposed in this paper 
and Section 3 describes the case study used to assess it, as 
well as the evaluation outcomes and their discussion together 
with some lessons learned. Finally, some conclusions and 
further works are reported.  
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

II. 
INSTRUCTIONAL APPROACH 
An instructional approach is proposed to organize the 
different items involved in those learning processes 
concerning adult education. Such approach deals with 
technical aspects related to mobile technologies but also 
takes into account learning requirements for users with 
specific needs. Therefore, a framework is required that 
addresses all these technological and instructional issues. In 
this paper, the ADDIE model [14] provides a sound 
instructional framework that also has been applied in 
technological contexts. ADDIE stands for Analysis, Design, 
Development, Implementation and Evaluation and it provides 
a general model to represent the several stages that are part 
of instructional processes.  
The Analysis stage is crucial to gather those learning 
needs expressed by users. Adult education covers a broad 
landscape of scenarios ranging from training courses to more 
informal learning contexts. The current work is focused on 
such informal scenarios addressed especially to elder people 
(more than 55 years-old) who are sometimes handicapped 
users or have special needs. Sometimes, these users also lack 
knowledge about technological notions though they are 
usually motivated to learn this kind of topics. From these 
requirements, the Design stage can deal with the formulation 
of goals that fit such requirements as well as the selection of 
educational resources and activities adapted for the needs of 
their users. Figure 1 shows a concept map that displays some 
of these Design components that are part of the proposed 
approach. For example, procedural goals can be based on 
achieving psychomotor skills by using keyboard in cellular 
phones or promoting self-organization abilities by means of 
scheduling apps. Moreover, resources, such as photo 
galleries or video recording can be easily accessed in these 
devices and activities, either individual (e.g., elaborating a 
personal agenda) or group-based (e.g., exchanging messages 
in a social network) that can contribute to improve self-
esteem and other emotional issues. 
 
Figure 1.- Instructional process concept map. 
The next stage concerns the Development of resources 
and activities, which can be applied in adult education. 
Several examples have been already mentioned and mobile 
technologies offer a wide spectrum of tools to develop them. 
For example, cameras in tablets and smartphones permit to 
take pictures or record video clips in a simple way. These 
devices also enable the processing of Quick Response (QR) 
codes to access different types of contents. Learning 
activities can be also benefited from the use of mobile 
technologies through the multiple applications available in 
distinct platforms and the multimodal interfaces provided by 
these technologies. Figure 2 shows a concept map that 
displays some of the technological possibilities offered by 
mobile devices. During the Implementation stage these 
resources and activities can be delivered by means of several 
environments and learning systems. In this sense, the most 
popular Learning Management Systems (LMS) provide 
adapted versions that fit with mobile features. Moreover, the 
use of HTML5 and CSS standards are pushing educational 
Web sites to be adapted to different screen sizes and device 
configurations applying responsive design principles. This 
circumstance allows users to easily access their educational 
contents and services though multiple mobile devices [15]. 
 
Figure 2.- Mobile technology concept map. 
The last stage in the proposed approach deals with the 
Evaluation of the learning processes when mobile 
technologies are deployed. A first method is used to gather 
personal opinions by means of questionnaires that are 
submitted during these processes. This kind of data source is 
very useful to evaluate the point of view from users who are 
using mobile devices reporting their qualitative perception 
about the learning experience. However, a more objective or 
quantitative way is ever required to get a less “invasive” 
point of view that provides neutral data from such 
experience. There are several methods to assess these 
interactions, such as “eye tracking” techniques, control of 
user gestures or tracking down the several applications that 
users run interacting with their mobile devices.  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

III. 
CASE STUDY 
The current research work has been based on a case of 
adult education in which the proposed instructional approach 
has been applied. This case study is integrated in the Senior 
University program developed at Universitat Politècnica de 
Valencia (UPV). Next subsections describe the context of 
this academic program and present some courses about 
mobile technologies delivered in this context. 
A. Academic context 
The Universitat Senior at UPV offers more than fifty 
courses to people older than 55 years. Every year about three 
thousand students join these courses that address several 
topics from general cultural issues, such as arts (e.g., music, 
sculpture or movies) to health and technology. The current 
case study is part of the courses focused on information and 
communication technologies and it complements other 
courses 
about 
computer 
basics, 
internet 
or 
office 
applications. In general, these courses have a high level of 
demand and their registration is mostly bounded by technical 
restraints imposed by those facilities deployed to deliver 
them. In most of the technological proposals, the number of 
registered users is about thirty students by course and one 
special feature is the huge diversity of user profiles that 
attend these courses. Many of them have completed higher 
education studies (degrees or masters) though they come 
from very different disciplines with sparse knowledge in 
technologies. This aspect sometimes makes teaching these 
courses difficult but the high motivation and the student’s 
degree of commitment, generally, compensates that situation. 
B. Courses about mobile technologies 
There are two types of courses offered to senior students 
that are addressed to teach mobile technologies: 
 
Introductory courses that covers basic concepts 
about this kind of technology. 
 
Advanced courses addressed to people with previous 
experience in these technologies. 
The first type of courses allows users to get some starting 
ideas about the use of mobile phones and tablets and no prior 
knowledge is required. These users usually own these 
devices though in most cases they are only used as traditional 
phones for merely calling people. Table 1 shows a 
description of the main contents delivered in these courses 
and their weekly scheduling. 
TABLE I.  
INTRODUCTORY COURSES 
Contents 
Weeks 
Introduction to the world of mobile phones and 
tablets.  Physical handling of the device. 
2 
Device 
configuration 
and 
customization. 
Choosing your tablet / smartphone. 
2 
Communication 
applications: 
e-mail, 
chat, 
videoconference. Apps instalation. . 
3 
Multimedia applications: camera use, image 
gallery, audio and video storage, e-books. 
3 
Internet: web browsing and search engines.  
2 
Social networks. Health and travel applications 
2 
Advanced courses require a previous experience in the 
management of mobile devices, for example by means of 
Introductory courses or being users of smartphones or 
tablets. These courses add an extra knowledge about more 
sophisticated services provided by these technologies, as 
well as practical activities over them. Table 2 shows a 
description of course contents and their scheduling by weeks. 
TABLE II.  
 ADVANCED COURSES 
Contents 
Weeks 
Advanced settings of mobile phones and tablets.  
Technical details of mobile fundamentals. 
2 
Managing several device interfaces. Analyzing 
multiple  tablet / smartphone devices. 
2 
Mobility applications based on GPS. Agenda 
and calendar services. 
3 
Advanced 
multimedia 
applications: 
image 
edition, audio and video processing. 
3 
Internet 
advanced 
search 
queries. 
Apps 
management. 
3 
Electronic commerce, shoping using your 
mobile device. Network security. 
3 
 
C. Course resources 
The instructional resources and material used in the 
presented courses are stored on a Web portal implemented 
by means of a blog tool. Figure 3 shows a screenshot sample 
of this portal that displays an activity description addressed 
to teach users how to setup their mobile device. Most of the 
resources are focused on practical activities that promote the 
acquisition of different types of skills together with 
knowledge about mobile technologies.  
 
Figure 3.—Web portal for mobile technology courses. 
Basic abilities are addressed in Introductory courses to 
enable simple motor skills using the smartphone keyboard or 
short term memory by means of routine tasks using tablets. 
Advanced courses encourage other abilities, such as self-
organization through calendar activities and systematic 
search procedures through the Web. 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

IV. 
 CASE IMPLEMENTATION 
The case of study has been implemented during the year 
2013 in several courses. In the first term, two Introductory 
courses to mobile technologies were taught to about fifty 
students. The second term, a new edition of Introductory 
course was delivered, and an Advanced course was included 
to cope with users that joined a previous course and wanted 
to improve their knowledge about these topics. Both courses 
were taught by the same lecturers in sessions of two hours by 
week.  
A. Course delivery 
The implementation of these courses has been based on a 
delivery method that mixed teaching in classrooms with 
learning experiences around the campus. This method 
allowed instructors to present basic concepts about mobile 
technologies in a controlled environment, as well as enabling 
activities in real scenarios outside the classrooms. An 
example consisted in visiting an outdoor sculpture exhibition 
that provided information as hot spots accessible from 
mobile devices. Figure 4 shows a picture that displays a 
sculpture sample and the QR hot spot used to support this 
learning activity. 
 
Figure 4.- Sculpture hot spot. 
Each course was delivered to about 24 students who 
attended sessions one day by week. Classroom sessions were 
taught in a special building prepared to receive multiple Wi-
Fi connections. A slide projector was also used to teach 
basics about mobile technologies and present the different 
learning activities supported by them. A set of tablets and 
smartphones was available for course participants though 
many of them brought their personal devices. This 
circumstance is further analyzed because the complexity of 
dealing with a diversity of device configurations and the 
multiple questions asked by participants about it.  
Another critical issue in the course delivery was the 
format of the documents that reported the technology basics 
and related activities. These documents were in electronic 
format (see Figure 3) but the lack of desktop computers in 
the classroom led to instructors to provide printed versions of 
this documentation that helped course participants in their 
instruction. Activities proposed in the classroom were mostly 
developed as individual works though some of them, such as 
sending or receiving messages were performed by pairs or 
even, in groups through social networks applications. 
Eventually, these activities were checked in order to detect 
the personal course progress but avoiding a grading purpose. 
B. Course evaluation 
The evaluation was mainly focused on analyzing the 
perception of course participants. Previously, a study of 
some participants’ attributes was performed to achieve a user 
profile in the several implemented courses. The analysis of 
user perceptions was organized in several items concerning 
issues, such as handiness of mobile technologies or their 
usefulness for course participants. A last aspect consisted in 
evaluating the user accesses to mobile applications through 
data logs provided by Android devices used in the courses. 
The study of user profiles was carried out using a printed 
questionnaire fulfilled by participants at the start of the 
course. This questionnaire was divided in two sections: the 
first one addressed to get demographic data, such as the user 
age, gender, or their academic studies. The second one was 
oriented towards gathering some technical data related to the 
use of mobile technologies. The next list presents some of 
the demographic data collected: 
 
Most of course participant were female (62% in the 
first term of 2013 and 70% in the second one). 
 
More than fifty percent of users aged between 63 
and 70 years. 
 
More than sixty percent of users had higher 
education. 
 
Three quarters or more were retired people. 
The technical study is summarized in Figure 5 that shows 
some interesting statistics. For example, the percentage of 
course participants who had internet in their mobile phones 
was higher than 60% in the first term (2013a) This 
percentage increased in the next course (2013b) till 85%. In 
the same way, the percentage of participants who owned 
smartphone or tablet devices grew until 80% and about 65%, 
respectively during 2013. Also, the percentage of course 
participants who daily used their mobile devices in the 
course 2013b was near the double than the first term.  
 
Figure 5.- User technical profile. 
0,00%
20,00%
40,00%
60,00%
80,00%
100,00%
INTERNET 
MOBILE
SMARTPHONE 
USERS
TABLET USERS
USE 
FREQUENCY
2013a
2013b
Technical statistics
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 6.- User technical profile. 
Figure 6 shows a bar chart that displays percentage 
statistics about the user viewpoints of the course. These 
viewpoints were gathered using an electronic form submitted 
to users at the end of each term and its answers were based 
on a Likert scale (from 1 to 5 being 5 the more positive 
valuation). The graphic view reveals some outcomes, such as 
the fulfillment of Expectations where about half of users 
stated a positive perception (a value higher than 3 in their 
answer) in the first term of 2013 and more than 60% in the 
second term. Higher percentages were drawn in issues, such 
as the Handiness to use mobile devices, their Usefulness or 
the ability to Visualize course documents. An aspect that 
provided a similar percentage (about 70% of positive 
valuation) was the perception on the use of mobile 
technologies to improve Organization skills.  
A second question that was evaluated consisted in the 
analysis of the log accesses to the mobile devices used 
during these courses. Such logs were obtained through a 
Logcat tool that provided information about those Android 
services, which were run in the course activities. Figure 7 
shows a sample of timing diagram that displays a sequence 
of Android events related to an e-mail activity. 
 
Figure 7.- Android service logs. 
 
Figure 8.- Android acccess statistics. 
This type of event tracking based on data logs enabled a 
deeper analysis of user behavior. In the current work, it 
allowed to measure the activity level of participants in the 
course when they were using mobile technologies. Such 
activity could be checked in order to test if the planned 
scheduling was met or get a performance index for each user. 
Figure 8 shows a chart that displays this kind of activity 
registering the timing of the Android events related to 
sending an e-mail in several devices. In this case, there is 
sparse distribution of events configuring the e-mail activity 
(AccountSetupBasics) regarding those events of type 
MailService. 
C. Lessons learned 
The evaluation of the case of study previously introduced 
has provided significant outcomes and lessons learned 
concerning the use of mobile technologies in specific 
scenarios of adult education. A first lesson is the need of a 
sound framework when learning processes are implemented 
within adult educational scenarios. This kind of framework is 
crucial when dealing with users who have different level of 
expertise and singular educational goals. The proposed 
framework has been based on a well-known instructional 
approach that fits quite well with the use of technologies in 
this type of scenarios. A key issue in such approach is the 
Analysis of the user learning requirements and the conditions 
that these users request. Mobile devices are relatively new 
technologies, especially for elder people, and it is important 
to gather their perspective in the knowledge of such 
technologies. Afterwards, it would be more suitable to adapt 
the Design of learning resources and teaching activities to 
these requirements.  
This rigorous and systematic approach has also enabled 
the appropriate Development of educational media that fit 
technical features of mobile devices: The diversity of size 
and interface features makes difficult to develop instructional 
materials to be deployed in several devices (e.g., a tablet vs. 
a smartphone). Therefore, it is important to collect these 
media and label them to get a catalog of available material 
adapted to the required learning scenarios. That lesson led to 
elaborate a database of potential mobile devices that could be 
0,00%
20,00%
40,00%
60,00%
80,00%
100,00%
2013a
2013b
Positive perception (%)
0
1
2
3
4
9:36:00
10:04:48
10:33:36
11:02:24
11:31:12
12:00:00
activity.setup.AccountSetupBasics
service.EmailBroadcastReceiver
service.MailService
Android events
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

used for adult education and the suitable resources for these 
devices. An additional lesson is focused on the mechanisms 
that can be deployed to deliver and supervise the use of 
mobile applications. There are several mobile platforms in 
the market and even within a specific platform like Android, 
multiple versions are available providing a different or 
customized display of applications. Moreover, users who 
brought their personal devices asked for tools to ease the 
access to these mobile applications. 
Finally, there is a general agreement about the need to 
find new Evaluation tools that enable a deeper study of the 
user behavior when they interact with mobile technologies. 
Questionnaires provide a qualitative perception of the users’ 
point of view but additional measures are required. In the 
current work, a Logcat tool was applied to track Android 
events in mobile devices though it was complex to manage 
the huge amount of collected data. Moreover, this type of 
tool is bounded to older Android versions. Alternative 
methods, such as eye tracking techniques and touch detection 
mechanisms could be explored to obtain new data sources in 
the context of adult education learning scenarios. 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The current work has presented an instructional approach 
that permits to organize learning processes in a context of 
deploying mobile technologies. These technologies have 
been used to implement several courses during the year 2013 
especially addressed to elder people. The proposed approach 
has shown its usefulness when implementing such courses 
since it provides a systematic way to analyze, design and 
develop learning resources and activities based on the use of 
mobile devices. A case study has been evaluated concerning 
two Introductory courses about mobile technologies and 
assessing their impact in the way elder people interact with 
such technologies. Several questionnaires have been 
delivered to gather profile information about users who 
joined these courses. At the end of each course, an additional 
questionnaire has been submitted to obtain the viewpoints of 
course participants. Also, data logs extracted from mobile 
devices deployed during these courses have been analyzed to 
check timing patterns in the use of mobile apps. The global 
analysis of the evaluation outcomes reveals a high interest of 
elder people about learning through this kind of technology 
although the data logs show the users’ problems to follow 
planned activities. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This 
work 
is 
supported 
by 
the 
TEA 
project 
(PAIDUPV/2791) and AulaSenior (aulasenior.es). 
REFERENCES 
[1] UNESCO, “Mobile Learning Week Report”, 2011 [Online] 
Retrieved 
March, 
2014: 
http://www.unesco.org/new/ 
fileadmin/MULTIMEDIA/HQ/ED/ICT/pdf/UNESCO%20ML
W%20report%20final %2019jan.pdf  
[2] NMC “Horizon Report 2012” Higher Education Edition 
[Online] 
Retrieved March, 
2014: 
http://www.nmc.org/ 
publications/ horizon-report-2012-higher-ed-edition 
[3] M. Bjerede and T. Bondi, “Learning is personal: Stories of 
Android Tablet Use in the 5th Grade” [Online] Retrieved 
March, 2014: http://www.learninguntethered.com/ 
[4] J. Sclafani, T. F., Tirrell and O. I. Franko, “Mobile Tablet Use 
among Academic Physicians and Trainees,” Journal of 
Medical Systems, 37 (1), 2013. 
[5] D. M. Ruth, T. M. Mastre and R. Fricker, “A Study of Mobile 
Learning Trends at the U.S. Naval Academy and the Naval 
Postgraduate School,” Educase Review, 2013 [Online] 
Retrieved 
March, 
2014: 
http://www.educause.edu/ 
ero/article/study-mobile-learning-trends-us-naval-academy-
and-naval-postgraduate-school 
[6] J. C. Dunlap and R. S. Grabinger, “Preparing students for 
lifelong learning: A review of instructional features and 
teaching 
methodologies,” 
Performance 
Improvement 
Quarterly, 16(2), pp. 6-25, 2003. 
[7] A. Perry, C. Shepherd, D.Moore and S. Schmolle, “Scaling 
up: Achieving a breakthrough in adult learning with 
technology,” Ufi Charitable Trust Report, 2013 [Online] 
Retrieved March, 2014: http://www.ufi.co.uk/sites/default/ 
files/Scaling%20 up_21_5_V3.pdf 
[8] W Dick and L Carey, The systematic design of instruction. 
4th ed. New York, NY: Harper Collin, 1996. 
[9] F. Ozdamli, “Pedagogical framework of m-learning,” 
Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 31(0), pp. 927–
931, 2011. 
[10] Y. Park, “A pedagogical framework for mobile learning: 
Categorizing educational applications of mobile technologies 
into four types,” The International Review of Research in 
Open and Distance Learning, 12(2), pp. 78–102, 2011.  
[11] M. Sharples, J. Taylor and G.Vavoula, “A Theory of Learning 
for the Mobile Age” In B. Bachmair (ed.) Medienbildung in 
neuen Kulturräumen. Stuttgart, Kohlhammer Verlag, pp. 87-
99, 2010. 
[12] T. Elias, “Universal Instructional Design Principles for 
Mobile Learning,” International Review of Research in Open 
and Distance Learning, 12 (2), pp. 143–156, 2011. 
[13] A. Dillard, “Mobile Instructional Design Principles for Adult 
Learner” Capstone Report. University of Oregon, 2012 
[Online] 
Retrieved 
March, 
2014: 
https://scholarsbank. 
uoregon.edu/xmlui/handle/1794/12253 
[14] M. Molenda, In search of the elusive ADDIE model. 
Performance improvement, 42(5), 34, 2003. 
[15] K. McCrane, Content Strategy for Mobile. Ed. A Book apart, 
2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

