A Multi-Agent’s Modeling for the 4D Model of hiv Dynamics 
Toufik Laroum 
Université 20 Aout 1955 
Skikda, Algeria 
laroumtoufik@yahoo.fr 
Bornia Tighiouart 
Université de Badji Mokhtar 
Annaba, Algeria 
b_tighiouart@yahoo.fr 
 
 
Abstract—The purpose of the modeling of the biological 
processes is to understand better the complexity of these 
phenomena; using various models.  The following research is 
an attempt to study the dynamics of the population of cells 
intervening during a human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection. This problem was mainly studied mathematically by 
using mathematical models which are based on the differential 
equations. We will use the approach of modeling Multi-agents 
to simulate the 4D model of this bio-process and show that the 
multi-agents model is more close to the real biological 
phenomenon 
than 
a 
mathematical 
model 
without 
underestimating the mathematical approach. The obtained 
results are consistent with the biological phenomenon and 
encouraged us to further improve the model. 
Keywords-Multi-Agents 
Simulation; 
dynamic 
of 
the 
populations; the human immunodeficiency virus infection; the 
virtual community; bio-informatics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The mathematical modeling was for a long time used to 
study the complex phenomena and the efficiency of this 
approach is not any more to be shown. However, the Multi-
agents approach began to be particularly used in the study of 
the dynamics of the populations relative to the cellular 
biology so allowing exceeding some limits of the 
mathematical approach.  
This work studies the dynamics of the population of cells 
concerned by the human immunodeficiency virus infection. 
There are several mathematical models that treat the 
dynamics of this phenomenon [3] [5]; the simplest is the 3D 
model [2] which we modeled with the multi-agents approach 
in [9]. We are interested in this work by the 4D model which 
is more complicated than the 3D model because it takes in 
consideration the dynamics of 4 categories of cells. 
This paper begins with a small presentation of the study 
field; wish is the modeling of bio-process (by using the 
mathematical modeling). Followed by an explication of the 
multi-agent modeling approach and the studied biological 
phenomenon (the human immunodeficiency virus infection). 
After that, the multi-agent system is presented with a 
discussion of the obtained results comparing with the 
mathematical model and the 3D system. 
II. 
DYNAMICS OF THE POPULATIONS 
The dynamics of the population is the science that studies 
the evolution of the individuals of the population in time and 
space as well as the interaction between them to understand 
the global behavior of the population. 
The research field is not recent. In 1790, there was a 
mathematical model of Malthus [10] (the exponential growth 
of a population), and then, in 1838, the model with logistic 
growth of Verhulst [7] was proposed. These two models 
described the evolution of a homogeneous population; but, in 
1925 the famous system prey-predator of Lotka-Volterra [1] 
[11] was the first model describing the evolution of two 
interacting populations and on which various models were 
proposed to today. However, the mathematical approach has 
some limits (complexity of the equations, difficulty in 
updating the model, abstract models, etc.) that we are trying 
to overcome by using the multi-agents approach. 
III. 
MULTI-AGENTS MODELING APPROACH  
The Multi-agents approach is suited well to the study of 
the complex systems constituted by several entities in 
interaction. It consists in representing every entity by an 
agent, then in developing the system with time. 
The evolution of different agents with their basic actions 
and interactions that link them will bring out the dynamic of 
the studied phenomenon with the appearance of behaviors 
and unanticipated events [6]. 
This approach with its low degree of abstraction allows 
to approach the model from the reality, where every agent 
moves, reproduces, interacts and reacts with the changes of 
its environment. The most important is that the agents are 
different than the others and that every agent is marked and 
can be followed at any time during its evolution. So, the 
addition or the retreat of an agent or of a set of agents is an 
easy operation [8]. 
IV. 
INFECTION BY THE HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY 
VIRUS 
An immune reaction is mainly expressed by the actions 
of lymphocytes cells called CD4 and CD8. CD4 lymphocyte 
produced by the Thymus is responsible of the coordination 
and the activation of cytotoxic lymphocytes CD8. This CD4 
cell is an infection subject by HIV virus which considers 
them as an adequate environment to carry out its cycle of 
proliferation. So, the destruction of CD4 by the HIV 
paralyzes the immune defense to its source [4]. 
The phenomenon of the infection takes place in three 
stages (see Figure 1): 
 
• 
Primary infection: lasts from 3 to 8 weeks, it is 
characterized by a fast diminution of lymphocytes 
CD4 caused by an increase of the viral load, 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

followed by a decrease of the viral load what allows  
increasing  the number of the cd4. 
 
• 
The asymptotic phase: its duration is of around 10 
years during which the immune system maintains a 
state of balance (stability) between the number of the 
CD4 and the viral load. 
 
• 
AIDS: It is the phase in which the immune system is 
depressed because of the fast decrease of CD4 
lymphocytes (less of 200 / mm3). 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  evolution of the biological phenomenon 
A. The 4D Mathematical Model  
We are interested in this study of the 4D model which 
treats 4 types of cells: the cd4 lymphocytes (T ), the viruses 
HIV (V ), the CD4 lymphocytes infected by the viruses 
(
T*
) and the CD8 lymphocytes (
TCTL
 for Cytotoxic T-
Lymphocyte). 
 
The phenomenon is modeled by the following equations 
[4], where 
T CTL
T
T
'
'*
'
,
,
and 
'
V indicates respectively the 
variation rates in density of CD4 cells, infected CD4 cells 
CD8 cells and the virus populations: 
 









−
=
−
+
=
−
−
=
−
−
=
cV
kT
V
Tctl
aTT Tctl
ctl
T
qTctlT
uT
TV
T
TV
T
s
T
*
'
*
'
*
*
'*
'
α
λ
β
β
δ
 
(1) 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE I.  
PARAMETERS LIST OF THE 4D MODEL  
 
CD4 lymphocyte cells are produced by the thymus at a 
constant rate equal to s  cells a day in 1 mm3 of blood, and 
die at a rate of natural mortality equals to δ  cells in a day.  
The population of CD4 lymphocytes loses also a number 
of cells which are transformed in infected CD4 cells because 
of the infection by the virus with a rhythm of TV
β
where 
β represents the infectivity of the viruses HIV which is the 
probability that a contact between CD4 and virus HIV is 
infectious. 
The transformation rate of CD4 cells on infected CD4 is 
the rate of production of this last one, dying at a natural 
mortality rate equal to u cells per day. An infected CD4 
produces a number of viruses at a rate of k  Virus HIV a 
day, these viruses die at a natural mortality rate equals to c  
virus a day. 
 
 
 
Parameters 
Definition 
s  
Production of CD4 cells by thymus  
δ  
Mortality rate of  CD4 cells 
β  
Virus infectivity 
u  
Mortality rate of  infected CD4 cells 
q  
Cytotoxity of the CD8 against the infected cd4 
λ  
Production rate of the cd8 by the thymus 
a  
Rate of proliferation of the cd8 
α  
Mortality rate of  CD8 cells 
k  
Production rate of virus 
c  
Mortality rate of virus 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
 
Figure 2.  Results of the mathematical model [4]. 
The CD8 lymphocytes are cells of the immune system, 
they have a toxic capacity that enables them to play a 
defensive role to destroy the infected cells cd4 (and foreign 
objects in general).  
 The infected CD4 cells are destroyed by the CD8 at a 
rhythm of 
qTTCTL
 where q represents the cytotoxity of the 
CD8 cells, in other words, the probability that a contact 
between a cd8 cell and a cd4 infected cell leads to the 
destruction of this second. 
The CD8 cells are produced by the thymus with a 
constant rate = λ  cells per day, and die with a death rate = 
α cells per day. During their defensive intervention, the cd8 
are proliferated with a rhythm = 
aTT *TCTL
proportional to 
the number of cd4, infected cd4 and the current number of 
the cd8 cells. 
This mathematical model gives the following results 
(Figure 2), which represents the phase of the primary 
infection and the asymptomatic phase in the process of the 
infection. 
We notice that the number of the cells CD8 increases 
during the phase of the primary infection because of the 
proliferation of the cells, then it starts to stabilize during the 
asymptomatic phase after the stability of the rates of the CD4 
and of the infected CD4 cells. 
B. Multi-agents Model 
To simulate the phenomenon by a Multi-agents system, 
we created a virtual environment in which various agents 
evolve and interact between them. It is an environment in 3 
dimensions that corresponds to 1 mm3 of the blood. 
We created four classes of reactive agents feigning the 
studied cells (The CD4 cells agents, the infected CD4 cells 
agents, CD8 cells agents and the virus HIV agents (Fig. 3). 
Each agent reproduces the behavior of a cell; we find the 
different biological actions of the phenomenon (creation of 
the cells, movement in the environment, infection, 
production of the viruses, immune defense, etc.). 
 
In each class, there is a population of agents wish move 
in the environment. Hiv agents move in the environment, 
find the closest cd4 agent and infect it if possible.  
Infected CD4 agents move in the environment and 
produce new HIV agents. CD8 agents move in the 
environment, find the closest CD4 infected agent and destroy 
it if possible then proliferate to create new agents.  
The thymus Agent represents the thymus; his role is the 
production of CD4 and CD8 agents.  
 The observer agent is required to execute the system 
because it provides information’s about all agents. For 
example, to find the closest cd4 agent the HIV agent must 
calculate the distance from all cd4agents, so he must have 
the coordinates of all these agents, it is the agent observer 
who gives this information. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Interactions in the Multi-agent system. 
This model Multi-agents is closer to the reality than the 
mathematical model, which is unable to express the 
phenomenon of meeting (contact in the biological sense) 
between a virus and a CD4 cell (the action of the infection) 
and between a CD8 cell and an infected CD4 cell (the action 
of defense or the destruction of the infected CD4).  
 
Effectively, in the mathematical model, the number of 
the produced infected CD4 agents is calculated by 
multiplying the total number of the possible contacts 
between the viruses and the CD4 cells (which is equal to 
TV ) by the parameter β  which does not describe faithfully 
the phenomenon. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

In other words, by means of the mathematical model, a 
population of 100 CD4 cells and 10 viruses gives 
100*10=1000 infected CD4 cells which are not so exact 
because in the reality this population produces in maximum 
10 infected cells CD4 if we suppose that every virus infects 
one CD4 cell [9].   
 
The same thing for the number of the infected CD4 cells 
eliminated by the cd8 cells; the total number is calculated by 
multiplying the number of the possible contacts between the 
CD8 and the infected CD4 cells (which is equal to 
TCTLT *
) 
by the parameter q .  
 
It is obvious that if there are 100 CD8 cells and 10 
infected CD4 cells, the number of destroyed cells will be 
10*1000 = 1000 cells if we suppose that q =1 while there 
were only 10 cells at the beginning. 
 
The number of the CD8 is multiplied during the 
destruction of the infected CD4 cells (by proliferation), 
consequently it depends on the number of the CD4, infected 
cd4 and CD8 more exactly depends on the number of the 
contacts between cd8 and cd4 infected. The mathematical 
model estimates this value by the multiplication 
aTT *TCTL
, 
i.e., all cd8 are proliferated because it does not make a 
distinction between the cd8 cells contrary to the Multi-agents 
model where for each contact between cd4-infected and CD8 
the two cells (agents) members of this phenomenon are well-
known because the agents are distinguished from each other! 
 
That returns because the mathematical approach treats 
the phenomenon on high-level (consider all the population) 
contrary to the approach Multi-agents where the treatment is 
made at the level of the individuals and each contact between 
cells is treated independently of the others, which gives a 
more exact representation of the reality. 
V. 
RESULTS 
A. Evolution without infection 
In the absence of the viruses or foreign dangerous 
objects, the number of the cells cd8 remains constant. If we 
suppose that the thymus produces daily 1 CD8 cell, at a 
mortality rate δ =0,002, that means that the lifespan of cells 
is 1/ δ =500 days [4]. We can notice that from several 
random initial states: 0 cells, 1000 cells and 1500 cells with a 
random initialization of the age of cells (between 0 and 500 
days to have a homogeneous population wish is close to the 
reality), the population of the CD8 will converge on 500 
CD8 cells and stabilizes around this value (Fig. 4).  
 
 
 
 
Figure 4.  Evolution of the CD8 without infection. 
 
We notice that the model Multi-agents converges more 
quickly than the mathematical model. The difference 
between both models appears also in the speed of extinction 
of an isolated population of CD8 cells, i.e., the rate of 
production is equal to zero (Fig. 5). 
 
 
 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 5.  Extinction of the CD8. 
The Multi-agents model shows that the population of the 
CD8 cells disappears immediately after 500 days (which is 
the lifespan of cells), and that happens independently of the 
initial number of the cells. 
 
B. Evolution of the infection 
In an environment, which represents 1 mm3 of the blood, 
evolve four categories of cells: infected CD4, CD8, infected 
CD4 and the viruses HIV which interact between them by 
feigning the phenomenon of the infection. 
 
In the presence of the infection, the CD8 cells play a 
defensive role. They exploit their cytotoxic capacity to 
eliminate the infected CD4 cells and consequently stop the 
production of the new viruses. The intervention of the CD8 
cells is accompanied by a proliferation of these last where 
new CD8 cells are produced according to the numbers of the 
other cells (according to the mathematical model).   
 
We notice that the two first phases of the process of the 
infection are recognizable on the various curves (Fig. 6).The 
phase of the primary infection is characterized by a growth 
of the viral population (initially little numerous) which 
invade CD4 cells (initially numerous). The infection of the 
healthy CD4 gives infected CD4 cells which are going to 
produce new viruses able to infect the others CD4. This 
growth persists until reach a maximal rate with which the 
reduced number of the population of the CD4 becomes a rare 
resource, consequently lot of viruses die without being able 
to infect CD4 and to produce infected CD4. In that case we 
notice a fall of the viral load and the number of the CD4 
infected. 
 
The second phase of the infection is the asymptomatic 
phase in which a kind of state of balance is established 
between the rates of the various cells. 
Figure 6 shows also the action of the CD8 cells. In the 
beginning, the production of the CD8 follows a natural 
production rate, but after the invasion of the viruses we 
notice that the number of the CD8 agents was increased 
considerably. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Results of the Multi-Agents model. 
The strong increase in the CD8 agents returns to the 
proliferation of the latter. The action of the CD8 agents is 
double: destruction of the infected CD4 cells and the 
proliferation to reinforce the immunity against the infected 
CD4 cells (The proliferation of the CD8 reaches its 
maximum when the number of the infected CD4 is max i.e. 
during the phase of the primary infection). 
 
3D 
4D 
3D 
4D 
3D 
4D 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

It is clear in the case of the 3D model (the dotted curve) 
that the number of the infected CD4 (consequently of the 
viruses) is more important than the one of the 4D model 
because there is no resistance from the system like the case 
of the model 4D. 
Figure 7 shows the number of CD8 cells produced by 
proliferation during both phase of the infection. 
 
 
Figure 7.  Cd8 proliferation. 
If there were not infection of the viruses, the production 
of the CD8 remains constant. In the primary infection the 
number of the infected CD4 reached its maximum it is for 
that we notice the abrupt increase in the CD8 agents because 
of the proliferation (look at the curve of CD8). 
 
During the asymptomatic phase, the number of the 
various cells (CD4, infected CD4 and virus) is stable thus we 
notice that the number of the CD8 agents becomes stable, 
more exactly; because the number of the CD8 cells agents 
produced by proliferation becomes more stable and weaker. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
The population of the agents could reproduce the 
evolution of the biological phenomenon relating to the 4D 
model. This model enriched the 3D model by the behavior of 
the CD8 cells which influences the dynamics of the infection 
in accordance with the expected results from the biological 
phenomenon. We can see that during the asymptomatic 
phase the system maintains a rate of the CD4 cells more 
important than the one which is in the 3D model thanks to 
the effect of the CD8 cells. Our multi-agent model is 
extensible, in future work we will add the behavior of other 
cells involved in this bioprocess; because if we can build a 
complete multi-agents model for the phenomenon of the 
infection, we will be able to predict the evolution of the 
phenomenon and consequently to better direct the treatment. 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] A. J. Lotka, “Elements of Physical Biology”, Williams and 
Wilkins company, Baltimore. (February 1925). 
[2] A. S. Perelson and P. W. Nelson, “Mathematical analysis of 
HIV- dynamics in vivo”, SIAM Review,  Vol. 41, No. 1  
(Mar., 1999), pp. 3-44. 
[3] C.H. Moog, D.A. Ouattara, C. Francois-Brunet, F. Bugnon, 
V. Ferre, E. Andre-Garnier, F. Raffi, “Mathematical 
modelling of HIV infection for an aid in the early diagnosis of 
therapeutical 
failures”. 
In 
XVI 
International 
AIDS 
Conference, Toronto, Canada, August 2006. Ref. CDA0120 
on http://www.aids2006.org. 
[4] D. A. Ouattara, “Modélisation de l’infection par le VIH, 
identification et aide au diagnostic”, Thèse de doctorat, 
Spécialité Automatique et Informatique Appliquée. Université 
de Nantes (2006). 
[5] F. Dubois, VJ. Le Meur. Hervé, and C. Reiss, “Mathematical 
modeling of antigenicity for HIV dynamics, MathematicS In 
Action, volume 3, p. 1-35, 2010.  
[6] M. Bouzid, “Contribution à la modélisation de l’interaction 
Agent/Environnement, 
modélisation 
stochastique 
et 
simulation parallèle”, Thèse de doctorat de l’université Henri 
Poincaré, Nancy 1 (Spécialité informatique). Laboratoire 
Lorrain de recherche en informatique et ses applications 
(2001). 
[7] P. F. Verhulst, “Notice sur la loi que la population suit dans 
son 
accroissemen, 
Correspondance 
mathématique 
et 
physique” 109, tome X – ou tome II de la 3e série (1838). 
[8] P.Ballet, “Intérêts Mutuels des Systèmes Multi-agents et de 
l’Immunologie. Applications à l’immunologie, l’hématologie 
et au traitement d’image”, thèse de doctorat Université De 
Bretagne Occidentale (2000). 
[9] T. Laroum and B. Tighiouart, "A Multi-agent System for the 
Modelling of the HIV Infection", KES-AMSTA 2011, LNAI 
6682, pp. 94–102, 2011. 
[10] T. R. Malthus, “An essay on the principle of population”, 
First Edition, J. Johnson in St Paul’s Churchyard, London. 
(1798).  
[11] V. Volterra, “Variazioni e fluttuazioni del numero d’individui 
in specie animali conviventi”, In R. N. Chapman : Animal 
Ecology. McGraw-Hill 1931, New York, 1926. 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

