The Empirical Analysis of a Web 2.0-based Learning Platform 
 
András Benedek  
Department of Technical Education 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
E-mail: benedek.a@eik.bme.hu 
György Molnár  
Department of Technical Education 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
E-mail: molnargy@eik.bme.hu
 
 
Abstract— The paper presents and analyses the new elements 
of instruction which have recently appeared as a consequence 
of the development of ICT (Information and Communications 
Technology) such as interactive and mobile communication 
tools or the applications contributing to 3D visual viewing at a 
university of significant traditions. The author also deals with 
the use of the special environment of networked learning based 
on atypical learning modes, the possibilities of instructional 
material and management development issues in details, as 
well as its typical effects on the active participants paying 
special attention to the forming new teaching and learning 
styles. Some extremely important parameters and their 
tendencies during the development decision making processes 
have been considered as essential by the lecturers involved by 
means of the application of different statistical algorithms and 
the webmining technology. Examining the learning activity of 
students of mainly traditional full-time courses in atypical 
learning environments, the possibilities of effective learning, 
network-based cooperation, students’ attitudes and the 
development of key qualifications were evaluated in connection 
with our blended learning courses supported by electronic 
learning management systems. (An example of such a course is 
Digital Pedagogy.) By introducing this course attracting a high 
number of students (3-400 students per course), we wish to 
present our latest experimental developments, such as course 
topics, students’ assignments, microcontent, blogs, and e-
portfolio. The learning patterns of the present – day student 
popular on demands the integration of the atypical modes in to 
the teaching/ learning process. Such as electronic new 
generation learning environment is Moodle (Modular Object - 
Oriented Dynamic Learning Environment), whose selection was 
supposted by its open source character modular structure to be 
easily further – developed and its word wide popularity. The 
popular on using the atypical learning environment presented 
in the paper cannot be considered to be representative, 
however, can be the starting point of the further - development 
of our learning environments. 
Keywords - ICT; learning support systems; Moodle e-
portfolio; web 2.0; online learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The mathematical model of the description of network 
structures, such as the Erdős - Rényi model of the 1960s, 
has been known for a long time [1]. This model was used 
for the description for random networks consisting of nodes 
and the connecting lines, and could be describe by means of 
Poisson distribution. The BACON game [1], mainly popular 
in the US, was based on such an algorithm. 
In accordance with Albert - László Barabássi’s theory 
based on recent researches [1], the operation of complex 
networks can only be understood through the structures, 
which implies the interpretation of complex systems and the 
preparation of maps. All these, require the paradigm shift of 
human thinking to be able to interpret the available 
databases appropriately. The complex systems are more 
than the behaviour of a network. Such a system can be the 
human mind or an economic system, or the systems of 
learning processes. Furthermore the given complex systems 
changes with time, and we need to understand how it 
changes. The measurement and study of human behaviour 
patterns, learning behaviours can help to achieve this goal. It 
can also imply the measurement of human mobility or 
learning environments. The study of up-to-date ICT tools 
(as like smartphones, interactive systems, pc-s, multimedia 
systems), 
social 
webpages 
or 
electronic 
learning 
environments contribute to these measurements. These 
complex systems can be interpreted as scale independent 
networks, an example being the worldwide web or the 
learning network, whose understanding requires modern 
theories in addition to the already existing up-to-date ICT. 
So our task is to create such models. This is the science of 
the future. Our paper wishes to present on one hand the ICT 
environment, on the other hand student behavior patterns 
[1]. 
The classic educational environments have radically 
changed. It could be best characterized by the increasing use 
of atypical learning modes. The learning environments these 
learning modes rely on are supported by ICT technologies in 
a great degree. The ’learning space’ can be compared to the 
physical behavior of light. Encouraging learning by 
activities can be considered as such impulses whose effects 
have been examined in the case of learning networks in the 
Moodle environment for a relatively great population of 
students. The impulses are such “flashes” which result in 
significant, although short student activities. It is supposed 
that the “flashes” can be developed into a flow of steady 
light in the learning space by means of appropriate 
techniques especially by encouraging horizontal activities. 
The paper calls attention to the above mentioned 
56
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

phenomenon and formulates statements concerning the 
sustainability of the active phases of learning based on 
Moodle statistical analyses. The intensive growing of the 
students’ horizontal communication (use of forums, chat 
rooms) and the increase of the frequency of learning 
communication in the informal learning space directly 
related to the formal learning process can have such a 
stabilizing effect on formal learning that can lead to the 
recognition of design and methodological relationships [2]. 
II. 
PROPOSAL 
A. ICT tools supporting instruction and learning 
The new strata of the information society grow up in the 
environment of the most up-to-date technology, so they 
might be called digital natives. They are familiar with IPTV, 
smart mobiles and homes, 3D TV, IPv6 network, thin client 
terminals, network communities (facebook, twitter, hi5) and 
Web 3.0 protocols [3]. This fact has such important 
potentials from the viewpoint of teaching and learning that 
should be relied on when designing and implementing 
courses. However, to be able to realize it successfully and 
effectively, we need to analyse the available results and 
experiences. 
One of the new and at present innovative fields is the 
world of 3Ds. The problem of how 3D reality can be 
illustrated in one dimension has long been studied. The 
main goal of the technique is to provide an exact 
representation, a geometrical analysis, interpretation of 
spatial figures. In this sense, the two most important forms 
of visual communication are the representation and the 
interpretation of figures. Cognition, thinking and creation 
are interrelated in both forms of visual communication. 
Visual cognition means using pictures, images, that is, we 
wish to understand the ability of visual thinking starting 
from basic procedures. They imply such mental activities as 
analysis, synthesis or abstraction. Visual images are made 
dynamic by means of such procedures [4].  
A 
classic 
example 
is 
the 
visionary 
turning, 
transformation of a spatial figure. Procedures by means of 
mental images can be interpreted as analogical processes of 
thinking, as opposed to the logical processes of conceptual 
thinking. If these procedures can become experience-like in 
a real physical environment, then the above mentioned 
thinking can be developed. Such a real environment is 
provided by the ICT system, the “Leonardo3Do”, whose 
development increases Hungary’s reputation. Students are 
able to create, formulate, cut off, and distort spatial figures, 
then improving their abilities of visual thinking and spatial 
visual abilities. In addition to it, the most important tool of 
visual seeing is the so-called bird, which is directly 
connected to its operator. In addition, the realization of 
visual thinking is strengthened by the so called active eye 
glasses the camera system and the control PC, most 
important tool of visual seeing (see Figure 1). 
 
 
Figure 1. Leonar3Do [17] 
Smart phones, IPADs and kinect units providing real life-
like simulation, as well as kinect units, games, and the 
network-based web 2.0 and its applications (Google 
documents, Google, slide share, Google questionnaires, 
Google mobiles, Google calendars, Goggle blog, (Facebook, 
Twitter, Hi5, LinkedIn), whose peripheries are replaced by 
human fingers. The group of interactive online integrated 
tools (6th sense technology), in which peripheries are 
replaced by human fingers is also a new direction of 
developments, equipped with a mobile small monitor 
instead of the traditional monitor, the PC by a PDA (See 
Figure 2) [15]. 
 
 
Figure 2. Interactive mobile system [18] 
B. Networked learning and its characteristics 
Having taken into consideration student attitude, 
learning characteristics, platform independence and the 
possibilities of development, the Department of Technical 
Education decided on introducing Moodle LMS system a 
few years ago. The word Moodle is an acronym of the 
notion Modular Object - Oriented Dynamic Learning 
Environment. Moodle is actually a kind of LMS (Learning 
Management System) application, more exactly a learning 
management system or an e-learning system shell integrated 
into the web 2.0 environment. The general task of the LMS 
is to identify its users and to match them with the adequate 
subject-matters (courses) according to their roles and rights. 
The network servers of these systems provide the right 
databases for system users and simultaneously log their 
activities and relevant learning data that can be used for 
generating statistics in the future. This data provide 
important information on the proficiency of students and 
also suitable for evaluation of the curricular effectiveness 
57
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

[16]. Moodle is a web-based system, as it was mentioned 
before, so its use requires a PC with Internet/intranet and a 
browser access, a server and its URL given by the service 
provider. For example: http://mpt.moodle.appi.bme.hu/ (See 
Figure 3). 
 
 
Figure 3. Opening page of the Moodle LMS of the Department, Source: own 
photo 
 
The main page of the Department’s Moodle LMS 
provides a list of all the courses of the Department 
structured by different categories such as academic years,  
types of programmes and whether the course is mandatory 
or optional.  
The Moodle platform of the Department offers learning 
management services for 3,869 participants at present, and 
their number is increasing semester by semester.  
The LMS provides detailed statistical data about the 
activity of the participants. The following figure shows the 
activity tendencies covering the past three years, with the red 
curve presenting the learners’ activities. It is to be seen that 
the maximums of the amplitudes overlap with the dates of 
performance measurement, that is, the dates of assignment 
submission or test writing. 
The paper presents the structure, characteristics, and the 
students’ activities of an optional course, Digital Pedagogy 
preferred by the students and attracting a huge number of 
students. The course has been supported by the Moodle 
LMS for four years. The course is offered in a blended 
learning mode, as in addition to the face-to-face lectures, the 
students are provided the opportunity of networked content 
creation and that of synchronous communication.  
As the above suggests networked communication starts 
at the beginning of the semester to harmonize topics, to have 
it approved by the lecturer and to have it assessed on both 
the students’ and the lecturer’s side. For this purpose, the 
system provides a set of activities, such as tests, activities, 
forums. The communication carried out on these channels 
can be followed in Moodle, but the participants also get a 
copy of each via e-mail, which makes the flow of 
information faster in a great degree [5]. 
It is possible to prepare log files of a given course – the 
last lesson of the course, activities, participation, as well as 
simple statistical curves - by means of the reporting motor 
of the electronic learning environment. 
Figure 4 shows all the activities of all participants 
(teachers, students, and administrators) in a given semester, 
which well illustrates that the activity levels are the highest 
around the dates of assignments submission and tests (see 
Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4. Activities of one semester of Digital Pedagogy course, Source: 
own photo 
Out of the administration blocks of a given course the 
points report is an excellent way of having information 
about the full performance of a student in a given semester 
in a given course – assignments, topic selection, on-line 
tests, - with given points and comments. It also provides an 
opportunity of monitoring the student-student and student-
lecturer horizontal and vertical communications. All student 
activities can also be summarized. 
Our experiences of several years show that while the 
lecturers are mainly active in the daytime, the students are 
active more often than not late in the evening or at night. 
Since the system is connected to the participants’ e-mail 
systems, most of the students stay online for 10-12 hours a 
day, so interactivity and quick feedback can be realized. The 
scope of activities to be carried out suggests that the 
students prefer the new generation activities, such as 
microcontent/related activities or the e-portfolio. The 
assignments are stored by the system, consequently they can 
be found any time. The following figure is an example of 
microcontent. The students’ activities are stored at a 
delegated page, and are used to prepare an illustrative 
collection of them (see Figure 5). 
58
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

 
 
Figure 5. An example of microcontent 
 
The e-portfolio integrated into the Moodle system is 
very popular among the students. Each student was required 
to log in and join the group of students of Digital Pedagogy. 
After entering, the participants could share the uploaded 
materials and their contributions. The e-portfolio group was 
used by 253 students in a course, and each of them prepared 
4-5 files and introductory portfolios in their profiles.  
Both the e-portfolio and the profile editions are user-
friendly, as they can be prepared easily and fast, e.g., by 
means of the clicking and dragging technique (see Figure 6). 
 
 
Figure 6. Editing e-portfolio profiles  
 
The students can view their own uploaded and edited 
contents, on the other hand their own introductory profiles 
with the photos, as well as the students’ acquaintances, 
groups, notice boards, which are the main forces of the new 
connectivity learning theories for the participants. By using 
them, the students can discuss important questions, 
requirements, solutions related to the course with their peers 
and their lecturers as well. 
C. Web Mining Algorithms 
The main objective of the investigation was to explore 
the most important characteristics of student behaviour or, 
in other words, the learning activity over the semester by 
means of web mining methods. The results presented in the 
previous chapter do not describe classic e-learning but 
blended learning integrating networked learning phases into  
the mainstream face to face education and combining the 
best of both forms of teaching and learning. 
In introducing learning activities, two approaches were 
followed. On one hand, the role of the students’ learning 
process  was explored (macroanalysis), and on the other 
hand the microstructure of processing electronic syllabuses 
was investigated (microanalysis). 
So-called offline web mining methods such as Google 
Analytics and SPSS Web mining for Clementine [7] and its 
web mining node are able to provide the possibility of a 
more profound, more comprehensive and more scientific 
analyses, far beyond descriptive statistics. It is an 
aggravating circumstance for the application of online tools 
that within the virtual learning environment several 
simultaneous courses are running. The isolation of related 
results as well as their survey is often too complicated. It is 
also difficult to perform analyses concerning the levels of 
the objects comprising the module and the pages comprising 
SCORM module and the html - based syllabus. Clementine 
is also capable of extracting related data from the log file. 
[9]. 
The application of web mining in VLE is an iterative 
cycle in which the excavated information and data should 
“enter the loop of the system and guide, facilitate and 
enhance learning as a whole, not only turning data into 
knowledge, but also filtering mined knowledge for decision 
making”.  The CRISP-DM (CRoss Industry Standard 
Process for Data Mining) as a well-known process model 
consists of six phases (See Figure 7) [12], [14]. 
59
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

Figure 7. The CRISP-DM model [13] 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
The tracking of the work during the semester is 
supported by log files of Subject sheets. The tracking tools 
are ready-made and partly built into the learning 
environment; users’ activities, their completed tasks and 
indices of achievements can be monitored by using statistics 
and graphs. Moreover, we carried out additional data 
analyses to obtain information on the progress in reaching 
the pedagogical goals connected with the course sheet 
usage. The Google statistical analyzer was used to prepare 
Figure 8 and Figure 9). The following table shows that how 
many students visited the the webpage of the course of 
Digital Pedagogy, how often and the amount of time spent 
there. 
 
 
Figure 8. Participant activities of one semester of Digital Pedagogy course  
 
 
Figure 9. Student activities of one semester of Digital Pedagogy course with 
google analytics 
 
The report on one single student’s performance is an 
interesting and useful set of statistical data, as it contains the 
student’s points collected during the course on the basis of 
his/her performance. By means of this, student performance 
can be evaluated individually and in a realistic way. 
Both the students and the lecturers have the opportunity 
to have access to the detailed report of a student’s activity in 
the function of actual measurements and their points and 
total points. This is also useful from the viewpoint of the 
students and the lecturers. 
When running a course, all activities of the learning 
environment are recorded and stored in an appropriate 
database. Thanks to this data mass, the learning environment 
becomes suitable for preparing simple statistics without 
involving any special knowledge. For obtaining reports 
based on more complex data-correlations, additional data 
filtering and data combinations need to be done. Therefore, 
we used data mining techniques for deeper data analyses 
(SPSS Clementine 12.0 software with WebMining for 
Clementine) [7]. 
Using the SPSS Clementine data mining software the 
content of the log files produced during the use of course 
sheets can be processed. By doing so, more information can 
be obtained on the students’ behaviour, their learning 
patterns and the usability of the interface to the electronic 
learning environment. By means of data mining it is possible 
to obtain information that could not be gained through other 
usability tests or queries. By the utilization of the results 
coming from data mining supported analyses of course 
sheets and curricula usage we are likely to identify effective 
education and learning processes and we will able to use the 
outcome during the development of the electronic curricula 
as well. 
First of all, we formulated questions that could not be 
answered by means of integrated statistical tools of the 
learning environment. Then we attempted to answer these 
questions by using the appropriate data mining software 
(SPSS Clementine 12.0 software with WebMining for 
Clementine). 
Most LMS have a built - in statistical module which 
makes possible the fixing of particular items of user 
activities. Such items can be entry data or download figures 
per subject item. However, these analysing methods are not 
qualified for revealing deeper relations or prediction of 
60
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

learning/related events. This latter fact is of utmost 
importance for us, as it makes the learning process more 
predictable pedagogically. The user interface and usage of 
the program do not require IT or mathematics skills but that 
scope of interest could be an advantage (see Figure 10) [8], 
[10]. 
 
Figure 10. Data analysis with SPSS Clementine 12.0  
 
The students can directly communicate with each other 
in the system by means of e-mailing, chatting or using 
forums, the direct communication channels are primarily 
built around the teacher-student relationship in the electronic 
earning environment. Our hypothesis, that on one hand the 
discrete flash-like momentums of networked learning are 
increasingly becoming continuous and steady, on the other 
hand the independent branches of the network will also be 
interrelated, is underlined by our experience and the earlier 
theories of learning.  
We also made an interesting observation that a great 
deal of the services provided by the electronic learning 
environment, such as the communication channels of 
chatting and blogging were not at all used by the students 
during the learning process. On the contrary, the same 
services of informal social networking homepages, such as 
chat module, noticeboard, were used daily, furthermore 
every one-two hour. For example in the case of facebook, the 
content of the message can also be related to course content. 
In addition, the informal network-based learning processes in 
most cases are carried out either in an open or in a close 
group in relation to, e.g., a course [11]. 
Focusing on the future, the Department plans to 
integrate new forms of network-based communication, that 
is, community homepages preferred and frequently used by 
the new generation, such as, e.g., facebook, Hi5, Twitter. 
These can offer opportunities for fast and wide information 
provision for the students, furthermore by means of such a 
channel they like using. This way they learn in an informal 
way without it seeming to be some sort of external 
motivation. The Twitter has already been integrated both 
into the homepage and the Moodle system as well by the 
Department of Technical Education. 
The tools described in the paper and the students’ 
activity help understanding the scale independent networks, 
by means of which we can get to know the behaviour 
patterns of students, which can contribute to the orientation 
in the field of defining future routes of educational 
development. Educational policy could lead to the formation 
of a new learning model to be adapted to the new learning 
environment, 
based 
on 
networks 
and 
taking 
into 
consideration 
the 
learners’ 
characteristics 
as 
well. 
Educational institutions could adopt this model. 
Our experiences and our students’ opinion suggest that 
this new – type networked learning support is needed log 
the present – day student population. Its signs are to be scan 
in the greatest student activity and in the continuous student 
– teacher interaction, which had a positive impact on student 
performance. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Barabási Albert-László: Behálózva – a hálózatok új 
tudománya (Networked – the new science of networks) 
(Magyar Könyvklub, 2003., ISBN 963547895X) 
[2] András Benedek (ed.): Curriculum plan on the development 
of distance education and e-learning, National Institute for 
Vocational Education, Budapest, 2006. 
[3] György Molnár: The requirements and development areas 
of the ICT aided learning environment, In: András Benedek 
(ed.): Digital pedagogy – Typotext Budapest 2008., pp. 
225-255 
[4] Péter Tóth: Seeing and Thinking: Spatial Intuition, Mental 
Operations, Visual Learning Lab, Budapest, 03.11.2010. 
[5] András Benedek - Vidékiné Reményi, Judit (2010): 
Pedagogy studies in high-tech environment. ATEE 35th 
Conference, Budapest, Hungary, Responsibility, Challenege 
and 
Support 
in 
Teacher’s 
Life-long 
Professional 
Development, 
Budapest, 
26th-30th 
August, 
2010, 
Programme and Abstracts, Ed.: Erzsébet Golnhofer, 
Magdolna Kimmel, Budapest, 2010. p.224. 
[6] András Benedek (2009): Mobile Learning: New Horizons 
and Unstable Summits. Mobile Communication and the 
Ethics of Social Networking. Communications in the 21st 
century. Engagement and Exposure. Mobil Communication 
and Ethics of Social Networking. ed. by Kristóf Nyiri, 
Vienna: Passagen Verlag, pp. 247-253. 
[7] András Benedek - György Molnár, János Horváth Cz. 
(2010): Moodle-based E-portfolio used in teacher training. 
(In: Sixth EDEN Research Workshop, User Generated 
Content Assessment in Learning. Enchanching Trasparency 
and Quality of Peer Production. Emerging Educational 
Technologies and Digital Assessment Methods, 24-27 
October, 2010, Budapest, Hungary. Edited by Morten Flate 
Paulsen and András Szűcs, Budapest, 2010. ISBN 978-963-
87914-4-3, pp. 131-133. 
[8] András Benedek - György Molnár, János Horváth Cz. 
(2010): Jump over the shadow? From the traditional 
education to the non-typical one or the experiences of an 
electronic learning environment. IADIS Multi Conference 
on Computer Science and Information Systems, Freiburg, 
Germany, 
26-29 
july, 
Proceedings 
of 
the 
IADIS 
International Conference e Learning, Volume II (Ed. 
Miguel Baptista Nunes, Maggie McPherson) ISBN:978-
972-8939-17-5, pp. 243-246.   
[9] Pahl: Data mining technology for the evaluation of learning 
content interaction. International journal of E-Learning, 
Vol. 3, 2004, pp. 47-55 
[10] SPSS Inc.: Web Mining for Clementine 1.5. User's Guide. 
NetGenesis, Chicago, 2005, p. 89 
[11] György Molnár: ICT, network and mobile communication’s 
solution in mirror of non tipical forms, In: Dr. Anikó 
61
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

Kálmán(szerk.): Mellearn Conference Proceedings, 5. 
Hungarian National and International Lifelong Learning 
Conference - Strategies, Technologies and Methods in a 
Learning and Knowledge society - Sopron 2009. April 16-
17., ISBN: 978-963-87523-9-0, Rexpo Kft., Debrecen, 
2009. pp. 85-98 
[12] Cristóbal Romero, Sebastián Ventura, Enrique  García: Data 
mining in course management systems: Moodle case study 
and tutorial. Computers & Education, Vol. 51, No. 1. 2008, 
pp. 368-384 
[13] Gregory Piatetsky - Shapiro: CRISP-DM: A Proposed 
Global Standard for Data Mining. The On - Line Executive 
Journal for Data - Intensive Decision Support, Vol. 3, No. 
15, 1999 
[14] Morten Flate Paulsen : Online Education Systems: 
Definition of Terms, In: Web - Education Systems in Eu, 
ZIFF Papiere 118, FernUniversität Hagen, Okt. 2002, pp. 
23-28. 
[15] McPherson, Maggie and Nunes, J.M. (2008). “Critical 
Issues for e Learning Delivery: what may seem obvious is 
not always put into practice”. JCAL, 24(6), pp. 433-445. 
[16] Piet Kommers, Piet A.M. (2010). ICT as explicit factor in 
the evolution of life-long learning. International journal of 
continuing engineering education and life-long learning, 
20(1/2010), pp. 127-144. 
[17] http://about3dtv.com/2010/07/leonar3do-create-3d-virtual-
art-in-your-own-home/, downloaded: 15.07.2010. 
[18] http://www.mobileUncle.com, 
downloaded: 
15.07.2010.
 
62
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

