 New Methodology for Developing Digital Curricula 
 
Nahla El Zant El Kadhi 
Management Information System Department 
Ahlia University  
Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain 
nahla@ahliauniversity.edu.bh 
 
 
Hanaa Al-Sharrah 
Information Technology Department  
Ahlia University 
Manama, Kingdom of Bahrain 
hanaa17@hotmail.com  
 
 
Abstract-- The vast and rapid development in the computer, 
communication and Internet technologies has significantly 
affected contemporary educational systems. This paper 
describes an approach for the deployment of an e-learning 
infrastructure/environment in addition to a new methodology 
of digital curricula development for an efficient E-learning 
implementation and adoption. Hence, the purpose of this 
research is to study and analyze the role of implementing the 
E-learning framework and online digital curricula in K12 
schools. Success factors of implementing the E-learning 
framework and project management perspectives of online 
digital curricula development are also presented and discussed. 
 
Keywords-E-learning; e-content; learning design; blended 
learning; e-learning model; web-based educational system.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Recent years have witnessed an enormous growth in 
multimedia applications and telecommunication technology 
like audio/video conferencing, and live video streaming, to 
name a few. Education technologies have been developed in 
the recent years where new technology-based learning 
methods and channels have been emerged. This paper reports 
the main components of a successful E-learning and 
introduces a new framework and model to implement E-
learning in K12 schools. It becomes widely known that the 
national initiatives in the region to implement different kinds 
of E-learning technologies in the public schools struggle in 
most the cases. This is due to the fact that such initiatives 
usually did not look at the “big picture” of E-learning projects 
and did not implement an integrated framework. Hence, the 
new framework is proposed to ensure the integration of all the 
components and success factors of an efficient E-learning 
system. This paper introduces an enhanced methodology of 
developing the online digital curricula (e-content). This 
process mainly handles the digitizing of the conventional 
curricula into an interactive digital one. Creating an online 
content is a challenge that faces  E-learning adopters. One of 
the most important elements in creating online content is the 
level of interactivity with the user to keep him attentive all 
the time. This paper introduces an instructional design 
model based on Bloom’s levels and the first principal. The 
evaluation process is based on Kirkpatrick’s model. 
II. 
LEARNING MODEL 
This section presents the learning model that represents 
the foundation to understand the proposed framework and 
blended learning for K12 schools. The model is based on the 
interaction between the instructors, the learners and the 
content. According to Spiro [6], cognitive flexibility is the 
“ability to spontaneously restructure one’s knowledge in 
many ways”. The proposed framework aims at enhancing 
the learning process by providing a better learning 
environment that “blends” the educational technology with 
the conventional face-to-face environment. The interaction 
between the three main components in the presented 
learning model is enhanced by using the technology. Hence, 
this model is based on the blended learning type. This 
“Blended learning programs may include several forms of 
learning tools, such as real-time virtual/ collaboration 
software, 
self-paced 
Web-based 
courses, 
Electronic 
Performance Support Systems (EPSS) embedded within the 
job-task environment and knowledge management systems” 
[4].  
III. 
DELIVERY ENVIRONMENT 
Al-Sharhan introduced a delivery model for the new E-
learning environment as explained in [7]. The elements of the 
environment 
are 
the 
learning 
management 
system, 
multimedia equipped classrooms (smart classrooms), and 
network or the Internet. The instructor guides the learning 
process by utilizing the online content where students access 
the content via the Internet. The LMS tracks the learning 
activities and provides the instructor with report about the 
learning process. Fig 1 depicts this model which was mainly 
introduced by Al-Sharhan in [7] and we have added to it the 
external environment.  
 
Figure 1. A new E-learning Model. 
Fig 2 depicts the E-learning projects incorporated in full-
fledge E-learning implementation in K12. All these projects 
are highly interconnected where the failure in one chain may 
cause serious problems in the whole implementation.  
148
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

Figure 2. E-learning project. 
IV. 
E-LEARNING INFRASTRUCTURE 
The Infrastructure projects aims to provide a high-
performance data center in the head office and the required 
computing devices in the schools. It also provides all the 
network facilities in the schools and Head office to work in 
both centralized and decentralized manners. The data center 
should provide a collection of virtual and physical devices to 
support the higher layer of applications such as the learning 
gateway and portal, Learning Management system, 
collaboration tools, disaster recovery, security and other 
applications. The design of the data center should be 
scalable since the E-learning projects usually implemented 
in phases. With the time, complex and high cost devices are 
added to incorporate more users and applications. A 
successful and scalable design of data center network must 
have, at minimum, Scalability, Simplification, Sharing, and 
Security. 
V. 
DATA CENTER DESIGN 
Today’s data centers may contain hundreds of computers 
with significant aggregate bandwidth requirements. The 
network architecture typically consists of a tree of routing 
and switching elements with more specialized and expensive 
equipment moving up the network hierarchy. During the 
design of the data center, the designers should pay attention 
to the increasingly growing applications that possesses 
special requirements.  In today’s data center design, the 
typical architectures consist of either two- or three-tiers 
networking routing. A three-tiered design usually has a core 
tier in the root of the tree, an aggregation tier in the middle 
and an edge tier at the leaves of the tree. A two-tiered design 
has only the core and the edge tiers. However, in modern 
design for new applications N-tier design should be 
considered to support the applications with multi-tier. While 
the N-tier logic development is suitable for large, medium, 
and small-scale applications, and Web applications, it can 
also enhance system application security, performance and 
scalability for future expansion. The Advantages of utilizing 
N-Tier architecture can be summarized as follows: 
 
Security of data and application can be easily 
maintained. 
 
Business rules will be separated into a component 
that is easy to maintain, use, and reuse. 
 
The architecture supports high scalability and 
expansion where every tier is independently maintained and 
expanded without affected the components of other layers 
and tiers. 
 
Data storage is centralized into an independent 
layer for more efficiency coding and implementation. 
 
The 
architecture 
provides 
flexibility 
where 
components can be distributed to different physical 
machines at any time. 
VI. 
SMART CLASSROOM 
The Smart Classroom project aims at applying smart 
technologies in a physical and conventional classroom. The 
project bridges the gap between modern technology-based 
and traditional classroom activities in terms of the teacher’s 
and student’s experiences. More specifically, the components 
of the smart classroom enable the teacher to utilize modern 
technology to enhance the teaching experience. All the 
teaching activities can be recorded and hosted on the learning 
gateway for future consideration.  In addition, the smart 
classrooms components will provide the teacher with efficient 
tool to manage the class and provide the students with an 
exceptional teaching and learning experience.  
Smart Classroom Components: The Smart Classroom 
system contains several component technologies that make 
the interaction between the teacher and students efficient and 
transfers the role of the teacher to be a facilitator of the 
learning process. In the proposed E-learning framework the 
main components are, smart wireless interactive board and 
data projector, teacher station, laptop for each student, class 
management system, and wireless network to connect the 
laptops to the learning gateway. Teachers in the Smart 
Classroom can utilize different smart components inside the 
class or freely using conventional teaching methods to instruct 
students in a blended methodology. 
 
VII. 
WHAT IS E-CONTENT 
E-content can be defined as the process of digitizing the 
conventional learning subjects and transferring them into 
interactive multimedia based subjects. Creating an online 
content is one of the serious challenges that face E-learning 
adopters. the most important elements in creating online 
content is the level of interactivity with the user to keep him 
attentive at all times. When building and developing the e-
content one should keep eyes on four important issues; 
namely: 
 
The Instructional Design process. 
 
The standards of building the e-content.  
 
The sharable Learning objects repository. 
 
The technology used in the development. 
The e-Content is designed using sequencing of learning 
objects (LOs) or Sharable Content Object (SCO). SCOs are 
small chunks of information, indexed Meta-Data, self-
contained and explanatory, reusable, have aggregation 
capability, and communication capability with LMS. In this 
paper, we define the SCO to have the following parts: the 
Learning Objective, concept explanation, exercises, and 
evaluation. SCOs are transferred into a digital format 
according to specific standards. SCOs will be stored in shared 
Learning Object Repositories (LOR). The course will be 
added to the Learning Management Systems (LMS). This 
concept is explained in Fig 3, while Fig 4 explains the relation 
between the SCOs and the online course. 
149
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

Figure 3. Learning Object Concept. 
Figure 4. SCOs and e-content. 
VIII. 
CULTURAL LEARNING OBJECT 
Cultural factors are very important for a successful E-
learning implementation. Culture, however, is a broad and 
concept with no unified definition. Fernandes believes that 
cultural issues and considerations are something in which 
people take pride, and that it must be considered and 
respected in the user interface [3]. Such considerations are 
importance because cultural design will touch several areas 
of a users’ culture consciously and unconsciously. Hence, 
cultural considerations increase the complexity of designing 
learning objects and e-content interfaces because more 
variables are added. Several cultural factors must be 
considered during designing and developing the learning 
objects and the e-content [1].  
IX. 
ONLINE COURSE DEVELOPMENT 
The phases of building online courses are as following: 
- 
The content is divided into small chunks as raw LOs it 
should be before; this is performed by SME (Subject 
Matter Experts) in collaboration with ID (Instructional 
Designer) according to an agreed scheme of course 
structure.  
- 
The LO Storyboarding takes place by the instructional 
designer. 
- 
The storyboard is sent to the production unit –multiple 
production lines exist.  
- 
LO is developed according to the storyboard which was 
authored by ID and under supervision of SME.  
- 
LO is produced according to E-learning standard (IEEE-
LOM) in the form of a SCO (Sharable Content Object) 
- 
LO is stored on a learning object repository (LOR). 
- 
LOs are packaged according to an agreed scheme of 
course structure which forms the standard SCORM 2004 
courseware. Courseware is uploaded and stored on 
Learning Management System (LMS)  
Fig 5 describes the life cycle of online courses 
development. 
 
Figure 5. The life cycle of course development. 
Courseware Development Methodology through Learning 
Objects approach goes through two major stages, an initial 
stage followed by execution stage, each has its own phases. 
The initial stage is considered a preliminary stage required 
for courseware development. A large scale analysis takes 
place to identify: course materials, learning goals and 
objectives. Audience analysis is carried out to identify their 
learning styles and capabilities. The instructional deign 
strategy is determined according to the results of analysis, and 
then the course outline (structure) is introduced. Educational 
material is divided into small chunks of information and data 
“raw learning objects”. Then the interface and templates 
design and development for its functional requirements is 
carried out. Eventually, a complete production and 
development for a prototype of an entire learning object is 
implemented. Such prototype is introduced to the concerned 
stakeholders for review and approval, and upon all that the 
execution phase is to be launched. The initial stage comprises 
of the following subsequent sequential phases: the analysis 
phase, design phase and the prototype development phase as 
shown in Fig 6. 
 
Figure 6. Initial Design. 
The execution stage is considered the real start of a large 
scale production of learning objects. It starts right after MOE 
stockholders approves the prototype that gives a general and 
future vision of what to be expected from the execution stage. 
Design 
Phase
Prototype 
Development 
phase
Analysis 
Phase
150
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

The prototype leads to minimization of risks to their lowest 
rates. The execution stage composes of subsequent sequential 
phases; those are storyboarding phase, development phase 
and packaging phase shown in Fig 7. 
 
Figure 7. Execution phase. 
X. 
EXISTING METHODOLOGY TO BUILD WEB-
BASED EDUCATIONAL SYSTEM 
 Success factors in an E-learning system are related to 
students including the disable, instructors, the developed 
course content and the delivery medium and environment. A 
new framework for the developing and delivery of the 
online content or courses is presented and mapped to the 
activity theory. This mapping explains and organizes the 
interactivity relations between instructors, students and 
online learning objects as they are bounded by the 
technology, Learning management system (LMS) and 
educational and external environments. ADDIE Model is 
one of the methodologies used to build educational web that 
includes 5 phases [10]:  
 
Analyze - analyze learner characteristics. 
 
Design - develop learning objectives, choose an 
instructional approach. 
 
Develop - create instructional or training materials. 
 
Implement - deliver or distribute the instructional 
materials. 
 
Evaluate - make sure the materials achieved the 
desired goals. 
XI. 
E-LEARNING EVALUATION 
Learning and online learning evaluation mainly deals 
with the education quality and its management. This process 
is part of a broader education evaluation process because of 
its practical issues and aspects in addition to its complicated 
theoretical approach. The evaluation content includes 
evaluation of learning environment, evaluation of learning 
style, evaluation of comprehensive ability and so on. 
However, the evaluation of the learning objects and learning 
process in general is not an easy process due to the 
pedagogical factors involved in it. In addition to the lengthy 
process, learning evaluation is inherently complex. This is 
due to the fact the several complexity factors are associated 
with the sustainable and dynamic interactivity of the various 
dimensions of the learning process such as learning goals, 
instructors, learners, and instructional technologies. Hence, 
a flexible framework of evaluation is required in order to 
realistically 
evaluate 
the 
E-learning 
outcomes. 
The 
evaluation model or framework must incorporate all the 
issues related to the learning process. The performance 
evaluation of E-learning is generally divided into the 
formative 
evaluation 
and 
the 
summative 
evaluation. 
Formative evaluation is performed by experts during each 
phase of the implementation progress of E-learning. Based on 
the evaluation result, an immediate action is taken to improve 
the current and future implementation, to improve the final 
results. Summative evaluation, is the evaluation performing 
after that all the E-learning deployment is completed, to 
understand the final implementation results and compare the 
difference of learning effectiveness of students and subjects 
before and after the implementation. From a pedagogical 
point of view, E-learning performance evaluation is 
considered to be purely formative evaluation. This means that 
the focus of evaluation shifts from the learning results to the 
learners’ learning process. This basic idea of E-learning 
performance evaluation has been widely accepted by the 
education community [2]. It is very important that the 
pedagogical approaches are evaluated while creating E-
learning content. Simple pedagogical approach will lack 
flexibility and approach. On the other hand, a complex 
approach will take time to develop and consume setup costs. 
Therefore, a perfect pedagogy should adopt the middle path 
by creating effective educational material while running 
parallel to engaging learning experience. In this work, the 
evaluation of the E-learning objects or the E-learning process 
is based on the Kirkpatrick’s model. It consists of four levels, 
namely the reaction evaluation, learning evaluation, behavior 
evaluation and results evaluation. In Kirkpatrick’s model, the 
evaluation process of learning or training program should 
always begin with first level, and then, should move 
sequentially through levels two, three, and four. The 
information from each level serves as the input or the base for 
the next level evolutional.  
The first level which is the  reaction evaluation measures 
how students in classroom react to the learning object and the 
online lessons and the perception of the students. The 
evolution of this level depends on answering questions 
regarding online lesson and learning objects acceptance. 
Example of these questions may include: Did they like a 
specific learning object? This type of evaluation can be 
conducted using an online survey, which is part of the LMS 
and learning gateway. In addition, the participants' reactions 
have important consequences for learning. The second level 
named learning evaluation aims at assessing the learning 
capabilities beyond learner satisfaction and targets assessing 
students’ developments in terms of skills, knowledge, or 
attitude. Naturally, the measurement outcome at this level is 
more difficult than the first level. Hence, methods of the 
evaluation differs from the first level and range from testing 
techniques to group assessment and self-assessment. A useful 
technique here is to have a pre-test and post-test in order to 
determine the amount of learning that has accumulated. The 
third level is the behavior evaluation that measures the 
impact of the learning occurred by the online lesson on 
learners’ behavior. It measure the amount of change or the 
transfer of the learners behavior due to the learning material 
and the knowledge accumulated in the online lesson or in a 
certain group of learning objects. For many educators the 
third Kirkpatrick’s level evaluation represents the truest 
assessment of learning effectiveness. However, measuring at 
Development 
Phase
Packaging Phase
Storyboarding 
phase
151
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

this level is not an easy task due to the fact that is almost 
impossible to predict when the change in behavior will 
happen. Hence, this level of evaluation requires important 
decisions in terms of when to evaluate, how often to evaluate, 
and how to evaluate. The fourth level of Kirkpatrick’s model 
measures the success of the learning process in terms of 
improving the performance of the educational management. 
XII. 
E-CONTENT DEVELOPMENT: E-CONTENT 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT  
The E-learning project starts with an initiation phase and 
then planning for the project activities and tasks. Once the 
planning phase is completed the execution phase starts along 
with monitoring and control process to ensure aligning the 
execution with the plans. The project is finished with a 
closure phase. The project life cycle is depicted in Fig 8.  
 
Figure 8.  Project Life Cycle. 
 
Defining / Initiation phase - The first phase in the e-
content development is the initiation or the defining phase, 
this phase includes several activities and processes such as 
defining the scope of the project, scope planning and defining 
the work breakdown structure (WBS) (see Fig 9).  
Defining the scope of the e-content project - The scope 
of the e-content project mainly concentrates on digitizing the 
curricula of the subject of year 10-12 in the ministry of 
education in Kuwait .The objective is to design the “online” 
course according to the best practices and international 
standards, namely, SCORM standard . Since this project is 
just member of a portfolio, the target is to host all the “online” 
courses on a “content” server and create online sessions based 
on clustering methodology that will distribute the different 
sessions on different cluster for good load balance. In order to 
get of the best of the E-learning the teacher should be able to 
track and follow his student’s activities. Hence, the entire 
subject must be managed by a Learning Management System 
(LMS) that will create all the learning sessions. 
Defining the Work Breakdown Structure - The Work 
Break Down Structure (WBS) is defined as a tool used to 
state and group a project's discrete work elements in a way 
that helps organize and  define the total work scope of the 
project [9]. The main structure of our WBS for the e-content 
project specify that each learning object must reflect an 
integrated object that reflects a scientific concept. It should 
incorporates, Learning Objectives, Concept Explanation, 
Training exercises, and Evaluations. The Learning object also 
should be linked to more knowledge areas and external 
resources such as websites, external files and other teaching 
material to enrich the learning experience. 
Planning Phase - the second phase in the project life cycle  
involves a set of processes and plans to help guide the project 
team through the execution, monitoring and closure phases of 
the project. The plans created during this phase help manage 
time, cost, quality, communication, risk and HR management. 
It also helps the project team to monitor, control, and manage 
the changes during the execution phase. Fig 10 illustrates the 
planning process.  
 
Figure 9. Initiation/Defining Phase. 
 
HR Management - HR management process includes a 
variety of activities like internal search for employees who 
are willing to join the E-learning, or recruit experienced 
personnel, from outside. Selecting the internal staff requires 
evaluation of their knowledge, experience and performance 
levels. Training is to be involved if it will help the employee 
to handle situations. The required manpower for the content 
development are, Project Manager, Subject Experts, 
Instructional Designers, Graphic designers, Animators, 
Quality assurance engineers, Multimedia Developers, and 
Audio/Video specialists. 
 
Figure 10. E-content Project Planning. 
 
Risk planning - The e-content development project has 
several risks factors that need to be considered during the 
execution phase. The risk factors can be classified according 
to the following: 
- 
Human related factors - availability of subject experts, 
the availability of the Instructional designers, and 
Developers. 
- 
Technology based factors - tools to be used, 
Technological risks, and Incompatibility. 
- 
Stakeholder Lengthy process - The approval process. 
- 
Intellectual rights. 
     Quality planning - It is necessary to analyze various 
factors in order to deliver efficient teaching methodologies 
such as:  
152
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

- 
Ease of use to implement the course and host it on the 
Learning Management system in order to be tracked and 
the tracking points must be clear for the teacher to 
understand the performance reports. 
 
Navigation: Students must not suffer of any difficulty to 
navigate in though the online course  
 
The amount of text in each electronic page. 
 
The amount of animation in each electronic page. 
 
Consistency, accessibility, interactivity
 
 & instructional 
issues, and content accuracy. 
Managing the project - Change management process is a 
crucial one in each project since it ensures that the changes 
to the project scope, deliverables, timescales or resources 
are formally declared and handled prior even to the 
development. 
Applying 
and 
implementing 
change 
management is a difficult task; especially in large projects. 
To ensure that changes are monitored through to 
completion, a change management record and tracking 
procedure is maintained. This allows the project manager to 
identify any outstanding changes and to measure the actual 
impact of each change once implemented. The change 
record provides the project managers and teams with 
information about the changes conducted in the project at 
different levels. It can provides record changes within the 
project, monitor the change status and its project impact, 
record the status of all change approvals, identify and report 
on any change management issues, and control the amount 
of change required to meet your objectives.  
Execution Phase - In this stage all courseware will be 
developed according to courseware development life cycle. 
Different processes are incorporated in Fig 11. 
 
Figure 11. E-content execution phase. 
 
Closure phase - Closing the project means delivering all 
the required deliverable according the agreed specifications. 
The project manager needs to make sure that the project 
closure criteria have been fully satisfied and that there are no 
outstanding items remaining. Also, he/she should identify a 
release plan for the project deliverables, documentation, 
supplier contracts and resources. Finally, the project manager 
must initiate a communication plan to inform all project 
stakeholders that the project has now been closed. 
 
XIII. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper presents a new implementation framework of 
the blended learning in K12 schools and a methodology for 
developing digital curricula or online courses. The proposed 
E-learning framework incorporates several components that 
are highly dependent in order to ensure an efficient 
implementation of the E-learning project. The evaluation 
and performance measure is important to guide the E-
learning adopters on their directions and future impacts. The 
model incorporates four levels of evaluation, i.e., reaction 
evaluation, learning evaluation, behavior evaluation and 
results evaluation. However, each of the four levels 
presented by the model requires an empirical study to 
measure and evaluate the E-learning system. Another 
direction here is to work on an enhanced Kirkpatrick model 
based on fuzzy logic concepts. The main driver behind this 
direction is the fact that it is widely known that the first 
level of Kirkpatrick's model is most important level since it 
controls whether or not proceeding to the upper levels in the 
model. However one needs to design and conduct several 
evaluation forms, distribute them to the learners and do the 
analysis. This process is a lengthy one and time consuming. 
An enhancement is to build a fuzzy engine for the first level 
to be used by the teacher to evaluate the students’ 
performance. Also the interaction between the teachers, 
students, smart class room technology is a very important 
area to be analyzed and thoroughly studied. Another area is 
the study of the motivations to efficiently utilize smart 
classroom and how to create a rich teaching environment in 
it. 
REFERENCES 
1. 
Al-Hunaiyyan A., and Al-Sharhan S. "Blended learning Design: 
Discussion of Cultural Issues." International Journal of Cyber Society and 
Education, 2008, pp. 17-33. 
2. 
Dali H. "Design and Implementation of E-learning Performance 
Evaluation System." International Conference on Computer Science and 
Software Engineering, 2008, pp. 376-380. 
3. 
Fernandes, T. Global Interface Design. Chestnut Hill, MA: AP 
professional, 1995, pp. 242-254. 
4. 
Khan, B. "Building Effective Blended Learning Programs." 
Journal of Educational Technology, 2003, pp. 51-54. 
5. 
Al-Fares M., Loukissas A., and Vahdat A. "A Scalable, 
Commodity Data Center Network Architecture." SIGCOMM’08, ACM, 
2008 pp. 63-74. 
6. 
Spiro R., Feltovich P., Jacobson M., and Coulson R.. "Cognitive 
Flexibility Constructivism, and Hypertext: Random Assess Instruction for 
Advanced Knowledge Acquisition in Ill-Structured Domains."1995, 
pp. 24–33. 
7. 
AL-Sharhan S., Al-hunaiyyan A., and Gueaieb W. "Success 
Factors for an Efficient Blended learning." Proceedings of the 10th 
IASTED International Conference on Internet And Multimedia Systems 
And Applications. 2006, pp. 77–82. 
8. 
Keller, J.M. “Development and use of the ARCS model of 
motivational design.” Enscheda, the Netherland, 1983. 
9. 
George  H. Effective Work Breakdown Structures: the project 
Management Essential Library Series, ISBN 156726-135-3. 
10. 
Molenda M., Pershing A., and Reigeluth M. ”Designing 
Instructional Systems.” The ASTD Training and Development Handbook 
4th ed. , McGraw-Hill 1996, pp. 266-293. 
153
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

