Does the Integration of the Concept of Rapid Instructional Design in Project 
Management Approaches Support the Efficient Realisation of E-learning Projects? 
Michał Kuciapski 
Department of Business Informatics 
University of Gdansk 
Gdansk, Poland 
e-mail: m.kuciapski@univ.gda.pl 
 
Abstract— The development and implementation of interactive 
e-learning courses is highly time-consuming and expensive. A 
question, therefore, arises whether it is possible to develop an 
e-learning program at a high level without incurring 
significant financial resources and the need to create a project 
team consisting of a wide range of specialists. In this respect, 
Rapid Instructional Design (RID) might have a useful role to 
play in that it focuses on a reduction of the cost and time 
involved in developing e-learning courses, while ensuring a 
reasonable level of quality. The purpose of this article is to 
present an adaptation of the concept of RID for proposing and 
verifying a practical approach to the implementation of  
e-learning. The article starts with an analysis of the problem of 
how to create an e-learning course with limited time, financial 
and human resources. Then, the article continues with a 
critical analysis of the RID concept. The third section of the 
article outlines an approach to the management of e-learning 
projects based on RID, taking into consideration the problems 
faced when developing e-learning courses. The fourth and fifth 
sections present the methodology and verification results of the 
developed approach which answer the question considered 
during the research - does the integration of the concept of 
Rapid Instructional Design support the efficient realization of 
e-learning projects? The last section of the article contains a 
critical discussion of the possible applications of the adapted 
concept of RID in various types of projects, based on the 
research of its implementation in two e-learning projects.  
Keywords- rapid instructional design; e-learning; higher 
education; project management; course development; quality 
management. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Despite the significant development of distance learning 
in the past few years, e-learning (network learning) and m-
learning (mobile learning), which are the newest forms of d-
learning (distance learning), are still under-utilized [22]. 
This, in turn, limits the adaptation of distance learning on a 
large scale. The use of even more innovative Web 2.0 e-
learning tools does not change the conclusion that it is the 
teaching material that still plays the key role. The challenges 
of modern academic teaching and the training market in 
conjunction with the rapid development of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICT) have led to more 
demanding quality requirements regarding e-learning [15]. 
An important indicator of the attractiveness of an e-learning 
course, in addition to the content, it is also the quality of the 
presentation of the educational material, often associated 
with the level of interactivity and multimediality [16]. In 
this regard, it is important to develop and integrate 
components, such as: illustrations, interactive graphic, 
movies, animations and simulations [24]. These cannot be 
simply "art for art's sake", but must serve the key objective 
regarding the multimedia content and interactivity of e-
learning courses, that is to improve the efficiency of 
learning [21]. This can be achieved when the multimedia 
objects involved in e-learning courses support a faster 
acquisition of knowledge and skill development [20]. The 
interactivity of e-learning material can also help to maintain 
a high level of commitment from the participants of e-
learning courses. 
The professional production of e-learning materials 
consistent with the assumptions outlined above is extremely 
time-consuming and expensive [25]. In order for the 
financial resources incurred in converting static teaching 
material into multimedia and interactive versions to be spent 
effectively, it is necessary to create a project team including 
a range of professionals [1], as indicated in Table 1. In 
addition, as shown in Figure 1a, the preparation and 
implementation of high quality e-learning courses requires 
the management of many parallel processes. This requires a 
commitment 
from 
project 
managers 
with 
relevant 
experience 
in 
e-learning 
initiatives 
[6]. 
Therefore, 
universities and training companies often have difficulty in 
preparing e-learning programs of high quality or on an 
appropriately large scale. 
Therefore, it is particularly relevant to seek approaches 
which may enable universities and companies to implement 
e-learning, but within the strict financial and time 
constraints faced by many organizations. These objectives 
are considered to be key in terms of the RID. Referencing 
RID to other alternative models for the development of 
distance learning, such as the Classroom Oriented Model 
[3], Product Oriented Model [2] or the System Oriented 
Model [10], it focuses more widely on practical aspects. The 
RID concept has been touched upon by only a few authors, 
so remains under-studied. 
Outlined in the current point of the article premises are 
the basis for the formulation of two hypotheses: 
1. The adaptation of RID in approaches to the project 
management of e-learning course development supports 
the creation of e-learning courses at an acceptable level 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

of quality while significantly reducing the time and cost 
of project realization relative to traditional approaches. 
2. The use of RID is a useful alternative in the 
development of e-learning courses, compared to 
preparing a simple e-learning programme based on static 
documents or expensive multimedia and interactive e-
learning materials. 
The verification results of the stated hypotheses will 
answer the question posed in the title of the article – does the 
integration of the concept of Rapid Instructional Design in 
project management approaches support the efficient 
realization of e-learning projects?  
The second section of the article contains a review of 
relevant literature and critical analysis of the concept of RID. 
The third section of the paper presents a proposed solution - 
an approach to the project management of e-learning course 
development that integrates the concept of RID to 
significantly reduce the time and cost of implementing e-
learning. The validation methodology of the proposed 
approach is outlined in the fourth section of the paper. The 
fifth section of the paper presents the validation results of the 
proposed solution that answer the research question - Does 
the integration of the concept of Rapid Instructional Design 
in project management approaches support the efficient 
realization of e-learning projects? The paper finishes with a 
discussion and conclusion. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND RELATED RESEARCH 
According to Clark [7], a key step in the preparation of 
an e-learning course is its design. An approach that can be 
used in a number of e-learning initiatives, in order to speed 
up the process, is the concept of Rapid Instructional Design. 
The direct meaning of the word ‘rapid’ does not fully reflect 
the specifics of RID. This concept, analogous to extreme 
software engineering methodologies, aims at shortening the 
development time and reducing the role of documentation. 
The RID concept was introduced by Thiagarajan [23], who 
devised the key objectives of RID to replace the traditional 
model of e-learning design - instructional design system 
(ISD) - with: the consistent creation of training packages, an 
acceleration of the design process, and use of appropriate 
shortcuts, borrowings and omissions from the ISD model. 
The consistent creation of training packages is based on 
‘just-in-time’ method, for the daily delivery of learning 
packages, unlike the conventional ISD model that assumes 
the sequential realization of these processes. In this respect 
[23] identified 10 strategies with 20 directives, among which 
the most important are: the use of existing learning 
resources, utilization of templates, integration of tools for the 
acceleration of ISD processes as well as a better and wider 
use of human resources. 
The RID concept was extended in [20]. Accordingly, 
projects based on RID, reductions in the duration and cost of 
developing an e-learning programme are achieved by 
simplifying, wherever possible, the standard activities that 
make up the design process like: analysis of the material, 
choosing methods of adaptation, preparation of instructional 
scripts, as well as the production and integration of the 
developed components of e-learning courses [19]. In 
particular, the instructional design should be limited in 
scope. Instructional design by [9] is a systematic approach to 
the design of teaching instructions as attractive learning 
scenarios, according to the customers’ needs and with the 
possibility for adaptation as a multimedia e-learning course. 
Despite its name, RID implies the accelerated execution 
of all processes, not just design. This is achieved by carrying 
out specific steps, while often omitting certain tasks. Support 
from RID in this area takes the form of a series of best 
practices, with the most significant being [23]: 
 
a needs analysis based on the materials immediately 
available or soon to be, such as existing documents, 
instead of conducting interviews, for example; 
 
the production of ready-made templates to facilitate 
the preparation of multimedia objects and activities; 
 
the use of a reviewing system of the e-learning 
course specifications by a team of professionals with 
assigned roles to enable the faster execution of the 
evaluation; 
 
assessment and review of the e-learning course 
based on representative testing, or a pilot, allowing 
the verification of the e-learning course quality by 
some of the participants before running it. 
The above list [13] may be expanded by adding the 
training of the authors in the application of technologies that 
enable the independent and rapid production of selected 
types of multimedia objects. Certain RID practices do not 
consider the important role that e-learning and ICT can play 
in facilitating the preparation of e-learning courses. Their 
potential caught the attention of [18] and [14] who 
distinguished a number of principles among which the most 
important ones are: 
 
the use of dedicated software to support the 
acceleration of the process of design and production 
of e-learning course components; 
 
the use of templates for: multimedia objects, 
activities, and other elements, wherever possible; 
 
the use of Reusable Learning Objects (RLO) and 
components; 
 
the use of ready-made commercially available e-
learning courses or teaching material; 
 
the use of existing solutions purchased from external 
suppliers; 
 
the use of tools to facilitate the needs analysis 
process; 
 
the use of Training Management Systems (TMS) to 
facilitate the preparation of e-learning courses with 
integrated tools. 
It should be noted that RID takes the form of a series of 
best practice recommendations rather than a precise 
methodology and is not based on a specific approach to 
project management. This allows the principles of RID to be 
adapted according to different models and methodologies of 
e-learning project management. 
III. 
SOLUTION PROPOSAL 
A concept regarding the practical implementation of the 
principles of RID was developed for projects such as CTF 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[4] and Case Simulator [5], carried out in 2012-2014. 
According to the principles set out primarily by Thiagarajan 
[23] and Piskurich [18] [19], their approach  for the project 
management of e-learning (Figure 1b) includes: 
1. 
A modification of the processes existing in the classical 
model of an e-learning project. The basic model is 
considered to be the ADDIE (Analyze, Design, 
Develop, Implement, Evaluate), which is very general 
in character. The author used developed model (Figure 
1a), which is compatible with the ADDIE model, and 
expanded it with popular approaches in relevant books 
and articles [11] [8] [17]. 
2. 
The wide use of software to support the acceleration of 
design and production processes. 
3. 
Process support via the use of already available 
templates of components. 
4. 
The omission of a range of activities during processes 
carried out at the conceptual and executive stages. 
The general model for adopting the concept of RID for 
project preparation and implementation of e-learning offer 
compared to a traditional approach is shown in Figure 1. 
 
Figure 1.  Traditional approach of e-learning project management (a), The 
approach to e-learning project management based on the RID concept (b).  
As shown in Figure 1, the modification of the traditional 
model of e-learning course development, in order to bring in 
the concept of RID, primarily concerned the design and 
production processes, which are combined in a single 
process. Thus, the main processes to be shortened and 
simplified are the design and production processes of e-
learning course development (Table 1). These are by far the 
most time consuming and cost intensive processes [12]. 
Other processes are carried out without any significant 
changes (Figure 1). In the developed model, the following 
elements of RID were adapted: 
 
a requirement analysis based on the materials 
immediately or quickly available instead of, for 
example, conducting interviews; 
 
a system of reusable components, through the 
preparation and implementation of e-learning in 
accordance with Sharable Content Object Reference 
Model (SCORM) standard and the production of 
similar multimedia objects based on templates; 
 
the direct design of the e-learning course structure 
with the use of authoring tools; 
 
the production of multimedia materials using tools 
supporting 
rapid 
animations 
and 
interactions 
generation based on preliminary concepts, to reduce 
the amount of multimedia objects’ specification. 
A list of the differences between the traditional approach 
and adaptation of the RID concept is shown in Table 1. 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON OF TRADITIONAL AND RID BASED 
APPROACHES FOR E-LEARNING COURSES DEVELOPMENT 
 
Process 
Implementation (according to approach) 
Executor  
Traditional 
RID 
Traditional 
RID 
Requirements 
Analysis 
Detailed analysis of 
the environment and 
training needs along 
with the target group. 
Basic analysis of the 
environment and training 
needs along with the 
target group. 
Instructional 
designer, 
author, expert 
Author 
Script creation Preparation of a 
script along with 
evaluation elements 
as well as an initial 
material adaptation 
concept. 
Preparation of a script 
along with evaluation 
elements as well as a 
material adaptation 
concept. 
Author, 
instructional 
designer, 
reviewer 
Author, 
designer 
Design 
Preparation of 
comprehensive 
specifications of 
multimedia objects as 
well as training 
structure. 
One process for creating 
e-learning course. Direct 
design in authoring tool 
and other auxiliaries of 
the e-learning structure 
as well as multimedia 
objects based on their 
concept. Simplification 
of multimedia objects. 
Preparation of 
implementation 
packages. 
Instructional 
designer 
Designer 
Production 
Production of 
multimedia items. 
Validation and 
integration of 
components. 
Preparation of 
implementation 
packages. 
Instructional  
designer, 
Multimedia 
team (graphic 
designer,  
audio-video 
specialist and 
others). 
Assessment 
and 
implementation 
Final evaluation of 
the e-learning course 
and implementation 
of updates. 
Same as in the traditional 
approach. 
Author, 
instructional 
designer, tutor, 
multimedia 
team, platform 
administrator 
Author, 
designer, 
tutor. 
Evaluation and 
revision 
Evaluation of the e-
learning course 
content and 
attractiveness and 
proper changes. 
Same as in the traditional 
approach. 
Author, 
instructional 
designer, tutor, 
multimedia 
team. 
Author, 
designer, 
tutor. 
According to Table 1, the omission and simplification of 
a range of activities is related to the processes of requirement 
analysis, design and production of the e-learning course. This 
reduces the time and costs of the last two processes mainly. 
At the same time, the approach assumes an expansion of the 
design process where the author creates the main script and 
the concept to adapt it as an e-learning course with 
multimedia objects. Significantly, Table 1 reveals a 
significant reduction in the number of members required for 
a project team, as selected activities are delegated to: 
 
the author – conducting the requirement analysis and 
preparing the concept for the adaptation of material 
for e-learning course. These tasks are traditionally 
done by instructional designer. 
 
the instructional designer  - the production of 
multimedia objects, integrating the components that 
comprise an e-learning course. These activities in 
classical approaches are carried out by the 
multimedia team. 
The project team was limited in members, in particular 
by the omission of contractors responsible for the production 
of multimedia. This is possible thanks to the decision not to 
make any technical specifications for the multimedia 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

materials and to reduce their complexity. In this way, the 
media production tasks are assigned solely to the designer.  
Unlike the concept of RID, the developed approach to the 
project management of e-learning course development did 
not include the training of authors in terms of utilizing tools 
for the self-production of selected types of multimedia 
objects. This was due to the specific nature of the CTF and 
the CaseSimulator projects. E-learning courses were 
developed as small solutions, based on 20-30 pages of script 
written by several authors for each e-learning course. A 
considerable amount of time would be necessary to conduct 
training for the authors. Moreover, the time spent on training 
the authors would be longer than the time required to 
produce the e-learning courses. Accordingly, operations 
were carried out exclusively by instructional designers. 
Entrusting the production of e-learning courses entirely 
to the designers would not be possible without the use of 
appropriate technology for the production of courses and pre-
built templates previously prepared by professionals, such as 
web-masters, graphic designers and SCORM programmers. 
In this regard, a sophisticated authoring tool, supporting 
basic and intermediate animations and interactions creation, 
was chosen to offer ample opportunities to produce 
multimedia 
materials. 
Mechanisms 
for 
specifying 
transformations provided by the application enabled the 
immediate development of basic animations for multimedia 
objects. This eliminated the need to use graphic designers 
and programmers for the multimedia production and 
simplified the development process of e-learning materials, 
helping to reduce the associated costs. The financial 
resources required were also reduced by excluding the 
preparation of special graphics made by graphic designers by 
using alternatives available online for free or by buying a 
repository license. 
IV. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
The approach developed based on the concept of RID 
was used during the CTF project, in the years 2012-2013. 
Twelve specialized e-learning courses were prepared and 
offered in the area of economics, particularly in 
entrepreneurship. Courses were available to employees of 
small 
and 
medium-sized 
enterprises 
on 
the 
catching.ug.edu.pl 
platform. 
Over 
600 
employees 
participated in the courses. This project management 
approach was also carried out during the CaseSimulator 
project. In 2013-2014, 3 e-learning programs were prepared 
and offered to students, presenting the use of an information 
system for simulating the running of a business. 
The factors that were used to validate the project 
management approach based on the concept of RID were as 
follows: the time and cost incurred for developing e-learning 
courses and the quality of the e-learning courses. The 
analysis of the time and costs of the developed approach was 
carried out in comparison with traditional solutions. 
Traditional verification approaches were made in 2008-2011 
during the project "The Implementation of Modern 
Education in the University of Gdansk", when 6 fully 
interactive multimedia and e-learning courses for students 
and academic staff were devised. Time and cost monitoring 
for the RID-integrated project management approach was 
performed during the CTF and Case Simulator projects, 
realized in 2012-2014.   
The quality of e-learning courses prepared according to 
traditional 
and 
RID-integrated 
project 
management 
approaches was assessed with the use questionnaires and 
interviews with authors (20) and participants (943). The 
results were compared with the assessment of e-learning 
courses developed with the use of a traditional project 
management approach. 
V. 
RESEARCH RESULTS 
E-learning courses prepared according to a traditional 
approach were developed on the basis of 170 pages of 
material on average, as opposed to an average of 20 pages in 
the case of the RID- integrated approach. Therefore, Table 2 
shows data for the elaboration and implementation of  8.5 
RID-based e-learning courses. The cost calculations do not 
include hardware, software or office supplies. 
TABLE II.  
COMPARISON OF THE TIME AND COST OF E-LEARNING 
COURSE DEVELOPMENT DEPENDING ON THE APPROACH 
 
Process 
Time (working days) 
Cost (USD) 
Traditional 
RID 
Traditional 
RID 
Requirements analysis 
Omitted 
Script preparation 
Omitted 
Design 
88 
 
10.5 
7330 
 
1700 
Production 
66 
7500 
Assessment and 
implementation 
15 
3 
1139 
558 
Evaluation and 
revision 
Omitted 
Total 
169 
13.5 
15969 
2258 
Table 2 clearly indicates a much shorter time and lower 
costs for e-learning courses developed with a RID-based 
project management approach compared with traditional 
methods. The time and cost of the requirements analysis 
process and the creation of the script are not dependent on 
the approach, were not relevant to the comparison and were 
therefore omitted. The difference in the duration and cost of 
the assessment and implementation of e-learning exists due 
to the time spent on course verification, improvements or 
updates. E-learning courses prepared in accordance with the 
developed approach were characterized by a simplification 
of the concept, and therefore of the multimedia objects. The 
preparation of an e-learning course by an instructional 
designer rather than a multimedia team. Therefore, as a result 
of 
these 
simplifications, 
the 
multimedia 
materials 
experienced significantly fewer bugs, with less time and 
money for fixing. The duration and cost of the course 
implementation was the same regardless of  used approach. 
For a precise comparison of the time and costs required 
to prepare and implement e-learning courses according to the 
approach, these values were calculated for the script page as 
a main comparison unit, and are presented in Table 3. When 
calculating the cost of e-learning projects depending on the 
approach, costs that are similar regardless of the use or non-
use of RID were disregarded: requirement analysis and the 
creation of the script, as well as hardware and software.  
122
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE III.  
COMPARING THE TIME AND COSTS FOR E-LEARNING 
COURSE DEVELOPMENT BETWEEN A TRADITIONAL AND AN RID-BASED 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT APPROACH 
Factor 
Traditional 
RID 
Relation (%)  
Time (days/page) 
1 
0.075 
7,5 
Costs (USD/page) 
93.95 
13.28 
14 
According to Table 3, the adaptation and implementation 
of a page of script as the webpage of an e-learning course, 
using an approach based on the concept of RID was 13.33 
times faster and 7.14 times cheaper than the traditional 
method. This indicates that the use of a methodology based 
on RID can enable the development of e-learning courses 
with significantly limited time and financial resources. Thus, 
the utilization of the developed approach gives important 
opportunities to universities and companies in terms of the 
adaptation of traditional materials for e-learning courses, and 
thus the preparation of a wide e-learning programme. 
The key factor in the assessment of the developed model 
is the verification of the quality of e-learning courses 
developed with the use of this approach compared with e-
learning courses produced and implemented by traditional 
methods. Analysis showed that e-learning courses developed 
with the use of a traditional approach and those which are 
RID-integrated have a similar visual quality. A more 
important issue is the reception of e-learning courses by the 
script authors and participants. In this regard, a verification 
of traditional approaches was made in 2008-2011 during the 
project "The Implementation of Modern Education at the 
University of Gdansk". The validation of the approach 
developed to integrate the concept of RID was carried out for 
the previously mentioned CaseSimulator and CTF projects. 
A summary of the quality assessment - resulting from 
questionnaires and interviews - for the respective project 
management approach is shown in Table 4. 
TABLE IV.  
ASSESSMENT OF THE QUALITY OF E-LEARNING COURSES 
PREPARED ACCORDING TO TRADITIONAL AND RID-INTEGRATED 
APPROACHES 
 
Traditional (6 e-learning courses) 
RID (15 e-learning courses) 
Amo 
unt 
Evaluation score 
Amo 
unt 
Evaluation score 
Autho
rs 
8  High evaluation score for the 
quality of the e-learning courses. A 
quantitive analysis revealed that 
12,75% of multimedia items 
contained significant errors 
compared with 78,5% of items with 
few or no errors. 
12 
No reservations regarding the 
quality of the e-learning 
courses. Acceptation of the 
quality of educational and 
visual content as well as the 
functionality of the e-learning 
courses – only quality research 
with interviews. 
Partici
pants 
183 Very high evaluation score for the 
quality of the e-learning courses.  A 
quantitive survey was carried out 
(102 answers received) in which the 
attractiveness of the presentation of 
materials was scored highly or very 
highly (86,5%) compared with the 
0% of students who rated the 
materials as unattractive. 
760 
No reservations regarding the 
quality of the e-learning 
programme. Acceptance of 
quality of the educational and 
visual content as well as the 
functionality of the e-learning 
courses - quality research with 
interviews. No quantitive 
surveys. 
Table 4 indicates the quality of e-learning courses 
prepared using a traditional approach compared with one 
integrating the concept of RID. E-learning courses prepared 
using a conventional approach were given a higher rating.  
Taking into account the validation results of the approach 
developed according to the concept of RID, in terms of 
factors such as the time and cost of preparation as well as the 
quality assessment of the e-learning courses, the two stated 
hypotheses were confirmed: 
1. The adaptation of RID in approaches to the project 
management of e-learning course development supports 
the creation of e-learning courses at an acceptable level 
of quality while significantly reducing the time and cost 
of project realization relative to traditional approaches. 
2. The use of RID is a useful alternative in the 
development of e-learning courses, compared to 
preparing a simple e-learning programme based on static 
documents or expensive multimedia and interactive e-
learning materials. 
The confirmation of the two stated hypotheses positively 
answers the question posed in the title of the article - does 
the integration of the concept of Rapid Instructional Design 
in project management approaches support the efficient 
realization of e-learning projects? 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
The use of the developed approach to e-learning project 
management, as well as the validation results of this 
approach, enable a critical evaluation of the RID concept. 
First and foremost, it is apparent that the RID-based 
solutions are usable when the multimedia materials to be 
produced will involve a low or moderate complexity of 
animations and interactions. In addition, in approaches to e-
learning project management based on RID, it is desirable 
for the instructional designer to have basic skills in the field 
of graphics and animation programming. 
The reason is that RID primarily concentrates on 
reducing expenditure on the design and production of 
multimedia objects, and thus the multimedia team. When the 
necessity arises to prepare complex animations with 
complicated interactions involving the use of audio and 
video, such as simulations, the concept of RID is highly 
difficult to apply. In such a situation it is of the utmost 
importance to develop a detailed instructional design 
specification for multimedia objects and create a multimedia 
team. However, even in such a scenario, the concept of RID 
can be partially applied, where the traditional production 
process will refer only to selected complex multimedia 
materials. This will continue to reduce the time and costs of 
projects for e-learning course development. 
One of the principles of RID is to delegate tasks. In this 
regard, practical experience shows the possibility of 
offloading design tasks to the authors, and production to 
instructional designers. However, delegation per se does not 
reduce the cost and duration of the project. Moreover, in 
more complex projects, it may turn out that the authors and 
designers do not have sufficient skills and are less effective 
in their work than a multimedia team. It should be noted that 
in such a situation, the opposite effect is achieved in terms of 
reducing expenditure. 
The key principle of RID assumes the simplification of 
the design and production processes of e-learning courses 
preparation, with an impact on the multimediality and 
interactivity of learning material. It is natural to believe that 
restrictions on the multimediality and interactivity of e-
123
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

learning is not possible without a negative impact on their 
quality. In this regard, relevant research should be 
conducted. The result of such a study would define the point 
at which the simplification of the multimedia objects in e-
learning courses leads to an unacceptable level of quality. It 
would also be desirable to conduct studies comparing the 
perceived attractiveness of e-learning courses prepared on 
the basis of the same material but with three different 
approaches: a traditional approach, one based on RID and 
one which does not adapt a script as multimedia and 
interactive e-learning material. The possibility to carry out 
appropriate research is significantly impeded, since it 
requires financial resources for the development of 
alternative versions of an e-learning course. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
The paper presents a project management approach with 
integrated Rapid Instructional Design for e-learning course 
development and implementation. The verification of its 
effectiveness also validates the very concept of RID.  
Study carried out during two e-learning projects 
confirmed both research hypotheses. Namely, adapting the 
concept of RID in approaches for the project management of 
e-learning course development supports the creation of e-
learning courses at an acceptable level of quality while 
significantly reducing the time and cost of project realization 
compared with traditional approaches. In addition, the use of 
RID is a useful alternative in the development of e-learning 
courses, compared with preparing a simple e-learning 
programme based on static documents or expensive 
multimedia and interactive e-learning materials. 
The validation results revealed the benefits of the 
approach developed by integrating the concept of RID, in 
that it develops e-learning courses at an acceptable quality, at 
a fraction of the cost and time compared with traditional 
approaches. The proposed solution enables organizations 
such as universities and training companies to prepare a 
wider e-learning programme. Therefore, in conjunction with 
confirmed two stated hypotheses, there is a positive answer 
to the question posed in the title of the article - Does the 
integration of the concept of Rapid Instructional Design in 
project management approaches support the efficient 
realization of e-learning projects? 
The use of the developed approach during the 
CaseSimulator and CTF projects, combined with its 
validation results, showed the limitations of RID concept. 
RID-based approaches may be applicable to the preparation 
of e-learning courses of low or moderate complexity. It is 
highly problematic to adapt RID for projects where it is 
necessary to produce high quality e-learning packages in 
terms of multimediality and interactivity. In this case, the 
design and production processes should follow a more 
traditional approach. 
REFERENCES 
[1] A. Akram, “Semi-Virtual Knowledge Engineering: Development of 
Semi-Virtual Knowledge Learning Process to Improve the Semi-
Virtual Individual learning”, Communications of the IIMA: Vol. 10: 
Iss. 2, 2010. 
[2] T. Bates, Technology, Open Learning and Distance learning,  
Routledge, 1995. 
[3] S. Braxton, K. Bronico and K. Looms, Instructional design 
methodologies and techniques,  The George Washington University, 
1995. 
[4] Catching the Future, http://catching.ug.edu.pl. 
[5] Case Simulator, http://casesimulator.pl. 
[6] E. 
T. 
Chen, 
“Successful 
E-Learning 
in 
Corporations”, 
Communications of the IIMA: Vol. 8: Iss. 2, 2008. 
[7] R. Clark, Developing Technical Training: A Structured Approach for 
Developing Classroom and Computer-based Instructional Materials, 
Wiley, 2008.  
[8] R. Clark, R. Mayer, e-Learning and the Science of Instruction: Proven 
Guidelines for Consumers and Designers of Multimedia Learning, 
Pfeiffer, 2007. 
[9] J. Elen, Blocks on the Road to Instructional Design Prescriptions: a 
Methodology for I.D. – Research Exemplified, Leuven University 
Press, 1995. 
[10] C. G. Gentry, Introduction to instructional development: Process and 
technique, Wadsworth Publishing Company, 1994. 
[11] R. Hassel-Corbiel, Developing Technical Training Courses A 
technical Writer’s Guide to Instructional Design and Development, 
Learning Edge Publishing, 2001. 
[12] B. Khan, Managing E-learning Strategies: Design, Delivery, 
Implementation and Evaluation, IGI Global, 2005. 
[13] M. Kuciapski, “A design framework for instructional design 
information 
system”, 
Polish 
Journal 
of 
Environmental 
Studies,18(3B), 2009. 
[14] M. Kuciapski, “Model for Project Management for Development and 
Implementation of E-Learning Courses”, Perspectives in Business 
Informatics Research, Proceedings of 9th International Conference, 
Springer, 2010. 
[15] B. Locke, R. Perkins, K. Potter, J. Burton and G. K. Kreb, “Defining 
Quality in Distance learning: Examining National and International 
Standards for Online Learning”, Conference Proceedings 27th Annual 
Conference on Distance Teaching & Learning, Madison, 2011. 
[16] G. M. Marković, B. Kliček and D. P. Vukovac, “The Effects of 
Multimedia Learning Materials Quality on Knowledge Acquisition”, 
Information Systems Development: Transforming Organisations and 
Society through Information Systems, 2014.  
[17] M. McVay Lynch and J. Roecker, Project Managing E-Learning: A 
Handbook for Successful Design, Delivery and Management, 
Routledge, 2007. 
[18] G. Piskurich, Rapid Instructional Design: Learning ID Fast and Right, 
Pfeiffer, 2006. 
[19] G. Piskurich, Rapid Training Development: Developing Training 
Courses Fast and Right, Pfeiffer, 2009. 
[20] D. Renner, S. Laumer and T. Weitzel, Effectiveness and Efficiency of 
Blended Learning – A Literature Review, IS in education, IS 
curriculum, education and teaching cases, AMCIS Proceedings, 2014. 
[21] V. Ruhe and B. Zumbo, Evaluation in Distance learning and E-
learning: The Unfolding Model, The Guildford Press, 2009. 
[22] J. Sims, P. Powell and R. Vidgen, “Identifying E-Learning 
capabilities and competences”, UK Academy for Information 
Systems Conference Proceedings, 2013. 
[23] S. Thiagarajan, “Rapid Instructional Design”. [Online]. Available 
from: http://www.thiagi.com/article-rid.html 2015.10.04. 
[24] L. Zapf,  “Building  Scalable and Context-Dependable Repositories 
for Learning Objects using Open Source  Components”, Learning  
Objects:  Standards,  Metadata, Repositories, and LCMS, Informing 
Science Press, 2007. 
[25] W. Zhengui, “Identification and prioritisation of variables influencing 
the cost of learning content development”, Computers & 
Telecommunications Engineering, University of Wollongong, 2009. 
124
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

