Cookie Monsters on Media Websites 
Dark Patterns in Cookie Consent Notices 
 
Esther van Santen 
Department of Business and Management, 
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
Email: e.vs@posteo.de  
 
 
Abstract–The EU’s General Data Protection Regulation 
attempts to improve the protection of user’s privacy by 
demanding that website operators have legitimate reason to 
process personal data. In the context of the use of cookies, 
therefore, usually consent is needed. The use of dark patterns 
stands in the way of valid consent and can be classified as 
unethical design. This contribution explores the occurrence 
and frequency of dark patterns in cookie consent notices for 
media outlet websites in Germany and the United States. Each 
examined cookie consent notice contained at least one dark 
pattern and 4.8 dark patterns on average. The dark pattern 
Privacy Zuckering is present on most researched websites in 
Germany and the U.S. The dark pattern Preselection is present 
on a quarter of German and U.S. American websites. The 
findings indicate that there are dark patterns which could be 
more prevalent in cookie consent notices. One newly described 
dark pattern could be specific to the context of consent notices 
on media websites.  
Keywords-cookie consent notice; dark pattern; ethical 
design; media websites. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In an attempt to maintain compliance with the EU’s 
General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), and at the same 
time to fulfill their own interests as uncompromisingly as 
possible, website operators resort to dark patterns when 
designing cookie consent notices. The concept of dark 
patterns was introduced into the discourse by Brignull in 
2010 and describes design patterns within any kind of user 
interface that “trick users into things they wouldn’t otherwise 
have done” [1]. In a more recent definitional approach with a 
legal focus, Martini et al. reject definitions based on users' 
agency or website operators' intent and speak instead of user 
interface design that “exploits the design power (...) 
unilaterally in the interest of website operators” [2]. This 
exploitation could result in cookie consent forms generating 
invalid consent under the GDPR, due to the non-voluntary or 
uninformed nature of the user’s decision, as demonstrated in 
a legal assessment by Kuehling [3].  
 
To improve both compliance and user experience in the 
context of cookie consent banners, it is important to deepen 
the public understanding of dark pattern occurrence and 
mechanisms. Previous research on frequency of dark patterns 
within cookie consent notices has focused on different 
aspects: Consent management platforms [4], specific 
categories of websites [5] or specific countries [6, 7]. This 
work contributes to dark pattern research insights for cookie 
consent notices by evaluating a set of 100 media outlet 
websites in the U.S. and Germany for the occurrence and 
frequency of different dark patterns. The analysis showed 
that there is indication that some dark patterns might be more 
prevalent in the context of cookie consent banners, and that 
there is one dark pattern that could be specific to consent 
notices for media websites. In Section 2, previous findings 
for the context of dark patterns in cookie consent notices are 
explored. Section 3 describes the methods that were used to 
examine the cookie consent notices on media outlet websites 
for dark patterns based on the dark pattern taxonomy 
suggested by Bösch et al. [2]. In Section 4, a frequency 
analysis for those dark patterns is performed and three 
further dark patterns specific for cookie consent notices are 
described. The conclusion in Section 5 completes this paper.  
II. 
RELATED WORK 
In 2016, Bösch et al. described and investigated dark 
patterns with an explicit tie to privacy concerns occurring on 
digital user interfaces, to form a framework that facilitates 
the documentation of dark patterns [8]. Gray et al. developed 
a taxonomy for Brignull’s initial dark patterns in 2018 and 
enriched this collection with dark patterns that they found 
while examining their corpus of 118 examples from various 
websites [9]. Gray’s taxonomy is based on five categories 
that were formed according to the influence that the design 
patterns included have on a user. Another classification, 
established in 2019 by Mathur et al., is based on a corpus of 
approximately 11000 shopping websites, from which they 
derived seven categories which are also based on how a set 
of patterns influences users [10].  
There are also several papers, which focus specifically on 
dark patterns within cookie consent notices: Nouwens et al. 
compared consent management platforms for frequency of 
dark patterns and testing the influence of the most occurring 
patterns on user’s consent decisions in 2020. They found out 
that the willingness to consent is increased by over 20 % if 
there is no option to decline on the first view of a consent 
notice. If there are more options to modify the extent of the 
consent on the first view, consent is reduced by 8 to 20 %.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-972-0
ICCGI 2022 : The Seventeenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Through a study with a set of 300 cookie consent notices 
that were collected from online news websites in 2020, Soe 
et al. found indications for seven dark patterns specific to 
cookie consent notices [5]. The research was also based on 
Gray’s taxonomy. Soe et al. give two reasons for focussing 
on news websites: These websites are intended to appeal to a 
broad target group and therefore they expect that the consent 
notices are quite generic in design. In addition, compared to 
social networks, news websites are not expected to be 
primarily interested in the advertising suitability of the 
processed data. In 2021, Kampanos and Shahandashti 
focused their research on the comparison of cookie consent 
notices on Greek and British websites in terms of interaction 
options [6]. Therefore, dark patterns were only addressed 
implicitly. They found that most of the investigated websites 
for both countries did not offer direct decline options. UK 
websites were more likely to violate the GDPR by not 
including cookie consent notices, even though there was use 
of third-party cookies. Krisam et al. examined 389 German 
websites in 2021 for frequency of choice options in consent 
notices [7]. They provide an analysis on which choice 
options have to be seen as dark patterns, but refrain from 
connecting them with existing taxonomy. Out of 389 
websites, 69 would not be legally compliant. As Krisam et 
al. are more focussed on compliance than ethics of design, 
they do not offer a total for dark patterns within their 
research set.   
III. 
METHODS 
The set of 100 media outlet websites (50 German, 50 
U.S. American) that this research is based on, was obtained 
manually. Using U.S. American websites was a deliberate 
choice to enable a comparison of an EU country with one 
outside the EU, as the GDPR is still applicable if a non-EU 
website is accessed by a person within the EU. However, it 
can be assumed that the GDPR’s requirements for cookie 
consent notices are not as well-known and strictly enforced 
outside the EU as within the EU. Also, this could lead to 
different solution approaches for obtaining consent. 
In contrast to the consideration made by Soe et al. 
concerning media websites as subjects, the decision for 
media outlet websites was based on an attempt to achieve 
better comparability of the subjects and to possibly find 
industry-specific dark patterns.  
 
The set of websites was manually obtained and fixed 
before starting the analysis. The following research 
hypotheses were formed:   
• 
RQ1: Which already described dark patterns can be 
found in consent notices on media websites?  
• 
RQ2: Are there dark patterns that have not yet been 
described and could therefore be specific to cookie 
consent notices or to media websites?  
• 
RQ3: Are there country-specific differences in 
which dark patterns occur in cookie consent notices 
on German and U.S. American websites? 
This study is based on the taxonomy by Gray et al. 
because its context is more generic than the taxonomy by 
Mathur et al., which is based only on the analysis of 
shopping websites. Nevertheless, after further reviewing the 
dark patterns contained in the classification of Gray et al., it 
became obvious that not all dark patterns made sense in the 
context of cookie consent notices. Some dark patterns were 
tied to a specific context, e.g. online shopping. Therefore, 
each category within the taxonomy was reduced to a set of 
dark patterns that seemed to be applicable to cookie consent 
notices. This set of dark patterns formed the basis for the 
quantitative visual analysis of cookie consent notices within 
the set of media websites. As Nagging is a category that does 
not contain any dark patterns, the category itself has to be 
analysed, counted and measured against other dark patterns 
rather than other categories.  
TABLE I.  
CATEGORISATION OF DARK PATTERNS 
Category 
Contained dark patterns 
Nagging 
(Nagging) 
Obstruction 
Roach Motel 
Sneaking 
Bait & Switch, Hidden Costs 
Interface Interference 
Hidden Information, Preselection, Toying 
with Emotion, False Hierarchy, Misdirection 
Forced Action 
Privacy Zuckering 
 
Before starting the analysis, it was necessary to establish 
a sound research environment. Any network measures, such 
as IP obfuscation and network-wide tracking blockers were 
deactivated for the course of the quantitative analysis. Then, 
the cookie notices were visually evaluated for the occurrence 
of dark patterns. In case of ambiguities, for example when 
determining whether a contrast ratio is sufficiently low for 
the information or button to be considered hidden, the 
provisions of the WCAG 2.1 (Web Content Accessibility 
Guidelines) were used to set limit values.  
IV. 
RESULT 
Out of all 100 websites, 67 contained a cookie consent 
notice. However, the existence of cookie consent notices was 
not distributed evenly for German and U.S. American 
websites. While 80 % of German websites contained a 
consent notice, only 57 % of American websites did.  
Out of the 67 websites that did contain a cookie consent 
notice, all 67 consent notices contained at least one dark 
pattern each. On average, each cookie consent notice 
contained 4.8 dark patterns. These are the cases for which the 
existence of a dark pattern within a consent notice was 
confirmed: 
TABLE II.  
OCCURRENCE OF DARK PATTERNS 
Dark pattern 
Properties  
Hidden 
Information 
(1) The relevant information is set in a very small 
font (less than 12 pt). (2) Or the contrast ratio of the 
text to the background is too low (less than 3.5:1). 
Preselection 
Checkboxes are already checked or toggles are 
already set to “confirmed”. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-972-0
ICCGI 2022 : The Seventeenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Dark pattern 
Properties  
False Hierarchy 
(1) “Accept” and “decline” or “options” are 
unevenly sized. (2) Or One the options is a button, 
the other is solely a text link. (3) Or options are 
unnecessarily stacked on top of each other. 
Misdirection 
(1) The colour scheme of the option buttons does 
not match usual colour schemes; usual meaning of 
colours is reversed (green is used for declining 
instead of accepting). (2) Or a consent option is 
offered in legitimate interest, although this reason 
for permission does not depend on user’s consent. 
Hidden Costs 
Information about data processing is non-existent or 
not detailed enough. 
Roach Motel 
Rejecting cookies cannot be done via the consent 
notice itself, but only via a more complicated way 
(for example by email). 
Privacy 
Zuckering 
If data is transferred to third parties for ordered data 
processing or for sale. 
Nagging 
The website is impossible to navigate without 
responding to the consent notice. 
 
These already described dark patterns were present in the 
research set: Privacy Zuckering (59 instances), Nagging (42), 
False Hierarchy (40), Hidden Costs (37), Hidden Information 
(18), Preselection (16), Misdirection (14) and Roach Motel 
(11). There were no instances of either Toying with Emotion 
or Bait & Switch.  
The occurrence of a category was affirmed for a website 
as soon as a dark pattern of this category was found. Forced 
Action occurred for almost every website (60 instances) and 
the remaining categories were found on more than half of the 
websites: Interface Interference (55 instances), Obstruction 
(47) and Sneaking (35). It is noticeable that the four most 
frequently found dark patterns belong to different categories. 
Since the categories in Grey et al.’s taxonomy are based on 
the effect that design choices have on the way that they 
influence a user, this is not surprising. After all, if dark 
patterns are supposed to persuade users to consent, why not 
work multiple angles? The results of this study are merely a 
small contribution to answering the first research question, as 
it was too broad to begin with. However, this indication 
could be a starting point for comparing these results with a 
larger set of media websites. 
 
In addition, three dark patterns were found and described, 
for which no existing dark pattern definitions could be found 
in the reviewed papers. These dark patterns are:  
Unclear Directions, which is a form of Sneaking and 
shall be defined as the concealment of a path which is 
required by the user. This is the case when the cookie 
management button is not recognisable because it is 
misleadingly named, e.g., “show purposes”, or if the link for 
more specific information on data processing is not 
sufficiently labelled, e.g., with “here” or “more”. 
Denial Maze, which is a form of Obstruction and which 
shall be defined as an interface design where it is more 
difficult to express disagreement than agreement. For this 
study, this was the case when more clicks were needed to 
reject than to accept the use of cookies. 
Conditional Access, which is a form of Forced Action 
and which shall be defined as a situation in which access can 
only take place if one accepts undesirable consequences. 
This means that users were only informed about the use of 
cookies without the possibility of interaction and, above all, 
the possibility of refusing the use of cookies or if the use of 
cookies is part of the business model and therefore only 
possible to refuse by paying for it. This business model 
approach could only be found on German websites. These 
results can only be seen as indications. In order to actually 
arrive at an answer to the second research question, it would 
be necessary to compare all three dark patterns with user 
interfaces other than consent notices in order to find out 
whether this mechanism is specific to consent notices. 
Furthermore, for the dark pattern Conditional Access, it 
would have to be examined whether this mechanism also 
applies to non-media websites. 
 
For this research set, the dark pattern that occurred most 
for both countries was Privacy Zuckering, which appeared 
on 85 % of  German websites and on 92.6 % of U.S. 
American websites. The dark pattern Preselection occurred 
on almost the same percentage of websites for both 
countries: It could be found on 22.5 % of German websites 
and on 25 % of U.S. American websites.  
There were notable differences for the occurrence of two 
dark patterns concerning the German and the U.S. American 
websites: The dark pattern False Hierarchy occurred on 70 % 
of German websites and on 44 % of U.S. American websites. 
The dark pattern Roach Motel occurred on 10 % of German 
websites but on 25 % of U.S. American websites. For all 
remaining dark patterns, the difference in occurrence was 
lower than 15 %.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
Starting with an already small sample size and then 
further limiting it, minimizes the significance of the results. 
For a further attempt, it would be useful to either choose a 
bigger set of websites in the beginning or to filter the set, so 
that every website contains a cookie consent notice. 
Research questions should be more specific to generate valid 
results. With regard to the fact that only 67 percent of the 
selected research objects contained a cookie consent notice, 
the following should be noted: It can be legal and in 
compliance with the GDPR to operate a website without a 
consent notice. However, the low percentage of U.S. 
American websites that contained a consent notice and the 
presence of dark patterns within every consent notice that 
was examined, indicates that the research set at least partially 
contained websites on which the absence of a cookie consent 
notice might not be lawful. Whether this is actually the case, 
however, would require a deeper technical and legal analysis.  
REFERENCES 
[1] H. Brignull, “Dark Patterns: Dirty Tricks Designers use to 
make 
People 
do 
Stuff,” 
Available 
from: 
https://90percentofeverything.com/2010/07/08/dark-patterns-
dirty-tricks-designers-use-to-make-people-do-stuff [retrieved: 
May, 2022]. 
[2] M. Martini, C. Drews, P. Seelinger, and Q. Weinzierl, “Dark 
Patterns: Phänomenologie und Antworten der Rechtsordnung 
[Dark Pattern: Phenomenology and Responses of the Legal 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-972-0
ICCGI 2022 : The Seventeenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

System],” Zeitschrift für Digitalisierung und Recht [Journal 
for Digitization and Law], vol. 2021, no. 1, pp. 47-74.  
[3] J. Kuehling, ”Rechtliche Rahmenbedingungen sogenannter 
‘Dark Patterns‘ [Legal Determinants of so-called ‘Dark 
Patterns‘],” 
Available 
from: 
https://www.bevh.org/fileadmin/content/04_politik/Europa/K
uehling-Gutachten-BEVH-Dark-pattern-22-02-16-final.pdf 
[retrieved: May, 2022].  
[4] M. Nouwens, I. Liccardi, M. Veale, D. Karger, and L. Kagal, 
„Dark Patterns after the GDPR: Scraping Consent Pop-ups 
and Demonstrating their Influence,” Proceedings of the CHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (CHI 
’20), 
April 
2020, 
paper 
no. 
194, 
pp. 
1-13, 
doi: 
10.1145/3313831.3376321.  
[5] T. H. Soe, O. E. Nordberg, F. Guribye, and M. Slavkovik, 
“Circumvention by Design – Dark Patterns in Cookie 
Consents for Online News Outlets,” Proceedings of the 11th 
Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Shaping 
Experiences, Shaping Society (NordiCHI '20), October 2020, 
article no. 19, pp. 1-12, doi:10.1145/3419249.3420132. 
[6] G. Kampanos and S. F. Shahandashti, “Accept All: The 
Landscape of Cookie Banners in Greece and the UK,” ICT 
Systems Security and Privacy Protection, June 2021, pp. 213-
227, doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-78120-0_14.  
[7] C. Krisam, H. Dietmann, M. Volkamer, and O. Kulyk, “Dark 
Patterns in the Wild: Review of Cookie Disclaimer Designs 
on Top 500 German Websites,” European Symposium on 
Usable Security 2021 (EuroUSEC '21), October 2021, pp. 1–
8, doi.org/10.1145/3481357.3481516. 
[8] C. Bösch, B. Erb, Benjamin, F. Kargl, H. Kopp, and S. 
Pfattheicher, “Tales from the Dark Side: Privacy Dark 
Strategies and Privacy Dark Patterns,” Proceedings on 
Privacy Enhancing Technologies, vol. 2016, no. 4, pp. 237-
254, 2016, doi:10.1515/popets-2016-0038.  
[9] C. M. Gray, Y. Kou, B. Battles, J. Hoggatt, and A. L. 
Toombs, “The Dark (Patterns) Side of UX Design,” 
Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human Factors 
in Computing Systems (CHI '18), April 2018, paper no. 534, 
pp. 1-14, doi:10.1145/3173574.3174108. 
[10] A. Mathur et al., “Dark Patterns at Scale: Findings from a 
Crawl of 11K Shopping Websites,” Proceedings of the ACM 
on Human-Computer Interaction, Volume 3, Issue CSCW, 
November 2019, pp 1-32, doi:10.1145/3359183. 
 
 
 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-972-0
ICCGI 2022 : The Seventeenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

