The Impact of the Internet and the World Wide Web On Distance and 
Collaborative Learning 
 
Franklyn Chukwunonso  
Department of Information Systems 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Johor Bahru, Malaysia 
e-mail: franconicostelo@yahoo.com 
Roliana Binti Ibrahim 
Department of Information Systems 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Johor Bahru, Malaysia 
e-mail: roliana@utm.my
Ali Bin Selamat 
Department of Information Systems 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Johor Bahru, Malaysia 
e-mail: aselamat@utm.my 
Adamu Idama 
Department of Statistics and Operations Research 
Modibbo Adama University of Technology 
Yola, Nigeria 
e-mail: apostleidama@yahoo.com
Wadzani A. Gadzama 
Department of Information Security 
Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 
Johor Bahru, Malaysia 
e-mail: ask4gadzama@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract—The advent of the Internet and the World Wide Web 
has changed the face of technology especially in the way we 
communicate and interact. The increasing use of this 
technology especially in teaching and learning has attracted 
enormous research efforts particularly in the development of 
distance and collaborative learning. Even though much gain 
have been recorded in this direction, there still remains a gap 
as to how well these highly proliferating web technologies have 
impacted on the collaboration between students and teachers, 
students and students, and its overall contribution to distance 
learning. This paper considered how these web-based 
technologies contribute to collaborative learning by enabling 
people to interact with each other from different locations. It 
identified the factors necessary to optimise the impact of web-
based technologies in distance and collaborative learning and 
concludes by proposing a best-practice guideline that will 
enhance the impact of the Internet and the World Wide Web 
for effective distance and collaborative learning. 
Keywords-Internet; World Wide Web; distance learning; e-
learning; collaborative learning. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The last decade has witnessed two major trends in the 
world of education: the transformation of the Web from a 
repository of hyper textual documents to a highly interactive 
communication media, and a shift in learning theory from 
the traditional educational theory of behaviourism to that of 
cognitivism and constructivism [1][2]. With this trend, web 
applications 
have 
become 
important 
candidates 
for 
educational activities, which often include collaborative 
sessions. The traditional emphasis on print in the educational 
system is constantly threatened by technology enhanced 
learning (TEL) [3]. Over the years, the use of technology in 
education has witnessed a tremendous growth not only in 
size, but also in the innovative way it is used. 
Distance learning is a way of delivering instructional and 
educational materials to learners in different places and at 
different or the same time, on an individual basis [4]. The 
use 
of 
technology 
in 
teaching 
brought 
about 
a 
transformational change in education, especially in distance 
learning. Distance education has come a long way, but it 
witnessed a rapid growth in popularity and use with the 
advent of more advanced technologies. From a humble 
beginning in 1728, when Caleb Philip taught his students 
new method of Short Hand through weekly mailed lessons 
[5], through 1840s, when Isaac Pitman used correspondence 
to teach shorthand in Great Britain [6], the introduction of 
technology to education introduced online learning programs 
at the K-12 level in 2008 [7]. Today, more impact of 
adopting Internet 
and 
web-based technologies 
have 
completely transformed the way we learn, play and work. 
Web applications are now considered very useful in 
enhancing 
educational 
activities, 
particularly 
for 
collaborative sessions [8][9]. A peoples wealth and 
competitiveness, 
human 
competency 
and 
social 
development, is highly dependent on the importance it 
attaches to education. With the current trend of globalization 
and rapid technological advancement, there is a need to 
adopt new methods of teaching and learning in training the 
population into a knowledge based society through the 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

adoption of more robust and collaborative web-based 
groupware technologies such as e-learning.  
These new mode of learning (e-learning) has the 
potential of meeting present day challenges in the acquisition 
and dissemination of knowledge and skill. The problem 
however is not in the adoption of the technology, but in its 
use to achieve the student’s learning outcomes. Unlike in the 
era of audiovisuals where the television played a lasting and 
remarkable role in distance learning (e.g., Telekolleg in 
Germany 1967, the Open University in Milton Keynes in 
Great Britain 1971, and the FernUniversität in Hagen 
Germany 1975), e-learning tools are yet to record a 
remarkable impact on learning as these tools are mostly 
underutilised for the benefit of distance and collaborative 
learning. This study is therefore convinced that if fully 
utilized, the Internet and web-based technologies can be used 
to address these challenges as e-learning is perceived to be a 
viable resource for teaching and collaborative learning either 
by synchronous or asynchronous methods. 
Section 2 takes a look at the background of the study 
from 
two 
perspectives: 
historical 
and 
educational 
perspectives. In Section 3, we discuss the role of technology 
in distance and collaborative learning. In Section 4, we 
discuss the impact of these technologies on teaching and 
learning based from the findings of our study and propose a 
guideline of best practice that will enhance the impact of the 
Internet and the WWW for effective distance and 
collaborative learning. Section 5 concludes the paper. 
II. 
BACKGROUND OF THE STUDY 
Recent times have seen a tremendous increase in the 
application of information and communication technologies 
(ICT) for educational purposes, resulting to a proliferation of 
networked technologies and evolution of e-learning methods 
[10]. As technology advanced, particularly Internet and web-
based technologies, the mode and method of delivering 
educational and instructional materials, otherwise known as 
distance learning evolved from distance education to e-
learning.  
Historically, the use of technology was first noted when 
the University of Illinois (in 1960) employed computer 
terminals to enable students access recorded lectures using 
remote audio or television devices [11]. From 1963 to date, 
educational institutions have been taking advantage of these 
new opportunities as they witnessed these technologies 
evolve in different and innovative ways. Early e-learning 
systems began to emerge such as Computer-Based 
Learning/Training (CBT) in the 1970s and 1980s [12], and 
Computer Supported Collaborative Learning (CSCL) in the 
1980s [13].  The introduction of CSCL coupled with the 
advance in technology from large low processing and 
expensive computers to today’s handheld computing devices 
changed the face of learning and gave birth to the first Open 
University in Britain and University of British Colombia 
[13][14], which also saw the development of the first Web 
CT (Blackboard Inc.), thus facilitating the use of Internet to 
deliver education [15], giving birth to web-based training 
and online distance learning, and online discussions between 
students at different locations [16]. The birth of the WWW in 
the early 1990s gave rise to the use of hypertext materials 
and online course websites – virtual learning [17]. Other 
advances in this regard are mentioned in [18][19][20]. 
From an educational perspective, the adoption of Internet 
and web-based technologies in education delivery has led to 
overthrow of more traditional methods of teaching and 
learning. From a simple and casual application of ICT to 
facilitate face-to-face classroom teaching and learning to the 
intensive use of ICT for educational purpose as in the case of 
virtual or online learning, e-learning, an end product of this 
evolution process has brought to light a completely different 
method of learning [21][22][23][24]. 
 In a simple form, E-learning is the application of 
information and communication technologies (ICT) and 
electronic media in education, inclusive of multimedia 
learning, technology-enhanced learning (TEL), computer-
based instruction (CBI), computer-based training (CBT), 
computer-assisted instruction or computer-aided instruction 
(CAI), internet-based training (IBT), web-based training 
(WBT), online education, virtual education, virtual learning 
environments (VLE) (which are also called learning 
platforms), m-learning, and digital educational collaboration, 
and can take place within or outside a conventional 
classroom, in synchronous or asynchronous ways [25]. E-
learning is best tailored for distance and collaborative 
learning but can also be applied in face-to-face teaching 
(blended learning). 
III. 
THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY 
Various Internet and web-based technologies exist, most 
of which are used to facilitate distance and collaborative 
learning, also referred to as e-learning. Today, we have terms 
like instructional technology, learning technology, Computer 
Aided Instruction or computer-based training. Online 
learning or education is however, specific to web-based 
learning. For learning through mobile applications, M-
learning is used. E-learning, which is our focus in this paper, 
goes beyond the application of technology in learning but 
also encompasses the actual learning activities enabled by 
the use of these systems. 
A. Aligning Educational Theories and Pedagogical 
Designs With E-Learning Technologies 
Distance learning has witnessed three major pedagogical 
evolution and many technological changes, yet, no single 
educational theory has been able to solely provide all the 
solutions demanded by e-learning designs as each has 
extended the work of others instead of developing a new 
prototype (Ireland, 2007). Each evolution demands a 
different approach to learning, different type of knowledge 
and contextual application, thereby requiring expertise on the 
mix of technology and pedagogy to be employed. In all three 
generations, the major players of teachers, learners, and 
content remain constant, however, the way in which these 
three relates vary; increasing from a learner-content 
interaction for cognitive-behaviourist models to learner-
learner interaction in constructivism, and then to the deeply 
networked 
learner-content-teacher 
interrelationship 
propagated in connectivist pedagogies. In connectivist 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

theory, the student plays the role of teachers and the teacher 
plays the role of students through a mediated digital artefact 
interaction created by all. The scenario is more of where the 
teacher’s role changes from being a guide to a co-passenger 
or a role model, but no more as the sole creator or guide in 
the learning activity. 
However, 
learning 
management 
systems 
(LMS) 
providers’ tend to focus more on technology without any 
pedagogical integration and this leaves most of these e-
learning tools unusable or being used in a way contrary to 
pedagogical principles, which negatively affects the learning 
process let alone the waste of resources used in 
implementing these e-learning systems. Previous researches 
reveal that most e-learning solutions lack pedagogical 
background and present some serious deficiencies regarding 
teaching strategies [26]. With the evolution of technology, e-
learning interfaces get more complex and overloaded with 
excess information and eye-catching graphics. This most 
times, has an adverse effect as the learner attention is 
distracted away from the content to technology. This can be 
avoided if the design interface is anchored on pedagogical 
principles, which will improve learner’s efficiency while 
making the learning activity more flexible. Though many 
learning theories abound, it is advisable to employ a 
combination of more than one learning theory in the design 
of e-learning systems as no one theory is specially tailored to 
support e-learning environments. Table I below shows a 
summary of learning theories principles. 
From the findings of Mayes and de Freitas [27], we can 
cluster these pedagogical theories into three broad 
perspectives from the assumptions they make about learning: 
the 
associationist/empiricist 
perspective 
(learning 
as 
activity), the cognitive perspective (learning as achieving 
understanding), and the situative perspective (learning as 
social practice), as presented  in Table II. 
TABLE I.  
SUMMARY OF LEARNING THEORY PRINCIPLES 
Learning Theories 
Core Principles 
Behaviourism 
Brain is a black box 
External stimuli provoke reaction 
Observation of behaviours 
Cognitive 
Involvement of different kinds of memories 
Learning is an internal process 
Use of node patterns 
Constructivism 
Attribution of a personal meaning to information 
Building of personal understanding 
Active process of information 
Active Learning 
Active involvement 
Combining previous involvement and dialogue 
TABLE II.  
MAPPING LEARNING THEORIES TO LEARNING OUTCOMES, 
ADOPTED FROM [27] 
Learning 
Theory 
Learning Outcome 
Associative 
perspective 
emphasises task analysis, defining sequences of 
component-to-composite skills. It provides a highly 
focused set of objectives, described as learning 
competencies. 
Cognitive 
perspective 
emphasises conceptual development, stressing the 
importance of achieving understanding of the broad 
unifying principles of a domain. This view also 
encourages us to frame learning outcomes in meta-
cognitive terms, with the educational aim of achieving 
learning 
how 
to 
learn, 
and 
encouraging 
the 
development of autonomous learners. 
Situative 
perspective 
encourages the definition of learning objectives in 
terms of the development of disciplinary practices of 
discourse and representation. It also focuses on 
learning outcomes that are dependent upon the 
establishment of collaborative learning outcomes, and 
on learning relationships with peers. This perspective 
also encourages us to formulate learning outcomes in 
terms of authentic practices of formulating and solving 
realistic problems. 
B. Internet  and Web-Based Groupware Technologies 
The first generation of complex groupware technologies 
was 
based 
on 
private 
networks 
and 
proprietary 
communication protocols and clients. Such technologies 
provided users within a limited area with rich user interfaces 
and customized functions. With the advent of the Internet, 
access to these groupware systems was extended to users in 
different areas, countries or even continents. The WWW in a 
weak sense can be regarded as a collaborative technology 
[28][29]. Actually, the Web provides a global platform for 
information sharing across what looks like a unique large file 
system [30]. This distinguishing feature of the WWW 
encouraged an increasing use of web-based collaborative 
tools especially in the field of project teams support [31]. 
Other reasons for this fast proliferation of the web-based 
technologies are the open network client standards 
characterizing Internet and the WWW [32][29]. Such 
standards enable any-place-any-time interaction, and make it 
possible to use standard browsers as clients (in the case of 
Web-based tools), freeing new users from the necessity to 
install new software. This interoperability is very useful to 
widely dispersed working groups, where the localization of 
people in different organizations and countries used to make 
deploying existing groupware technologies very hard [33]. 
Other positive consequences to the use of standard browsers 
are a reduction in the users’ need for training and set-up 
costs, and the Web’s suitability to be used as an interface as 
it combines platform independence and rapid distribution, 
two factors that are highly appreciated as interface 
characteristics. Despite all these assets, Internet-based and 
Web-based groupware tools also encounter a series of new 
problems and challenges. Among the disadvantages 
associated with Internet-based and Web-based groupware 
tools are slowness and unreliability, uncertainty and 
perceived insecurity. Advanced Web-based groupware has 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

now partially overcome these last limitations, thanks to 
relatively new technologies such as Java, XML and CORBA 
[34]. 
C. The Future of Distance and Collaborative Learning 
E-learning is being increasingly viewed as an important 
activity in the field of distance and continuing education. 
Web-based courses offer obvious advantages for learners by 
making access to educational resource very fast, just-in-time 
and relevant, at any time or place. Increasingly, the WWW is 
used to support and facilitate the delivery of teaching and 
learning materials. This use has progressed from the 
augmentation of conventional courses through web-based 
training and distance learning to the web-based and e-
learning education. E-learning is not just concerned with 
providing easy access to learning resources, anytime, 
anywhere, via a repository of learning resources, but is also 
concerned with supporting such features as the personal 
definition of learning goals and the synchronous and 
asynchronous communication and collaboration, between 
learners and between learners and instructors.  One of the 
hottest topics in recent years in the Artificial Intelligence 
(AI) community, as well as in the Internet community, is the 
semantic web. It is about making the web more 
understandable by machines. It is also about building an 
appropriate infrastructure for intelligent agents to run around 
the web performing complex actions for their users. 
Furthermore, semantic web is about explicitly declaring the 
knowledge embedded in many web-based applications, 
integrating information in an intelligent way, providing 
semantic-based access to the Internet and extracting 
information from texts [35]. Figure 1 presents a simple 
knowledge-based e-learning system architectural framework, 
Figure 2 shows a wider integrated view of the learning 
model, while Figure 3 shows a typical e-learning system.  
Figure 1.  A simple Knowledge based e-learning systems framework. 
Adapted from [36] 
From Figure 1 above, the learning system serves as the 
input to the system and its output is communicated to the 
learner through the user interface which may be in a blended 
learning, 
distance 
learning 
or 
traditional 
learning 
environments respectively (as shown in Figure 2). What the 
knowledge-based e-learning system in Figure 1 simply does 
is to extract user-specific information from a vast collection 
of available information in the learning system by subjecting 
the content to a set of decision rules. The output from the 
ontology based and content/collaborative filtering processes 
are then streamlined and recommended to the user based on 
those criteria. This process ensures that only user-specific 
content reaches the learner. Ultimately, semantic web is 
about how to implement reliable, large-scale interoperation 
of web services, to make such services computer 
interpretable – to create a web of machine-understandable 
and interoperable services that intelligent agents can 
discover, execute and compose automatically. The problem 
is that the web is huge, but not smart enough to easily 
integrate all of those numerous pieces of information from 
the web that a user really needs. Such integration at a high, 
user-oriented level is desirable in nearly all uses of the web. 
Unfortunately, the web was built for human consumption, 
not for machine consumption - although everything on the 
web is machine-readable, it is not machine-understandable. 
 
 
Figure 2.  A Typical E-learning Model 
D. Connecting for Lifelong Learning 
Several studies abound in the field of Web-based 
technology application in learning [37][36]. Rokou et al. [38] 
distinguished three basic levels in every web-based 
application: the Web character of the program, the 
pedagogical background and the personalized management 
of the learning material. They defined a web-based program 
as an information system that contains a Web server, a 
network, HTTP and a browser in which data supplied by 
users act on the system’s status and cause changes. The 
pedagogical background means the educational model that is 
Learning System 
Follow the 
academic 
rules? 
Rating 
information 
is available? 
Widespread 
knowledge 
is available? 
Ontology is 
available? 
Knowledge based 
Hybrid filtering 
Ontology based 
Content filtering 
Collaborative filtering 
Recommendatio
n 
User interface 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

used in combination with pedagogical goals set by the 
instructor. The personalized management of the learning 
materials means the set of rules and mechanisms that are 
used to select learning materials based on the student’s 
characteristics, the educational objectives, the teaching 
model and the available media. 
Many works have combined and integrated these three 
factors 
in 
e-learning 
systems, 
leading 
to 
several 
standardization projects [39][9]. Some projects have focused 
on determining the standard architecture and format for 
learning environments, such as IEEE Learning Technology 
Systems Architecture (LTSC), Instructional Management 
Systems (IMS) and Sharable Content Object Reference 
Model (SCORM). IMS and SCORM define and deliver 
XML-based interoperable specifications for exchanging and 
sequencing learning contents, i.e., learning objects, among 
many heterogeneous e-learning systems. They mainly focus 
on the standardization of learning and teaching methods as 
well as on the modelling of how the systems manage 
interoperating educational data relevant to the educational 
process. IMS and SCORM have announced their content 
packaging model and sequencing model, respectively. The 
key technologies behind these models are the content 
package, activity tree, learning activities, sequencing rules 
and navigation model.  
Their 
sequencing 
models 
define 
a 
method 
for 
representing the intended behaviour of an authored learning 
experience and their navigation models describe how the 
learner and system initiated navigation events can be 
triggered and processed. Quemanda and Simon [40] have 
also presented a model for educational activities and 
educational materials. Their model for educational activities 
denotes educational events that identify the instructor(s) 
involved and take place in a virtual meeting according to a 
specific schedule.  Also [38] described the introduction of 
stereotypes to the pedagogical design of educational systems 
and appropriate modifications of the existing package 
diagrams of UML (Unified Modelling Language). The IMS 
and SCORM models describe well the educational activities 
and system implementation, but not the educational contents 
knowledge in educational activities. Most e-learning models 
add 
more 
pedagogical 
background 
by 
emphasizing 
educational contents and sequences using the taxonomy of 
learning resources and stereotypes of teaching models. But 
the educational contents and their sequencing in these 
models are dependent on the system and lack standardization 
and reusability. Thus, we believe that if an educational 
contents frame of learning resources can be introduced into 
an e-learning system, including ontology-based properties 
and hierarchical semantic associations, then this e-learning 
system will have the capabilities of providing adaptable and 
intelligent learning to learners. 
 
 
Figure 3.  A Typical E-learning System 
IV. 
THE IMPACT OF INTERNET AND WEB-BASED 
TECHNOLOGIES ON LEARNING 
With the increasing importance of education for social 
development and improvement of human competencies, 
especially in the face of a rapidly changing technological 
advanced world that affects the living and working 
environment, the demands posed by e-learning on 
educational institutions, teachers and students is new and 
different from the traditional. This calls for new means of 
knowledge dissemination and skills acquisition, especially 
for the socially challenged and people with disabilities. The 
traditional way of learning has come short of meeting the 
needs of a society as new media and communication services 
and the ever busy demands placed by working, learning and 
family life schedules poses new challenges. To properly 
harness the impact of these Internet and web-based 
technological tools on distance and collaborative learning, 
we have decided to look at it from four perspectives:  
• 
Applications of e-learning. 
• 
Implications of e-learning. 
• 
Benefits of e-learning. 
• 
Guidelines for best practices of e-learning. 
A. Applications 
Positive effects have been recorded in all major subject 
areas, from preschool to higher learning, and for both regular 
students and those with special needs through the application 
of e-learning in education. Educational institutions must 
adopt new ways of disseminating information and acquiring 
skills and knowledge via e-learning in order to meet these 
challenges faced by today’s advanced and knowledge-based 
society. Some of the ways in which e-learning is applied to 
impact on education are mentioned below. 
1) Preschool: Different types of learning now take place 
among pupils even before they enroll into formal education. 
[41] posits that the impact of such e-learning is yet to be 
ascertained, however, parents are of the opinion exposing 
children to handheld devices or computers at an early age is 
a positive experience for the kids as it exposes them to 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

information that aids them when they enroll into schools. 
This claim is in agreement with [42][43]. 
2) K-12: 
Virtual 
schools, 
which 
make 
use 
of 
synchronous or asynchronous learning are e-learning 
applications adopted by public K-12 school. Classes can be 
attended either in conventional classrooms or from home or 
both. Students are provided computers and printers and 
other technological tools while in the school and reimbursed 
for home use. These cyber schools enable learners study at 
their own pace, select their courses, and create their 
schedules, thereby making learning very flexible and 
convenient. K-12 schools often make use of with innovative 
course delivery technology and administrative models [44].  
3) Higher Education:  In most developed and 
developing country, the application of e-learning in post-
secondary education is predominantly on the increase [45]. 
With an inrease in online education, some research 
universities now offer online doctoral programs [46]. Even 
though some of the massively-open online courses have 
limitations, research institutions like MTT, Stanford and 
Princeton University now offer non-credit courses to a wide 
range of global audience [46]. University course programs 
and a wide variety of courses can also be found on 
YouTube. Other such online higher education courses 
embarked by Universities include Udacity (which offers free 
computer classes), Coursera (an online-enrollment platforms 
that offers education for millions around the world) and 
several free online course websites in almost every field and 
discipline. 
4) Coorporate and Professional: The shift toward a 
Knowledge (K-economy) has affected the work setting, and 
created a need for knowledge workers with high intuition 
and ability to solve detailed and genuine problems 
confronted in the work environment. E-learning can 
adequately meet these requirement because employees can 
take advantage of online learning and online training, from 
their homes or offices, and at their pace and convenience. E-
learning has been adopted and used by various corporations 
and companies to overcome this challenge. 
B. Implications 
The difficulty in understanding the future implication of 
new technologies in society is seen in the growth of the 
Internet throughout the world, and in particular, in 
educational institutions. Despite the achievements recorded 
by e-learning systems and its considerable impact on 
education and training, it is still not presently utilised to its 
full capacity for the benefit of distance and collaborative 
learning. The high hopes raised by the application of these 
Internet and web-based technologies in learning are yet to be 
fulfilled. 
1) Misappropriation of Use: The existence of any 
technological artefact is no guarantee that it will be used for 
its intended purpose, and even if computers are found in 
classrooms, they may not be used to their full potential [47]. 
To this effect, a survey of five selected faculties in different 
Nigerian Universities was conducted to show the readiness 
for new computerized functions and total integration of ICT 
in education. The survey reveals that the purpose for which 
these computers are being used were primarily for word 
processing, spread sheet, and power point presentations 
outside the leading role of using computers for e-learning. 
While all the universities investigated had Internet access, 
only a few percent of them use the Internet for the primary 
purpose of e-learning as most use the Internet mostly for 
emails and which has no direct impact on learning or 
teaching. Figure 4 below depict the findings of the survey. 
Such results are not surprising. [48][49] argued that 
previous classroom technologies such as television have not 
been widely adopted because teachers need to be convinced 
that challenges to the rituals of everyday classroom life are 
in their interests. Educational systems are inherently 
conservative and resistant to change. Departure from 
conventional practices and continuity are justified only if 
the intended innovation is simple, durable and reliable.  
 
(a) 
 
 
                                                                   (b) 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

(c) 
Figure 4.   (a) Readiness for New Technology, (b) Access to Computers, and (c) Purpose of Computer Usage in 5 Different Nigerian Universities.
2) Lack of timely access to user tailored information: 
Nowadays, emphasis is not laid on accessibility to 
knowledge, but on it timeliness, relevance and usefulness to 
the user. Most e-learning systems tend to overload users 
with irrelevant information without giving attention to the 
user’s specific needs. The true measure of e-learning is not 
in training and accessibility, but its ability to use this feature 
to train the right individual to obtain the required 
knowledge/skill when needed. 
3) Lack of Standards: There is a need for users, vendors 
and developers of e-learning systems to adopt standards in 
order to facilitate interoperability and increase information 
sharing between different e-learning platforms. This can be 
achieved through an international body comprising of major 
stakeholders in the field of e-learning, by obtaining 
information 
on 
user 
requirements 
and 
drawing 
specifications from these collected data for standard 
definition and e-learning content architecture and protocol 
development. Coorpeation among the e-learning community 
is beginning to be witnessed as user requirements are being 
validated and the approved specifications converted into 
standards. 
4) Lack of Interoperability Among E-learning Systems: 
Another divergent problem arising from lack of standards is 
the lack of interoperability among various e-learning 
systems as noted by [50]. Whole and parts of different e-
learning systems must co-operate and interoperate to 
facilitate full integration and wider accessibility. Institutions 
of learning should adopt the use of standards that cover 
every area of learning. Developers of e-learning tools must 
incorporate standards in their design, and any customised 
protocol or standards should be resisted in order to forstall 
the chaos presently witnessed by multimedia technologies. 
 
C. Benefits of E-learning 
The use of Internet and web-based technology tools in 
learning enables disabled people carry out tasks, which prior 
to e-learning, was seen as difficult or impossible. These 
include the use of chat programs for the deaf, text-to-speech 
software for the blind, and diction software for the armless 
who cannot write [51]. Online courses are not limited by 
distance, location, or time as they can be easily accessed by 
learners from anywhere and at anytime.  
Technology allows real-time modifications, accreditation 
of a continuously updated tool in accordance with the 
research literature. Foremost, the WWW can be used to 
dynamically transfer knowledge in real time around the 
globe. This will lead to higher-education opportunities for 
foreign students. Countries without "mass" university 
education can access universities in other countries through 
the Web. Finally, this technology is able to track use and 
activity, provide reports, and record information about every 
learner’s performance. This feedback could be included in 
continuing education courses. Demand for individualized 
services, tools, interactive experiences, and open access to 
knowledge is growing. Learning is no longer expected to be 
paced so much by the teacher as it is by the student’s 
capacity to grasp the material (student-focused learning). The 
speed at which students can progress through a course of 
instruction varies by factors of three to seven, even in classes 
of carefully selected students. In traditional training models, 
it is impossible to deliver individually customized learning 
solutions because of cost. The capacity of e-learning for real-
time, on-demand adaptation can provide individualized 
learning at affordable cost. Technologies that allow 
collaboration, interactivity, simulation, and self-testing can 
help students acquire the skills being taught effectively and 
efficiently. It is thus possible to create a learning 
environment in which students become active participants, 
fully engaged in the learning process. Additionally, the 
educational topic selection can cater to a student’s particular 
needs. Any given student may be studying any given topic at 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

any time, and progressing through that material at a pace 
appropriate to his or her learning ability. 
These benefits mentioned above can be summarized into 
five key points in agreement with past research findings in 
this field: 
• 
Wider access to education [52]. 
• 
Increased integration for disabled, part-time, and 
working students, especially in continuing education 
[52]. 
• 
Enhanced 
student-student 
and 
student-teacher 
interaction and collaboration [53]. 
• 
Promotes self-paced learning and independent 
problem solving by learners [53]. 
• 
Promotes the acquisition of ICT knowledge and 
development of ICT skills through usage of 
computers and web-based tools [43]. 
D. Guidelines for Best Practices 
We have discussed in this paper the various evolution 
that has taken place in learning, particularly, distant and 
collaborative learning, in the face of changing technologies. 
It is clear that we are in a stage of rapid technological 
development and profound new discoveries of life and 
learning in connected contexts. The emergence of collective 
understanding formed by the selective use and analysis of the 
networks, sets, behaviours and activities within which we 
engage promises much deeper understanding of our 
knowledge construction and application.  
However, to achieve an educational semantic web, and 
maximize the potentials of Internet and web-based 
technologies in distance and collaborative learning, two main 
issues must be addressed: interoperability among different e-
learning systems, and the use of learning objects for content 
generation. While the earlier is subject to the standardization 
of these e-learning tools, the later can be achieved by using 
structured, unified and automated authoring tools to generate 
content. Thus in realizing the Semantic Web dream, it is 
necessary to consider the use of common standards in 
communication syntax, semantic concepts and ontologies, 
full integration/unification of educational content and 
authoring tools.  
Below is a summarized set of best-practice guideline, 
which this paper proposes: 
1) Identify the current processes involved in designing 
an e-learning system. 
2) Provide a proper definition of learners’ competency. 
3) Integrate the different design components. 
4) Identify the nature of interaction among the various 
components of the e-learning framework: 
a) the collaboration between student-student and 
student-teacher,  
b) the physical components of the e-learning system,  
c) the pedagogical framework, and  
d) the educational setting; learning (activity, tasks, 
outcome, environment, and relationships). 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The Information and communication technologies act as 
a catalyst for innovation in learning, providing access to 
contextualized high-quality content. With the development 
of e-learning and its ability to provide rich animated content 
rapidly to a wide audience, new methods for teaching have 
evolved. The authors of e-learning material can use multiple 
media to present ideas and concepts, combining traditional 
educational content (text, images, graphs, and diagrams) with 
interactive 
computer-based 
resources 
(sound, 
video, 
animation, image series) and over an inter-networked 
environment made possible by web-based technologies. 
Among all the "e" movements in computer sciences, e-
learning is one of the fastest growing. However, its full 
impact is yet to be felt. Therefore, this paper has attempted to 
present a guideline for best practice which it believes will 
help enhance the efficiency and impact of these Internet and 
web-based 
technologies 
employed 
in 
distance 
and 
collaborative learning. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. L. Webb, A. Metha, and K. F. Jordan, Foundations of American 
Education, 6th Ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Merill, 2010, pp. 77-
80,192-193. 
[2] B. Courts, and J. Tucker, “Using technology to create a dynamic 
classroom experience,” Journal of College Teaching & Learning 
(TLC), vol. 9(2), 2012, pp. 121-128. 
[3] J. Bocchi et al., “Technology-enhanced learning in industry and 
higher education: preliminary report on a "gap" analysis,” The 
Technology 
Source, 
May/June 
1999, 
doi:technologysource.org/article/technologyenhanced_learning_in_in
dustry_and_higher_education. 
[4] M. G. Moore, and W. Anderson, Handbook of Distance Education, 
2nd ed., Psychology Press, 2012. 
[5] B. Holmberg, “The evolution, principles and practices of distance 
education,” 
Studien 
und 
Berichte 
der 
Arbeitsstelle 
Fernstudienforschung der Carl von Ossietzky Universität Oldenburg 
[ASF] (in German) vol. 11. Bibliotheks-und Informationssystem der 
Universitat Oldenburg, 2005, p. 13.  
[6] M. G. Moore, and K. Greg, Distance Education: A Systems View, 
2nd ed.,  Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 2005. 
[7] P. Olszewski-Kubilius, and S. Corwith. “Distance education: where it 
started and where it stands for gifted children and their educators,” 
Gifted Child Today, vol. 34(3), 2011, p. 16-24. 
[8] R. Preston, "Down to business: higher education is ripe for 
technology disruption," Information Week (UMB), vol. 60, May 16, 
2011. 
[9] P. Pumilia-Gnarini, “Didactic strategies and technologies for 
education,” Incorporating Advancements, 2012, pp.  48-56. 
[10] E. K. Kahiigi, L. Ekenberg, H. Hansson, F. F. Tusubira, and M. 
Danielson, “Exploring the e-learning state of the art,” The Electronic 
Journal of e-Learning, vol. 6(2), 2008, pp. 77-88. 
[11] D. Wolley, "PLATO: The Emergence of Online Community," 
Thinkofit: Consultants in Online Communication, David R. Woolley, 
Feb. 2013. 
[12] S. Hiltz, “Evaluating the virtual classroom,” in Harasim, L. (ed.) 
“Online Education: Perspectives on a New Environment,” New York: 
Praeger, 1990, pp. 133–169. 
[13] C. B. Whyte, “Student affairs-the future,” Journal of College Student 
Development, vol. 30, 1989, pp. 86-89. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[14] R. Mason, and A. Kaye, Mindweave: Communication, Computers 
and Distance Education, Oxford, UK: Pergamon Press, 1989. 
[15] A. Bates, Technology, e-Learning and Distance Education, London: 
Routledge, 2005. 
[16] H. M. Johnson, “Dialogue and the construction of knowledge in e-
learning: Exploring students’ perceptions of their learning while using 
Blackboard’s asynchronous discussion board,” European Journal of 
Open, Distance and E-Learning, vol. 5(1), 2007. 
[17] T. Ellis-Christensen, "What Is Virtual Education?." wiseGEEK: clear 
answers for common questions. Conjecture Corporation, Feb. 2013. 
[18] G. M. Farrell, The Development of Virtual Education: A Global 
Perspective, Vancouver: Commonwealth of Learning, 1999. 
[19] A. Di Iorio, A. A. Feliziani, S. Mirri, P. Salomoni, and F. Vitali, 
“Automatically producing accessible learning objects,” Educational 
Technology & Society, vol. 9(4), 2006, pp. 3-16. 
[20] M. Learners, "CALCampus - About." Accredited Distance Learning 
Courses-CALCampus Online, CALCampus, Feb. 2013. 
[21] A. Bates, and G. Poole, Effective Teaching with Technology in 
Higher Education, San Francisco: Jossey-Bass/John Wiley, 2003. 
[22] OECD, E-Learning in Tertiary Education: Where Do We Stand?, 
Paris: OECD, 2005. 
[23] C. Baker, "Blended learning: Teachers plus computers equal success," 
Desert 
News, 
31 
March 
2013, 
doi:deseretnews.com/article/865569876/Blended-learning-teachers-
plus-computers-equal-success.html?pg=all  
[24] V. Strauss, "Three fears about blended learning," The Washington 
post., 
doi:washingtonpost.com/blogs/answer-sheet/post/three-fears-
about-blended-learning/2012/09/22/56af57cc-035d-11e2-91e7-
2962c74e7738_blog.html, 31 March 2013. 
[25] Doi:en.wikepedia.org/wiki/E-learning. 17 May 2013. 
[26] B. Smith, P. Reed, and C. Jones, “Mode Neutral’ pedagogy,” 
European Journal of Open, Distance and E-learning, 2008. 
[27] T. Mayes, and Sara de Freitas, JISC e-Learning Models Desk Study, 
JISC 
Report, 
15 
April 
2012, 
doi:jisc.ac.uk/uploaded_documents/Stage%202%20Learning%20Mod
els%20(Version%201).pdf 
[28] N. Brügger, “Historical perspective on the World Wide Web, 
including issues of culture, content, and preservation,” ed. Web 
History, 2010,  pp. 362. 
[29] T. Berners-Lee, T. Bray, D. Connolly, P. Cotton, R. Fielding, M. 
Jeckle, C. Lilley, N. Mendelsohn, D. Orchard, N. Walsh, and S. 
Williams, Architecture of the World Wide Web, Volume One, 
Version 20041215, W3C, 15 December 2004. 
[30] J. Lynn, "Internet users to exceed 2 billion ...," Reuters, 19 October 
2010. 
[31] R. Mitnik, M. Recabarren, M. Nussbaum, and A. Soto, “Collaborative 
robotic instruction: a graph teaching experience,” Computers & 
Education, vol. 53(2), 2009, pp. 330-342. 
[32] R. Grier, "Interoperability Solutions," Interoperability, Catalyst 
Communications, 28 May 2011. 
[33] T. Slater, "What is Interoperability?", Network Centric Operations 
Industry Consortium - NCOIC, 2012. 
[34] S. Britain, “A review of learning design. Concept, specifications and 
tools,” JISC report, 2004. 
[35] L. Yu, A Developer's Guide to the Semantic Web. Springer. January 
6, 2011. 
[36] S. Shishehchi, S. Y. Banihashem, N. Azan Mat Zin and S. A. M. 
Noah, “Ontological approach in knowledge based recommender 
system to develop the quality of e-learning system,” Australian 
Journal of Basic and Applied Sciences, vol. 6(2), 2012, pp. 115-123. 
[37] D. Vlachopoulos, and N. Cabrera, “Building an inclusive definition of 
e-Learning: an approach to the conceptual framework,” The 
International Review of Research in Open and Distance Learning, 
vol.13(12), 2012. 
[38] F. P. Rokou, et al., “Modeling web-based educational systems: 
process design teaching model,” Educational Technology Society, 
vol.7, 2004, pp. 42-50. 
[39] C. Redecker, "Review of Learning 2.0 Practices: Study on the Impact 
of Web 2.0 Innovations on Education and Training in Europe," JRC 
Scientific and technical report, 2009, (EUR 23664 EN – 2009). 
[40] J. Quemanda, and B. Simon, “A use-case based model for learning 
resources in educational mediators,” Educational Technology Society, 
vol. 6, 2003, pp. 149-163. 
[41] V. Rideout, E. Vanderwater, and E. Wartella,  Zero to Six: Electronic 
Media in the Lives of Infants, Toddlers, and Preschoolers, Menlo 
Park, CA: The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 2003. 
[42] W. Buckleitner, "So young, and so gadgeted," New York Times, 
2008. 
[43] K. Meidlinger, “Choosing media for children checklist,” San 
Francisco: Kids Watch Monthly, KQED.org (adapted from Rogow, 
F.), 
2011, 
doi:kqed.org/assets/pdf/education/earlylearning/kidswatch/kidswatch-
choosingmedia-english.pdf 
[44]  C. Cavanaugh, “Effectiveness of cyber charter schools: A review of 
research on learnings,” TechTrends, vol. 53(4), July/August 2009, 
pp.28-31. 
[45] I. E. Allen, and J. Seaman, Staying the Course: Online Education in 
the United States, Needham MA: Sloan Consortium, 2008. 
[46] D. G. Hebert, "Five challenges and solutions in online music teacher 
education," Research and Issues in Music Education, vol. 5(1), 2007. 
[47] F. Chukwunonso, et al., “Challenges for the adoption of new ICTs in 
architectural education in Nigeria,” unpublished. 
[48] D. Crow, S. Parsowith, and G. Wise, “The evolution of CSCW – past, 
present 
and 
future 
developments, 
1997, 
doi:acm.org/sigchi/bulletin/1997.2/students.html. 
[49] R. M. Glass, and J. A. Putnam, “Cooperative learning in teacher 
education: a case study,” In Action in Teacher Education, vol. 4, 
Association of Teacher Educators, 1988, pp. 47-52. 
[50] D. Namuth, S. Fritz, J. King, and A. Boren, “Principles of sustainable 
learning object libraries,” Interdisciplinary Journal of Knowledge and 
Learning 
Objects, 
vol. 
1, 
2005, 
pp. 
181-196. 
doi:ijklo.org/Volume1/v1p181-196Namuth.pdf 
[51] J. V. Asuncion, C. S. Fichten, and M. Barile, “Which forms of 
eLearning are accessible to Canadian postsecondary students with 
disabilities?”, Communiqué, vol. 7(3), 2007, pp. 36. 
[52] Z. Ahmad, “Virtual education system (current myth & future reality 
in 
Pakistan),” 
Entrepreneurial 
Tutors, 
Nov. 
2010, 
doi:ssrn.com/abstract=1709878. 
[53] C. Dalsgaard, "Social software: E-learning beyond learning 
management systems". eurodl.org. University of Aarhus, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

