ICT Related Tasks and Challenges In The New Model of Technical Teacher 
Training 
András Benedek  
Department of Technical Education 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
e-mail: benedek.a@eik.bme.hu 
György Molnár  
Department of Technical Education 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
e-mail: molnar.gy@eik.bme.hu 
 
 
Abstract— As constant changes become a commonplace of 
everyday life, the clearly perceptible processes by which 
learning spaces are expanding are releasing new teaching and 
learning potentials and creating the opportunity to build 
knowledge networks. The symptoms of this development can 
be seen in the behaviour of learners, the formation of e-
learning habits and the spread of community-based forms of 
communication. The effect of these changes can be perceived in 
the transformation of the roles of both teachers and students, 
and of the learning environment. The results of the survey 
conducted on a micro-scale in connection with the performance 
appraisal of the new elements may be relevant to the new 
educational and graduation requirements for technical 
teachers currently being formulated, and may help to guide 
future syllabus design and teaching material development. The 
results of the survey informs future teachers on how the new 
benchmark analysis is implemented in micro environment and 
can help appoint future training requirements and develop the 
appropriate curriculum. 
Keywords-ICT; learning network; Web 2.0 communication; 
e-portfolio. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
If the development of the learning environment is 
analysed in terms of changes in human behaviour, it can be 
seen that a new generation is developing whose members 
are devotees of online education. This generation moves 
more easily in the info-communication space than previous 
generations and it is becoming ever more informed and 
organized. With these competencies, the members of this 
generation get more information and support from each 
other than from the various institutions. 
Forecasts predict that the role of learner communities 
will grow. These new communities are characterised 
primarily by their common areas of interest, where the 
learners interact with each other, learn together and amass 
shared reserves of information sources [1]. 
This nascent practice does not, however, preclude 
learning opportunities in a system of higher education in a 
period of transition. In this dynamized “learning space”, the 
classic roles (teacher-student) are scarcely perceptible, as 
thanks to the altered architecture of the net, an architecture 
which is based on collective knowledge sharing and content 
generation with simple user interfaces, “every downloader 
will potentially become an uploader” [2].  
First, the paper presents the items in the digital learning, 
then the E-portfolio support system, and, finally, shows an 
empirical research. 
II. 
ICT IN LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS 
A. Items in the Digital Learning 
ICT (Information and Communications Technology) and 
the development of forms of e-learning is characterised by 
ubiquitous computing, in which it is necessary to take into 
consideration the technical and societal qualities of a 
learning space shaped by virtual reality. In this space, an 
organic learning environment, an educational theoretical 
basis may be provided by e-learning. In this learning 
paradigm the key differentiating features are interactivity, 
the ability to manage time and space and asynchronous 
learning. All this is understandably in tension with 
traditional forms of education and instruction—teaching and 
learning which in some cases has remained unchanged for 
decades, cloistered in a closed world of classrooms. The 
forms of learning, which are taking shape under the 
influence of new technology are characterised by a focus on 
devices for individual use, alongside constant striving for 
interactivity and the application of networks.  
The learning network is not merely a pedagogical 
theory, but an environment where the application of a new 
pedagogical theory of learning effectively supports the 
acquisition and generation of knowledge. Currently, the 
main features of the interaction between education and 
information are: 
 
Developed forms of human-machine interaction 
 
Spatial and temporal independence 
 
The ubiquity of mobile telephony 
 
The opportunity to create a complex multi-media 
“learning space” 
The Web 2.0 [4] concept does not only refer to new 
forms of websites and services, but also to the technologies 
they are based on which allow community content 
development, and to the ability of these social networks to 
democratically 
locate 
the 
individual. 
Pedagogically 
speaking, the Web 2.0 implies openness to constructive 
forms of communication, which include free or low-cost 
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

services with well-developed ICT support. Currently, such 
services can be said to include (and this list is far from 
complete) social networking services (Facebook, iWiW), 
photograph sharing sites (Flickr), video sharing sites 
(YouTube, Videa) and various types of blogs. Wikipedia 
and other open freely editable information resources have 
significant potential for content development, and auction 
websites (Vatera, eBay) can also be counted as part of Web 
2.0, Twitter, various social bookmarking sites (delicious), 
forums, 
online 
office 
suites 
(Google 
Docs), 
web 
(news)feeds (RSS) and file hosting services (Dropbox, 
Google Drive). In the Web 2.0 environment, the 
fundamental orientation is towards community participation 
and creative application of methods which are based on 
community content development. From a pedagogical 
standpoint, it is particularly important to recognize that in 
the Web 2.0 space the users jointly create the content and 
share the knowledge thus generated with each other [2]. It 
is, however, typical of web 2.0 services—and in this the 
progressive institutions of higher education are pioneers—
for the institution to provide a technological framework and 
organizational structure where the users upload and develop 
content themselves, and where the system facilitates the 
further development of knowledge, knowledge sharing and 
the expression of opinions. All this requires the 
establishment of technical and ethical norms, which will 
have a defining role in the development of these systems. 
The technical criteria of individual-oriented learning are 
also changing in step with the spread of information 
technology, broad-band internet access and access to mobile 
networks. The greatest challenge for traditional pedagogical 
thinking in the coming years will come in the shape of the 
spread of nonformal learning. It is becoming a universal 
tendency in developed countries for this form of learning to 
play an ever more important role in comparison with 
institutional study. This is also the case when this form of 
learning is not typified by formal qualifications or degrees, 
although learning goals and content are still important in 
their absence. Mobile learning is growing in significance for 
learners/students in initial training, as well as in later 
periods of study. 
Beyond those learning forms which function outside of 
formal education (in the school system): informal learning, 
atypical learning encompasses all the methods (distance 
learning, open learning), which exercise an influence on the 
intellectual and physical development of the individual [2].  
Digital pedagogy has arisen as a response to the 
questions raised by the interplay of new technology and 
education described above. Its aim is to make as wide 
reaching a study as possible of all related challenges and 
opportunities which affect active participants in the teaching 
and learning process. As the media environment has 
transformed, the teaching objectives and roles need to be 
reformulated too. It is worth considering the ways and 
means in which interactive solutions and online and mobile 
support can be incorporated when planning courses in 
various contexts. The aspects of the latest incarnation of the 
Web (wikis, blogs) make ICT device based education usable 
on an everyday level. 
Grouped from a pedagogical perspective, work on the 
following content types, activities and processes is 
especially applicable to Web 2.0 communication:  
 
 Varying 
levels 
of 
education, 
competence 
and 
knowledge. Raising awareness, boosting motivation. 
Communication 
management 
implementation 
in 
learning 
 
Computer literacy; development of required abilities 
and attitudes. Giving recognition of an individual’s 
level of knowledge 
 
Formation of learning communities. Collaborative and 
co-operative learning 
 
E-learning as the application of distance learning in a 
virtual educational environment 
 
The use of blogs in education: course-blog, podcast, 
videoblog as (homework) assignments [4]. 
B. E-portfolio support system–Mahara 
Portfolio is a word of Italian origin meaning a dossier or 
folder of documents, or an expert’s dossier, or in more 
prosaic terms it refers to a collection of a student’s work. 
Many definitions have been proposed, the one used here is 
that cited by Iván Falus and Magdolna Kimmel: “The 
portfolio is a purposeful, systematic collection of works 
completed by a student on one or more courses”. It has two 
objectives: on the one hand it is for assessment purposes, on 
the other hand to aid in learning [5]. 
Three basic types of portfolios can be distinguished: 
[6][7]: 
• 
The Working portfolio (progress documenting 
collection): The student collects all documents pertaining to 
a particular learning process in this portfolio. This type of 
portfolio fulfils the role of demonstrating the presence and 
level of development of teaching competences. The student 
can then receive regular feedback on the basis of these 
documents, and evaluate her own progress. 
• 
Showcase (Best works) Portfolio: Only the best 
work of the student is included in the showcase portfolio. 
This work is selected by the student himself from among the 
documents in the working portfolio which in his opinion 
best reflect him and his achievements. Naturally in order to 
do this the student must be able to judge which his best 
pieces of work are, and it is necessary for the student to 
have access to a clear evaluative framework. 
• 
Assessment portfolio (evaluation of results): this is 
a type of alternative assessment, measured against external 
assessment criteria. Every document has to meet a certain 
standard of achievement, and so the assessment criteria are 
the boundary lines for this type of portfolio. The main aim is 
for the teacher to evaluate the student’s achievement not by 
means of traditional grades but holistically, with the help of 
representative samples of the student’s work. 
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Portfolios have a long history in Hungarian public 
education, as when, for instance, portfolio-based methods 
were tested in a number of primary schools as part of the 
Hungarian 
Institute 
for 
Educational 
Research 
and 
Development’s “MAG” (“seed”) project. The results of this 
initiative are presented in the OKI (National Institute of 
Public Education)’s publication “Magtár–Ötletek tanítóknak 
a fejlesztő értékeléshez és az adaptív tanulásszervezéshez” 
(Seed-store–Ideas 
for 
educators 
towards 
formative 
evaluation and adaptive learning management) [8]. The 
goals of the portfolios which were created in this project 
were decided upon by the teachers involved, and 
consequently the aims and content of the portfolios were 
extremely varied. Some educators set out to assess all of the 
students’ work over a school year, while others focused on 
the students’ progress in a single subject or course. Some 
teachers focused on the achievements of only one student, 
while others dealt with whole classes or larger groups. 
In 2009, the BME Department of Technical Education 
and the BME Institute for Applied Pedagogy and. 
Psychology 
(APPI), 
recognising 
the 
difficulties 
of 
implementing a traditional portfolio system drawing on 
experience garnered from the final examinations of the first 
graduating year, while bearing in mind environmental 
protection, and the growing power of electronic forms of 
learning, introduced an electronic portfolio framework 
employing the Mahara electronic environment integrated 
into the Moodle system, which has been in use since 2006 
[9]. The applications of a electronic learning environment 
and computer based learning have become widespread in 
Hungarian higher education [10][11]. 
The e-portfolio, that is, an electronically-based portfolio, 
aims to face the challenges of the constantly and rapidly 
evolving ICT environment and fulfil the learning needs of 
the digitally savvy “generation Z” as well as the need to 
optimize the process of gathering work for assessment. The 
e-portfolio is especially suitable for the following tasks: 
• 
Management of  multifaceted complex dossiers 
• 
Handling large quantities of documents in a single 
system 
• 
Continuous preparation and monitoring (by mentor 
teachers) 
• 
Gaining experience in the use of current technology-
centred theories of learning 
• 
Excellent ICT support 
 
 
Figure 1. E-portfolio in the BME Moodle. 
 
The Mahara system can be directly accessed at the [12]. 
It can also be reached through the Moodle system via a link 
in the bottom right hand corner of the page (See Figure 1.). 
The 
figure 
below 
shows 
the 
main 
options 
page 
(“dashboard”) after logging on: 
 
Figure 2. The Mahara interface after logging on. 
Using this interface is relatively simple for users, and the 
“drag and drop” technique can be used to edit the user 
profiles. 
Uploading 
files 
and 
blog 
posts 
is 
also 
straightforward, by means of the browser function and text 
box editing (See Figure 3.) [13]. 
 
Figure 3. Editing a Mahara profile. 
 
The e-portfolio system facilitates the creation of 
community forums and groups, and it even has an instant 
messaging function. Employing this model, for example, the 
BME Department of Technical Education established a 
group for mentor teachers and students pursuing engineering 
teacher training, for which all participants had to register 
and create their own profiles. The members of the groups 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

could thus directly contact each other through the system, as 
well as the mentor teacher and a maximum of 4-5 trainee 
teachers assigned to him. The interface also facilitated the 
tracking, monitoring and evaluation of work added to the 
portfolios over the course of the semester. 
The uploading of documents takes place by means of the 
file management interface on the first page of the site. 
Trainee teachers belonging to the group are able to edit the 
folders containing work they have already uploaded, which 
they can then share to make them accessible to university 
students and mentor teachers. The structure of the portfolio, 
in accordance with the theoretical elements of the relevant 
legislation, is organized into 3 main folders. A student’s e-
portfolio created in this way is shown in the following 
screen capture image (See Figure 4.)[14]. 
 
Figure 4. A Trainee Teacher’s portfolio in Mahara. 
C. Description of the research 
 
The main hypothesis of the research is that, in order to 
provide high quality education, there is just as much of a 
need for future teaching professionals who are well-versed 
in methodology, learning technology and their own subject 
area at school and vocational college level as there is in 
higher education. At the same time, the recent changes 
present student teachers with significant challenges along 
with the increased burdens related to admission and 
graduation requirements and new types of tasks. 
The numbers of university students graduating and 
beginning courses under the Bologna system were initially 
rather modest. The figures obtained retrospectively after 4 
years were: 
• 
1st generation–6 students (2009) 
• 
2nd generation–18 students (2010) 
• 
3rd generation41 students (2011) 
• 
4th generation57 students (2012) 
A cross-sectional performance appraisal was conducted in 
autumn 2012 to gauge participants’ impressions of and 
satisfaction 
with 
the 
new 
education 
format. 
The 
investigation employed a well-established approach in 
pedagogical practice: the online questionnaire. This 
comprised 24 closed-ended multiple choice questions or 
Likert-scale type items. Number of the answers are N=116. 
The survey used a closed-ended type survey engine to 
collect the respondents’ answers [15]. 
The figure below shows the distributions of several typical 
results of the survey.  
The area where students had the greatest difficulty in 
creating their teacher portfolios was assembling and 
organizing suitable documents to include. 
 
Figure 5. Competencies in using Mahara. 
53% of the respondents were satisfied with their ability to 
use the Mahara system, and only rarely required assistance 
with it (See Figure 5.). 
 
Figure 6. The role of Mahara in preparing teacher portfolios. 
41% of the respondents rated the Mahara system as very 
useful for preparing the e-portfolio (See Figure 6.). 
 
Figure 7. Further reasons for using Mahara. 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

More than half of the respondents required assistance 
connected to editing their portfolios, and a quarter needed 
help to use the system at all (See Figure 7.). 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
The evaluation indicates that 35% of those asked found 
the preparation of the portfolio the most difficult part of the 
assessment, while 28% found teaching practice the hardest, 
and the final examination was considered to be the least 
challenging of the tasks they faced. This may be explained 
by the need for students to familiarize themselves with 
elements of the course which were new to them, and to 
gradually learn the necessary skills by the time they took the 
final examination. The majority of respondents rated the 
Mahara portfolio management system as very useful, and 
only occasionally required minor assistance in using it, and 
would willingly use it in the future for other applications. In 
addition the respondents wished to learn more about other 
portfolios created by the community, and would welcome 
reinforcement of the system’s approach. The majority would 
support the incorporation of material regarding the e-
portfolio into one of the course modules. According to one 
written opinion, “Wide-scale use of (the system) becomes 
increasingly essential as the pedagogical work progresses.” 
[15]. 
The new, currently still evolving teacher training model 
raises numerous important questions and will replace 
current courses by 2016 at the latest. The road to that 
destination is a long and rather winding one. The results of 
the survey conducted on a micro-scale in connection with 
the performance appraisal of the new elements may be 
relevant to the new educational and graduation requirements 
for technical teachers currently being formulated, and may 
help to guide future syllabus design and teaching material 
development. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] http://index.hu/tech/net/web1214, last acces: 05.09.2012. 
[2] Piet Kommers, P.A.M.: ICT as explicit factor in the evolution 
of life-long learning. International journal of continuing 
engineering education and life-long learning, 20 (1/2010), pp. 
127-144., last access: 15.08.2012  
[3] http://enc.phil-inst.hu/1enciklopedia/fogalmi/ped/atiptan.htm, 
last acces: 15.09.2012. 
[4] András Benedek (ed.): Digital pedagogy 2.0 – Typotext 
Budapest 2013., pp. 18-23 
[5] Kalimkova: Portfolio kak sztredsztvo szamoorganyizacii i 
szamorazvityija licsnosztyi, 5.2002 pp. 23-25 
[6] De Fina, Allan A.: Portfolio assessment, getting Started, New 
York, 06.1992 
[7] Helen C. Barret: Create Your Own Electronic Portfolio, In: 
Learning & Leading with Technology, 04.2000., pp. 15-21 
[8] http://mag.ofi.hu/magtar-otletek/magtar-otletek, last acces: 
22.06.2013. 
[9] András Benedek and György Molnár: The empirical analysis 
of a Web 2.0-based learning platform, In: Constantin 
Paleologu, Constandinos Mavromoustakis, Marius Minea 
(ed.): ICCGI 2011, The Sixth International Multi-Conference 
on Computing in the Global Information Technology, 
Luxembourg, June 19-24, 2011., ISBN: 978-1-61208-008-6, 
06.2011 pp. 56-62, last access: 05.2012 
[10] Péter Tóth: Adaptive Online Learning Environment and Web 
Usage Mining, IEEE 8th International Symposium on Applied 
Computational 
Intelligence 
and 
Informatics 
(SACI), 
Timisoara, Románia, 2013. pp. 61-66 
[11] I. Simonics, “eLearning and Presentation Techniques.” Óbuda 
University e-Bulletin, Vol. 1 (1), 2010, pp. 211-217. 
[12] http://e-portfolio.appi.bme.hu/, last acces: 22.06.2013. 
[13] György Molnár: Collaborative Technological Applications 
with Special Focus on ICT based, Networked and Mobile 
Solutions., Wseas Transactions on Information Science and 
Applications 9:(9)2012 pp. 271-281 
[14] György Molnár: Flashes or steady light? Or the potentials of 
developing networked learning, In: Miguel Baptista Nunes, 
Maggie McPherson (ed.): Proceedings of the IADIS 
International Conference e Learning, IADIS international 
conference E-learning 2011, Volume II. Rome, Italy, July 20-
23, 2011, ISBN: 978-972-8939-38-0, 07.2011 pp. 405-408 
[15] http://appi.bme.hu/survey/admin/admin.php, 
last 
acces: 
22.06.2013. 
 
 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

