Advancing Disaster Response Systems 
Implementing Biometric Technologies as Demographic Identifiers 
 
Omorodion Steve Eguasa 
School of Technology 
Purdue University Calumet 
Hammond, USA 
oeguasa@purduecal.edu 
Barbara Nicolai 
School of Technology 
Purdue University Calumet 
Hammond, USA 
bnicolai@purduecal.edu 
 
 
Abstract— This study covers multiple findings from the origin 
of biometric technology, its application in the modern world, 
and new ideas that have made this technology practice very 
useful and popular. It also provides an assessment of how 
future developments of Natural Disaster Response Systems can 
benefit from utilizing parts of this technology during search 
and rescue situations to administer emergency medical care for 
disaster-stricken victims that may be unresponsive and without 
identification. Using biometric technologies such as fingerprint 
identification and iris recognition software on handheld 
devices will allow responders to scan fingerprints or the iris of 
unresponsive victims to gain emergency medical records that 
their healthcare professionals use to treat them. 
Keywords-biometric technology; natural disaster; response 
systems; fingerprint; iris; handheld;  emergency medical care 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Agencies on the local, state, or federal level all face 
different challenges and continue to encounter issues when it 
comes to rescuing and administering emergency medical 
assistance to stricken victims. The first Emergency 
responders that arrive on the scene - firefighters, police, 
coast guards, paramedics, etc. - can only apply emergency 
care within their realm. Agencies that manage disaster 
situations however, have been taught the proper response 
procedures. In terms of technology, emergency responders 
have limited options for managing and/or delegating tasks. 
Despite these limitations, disaster situations occur more 
frequently than they have historically, spurning the need for 
advancements in how responders apply medical assistance 
and what resources are available to help them do this in the 
most efficient way. Potential drawbacks of this advancement 
are: security breaches, accuracy, consistency, cost, privacy 
and legal issues, adaptation to newer technologies (in an 
environment where new technologies emerge often) etc. 
Nonetheless, with a rapidly changing world and considering 
natural and man-made disasters of the past couple decades, 
these two factors alone provide sufficient cause to make 
more resources available to target such technologies that 
could save more lives in the wake of such events. 
Currently, fingerprints and iris recognition are two 
biometric identifiers used within various industries as tools 
to enhance security. Although very few states attempt to 
implement biometric technology within their disaster 
response models, more widespread use can help deliver 
specialized emergency response to victims who may have 
special needs (e.g., may have preexisting conditions that 
responders don’t know of, etc.). The use of these 
technologies to acquire emergency medical records of 
victims to aid in life-saving treatments may be the next step 
in improving disaster response, bridging care that would be 
received at hospitals or other medical facilities.  
The significance of the problem began after Hurricane 
Katrina pounded the Gulf Coast and most of the 1 million 
people displaced by the storm were left with no medical 
records, making it difficult, if not impossible, for emergency 
responders working on scenes, medical centers and 
community hospitals to treat them [1]. The patient medical 
histories remained unknown and medical responders made 
vital treatment decisions with incomplete information. 
In the case of the Haiti earthquake, the Haitians were 
under-served and under-represented by the lack of medical 
knowledge and health services. Patients didn’t had medical 
records to make available for emergency medical responders 
but just a sticky note from the triage tent with a chief 
complaint, age, and sex on their chests [2]. If by any chance 
any of the patients were transferred to another medical 
station, a piece of paper with critical information listed 
would be taped to their chest. 
Biometrics consists of methods for uniquely recognizing 
humans based upon one or more intrinsic physical or 
behavioral traits. In computer science, in particular, 
biometrics is used as a form of identity access management 
and access control. It is also used to identify individuals in 
groups that are under surveillance. Biometrics comprises of 
two parts; the physical and behavior aspects. Features 
measured include face, fingerprints, hand geometry, 
handwriting, iris, retinal, vein, and voice [3]. The fingerprint 
identification is one of the most well-known and publicized 
biometrics because of their uniqueness and consistency over 
time, fingers have been used for identification for over a 
century, more recently becoming automated. Iris recognition 
is the process of recognizing a person by analyzing the 
random pattern of the iris. The automated method of iris is 
relatively young, existing in patent only since 1994 [4]. The 
iris is a muscle within the eye that regulates the size of the 
pupil, controlling the amount of light that enters the eye.  
This study will further cover the statement of the problem 
which describes includes key dependent and independent 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

variables, the research question and a hypothetical account if 
such technologies were to be implemented, assumptions, 
limitations such issues hindering the use of biometric 
technologies to acquire victim information; and delimitations 
that should be taken into account for this concept to be 
eventually become reality. 
II. 
STATEMENT OF THE PROBLEM 
There is a need for these responders in the frontlines of 
natural and man-made disasters to have access to victims 
emergency medical records which in turn allows them to 
efficiently provide the best medical services to those with or 
without unique health situations. In the cases of Hurricane 
Katrina and the earthquake in Haiti, providing medical 
assistance to victims proved to be very tough without the 
presence 
of 
effective 
medical 
care 
information. 
Unresponsive victims either died from not been given proper 
medical treatments or experienced further complications 
from allergic reactions to improper treatments.  
The utilization of fingerprint and iris recognition as 
demographic identifiers in a disaster response system will 
allow first responders and professional disaster workers to 
efficiently provide the best medical services to those with or 
without unique health situations. The key variables of the 
problem will help answer the question about the influences, 
the factors contributes to the presumed effect of saving more 
lives in disaster situations. These variables include: 
Dependent  
 
Electronic medical records databases 
 
Developed software web application 
 
Handheld mobile devices equipped with fingerprint 
and iris scanner 
Independent  
 
Disaster response command center 
 
Medical care centers 
 
Emergency mobile units 
 
The process of advancing current response systems would 
start from the development of electronic medical records of 
inhabitants in each community regardless of whether there 
are known or unknown issues. This will help populate a 
National Biometric ID database and also provide to baseline 
to giving responders adequate knowledge in providing 
response care if needed. It can be updated at the request of a 
prospective client to their assigned physicians. For example, 
proper information about a client would help avoid a 
responder treating an unresponsive victim with antibiotics 
that they are allergic to. 
An efficiently ran command center has to be able to 
translate received data into valuable information for 
responders in the field to properly utilize. With information 
been passed down, responders on-scene can quickly 
determine at the side of a responsive and unresponsive 
victim if they administer medical care right away or be 
transported to a nearby medical center. With appropriate 
mobile devices on hand that are equipped with federal 
regulated finger and iris recognition software that will be 
developed, a responder can receive real-time medical 
information about victims and how best they can be treated 
to avoid further health complications besides the shock from 
experiencing the event. Mobile units including ambulances, 
medical helicopters and even foot responders have to be 
properly dispatched with these mobile devices in order to 
shorten the response time in these disaster situations. The 
process in Figure 3 displays a conceptual framework of the 
prospective concept’s flow of research and development. 
 
Figure 1.  Conceptual framework. 
An investigation will be conducted to help analyze and 
interpret data, sources and results by employing a hypothesis 
testing approach. Considering the type of research problem 
stated earlier, a well suggested experiment to employ will be 
based on both a lab and a field approach as described below: 
Lab  
 
Done in an artificial or contrived environment. 
 
To control other factors that might contaminate the 
discovery of the cause-and-effect relationship. 
 
To manipulate the independent variable to establish 
the extent of its causal effect. 
Field  
 
Done in the natural environment where activities 
take place regularly. 
 
It may not be possible to control all the 
contaminating factors. 
 
The use control groups. 
 
A conducted lab experiment will allow for the recording 
and studying of real time request and response times during 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the use of these handheld devices. The experiment will also 
track the use of the fingerprint and iris recognition 
capabilities. This will allow for the creation of guidelines to 
follow when interacting with responsive and unresponsive 
clients. It will also allow me to measure the difference 
between traditional interaction between responders and 
clients before medical care is administered. Reducing that 
time and administering the right medical will make the 
biggest impact on whether the implementation of that 
technology will be successful. This process will validate the 
testing internally due to a controlled environment that will be 
simulated.  
There will be dual types of useful data in this situation, 
some primary and secondary sources of data. The primary 
sources will be individual emergency responders and a 
focused group of emergency responders (two different 
townships); and the secondary source will be analyses 
gathered from the industry's emergency decision makers. In 
collecting data from individual emergency responders, an 
assessment can be made on how they personally feel it 
improves their performance in assisting patients in a lab or 
field environment with the presence of obstructive or non-
obstructive measures. This data will also ascertain if there 
can be possible changes in the system processes from start to 
finish. With a focus group of respondents, interpretations and 
opinions can be collected on how effectiveness and 
efficiency evolves within a team in a controlled environment. 
It will display how quickly a respondent can end a task and 
assist in another to safeguard more lives. In terms of figuring 
out how a secondary source like analyses collected from the 
industry of emergency respondents will be utilized, it will go 
to show more than just in-field data like other influences 
involved in the business of saving lives. It will also show 
how saving time and costs in effectively managing man 
hours, legal and non-legal measures, community acceptance 
etc. can either encourage the project’s implementation or not. 
A structured set of survey questions will be utilized and 
observations will be closely monitored during experiments. 
The survey will be designed to fit the lab and field tests 
individually since there are specifically influences to both. 
Questions for the respondents will curtail to field operations 
and the other set of questions relating to the industry’s 
analyses will be referred to agency managers. Both sets of 
questions will be arranged properly and accompanied by 
clear instructions, guidance and good alignment to minimize 
biases so as to acquire the best assessment from both parties. 
Observation will only occur during the lab and field testing 
to collect data on how reducing the time and administering 
the right medical can make the biggest impact on whether 
using biometric technologies such as fingerprints or iris 
recognition to access medical data from secure data servers. 
Based on the data collection methods which involves the 
selection of emergency responders (Paramedic personnel), 
conclusions should be drawn based on how many samples 
are collected. Samples collected will be examined closely 
because the results will almost mirror how real-time 
performances will occur. To keep the sample simple and 
random, there should be participation from fifty different 
paramedic agencies who can allow the involvement of two 
personnel each. This will allow for close observation of 
partners working together to attend to a patient in a fast and 
efficient manner while utilizing the technology. Training 
sessions will take place initially to give the responders ample 
time to get familiar with the device. There will be no bias in 
the selection process because if the device is successfully 
lunched, every responder will be required to partake in 
training so as to keep procedures at an even standard. 
After the data sampling information are recorded, they 
will need to be analyzed and interpreted properly to become 
useful to the project. The Analysis process will include the 
interpretation of the results from the experiments conducted. 
There are steps that will be followed before analysis which 
include: 
 
Editing data  
 
Handling blank responses 
 
Coding 
 
Categorizing 
 
Entering data 
 
Once these steps have been followed carefully, getting a feel 
for the data collected from paramedics would follow. Also 
testing the goodness (stability and validity) and the 
hypothesis of the data would follow suit to ensure that 
mistakes are omitted and the process works. 
Like all other technologies, they will have performance 
standards or metrics which must be evaluated first before 
implementing them in disaster recovery systems. Biometric 
News wrote that these performance standards, or metrics, are 
widely used by the biometric industry in order to gauge the 
effectiveness of the various biometric technologies. These 
standards are not particular to any specific biometric 
technology; they apply to all of the technologies [5]. These 
standards are: 
 
The False Acceptance Rate; 
 
The False Rejection Rate; 
 
The Equal Error Rate; 
 
The Failure to Enroll Rate; 
 
The Ability to Verify Rate. 
This could pose to be very disastrous in scenes because 
everything going on is already hectic and such systems are 
meant to bring some sought of stability in the areas of 
emergency medical care. Equipping a handheld disaster 
response device a fingerprint scan and iris recognition can 
end up saving more lives of disaster struck victims and it 
should be able to rely on emergency medical information 
that can be accessed by the response team onsite. 
There are various benefits and disadvantages of 
implementing biometric technologies as identifiers. The 
government would play the largest role in its use in order to 
monitor security for its citizens just like the United Kingdom 
that already uses a National Biometric ID. There are few 
reasons why it’s been slow to be implemented in the U.S due 
to survey responses conducted concerning cost, risks of 
information misuse, privacy of personal data, and security 
[6]. Figures 2 & 3 below show the graphical illustrations 
from an earlier study. 
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 2.  Benefits of using biometrics (%). 
 
Figure 3.  Disadvantages of using biometrics (%).  
V. Chu, and G. Rajendran (2009), “Use of biometrics”. 
III. 
RESEARCH QUESTION/HYPOTHESIS 
Research Question 
Can the implementation of biometric technologies such 
as fingerprint and iris scan recognitions in disaster response 
systems be utilized as useful demographic identifiers in 
providing emergency medical responses to disaster stricken 
victims? 
Hypothesis 
Since natural or man-made disasters do not happen as 
often, it will be adequate to employ the help of paramedics 
who are healthcare professionals that work in emergency 
situations regularly to responsive and unresponsive patients. 
Paramedics provide advanced levels of care for medical 
emergencies and trauma. The majority of paramedics are 
based in the field in ambulances, emergency response 
vehicles, or in specialist mobile units such as cycle response. 
They provide out-of-hospital treatment and some diagnostic 
services, although some may undertake hospital-based roles, 
such as in the treatment of minor injuries. They have to 
perform at high expectations in every giving situation just as 
a disaster responder would, including following ethical and 
work related guidelines. With this approach, the paramedics 
will be able to utilize the proposed handheld devices that will 
run the web application software that handles fingerprint and 
iris recognition to retrieve medical information related to the 
clients. 
This process validates the testing externally due to the 
fact that we will be aware of how and when it will be 
utilized. It will record real-time response of data request 
from the server to the handheld device and how effectively it 
assists the paramedic in applying medical care.  A request 
will have to be made to the client to allow for the testing. A 
survey will be administered to clients that received 
treatments from the participating paramedics about how they 
felt about the medical assistance they got. It will studied to 
see if using the device saved ample time spent in trying to 
ask about medical information from the clients rather than 
spending it on actually treating them, not to mention the 
unresponsive ones. 
IV. 
ASSUMPTIONS 
Emergency medical records (EMRs) or Electronic health 
records (EHRs) can play big role in helping emergency 
responders during disasters because that would be direct 
access to important data that can cut down the increase in 
fatalities. Digitized records provide a timely, cost-effective 
way to share patient information. If physicians aren't using 
them in their private practices, they lose those benefits, as do 
the hospitals they work with [7]. If physicians can utilize this 
this system effectively, why can’t emergency responders do 
the same? EMR systems can integrate evidence-based 
recommendations for preventive services (such as screening 
exams) with patient data (such as age, sex, and family 
history) to identify the ones that need specific services.  
A group of researchers at Weill Cornell Medical College 
and the University of California, Davis, where they predict 
improvements in patient outcomes after a major earthquake 
through more effective use of information technology. They 
insist a control tower-style telemedicine hub to manage 
electronic traffic between first responders and remote 
medical experts could boost the likelihood that critically 
injured victims will get timely care and survive, according to 
the team's computer simulation model [8]. Currently the use 
of biometric technology is being used to track responders on 
scene by an emergency command center. With a smart 
mobile computer in the hands of responders, they can bring 
real-time mobile data to the point of activity. On site at an 
incident, such solutions can help rapidly screen, check in, 
and track first responders. Motorola developed mobile 
devices using mobility solutions that help improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of first responders. However, 
with firefighters, police, rescue, EMS, and other first 
responders flooding the scene, keeping track of personnel, 
victims, and assets is no easy task. When every second 
counts, the paperwork burden and its associated productivity 
loss can translate into lost lives [9].  
Furthermore, with manual systems, critical information 
often resides on clipboards at the scene and is inaccessible to 
offsite command centers, evacuation sites, hospitals and 
other agencies. Complete electronic record documents are 
made available when responders enter and exit an incident 
scene which will provide National Incident Management 
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

System compliance (NIMS) which mandates visibility into 
available resources to best prepare for, respond to and 
recover from an incident as well as efficient communications 
and information access during an incident.  
The Emergency Operations Center (EOC) is the physical 
location where various organizations come together under 
the direction of Emergency Operations Management (EOM) 
during an emergency to coordinate response and recovery 
actions and resources. These centers may alternatively be 
called command centers, situation rooms, war rooms, crisis 
management centers, or other similar terms [10]. During an 
incident, there may be a need to confirm the identity and 
medical credentials of an individual clinical care provider 
when they request permission to enter the scene. At this step 
in the flow, the incident control personnel at the scene could 
request confirmation of the medical credentials in one or 
more possible ways, including: 
 
Via a request made to EOC systems. That center 
could either confirm the credentials from their own 
internal information sources (e.g. EMTs on staff for 
at center), or via a query to the Health Information 
Service Provider. In the latter instance, the response 
to the query could potentially include additional 
information that may be used to identify and 
authenticate the individual, as well as information 
which describes the role(s) which that individual is 
authorized to perform (as defined in steps I and III).  
 
Potentially via a field-deployable authentication 
device (e.g. identification card reader or biometric 
device) which could transmit information directly to 
a remote authentication service and receive 
authentication 
confirmation 
and 
authorization 
information in return.  
 
There may be additional mechanisms available for 
querying to confirm the credentials of a medical 
provider in the field. For example in the future, it 
may be possible to make this query directly from 
the field without the need for an intermediary (e.g. a 
query sent directly from the requestor to a registry 
service). 
This is an on-going trend that wasn’t seen as a possibility in 
the area of emergency response that has continued to gain 
popularity. Emergency response officials in Tallahassee, 
Florida, for example, must pass through a biometrics-enabled 
security system to access their Emergency Operations Center 
(EOC) as well as their daily office space [11]. There 
fingerprint scanners at the center where they go up to the 
doors and put their fingers on to be scanned. It has to be done 
to be able to access the building. 
Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) did a 
case study in 2008 on responder authentication which stated 
that advancements in biometric technology and the 
development of biometric tools for the public safety realm 
have begun to provide solutions to identity verification issues 
[12]. Such technologies, when integrated into emergency 
management plans and processes, can be a powerful tool for 
emergency response organizations in both meeting day-to-
day operational needs and disaster response. 
V. 
LIMITATIONS/DELIMITATIONS 
There are several weaknesses that could revolve around 
implementing these types of technologies currently for 
disaster response which could possibly include security 
breach issues, accuracy, consistency, cost, privacy and legal 
issues, adaptation to newer technologies etc. Some of these 
limitations carry more effect than others but should all be 
considered as relevant challenges to this study. The major 
concerns for the general public's acceptance of the voluntary 
use of biometrics identification will be: privacy, necessity 
and identity protection. Many individuals will be concerned 
that information collected about them could be used against 
them such as medical records preventing them from the 
ability to get health or critical illness insurance. Major 
restrictions that will not be able to be addressed include 
policies by governing bodies on how medical records are 
assessed and the absence of a national biometric 
identification.  
Just as the credit bureau keep track of how well we pay 
our bills and manage our credit, so does the Medical 
Information Bureau (MIB) on everyone that applies for 
health insurance and they are required to follow the same 
rules as the credit bureau because they are considered by the 
government to be a consumer reporting agency, its services 
must adhere to the US Fair Credit Reporting Act and the Fair 
and Accurate Credit Transactions Act. The purpose of MIB 
is to provide a vehicle for each of its members to contribute 
health and medical information obtained in connection with 
the underwriting of, and payment of claims made under, life 
and health insurance policies, and receives this same type of 
information contributed to MIB by other members [13]. MIB 
operates under certain but not all rules and regulations under 
the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) of Privacy Rule as also stated in the article. This 
allows them to collect important medical data and share it to 
its members.  
The Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA) Privacy and Security Rules protects the privacy of 
individually identifiable health information; the HIPAA 
Security Rule, which sets national standards for the security 
of electronic protected health information; and the 
confidentiality provisions of the Patient Safety Rule, which 
protects identifiable information being used to analyze 
patient safety events and improve patient safety [14]. 
Although this agency would be considered one of the biggest 
hindrances to the concept of using biometric technologies 
during disaster response, it would make sense to have state 
legislatures approve the development of an emergency 
medical record database that would strictly assist emergency 
responders on the frontlines of disasters. Policymakers can 
sponsor universal electronic medical records (EMRs) and 
propose incentives for “meaningful use” of EMRs. They also 
state that even though emergency responders are particularly 
sensitive to the benefits and unintended consequences of 
EMR adoption, surveillance has been limited [15]. This just 
means that if further research can be approved by 
government officials who oversee emergency response 
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

agencies, the ability to display to the public that collecting 
these medical data can be advantageous. 
Although this concept may seem out of reach in reaching 
reality, disaster response continues to lack focus from the 
U.S government and the past few disasters that occurred 
showed how much more response processes needs to be 
addresses and improvements to be made to save more lives. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors would like to thank RS2 Technologies LLC, 
a technology-driven manufacturer of cutting edge access 
management hardware and software, for sponsoring the 
submission of this study.  
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Mann, “Katrina shows need for electronic health records,” 2005, in 
press. [Retrieved: April, 2012] Available:  
http://www.foxnews.com/story/0,2933,170146,00.html 
[2] D. Barry, “Providing medical care to haiti earthquake victims: A 
nurse practitioner’s experience. College health in action,” vol. 49, pp. 
26. 2010, in press. [Retrieved: April, 2012] Available: 
http://www.acha.org/Promotional_Opportunities/docs/ACTION_v49n
4.pdf 
[3] The 
Biometric 
Consortium. 
“Introduction 
to 
biometrics,” 
unpublished. [Retrieved: February, 2012] Available: 
http://www.biometrics.org/introduction.php 
[4] K. Smith, J. Matey, R. Lazerick, and J. Cambier, “Iris recognition.” 
Biometrics,  pp. 1. 2006, in press. [Retrieved: February, 2012]  
Available: 
http://www.biometrics.gov/Documents/irisrec.pdf 
[5] BiometricNews.net, “Business and technical factors to be taken into 
consideration before implementing a biometric system at your place 
of business,” publications, pp. 2-3. [Retrieved: February, 2012]  
Available: 
http://www.biometricnews.net/Publications/Biometrics_Article_Busi
ness_Technical_Factors.pdf 
[6] V. Chu, and G. Rajendran, “Use of biometrics”. TechCast, pp. 1, 3- 4. 
2009, in press. [Retrieved: February, 2012] Available: 
http://www.techcast.org/Upload/PDFs/634122830612738824_Biomet
rics-VivianandGayathrilo-res.pdf 
[7] M. McGee, “Electronic health records: Time to get onboard. 
InformationWeek,” July 2010, in press. [Retrieved: February, 2012]  
Available: 
http://reports.informationweek.com/abstract/105/3613/Healthcare/ele
ctronic-health-records-time-to-get-onboard.html 
[8] ScienceDaily, “Health information technology control tower could 
improve earthquake response,” March 2011, in press. [Retrieved: 
February, 2012]  Available: 
http://www.sciencedaily.com/releases/ 
[9] Motorola, “Improve the efficiency and effectiveness of your first 
responders with mobility,’ pp. 1, 2007, unpublished. . [Retrieved: 
February, 2012]  Available: 
http://www.motorola.com/web/Business/Products/_Documents/_Stati
c%20files/AB-FirstResponder_1007.pdf 
[10] Department of Health & Human Services, “Emergency responder 
electronic health record,” Detailed use case, pp. 32-33, 40, 2006, in 
press.  
[11] D. Bates, “Fingerprints and more: New biometric tools help first 
responders secure facilities and incident scenes,” Homeland1, May 
2006, 
in 
press. 
[Retrieved: 
February, 
2012] 
Available 
http://www.homeland1.com/homeland-security-products/biometrics-
facial-recognition-finger-print-identification/articles/349715-
fingerprints-and-more-new-biometric-tools-help-first-responders-
secure-facilities-and-incident-scenes/ 
[12] Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), “Utilizing 
biometrics to identify Responders in the National Capital Region,” 
2008, 
in 
press. 
[Retrieved: 
February, 
2012] 
Available: 
http://www.fema.gov/pdf/emergency/nims/Alexandria_ANSI_INCIT
S_398.pdf 
[13] B.T. Casey, “Health Insurers' Relationship with the Medical 
Information Bureau: The Impact of HIPAA Privacy Regulations,” 
riskVue. 2003, in press, [Retrieved: March, 2012] Available: 
http://www.riskvue.com/articles/rb/rb0307c.htm 
[14] United States Department of Health and Human Services, “Health 
Information Privacy”, unpublished. [Retrieved: March, 2012] 
Available: 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/ 
[15] B.P. Geisler, J.D. Schuur, and D.J. Pallin, “Estimates of Electronic 
Medical Records in U.S. Emergency Departments,”  PLoS ONE, vol 
5, pp. 1, 2010, in press. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

