A New Approach Based on Computer Vision and Collaborative Social Networking 
for Environmental Preservation:  
Theory, Tools and Results of Italian ACI Project 
 
Maria Grazia Albanesi 
 Dept. of Electrical, Computer and Biomedical Engineering 
 University of Pavia 
Pavia, Italy 
mariagrazia.albanesi@unipv.it 
 Roberto Albanesi 
Thea s.r.l. 
Pavia, Italy 
ufficiostampa@albanesi.it
 
 
Abstract—The ACI project (from the Italian acronym 
Antropentropia Comuni Italiani, i.e., Italian Municipality 
Anthropentropy) is a collaborative social media based project 
whose main goal is to measure the impact of  invasive presence 
of human settlements on the environment. The novelty of this 
approach is to propose a new indicator, which considers not 
only the area of regions which are occupied by human 
settlements (buildings, roads, recreational areas), but also their 
relative shape and contiguity, in order to include in the metric 
the negative effect of territory fragmentation. Land use and 
fragmentation is expressed by the Anthropentropy Factor 
(AF); it is computed by classical computer vision operators 
(morphological dilation).  The paper describes the theory of the 
new metric, its application to the Italian territory and the 
involvement of social network and crowdsourcing for 
generating open data on the current state of land use. One  of 
the aims of this contribution is to show how well known 
computer vision algorithms, applied to open data collected by 
the User Generated Content paradigm, can be useful to map 
the state of degradation of the Italian territory. 
Keywords- 
Land 
use, 
territory 
fragmentation,  
anthropentropy 
crowdsourcing, 
social 
network, 
UGC, 
morphological operators. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
There are plenty of aspects of the effects of human 
activities on environment, and one of the most important is 
preserving land use form the threat of an inappropriate urban 
expansion; this is a great challenge of European Community 
in the field of environmental protection, as documented by 
several studies and data sheets: the European Environment 
Agency stated [1] that annual land take in 36 European 
countries was 111 788 ha/year in the period 2000-2006. In 
the most urbanized countries, the annual land take increased 
by 9 % in the last years. One of the consequences of land use 
is soil sealing, a modification of the soil which prevents it 
from performing vital functions for the ecosystems. The 
phenomenon of soil sealing is particularly evident near urban 
and rural areas and  along main road axes. Urbanization is 
not the only cause of these negative effects: intensive 
farming and touristic activities (especially for coastlines) 
contribute to a relevant increase of land use, as reported by 
the European Environment Agency.  
In the case of Italy, the situation is dramatic: land take 
and soil sealing assessments have been reported by ISPRA 
[2], showing a rapid medium growth of the sealed surface 
areas of 6.3% for the period 1956-2006.  The main effort of 
researchers is twofold: to search new indicators to express 
the land use, and to recall or update data on the current state 
of the soil. In this paper, both these problems are addressed. 
In Section II, the motivations of our approach are 
explained, in particular with reference to the current state of 
the art, and the definition of the Anthropentropy  Factor (AF)  
is given. In Section III, the proposed metric is explained and 
discussed, and the experimental results are reported for some 
significant cases of Italian territory. In Section IV, 
conclusions and considerations about future work are given. 
A. Related work 
In literature, very few contributions are related to new 
indicators for land use and their automatic or semi-automatic 
computation. For example, indicators of land quality [3] and 
bio indicators, such as populations of ants [4] and bryophytes 
[5], have been investigated. The main limitation of these 
indicators is that they take into consideration not only land 
use, but also other aspects of environmental preservation, 
such 
as 
agro-biodiversity, 
water 
quality 
and 
land  
contamination/pollution. In fact, these complex indicators 
consider not only soil use and degradation, but also 
combined aspects of water, terrain, and biotic resources. 
Sometimes, these indicators show a week correlation with 
land use, as they are more sensitive to other features of 
ecosystem degradation; for example, the maps of bio 
indicator  lichens [6], which seem very similar to our 
anthropentropy maps (see Section III), are very sensitive to 
pollution and presence and directions of winds, rather than 
urbanization; even if the negative effects of the two facts can 
be correlated, it is difficult to find indicators which isolate 
the dependence on each single aspect of environmental 
degradation. 
The second problem is to compute land use in a 
completely automatic way, for example by using image 
processing primitives: several contributions refer to the use 
of remote sensing [7], but the most significant results are 
obtained after a post processing of  supervised classification, 
which requires prior knowledge of the ground cover in the 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

study area. Besides, the two main problems of these systems 
are the coarse map resolution and a limited number of 
classes. A manual supervised classification is the most 
effective method, as in Corine Cover Project [8], with 400 
classes of land cover, whose data have been used in our 
approach. 
In conclusion, contributions in literature underline that 
the problems of finding significant indicators for land use 
and their supervised or unsupervised computation are still an 
open challenge, with dramatic consequences on environment 
preservation. 
II. 
A NEW INDICATOR FOR LAND USE 
In this research, the first step to measure the impact of 
human settlement on environment is the computation of a 
new two-dimensional global metric. The metric is based on 
the concept of anthropentropy: this term is a neologism [9] 
derived from the Greek term Anthropos (Άνθρωπος) = man, 
and entropy. As entropy is the well-known measure of 
disorder of a system, the term anthropentropy refers to the 
“disorder” introduced in a virgin environment by the 
presence/penetration of human beings. The basic idea is to 
associate to a limited geographic area a new indicator, called 
Anthropentropy Factor (AF in the following), which 
expresses the degree of penetration of human settlement in 
the environment. This is not only based on classical well-
known indicators, such as the percentage of soil occupied by 
human activities and urban expansion, but it takes into 
consideration also the shape of the areas subtracted to nature. 
For this reason, we have chosen the term two-dimensional 
metric, where the two dimensions refer to a two-dimensional 
plan description of the areas of human settlements and their 
relative shapes and spatial relationships, in particular their 
contiguity. This choice is supported by the results of several 
studies in ecology:  many researches highlight that the shape 
of the land is important for wild animal species that inhabit it 
and that the fragmentation of the territory contributes greatly 
to limit some environmental key treats, for example 
biodiversity. In fact, the UN Convention on Biological 
Diversity [10] considers fragmentation as a major threat to 
habitats and species populations, because it has a direct 
impact (due to proximity and disturbance) in creating 
barriers to the wandering and spreading of animals.  One of 
the most important causes of fragmentation of territory is a 
disordered urban expansion where the incremental areas (due 
to new human settlements) are distributed in the territory in 
such a way that new settlements are not contiguous to 
existing ones. This is potentially a great drawback, because it 
increases greatly fragmentation. To illustrate this concept 
with a simple schematic example, suppose that the initial 
situation of an area of 16 square km is that of a single urban 
settlement of square shape of 1 km (Fig. 1a): as a 
consequence of the urban expansion, this area gets wider,  by 
rising the measure of the side to 2 km (Fig. 2b). The increase 
of the use of soil passes from 0.0625 to 0.25. Now let us 
suppose instead of switching to a new situation in which 
there are three other new settlement squares of 1 km each 
(Fig. 1c). The new occupation of the land use remains the 
same (0.25), because cases (b) and (c) have the same relative                         
                   (a)                                                         (b)  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(c) 
Figure 1.  
The  sprawl of urban settlements causes a loss of 
continuity and consequent territory fragmentation. (a) original situation; (b) 
contiguous incremental areas (c) non contiguous incremental areas. 
land take increment (+25%),  but the situation, regarding the 
fragmentation of territory, is clearly more dramatic. Despite 
the calculated indicators are the same, the first scenario (b) is 
definitely preferable than the second (c) from the ecological 
point of view. A simple qualitative example is the 
construction of a road in the countryside: the impact on 
wildlife is not just due to the simple loss of land, most likely 
because the animals of the area will not only reduced their 
amplitude territory occupied by concrete and asphalt, but it is 
slightly larger, due to other aspects of environmental 
pollution (noise, vibration, impossibility to cross the road).  
For this reason, by considering the increment of 
urbanized areas, it is important to notice that the relative 
numeric increment of land use is not a sufficient indicator to 
take into account. In [11] the problem of land fragmentation 
is analyzed in full details, but with two great limitations: data 
refers to 2000 and have no longer updated and (2) the 
fragmentation taken into consideration is the only one 
induced by great communication roads. However, if you 
want to measure the quality of life of individuals, the use of 
such macroscopic level data may not be sufficient. In order 
to overcome the limitations of the classical approaches of 
previous studies, and to improve our knowledge about 
environment preservation, it is mandatory (a) to update data 
to a more recent situation and (b) to take into consideration 
several urban settlements, both from the point of view of 
considering all their possible typologies, and also their 
spatial distribution, in order to minimize fragmentation.  
How you can put all this logic in an indicator that: a) takes 
into account the relative positions of the urbanized areas and  
b) is easy to compute and to be updated? The solution 
proposed here is the metric based on anthropentropy and the 
consequent definition and computation of indicator AF on a 
given geographic area in a collaborative environment, using 
the paradigm of User-Generated Content (UGC). The  metric 
and the AF definitions answer challenge (a), while to answer 
the challenge (b), the second novelty of our research is 
adopted: social crowdsourcing, by involving in the project a 
social networking community in order to generate open data. 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 2.  
Example of anthropentropy mapping for municipality of 
Verbania (Italy): in red the anthropic places, in yellow the neutral area.  
A. The AF definition 
The solution consists in considering an urbanized area 
and then "enlarge" of a security zone by expanding it shape 
in the two dimensions and, consequently, by increasing its 
size. The extension has the purpose of taking into account 
the negative effects (due to noise and pollution) in the 
immediate vicinity of human urbanized areas; moreover, if 
the urbanized areas are sufficiently close each other, the 
enlargement causes an effect of dilation (where contiguous 
“holes” can be filled), which defines wider areas of 
individual settlements. The indicator must take into account 
these enlarged areas, instead of the original ones. 
In order to investigate the human presence as the 
occupation of land by human resources that are not 
compatible with nature,  the whole set of anthropic places 
are defined by four typologies (in the following, referred as 
List 1): buildings of any kind (housing, workplaces, schools, 
hospitals, if there is the actual presence of human activity, 
also in occasional mode, for example a settlement of voltaic 
solar panels),  paved roads, railways, and places of intensive 
agriculture (such as greenhouses, nurseries, where the 
human presence is fairly continuous and has effectively 
ousted the wild). 
In order to compute the AF, some considerations and 
definitions are necessary. Let us consider a generic 
geographic region bounded by recognized borders (e.g., a 
municipality, a county or a state) and let define S the area (in 
squared kilometers) of the region (assuming you have an 
appropriate two-dimensional scaled map and the numeric 
value of S). Within the region, we proceed to the 
identification of all the sub-regions occupied by the 
anthropic places of List 1. Sub-regions can be disjoint. Each 
sub-region contains at least one of the anthropic places listed 
in List 1. We define a neutral sub-region  as a part of  
territory containing at least these two kinds of elements: (a) 
stretches of inland water (lakes, lagoons etc.) extending more 
than two squared kilometers (this choice is to be consistent 
with the coastline, which is normally considered as 
administrative boundary of the coastal municipalities) and 
(b) the land located more than 3,000 m above sea level. For 
the given region, the union of all the neutral sub-regions (if 
present), correspond to the Neutral Zone. Let define  NA as 
the area (in squared kilometers)  of the Neutral Zone. 
Obviously, not all the geographic region necessary contain a 
neutral zone, in that case NA is set to 0. In Fig. 2, an 
example of anthropentropy mapping of the municipality of 
Verbania is shown. The portion of the lake is the yellow 
area, the red area are the anthropic places (for clarity, the 
territory outside the municipality is blackened). Each area 
occupied by anthropic places is enlarged (along the two 
Cartesian dimensions X and Y) with a factor of "charging" of 
50 meters, to give rise to anthropic sub-regions; for example, 
suppose a generic sub-region is a square of side 1000 meters, 
then the correspoding anthropic sub-region will be a square 
of side 1100 meters. The choice of a “buffering” of 50 
meters is based on the principle of reciprocity: in Italian 
laws, most particularly intrusive activities, e.g., hunting, shall 
be allowed only at a distance greater than 50 m from urban 
settlements. This distance then seems a good compromise 
between the two extremes of a too restrictive and a too 
permissive limit. We define the union of all the anthrophic 
sub-regions as Death Zone of the region. Let define DA as 
the area (in squared kilometers) of the Death Zone. We 
define the Anthropentropic Factor AF as the ratio: 
 
AF = DA / (S – NA)  
 
The AF is a fractional number between 0 (completely 
uninhabited regions without human active settlements) and 1 
(fully populated regions). In (1) the special case of NA = S is 
not considered, as it would mean that the entire geographic 
area is occupied by water or it is located above 3,000 m 
above the sea, thus it is not suitable to urban settlements and 
the computation of FA is meaningless.  
B. Critical issues in the AF computation and their 
solutions 
The main purpose of the ACI project is to map the 
complete Italian territory in such a way that, for each 
municipality, the AF factor (1) is computed according to the 
procedure described in Section II.A. The first problem is the 
availability  of a description of land use in terms of anthropic 
places (see List 1), possibly with an accuracy of scale 
comparable with the size of the dilation (50 m) accomplished 
by the algorithm.  At this purpose, the ACI project refer to 
the data-set created by the Corine Land Cover (CLC) project 
[8]; it was born in Europe specifically for the detection and 
monitoring of the characteristics of cover and land use, 
especially for environmental protection. The first realization 
of the CLC data-set refer to 1990 (CLC90) and subsequent 
updates refer to the year 2000 through the project Image & 
Corine Land Cover 2000. In 2000, 33 countries adhered to 
the project, including Italy.  
Unfortunately, the first critical issue of the project is that 
Corine data set is not available for all the Italian territory, but 
only for 7 regions (over a total of 20 regions), namely for the 
40,9% of municipalities (3311 over 8092). For the remaining 
municipalities, data of land use are not available at all, or 
they are not available free of charges. To fill the gap of data, 
an UGC approach has been use (see Section II.C). As our 
project stresses the importance of open data for society 
growth, we had to face this problem and we solved it by 
proposing a solution based on User Generated Content and 
social networking. Therefore, the results of the ACI project 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

derive from two distinct procedures: (a) the AF mapping 
based on Corine Land cover data set (due to the avalibility of 
Corine data set, this part can be developed for a total 
percentage of 40.9% of Italian municipalities), and (b) the 
AF mapping based on UGC and social networking open 
data. 
In Section III, results for the two cases are described. 
First, the procedure for UCG and open data generation of our 
collaborative project has to be described. 
C. UGC and collaborative social networking for AF 
computation 
The ACI project can count on a social network consisting 
of 7000 users [12]. All of them are potentially involved in 
the project of UGC. Collaborative users are asked to generate 
a map (UGC map) on Google Earth environment in which 
the limits of anthropic sub-regions and neutral zones (if any) 
are plotted. Obviously, each user will produce the map for 
the municipality in which he/she actually lives: in this way 
the knowledge of one’s own territory, provided by everyday 
user experience, is coded in the map. A procedure for the 
generation of the UGC map of the territory is given to the 
users of the social network. The procedure must have the 
following characteristics: (a) it requires a low level of 
expertise in informatics: the only required skills are to be 
able to open files and do some basic operations such as 
selecting and tracking area boundaries filled with different 
colors (red for anthropic sub-regions and yellow for neutral 
zones), and (b) it is based on open software and open data 
(Google Earth maps and Gimp). The user is given a detailed 
procedure to download the Google Earth map and to fill 
areas with the proper set up of Gimp tools (types, fillings, 
colors). In Fig. 3a, an example of UGC map for the 
municipality of San Martino Siccomario (Pavia, Italy) is 
shown: red areas refer to the anthropic places, in black the 
limits of the municipality are shown. After the user has 
generated the UGC map of his/her own municipality, we 
received the map and processed it according to a simple 
computer vision algorithm, implemented in Matlab. It is 
composed of four steps. The first one is a calibration step, 
which  is necessary to discover the scale of the UGC map. At 
this purpose a couple of points are select on Google earth 
original map and their distance is measures in Google Earth 
with the Ruler tool. The same two reference points are 
selected in matlab interactive environment and the Euclidean 
distance is computed (see Fig. 3b, the green line is drawn for 
euclidean distance and computation of pixel dimensions). 
This gives the effective area represented by one pixel, which 
is assumed to be squared. In the second step, the red areas 
are enlarged by the well-known morphological operator of 
dilation [13], in X and Y dimensions, assuming a radius of 
dilation of 50 meters (see Fig. 3c). This step creates the 
Death Zone. By comparing Fig. 3b and  Fig. 3c, it can be 
noticed that areas are enlarged and, in some points, “holes” 
are partially or completely filled (further examples are 
reported in Experimental results, see Fig. 6). In the third step, 
the areas of dilated zones and neutral zone (if any) are 
computed by simply counting the number of pixels of the 
Death Zone and of the Neutral zone (if any) and by 
multiplying these numbers for the effective area of a pixel 
computed in the calibration step. This step gives rise to the 
values of DA and NA in (1). In the last step, the area of the 
entire municipality is read form official on line Istat database 
[14] and AF factor is computed according  to (1).  
D. Discussion on applicability, merits and limitations 
The first important question is: is AF a significant factor? 
This indicator gives, in an absolute scale (from 0 to 1), the 
degree of land use and it is very intuitive to understand. 
Consider the paradox of cement: if every Italian citizen 
occupied with his/her business (home, work, communication 
routes) an area of 70 X 70 meters, the whole Italian 
peninsula (including mountains!) would be populated and the 
factor AF would be equal to 1 everywhere. The  distance 
from value 1 indicates how far we are from this tragic limit 
situation. The second important question is: in which aspects 
can the AF help in environment preservation?  As the metric 
is based on an objective, scientific indicator and it is very 
simple to understand,  it can be a very powerful tool to help 
legislators and local administrators to evaluate the present 
situation and to impose limits to urbanization. 
Some limitations of the approach have to be underlined, 
especially in the part of UGC data set, in particular: (a) the 
precision of Death Zone and Neutral Zone definition varies 
from map to map, as it is related to the manual skill of 
selection by mouse of the user (this precision cannot be 
estimated in advance in a quantitative way), and (b) the 
knowledge of the land use of the territory varies from map to 
map, because it is related to the awareness of land use of the 
user. For the first limitation, several tests have been done to 
assure that the precision of manual selection by the mouse of 
the two reference points does not affect the computation of 
FA. Even with a simulated error of selection up to five 
pixels, the variation of the indicator AF is less than 0.01%. 
For the second limitation, a preliminary check on the quality 
of the UGC map is performed manually, by a strict 
cooperation with the social network users, in order to verify 
the level of their expertise. Obviously, the UGC values of AF 
cannot replace the same precision the computation based on 
Corine data set, but as the main goal is not replacing but 
filling the gap of open data, this method can be a valid 
solution: besides, the method based on UGC maps have three 
main advantages. First of all, it increases the awareness of 
the citizens on the state of the environment where they lives. 
Map reading and, above all, participation to complete them 
makes us more aware of the environmental richness that we 
are losing. And it is, after all, the ethical purpose of ACI 
project, to show that crowdsourcing and social technologies 
can help to improve society. Besides, the procedure for AF 
computation can be used as a simulation to study future 
urban expansions in a scenario of What if?. This suggests a 
possible very useful application of our system: to help local 
government in planning the annual Territory Government 
Plan where new urban expansions are decided. Finally, it can 
react rapidly to the local changes for land use, as the main 
source of knowledge is the citizen (a typical bottom-up 
knowledge). For what concern the comparison to a fully 
automatic image processing approach, as we pointed out in 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Section I.A (Related work), a fully automatic method to 
recognize anthropic places is not possible, because general 
image processing characteristics, such as multispectral 
information, color and texture are not sufficient to code in a 
map the level of knowledge necessary to differentiate a 
nursery for intensive agriculture from a field of sorghum 
(extensive agriculture), a golf course from a simple lawn, or 
a complex of abandoned and inhabited houses from an 
habited one. 
III. 
THE METRIC AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS 
A. The metric 
After the computation of  AF index, a simple numeric 
(and the corresponding visual representation) metric is 
proposed here: if AF is between 0 and 0.2, the area is 
considered a very low “anthrophized area” (the ideal 
condition for the environment). This condition is represented 
visually on the map by coloring the area into varying levels 
of green. If AF is between 0.2 and 0.4, the area is considered 
with a limited but worrying level of anthropentropy. This 
condition is represented visually on the map by coloring the 
area into varying levels of yellow. This type of area have to 
be monitored in time to control its evolution potentially to 
undesired higher  level of anthropentropy. If AF is between 
0.4 and 0.6, the area is considered with a serious level of 
anthropentropy. This condition is represented visually on the 
map by coloring the area into varying levels of red. In these 
areas, the presence of humans greatly impact negatively on 
environment. If AF is between 0.6 and 1, the area is 
considered with a very serious level of anthropentropy, in an 
irreversible environmental degradation. This condition is 
represented visually on the map by coloring the area into 
varying levels from violet to black. In these areas, the 
presence of humans has completely compromised the 
situation. Following the metric and the visual convention on 
visual mapping, for a given area of the Italian territory (a 
group of municipalities, i.e., region), it is now possible to 
generate an Anthropentropy Map. In Section III.B, 
significant results are shown and commented. 
B. Experimental results 
In Fig. 4, an example of Anthropentropy Map for region 
Trentino (Italy) is shown. The most compromised areas are 
near big cities, and this is, to a certain extent, a predictable 
result, however, the situation is quite good because no black 
areas are present even on the cities, and red areas are limited 
both in extension and dispersion. This can be quantitatively 
expressed by the statistics: the minimum value of AF is 0.01, 
the average is 0.14, and the standard deviation is 0.11. From 
the anthropentropy map, a low level of fragmentation of 
green territory is evident. In Fig. 5, the most compromised 
situation is shown. The black spot refers to the high 
urbanized area of Milan. The map shows clearly however 
that the worrying situation is also far off the big cities, in 
countryside, due to local uncontrolled urban settlement 
growth. In Fig. 6, some examples of UCG maps are 
presented, and the corresponding Death Zone computed by 
the computer  vision algorithm based on  morphological  
 (a) 
  
 
                              (b)                                                        (c) 
Figure 3.  
AF computation for the municipality of San Martino (Pavia, 
Italy): (a) original UGC map (b) calibration step (c) Death Zone. 
dilation. The maps refer to the municipalities of Erice 
(Sicily) and Scarperia (Tuscany), with AF of  0.214 and 
0.1637, respectively.  
IV CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, an innovative indicator to evaluate land use 
is proposed, basing upon the concept of anthropentropy. 
According to the definition, a method to compute the 
Antropentropy Factor for a given territory is described, both 
on open data and on collaborative UGC maps. On the time of 
writing of the present paper, the ACI project covers a 
percentage of generation of Anthropentropy Maps for the 
whole set of Italian municipality (8092)  equal to 36,7%, and 
new results are constantly being collected, both from the 
social collaborative approach  and on new, recently 
available, open data. Future work includes the mapping of 
the entire Italian territory and the presentation of results to 
local and governmental administrations, in order to put in 
practice an innovative policy of environment preservation 
based upon a sustainable land use and to measure with some 
metric the efficacy of the method on real cases of 
environmental degradation. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors greatly appreciate for his collaboration 
Antonio di Gennaro [15], for AF and map generation from 
Corine data set.  
REFERENCES  
[1] Overview of exiting Policies to reduce and mitigate soil 
sealing 
in 
the 
EU 
and 
Member 
States, 
http://ec.europa.eu/environment/soil/pdf/sealing/4.%20Overvi
ew%20of%20existing%20Policies%20EU%20and%20MS%2
0(A-H).pdf [retrieved: May, 2013]. 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[2] Land 
Use, 
State 
and 
impact 
(Italy). 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/soer/countries/it/land-use-state-and-
impacts-italy [retrieved: May, 2013]. 
[3] J. Dumanski and C. Pieri, "Land quality indicators: research 
plan," Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment 81.2, 2000, 
pp. 93-102. 
[4] J. D. Majer, “Ants: Bio-indicators of minesite rehabilitation, 
land-use, 
and 
land 
conservation,” 
Environmental 
Management, Vol. 7, n. 4, Springer Verlag, 1983, pp. 375-
383. 
[5] H.G. Zechmeistera, I. Schmitzbergera, B. Steurerb, J. 
Peterseila, and T. Wrbkaa, “The influence of land-use 
practices and economics on plant species richness in 
meadows,” Biological Conservation, n. 114, Elsevier, 2003, 
pp. 165–177.  
[6] http://www.arpa.veneto.it/temi-ambientali/aria/file-e-
allegati/docup-2007/09-Isocrono.pdf  [retrieved: May, 2013] 
[7] J. Rogan and D.M.Chen, “Remote sensing technology for 
mapping and monitoring land-cover and land-use change,” 
Progress in Planning, n. 61, Elsevier, 2004, pp. 301–325. 
[8] Corine Land Cover Project: 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/COR0-landcover, 
[retrieved: May, 2013] 
[9] ACI 
project: 
http://www.albanesi.it/Ambiente/ACI.htm 
[retrieved: May, 2013] 
[10] The 
UN 
convention 
on 
biological 
diversity, 
http://enrin.grida.no/biodiv/biodiv/cbd/eeafoll.pdf [retrieved: 
May, 2013] 
[11] Fragmentation of ecosystems and habitats by transport 
infrastructure, 
http://www.eea.europa.eu/data-and-
maps/indicators/fragmentation-of-land-and-forests/eu-ac-
fragmentation. [retrieved: May, 2013] 
[12] Facebook page: https://www.facebook.com/RobertoAlbanesi, 
[retrieved: May, 2013] 
[13] R. C. Gonzales and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing, 
Pearson Prentice Hall, 2008, Chapter 9, “Morphological 
Image Processing”.  
[14] ISTAT: www.comuni-italiani.it [retrieved: May, 2013] 
[15] Linkedin 
page: 
http://www.linkedin.com/in/adigennaro 
[retrieved: May, 2013]. 
 
Figure 4.  Anthropentropy Map of RegionTrentino, Italy (land area: 13605 
squared kilometers). 
 
Figure 5.  Anthropentropy Map of Region Lombardia, Italy (land area: 
23863 squared kilometers). 
 (a) 
 (b) 
 (c) 
 (d) 
Figure 6.  Example of UGC maps for the municipalities of (a) Erice 
(Trapani, Sicily) and (b) Scarperia (Florence, Tuscany) and their 
corresponding Death Zones (c and d).  
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

