Microarea Selection Method Based on Service Diffusion Process for Broadband 
Services 
 
Motoi Iwashita, Akiya Inoue 
Dept. of Management Information Science 
Chiba Institute of Technology 
Chiba, Japan 
e-mail:{iwashita.motoi, akiya.inoue}@it-chiba.ac.jp 
Takeshi Kurosawa 
Dept. of Mathematical Information Science 
Tokyo University of Science 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: tkuro@rs.kagu.tus.ac.jp 
Ken Nishimatu 
Network Technology Laboratories 
NTT 
Tokyo, Japan 
e-mail: nishimatsu.ken@lab.ntt.co.jp
 
 
Abstract— 
Wired/wireless 
information 
communication 
networks have been expanded in order to meet the demand for 
broadband services as an information and communication 
technology (ICT) infrastructure. Since the installation of such 
ICT infrastructures requires a large amount of time and 
money for expansion, the decision how to select the installation 
area is a key issue. Low-usage facilities can cause problems for 
business in terms of investment efficiency. Moreover, it takes 
time to select areas because of the need to consider how to 
estimate the potential demand, and how to manage the 
installation of infrastructures for thousands of municipal areas 
across the nation. In this paper, we propose an efficient 
microarea selection method for use during the life cycle of 
broadband 
services. The 
method is constructed with 
consideration of consumer segmentation, and each type of 
consumer behaviour as the broadband service propagation 
model. 
Keywords-data mining; area marketing; demand forecast; 
decision support system; algorithm. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Fibre-to-the-home (FTTH) is an ultra-high-speed, wired, 
broadband access infrastructure, provided in Japan since 
2002. Such an ICT infrastructure provides a variety of 
technologies and circumstances for corporate activity. 
Although the FTTH coverage rate for 2014 with respect to 
the total number of households nationwide was about 98% 
[1], the customer rate using FTTH in the coverage areas was 
still only 43%. As for wireless broadband access, long-term 
evolution (LTE) for high-speed wireless access has been 
provided since December 2010. The LTE coverage rate for 
the population was more than 90%, and the customer rate 
was about 42% in 2014 [2]. The other high-speed wireless 
access, worldwide interoperability for microwave access 
(WiMAX), which has been provided since 2009, had a 
coverage rate of greater than 90%, and the total number of 
customers was about 7 million in 2014. 
Since the infrastructure installation is very expensive, 
business management is strongly affected when the facility 
usage is low. Therefore, strategic and economical installation 
is necessary for ICT infrastructures, such as broadband and 
wireless access facilities. Such installations strongly depend 
on how we estimate the potential demand in different areas; 
therefore, an efficient estimation method is urgently required. 
The goal of providing an area with ICT services is to 
determine the investment order of areas, as ICT 
infrastructure installation per area is both more effective and 
less expensive than on-demand installation. If we can come 
up with an efficient method, it will have a lasting impact on 
enterprise business. 
In this paper, we propose a microarea selection method 
that is simple to use compared with trade analysis [3]. Our 
target is ICT infrastructure installation during the life cycle 
which covers both early and late stages of broadband 
services. The proposed method is based on consumer 
segmentation, on each type of consumer behaviour as in the 
broadband service propagation model, and is verified with 
the service penetration of WiMAX services. Section II 
introduces related works. The trend of demand of WiMAX 
in Japan is described in Section III. Section IV is devoted to 
the hypothesis of the service diffusion and its model. Section 
V describes an efficient method for the selection of 
microareas. Simulation results and discussions are presented 
in Section VI. Section VII concludes this paper. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Determining the target area for marketing, such as which 
area to focus on in terms of sales activities, and which area to 
install the facility in, is based on trade analysis. In fact, the 
setting up of a convenience store is decided by demographic 
data and field surveys. The geographic information system 
(GIS) [4] is an effective tool for area-related decision making. 
An empirical study using GIS for trade analysis has been 
previously [5] reported. These approaches are effective for 
deciding whether a store should be set up in a given area. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

For the application of these methods to ICT infrastructure 
installation, it is necessary to spend a large amount of time 
selecting areas, because the installation has little effect from 
the viewpoint of network externality [6] if it is carried out in 
one area rather than in several areas simultaneously 
nationwide. 
In order to select the areas, we need to first consider the 
potential demand. Previous research [7]-[9] has focused on a 
macrodemand forecast to provide facility installation 
principles, not to specify installation areas. There has been 
one study on microarea forecasting [10]. It describes only the 
guidelines for microarea forecasting by using multiple 
regression analysis. 
In order to proceed with microarea marketing, we 
focused on the diffusion mechanism of the ICT infrastructure. 
It seems to be diffused in accordance with service reputation 
in areas where ICT infrastructure has been provided as a trial. 
Therefore, who pushes forward service diffusion is an 
important question. An innovative early adopter in the 
technology lifecycle is characterized as an information 
source affecting acquaintances from the viewpoint of 
innovative diffusion [11]. The innovative early adopter is 
generally reckoned as a person who gets stimulated with 
many contacts through his/her mobility. It is difficult to 
identify each person in an area from the viewpoint of the 
technology life cycle (e.g., who is an early adopter). 
Concerning the diffusion of the broadband infrastructure 
facilities at the moment, the framework of microarea 
marketing is based on commuting flows in terms of 
considering human behaviour [12]. Such a flow-based 
microarea selection method has been developed and 
compared to the population-based method, which is a simple 
application of the population order [13]. However, the 
application of this method is limited to only the early stage 
of area penetration. Therefore, it is necessary to construct a 
microarea selection method that is applicable throughout the 
life cycle (from early to late stage) of broadband services. 
III. 
TREND OF DEMANDS FOR WIMAX IN JAPAN 
WiMAX is a wireless broadband access service that has 
been in place in Japan since 2009. The total demand is 
increasing, with about 20 billion customers existing in 2015 
as shown in Fig. 1. The demand increases at a consistent rate 
until 2014, and then increases sharply from 2014 to 2015. 
This is because service by mobile virtual network operator 
(MVNO) was introduced in mid 2013. MVNO is defined as 
a network service operator that does not have a network 
facility itself, but rather borrows the facility from a real 
network operator. Therefore, newcomers to MVNO have 
features for value-added services, such as character brand 
gadgets, rich content of video, and so on. Customers have 
many options of network operators through SIM-free 
terminals. MVNO*1 represents the demand excluding real 
mobile network operators, while MVNO*2 represents the 
demand including the results of real mobile network 
operators as MVNO. These results show that the effect by 
MVNO*1 is small for the total demand, while the total 
demand is almost the same with MVNO*2. Considering these 
results, customers who have already been WiMAX users do 
not change their service to MVNO, this is because the total 
demand is almost the same as those of MVNO*2. Therefore, 
new customers tend to choose their MVNO in terms of 
pricing compared to 2013. 
 
Figure 1.  Demand for WiMAX in Japan. 
 
Figure 2.  Trend of number of microareas for WiMAX. 
Fig. 2 shows the trend of penetration microareas for 
WiMAX since August 2010. The microarea is defined as the 
municipal area in this study. The vertical axis is the 
penetration rate of WiMAX services, meaning the ratio of 
the number of microareas for a WiMAX facility installed 
against the total number of microareas in the prefecture. 
Thirteen prefectures were taken and defined as A to M. The 
graph shows that many microareas were selected, and that 
the facilities were installed from 2010 to 2012. This time 
interval corresponds to the early stage of WiMAX diffusion. 
The demand grew inside the areas from 2012 to 2014 this is 
because the number of installed microareas did not change. 
Since late 2014, the number of installed microareas has 
increased. This situation corresponds to the appearance of 
MVNO, and this means that the customers who are 
interested in the price of services are major factors. 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

IV. 
HYPOTHESIS OF SERVICE DIFFUSION AND ITS MODEL 
We made a hypothesis of service diffusion in early stage 
on the basis of personal behaviour [13]. Since face-to-face 
communication with friends/acquaintances is the key of 
broadband service diffusion, it is absolutely necessary to 
introduce the concept of innovation diffusion [11]. There are 
five types of consumers, namely the innovator, early adopter, 
early majority, late majority, and the laggard. In particular, 
an early adopter who is trend-conscious, and collects 
information and makes decisions by himself/herself plays an 
important role. It is widely known that an early adopter has a 
considerable influence on general consumers as an opinion 
leader. This implies that he/she sends interesting information 
to his/her acquaintances. If an individual (especially early 
majority) has many contacts with early adopters, the 
possibility that he/she will demand the service is high [14], 
as shown in Fig. 3 (a). Since face-to-face communication is 
effective in the diffusion of broadband services, the mobility 
of an early adopter will probably induce broadband service 
diffusion through contacts with many individuals. Therefore, 
we assumed a commuting flow that includes early adopters 
in the service diffusion process, as shown in Fig. 3 (b). 
 
 
Figure 3.  Mechanism of service diffusion in early stage. 
 
Figure 4.  Relationship between service diffusion and customer 
segmentation. 
Next, we explain the mechanism from early to late stage 
according to the trend as shown in Fig. 2. The early stage of 
service diffusion corresponds to the time interval between 
2010 and 2012. The penetration rate grew with a steep slope, 
for which the mechanism has already been explained in the 
previous study. The middle stage of service diffusion 
corresponds to the time interval between 2012 and 2014. In 
that stage, there were no increases of the number of installed 
microareas. This means that the early majority affected by 
early adopters made contact with others of the early majority 
in the same microarea, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). As a result, the 
demand increased inside a microarea of the middle stage. 
The penetration rate increased in all areas during the late 
stage of service diffusion after 2014. The new type of 
services provided by MVNO started in that stage, where 
there is potential demand from the late majority. The late 
majority tends to be skeptical of the service, price-oriented 
and follow the early majority after the service has 
sufficiently penetrated the field. Therefore, the late majority 
is not affected by contact with the early majority, but rather 
by resonance [15] with early majority, as shown in Fig. 4(c). 
 
Figure 5.  Mechanism of potential demand diffusion. 
The next step was to obtain the mechanism of potential 
demand diffusion as shown in Fig. 5. Our hypothesis at the 
early stage for service diffusion is that the demand grows 
with high movement among microareas (Fig.5 (a)). 
Therefore, the microarea is selected by in- and outflows of 
commuters in a microarea. Since the possibility of growing 
potential demand exists inside a microarea during the middle 
and late stages, the effect of population in microareas 
becomes great when compared with that of movement 
among microareas (Fig. 5(b)). 
V. 
MICROAREA SELECTION ALGORITHMS 
The population-based algorithm is defined as the method 
that selects areas by the application of the population order; 
therefore, areas with a large population tend to be selected. 
The flow-based algorithm is defined as a method that selects 
areas on the basis of the inflows and outflows among areas. 
To analyse inflows and outflows among areas, we introduced 
the representation of a graph model with an area as a node, 
and the commuting flow among areas as a link. In particular, 
a link has an arrow to consider the direction of commuting 
flows; therefore, areas with a large inflow/outflow tend to be 
selected. According to the mechanism described in the 
previous section, the mixed algorithm is constructed so that 
the flow-based algorithm is used in the low penetration rate 
while the population-based algorithm is used in the high 
penetration rate. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Let G = (N, L) be a graph, where N denotes a finite set of 
nodes (i ∈N) and L represents a set of links (lij ∈L). 
For any lij, there exists a function f: L  N0 (non-negative 
integer) such that f(lij) = zij for lij  L. For any ni, there exists 
a function g: N  M0 (non-negative integer) such that g(ni) 
= ui for ni ∈ N. 
The procedure for the mixed algorithm is as follows; 
• 
Step 1: Let c = 1 be a counter with an initial value 
‘1’, and n(k) be a k-th element of the array where k = 
1, 2, 
. Let “p” as the number of selected areas by 
WiMAX evolution under the penetration rate (40%), 
Set Nt  N. 
Sort links according to flow values f(lij) in N0 in the 
descending order: assign threshold values α and β. 
Sort nodes according to population values g(ni) in 
M0 in the descending order. 
• 
Step 2: If p ≥  c, then the following steps are 
performed (flow-based algorithm): 
o 
Step 2-1: Define a set K (⊂ L) = arg max 
f(lij), and denote f(l*
ij) = zd  N0 for l*
ij  K. 
o 
Step 2-2: If there is a node ‘m’  Nt whose 
in-degree exceeds α, then select node ‘m’, 
and set n(c)  m, c  c+1, and replace Nt 
with Nt\{n(c)} and replace L with L\K. 
o 
Step 2-3: If there is a node ‘m’  Nt whose 
out-degree exceeds β, then select node ‘m’, 
and set n(c)  m, c  c+1, and replace Nt 
with Nt \{n(c)} and replace L with L\K. 
• 
Step 3: If | N | ≥ c, then the following steps are 
performed (population-based algorithm): 
o 
Step 3-1: If there is a node ‘m’  Nt whose 
g(n) = max g(ni), then select node ‘m’, and 
set n(c)  m, c  c+1, and replace Nt 
with Nt\{n(c)}. 
VI. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
A. Classification of prefectures 
The 33 prefectures are considered as representative of 
prefectures in terms of size. Since employee fluidity (as 
commuting flows) depends on the area selected especially in 
the early stage [13], the attributes of prefectures are 
considered to be ‘number of employees in own microarea’, 
‘inflow of employees among microareas’, and ‘outflow of 
employees among microareas’. We classified the prefectures 
into the following five categories in terms of employee 
fluidity according to the correspondence analysis shown in 
Fig. 6. The vertical axis represents the occurrence ratio of the 
in- or outflow among the microareas in the prefecture. The 
horizontal axis represents the staying ratio of employees in 
their own microareas. 
• 
Group 1: areas with large inflow; Aichi (A) 
• 
Group 2: areas with large in- and outflows; Ibaraki 
(B) and Shiga (F) 
• 
Group 3: areas with large outflow; Saitama (C) and 
Nara (H) 
• 
Group 4: areas with little in- and outflows; Niigata 
(D), Okayama (I) and Hiroshima (J) 
• 
Group 5: balanced areas of average in- and out-
flow; Kagawa (E), Ishikawa (G), Yamagata (K), 
Tokushima (L) and Fukui (M) 
 
Figure 6.  Correspondence analysis of employee fluidity. 
B. Comparison with algorithms 
In this section, we compare and evaluate the population-
based, flow-based and mixed algorithms. To determine the 
difference in results depending on region, thirteen 
prefectures were considered among five groups (A to M). 
TABLE I.  
COMPARATIVE RESULTS 
Prefecture 
(Area no.) 
Group 
Population
-based 
algorithm 
Flow-based 
algorithm 
Mixed 
algorithm 
A (83) 
1 
0.92 
0.94 
B (54) 
0.94 
2 
0.79 
0.79 
F (32) 
0.79 
2 
0.80 
0.80 
C (87) 
0.80 
3 
0.91 
0.93 
H (42) 
0.93 
3 
0.93 
0.97 
D (43) 
0.97 
4 
0.82 
0.82 
I (32) 
0.82 
4 
0.88 
0.92 
J (28) 
0.92 
4 
0.86 
0.91 
E (34) 
0.91 
5 
0.81 
0.81 
0.89 
G (20) 
5 
0.81 
0.81 
K (38) 
0.81 
5 
0.81 
0.81 
0.87 
L (35) 
5 
0.87 
0.87 
0.91 
M (27) 
5 
0.86 
0.86 
0.90 
 
Table 1 shows the concordance ratio comparison among 
the three algorithms. The penetration rate is calculated as the 
ratio of the number of areas, where WiMAX has been 
introduced by the provider (WiMAX evolution), to the 
number for all areas in the given prefecture. The Table 1 
results are when the penetration rate was 80% in each 
prefecture. α = β = 1 are taken in the flow-base algorithm 
because of the optimization analysis in the early stage [13]. 
The concordance ratio (CR) of the number of selected areas 
between WiMAX evolution and each algorithm is defined by 
the following equation. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
CR = (Number of selected areas matching WiMAX 
evolution areas /Number of WiMAX evolution areas).     (1) 
The underlined values indicate the highest CR at each 
prefecture. Although the CR by flow-based algorithm is 
sometimes the highest, the CR by population-based 
algorithm is always the highest for Groups 1 to 4. Employee 
fluidity well explains the behaviour in the early stage as 
applying the flow-based algorithm, while the resonant effect 
well explains the demand increase by population in the late 
stage as applying the population-based algorithm. Therefore, 
the mixed algorithm is for use in accordance with the 
penetration rate for Groups 1, 2, 3 and 4 during the life cycle 
of the services. However, the CR by flow-based algorithm is 
always superior to that by population-based algorithm for 
Group 5. It is better to use the flow-based algorithm for the 
whole penetration rate. 
C. Consideration for microarea characteristics 
In this subsection, we consider the differences between 
Group 5 and the other groups in order to apply the proposed 
algorithm. The differences of population between areas are 
focused and analysed. Figs. 7 and 8 show the relationship 
between population in a microarea, and ranking of 
microareas for four prefectures (B, C, J and K). The target 
microareas exclude the microareas which were selected by 
WiMAX evolution when the penetration rate was lower than 
40% in each prefecture. 
 
Figure 7.  Relationship between population in area and its ranking (C and 
J). 
 
Figure 8.  Relationship between population in area and its ranking (B and 
K). 
The results showed that the approximation by regression 
line fits into the scatter diagram in C (Group 3) and J (Group 
4) in Fig. 7, while it does not fit in B (Group 2) and K 
(Group 5) in Fig. 8. Instead, the diagram fits into logarithmic 
regression curves in B and K. It is understandable that the 
population difference is small for low-ranking microareas in 
B and K, and the effect of fluidity is greater than that of 
population-based algorithm. The results are significant for 
Group 5, while the same results (CRs between three 
algorithms) are obtained for Group 2. 
 
VII. CONCLUSIONS 
It is tremendously important to select an area in which an 
ICT infrastructure is introduced in order to ensure quick and 
economic development of an advanced information society. 
Area selection strongly depends on the potential demand, 
and one of the main features of the ICT infrastructure is 
network externality; therefore, a huge amount of time and 
labour is required to select specified areas from among a 
large number of candidate areas. 
In this paper, we proposed an efficient area selection 
method based on a service diffusion model. We evaluated 
the method using real field data from 13 prefectures, and we 
obtained the application of flow-based and population-based 
algorithms during the life cycle of the services. 
Our future work will analyse the more detailed features 
of area category, in addition to evaluate the proposed method 
for the rest of prefectures. Furthermore, we intend to apply 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the method to other information network infrastructures, 
such as FTTH, LTE, and energy management services. 
REFERENCES 
[1] The Ministry of International Affairs and Communications of 
Japan, Broadband Service Coverage Rate With Respect to the 
Total Number of Households. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.soumu.go.jp/soutsu/tohoku/hodo/h2501-
03/images/0110b1006.pdf (accessed 3 September 206). 
[2] The Ministry of International Affairs and Communications of 
Japan, “Information and Communications in Japan,” 2014 
White Paper, p. 174, 2014. 
[3] K. Yonetaka, Fact of areamarketing. Tokyo: Nikkei Pub. Inc., 
2008. 
[4] Y. Murayama and R. Shibazaki, GIS theory. Tokyo: Asakura 
Pub. Co. Ltd., 2008. 
[5] T. Sakai, et al., “Use of Web-GIS area marketing and its 
application to the local region,” Bulletin of Global 
Environment Research, Rissho Univ., vol. 6, pp. 125-130, 
2004. 
[6] T. Ida, Boradband economics. Tokyo: Nikkei Pub. Inc., 2007. 
[7] R. L. Goodrich, Applied statistical forecasting. Belmont: 
Business Forecast Systems Inc., 1992. 
[8] T. Abe and T. Ueda, “Telephone revenue forecasting using 
state space model,” Trans. on IEICE, vol. J68-A, no. 5, pp. 
437-443, 1985. 
[9] H. Kawano, T. Takanaka, Y. Hiruta, and S. Shinomiya, 
“Study on teletraffic method for macro analysis and its 
evaluation,” Trans. on IEICE, vol. J82-B, no. 6, pp. 1107-
1114, 1999. 
[10] M. Iwashita, K. Nishimatsu, T. Kurosawa, and S. Shimogawa, 
“Broadband 
analysis 
for 
network 
building,” 
Rev. 
Socionetwork Strat., vol. 4, pp. 17-28, 2010. 
[11] E. Rogers, Diffusion of innovation, 5th ed. New York: Free 
Press, 2003. 
[12] M. Iwashita, “A consideration of an area classification 
method for ICT service diffusion,” Knowledge-Based and 
Intelligent Information and Enginieering Systems, LNAI, 
6883, pp. 256-264, 2011. 
[13] M. Iwashita, A. Inoue, T. Kurosawa, and K. Nishimatsu, 
“Efficient microarea selection algorithm for infrastructure 
installation of boradband services,” Internationa Journal of 
Systems, 
Control 
and 
Communications, 
Inderscience 
publishers (to appear). 
[14] S. Shimogawa and M. Iwashita, “Method for analyzing 
sociodynamics of telecommunication-based services,” Proc. 
of 9th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Computer and 
Information Science, pp. 99-104, 2010. 
[15] Y. Ohsawa, M. Matsumura, and K. Takahashi, “Resonance 
without 
Response: 
The 
Way 
of 
Topic 
Growth 
in 
Communication,” Chance Discoveries in Real World 
Decision Making, Studies in Computational Intelligence, Vol. 
30, pp. 155-165, 2006. 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

