Automated Analysis of CT Slices for Detection of  
Ideal Midline from Brain CT Scans 
 
Xuguang Qi, Ashwin Belle, Sharad Shandilya, 
Kayvan Najarian 
Department of Computer Science, School of Engineering, 
Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, VA 
E-mail: qix2@vcu.edu, bellea@vcu.edu, 
shandilyas2@vcu.edu, knajarian@vcu.edu  
Charles Cockrell, Yang Tang 
Department of Radiology, School of Medicine, 
Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, VA  
E-mail: chcockrell@vcu.edu, ytang2@vcu.edu  
Rosalyn S. Hobson Hargraves  
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, 
Virginia Commonwealth University, 
Richmond, VA 
E-mail: rhobson@vcu.edu  
 
Kevin R. Ward 
Department of Emergency Medicine, 
Michigan Center for Integrative Research in Critical Care 
University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, MI  
E-mail: keward@med.umich.edu 
 
 
 
Abstract—Midline shift detection with high accuracy is crucial 
in quantitatively analyzing the severity of a brain injury in 
clinical environments. Accuracy of the estimated ideal midline 
(IML) significantly affects the accuracy of the computed 
midline shift. In this work, a two-step process, which consists 
of computed tomography (CT) Slice Selection Algorithm (SSA) 
and IML detection, is proposed to automatically estimate the 
IML in brain CT images. SSA is designed for automatic slice 
selection. Skull fracture level and intracranial area are used as 
vital features in the selection. Using skull symmetry and 
anatomical features, IML detection accurately estimates the 
position and rotation angle of the IML before calibrating.  
Experimental results of the multi-stage algorithm were 
assessed on 1762 CT slices of 40 patients. The accuracy of the 
proposed system is 91.6%, which makes it viable for use under 
clinical settings. 
 
Keywords-ideal midline;IML; midline shift; MLS; CT slice; 
SSA; mid-sagittal plane 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In the United States alone, nearly 1.7 million cases of 
Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI) are recorded annually [1]. 
Midline Shift (MLS), which is the shift in the brain’s 
midline, is a common aftermath due to the head injury. It is 
an important index for clinicians to assess the severity of 
TBI. MLS greater than 5 mm can lead to sufalcine 
herniation and possibly death [2]. Ideal midline is the 
symmetric midline of the brain without injury or illness. 
Estimating Ideal Midline (IML) [2] is a vital step in MLS 
calculation. 
Skull symmetry and anatomic features have been widely 
used to detect the IML in last two decades [3, 4, 5].  Ruppert 
et al. extracted the mid-sagittal plane (MSP) based on 
bilateral symmetry maximization [6]. Chen et al. used a 
combination of bone symmetry and anatomical features in 
CT images for detection of IML [7]. This method works 
effectively and accurately on a single CT slice, but does not 
consider the connection among CT slices. Furthermore, all 
the methods above mentioned [3, 4, 5, 6, 7] cannot 
automatically select the proper slices before analysis. In 
practice, dozens of CT images can be acquired in one 
patient’s brain scan. It is crucial to choose a few appropriate 
slices that contain clear anatomical features and limited 
noise, to be used for MLS quantification. Prior to this work, 
no automated method to perform this task existed. 
In this work, we propose a two-step algorithm for 
automated detection of the IML. As the first step, a CT Slice 
Selection Algorithm (SSA) is proposed to select appropriate 
slices from a large number of raw CT images. SSA 
proposed in this work realizes the real automated slice 
selection which is the initial step for automated IML 
detection. We did not find any existing automated method to 
perform this task. The second step focuses on the IML 
detection through anatomical features extracted from the 
selected slices and the consideration of the connection 
among CT slices. A database of 1762 CT slices of 40 
patients with TBI cases were used for this study. As shown 
later, the proposed algorithm yields highly desirable 
accuracy and efficiency when tested against this dataset.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: the 
methodology is introduced in Section II. The results are 
presented and discussed in Section III. The work is 
summarized in Section IV. 
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

II. 
METHODOLOGY 
2.1   CT Slice Selection Algorithm (SSA) 
Among the dozens of raw CT images acquired from a 
single patient, only a few are useful for the physician in a 
diagnosis that includes midline estimation. Some images 
taken from the lower section of the head contain too much 
interference/noise from other organs, such as the eye and 
nose in the top image in Figure 1-a. Some images capture a 
small intracranial area because the scan position is too close 
to the calvaria, as seen in Figure 1-b. From the viewpoint of 
anatomical features, the ideal CT slices usually contain 
integrated skull bone and larger intracranial area, such as 
Figure 1-c.  Therefore, CT slice selection should ideally be 
based on the above mentioned features. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Three raw CT slices from one patient’s head CT scan. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Flowchart of CT Slice Selection Algorithm (SSA). 
 
The CT Slice Selection Algorithm (SSA) was designed 
to effectively select a few appropriate CT slices from a large 
number of images. As the flowchart shows in Figure 2, this 
algorithm analyzes every slice by examining multiple 
anatomic features.  
 
 
Figure 3.  Skull detection process. (a) Raw CT slice (b) Detected bones B 
with little bone chips (c) Detected skull.  
As the first step in SSA algorithm, skull detection is 
implemented on every raw CT slice. Using a threshold 
method, potential bone pixels can be extracted from the raw 
image. In this study, based on experimentation, the value for 
the threshold is set to 250 (out of 255), which lies within the 
common range for bone intensity within CT images. Using 
the connected component algorithm (CCA) [8], the discrete 
bone chips can be removed (Figure 3-b). Bone pixels form a 
certain number of connected regions. We choose the one 
containing the largest number of elements as the candidate 
skull  (Figure 3-c).  
 
 
Figure 4.  Skull fracture inspection. The left three images are the raw CT 
images while the right three images show the detected skull.  
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

The second step in the SSA algorithm is skull fracture 
inspection to remove slices with either skull fractures or 
partial skull. Such "non-integrated" skull affects IML 
identification since symmetry value calculation, through the 
exhaustive symmetric position search, is sensitive to skull 
contour. We define a new measure, called skull fracture 
level F, to estimate the integrity of the skull. Skull fracture 
level F is defined by the number of isolated regions 
separated by the skull. To prevent any small holes in the 
skull from affecting the calculation, a minimum threshold 
(of 200 pixels in this work) is set for the area of those 
isolated regions. If the computed skull fracture level F is 
equal to 2, it implies that the skull is integrated and ideal for 
the following steps of detection. An example is the middle 
slice in Figure 4. If the skull fracture level is not equal to 2, 
the image cannot be used in detection of IML due to either 
an inappropriate scan position or a serious fracture in the 
skull. Examples are the top and bottom slices in Figure 4. 
After skull fracture inspection, all images with F2 are 
removed from the slice subset. 
Based on clinical experience, CT slices with larger 
intracranial area generally contain more information for 
IML detection. Hence, in the third step of the SSA 
algorithm, the intracranial area is calculated and sorted for 
all remaining slices. After skull fracture inspection, every 
CT image should contain only two dark regions, which are 
separated by the detected skull. An example is the middle-
right image in Figure 4. In order to calculate intracranial 
area, the intracranial region has to be distinguished from the 
region outside of the skull. This can be achieved using the 
coordinate of the skull’s mass-center. The image moment 
mpq of the order p+q can be defined as below,  
,      (p = 0,1;q = 0,1)
j
i
=
m
n
1
j
m
1
i
ij
q
p
pq 




              (1) 
where 
ij
  with the value of either 1 or 0 represents the 
intensity of the element at the ith row and jth column in the 
detected skull matrix . The coordinate of the mass center (x, 
y) of the identified skull can be obtained by  








00
01
00
10
m
m
y
m
m
x
                                         (2) 
Thus the region containing the coordinate of the skull mass 
center (x, y) is the intracranial region. The intracranial area 
of all remaining slices is calculated and sorted in descending 
order. The first  slices with larger intracranial areas are 
selected as the candidate slices for IML detection. This 
number of  is a variable that depends on the number of 
slices for one patient or on physician’s requirement. In this 
work, we choose =3 candidate slices for the detection that 
follows. 
 
 
2.2    Ideal midline detection  
 
Figure 5.  Flow chart of ideal midline detection 
After slice selection is performed using SSA algorithm, 
all candidate slices are appropriate for IML detection. Ideal 
midline detection consists of an exhaustive search as well as 
falx cerebri and protrusion detection, as shown in Figure 5.  
To find the approximate IML, we use the exhaustive 
symmetric position search algorithm, which was developed 
in a prior work by our research group [9]. The row 
symmetry is defined as the difference in distance between 
each side of the skull edge and the current approximate 
midline. The CT image is rotated around the mass center of 
the skull, which is calculated by (2). The symmetry cost S 
of the image at each rotation angle  is calculated as the sum 
of all row symmetry in the resulting image as follows.  



m
1
i
i
i
r
l
S =
                                     (3) 
where m is the number of rows in the image with the 
rotation angle   (in this study ; -45º< <+45º) and measures 
li and ri are the distance between the edge of the skull on the 
left or right side, respectively, and the current approximate 
midline at the ith row. More details can be found in [9]. 
Finally, the rotation angle  with the minimum symmetry 
cost S determines the rotation direction of the midline of 
the brain on each particular CT slice.  
)
k
],  (1
S
,
S,
argmin[ S
θ
kl
k
k
kj
k









2
1
         (4) 
where k is the rotation angle of the midline on the kth slice 
and 
kl
S is the symmetry cost of the kth slice at the rotation 
angle kj. Then, the kth candidate slice is calibrated to the 
vertical direction by rotating the skull by -k angle. 
In addition, the accuracy of approximate IML can be 
improved by utilizing other features of the skull and the 
brain. Thus, following the approximate IML estimation 
using exhaustive search, brain anatomical features, such as 
the position of the falx cerebri and protrusion of skull bone, 
are used to refine the position of the IML. Here, we use the 
algorithm proposed in our previous work [9, 10]. The falx 
cerebri is a strong arched fold of dura mater that descends 
vertically in the longitudinal fissure between the left and 
right cerebral hemispheres. In this work, we use edge 
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

detection method and Hough transform to execute the 
detection. Additionally, a bone protrusion located in the 
anterior section of the skull is used in the refinement. To 
locate the lowest point of the protrusion curve, the 
derivative of the curve is calculated in a limited 
neighborhood area (10-15 pixels in this work). The local 
minimum point a is determined by  
( x )]
w)
( x
w)
( x
argmax[
x
x
a
 





2
     (5) 
where the function 
( x )
 is the extracted curve of the 
interior bone edge and w is the neighborhood width. Using 
the detected falx cerebri and the bone protrusion, we can 
obtain the refined rotation angle φk of the midline in the kth 
slice. Therefore, the rotation angle for the kth slice should 
be k=k+φk.  
It is worth notice that those obtained rotation angles may 
be different for different slices. However, since the patient 
usually keeps the same gesture during CT scan, the slices in 
one CT scan should have the same rotation angle. In order 
to fully consider the connection among slices, we use a 
global rotation angle  given by (6). 
],  
, ,
,
median[

 



2
1
                      (6) 
As shown in (6), it is the median value of the rotation angles 
of all  slices after CT slice selection. 
Lastly, each slice is calibrated to the vertical direction. 
Therefore, during the IML detection process, the IML is 
centered by the mass center of the skull and rotated by an 
angle of – from the original position in the slice. 
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
The SSA algorithm is primarily based on the 
anatomical characteristics of the skull and closely simulates 
the process of manual CT slice selection and decision 
making in IML by physicians. In our database, all CT slices 
selected by the SSA algorithm have been found to be 
acceptable for IML detection by physician’s approval. 
Result of the IML detection is displayed in Figure 6. It can 
be noticed that the detected IML is accurately located in the 
middle of the skull. Additional, the direction of the skull is 
calibrated by moving the IML to vertical direction. 
 
 
Figure 6.  The ideal midline detection on a candidate slice selected by the 
SSA algorithm. (a) Original CT slice, (b) ideal midline is detected and the 
skull direction is calibrated. 
This database contains original 1762 axial CT scan 
slices acquired across 40 patients with cases of both mild 
and severe Traumatic Brain Injuries (TBI). Collaborating 
physicians manually labeled the IML. With a strict 
definition of accuracy, which is an allowed error of three 
pixels in the horizontal direction and 2 degrees of the 
rotation angle, accuracy of our algorithm is 91.6% and the 
mean value of the error  in horizontal direction is only 2.4 
pixels as shown in TABLE I. 
We have evaluated our method using a previous work 
designed by some authors of this paper [9] as baselines. 
With the same criteria, the accuracy of this work is 6% 
higher and the mean value of horizontal error is 17% 
smaller than the method in [9].  
 
TABLE I.  
COMPARISON ON THE ACCURACY OF IML ESTIMATION 
Method 
Our method 
Method in [9] 
Number of patients 
40 
40 
Accuracy 
91.6% 
85.7% 
Mean value of error δ 
2.4 
2.9  
 
The improvement on accuracy shows that the 
implementation of global rotation angle after IML detection 
greatly enhances the accuracy on skull rotation calibration 
by fully considering the connection among slices. 
IV. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK 
In this work, we developed a system with the 
combination of the SSA algorithm and the ideal midline 
(IML) detection process to identify the IML using CT scans 
of patients with head injuries. The proposed SSA algorithm 
is used to closely simulate the process of manual selection 
of CT slice by physicians. Fully considering the symmetry 
of the skull and anatomical features, IML detection 
algorithm with the adjustment of global rotation can 
accurately identify the IML on the candidate CT slices 
selected by the SSA algorithm. The obtained results show 
high accuracy (91.6%) and a potential for the system to be 
implemented in clinical settings. In the future, more work 
can focus on the actual midline detection which is the 
shifted midline after brain injury or illness. Then IML 
detection can be used the midline shift estimation which is 
one of the key index in TBI assessment in clinical practice. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Faul, L. Xu, M. M. Wald, and V. G. Coronado, 
―Traumatic Brain Injury in the United States: Emergency 
Department Visits, Hospitalizations and Deaths, 2002-2006,‖  
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Center 
for Injury Prevention and Control, Atlanta, GA, USA, 2010. 
[2] J. S. Broder, ―Head computed tomography interpretation in 
trauma: a primer,‖ The Psychiatric Clinics of North America, 
vol. 33, 2010,  pp. 821–854. 
[3] Q. Hu and W. L. Nowinski, ―A rapid algorithm for robust and 
automatic extraction of the midsagittal plane of the human 
120
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

cerebrum from neuroimages based on local symmetry and 
outlier removal,‖ NeuroImage, vol. 20, no. 4, 2003, pp. 2153–
2165. 
[4] G. Ruppert, L. Teverovskiy, C. Yu, A Falcao, and Y. Liu. ―A 
new symmetry-based method for mid-sagittal plane extraction 
in 
neuroimages,‖ 
IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Biomedical Imaging: From Nano to Macro, 2011, pp. 285-
288. 
[5] C.C. Liao, F. Xiao; J. Wong, and I. Chiang, ―A simple genetic 
algorithm for tracing the deformed midline on a single slice of 
brain CT using quadratic Bezier curves,‖ Sixth IEEE 
International Conference on Data Mining Workshops, 2006, 
pp. 463-467. 
[6] R. Guillemaud, P. Marais, A. Zisserman, B. McDonald, T. J. 
Crow, and M. Brady, ―A three dimensional mid sagittal plane 
for brain asymmetry measurement,‖ Schizophrenia Research, 
vol. 18, no. 2, 1996, pp. 183–184. 
[7] W. Chen, R. Smith, S. Y. Ji, K. Ward, and K. Najarian, 
―Automated ventricular systems segmentation in brain CT 
images by combining low-level segmentation and high-level 
template matching,‖ BMC Medical Informatics and Decision 
Making, vol. 9, 2009, pp. S4. 
[8] R. M. Haralick and L. G. Shapiro, ―Computer and Robot 
Vision,‖ Volume I, Addison-Wesley, 1992, pp. 28-48. 
[9] W. Chen, R. Smith, S.Y. Ji, and K. Najarian, ―Automated 
segmentation of lateral ventricales in brain CT images‖ 
Bioinformatics 
and 
Biomedicine 
Workshops, 
IEEE 
International Conference , 2008, pp. 48-55. 
[10] W. Chen, A. Belle, C. Cockrell, K. Ward, and K. Najarian, 
―Automated 
Midline 
Shift 
and 
Intracranial 
Pressure 
Estimation based on Brain CT Images,‖ J. Vis. Exp., vol. 74, 
2013, pp. 3791-3871 
 
121
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

