Mobility platform for video content with Augmented Reality 
Ángel García Crespo, Israel González Carrasco, José 
Luis López Cuadrado 
Computer Science Department 
Universidad Carlos III de Madrid 
Leganes, Spain 
acrespo@ia.uc3m.es, igcarras@inf.uc3m.es, 
jllopez@inf.uc3m.es  
Carlos Celorrio, Álvaro González 
Planet Media Advanced IT Solution 
C/ Torrelaguna, 77 
Madrid, Spain 
carlos.celorrio@planetmedia.es, 
alvaro.gonzalez@planetmedia.es
  
Abstract— Augmented reality is to include multimedia 
elements in real images captured from the real world. 
Nowadays mobile devices allow visualizing of high quality 
multimedia elements and processing video, images and 
information like a personal computer.  The inclusion of 
augmented reality applications in the mobile devices is 
growing but so far it has not been massively exploded. 
Developing games is one of the major applications of this 
technology. Gymkhanas, guided tours or treasure hunts are 
funny games that can be improved by the application of AR. 
However there are not tools that allow the final users for 
developing their own games. This paper presents an ongoing 
work that aims to develop an online framework for creating 
augmented reality games for mobile devices which allows the 
user for creating their own games sharing them with other 
people. The application of this tool will not be only focused 
to gaming: training programs, fire prevention or guided 
tours could be developed in an easy way. 
Keywords- Augmented Reality, Developing Tool, Mobile 
Devices, Games 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
The Augmented Reality (AR) technologies are being 
integrated gradually into mobile devices, enabling the 
creation of increasingly sophisticated games and other 
useful applications for day to day. From the point of view 
of video games different proposals aimed at introducing 
real game virtual items has been developed. However, the 
authors didn’t find an approach that allows the user to 
define their own game, in their environment and their own 
goals, and simultaneously seek interaction with users of 
different devices. 
In addition, consumers of digital media content in the 
form of games are usually accustomed to playing on 
scenarios and pre-defined objectives. AR allows the use 
of related real spaces for users to define different stages of 
a game. Although there are games that take advantage of 
these real spaces, there is not a tool that facilitates the user 
to create their own game without having deep technical 
knowledge. The 
approach of 
this 
technology to 
the 
user opens the ability to benefit from the advantages of AR 
in everyday situations, either as a game or, as already 
mentioned, for 
the 
definition 
of simulation and 
guides. Besides the creation of an online tool enables 
collaboration of multiple users from different locations and 
facilitates the publication and access to content through a 
web server. On the other hand, a tool for development this 
type of games will to facilitate to companies the creation 
of content for mobile devices and the possibility of quick 
development of AR-based games.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Augmented reality consists of expanding the reality 
captured by image information 
generated by 
computer. The areas of application of this technology 
are very different but the content creation tools for these 
technologies are usually single-user desktop applications. 
Originally virtual reality was used as a technique for 
rehabilitation in different areas. Thus, Wilson and others 
assert that the main benefits of applying these techniques 
involve the ability to create activities in a simulator, 
without the limitations imposed by their disability, to 
allow the people with disabilities to perform them safely 
[2]. For example, such exercises can be simulated in a 
kitchen without the dangers associated with it (fire, etc.). 
There have been various approaches to therapy based on 
virtual reality, e.g. Jack et al. propose a virtual reality 
system in which the patient can perform the exercises 
from two gloves that allow interaction with the system 
[3]. 
Furthermore, AR presents a promising future, being an 
emerging 
technology 
with 
interesting 
potential 
applications in many domains. Among them, the 
entertainment, and more specifically the videogame, takes 
an important place. This alternative is conceived as 
computer software created for entertainment in general 
and based on the interaction between one or more persons 
with an electronic device that runs the game. The video 
game market is one of the emerging sectors of the 
communications industry and entertainment, exceeding its 
sales to the cinema in some countries [4]. Taking these 
data into account it is understandable that companies are 
betting in a clear way for AR in this field, since this 
technology offers very attractive possibilities for end 
users 
Despite the global crisis the fall in sales in Spain is 
below than the rest of Europe [4]. In this sense in recent 
years, AR has made its way into the game technology, 
thanks in large part to the great evolution of gaming 
311
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

technology and the great competition among the 
companies. The inclusion of reality factor in the computer 
image makes the exercise gain in credibility for the end 
user compared to the previous solutions based solely on 
virtual reality. Today there are increasing examples of 
commercial video games based on this technology. Global 
dimension 
companies 
such 
as 
Sony 
Computer 
Entertainment 
with 
Invizimals 
[1] 
have 
made 
contributions to this technology for different consoles 
platforms. Other attractive AR solution developed for 
mobile devices is Can You See Me Now? of  Blast 
Theory [6]. This is an online game of persecution on real 
streets of different cities based on locations obtained from 
GPS devices. Another important project was the Project 
ARQuake [7], adaptation of the popular video game to be 
played in real locations. Even newly emerging platforms 
such as Android or iPhone begin to take advantage of AR 
to provide the end user a different experience and 
advantageous. An example is Wikitude World Browser 
which allows from an Android device plan trips and find 
content of interest about the user's environment through 
information from Wikipedia and Qype [8]. Finally, 
Augmentizer for iPhone provides information of reality 
through labels that identify points of interest (POI) via the 
mobile phone [9]. 
Regarding the generation of AR-based effects, there are 
several tools that will facilitate the creation of 
applications and tools with these features. With these 
toolkits, developers will be able to comprehensively 
implement AR experiences, from initial concept or idea to 
final product delivery. Atomic [10] is a tool that allows 
you to define patterns that will be recognized from the 
image of a webcam to be replaced by virtual images. 
Similar tools asDart [11] 
or BuildAR [12] or 
programming libraries like OSGART [13] facilitate the 
creation of AR-based effects that can be integrated in 
other projects and applications, enabling integration of 
software architectures under the same solution. However, 
none of these tools allows online development with the 
collaboration of multiple users. 
With respect to existing devices, an essential 
component of AR is the camera. Currently, over 30% of 
the installed PC has a webcam. In 2008, the web camera 
market was valued at 1,500 million euros, and forecasts for 
2015 are to achieve a growth of over 2,500 million. 
Laptops manufactured in recent years, incorporated in 
most cases a web camera. Moreover, all 3G-based mobile 
phones have video cameras. The latest generation of 
consoles (Xbox 360 with Kinect, Play Station 3 with the 
move motion controller, Wii ...) allows the acquisition and 
use of webcams. The new generation of consoles, 
including portable (e.g. Nintendo 3DS, PSPgo, PSP-3000, 
and iPhone4 and Sony Ericsson Xperia Play), also 
included standard video cameras. The functionality and the 
use of these webcams is very limited, sticking exclusively 
to the videoconference and to take pictures, but the number 
of webcams installed is very significant, with expected 
growth in coming years. This is a great opportunity for the 
application of AR to enhance the appearance of new 
applications and services based on these devices, since this 
technology is based precisely on the capture and image 
processing for generating real-time image synthesis 
seamlessly integrated with reality. 
III. 
PROPOSED SOLUTION 
A. INTRODUCTION 
The aim of this research is to develop an online 
platform to for creating AR games which requires the 
interaction between mobile devices. It is a complex 
system that requires the development of complex 
components that must be integrated together. 
AR is to introduce virtual reality elements into real-
world images, providing additional information. This 
technology has been applied in the video-games area 
offering advanced video-games. The evolution of mobile 
devices has opened a new world of possibilities in the 
creation of AR applications: from guides of museums to 
driving 
assistants. 
The 
bandwidth 
of 
mobile 
communications to the Internet grows with the technology 
of the new devices, allowing the reception of data in 
reasonable time and providing with more possibilities of 
communication 
and 
processing. 
However, 
the 
technologies of the mobile devices are heterogeneous and 
most of the developments are device dependents. 
The development of the components required for the 
execution of games in mobile devices is direct 
consequence of the requirement of probe that the 
proposed development framework works properly. 
The proposed technology will allow users without 
technical knowledge for the development of personalized 
games. The games developed are not restricted to leisure 
aims: it can also be used as professional training in role-
playing or simulation (especially simulation of situations 
of risk), or as an assistant for mobility. Thus a simulation 
of the evacuation of a building in a fire emergency could 
be defined. Each player with a mobile device with a 
camera could visualize the images of the place in which 
the game is played. From the central server, each player 
would receive the information about virtual obstacles or 
hints about the best way to go. 
Achieving the aims of this research implies the 
validation of the idea of an operative framework as is, as 
well as the establishment of the basis for the development 
of a generic technology for defining AR video-games that 
allows the integration of several players with different 
devices in the same activity guided by the rules of the 
game. It allows the user for taking part in a real-time 
collective game without technological restrictions. 
B. FRAMEWORK ARCHITECTURE 
This project is based on creating a platform for 
developing and publishing online games based on AR. The 
aim of the game defined could be different than 
312
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

recreational purposes: as mentioned, it can be used for 
simulation exercises or tests emulating risk situations 
difficult to obtain in the real world. 
As shown in the literature review, there are games 
based on the movement in a defined environment. 
However, these games are invariables, meaning that either 
the goals or the field must always be the same. While there 
have been found development frameworks for AR, they 
are not intended for non-technical users or developments 
in an online platform where multiple developers can 
participate.  The other feature of the game is that a 
director, in real-time, is interacting with the players to lead 
the achievement of the objectives of the game. 
The main components of this framework are depicted 
in Figure 1. The main feature of the games is that they will 
be directed from a central computer via a game server 
component from which the information is sent to various 
players involved in the game. Players, with heterogeneous 
mobile technology, will capture images of where they are. 
Through cameras that incorporate such devices. The 
elements that are defined for the game, and other elements 
the director of game want to send, will be included in these 
images by means of the mobile client component. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  General architecture: components of the complex system. 
 
The demonstration of the validity of the proposed 
framework will be made on a game server component, 
which will include an element of control for the game 
director, and a client component of the game for Android 
platforms. Figure 2. depicts the sequence of game 
definition from a set of base components. 
The development framework will be based on a Model 
Driven Architecture (MDA). The foundation of this 
architecture lies in the definition of the games in a device-
independent way, so that performance on specific devices 
will be based on the interpretation of the generic definition 
of the game. It will allow the execution of games in several 
existing platforms as well as future platforms, by means of 
specific components for each architecture. Furthermore, 
modelling each game in a device-independent way 
facilitates the creation of different generic components that 
can be used for different games on different platforms. It 
will also ease the process of setting up each game without 
device-dependent considerations. 
 
Figure 2.   Process for defining the game (device-independent) 
 
C. OPERATION STEPS 
1. The first step is to define the scenario in which the 
game will take place. Since the game can be defined 
in the place that the user decides, it is necessary to 
establish a set references that can be used later to 
define virtual elements on them. 
2. After obtaining the images and / or geographic 
positions in which the elements of the game will be 
introduced, the user will enter this information on the 
game development tool. With this tool, the user 
defines different virtual items to be entered into the 
game and which ones are the goals of the game (get to 
a certain point, find a certain number of elements, 
etc.). 
3. Once the game has been defined, the execution 
module will register the devices that will participate in 
the game and establish the communication between 
them. The defined game is loaded in the game control 
server. Each device read the model by means of the 
execution component. This component adapts the 
independent model to the specific device in which it 
will be executed. From that moment, the devices will 
send their GPS position and will receive the elements 
defined based on their position. 
4. The master of the game, from the control tool, could 
monitories the position of the players. 
5. In real time, the master of the game can sent messages 
and other non previously defined elements to the 
players. In this way the game is more dynamic and 
can be adapted by the master to unexpected situations.  
 
The communication between devices is done through a 
network connection, either wireless or mobile phone 
connections, depending on the characteristics of the 
device. Initially there are no restrictions, except that 
313
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

technical analysis or further field tests determine 
significant constraints on the connection requirements. 
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper has introduced the work in progress on a 
novel framework for developing games based on mobile 
technologies and AR. The impact of the proposed 
framework in the market is twofold: on the one hand it can 
become a professional development tool for providers of 
mobile services; on the other hand a restricted version 
aimed at home users can created their own games. 
Moreover, the component for defining the games will 
bring the creation of AR-based content to users without 
much knowledge of computers, so they can create their 
own games in the environment they prefer without having 
deep knowledge about 3D technology, AR and, of course, 
without any programming. 
The nature of this research is clearly horizontal because 
this technology is not only focused on games based on AR 
but also it can be applied as discussed to create simulations 
that allow training evacuation plans, defining guided tours 
including POI information, or including advertising 
elements. In short, the platform opens a new world of 
possibilities for creating AR content and for its distribution 
in mobile devices with heterogeneous technologies. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Animalz, http://petz.es.ubi.com/ (Last visited 31/05/2010). 
[2] Wilson PN, Foreman N, Stanton D., Virtual reality, disability and 
rehabilitation. Disability and Rehabilitation, 19(6):213-20. 1997. 
[3] Jack, D., Roian, R. Merians, A.S., Tremaine M., Burdea, 
G.C., Adamovich, S.V., Recce, M. and Poizner H. Virtual 
Reality-Enhanced Stroke Rehabilitation. IEEE Transactions 
on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, 9(3): 
308-318. 2001. 
[4] Asociación Española de Distribuidores y Editores de 
Software de Entretenimiento. Balance económico de la 
industria 
del 
videojuego. 
http://www.adese.es/pdf/dossier_prensa%20_balance_econ
omico_2009.pdf (Last visited 31/05/2010). 
[5] INVIZIMALS: http://www.invizimals.com/ (Last Visited 
31/05/2010) 
[6] Can 
You 
See 
Me 
Now?: 
http://www.blasttheory.co.uk/bt/work_cysmn.html 
(Last 
visited  31/05/2010). 
[7] ARQuake: http://wearables.unisa.edu.au/projects/arquake/   
(Last visited 31/05/2010). 
[8] WIKITUDE 
WORLD 
BROWSER: 
http://www.wikitude.org/wikitude-ar-guide (Last visited 
31/05/2010) 
[9] AUGMENTIZER:  http://augmentizer.net  (Last visited 
31/05/2010). 
[10] ATOMIC: http://www.sologicolibre.org/projects/atomic/es/ 
[11] DART: 
http://www.cc.gatech.edu/dart/ 
(Last 
visited 
31/05/2010) 
[12] BUILDAR: http://www.hitlabnz.org/wiki/BuildAR (Last 
visited 31/05/2010) 
[13] OSGART: http://www.artoolworks.com/community/osgart/ 
(Last visited 31/05/2010). 
 
314
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

