Integrating Crime Data by the Use of  
Generic Data Models  
 
Dirk Frosch-Wilke  
Institute of Business Information Systems 
University of Applied Sciences Kiel 
Kiel, Germany 
e-mail: dirk.frosch-wilke@fh-kiel.de 
Lennard Scheffler 
Graduate of  
University of Applied Sciences Kiel  
Kiel, Germany 
e-mail: l.scheffler@online.de 
 
Abstract. Effective and efficient crime data analysis can facil-
itate police work and could increase success rates in crime 
fighting and crime prevention (e.g. predictive policing). Rele-
vant crime data are usually stored in various heterogeneous 
systems within different police organizations and other feder-
al agencies. For this reasons many crime fighting agencies are 
eager to build Data Warehouse Systems for integrating crime 
data and providing a single data source for crime data analy-
sis and crime data mining. But these Data Warehouse pro-
jects are often faced with data quality problems due to in-
complete integration of relevant crime data. The reason for 
this is often the variety, variability, and granularity of crime 
data in different IT-systems and the inflexibility of the data 
models used in Data Warehouses to handle these complex 
data characteristics. In this paper we apply concepts of Ge-
neric Data Modeling and Data Model Patterns in order to 
build data models for crime data which allows complete and 
consistent integration of crime data in Data Warehouses.  
Keywords-Relational Data Modeling; Data Warehouse; 
Generic Data Modeling; Police Data, Data Model Pattern 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The research about Business Intelligence and Data 
Warehousing focused mainly on business [1]. However, 
the knowledge about how to integrate and analyze data is 
portable to other contexts. Especially the public sector that 
stores and manages many different data has now taken 
advantage of Business Intelligence concepts [2], [3], [4]. 
This work deals with how to provide high quality data 
models for the police context. Even though many police 
departments have noticed the benefit of data analysis, they 
often suffer from insufficient data integration and analysis 
options. Though the reasons for this are sometimes project 
specific, a more general reason is the quality of the data 
models especially in the crime fighting sector. Therefore 
this paper particularly deals with how to develop flexible 
and solid data models in order to integrate crime data from 
various sources on the long run.  
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we 
shortly describe the Application Domain. Section III pro-
vides the theoretical background for data model patterns as 
well as for Generic Data Modelling and thereby describing 
the Knowledge Base of our research. 
In Section IV we present some of our design artifacts 
for high quality crime data models as well as the evalua-
tion of these artifacts. The paper ends with a conclusion 
and  prospects regarding further research activities. 
II. 
APPLICATION DOMAIN 
Even though this research results in abstracted data 
model solutions that can be applied to various projects and 
contexts regarding to the police domain, the starting point 
has been a data warehouse project of some federal police 
department in Germany. Since the year 2012 both, the 
Business Intelligence Competence Center (BICC) as well 
as the Business Intelligence department of the federal IT-
service provider maintain a data warehouse system in 
order to support strategic and operational crime fighting 
activities. This system is based on Inmon’s enterprise 
architecture [1] running on an Oracle database system. It 
integrates various operational data sources into a relational 
core area and provides different multi-dimensional data 
marts for analysis purposes. Outcomes can be visualized 
ether in charts, crosstabs or geographical maps. This sys-
tem especially in terms of standard reporting is used by 
police officers as well as management and controlling.  
The challenge of this project is to build flexible and 
consistent data models, which allow to easily integrating 
existing data sets as well as new kinds of data. The crime-
fighting sector stands out due to a huge amount of differ-
ent data. This means, documenting a criminal case brings 
up varying entities and objects depending on the particular 
circumstances. Thus, examining a single case, the amount 
of data is not down to a large number of similar objects 
but too many objects of different classes, e.g. persons, 
things, locations, actions and so on. For this reason, de-
tailed relationships between objects usually can add most 
of the value for data analysis. Only inquiring objects of 
one class without considering relationships to other enti-
ties will not lead to satisfying results. Summarized, a data 
model for integrating crime data has to care about both, 
providing well-structured objects as well as detailed rela-
tionships that can handle most of possible object correla-
tions.  
Although this is a challenging task on its own, the de-
veloper has to care also about maintaining the data model 
in a flexible way in order to fit future requirements and 
simultaneously lower the complexity towards the end-user. 
Because of different reasons the mentioned project sticks 
to multi-dimensional modeling of data marts, where it can 
be difficult to transform the complex relational core model 
into a valid and high-performance multi-dimensional 
model. In particular, the many n:m-relationships can affect 
the size and complexity of fact tables enormously. Lastly, 
it is not possible to develop data models (neither relational 
nor multi-dimension) without profound knowledge of the 
problem domain. 
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

III. 
KNOWLEDGE BASE 
A. Data Model Patterns 
Back in the beginnings of software engineering in the 
sixties of the last century software development was un-
derstood as an artistic task [5]. Friedrich L. Bauer was the 
first to introduce the idea of a software developer as an 
engineer in 1969 [6]. Since then standardization in meth-
ods, processes, roles and techniques increased by follow-
ing the example of conventional engineering. One of the 
most influential advantages has been the development of 
reusable parts, so called patterns, basically invented by 
Christopher Alexander [7]. While the use of patterns has 
already been known for many years in programming [8] it 
is now assigned to the area of conceptual data modeling 
e.g. by David C. Hay [9] or Len Silverston [10] and has 
been applied e.g. for dimensional modeling to the Data 
Warehouse context [11]. 
In the context of data modeling a pattern is understood 
as a template or guidance for developing parts of a data 
model in order to store data of a certain domain. Every 
pattern is abstracted to be reusable for a class of similar 
problems. Moreover, a pattern consists of three parts. The 
context defines in which condition the pattern can be used. 
The problem describes the challenge that has to be solved. 
Lastly there is an abstract solution, which has to be con-
cretized by the user [12]. The probably greatest advantage 
in using data model patterns is to solve a problem once 
and then apply this solution to multiple data models. This 
leads to a better understanding of data models and de-
creases development costs. Furthermore, high quality 
patterns can highly increase the strength and flexibility of 
data models. 
B. Generic Data Modeling 
The benefits of patterns can increase data model quali-
ty, if the pattern itself is of high quality. To create signifi-
cant data model patterns, there is a need for methodic 
definition. In 2007, Stephan Schneider introduced the 
concept of Generic Data Modelling as methodological 
background [13]. 
Many developers presuppose an adequate grade of 
their data models, which results in insufficient quality 
management. This approach often tempts to cover weak-
nesses of data models, which ends in low quality results. 
On top of that, these vulnerabilities are frequently not 
noticed before trying to embed new requirements. There-
fore, the method of generic data modeling integrates the 
quality management into the process of modeling. Basical-
ly, a developer has to follow eleven rules exceeding 
known strategies like normalization (c.f. table 1). Follow-
ing these rules is one important activity in achieving high 
quality data models. But it is also necessary to separate the 
concepts of nature and roles, which many data modeling 
professionals are lacking [13]. 
 
 
TABLE 1 RULES OF GENERIC DATA MODELING [13, p. 395 
ff.] 
Rule 
Description 
completeness 
The data model represents the 
whole problem domain or the neces-
sary parts. 
correctness 
All data model items are con-
sistent and do not need to be inter-
preted.  
minimality 
The model is free of redundancy; 
no part could be removed without 
losing information content. 
understandability 
The model is significant to the 
reader by using meaningful naming 
for entities, properties and relation-
ships. 
simplicity 
The data model is not unneces-
sarily complex.  
flexibility 
The data model enables easy in-
tegration of changed requirements 
or conditions. 
stability 
The data model offers ways to 
implement changed requirements or 
conditions without changing struc-
ture. 
modularity 
The data model is based on con-
sistent model parts. 
reusability 
Model parts can be adopted di-
rectly or slightly modified to other 
model parts. 
ability for integra-
tion 
Data model parts can be com-
bined to a complete model. 
ability for imple-
mentation 
The data model can be imple-
mented on a database system. 
A simple example may explain both concepts: In the 
problem domain of crime fighting the entities suspect, 
witness, and victim are obvious. A quick and even com-
mon data modeling solution would be to model these three 
as separate entities. But of course these identified entities 
have many common attributes like name, address, date of 
birth and so on. For this reason the abstraction of parts of 
each of these entities to a generalized entity named person 
is possible. Person reflects the nature of the former men-
tioned entities. Understanding these entities as roles of a 
person would complete the data model and make it even 
closer to reality (cf. Fig. 1). Moreover, separating between 
nature and role can help avoiding hidden redundancies. 
This becomes clear while looking at a suspect for instance, 
who is witness in the same record. By using the role con-
cept, it is possible to store the key attributes of the person 
only once and then relate it to its roles. The other way 
would expect to store the person for each of its roles, 
which will expire in data inconsistencies.  
  
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 1. Abstraction by example 
IV. 
DESIGN ARTIFACTS 
The following part of this article explains some of our 
developed patterns for crime data integration within the 
above mentioned project (c.f. Section II). The presented 
data models are not necessarily complete but they build 
the fundamental architecture which allows an easy exten-
sion of the models by following the explained rules.  
A. Characteristics 
One of the main challenges in data modelling for crime 
fighting is the complexity of police work. The key to ef-
fective crime fighting is to store as many facts as possible 
that might be important for solving crime cases. In conse-
quence, crime data is characterized by a very high level of 
granularity and heterogeneity in order to fulfill this re-
quirement.  
The initial data modeling process cannot account for 
every possible fact that might be relevant later on. There-
fore, the data model has to fit abstraction requirements in 
order to store every relevant data in future. Otherwise, the 
limitation of storable attributes for describing a suspect for 
example could end up in bad analytical and crime fighting 
results because of information loss.  
  
Figure 2.  Highly abstracted characteristic pattern 
. 
 
78
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Further on, different operational police applications 
will store different facts depending on their purposes and 
orientation. To be able to integrate all these operational 
crime data as well as to be flexible for integrating new 
criminological relevant characteristics we have developed 
the data model in Fig. 2. 
The data model pattern in Fig. 2 is all about managing 
characteristics and can be applied to many different enti-
ties. It is based on the idea that a characteristic consists of 
attributes, e.g. the color of a car, and its specification, e.g. 
red [14].  
In the pattern’s center there is the CHARACTERISTIC 
representing a property. The CHARACTERISTIC is sepa-
rated into METRIC and NON-METRIC depending on the 
kind of possible specifications. METRIC CHARACTER-
ISTIC is used to manage properties with countable speci-
fication. In order to enable interpretations of distances, a 
METRIC CHARACTERISTIC is optionally related to a 
MEASURE. In contrast, NON-METRIC CHARACTER-
ISTIC can be used to store uncountable measures. To 
avoid hidden redundancies, specifications are stored with-
in a separate entity in this case.  
The attributes VALID_FROM and VALID_TO take 
care of the time aspect of properties. Some properties may 
only be valid for a period of time, especially if they are 
roles. Other properties may be constant in property but 
changeable in specification, which certain timestamps can 
handle as well.  
By using a power type like CHARACTERISTIC 
TYPE it is possible to add categories or hierarchies to 
Figure 3. Cases and their contextual relationships 
 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

store characteristics, which is very useful especially for 
drilling-functions in data analysis.  
By implementing this pattern, a data model can store 
affected entities in a much more flexible way. For exam-
ple, decorating parties (this means persons, organizations, 
etc.) with characteristics enables you to store every single 
important fact about a suspect. This could be the body 
height, hair and eye color as well as clothing or behaviors. 
Every new characteristic can be easily applied by just 
adding a new characteristic type on data level without 
changing the models structure. 
B. Records and Cases 
Our data model about records and cases in Fig. 3 is 
less abstract in terms of different fields of application. 
 
Figure 4. Things pattern 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Nevertheless, it is built out of abstract data model pat-
terns so that it is very flexible within the context of crime 
data.  
A RECORD is the central element of operational po-
lice work. It is the representation of an old-fashioned file 
or document that bundles every relevant items or cases. It 
has no direct crime fighting significance but it is used to 
structure data on a higher level, especially in operational 
work.  
More important for crime data analysis is the CASE 
entity instead. The CASE can be understood as every 
committed criminal action. Because of that, a CASE con-
tains contextual relationships to nearly every other entity 
stored in the whole data model. For this reason, it has to be 
possible to store LOCATIONS as well as PARTIES or 
THINGS depending on their role.  
This kind of modelling is what achieves the needed 
flexibility. By adding roles or entity types one can easily 
expand the model without structural changes.  
We used the characteristic pattern (Fig. 2) within the 
case data model (Fig. 3) in order to store the way of com-
mitting crimes or other properties that might be unknown 
now.  
Different from the characteristic model, this pattern 
mainly adds value by holding relationships instead of 
objects details. As we described in Section II, this is one of 
the key tasks for crime fighting data models. This data 
model allows storing a very detailed view of cases and 
their circumstances. Looking at a case one can extract 
relevant information like e.g. who was concerned, who is 
suspected of having committed an offence, or which things 
were used. This means the CASE entity enables allowing 
getting a full overview of a committed crime. From a 
technical perspective, this gets possible by using contextu-
al roles which allows setting up one single relationship on 
a structural level that can be specified on the object level 
by using role types. Now we can store new kinds of rela-
tionships easily by just adding roles that concretize an 
existing relationship.  
C. Things 
Among the administrative level shown in Section IV B 
one of the main tasks in police work is managing things 
corresponding to a case. This may contain stolen or dam-
aged goods, evidence or anything else. The main differ-
ence between the police and conventional business context 
is that criminological data processing has to be able to 
store nearly every kind of thing at a very high level of 
granularity. Thus, a data model managing things has to be 
very close to the real world. Remembering that one of the 
key steps in data model development is to define the rele-
vant real world cutout, we now have to enable the database 
to store nearly any real world requirement. 
Fig. 4 is an approach of meeting all the mentioned 
goals. In the center of this figure the key entity THING 
representing any possible physical item. To give a glue of 
what a thing can be, the entity exemplarily contains some 
derivatives like WEAPON, VEHICLE or ANESTHETIC. 
Of course, every sub-entity can be specialized further on if 
needed.  
As the police not only deal with single items, the mod-
el has to enable the database to store UNITS. This is to be 
explained by means of an example: Now we can store one 
stolen notebook by using the entity THING as well as a 
whole bunch of stolen notebooks by using the entity 
UNIT. Because both entities are very similar in shaping 
and share many relationships to other entities, they are 
both generalized to OBJECT, which mainly is an expedi-
ent to hold relationships centrally.  
In conventional modeling every sub-entity of THING 
would have to hold its nature properties. Still, this would 
be an acceptable and solid approach. Because of the varie-
ty, it would be hard to predefine these properties as well as 
to decide on the optimal abstraction level. This is why we 
decided to outsource properties of a thing to the already 
introduced pattern of characteristics.  
The THING model is a very good example of how to 
make use of universal data model patterns like characteris-
tics and the strength of generic data models. The model 
stays with conventional modeling and database techniques 
but is also very near to real world requirements. This also 
clarifies that multi-structured data is not necessarily need-
ed in order to add flexibility to data models. 
The THINGS pattern combines detailed object descrip-
tions with many relationships to other entities and the 
fields of application are very wide spread.  
V. 
CONCLUSION 
The concepts of patterns have already been known for 
many years in software engineering. By adopting these 
ideas and transferring them to the process of data model-
ing especially regarding to the police domain, we can 
increase the quality of data models while simultaneously 
decreasing development costs. There is still a need of 
methodological background. The method of Generic Data 
Modeling enables the developer to integrate quality man-
agement into the process of modeling.  
In this paper we illustrated the use of Generic Data 
Modeling in the context of data modeling for crime data. 
Generic Data Modelling allows us to develop flexible data 
models that scale with the agile requirements for crime 
fighting and offer the needed strength to be a solid plat-
form for data analysis at the same time. Referring to the 
use of such a data model for police data warehouse, it 
becomes possible to integrate data from different hetero-
geneous sources easily. Because of the abstraction that is 
based on a target-oriented analysis of the problem domain 
instead of technical requirements this model can perfectly 
be used as a structural protection layer for different data 
marts. 
Further research work needs to deal with demonstrat-
ing the performance of data analysis based on such ab-
stract data models, quantifying the benefits of using pat-
terns for data modeling and transferring Generic Data 
Modeling concepts to other application domains as well.
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Inmon, W. H.: Building the data warehouse, 4th edition, 
Indianapolis (2005) 
[2] 
Hartley, K., Seymour, L.F.: Towards a framework for the 
adoption of business intelligence in public sector organisa-
tions: the case of South Africa, in: Proceedings SA-
ICSIT’11, pp. 116-122 (2011) 
 
[3] 
Kim, G.-H., Trimi, S., Chung, J.-H.: Big data applications 
in the government sector, in: Communications of the ACM, 
Vol. 57, No. 3, pp. 78-85 (2014) 
[4] 
Chen, H. et al.: Crime Data Mining: A General Framework 
and Some Examples, in: Computer, Vol. 37, No. 4, pp. 50-
56 (2004) 
[5] 
Ludewig, J., Lichter H.: Software Engineering, Dpunkt, 
Heidelberg (2010) 
[6] 
Bauer, F. L.: Software Engineering. Wie alles begann, in: 
Informatik Spektrum, Nr. 5, pp. 259-260 (1993) 
[7] 
Alexander, C.: A Pattern Language: Towns, Buildings, 
Constructions. Oxford University Press (1978) 
[8] 
Gamma, E: Design patterns. Elements of reusable object 
oriented software. (1995) 
[9] 
Hay, D. C.: Data model patterns. Conventions of thought, 
New York (1996) 
[10] Silverston, L., Agnew, P.: The data model resource book, 
Indianapolis (2009) 
[11] Schneider, S., Frosch-Wilke, D.: Analysis Pattern in Di-
mensional Data Modelling, in: Kannan, R., Andres, F. 
(ed.): Data Engineering and Management – Second Inter-
national Conference, ICDEM 2010; LNCS Vol. 6411, 
Springer, pp. 109-116 (2012) 
[12] Tešanovic, A.: What is a pattern?, URL: http://st.inf.tu-
dresden.de/Lehre/dpf/IntroductoryPapers/tesanovic-
WhatIsAPattern.pdf, April 24, 2014 
[13] Schneider, S.: Konstruktion generischer Datenmodelle auf 
fachkonzeptioneller Ebene im betrieblichen Anwendungs-
kontext. Methode und Studie. Dissertation. European Busi-
ness School (2007) 
[14] Summerford, J.: Neither Universals nor Nominalism. Kinds 
and the Problem of Universals, in Metaphyica, No. 5, pp. 
101 – 126 (2003) 
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

