Evaluation of Preferred Brightness and Detail Levels in 3D and 2D Images Based on 
HDR Tone Mapping 
 
Zicong Mai, Colin Doutre, Panos Nasiopoulos, and Rabab Ward 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
The University of British Columbia, Canada 
Vancouver, Canada 
{zicongm, colind, panosn, rababw}@ece.ubc.ca 
 
 
 Abstract—High dynamic range (HDR) images provide 
superior picture quality by allowing a larger range of 
brightness levels to be captured and reproduced. Even with 
existing 8-bit displays, picture quality can be significantly 
improved if content is first captured in HDR format, and then 
tone-mapping is applied to convert from HDR to 8-bit, low 
dynamic range format. Tone mapping methods have been 
extensively studied for 2D images.  By varying the tone 
mapping process, the brightness and level of details (i.e., 
sharpness) of the output image can be altered. In this paper, 
we present a study that compares:  i) the preferred level of 
brightness, and ii) the preferred amount of details, of tone 
mapped images when they are displayed in 2D and 3D formats.  
Images at a large range of different brightness and detail levels 
were first generated by HDR capturing followed by tone 
mapping with different parameters. We performed an 
extensive subjective experiment that allowed participants to 
vary the brightness and amount of details in the output tone 
mapped images and select the level they thought gave the best 
visual quality.  The results showed that there is no statistically 
significant difference between the preferred brightness level 
for 2D and 3D content. On the other hand, the subjects 
consistently chose a higher level of details (i.e. a sharper image) 
for 3D images compared to the level of details they thought was 
optimal in 2D mode.  This result indicates that when 
processing 3D content, the image should be sharper than the 
same content viewed in 2D mode for optimal appearance. 
Keywords—3D; high dynamic range; HDR; tone-mapping; 
quality of experience 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
High dynamic range (HDR) images/videos have been 
gaining increasing attention in the past decade because of the 
superior picture quality they are able to deliver. Existing low 
dynamic range (LDR) content allows only a limited range of 
contrast which is far below the capability of human eyes. 
HDR media supports a very large luminance range that is 
comparable to what the human vision systems is able to 
perceive. HDR signals need to be encoded with at least 10 
bits per color component [1], as opposed to LDR signals 
which are represented by only eight bits. Although the 
majority of today‟s displays can support only LDR content, 
they can all provide much better picture quality if the content 
is first captured in HDR and then converted to LDR format. 
Such production pipeline, i.e., shooting in HDR and then 
rendering to LDR, has been gaining increasingly interest in 
movie/television production and high-end photography.  
In order to show HDR content on existing/8-bit displays, 
a process that converts HDR to LDR signals needs to be 
conducted. This process is called tone-mapping. A number 
of tone-mapping operators (TMOs) have been developed 
under different principles [2]-[8]. Combining HDR capturing 
and tone mapping is beneficial even when an LDR display is 
used because they together produce higher quality images 
with much less over and under saturated areas compared to 
the traditional LDR capturing process. In addition, tone-
mapping allows higher degrees of freedom for artists who 
during postproduction can decide the final effect/style of the 
resultant LDR image. 
In a similar manner, the 3D display technology also aims 
at providing viewers with a more realistic visual experience 
by providing a sense of depth. An increasing number of 
theatres and households have been equipped with 3D display 
systems. More 3D content is being produced for satisfying 
the demand of the rapidly growing 3D consumer market.  
Ideally, content could be captured in a 3D HDR 
representation and viewed on a 3D HDR display, to achieve 
a more lifelike picture quality. However, existing 3D 
displays can support only 8-bit LDR content. In order for 
HDR content to be displayed on existing imaging systems, 
LDR signals need to be generated for each view of the 3D 
HDR pair. That is, tone-mapping needs to be applied to each 
view. The fact that tone-mapped images produce less under- 
and over-exposed areas will help the fuse of the 3D depth, 
and the superior picture quality of HDR tone-mapped 
content will also add value to the 3D representation. 
By varying the tone mapping method and the related 
parameters, LDR images with different visual effect can be 
achieved.  In particular, the tone mapping process can adjust 
the brightness and levels of „details‟ in the output images.  
Many tone mapping methods have been developed trying to 
preserve local contrast, which gives images with a greater 
levels of details, i.e., images that look sharper and have 
stronger texture.  Brightness and sharpness/texture have also 
been noted by artists to affect the visual comfort and quality 
of 3D content [10].  In summary, the optimal tone mapping 
parameters may be different for 3D images than those for 2D 
images.  
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

In this paper, we present a study on whether the preferred 
levels of brightness or details are different for tone-mapped 
2D and 3D content. 3D content may need to be prepared in a 
different way from 2D content, in order to provide the best 
possible picture quality. Here, we address the problem of 
identifying the preferred brightness and detail levels for 2D 
and 3D images by performing a set of subjective 
experiments.  
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
describes the experimental setup. Results and discussion can 
be found in Section III. Section IV concludes the paper.  
II. 
EXPERIMENTAL SETUP 
Our study focuses on how the preferred level of 
brightness and the preferred amount of details differ between 
3D and 2D images. “Preferred” means the best depth 
impression for 3D images and the best overall picture quality 
for 2D images. 
A. Image Preparation 
Eight scenes, four indoors and four outdoors, were 
captured in 3D with multiple exposures, and then 
stereoscopic HDR images were generated by blending these 
exposures [10]. These scenes were selected to represent 
different scenarios, such as scenes containing light sources 
and scenes having only reflectance. Fig. 1 shows an LDR 
version of the eight scenes. In order to investigate the effect 
of brightness and the amount of details, 3D images at 
different levels of brightness and with different amount of 
details are generated from the eight HDR images 
respectively.  
To vary the brightness levels in the LDR version with 
consistent effect, we chose to apply the popular photographic 
TMO since it provides a user parameter (key value α) for 
changing brightness. This tone-mapping operator simulates 
the dodging and burning techniques in photographic tone 
reproduction. For each scene (i.e., each HDR image), we 
altered the value of α such that i) 41 LDR images with 
different brightness levels were produced, from very dark to 
very bright, and ii) the difference in the overall image 
brightness between two consecutive levels is as constant as 
possible. Fig. 2(a) illustrates tone-mapped images at different 
brightness levels generated using the above approach.  
To produce different amounts of details in the LDR 
version, we choose a popular TMO based on bilateral 
filtering [5]. This TMO filters an HDR image into a base 
(low-pass) layer as well as a detail layer and then combines 
the modified versions of them to yield its tone-mapped 
image. The original bilateral filtering TMO uses a fixed ratio 
between the base and the detail layers when binding them. In 
our modification, this ratio λ may be changed for adjusting 
the contribution of the detail layer against the base layer as 
can be seen in (1).  
d
b
LDR
L
L
I




 
where ILDR denotes the resulting tone-mapped image. Lb and 
Ld represent the base layer and the detail layer, respectively. 
The effect of changing this ratio λ on the amount of details is 
demonstrated in Fig. 2(b). 
For each of the scenes, four sets of tone mapped versions 
of the screen were created: i) 3D representation with various 
brightness levels, ii) 3D representation at various detail 
levels, iii) 2D representation at various brightness levels, and 
iv) 2D representation at various detail levels. For each 
version, we prepared 41 different levels. In total, there are 8 
(scenes) x 4 (versions) x 41 (levels) = 1312 images in our 
system that have to be evaluated.  
 
Fig. 1. Scenes used in the subjective test. Since HDR content cannot be shown on the paper or most monitors, all the images displayed above are tone-
mapped using the photographic TMO.  
(1) 
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

B. Testing enviorment and procedures 
Eighteen subjects (18 – 38 years old) participated in our 
subjective experiment. All of them had normal or corrected 
vision with no/marginal experience in 3D technology. The 
display device used in our test was a 65” Full HD 3D display 
(©Panasonic, Plasma, TC-P65VT25), which uses active 
shutter glasses. The viewing conditions of our tests were set 
based on the ITU-R Recommendation BT.500-11 [13]. 
Viewers keep having their 3D glasses on when watching 2D 
videos. This guarantees that the brightness reduction is the 
same when watching 3D and 2D videos.  
A secondary display, a 19” 2D screen, was placed closed 
to the viewer, where a graphic user-interface was created for 
subjects to select their preferred image (level) for each of the 
versions. Fig. 3 demonstrates the user interface. A slider bar 
can be found near the center of the interface. The slider 
consists of 41 values and each value corresponds to each 
brightness/detail level. The position of the slider is reset to 
the middle of the bar when a new scene is loaded. Once a 
particular position/value is chosen, an image at the selected 
level (brightness or amount of detail) is updated and shown 
immediately. As the slider is moved from left to right, an 
image will become brighter in the case of evaluating 
brightness versions and will have more details in the case of 
evaluating detail versions. An “OK” button sits below the 
slider and is used by subjects to confirm their selection. The 
selected value on the slider will then be recorded. 
Before the test started, participants were provided with a 
training section which ensures they were comfortable in 
using the scoring interface and had their eyes adapted to the 
viewing conditions. In the test, they were asked to move the 
slider for selecting the preferred images for each version of 
each scene. As stated at the beginning of this section, 
“preferred” means the best depth impression for 3D images 
and the best overall picture quality for 2D images.  
During the test, subjects know in advance the kind of 
image (3D or 2D) to be viewed. The procedure for each 
subject would proceed as follows.  First, a 3D version of one 
scene would be shown to the subject, and he/she would 
adjust the slider on the GUI to select the level of brightness 
they thought gave the best 3D quality.  Then the subject 
would press the OK bottom on the GUI, after which 5 
seconds of grey is shown to allow the subject to rest his/her 
eyes.  Then, the next scene would be displayed and the 
subject would repeat the process.  After the user has done 
this for all 8 scenes, the slider is changed to control the 
amount of detail in the images, while still displaying 3D 
images.  Again the user would adjust the slider to select what 
is thought to be the best amount of details for each scene.  
After the subject has selected the preferred amount of details 
for all eight scenes, the entire procedure is repeated in 2D 
viewing mode. That is, the user first selects what he/she 
considers the optimal amount of brightness for each scene, 
and then selects the optimal amount of details for each scene 
viewed in 2D. 
The time of each test was completely controlled by the 
participants and lasted until they reached their final decision. 
 
(a) 
 
(b) 
Fig. 2. Demonstration of images at different brightness and detail levels: (a) - the scene “Library” at different brightness levels; (b) the scene “ICICS” at different 
detail levels. 
 
 
 
Fig. 3. Illustration of the graphic user interface for subjects to fully navigate 
the psychophysical experiment on their own pace and to select the images at 
the preferred brightness or detail levels. 
 
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Although the time varies depending on the subject, no 
subject took more than 25 minutes to complete a test.   
III. 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
After recording the results from the psychophysical tests, 
we performed statistical analysis on the collected data. First, 
we tested for outliers based on ITU-R Recommendation 
BT.500-11 [13] and in our case no outlier was identified, so 
the data for all subjects were used.   
In order to quantify the brightness and the detail levels 
for the different tone mapped images, we use mean image 
brightness Bimg and mean image gradient Dimg. These are 
defined as:  





m
i
n
j
img
I i j
m n
B
1
1
( , )
1
 







m
i
n
j
img
j
I i
I i j
m n
D
1
1
,1 )
(
( , )
1
 







m
i
n
j
I i j
I i j
n
m
1
1
)1
( ,
( , )
1
 
where I(i, j) denotes the pixel value at the location of (i, j) in 
an image I, and m and n are the dimensions of the image I.   
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
Image index
Mean gradient
 
 
3D
2D
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-1
-0.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Image index
Difference in mean gradient
 
(a)                                                                                              (b) 
 
Fig. 5. Comparison between 2D and 3D images in terms of the preferred detail level: (a) – mean image detail, (b) subtraction of the mean image detail of 
2D from that of 3D images. The horizontal axis denotes the image index, and the image order is the same as Fig. 4. The vertical axis denotes gradient 
value in (a) and the difference of gradient values in (b).  
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
Image index
Mean brightness
 
 
3D
2D
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
-10
-5
0
5
10
15
20
Image index
Difference in mean brightness
 
(a)                                                                                              (b) 
Fig. 4. Comparison between 2D and 3D images in terms of the preferred brightness level: (a) – mean image average, (b) subtraction of the mean image 
average of 2D from that of 3D images. The horizontal axis denotes the image index, and 1 – 8 correspond to 'ICICS', 'MeetingTable', 'LabWindow', 
'Bulletin', 'Stairs', 'SauderBuilding',  'LibraryTree', 'ChemEngEntrance', respectively. The vertical axis denotes pixel value in (a) and the difference of pixel 
values in (b).  
  
(2) 
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

The plot in Fig. 4(a) shows the mean image brightness 
(Bimg) of the preferred 3D and the preferred 2D 
representations for each of the eight scenes (horizontal axis). 
The height of each bar is obtained by first calculating the 
mean image brightness of the preferred level from each of 
the 18 subjects and then averaging these 18 values. A general 
observation is that the mean brightness of the preferred 3D 
images is slightly higher than that of the preferred 2D 
counterparts for all the scenes except scene six (“Sauder”). 
All the mean brightness values fall in the interval between 
115 and 135.  
In order to gain a better understanding of the differences 
between 3D and 2D viewing, for each subject we calculated 
the difference between the average brightness of their 
preferred images in 3D and 2D modes as: 
D
pref
D
pref
B
B
B
,2
3,



 
where Bpref,3D is the average brightness of the image the user 
selected with the slider in 3D mode (their „preferred‟ image), 
and Bpre,f2D is the corresponding average brightness of the 
preferred image they selected in 2D mode.   A positive value 
for ΔB indicates the subject prefers a brighter image when 
viewing in 3D compared to viewing in 2D.  Fig. 4(b) shows 
the difference averaged over the eighteen participants, and 
also the 95% confidence interval for the differences.  It is 
seen that although the average values of seven out of the 
eight scenes are above zero, all of the 95% confidence bars 
cross the zero axis. Therefore, there is no statistically 
significant difference in the preferred brightness level 
between a 3D image and its 2D counterpart.  
The results of the preferred mean image gradient of the 
3D and the 2D representations are shown in Fig. 5(a). Each 
point is the average of the preferred gradient selected by each 
of the subjects for each of the scenes. For all scenes people 
selected a higher level of details in 3D viewing mode 
compared to 2D viewing. Similar to the brightness case, we 
compute the difference in mean gradient between the 
preferred 3D and the preferred 2D images for every single 
subject and every scene. Fig. 5(b) shows such difference 
averaged over 18 subjects for each of the scenes, and the 
95% confidence intervals are also provided. Positive values 
on the vertical axis mean that people favor more details in 
3D images than their 2D counterparts.  It is observed from 
the plot that all the average difference is above zero. 
Moreover, for many of the scenes, the 95% confidence 
interval is either completely (scenes 3, 4, 5 and 6) or majorly 
(scenes 1, 2, 7 and 8) above zero. A reliable conclusion can 
thus be drawn that people prefer a higher level of details (i.e., 
a sharper image with more texture) when viewing in 3D than 
when viewing in 2D. Since our test images cover a wide 
range of content (four indoor and four outdoor scenes), this 
conclusion will hold regardless of the nature of the content.    
This could be explained by the conclusion in Cormack et al. 
[12], that the 3D effect can be improved when the contrast is 
near the visibility threshold. By adjusting the tone-mapping 
process to produce more detail, the 3D effect in image 
regions where the contrast is near the threshold may be 
improved.     
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we studied how different are 3D and 2D 
HDR tone-mapped images in terms of i) the preferred 
brightness levels and ii) the preferred detail levels. Images at 
a large range of different brightness and detail levels were 
generated from high dynamic range capturing followed by 
the tone-mapping process. With such a great variety of 
images, we conducted an intensive subjective experiment 
that allows participants to select 3D and 2D images with 
their preference on brightness and details, respectively. Our 
results show that while people selected slightly brighter 
images in 3D viewing compared to 2D, the difference is not 
statistically significant. However, compared to 2D images, 
the subjects consistently preferred having a greater amount 
of details when viewing in 3D.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
R. Mantiuk, G. Krawczyk, K. Myszkowski, and H.-P. Seidel, 
“Perception-motivated high dynamic range video encoding,” ACM 
Transactions on Graphics, vol. 23, no. 3, pp. 730–738, 2004. 
[2] 
E. Reinhard, M. Stark, P. Shirley, and J. Ferwerda, “Photographic 
tone reproduction for digital images,” ACM Transactions on 
Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 267–276, 2002. 
[3] 
R. Mantiuk, S. Daly, and L. Kerofsky, “Display Adaptive Tone 
Mapping,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), vol. 
27, no. 3, pp. 68–68, 2008. 
[4] 
F. Drago, K. Myszkowski, T. Annen, and N. Chiba, “Adaptive 
Logarithmic Mapping for Displaying High Contrast Scenes,” 
Computer Graphics Forum (Proc. of Eurographics), vol. 22, no. 3, 
pp. 419–426, 2003. 
[5] 
F. 
Durand, 
and 
J. 
Dorsey, 
“Fast 
Bilateral 
Filtering  
for the Display of High-Dynamic-Range Images,” ACM Transactions 
on Graphics (Proc. SIGGRAPH), vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 257–266, 2002. 
[6] 
Z. Mai, H. Mansour, R. Mantiuk, P. Nasiopoulos, R. Ward, W. 
Heidrich, " Optimizing a Tone Curve for Backward-Compatible High 
Dynamic Range Image/Video Compression ", IEEE Transactions on 
Image Processing (TIP), vol. 20, no. 6, pp. 1558-1571, 2011 
[7] 
R. Fattal, D. Lischinski, and M. Werman, “Gradient Domain High 
Dynamic Range Compression,” ACM Transactions on Graphics 
(Proc. SIGGRAPH), vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 249–256, 2002. 
[8] 
E. Reinhard, and K. Devlin, “Dynamic Range Reduction Inspired by 
Photoreceptor Physiology,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and 
Computer Graphics, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 13-24, 2005.  
[9] 
B. Mendiburu, “3D Movie Making – Stereoscopic Digital Cinema 
from Script to Screen.” Elsevier, 2008. 
[10] P. E. Debevec and J. Malik, “Recovering High Dynamic Range 
Radiance Maps from Photographs,” Proceedings of the 24th annual 
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques (Proc. 
SIGGRAPH '97 ), pp. 369-378, 1997. 
[11] ITU-R, "Methodology for the subjective assessment of the quality of 
television pictures," ITU-R, Tech. Rep. BT.500-11, 2002. 
[12] L.K. Cormack, S.B. Stevenson, and C.M. Schor, “Interocular 
correlation, luminance contrast and cyclopean processing,” Vision 
Research, vol.31, no.12, pp. 2195–2207, 1991. 
 
 
 
(3) 
199
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

