Applications of RFID in Incident Management 
 
Amir N. Shamdani 
IT Department, School of Technology 
Purdue University Calumet, USA 
ashamdan@purdue.edu 
Barbara J. Nicolai 
IT Department, School of Technology 
Purdue University Calumet, USA 
bnicolai@purduecal.edu 
 
Abstract – This paper surveys the applications of Radio 
Frequency 
Identification 
(RFID) 
in 
incident 
management to improve the accurate resource tracking 
and tracing functionalities in disaster situations. The 
paper started with an initial discussion on what the 
possible goals working with the active RFID kit (FFID 
Reader + RFID Tags), to provide a solution to monitor 
an object for the purpose of identification and tracking 
using radio waves. Afterwards, Incident Management 
and its role in specifying the response process and 
resource management from the Network Centric 
approach will be determined with an applied approach. 
It is concluded that what would be the process of 
monitoring at any time for Dynamic Information 
Collection to provide a real-time scalable decision 
support framework built on rapid information collection 
using RFID technology. 
   Keywords – RFID; Incident Management; Command 
and Control; Network Centric Paradigm 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) is defined as a 
set of technology that provides network delivered 
information 
services 
dependent 
on 
physical 
object 
identification captured by radio waves. A typical RFID 
system consists of four main components, a tag 
(transponder), a reader (interrogator), an antenna and 
middleware (Computer) [1]. When the tag is in the 
electromagnetic field of RFID antenna the tag‟s presence is 
detected by the reader. The reader is interfaced to the 
middleware using a network cable which displays the 
number of reads on a screen. This entire process can be 
completed with no human intervention hence RFID system 
can be truly automatic. Hence this is the most preferred 
methodology of tracking and tracing objects within and 
beyond the organization‟s borders. 
In incident management, RFID is the use of an object 
(typically referred to as an RFID tag) applied to or 
incorporated into patients, responders, or emergency 
transport vehicles involved in disasters to identify their 
locations and status [1]. RFID is a technology that offers 
huge potential for incident management activities by 
automating processes and providing accurate, trusted data. 
Its unique features include giving each physical object a 
globally unique digital identity read from a distance without 
requiring line-of-sight capability, and often without using a 
battery. These features provide new ways of measuring and 
integrating the real world into information systems. The two 
most talked-about components of a RFID system are the tag, 
which is the identification device attached to the item one 
wants to track, and the reader, which is a device that can 
recognize the presence of RFID tags and read the 
information stored on them. The reader can then inform 
another system about the presence of the tagged items [1], 
[2]. 
Disaster response and recovery efforts require timely 
interaction and coordination of emergency services in order 
to save lives and property. Decisions about the selection of 
new technologies such as RFID to track patients, equipment 
and staff during the response to a disaster require significant 
investment and can provide a real-time scalable decision 
support framework built on rapid information collection and 
accurate resource tracking functionalities. The purpose of 
this paper is to improve managerial decision making about 
the adoption of RFID in incident management. It discusses 
the use of this technology from a managerial viewpoint for 
disaster managers. This paper contains the following 
subjects: 
At first, the RFID Applications and the necessity of 
attention to this technology are defined. Then differences in 
scope and leveling between the terms incident response, 
incident handling, and incident management are determined. 
Section IV introduces resource management concepts. The 
complexity of information age and disaster missions are 
described in section V. Section VI discusses the RFID tag 
readability and Section VII concludes the paper. 
II. 
RFID APPLICATIONS 
The two major areas of significant where this 
technology is used are financial services for IT asset 
tracking and healthcare with more than 60% of the top 
medical device companies using passive ultrahigh-
frequency (UHF) RFID in 2010. RFID use in product 
tracking applications begins with plant-based production 
processes, and then extends into post-sales configuration 
management policies for large buyers. On the other hand, 
logistics and transportation are important areas of 
implementation for RFID technology. For example, yard 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

management, shipping and freight and distribution centers 
are some areas where RFID tracking technology is used. 
Locomotives and rolling stock are equipped with two 
passive RFID tags (one mounted on each side of the 
equipment); the data encoded on each tag identifies the 
equipment owner, car number, type of equipment, number 
of axels, etc. Aerospace applications that incorporate RFID 
technology are being incorporated into Network Centric 
Product Support Architecture [2]. This technology serves to 
help facilitate more efficient logistics support for systems 
maintenance on-board commercial aircraft. 
RFID could also be used to mitigate a wide array of 
logistical challenges such as monitoring evacuees and 
managing the flow of medical supplies in the immediate 
aftermath of major disasters, like an earthquake, to help save 
lives. Researchers found there is a 72 hour „golden‟ rescue 
period following an earthquake during which the efficiency 
of emergency response procedures is key to the rescue 
operation [3]. Particularly challenging, is knowing how 
many people are present in a damaged building or structure 
that needs to be evacuated. In these scenarios, RFID can 
facilitate the dispatch of rescue personnel and provide real-
time information that could be used to organize search and 
rescue missions.  
A real-world example of the value that RFID can 
provide in emergency situations was realized immediately 
following the 7.0 earthquake that struck Port-au-Prince, 
Haiti on January 12th, 2010. As detailed in an RFID Journal 
report, the U.S. Department of Defense leveraged its In-
Transit Visibility (ITV) network to track shipping 
containers as they moved to and from the island. Lieutenant 
Colonel Ralph Riddle, the commander of the 832nd 
Transportation Battalion, in Jacksonville, FL described the 
benefits of ITV network: "From a commander's point of 
view, I'd say that the ITV was critical to the recent aid 
operations in Haiti. This was a very complex mission, with a 
rapid deployment. It's something we don't do every day, but 
we prepare for every day, and the ITV network was 
absolutely critical to its success" [3]. 
As an engineering solution, RFID is best understood as 
technology cluster within the auto ID group of technologies 
(which also includes, for example, barcode and optical 
character recognition). Unlike auto ID, however, RFID has 
no line-of-sight requirement, which means it provides 
wireless unique identification at the item level that can be 
seamlessly retrieved at the group level. RFID systems can 
operate on a stand-alone network of RFID readers and 
collectors or can be imbedded into responder centers‟ WiFi. 
The following illustration, Fig. 1, shows how the RFID 
Software modules connect RFID devices and generic 
sensors with business applications. 
 
Figure 1. Layers of RFID systems. 
The RFID Software consists of the RFID Event 
Manager, the RFID Management Console and the RFID 
Information Server modules. The RFID Event Manager 
gathers information from RFID readers, filters the 
information, and provides the processed information to the 
RFID Information Server module or to a third-party ERP 
system. The integration layer is optional as business 
applications can obtain RFID sensor events through an 
integration layer or directly through dedicated connectors 
[2], [3]. 
III. 
INCIDENT MANAGEMENT 
Historically, people have used the term “incident 
response” and “incident handling” to define the activities for 
tasks and projects of a disaster responder. Consider those 
phrases also too narrow in scope to adequately address the 
wide range of work and services a responder might provide. 
It is shown that although incident handling and incident 
response are part of that work, the range of work that can be 
done actually encompasses a larger set of activities that we 
refer to as incident management [4]. There is a defined 
difference in scope and leveling between the terms incident 
response, incident handling, and incident management. We 
define incident handling as one service that involves all the 
processes or tasks associated with “handling” events and 
incidents. Incident handling includes multiple functions: 
 
 
Detecting and reporting: the ability to receive and 
review event information, incident reports and 
alerts. 
 
Triage: the actions taken to categorize, prioritize, 
and assign events and incidents. 
 
Analysis:  the attempt to determine what has 
happened, what impact, threat, or damage has 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

resulted, and what recovery or mitigation steps 
should be followed. This can include characterizing 
new threats that may impact the infrastructure. 
 
Incident response: the actions taken to resolve or 
mitigate an incident, coordinate and disseminate 
information, and implement follow-up strategies to 
prevent the incident from happening again. 
 
Incident response, as noted in the list above, is one 
process, the last step in incident handling. It is the process 
that encompasses the planning, coordination, and execution 
of any appropriate mitigation and recovery strategies and 
actions. 
 
The term “incident management” expands the scope of 
this work to include the other services and functions that 
may be performed by disaster responders, including 
vulnerability handling, artifact handling, security awareness 
training, and the other services outlined in the service 
management procedures. The definition of this term to 
include this expanded set of services is important because 
incident management is not just responding to an incident 
when it happens. It also includes proactive activities that 
help prevent incidents by providing guidance against 
potential risks and threats, for example, identifying 
vulnerabilities in software that can be addressed before they 
are exploited. These proactive actions include training end 
users to understand the importance of computer security in 
their daily operations and to define what constitutes 
abnormal or malicious behavior, so that end users can 
identify and report this behavior when they see it [4].  
 
Usually as part of the wider management process in 
private organizations, incident management is followed by 
post-incident analysis where it is determined why the 
incident happened despite precautions and controls. This 
information is then used as feedback to further develop the 
security policy and/or its practical implementation. In the 
USA, the National Incident Management System, developed 
by the Department of Homeland Security, integrates 
effective practices in emergency management into a 
comprehensive national framework [4]. 
 
Fig. 2 illustrates the relationship between the terms 
incident 
response, 
incident 
handling, 
and 
incident 
management. Incident response is one of the functions 
performed in incident handling; incident handling is one of 
the services provided as part of incident management [5]. 
 
Information Technology and technological systems 
provide supporting capabilities essential to implementing 
and continuously refining the disaster domains. These 
include 
voice 
and 
data 
communications 
systems, 
information systems (i.e., record keeping and resource 
tracking), RFID technology and display systems [6]. These 
also include specialized technologies that facilitate incident 
operations and incident management activities in situations 
that call for unique technology-based capabilities. Ongoing 
development of science and technology is integral to 
continual improvement. Strategic research and development 
(R&D) ensures that this development takes place. Each 
system should rely on scientifically based technical 
standards that support the nation‟s ability to prepare for, 
prevent, respond to, and recover from domestic incidents 
[5]. 
 
Maintaining an appropriate focus on science and 
technology solutions as we relate to incident management 
will necessarily involve a long-term collaborative effort 
among 
nation‟s 
partners. 
Effective 
communications, 
information management, and information and intelligence 
sharing 
are 
critical 
aspects 
of 
domestic 
incident 
management. Establishing and maintaining a common 
operating 
picture 
and 
ensuring 
accessibility 
and 
interoperability are principal goals of communications and 
information management. A common operating picture and 
systems interoperability provide the framework necessary to 
[4], [5]: 
 
 
Formulate 
and 
disseminate 
indications 
and 
warnings. 
 
Formulate, execute, and communicate operational 
decisions at an incident site, as well as between 
incident management entities across jurisdictions 
and functional agencies. 
 
Prepare for potential requirements and requests 
supporting incident management activities. 
 
Develop and maintain overall awareness and 
understanding of an incident within and across 
jurisdictions. 
Prior to an incident, entities responsible for taking 
appropriate pre-incident actions use communications and 
information management processes and systems to inform 
and guide various critical activities. These actions include 
mobilization or pre-deployment of resources, as well as 
strategic 
planning 
by 
preparedness 
organizations, 
multiagency coordination entities, agency executives and 
jurisdictional authorities. During an incident, incident 
management 
personnel 
use 
communications 
and 
information 
processes 
and 
systems 
to 
inform 
the 
formulation, coordination, and execution of operational 
decisions and requests for assistance [5].  Their goal is to 
restore a normal service operation as quickly as possible and 
to minimize the impact on responder operations, thus 
ensuring that the best possible levels of service quality and 
availability are maintained. 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 2. Defining the relationship between incident response, incident handling and incident management.
IV. 
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
Resource management involves coordinating and 
overseeing the application of tools, processes, and systems 
that provide incident managers with timely and appropriate 
resources during an incident. Resources include personnel, 
teams, facilities, equipment, and supplies. Resource 
management involves four primary tasks: 
 
 
Establishing systems for describing, inventorying, 
requesting, and tracking resources; 
 
Activating these systems prior to and during an 
incident; 
 
Dispatching resources prior to and during an 
incident; and 
 
Deactivating or recalling resources during or after 
incidents. 
 
The basic concepts and principles that guide the 
resource management processes allow these tasks to be 
conducted effectively. By standardizing the procedures, 
methodologies, and functions involved in these processes, 
resources move quickly and efficiently to support incident 
managers and emergency responders. The underlying 
concepts of resource management are that [5]: 
 
 
It provides a uniform method of identifying, 
acquiring, allocating, and tracking resources. 
 
It uses effective mutual-aid and donor assistance 
and is enabled by the standardized classification of 
kinds and types of resources required to support the 
incident management organization. 
 
It uses a credentialing system tied to uniform 
training and certification standards to ensure that 
requested personnel resources are successfully 
integrated into ongoing incident operations. 
 
Generally, preparedness organizations work together in 
advance of an incident to develop plans for managing and 
employing resources in a variety of possible emergency 
circumstances [7]. Resource managers use standardized 
processes and methodologies to order, identify, mobilize, 
dispatch, and track the resources required to support 
incident management activities. Resource managers perform 
these tasks either at a customer request or in accordance 
with planning requirements. Resources are categorized by 
size, capacity, capability, skill, and other characteristics. 
This makes the resource ordering and dispatch process 
within jurisdictions, across jurisdictions, and between 
governmental and nongovernmental entities more efficient 
and ensures that incident management receive resources 
appropriate to their needs. 
V. 
INFORMATION AGE AND DISASTER MISSIONS 
The most effective consequence of Information age 
paradigms is deep changes in various fields including the 
disaster environment. Growing complexity and diversity of 
recent disaster missions, tasks and also methods have 
affected deeply Command and Control (C2) structure [8]. In 
fact, various missions in the disaster atmosphere require 
faster and more flexible plans where the traditional central 
and hierarchical C2 structure is not suitable. It is obvious 
that without dynamic information collection and resource 
tracking there is no guarantee for a smart response to the 
environment change. Also, there is neither agility nor fast 
movements and it is hard to plan complex operations in the 
right place and at the right time. These facts necessitate a 
new paradigm for the C2 and the main decision maker in the 
disaster [8], [9]. The Network Centric approach using RFID 
technology is a good substitution for the traditional C2. In 
this way, various aspects of disaster environments such as 
power transferring to the edge, self-similarity, sense 
making, agility and effectiveness can be achieved more 
easily [10], [11]. Concurrent planning and execution is one 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

of the most fundamental subjects in which there is always 
the opportunity to change, modify and/or heal the plans, 
therefore complex missions can be done. Active RFID is 
now being used to track and trace victims in a disaster 
situation. Each tag generating a message each time when 
passing a reader may be a desired outcome. Some RFID tags 
can be read from several meters away and beyond the line of 
sight of the reader. The application of bulk reading enables 
an almost-parallel reading of tags. Data can be collected in 
real time and made available to emergency workers 
immediately, saving precious hours. Crisis management 
teams, hospitals and other emergency personnel have access 
to the information via a computer database. Hospitals, for 
instance, can start planning for the arrival and treatment of 
disaster victims. The combination of these components will 
result in the creation of a mobile, scalable tool that can be 
rapidly deployed at a disaster scene to enable an offsite 
commander to visualize the location and triage condition of 
the casualties as well as the available resources. This 
information will improve the coordination of the response to 
better match supply (care providers, ambulances, medical 
equipment) with demand (number of patients, level of 
acuity) [12], [13]. 
VI. 
RFID TAG READABILITY AND OPTIMIZATION 
OF RFID SYSTEMS 
For an incident commander, keeping track of resources, 
equipment and products at the scene of an emergency is 
vital. Current performance of RFID systems is highly 
application dependent: tag-reader combinations behave 
differently for different target applications, as well as under 
variations of the environment for a given application. In 
general, successful data transaction between tags and a 
reader with a maximum reading range, and tag read rates (as 
specified by the existing standards EPC Class 0 & 1, ISO 
18000-6A/B, ISO 15693, etc.) with unrestrictive tag 
orientations are the key aspects that measure performance of 
an RFID system [14]. Currently, low frequency and high 
frequency technologies perform reliably, but for ultra-high 
frequency RFID the deployment needs careful tag, reader, 
protocol and environment selection to achieve acceptable 
tracking reliability. The main factors that effect the tag 
readability are type of antenna, height of tag from the 
ground, displacement of tag and distance of tag from 
antenna. RFID system implementation always requires that 
the system be optimized to every application. For 
optimizing the RFID system experiments need to be 
performed to identify the placement, location, orientation of 
tag antenna and other factors which interact with the system. 
The importance of optimization is explained by Ammu [14]. 
He identifies the effect of distance between tag and antenna 
and performs design of experiments to analyze the resulting 
data. The main measurement is the number of reads for 
every experiment and its repetitions. The difference between 
the levels of each factor is also analyzed using statistical 
analysis software. The placement and location of the tag is 
identified using the factorial approach. This approach gives 
an application specific optimization. The RFID system is 
used as a trigger mechanism to a vision system which 
determines whether the object is moving towards or away 
from a particular position. Another similar invention is the 
integration of video surveillance system with the RFID 
tracking system. The calibration of RFID tracking system is 
enhanced by the use of information provided by the video 
surveillance system. Moreover, the calibration of the vision 
system is enhanced by the information of the RFID system. 
RFID systems are calibrated by placing RFID tags at 
visually apparent locations to determine appropriate 
correction factors for use in subsequent RFID locations. 
This invention provides the advantages of RFID tracking 
system and the video surveillance system to overcome the 
disadvantages of either systems or both [14]. 
VII. 
CONCLUSION 
The demand for effective and expediently-made 
decisions is always in vogue. This is not surprising since 
making correct decisions is essential for successful 
operations in many places such as disaster environments. 
Decisions require data to be processed for quality, concept 
and context [13]. The goal of information gathering and 
processing is focused on existing or arising problems. The 
main conclusion of this paper is expanding the network-
centric paradigm allows for access to additional, previously 
unreachable sources of information in addition to physical 
and informatics scopes [15]. One the main points in this 
conclusion is the development of security as well as quality 
of services rendered by trust networks and reliability 
systems using RFID technology. RFID is a non-line-of-sight 
(capable of communicating remotely even when obscured) 
and contact-less (without direct contact between the 
transacting elements) automatic identification technology. 
The identification data is stored on chips that can be 
attached or embedded into products, animals or even 
humans. The tag can be active (with on-board power source) 
or passive (with no power source). These enable robots and 
humans to use passive RFID tags and GPS devices to map 
out a disaster area and send information to a command 
center. While there is a benefit of getting more information, 
the time spent to weigh information for quality, to fuse 
information into concepts, and to package for contextual 
relevance is also increasing. 
VIII. 
REFERENCES 
[1]. Takizawa, O., “RFID-based Disaster-relief System”, National 
Institute of Information and Communications Technology, Japan, 
2005. 
[2]. Kitayoshi, H. and Sawaya, K., “Technical Conditions for 
High-power Passive Tag Systems Using the 950 MHz Band 
(partial report from Information and Communications Council)”, 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, Tokyo, Japan, 
2004. 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[3]. Shibayama, A. and Hisada, Y., “An Efficient System For 
Acquiring Earthquake Damage Information In Damaged Area”, 
The 13th World Conference on Earthquake Engineering, No.1121, 
Vancouver, Canada, August 2004. 
[4]. Chertoff, M., “National Incident Management System 
(NIMS)”, Federal Emergency Management 
Agency, U.S. 
Department of Homeland Security, Washington DC, USA, March 
2010. 
[5]. Alberts, C., Dorofee, A., Killcrece, G., Ruefle, R., and Zajicek, 
M., “Defining Incident Management Processes for CSIRTs: A 
Work in Progress”, USA, October 2004. 
[6]. Gadh, R. and Prabhu, B. S., “Radio Frequency Identification 
of Katrina Hurricane Victims”, USA, 2010. 
 [7]. Atkinson, S. R. and Moffat, J., “The Agile Organization: 
From Informal Networks to Complex Effects and Agility”. 
Washington D.C, USA, CCRP 2005. 
[8]. Alberts, D. S. and Hayes, R. E., “The future of command and 
control”, Washington DC, USA, CCRP 2007. 
[9]. Alberts, D. S. and Hayes, R. E., “Power to the Edge: 
Command Control in the Information Age”, Washington DC, 
USA, CCRP 2003. 
[10]. David, A. S., Garstka, J. J., and Stein, F. P., “Network 
Centric 
Warfare: 
Developing 
and 
Leverage 
Information 
Superiority”, Washington DC, USA, CCRP 1999. 
[11]. Dekker A. H., “A taxonomy of Network Centric Warfare 
Architectures”, 
Systems 
Engineering/Test 
and 
Evaluation 
Conference, Brisbane, Australia, November 2005. 
[12]. Ling, M. and Selvestrel, M., “An Organisation-Oriented 
Agents Approach to Modelling Network-Centric Warfare”. 
SimTecT 2004, Canberra, Australia, 2004. 
[13]. Shamdani, A. N., “Intelligent Net Centric Command and 
Control Architecture Using Cognitive Approach”, The World 
Congress on Engineering and Computer Science (WCECS 2008), 
San Francisco, USA, 22-24 October 2008. 
[14]. Ammu, A., “Effect of Factors on RFID Tag Readability – 
Statistical Analysis”, USA, 2009. 
[15]. Shamdani, A. N., “The Effect of Avicenna‟s Philosophy on 
the Development of Cognitive Architecture for the Network 
Centric 
Command 
and 
Control”, 
The 
International 
MultiConference of Engineers and Computer Scientists (IMECS 
2010), Hong Kong, 17-19 March 2010. 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

