A Study on the Performance Control for Building Façades 
Applied with Patterns of Hanok Openings 
 
 
Seulki Kim 
School of Architecture 
Chonnam National University 
Gwangju, Korea 
selky5@naver.com 
 
Kyoung-Hee Kim 
School of Architecture 
University of North Carolina Charlotte 
Charlotte, NC, United States 
kkim33@uncc.edu 
 
Seung-Hoon Han 
School of Architecture 
Chonnam National University 
Gwangju, Korea 
hshoon@jnu.ac.kr  
(Corresponding Author) 
 
Abstract — This study focuses on window patterns of Hanok, 
Korean traditional residence, and their effects on building 
performance and adaptabilities as building skins. The purpose 
of this study is to investigate the possibility of Hanok patterns 
as a new type of building façade that satisfy both aesthetic and 
the efficiency of building space, and to suggest a new method 
based on Information and Communication Technology (ICT) 
for optimizing the building performance. For this research, a 
variety of Korean traditional window patterns were reviewed 
first, and a typical façade was applied for a comparative 
analysis in aspect of the effect on the building indoor 
environment. In addition, this study examines selected façade 
patterns that could minimize heat loss and make it easy to 
adjust indoor light environment by changing the intervals. ICT 
has played an important role as both a controller for the 
spatial environment and a simulator for evaluating various 
experimental factors; Wireless Smart Sensor Network (WSSN) 
and Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi) have been utilized for adjusting 
configuration of the opening patterns, and popular simulation 
tools like Project Vasari and Green Building Studio (GBS) 
have been used for verification of the feasibility, investigating 
relationship between daylighting capability of proposed skins 
and their energy performance. Finally, building skins 
satisfying both Korean traditional identity and efficiency of 
energy performance are suggested and examined in this study. 
Keywords - Hanok; Korean Traditional Window; Opening 
Patterns; Energy Efficiency; Energy Simulation; Sustainability 
 
 I.     INTRODUCTION 
Modern architecture offers not only aesthetic and user 
experience but also provides indoor environments that satisfy 
various requirements, such as visual and thermal comforts. In 
other words, both design and function should be taken into 
consideration because contemporary man’s demands are 
going to be greatly diversified. Nowadays, building façades 
world-wide look very similar without explicitly presenting 
their identities and tend to focus on simply available form 
and design. Consistent skins mean that they do not offer any 
specific characters responding to country, area, and/or 
building location. This situation causes building users to be 
uncomfortable in the indoor environment.  
Recently, Hanok, which is a Korean traditional residence, 
has received attention by changing people’s awareness 
because Hanok has its own beauty and is environmentally 
friendly [1]. Hanok consists of unique structures and 
components that can accommodate the four seasons of 
Korean climates. In particular, Hanok window is a more 
important component than other elements, and it occupies 
most of the external wall. The Hanok window in this 
research has been developed as control equipment of 
external environment that Korean season is hot and humid in 
the summer and cold and dry in the winter [2]. Figure 1 
shows the scheme of this study that Hanok window can be 
used for new type of façade and increase Energy Efficiency. 
Hanok window also has a completely distinguished design 
and tectonic, consisting of a series of wooden ribs and 
creating unique patterns. 
 
 
The target of the experiment for this study is a general 
office building. A comparative study was carried out 
between an office building with a typical window system and 
one with Hanok window pattern in the study area of indoor 
environment and energy efficiency. Indoor environment 
analysis includes illuminance and insolation and energy 
efficiency includes fuel consumption, carbon emission 
quantity, and heating and cooling load [3].  There are details 
of analysis tools and target factors in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
ANALYSIS TOOLS AND TARGET FACTORS 
Analysis for 
Building 
Performance 
Tools 
Factors 
Project Vasari, 
GBS 
Fuel Consumption, 
Carbon Emission Quantity, 
Heating and Cooling Load 
Autodesk Ecotect, 
Radiance 
Illuminance, 
Insolation 
 
A simulation was carried out by changing the interval 
and the scale of Hanok window pattern ribs. Project Vasari 
Figure 1.  Scheme of the Study 
128
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

and GBS was used to confirm energy efficiency, and indoor 
environment analysis was simulated by Ecotect and 
Radiance. An office modeling unit is a basic form  provided 
from the Project Vasari program with code complied 
construction, located in Seoul, Korea where it has various 
climatic conditions depending on the four seasons.  
 
 
Accordingly, this study suggests the architectural skin 
that is applicable to various climates and also satisfies 
identical design. Simulation tools were used to prove that the 
typical Korea window pattern presented in Section II has a 
positive effect on indoor environment and improves the 
energy efficiency. ICT such as WSSN and Wi-Fi were 
applied with window to do a important role as both a 
controller for the spatial environment and a simulator for 
evaluating various experimental factors as described in 
Section III. All data and contents were then integrated to 
conclude the paper in Section IV. Figure 2 is the flow chart 
of this study. 
 
II.     HANOK-STYLED FAÇADE AND OPENING PATTERNS 
Hanok is Korean traditional residence style and is 
different from western-style housing in structure, space 
organization, and design [4]. However, previous studies on 
Hanok façades are limited in that they focused on improving 
efficiency only or applying design to modern buildings and 
Table II shows those examples. These studies were mostly 
related to replacement materials on finishing materials and 
windows. These existing studies are important, but integrated 
improvement and eco-friendly design of Hanok and Korean 
traditional design elements are also important. 
TABLE II.  
EXAMPLE FOR A STANDARD HANOK DESIGN AND 
EXPERIMENT FOR BUILDING PERFORMANCE WITH HANOK WINDOWS 
Design Alternatives 
for Hanok Window 
Patterns 
  
 
Experimental 
Devices for 
Performance 
Monitoring 
 
 
 
Therefore, the study of Hanok window is needed with a 
holistic integrated design approach because it acts as not 
only a mediator between indoor and outdoor climates, but 
also serves an alternative to suggest the architectural skin 
considering Korea identity and energy efficiency. Hanok 
window physically connects the indoor and outdoor of a 
building and can be a major influence on the indoor 
environment such as lighting, heat gain and ventilation.  In 
the design, various window styles can be selected based on 
client's needs, and this shows a possibility for developing 
new façade typologies with Hanok patterns. 
Hanok window patterns can be configured with different 
typologies according to climate condition, window location, 
function, and size. For example, the grid pattern is interlaced 
by both vertical and horizontal ribs, and formed as 
intersected rectangular shapes. A window graved in the form 
of a flower is called Flower-rib window (Kkot-sal-moon in 
Korean) and many other types also exist such as Wan-ja, Ah-
ja, Beaum-sal, Se-sal, Kyo-sal, Ti-sal [5]. 
TABLE III.  
KOREAN TRADITIONAL WINDOW PATTERNS 
 
 
 
 
 
Grid 
Jeong-ja 
Young-ja 
Wan-ja 
Ah-ja 
 
 
 
 
 
Kkot-sal 
Gu-gab 
Sut-dea 
Gu-ja 
Bit-sal 
 
These names are determined by the number of ribs, size, 
distance between grids, and angle, but the most affective 
element is a form composed by crossed ribs. These 
compositions of window grids play an important role as a 
structural element to support the window and show the 
beauty of window design. Figure 3 is that grid patterns as a 
representative typology of Hanok window is not entirely 
typical in the aspects of vertical and horizontal proportion, 
but they have a 3.6~6.0cm gap in average between grids and 
thickness, width, and angle can be changed by grid types. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Overall Flow of the Study 
Figure 3.  Typical Dimension of the Korean Window Pattern 
129
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

The grid pattern, a typical layout of Hanok window 
pattern was used as the basic form for this study. The number 
of ribs, size, distance between grids, and angle of grid pattern 
were adjusted to find the most ideal pattern for energy 
efficiency and design. The adjusted grid pattern was applied 
to a general office building and simulated to compare its 
performance with a typical office building. 
 
III.     ANALYSIS FOR BUILDING PERFORMANCE      
APPLIED WITH HANOK-STYLED FAÇADE 
A. Methods and Tools 
For this study, Project Vasari, GBS, Ecotect, and 
Radiance were selected for simulation to compare indoor 
environment and energy efficiency of the target buildings 
mentioned on the previous section. Project Vasari uses DOE-
2 as an analysis engine based on American Society of 
Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 
(ASHRAE) standards to input parameters, so it can make 
relatively accurate results from the simulation.  In addition, a 
Vasari model can produce data in gbXML/IFD format and 
compute various experimental settings easily by interlocking 
with GBS; Creating building models and analyzing given 
problems are executed by Project Vasari, and then GBS 
performs building energy analysis in this study [6]. 
For the indoor illuminance, Radiance and Ecotect were 
used to analyze indoor environment. A lighting research 
team at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory has 
developed   Radiance, which is a program to evaluate 
lighting performance. This tool uses a ray-tracing logic 
which starts calculation on the observer's view and 
investigates complicated phenomenon such as reflection, 
curve of lighting and diffusion reflection between object 
surfaces. This program is free for use and can simply be 
plugged into Ecotect.  
Ecotect is developed by Square One Research, Australia, 
and taken over by Autodesk in 2008. This program can 
predict the simulation result simply and make the data 
available for different building performance. This program 
also can estimate various elements such as sun’s radiation, 
natural lighting, air current, heating, shade and shadow, 
building heating and cooling load, and so on, allowing 
designers to use it from the pre-design phase to the design 
development process. The weather tool and the solar tool are 
also provided by Ecotect, and make it possible to interpret 
weather situations and solar movement for loaded building 
models. Analysis data generated by this tool can easily be 
exported to various formats for interlocking with more 
applications [7]. 
 
B. Scope and Detail Levels 
Since there are no specified guidelines about detail levels 
of building models for performance evaluation, Level Of 
Development (LOD) 100 suggested by American Institute of 
Architects (AIA) has been used for modeling in this study. 
LOD 100 is known as an equivalent level of the conceptual 
design in Korea that volume of the building mass and the 
building type are defined and overall modeling process is 
established with fundamental building parameters such as 
area, height, volume, place, axis and so on [8]. In addition, 
this detail level determines not only a type of the project 
ordering as suggested by Integrated Project Delivery (IPD) 
and an initial step for design process with Building 
Information 
Modeling 
(BIM) 
as 
well; 
The 
AIA 
documentation, E202TM-2008, includes all the steps of the 
IPD design process and their detail levels towards BIM [9].  
 
 
This study has utilized LOD 100 as shown on Figure 4, 
because the target for the performance evaluation is not for 
building facility and utilities, but for building façade as an 
architectural component. Then, building performance 
focusing on environmental and energy factors has been 
analyzed with a few alternatives of building skins chosen 
from both a typical curtain wall and Hanok-styled window 
patterns for comparison. 
 
C. Settings and Factors 
First of all, it is important to set up the climate condition 
to perform the building performance in aspect of the building 
skins facing surroundings. The greatest percentage of  people 
on the Earth live in the temperate climate zone along the 
westerly belt, because this warm area has four clear seasons 
caused by ideal solar positions normally distributed between 
20 to 60 degrees in altitude. Korea is also located in a 
temperate climate zone in the middle latitude belt, and Seoul, 
the capital city of Korea, has been selected for analysis, 
because about 40 percent of the office buildings in Korea are 
distributed in this city as shown in Table IV. 
Most settings for simulation, including weather and 
climate factors, were extracted from the database supported 
by official statistics archives such as ASHRAE, and then 
Ecotect and Project Vasari were utilized to import this 
information, run simulations and visualize the results on 
Google Maps directly. Users are able to input standard 
information about any selected area provided by ASHRAE 
anytime in this way. 
TABLE IV.  
DISTRIBUTION OF OFFICE BUILDINGS BY METROPOLITAN 
CITIES IN KOREA (2012)  
 
Seoul 
(40%) 
Busan 
(18%) 
Daegu 
(14%) 
Incheon 
(13%) 
Gwangju 
(8%) 
Daejeon 
(7%) 
No. of 
Office 
140,987 
66,494 
49,462 
47,654 
28,906 
28,999 
Figure 4.  Building Model for Simulation Based on LOD 100 
130
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
 
Figure 5 shows detailed information about the Seoul 
climate illustrated by the weather tool in Ecotect as an 
example. It is easily noticed that temperature and isolation 
are the highest on July 30th and this data can be accepted as 
Summer data. The building modeling for the standard office 
is performed by the standard of LOD 100 and then, various 
types of the building façade including Hanok-styled 
openings have been applied one by one for the same analysis 
process repeatedly. Standard office settings used for 
simulation are shown on  Table V, and they include 
operation hours, lighting equipment schedule, user activity 
level, and heat gain. 
TABLE V.  
DATA TYPES FOR OFFICE BUILDINGS 
Parameters 
Default Values 
Occupancy Schedule 
Common Office 
8am - 5pm 
Lighting/Equipment Schedule 
Office lighting 
6am - 11pm 
People/100 sq. M 
3.5 
People Activity Level 
Standing, Light work, 
Walking 
People Sensible Heat Gain(W/Person) 
73 
People Latent Heat Gain(W/person) 
59 
People Sensible Heat Gain(Btu/Person) 
250 
People Latent Heat Gain(Btu/Person) 
200 
Lighting Load Density(W/sq. ft.) 
1.00 
Equipment Load Density(W/sp. Ft.) 
1.30 
Electrical Equipment Radiant Percentage 
0.3 
Condition Type 
Heated and Cooled 
OA L/S Person 
10 
OA Flow per Area(Cu. M./hr/sq. M) 
3.7 
Unoccupied Cooling Set point 
82 
TABLE VI.  
BUILDING PERFORMANCE FACTORS 
Location 
Seoul, Korea 
Weather Station 
555181 
Outdoor Temperature 
Max:35°c/Min:-14°c 
Floor Area 
3,721㎡ 
Exterior Wall Area 
1,488㎡ 
Average Lighting Power 
10.87W/㎡ 
People 
130 
Exterior Window Ratio 
0.24 
Electrical Cost 
$0.06/kWh 
Fuel Cost 
$1.21/Therm 
 
D. Data Analysis 
This study has suggested four types of grid patterns from 
the most typical Hanok-styled façade for simulation analyses 
in Figure 6. The first type has a general scale with a standard 
rate of proportion between vertical and horizontal ribs [10]. 
This means that a rate of thickness, width and angle of the 
crossed components are exactly the same as the traditional 
form. The second type has prominent vertical ribs instead of 
the original feature which is adjusted to fit in the typical 
curtain wall mostly used for current office buildings. 
 
 
 
 
 
 The next type has increased in depth for horizontal ribs 
that can play a role as building louvers. Various rib rates can 
be selected for both design values and energy efficiencies. 
The last type shows a combined configuration with both 
horizontal and vertical ribs that providesmore possibilities 
for design variation. This type looks very similar to Korean 
Wan-ja or Sut-dea window patterns as shown in Table III, 
and it was assumed that the most ideal composition can be 
found with the analysis procedure suggested in this study. 
Table VII summarizes the simulation results generated by 
GBS and Radiance applications for the above four types. It is 
found that all cases applied with Hanok opening patterns on 
the building façade have relatively better scores than the 
controlled group with a façade type of the general office 
building. Especially, the annual carbon emissions showed the 
biggest difference among these, and Hanok-styled façade 
types seemed relatively helpful for increasing energy 
efficiency in the aspect of cost. This result emphasizes that 
the use of Hanok-styled façade may possibly have 
Figure 5.  Monthly Climinate Data for Seoul 
Figure 6.  Operational Alternatives for Simulation 
131
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

advantages for both the design creation and the building 
performance. 
 
E.  Proposed Performance Control with ICT 
With the above investigation, it turns out that applying 
Hanok window patterns can increase the effectiveness for 
indoor 
environmental 
quality 
and 
energy 
savings. 
Furthermore, proposed patterns will possibly be more 
adaptable to the commercial building façade, if building 
users can control parameters for the grid patterns 
conveniently depending on their design preference or any 
given specific environmental situation. 
ICT can play a important role in this sense, and WSSN 
can be proposed and utilized for adjusting grid intervals 
and/or component scales of the façade. In addition, WSSN is 
applicable with mobile devices like smart phone used by 
most people in daily life. For example, sensors installed onto 
the building receive signals from smart phones, and then 
kinetic façade components are operable for controlling their 
intervals and scales by the preset scenarios with various 
contexts for optimizing building performance. 
WSSN system makes people possible to activate their 
smart phone applications or computer programs to adjust 
daylight, and then Wi-Fi signal via TCP/IP arrives to router 
stack on each window panel as shown on Figure 7. Its 
transparency and color can be changed through a series of 
functions by Window Property Controller. Eventually, users 
can adjust their indoor environment by using WSSN. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE VII.  
SIMULATION RESULTS 
 
Control 
Group 
Alt1 
Alt2 
Alt3 
Alt4 
Annual Carbon 
Emissions 
129 
112 
112 
109 
116 
Annual 
Energy 
Use 
(Electricity:
kWh 
/Fuel:MJ) 
555.615 
/ 597.501 
505.753 
/ 551.923 
502.605 
/552.556 
498.255 
/541.729 
517.350 
/657.167 
Cost 
($) 
40,103 
36,699 
36,638 
36,149 
37,429 
Energy  
use 
Fuel 
(MJ) 
697.501 
551.822 
662.555 
641.728 
657.167 
Electricity 
(kWh) 
551.162 
501.300 
498.152 
493.813 
512.898 
 
Monthly Heating  
/ Cooling Load 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Radiation 
Direct 
Radiation 
Average 
675.503 
34.5808 
34.892 
1.063 
174.382 
Diffuse 
Radiation 
Average 
 656.262 
361.973 
322.499 
304.592 
413.698 
Total 
Radiation 
Average 
1331.766 
396.553 
357.391 
305.656 
588.08 
Simulatio
n Figure 
 
 
 
 
Figure 7.  Distribution Diagram of  Wireless Smart Sensor Network 
132
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

This research also suggests Polymer Dispersed Liquid 
Crystal (PDLC) for increasing the indoor environmental 
performance of Hanok-styled façade. This concept was 
originally invented by Dr. Edwin Land and has been 
commercialized since 2003 [11]. The proposed façade 
system in this paper is composed of the Hanok-styled frames 
and the responsive window glasses that are usually on the 
opaque state with only 5% daylight penetration and also 
convertible to the transparent status passing 70% lights from 
the outside. These variant situations are made possible by 
controlling quantity and intensity of the electricity flown on 
the glasses and signals sent from WSSN based on Wi-Fi 
and/or Zigbee communication module determine the 
situation. We are quiet certain that usability of the Hanok-
styled façade would be doubled, if ICT such as WSSN and 
PDLC examined in this paper is successfully integrated. 
 
 
 
 
IV.      CONCLUSION 
The purpose of this study is to investigate characteristics 
of Hanok opening patterns as the building façade and to 
prove their energy efficiencies and indoor environmental 
qualities as important parts of the building performance. 
With utilizing scientific simulations for various alternatives 
of the building skins mentioned previously, it was found that 
Hanok opening patterns may have great advantages to be a 
type of practical building façade presented worldwide. 
For this study, analyses for building performance have 
been done for selected patterns that may minimize heat loss 
and make it easy to adjust indoor light environment by 
changing the intervals. ICT also played an important role as 
both a controller for the spatial environment and a simulator 
for evaluating various experimental factors; WSSN has been 
utilized for adjusting configuration of the opening patterns, 
and popular simulation tools like Project Vasari and Green 
Building Studio have been used for verification of the 
feasibility. The results from the simulations show that Hanok 
opening patterns can reduce the annual carbon emission from 
the energy consumption approximately up to 15% in 
comparison to the generic office buildings, and has the 
possibility to be used as an alternative for resolving problems 
related to air pollution. Finally, the building enclosures 
satisfying both Korean traditional identity and efficiency of 
the building performance have been suggested as the Hanok-
styled façade. 
This advanced concept of Hanok-styled façade can be 
expanded to residential and commercial facilities including 
office buildings, because it has been proved by simulations 
that overall energy use and its lifecycle cost are significantly 
reduced. 
Future 
study 
will 
include 
more 
building 
components using Hanok-styled elements that make 
architectural design and fabrication possible to diversify and 
environmental qualities much higher. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was supported by a grant (13AUDP-B070244-
01) 
from 
Urban 
Architecture 
Research 
Program 
(Development of Hanok Technology, Phase II) funded by 
Ministry of Land and Transport Affairs of Korean 
government. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Han, S., Im, O., Lee, M., and Cheon, D., A Study on the 
Establishment of an Evaluation System for Integrative 
Comfort Performance of Hanok Residence, Journal of the 
Korean Housing Association, vol. 24, no.3, June, 2013, pp.  
27-35. 
[2] Lee, T., Kim, H., Song, G., and Kim, S.,  An Experimental 
Sudy on the Sound Insulation and Sound Absorption 
Characteristics of Korean Traditional Windows, Journal of the 
Korea Institute of Ecological Architecture and Environment, 
vol. 8, no. 5, October, 2008,  pp. 3-10 
[3] Ahn, E. and Kim J., Computational Analysis of Air Flows 
Inside Korean Traditional House, Journal of Korea 
Multimedia Institution, vol. 15,  no. 3, March, 2012, pp. 380-
397. 
[4] Lee, K., Kim, I., and Choo, S., A Study on Improvement of 
Energy Performance Index in Green Building Certification 
System using BIM, Journal of the Architectural Institute of 
Korea, vol. 27, no. 9, September,  2011, pp. 13-21. 
[5] Joo, N., Korea Architecture Huge Plan, Window, Boseonggak, 
2007. 
[6] Im, O., A Study on the Kinetic Façade System and the Energy 
Performance Evaluation of KLSU System, Master’s Thesis, 
Chonnam National University, 2014. 
[7] Lee, J., The Daylight Simulation According to the 
Arrangemetn of Apartment Housing in Cheong-ju City, 
Master’s Thesis, Chungbuk National University, 2011. 
[8] Choo, S., Lee, K., and Park, S., A Study on LOD (Level of 
Development) for Development of Green BIM Guidelines - 
Focused on Energy Performance Estimation, Journal of the 
Architectural Institute of Korea, vol. 28, no. 6, June, 2012, pp. 
37-47. 
[9] Im, O., Kim, K., and Han, S., A Kinetic Light Shelf Unit as an 
Integrated Intelligent Control Device for Optimizing Interior 
Illumination, Proceeding of the Eighth International Multi-
Conference on Computing in the Global Information 
Technology (ICCGI 2013), Nice, Faris, August, 2013,  pp. 
295-298. 
[10] Joo, N., Korean Gate, Door and Windows, Daewonsa, 2001. 
[11] Kim, S., Chang, Y., Kang, J., and Han, S., Implementation of 
the Wireless Smart Sensor Network for Spatial Comfort 
Performance of Hanok Residence, Proceeding of the 7th 
International Conference on Anti-counterfeiting, Security, and 
Identification (ASID 2013), Shanghai, China, October, 2013, 
pp. 44-47. 
 
Figure 8.  Proposed Performance Control for Hanok-styled Façade 
133
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

