A Survey of Power-Aware Network-on-Chip Design
Techniques
Emmanuel Ofori-Attah
Faculty of Art, Science and Technology
Univeristy of Northampton
Northamptonshire, UK
Emmanuel.Ofori-Attah@northampton.ac.uk
Michael Opoku Agyeman
Faculty of Art, Science and Technology
Univeristy of Northampton
Northamptonshire, UK
Michael.OpokuAgyeman@northampton.ac.uk
Abstract—The Network-on-Chip paradigm has been heralded
as the solution to the communication limitation that System-on-
Chip poses. As we usher into the billion-transistor era, Network-
on-Chip which was once deemed as the solution is defecting
due to its power demanding components. Several techniques
have been proposed over the years to improve the performance
of the Network-on-Chip, trading off power efﬁciency. However,
low power design solution is one of the essential requirements
of future Network-on-Chip based System-on-Chip applications.
Power dissipation can be reduced by efﬁcient routers, archi-
tecture saving techniques and communication links. This paper
presents recent contributions and efﬁcient saving techniques at
the router, Network-on-Chip architecture and Communication
link level.
Keywords: Network-On-Chip; Power Consumption; Many-
Core; Routers.
I. INTRODUCTION
Transistor size reduction in Complementary Metal-Oxide
Semiconductor (CMOS) technology has resulted in the dupli-
cation of many-cores integration on the same die [1] [2]. As
a result of this complexity, the conventional bus interconnect
becomes inadequate for future System-on-Chip (SoC) designs
as they are constrained from delivering an assured Quality of
Service (QoS) and bound to scalability issues and bandwidth
limitation [3]. To mitigate this problem, Network-on-Chip
(NoC) is proposed to enable simultaneous communication in a
high integrated Multi-Processing-Element (MPE) system [4]–
[6]. At the same time, this multiplies the power consumption
and contributes to the excessive thermal issues (reliability,
lifetime of systems, hotspots, chip damage) currently limiting
the number of Processing Elements (PE) that can powered-on
in MPE systems [7] [8]. NoC contributes to 40% of the chip’s
total power and increases as the network is extended. As a
result, the number of powered-on PE in an MPE system will
be limited leading to a degrade in performance.
To overcome this challenge, extensive research has been
done in reducing the power consumption of NoC’s resources
with more emphasis on leakage power due to its consumption
of the majority of the on-chip power [9]–[13]. Depending
on the workload, the leakage power of a network can vary
between 30-90% of the total power and therefore, optimal
solutions are required for the development of deeper scaling
in technology [14] [15]. Nevertheless, the switching activi-
ties of NoC’s components have also received some attention
[16] [17]. To reduce dynamic power consumption, Dynamic
Voltage Frequency Scaling (DVFS) schemes are generally
employed.
DVFS vary the voltage frequencies of working compo-
nents based on the network load. Such techniques predict
the network load and supply the amount of voltage required
for a successful operation without impacting the performance
[18]. Phan et al. [18] proposed an DVFS algorithm which
incorporates a controller to monitor the activity of a router
through its ports. Based on the trafﬁc load of the ports,
the controller supplies the required amount of voltage and
frequency. However, varying the frequency of some tasks may
result in errors and missed deadlines. Subsequently, a widely
popular technique employed to reduce the leakage power con-
sumption in technology is Power-Gating (PG). PG is normally
used to power-off NoC components when the network is
under-utilized. However, PG can affect the performance of the
network and therefore, power efﬁciency becomes an important
factor in many-core design architectures.
This paper presents a study of recent contributions on low
power techniques for NoC design. Particularly, to achieve this,
we investigated the power saving technique into three main
levels. The rest of the paper is organised as follows. Section
II explains about the NoC router architecture. Section III
discusses efﬁcient techniques for power in NoC architectures.
Section IV provides techniques for communication links and
ﬁnally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. ROUTER ARCHITECTURE
Routers occupy majority of the NoC’s power consumption
and therefore are widely selected as the best candidate for
mitigating leakage power consumption. A typical router archi-
tecture consists of a buffer, crossbar, input and output ports.
Moreover, existing literature [16] reveals that 33% of dynamic
power in routers are consumed by buffers. Notably, the input
buffers are shown to consume 44% of router power and
occupy 15% of area [19]. Since buffers occupy majority of the
power and occupy large area, many architectural designs have
been proposed to overcome this challenge. One such proposal
is the bufferless router concept. Bufferless routers employ
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-641-5
ICCGI 2018 : The Thirteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

algorithms to route packets without temporally storing it [20]–
[22]. However, this develops a bottleneck when the network
packet injection rates rise eventually leading to livelock and
deadlock. Deadlock in bufferless routers occur when two
packets arise at the same time and contest for the same port.
To solve this problem, existing work propose algorithms which
grants access to one packet while the other is redirected on
another route leading to livelock thus increasing the power
consumption. Therefore, it is not practical to design a network
which completely dismisses buffers.
Subsequently, the crossbar switch also consumes a sig-
niﬁcant amount of power. Increase of PE in MPE systems
increases crossbar sizes and therefore adds complexity, scala-
bility issues and large area as well as power consumption as
shown by the amount of the power Intel’s teraﬂops processor
and MIT RAW crossbars consume [23]–[25]. Therefore, to
reduce the power consumption of the routers, existing work
have utilized novel techniques to improve power efﬁciency,
the crossbar size, arbiter, and buffer designs. For this purpose,
this paper focuses on optimized power saving techniques at
the buffer and crossbar level.
A. Router Architecture Techniques
The employment of buffered routers trade-off area and
power consumption to prevent deadlock, livelock, and high
throughput. Alternatively, Virtual Channels (VC) are employed
in buffers to enable parallelism. VC allows multiple access to
a physical channel simultaneously. However, they consume a
signiﬁcant portion of NoC routers. Unfortunately, completely
dismissing buffers leads to a poor performance network. To
defuse this situation, many architectural designs have been
proposed. This section of paper presents techniques which can
improve the power performance of buffers.
1) Reduction in the pipeline stages: The many stages
(Buffer Write (BW), Route Computation (RC), Virtual Chan-
nel Allocation (VA), Switch Allocation (SA), and Switch
Stage (ST)) that a packet must traverse through to reach
its destination increases latency and power consumption. For
this purpose, Noghondar et al. [26] proposed an arbitration
method which reduces latency and power consumption as well
as contention among ﬂits. The proposed arbitration method
assigns priority levels to each input port and the port with the
highest priority is granted access to its required output port. To
prevent latency of low priority ports, a counter is employed to
keep track of the cycles that a ﬂit has been delayed for. When
the delay exceeds the threshold of the ﬂit, the low priority port
is granted access to the output port.
Likewise, Postman et al. highlights in [27] and propose the
SWIFT NoC. The SWIFT NoC reduces power consumption
by allowing ﬂits to bypass the buffering stage in one (1) cycle;
averting the use of read and write power.
Shenbagavalli et al. [28] on the other hand approach this
issue by proposing a hybrid scheme which combines circuit
and packet switching to allow ﬂits to traverse through the
network with only one (1) stage. Compared to virtual point
to point connections, this hybrid scheme achieves a reduction
of 6.8% in latency and 11.3% in power.
2) Power-gating Techniques: As previously stated before,
PG disconnects idle resources from their voltage source to save
more power for actual computation. The following authors em-
ployed PG to power-off VCs. Muhammad et al. [29] employed
PG to activate and deactivate VCs based on the network’s
workload. In this architecture, VCs are divided into separate
groups. Based on the workload, the groups are activated and
deactivated. Similarly, Zhan et al. [17] employed PG to activate
and deactivate grouped VCs. However, the power savings of
the Zhan’s architecture, is higher than Muhammad’s because of
the employment of Spin-Transfer Torque Magnetic Random-
Access Memory (STT-RAM) which consumes less power than
the conventional Static Random-Access Memory (SRAM). In
addition to this, Zhan’s VCs can either be powered-off or
set into a drowsy state which decreases the wake-up time.
Consequently, Nasirian et al. [30] employs PG to disable idle
buffers by tracking its inactivity cycle state.
Unfortunately, to achieve a high-power savings, routers
must be shut down for long periods of time because the
continuous shut down of components incur non-negligible
power overhead. For this purpose, existing work propose
complex algorithms to route packets through different chan-
nels. Unfortunately, such algorithms require knowledge of the
network to prevent deadlock and livelock [31]. Consequently,
this adds extra complexity and functionality and increases
the power consumption as well as possible latency issues.
Additionally, the wake-up time for powered-off routers to be
activated in time for incoming trafﬁc introduces delay and
causes performance degradation. Chen et al. [32] proposed a
solution to transmit wake-up signal 3 hops ahead, ensuring
intersecting routers which are powered-off are activated in
time.
3) Substitutes to Input Buffers: Input buffers particularly
consumes a staggering amount of power. To maintain perfor-
mance whilst also mitigating the power consumption, many
designs propose alternatives to input buffers. Kodi et al.
[33] proposed an architecture which employs dual-function
links and utilizes dynamic router allocation to assign ﬂits to
any free buffer. DiTomaso et al. [16] proposed QORE, an
architecture which improves power consumption using power-
efﬁcient Multi-Function Channel buffers (MFC) and enhances
the performance through reversible links. The use of MFC
enables the channel buffers to be utilized instead of the routers
in the buffers. Li et al. [34] deals with power consumption by
replacing the conventional SRAM with Embedded Dynamic
Random-Access Memory (eDRAM). Signiﬁcantly, the buffer
area was reduced by 52% and power by 43%.
B. Crossbar Switches
A crossbar switch is composed of individual switches
arranged in a matrix form between several inputs and out-
puts. Crossbar size increases as the network gets larger. This
ampliﬁes the power consumption. Crossbar switches can be
categorized into two groups, single stage and multi stage.
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-641-5
ICCGI 2018 : The Thirteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

1) Crossbar size: To achieve low power consumption and
small area, existing work focuses on splitting large crossbars
into smaller crossbars. Kim et al. [35] proposed a router
architecture composed of two crossbars. In the proposed router
architecture, the employment of smaller crossbars reduced the
size of the Virtual Channel Arbiter (VCA), Switch Arbiter
units (SA) and shorter logic depth. Similarly, an optimized
crossbar is proposed by the Park et al. in [36] which combines
decomposition and segmentation to effectively reduce power
consumption by 35%. The crossbar has been disassembled in
two small crossbars to reduce area and power. However, in
a large-scale network, there will an increase to latency and
contention issues.
Emerging crossbars are being built based on multi stage
crossbars such as the Clos and Benes network [37] [38] [39]
because of their provision of low power and smaller area.
Yikun et al. [40] conducted a study on Circuit design and
concluded that the Clos network outperform their counterparts
(Benes and Single stage Crossbars) in several ways. In the Clos
network, there is a reduction in the number of logic unit used.
The Benes network suffers from 65% delay in timing and less
power in Clos consumed because of the size of crossbars.
Naik et al. [41] proposed a heterogeneous NoC embed-
ded with circuit switched routers composed of buffered and
bufferless routers and a 3-stage Clos network. In comparison
to a crossbar switch of the same size, the results of this is
a reduction of 26% in power consumption and 32% in area.
However, circuit switched network causes additional latency
when a transmission is established between a source and its
destination.
2) Switching Algorithm: In theory, there are two different
types of routers; circuit switching routers and packet switching
routers. In packet switching routers, data is encoded into
packets and routed individually through the network. Circuit
switching routers on the hand establishes a connection between
the source and destination and speciﬁcally allocate resources
which will be used for transmission [42]. In Circuit switching
routers, there is guaranteed throughput because all packets can
be transmitted at the same time without delay in any router.
However, there is an increase in latency. This is because during
the transmission process, the resources allocated cannot be
accessed.
For this purpose, CirKET switching mechanism has been
proposed by the authors in [43] to effectively use the beneﬁts
of packet switching and circuit switching. In this architecture,
messages are split into different groups; High priority and Low
priority. High priority messages are transmitted using circuit
switching and low priority messages are transmitted using
packet switching. The employment of these two mechanisms
allow power rails to be disconnected and power-gating to be
used to disconnect parts of the router which are not used during
a transmission.
III. LOW NETWORK ARCHITECTURE
Novel NoC architectures have been proposed to reduce
the average packet latency while increasing the throughput.
However, this is usually at the expense of power consumption.
To combat the challenges imposed by these power Hungry
NoCs, various architectures have been proposed.
The exponential increase in the number of cores in multi-
core over the last decade has resulted in the emergence of
Three-Dimension (3D) NoC as the platform for On-Chip com-
munication [44] [45]. 3D NoC allows multiple silicon layers
to be stacked together to not only enhance the throughput and
latency, but also to reduce power consumption [46] [47]. In 3D
NoC, the lengthy wires are replaced with short wires through
silicon vias (TSVs) to minimize the number of hops it takes
for a packet to traverse through the network. Particularly, the
increase in the number of links in 3D Integrated Circuits (IC)
allows the transmission of more messages around the network
[48].
Debora Matos et al. [49] proposed the 3D HiCIT, an
architecture comprised of two hierarchical levels with a mesh
topology at the top level. In comparison with the traditional
3D spin and 3D mesh topologies, the proposed architecture
reduces the average latency to 50% and 54% respectively,
with the 3D spin been the latter [49]. In addition to this, the
architecture is comprised of a crossbar and low-cost routers.
Compared to the 3D spin and 3D butterﬂy fat tree topologies,
the proposed architecture uses less TSVs.
Stacking of multiple silicon layers in 3D IC reduces hop-
count in comparison with the long interconnect wires in Two
Dimension (2D) NoC. However, limitations such as power
density caused by the chip size, the cost of TSV and its defects
[50] [49] prevents 3D NoC from reaching its potential. For this
purpose, the author in [51] recommends the use of monolithic
3D. One approach to reduce power consumption is to use
fewer buffers at the router port [52]–[54]. Similarly, Fang et al.
[55] proposed Reduce Router Counts and Increase Efﬁciency
Service (RRCIES), an architecture based on a mesh topology.
RRCIES allows multiple cores to be connected between one
router. As a result, hop distance is reduced. The use of fewer
routers constitutes to a reduction in power hungry components
such as buffers, crossbar, switches, and virtual channels.
Another alternative is to employ PG. The study of vertical
slit ﬁeld effect transistors led to the proposal of a 3D Hybrid
architecture in [56]. PG and clock gating are employed in
this architecture to enable different level of buffers to be
deactivated. The proposed architecture splits the input buffers
into three (3) levels. Each input port is designed to access all
three levels and permit any virtual channel destination to be
chosen. In addition, the buffers from ports which are not being
used are shared among busy ports.
IV. COMMUNICATION LINKS
Although routers consume more power in NoC, the com-
munication links can be optimized to accommodate this.
According to [57] and [58], routers and communication chan-
nels contributes to most of the power consumption in NoC.
Therefore, existing work have developed techniques to reduce
the amount of power consumed by the links.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-641-5
ICCGI 2018 : The Thirteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

1) Voltage Scaling : The voltage swing in the communica-
tion links can be optimized to reduce the amount of power it
consumes. However, this is at a cost of a rise in error bit rate.
For this purpose, Mineo et al. [59] proposed to reduce power
consumption by using a technique which permits two working
levels in a link. A ﬂag is attached to each communication to
identify their priority. Low prioritised communications (Body
and Tail ﬂit) can be transmitted on a low-level voltage swing
while the others (Head ﬂit) can be sent using a normal level
voltage.
2) Half-cycle Flits : The longer ﬂits traverse through the
links in NoC, the more power is consumed. Therefore, de-
creasing the number of cycles of it takes from a ﬂit to transmit
between routers would not only enhance the performance of
the network but also save power. A. Psarras et al. [60] proposed
a technique which allows ﬂits to only use half a cycle to hop
between routers. By allowing ﬂits to spend less time in the
links, less power is consumed compared to single cycle routers
where one cycle is used to execute all operations in the router
and one is used to hop between routers.
V. SUMMARY OF CONTRIBUTION
Table I presents a summary of the techniques. The table
presents three categories (Techniques, Performance degrada-
tion and power saving). The Technique categories presents all
the techniques which have been presented in the paper. The
performance degradation category shows the impact that the
applied technique has on the performance on the architecture.
Lastly, the power saving technique shows the amount of power
savings that the applied technique saves when applied to the
architecture.
From the table, it can be concluded that there is a balance
between performance and power when alternative buffers
are used. Additionally, employing PG also impacts on the
performance and power of the architecture.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, several NoC power saving techniques have
been critically evaluated. Particularly, the effect of buffered
and bufferless routers on power consumption have been pre-
sented. Moreover, a summary of these techniques has been
presented to compare their trade off. The combination of
some of the architectures presented, if employed, can help
improve the amount of power consumed by NoC resources
which can either be removed or switched off. Whether it
being the adjustment (crossbar size, buffers, virtual channels)
of the components in the router architecture, modifying the
architectures (resource management) and the amount of volt-
age used in the communication links. Also, we explored low
power techniques used in emerging NoC Architectures; 3D
NoC and WNOC. Based on our discussions, we can conclude
power dissipation can be reduced in all areas of a network
infrastructure. Our future work will be focused on accessing
the power consumption of the memory subsystem. Particularly,
on the Last Level Cache [61] [62].
REFERENCES
[1] M. O. Agyeman, A. Ahmadinia, and A. Shahrabi, “Heterogeneous
3d network-on-chip architectures: Area and power aware design tech-
niques,” Journal of Circuits, Systems, and Computers, 2013.
[2] M. O. Agyeman, Q. Vien, A. Ahmadinia, A. Yakovlev, K. Tong, and
T. S. T. Mak, “A resilient 2-d waveguide communication fabric for
hybrid wired-wireless noc design,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst.,
pp. 359–373, 2017.
[3] M. H. Neishaburi and Z. Zilic, “A fault tolerant hierarchical network on
chip router architecture,” in IEEE International Symposium on Defect
and Fault Tolerance in VLSI and Nanotechnology Systems, 2011, pp.
445–453.
[4] M. O. Agyeman and A. Ahmadinia, “Optimised application speciﬁc
architecture generation and mapping approach for heterogeneous 3d
networks-on-chip,” in IEEE 16th International Conference on Compu-
tational Science and Engineering, 2013, pp. 794–801.
[5] ——, “An adaptive router architecture for heterogeneous 3d networks-
on-chip,” in NORCHIP, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[6] ——, “Optimising heterogeneous 3d networks-on-chip,” in Sixth Inter-
national Symposium on Parallel Computing in Electrical Engineering
(PARELEC 2011), 4-5 April 2011, Luton, United Kingdom, 2011, pp.
25–30.
[7] E. Ofori-Attah, W. Bhebhe, and M. O. Agyeman, “Architectural tech-
niques for improving the power consumption of noc-based cmps: A case
study of cache and network layer,” Journal of Low Power Electronics
and Applications, 2017.
[8] M. O. Agyeman, Q. Vien, and T. S. T. Mak, “An analytical channel
model for emerging wireless networks-on-chip,” in IEEE Intl Conference
on Computational Science and Engineering, CSE 2016, and IEEE Intl
Conference on Embedded and Ubiquitous Computing, EUC 2016, and
15th Intl Symposium on Distributed Computing and Applications for
Business Engineering, DCABES 2016, Paris, France, August 24-26,
2016, 2016, pp. 9–15.
[9] J. Howard, S. Dighe, Y. Hoskote, S. Vangal, D. Finan, G. Ruhl,
D. Jenkins, H. Wilson, N. Borkar, G. Schrom, F. Pailet, S. Jain,
T. Jacob, S. Yada, S. Marella, P. Salihundam, V. Erraguntla, M. Konow,
M. Riepen, G. Droege, J. Lindemann, M. Gries, T. Apel, K. Henriss,
T. Lund-Larsen, S. Steibl, S. Borkar, V. De, R. V. D. Wijngaart, and
T. Mattson, “A 48-core ia-32 message-passing processor with dvfs in
45nm cmos,” in IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference -
(ISSCC), 2010.
[10] R. Parikh, R. Das, and V. Bertacco, “Power-aware nocs through routing
and topology reconﬁguration,” in 51st ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Au-
tomation Conference (DAC), 2014, pp. 1–6.
[11] E. Ofori-Attah and M. O. Agyeman, “A survey of low power
noc design techniques,” in Proceedings of the 2Nd International
Workshop
on
Advanced
Interconnect
Solutions
and
Technologies
for
Emerging
Computing
Systems,
ser.
AISTECS
’17.
New
York,
NY,
USA:
ACM,
2017,
pp.
22–27.
[Online].
Available:
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/3073763.3073767
[12] M. O. Agyeman, J. X. Wan, Q. T. Vien, W. Zong, A. Yakovlev,
K. Tong, and T. Mak, “On the design of reliable hybrid wired-wireless
network-on-chip architectures,” in IEEE 9th International Symposium
on Embedded Multicore/Many-core Systems-on-Chip, 2015.
[13] E. Ofori-Attah and M. O. Agyeman, “A survey of recent contributions
on low power noc architectures,” in Computing Conference, 2017, pp.
1086–1090.
[14] R. Das, S. Narayanasamy, S. K. Satpathy, and R. G. Dreslinski, “Catnap:
Energy proportional multiple network-on-chip,” SIGARCH Comput.
Archit. News, 2013.
[15] B. K. Daya, C. H. O. Chen, S. Subramanian, W. C. Kwon, S. Park,
T. Krishna, J. Holt, A. P. Chandrakasan, and L. S. Peh, “Scorpio: A
36-core research chip demonstrating snoopy coherence on a scalable
mesh noc with in-network ordering,” in ACM/IEEE 41st International
Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA), 2014.
[16] D. DiTomaso, A. K. Kodi, A. Louri, and R. Bunescu, “Resilient
and power-efﬁcient multi-function channel buffers in network-on-chip
architectures,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, no. 12, pp. 3555–3568,
2015.
[17] J. Zhan, J. Ouyang, F. Ge, J. Zhao, and Y. Xie, “Hybrid drowsy sram and
stt-ram buffer designs for dark-silicon-aware noc,” IEEE Transactions
on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, no. 10, pp. 3041–3054,
2016.
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-641-5
ICCGI 2018 : The Thirteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

TABLE I
LLC SRAM AND STT-RAM TECHNOLOGY COMPARISONS
Techniques
Performance Degradation
Power Saving
Power Gating
Medium
Medium
Alternative Buffers
Medium
High
Pipeline Stages
Low
Low
Voltage Scaling
Low
Low
Half-cycle Flits
Low
Low
[18] H. P. Phan, X. T. Tran, and T. Yoneda, “Power consumption estimation
using vnoc2.0 simulator for a fuzzy-logic based low power network-on-
chip,” in IEEE International Conference on IC Design and Technology
(ICICDT), 2017.
[19] P. Kundu, “On-die interconnects for next generation cmps, in workshop
on on- and off-chip interconnection networks for multicore systems,”
2006.
[20] C. Feng, Z. Liao, Z. Lu, A. Jantsch, and Z. Zhao, “Performance analysis
of on-chip bufferless router with multi-ejection ports,” in IEEE 11th
International Conference on ASIC (ASICON), 2015, pp. 1–4.
[21] C. Fallin, C. Craik, and O. Mutlu, “Chipper: A low-complexity bufferless
deﬂection router,” in IEEE 17th International Symposium on High
Performance Computer Architecture, 2011, pp. 144–155.
[22] B. K. Daya, L. S. Peh, and A. P. Chandrakasan, “Towards high-
performance bufferless nocs with scepter,” IEEE Computer Architecture
Letters, pp. 62–65, 2016.
[23] K. Sewell, R. G. Dreslinski, T. Manville, S. Satpathy, N. Pinckney,
G. Blake, M. Cieslak, R. Das, T. F. Wenisch, D. Sylvester, D. Blaauw,
and T. Mudge, “Swizzle-switch networks for many-core systems,” IEEE
Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, pp.
278–294, 2012.
[24] M. B. Taylor, J. Kim, J. Miller, D. Wentzlaff, F. Ghodrat, B. Greenwald,
H. Hoffman, P. Johnson, J.-W. Lee, W. Lee, A. Ma, A. Saraf, M. Seneski,
N. Shnidman, V. Strumpen, M. Frank, S. Amarasinghe, and A. Agarwal,
“The raw microprocessor: a computational fabric for software circuits
and general-purpose programs,” IEEE Micro, pp. 25–35, 2002.
[25] S. R. Vangal, J. Howard, G. Ruhl, S. Dighe, H. Wilson, J. Tschanz,
D. Finan, A. Singh, T. Jacob, S. Jain, V. Erraguntla, C. Roberts,
Y. Hoskote, N. Borkar, and S. Borkar, “An 80-tile sub-100-w teraﬂops
processor in 65-nm cmos,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, pp.
29–41, 2008.
[26] A. F. Noghondar, M. Reshadi, and N. Bagherzadeh, “Reducing bypass-
based network-on-chip latency using priority mechanism,” IET Comput-
ers Digital Techniques, 2018.
[27] J. Postman, T. Krishna, C. Edmonds, L. S. Peh, and P. Chiang, “Swift: A
low-power network-on-chip implementing the token ﬂow control router
architecture with swing-reduced interconnects,” IEEE Transactions on
Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, pp. 1432–1446, 2013.
[28] S. Shenbagavalli and S. Karthikeyan, “An efﬁcient low power noc
router architecture design,” in Online International Conference on Green
Engineering and Technologies (IC-GET), 2015, pp. 1–8.
[29] S. T. Muhammad, M. A. El-Moursy, A. A. El-Moursy, and A. M.
Refaat, “Optimization for trafﬁc-based virtual channel activation low-
power noc,” in Energy Aware Computing Systems Applications (ICEAC),
International Conference on, 2015, pp. 1–4.
[30] N. Nasirian and M. Bayoumi, “Low-latency power-efﬁcient adaptive
router design for network-on-chip,” in 28th IEEE International System-
on-Chip Conference (SOCC), 2015, pp. 287–291.
[31] D. DiTomaso, A. Sikder, A. Kodi, and A. Louri, “Machine learning
enabled power-aware network-on-chip design,” in Design, Automation
Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE),, 2017.
[32] L. Chen, D. Zhu, M. Pedram, and T. M. Pinkston, “Power punch:
Towards non-blocking power-gating of noc routers,” in IEEE 21st
International Symposium on High Performance Computer Architecture
(HPCA), 2015, pp. 378–389.
[33] A. K. Kodi, A. Sarathy, A. Louri, and J. Wang, “Adaptive inter-router
links for low-power, area-efﬁcient and reliable network-on-chip (noc)
architectures,” in Asia and South Paciﬁc Design Automation Conference,
2009, pp. 1–6.
[34] C. Li and P. Ampadu, “A compact low-power edram-based noc buffer,”
in Low Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED), IEEE/ACM Interna-
tional Symposium on, 2015, pp. 116–121.
[35] J. Kim, C. Nicopoulos, and D. Park, “A gracefully degrading and energy-
efﬁcient modular router architecture for on-chip networks,” in 33rd
International Symposium on Computer Architecture (ISCA’06), 2006,
pp. 4–15.
[36] D. Park, A. Vaidya, A. Kumar, and M. Azimi, “Mode-x: Microar-
chitecture of a layout-aware modular decoupled crossbar for on-chip
interconnects,” IEEE Transactions on Computers, no. 3, pp. 622–636,
2014.
[37] Y. Xia, M. Hamdi, and H. J. Chao, “A practical large-capacity three-
stage buffered clos-network switch architecture,” IEEE Transactions on
Parallel and Distributed Systems, 2016.
[38] S. Yang, S. Xin, Z. Zhao, and B. Wu, “Minimizing packet delay via load
balancing in clos switching networks for datacenters,” in International
Conference on Networking and Network Applications (NaNA).
[39] J. Zhang and H. Gu, “A partially adaptive routing algorithm for benes
network on chip,” in 2nd IEEE International Conference on Computer
Science and Information Technology, 2009.
[40] Y. Jiang and M. Yang, “On circuit design of on-chip non-blocking
interconnection networks,” in 27th IEEE International System-on-Chip
Conference (SOCC), 2014.
[41] A. Naik and T. K. Ramesh, “Efﬁcient network on chip (noc) using
heterogeneous circuit switched routers,” in International Conference on
VLSI Systems, Architectures, Technology and Applications (VLSI-SATA),
2016, pp. 1–6.
[42] N. Chin-Ee and N. Soin, “A study on circuit switching merits in the de-
sign of network-on-chip,” in Computer and Communication Engineering
(ICCCE), International Conference on, 2010, pp. 1–5.
[43] M. FallahRad, A. Patooghy, H. Ziaeeziabari, and E. Taheri, “Cirket:
A performance efﬁcient hybrid switching mechanism for noc architec-
tures,” in Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design (DSD), 2016,
pp. 123–130.
[44] M. O. Agyeman and A. Ahmadinia, “An adaptive router architecture for
heterogeneous 3d networks-on-chip,” in 2011 NORCHIP, Lund, Sweden,
November 14-15, 2011, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[45] ——, “Power and area optimisation in heterogeneous 3d networks-on-
chip architectures,” SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, vol. 39,
no. 4, pp. 106–107, 2011.
[46] C. Chao, “Trafﬁc and thermal aware run time thermal management
scheme for 3d noc systems,” pp. 223 – 230, 2010.
[47] W. R. Davis, “Application exploration for 3d integrated circuits: Tcam,
ﬁfo and fft case studies,” pp. 496 – 506, 2009.
[48] A. W. Yin, “Change function of 2d/3d network-on-chip,” 2011.
[49] D. Matos, M. Prass, M. Kreutz, L. Carro, and A. Susin, “Performance
evaluation of hierarchical noc topologies for stacked 3d ics,” in IEEE
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2015, pp.
1961–1964.
[50] D. e. a. Velenis, “Impact of 3d design choices on manufacturing cost,”
2009.
[51] D. K. Nayak, S. Banna, S. K. Samal, and S. K. Lim, “Power, per-
formance, and cost comparisons of monolithic 3d ics and tsv-based
3d ics,” in SOI-3D-Subthreshold Microelectronics Technology Uniﬁed
Conference (S3S), IEEE, 2015.
[52] A. T. Tran and B. M. Baas, “Roshaq: High-performance on-chip
router with shared queues,” in Computer Design (ICCD), IEEE 29th
International Conference on, 2011, pp. 232–238.
[53] K. Latif, A. M. Rahmani, L. Guang, T. Seceleanu, and H. Tenhunen,
“Pvs-noc: Partial virtual channel sharing noc architecture,” in 19th Inter-
national Euromicro Conference on Parallel, Distributed and Network-
Based Processing, 2011, pp. 470–477.
[54] R. S. Ramanujam, V. Soteriou, B. Lin, and L. S. Peh, “Design of a
high-throughput distributed shared-buffer noc router,” in Networks-on-
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-641-5
ICCGI 2018 : The Thirteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Chip (NOCS), Fourth ACM/IEEE International Symposium on, 2010,
pp. 69–78.
[55] J. Fang, J. Lu, and C. She, “Research on topology and policy for low
power consumption of network-on-chip with multicore processors,” in
International Conference on Computational Science and Computational
Intelligence (CSCI), 2015, pp. 621–625.
[56] V. S. Nandakumar and M. Marek-Sadowska, “A low energy network-on-
chip fabric for 3-d multi-core architectures,” IEEE Journal on Emerging
and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, no. 2, pp. 266–277, 2012.
[57] J. Balfour and W. J. Dally., “Design tradeoffs for tiled cmp on-chip
networks in ics,,” 2006.
[58] S. M. Hassan and S. Yalamanchili, “Centralized buffer router: A low
latency, low power router for high radix nocs,” in Networks on Chip
(NoCS), Seventh IEEE/ACM International Symposium on, 2013, pp. 1–
8.
[59] A. Mineo, M. Palesi, G. Ascia, and V. Catania, “Runtime online links
voltage scaling for low energy networks on chip,” in Digital System
Design (DSD), Euromicro Conference on, 2013, pp. 941–944.
[60] A. Psarras, J. Lee, P. Mattheakis, C. Nicopoulos, and G. Dimitrakopou-
los, “A low-power network-on-chip architecture for tile-based chip
multi-processors,” in International Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI
(GLSVLSI), 2016, pp. 335–340.
[61] E. Ofori-Attah, X. Wang, and M. O. Agyeman, “A survey of low
power design techniques for last level caches,” in Applied Reconﬁgurable
Computing. Architectures, Tools, and Applications - 14th International
Symposium, Santorini, Greece, May 2-4,, Proceedings, 2018, pp. 217–
228.
[62] S. Borkar, “How to stop interconnects from hindering the future of
computing,” in Optical Interconnects Conference, 2013.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-641-5
ICCGI 2018 : The Thirteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

