 
Technology Powered Learning at Academic Institutions 
Personal Credit Portfolio 
 
Danuse Bauerova 
Innovation in Education Institute, Department of Mathematical Methods in Economics 
VSB – Technical University of Ostrava 
Ostrava, the Czech Republic 
danuse.bauerova@vsb.cz
 
 
Abstract—This article aims to describe the methodology for the 
realization of particular although partial steps when accepting 
a new paradigm of learning or other school processes. A part 
of the paper 
deals with the 
verification 
of partial 
methodologies of the Model of Technology Powered Learning 
at school. The student-centric approach and the impact of 
information and communication technologies on education and 
university society are applied. Positive digital identity of 
personality is an outcome of human activity while at the same 
time it accepts the technology of cloud computing and deep 
web. A new term – Personal Credit Portfolio – has been 
invented. The processes are implementable for students and 
for all the members of academic staff, and consequently have 
an impact on the credit of the whole – University.   
Keywords-Personal Learning Portfolio; Personal Credit 
Portfolio; Technology Powered Learning; Social Web; Internet-
based Education 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Many research programs explored how new technology 
brings mass collaboration and changes the world. For 
example, New Paradigm team [1] has conducted several 
investigations to understand how the Web 2.0 changes the 
corporation. Collaboration and relationship has been newly 
shifted to the new paradigm principles.  
A. Contextualization and Importance of the Theme 
Web 2.0 tools do not only provide different ways of 
communication which should enhance learning and 
interaction in the virtual environment. They also offer a real 
opportunity to create a classroom without walls [2]. Boyd [3] 
claims that the social aspects of Web 2.0 have great potential 
for enhancing education, while many authors suggest that 
Web 2.0 
concepts 
could 
support 
lifelong 
learning 
communities. The teachers´ role is to encourage eLearners to 
creative thinking and to stimulate them to be active users 
(i.e., prosumers) [4]. 
Learning through ePortfolio is offen offered. Hellen 
Barret describes Balancing the Two Faces of ePortfolios [5] 
and separates the process of creation (Portfolio as 
Workspace) and the process of final display of the product 
(Portfolio as Showcase). By this approach the process of 
positive digital identity building is solved only partially. In 
this article, a proposal of good personality image building by 
a so called Personal Credit Portfolio (PCP) is newly 
formulated. For the process of the PCP creation is significant 
continuous interaction of personalities and technologies. 
Links are the new CVs, portfolios aren’t just for artists 
anymore, and experience reigns. The most important skill 
we’ll have in a world where 50% of people see self-
employment as more secure than having a full-time job is the 
ability to go out and get the right knowledge for the right 
purpose at the right time [6]. 
The academic exclusivity has for centuries been based on 
the strictly hierarchical structure of the processes. The 
evaluation of students, pedagogues and scientific staff is a 
direct outcome of academic activities. Being closed in is the 
means of building exclusivity. The role of the so-called 
gatekeepers is integrated within the system, and the openness 
and sharing create strong concerns. As it can be generally 
seen, nowadays numerous methodologies of hierarchic 
evaluation of academic institutions and their individual 
members are being introduced.  
Hierarchic teams at universities are not very efficient. 
The open web environment with its flat net structure of the 
processes with natural activities of end participants offers 
more. Openness and sharing are not typical of teams within 
universities and thus the effective connection to the outside 
world based on the continuous feedback is missing. There is 
still a tendency to adhere to publishing the results of pre-
reviewed scientific research which does not correspond to 
the speed of development. The natural characteristics of the 
open web environment concerning the criteria of the 
evaluation with continuous feedback are missing. Any 
growth is thus supported with intolerable delay. 
The openness of the Internet is a threat. Especially 
worried are those whose outputs are not shared and naturally 
used by professionals. It is not always academics who refuse 
changes; sometimes the same can be said about students. The 
newly created net connection brings development but also 
the necessity of continuous work. However, students are not 
always willing to make an effort because it is the evaluation 
which is considered the main product of their work not the 
real personality development. Some students admit that they 
are studying only to get a degree. Continuous shared 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

collaborative work, for which the activity of each member is 
a necessity, seems to be a useless complication on their way 
towards a degree. In this way, the core of the interest lies not 
in the real personal development but in the achievement of 
an academic title. 
The theme is important and relevant as a fight for 
survival of a hierarchic structure against the danger of the 
flattening of the world by net structure is a strong 
characteristic of the present academic life. New paradigms 
cause disruption and uncertainty, even calamity, and are 
nearly always received with coolness, hostility, or worse. 
Vested interests fight against the change, and leaders of the 
old are often the last to embrace the new. Consequently, a 
paradigm shift typically causes a crisis of leadership [7].  
The openness of the Internet is a threat for the hierarchic 
structure and as a consequence it leads to the refusal of new 
technologies by those whose good reputation (credit) is 
supported by the hierarchic evaluation. Pundit Andrew Keen 
issues a long bleat claiming that the world is awash with 
drivel because it is so easy to propagate ideas on the Internet. 
Keen pines for the good old days—a time when apparently 
only smart and credible people had access to printing presses 
and the airwaves. A healthy society needs gatekeepers, he 
argues.  
Throughout history academic institutions have organized 
themselves according to strict hierarchical systems of 
authority. At the time of the Internet it does not seem to be 
effective to report on the strength of an individual or an 
academic institution through various hierarchical systems of 
evaluation. Today, you advance in the world based on your 
performance, not a piece of paper declaring your expertise in 
"knowing a little about a lot of things" [6]. The good 
reputation (credit) of universities, individual students, 
pedagogues, and scientists could be developed through 
openness. Sharing outputs brings along a natural evaluation 
of quality. The flattening of the evaluation processes towards 
the net structure with active participation of end users is 
beneficial.  
Individuals and institutions reject these changes. No clear 
examples of such change implementation have been 
observed in the surrounding environment. There has not been 
a methodology put into practice yet. 
B. Research question and Objectives 
This article aims to describe the methodology for the 
realization of particular although partial steps when 
accepting a new paradigm of learning or other school 
processes. A part of the paper deals with the verification of 
partial methodologies of the Model of Technology Powered 
Learning at school. Is the end-user approach applicable on 
education and university society? Would a Positive Digital 
Identity of personality be an outcome of human activity and 
the technology of cloud computing and deep web at the same 
time? How can end-users contribute to their personal identity 
(whether they are students, pedagogues or scientists) and 
further to identity and prestige development of the whole 
institution within the process? Are the students able to create 
systematically their Personal Learning Portfolios and 
perceive a power of these outputs when creating their digital 
identity? Could be realized processes generalized?  
The aim is to use the results of long term qualitative and 
quantitative 
analysis 
to 
formulize 
generally 
valid 
methodology. The outputs are monitored when transferring 
them from Learning Management System usage to freely 
accessible web applications. The subject of interest a 
monitoring of implementation effects of Technology 
Powered Learning is. The research is in process when 
educating thousands of students of academic institution 
within more than 10 years. The outputs are generalized in 
proposed methodology to be transferred to Technology 
Powered Learning Model.  
A new term – Personal Credit Portfolio – has been 
invented.  
C. Structure of the Paper 
In the introduction the context and rationale of using 
different Web 2.0 tools in teaching and learning are 
mentioned.  
Section II presents the results of examples study. Facts 
and methodologies of successful world universities are 
reminded; these universities use an openness and power of 
Internet more effectively than universities in the Central 
Europe do. Section is involved to strengthen previous 
argumentations in favor of research, hypotheses formulation 
and methodology of innovations implementations to the 
environment of the Central Europe universities.    
Section III involves the results of research being 
provided at the university to argumentation for the change 
and proposes the procedures. Here the results of long term 
research in usage of Learning Management System (LMS) 
Moodle to support academic education are stated. 
Methodology of the transition from LMS Moodle to the open 
access web applications and creation of Personal Learning 
Networks is described. The way of using the power of social 
networking when implementing the model of Learning 
Powered by Technology is shown.  
Section IV brings new knowledge and implements a new 
term. It is linked to previous contributions, which separate 
two parts of ePortfolio creation – one as the process and 
second one as the product.  The new implemented term 
Personal Credit Portfolio points out inseparability of both 
parts. Building of positive identity is presented as continual 
process. Participants here is not only the man but hidden 
technology processes as well. Experiences are used 
accepting the fact that Every work starts with the potential to 
be a Thought Paper that might be read by millions. I am 
responsible for building my resume or portfolio since my 
first day in college. [8]. 
The final section presents a concluding discussion of the 
findings of the study and university reality from different 
angels. The pros and cons of different Web 2.0 tools at 
universities and the synergy effects of the integration of the 
selected tools to university processes are also examined. 
Discussion about the future direction of the Web 2.0 
application at the university environment is open. 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

II. 
SUCCESSFUL UNIVERSITIES ARE UNIQUE BY THEIR 
OPENNESS 
Universities as well as their academics strive for the best 
in their field. The danger consists in persuading ourselves 
that we can get among the successful ones through the 
currently used methods of evaluation. The winners are those 
who can accept the fact that there is no need to develop the 
processes and criteria applicable in the times before the 
Internet. The challenge of today’s world is to overcome the 
existing paradigm in the most direct way. The focus of the 
new evaluation methodology lies in openness and sharing, 
which leads to a natural evaluation based on relevant 
feedback.  
Openness and sharing demonstrably increase the 
effectiveness of the present processes. Academic processes 
are no exception. Openness and sharing are what increases 
the personal and the academic institutions´ credit, and as 
such they are necessary to be included among the relevant 
evaluation criteria. The growth of the credit refers to: 
• 
student´s, graduate’s and teacher´s personalities but 
only in case that it is the “learning” not  the “testing” 
which forms the center of the pedagogical processes 
(personality´s credit is built on continuous learning 
not on evaluation by testing), 
• 
research and science workers but only if the Internet 
is used for the open scientific cooperation with 
shared outputs and for continuous feedback, 
• 
administrative workers but only if the Internet is 
used for the shared collection and continuous 
generating of customized data needed for academic 
processes, 
• 
institutions 
consisting 
of 
students, 
graduates, 
pedagogues, and scientific and administrative staff 
who have relevant knowledge and who use the 
current power of the Internet as described above. 
III. 
SOCIAL NETWORKING  
AND THE MODEL OF LEARNING POWERED BY TECHNOLOGY 
The present state of eLearning at the Central European 
universities is based mostly on the pre-internet time 
processes. Old processes are only performed with new 
technology usage but they are not powered by technology. 
The power of new Internet Web 2.0 is not fully utilized, 
even though there has been positive feedback from end 
users/students. The focus of the present approach is a 
pedagogue not the social networking of learners. So far there 
are not accepted activities and processes of the Model of 
learning powered by technology. 
A. Out of the classroom,  
out of the Learning Management Systems 
To increase competitiveness of labor force in global 
knowledge-based economy it is necessary to accept new 
paradigm of education. The future of learning needs to move 
out of the box – whether it is the little red school house or the 
course management system. We need a new way of thinking 
about teaching and learning that put not just the learner, but 
learning at the center [8]. 
B. Methodology of the transition from LMS Moodle to the 
open access web applications 
The key word for all Learning Management Systems 
(further LMSs) such as Moodle is the management. 
Students‘ work managed by the teacher is a clear indication 
of the hierarchic structure of activities. Within the last ten 
years, the team of the Innovation in Education Institute at the 
Technical University Ostrava has conducted large group 
(tens of thousands of students) investigations to understand 
how the Learning Management System works. It can be said 
that LMSs play de facto 3 functions as you can see in 
Figure 1. 
1. Making the content accessible (static presentation of 
the text or multimedia study materials created by the 
teacher or borrowed ones). 
2. Administration of students´ work such as reporting, 
evaluation, archiving etc.   
3. Management of students‘ activities, favorably their 
guiding and the overall communication management. 
Ad 1. The first part – static presentation of content 
continuously decreases its imperfections. Such created 
materials exceed the LMS, namely to the open access web 
applications. 
• 
During the first step forward the files (although 
multimedia ones but still files) are uploaded to web 
outside LMSs. Their characteristic feature is more 
flexible accessibility, and they can be used for 
further courses, mostly done by the same teacher. 
• 
Later on the content is to be designed through the 
open access applications, i. e. directly in web space. 
Content created in GoogleDocs can serve as the 
example but also wiki, blogs etc. are used. There 
need to be said that the present LMSs, e.g., Moodle 
version 2.x, support the creating of some hybrids, 
i.e., they accept the outputs of the above mentioned 
web applications and they can implement them into 
their management systems. 
 
 
Figure 1.  LMS is transferring benefitting from open web applications. 
Ad 2. Gradually, it appears that the right role of LMS lies 
in the second group of the above mentioned functions, i.e.,  
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the administration of students ‘work. Reporting, testing, 
tasks evaluation, and the archiving of the students´ 
performance can be done in LMS effectively, probably even 
more effectively than anywhere else. The strengthening of 
testing and evaluation is not in accordance with the concept 
of a new lifelong learning model on one hand; however, the 
current academic environment cannot in fact operate without 
them.  Let us leave them then inside the LMS stating that in 
this way they are effective, even though their effectiveness 
for the Model Powered by Technology is more than 
doubtful.  
Ad 3. The creation of the learning content by open access 
web applications meets with the third part of the above 
mentioned activities of eLearning in LMSs, i.e., the students‘ 
work guiding (Figure 1). It is more effective to communicate 
with the students outside LMS, i.e., in other applications 
designated to it. It is the social web which is used. The 
guidance by a teacher is lowered and the communication 
among students increases. In other words, the mutual 
continuous connection among learners is much more 
stimulating in a process of a creation of collective 
intelligence. Pedagogue is one of the nodes, only possibly 
distinguished by the coaching aspects. When the network is 
set up, Model of Learning Powered by Technology begins. 
Lifelong Learning goes on in a continuous mutual 
interaction.  
IV. 
PERSONAL LEARNING PORTFOLIO  
AND PERSONAL CREDIT PORTFOLIO  
The LMSs provided a low level entry on the web. In the 
new model a course exists outside of the student’s own 
learning space. A course is one of many hubs of designed 
and facilitated learning objects and activities, and it links to 
an established social network of students and professionals 
exploring the same content and activities. A course becomes 
a hub of activities facilitated by the expert – the faculty 
member. But it remains outside of the traditional course 
space, in students’ own ePortfolios, which transcend the 
limited space and time that any single course can be expected 
to provide [8]. 
Personal Learning Networks are a great way to widen 
knowledge and learning beyond won [9]. PLNs are created 
by the individual learners. To extend relevant connection of 
those who are learning with those of the same interest and 
knowledge can fulfill specifics of their needs. PLNs provide 
with an access to significant personalities and experts 
worldwide. Those form the communities around them, to 
which others have access. Everyone has opportunity to get 
the sources and knowledge, which would be inaccessible 
behind the school walls. Individual learners create their 
personal learning network as in Figure 2 you can see [10]. 
Personal Credit Portfolios as social networking products are 
created continuously. Students are encouraged to make their 
learning visible. Activities in the course of study subjects are 
the part of Personal (Learning or Credit, resp.) Portfolios are 
accessible any time. Accountability and employment of the 
course participants including teacher is continuously 
increasing. 
As in [5], social networking and personal portfolios 
creation are used in education: 
1. for personal knowledge improvement (Personal 
Learning Portfolio), i. e. 
• 
to store outputs and share experiences,  
• 
to reflect on learning, 
• 
to take feedback for improvement, 
2. to 
showcase 
achievements 
(Personal 
Credit 
Portfolio), i. e. 
• 
to showcase achievements and accomplishments and 
to facilitate accountability and employment searches. 
Both parts act in mutual interaction and are not 
dividable. The more the man would try to distinguish the 
“working” parts (Learning Portfolio) and „showcases“ 
(Credit Portfolio) the more work he would have (and never 
would finish). He would still have to keep in mind 
unexpected “tricks” of never ending cleaning, setting and 
structuring the outputs being implemented by the tools of 
deep web and Cloud Computing. Cleaning is pointless work 
– we all know that HR officer can always find something 
what have not been showed in „Credit“ Portfolio by 
applicant. On the contrary, an applicant makes effort to hide 
imperfect information. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Personal Credit Portfolio [9]. 
We have to consider the fact that by each click on web 
we create „Lifelong Interactive Portfolio“! In this way hardly 
controlled Mush-up such as reports on Facebook, Blogs, 
wikis, Twitter, Ning, YouTube, Flickr, Picasa etc. is created. 
Students (as well as pedagogues and scientists) have to be 
awarded that each their trace can be seen by millions of 
Internet users! They contribute to their Personal Credit 
Portfolio by all work they do on the Internet. 
A. Literacy to PLN creation 
The man has to be equipped with literacy, i.e., how to 
access the community or to build it, how to find people and 
sources being trusted. It is more complex process than to sit 
in the class; it is more independent overreaching curriculum 
of the subject.  
103
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

New role is hard for both students and pedagogues. 
Teacher has to be prepared for his students´ activities, also 
for the danger resulting from the fact students can go 
anywhere and speak with anybody to fulfill their ambitions. 
The pedagogue is able to manage the students to active 
safely and effectively in a way socially demanded. Active 
approach of the pedagogue to educational process demands 
to be equipped with ability to open conversation, which is 
the base of continuous connection, providing and receiving 
feedback. Literacy to PLN creation can be acquired step by 
step and the advices of predecessors can be used as well. 
B. The way from PLN 1.0 to PLN 2.0 
To develop their personality students get ideas how to 
start with building their own PLNs. There exist many 
recommendations but all have one thing the same – to 
proceed by two phases from PLN 1.0 to PLN 2.0. 
1. 
The best way to enter the new world is to become 
consumer first, i.e., to acquire the skills to work at reader 
level. The aim of this phase is PLN 1.0. It is the mark 
overtaken from the term Web 1.0, whose basis is the reading 
on the Internet (Read Web alias Web 1.0). 
2. 
Then the personality’s development towards 2.0 
skills is able. Students and pedagogue can go towards creator 
role. Individual starts to be active. PLE 2.0 is analogical 
extension of the term Web 2.0 where it is about not only 
reading but also about active writing (Read-Write Web alias 
Web 2.0) [11]. 
Above mentioned two steps are applied gradually to the 
process of acquiring the knowledge to work with others and 
others web tools suitable for interaction and reflexing. 
Among those chronological reports, wiki for web creation, 
multimedia 
for 
active 
creation 
of 
web 
content, 
microblogging, today Twitter and social networking, today 
Facebook, Google+ are. Everything can be shifted to 
hundreds of web applications but all the time the 
effectiveness of such activity has to be considered. 
C. Tools integration 
We can integrate Web 2.0 tools into (university) course 
delivery. One of the possibilities is using widely integrated 
tools of Google as an environment enabling easier 
integration of partial tools while logged only ones. In this 
case it is suitable to create an account at Google and to create 
own iGoogle. Gradually it can be supplemented by some 
other selected tool beyond Google group. Entering the new 
and new fields can be repeated in the model from 1.0 to 2.0. 
Blogging. It is good to devote the first cycle “from 1.0 to 
2.0“ acquiring skills to blog. The real output of it is going to 
be not only skill but the first part of own PLN as well.   
1. To become involved in professional social network 
according personal interest by choosing some 
bloggs 5 at most being interesting for the individual 
as for determined aims. By RSS channel to log for 
receiving chosen bloggs and to watch them through 
Google Reader (to make it the part of personal 
iGoogle).   
2. To manage own blog by own inspiration e.g., using 
Google service Blogger or Edublog or others. To 
believe in an opportunity to be involved in 
conversation and commenting bloggs. Most of 
authors wait for reactions of the readers and are 
prepared to answer them. There is no reason for 
fear. 
Microblogging. At the same time or with small time lag 
the two phases’ cycle can begin e.g., microblog. First to get 
known it by reading, later to become active in writing notes 
and finally to write comments to the others´ notes:  
1. To become involved in microblogging by reading 
Tweets at Twitter. Five well know communities can 
be chosen to watch their content being produced 
and shared. In short moment when 140 symbols are 
read there can be learned a lot. Especially by 
creating the connections between earlier acquired 
terms. Besides the professional microblogs we can 
watch also public personalities such Twitter 
BarackObama. As a rule big surprise comes how 
effective such short notes can be.   
2. Later to create own Twitter and be active on it. The 
last thing to do is to comment Twitters of others. 
Google+ (Facebook). To start the work on Facebook the 
same scheme suits from reading (1.0) to writing and active 
contributing (2.0).   
Wiki. Analogically can be proceeded when using other 
tools, e.g., wiki should not be excluded from any educational 
community at universities – students “cooperate” on daily 
basis. Wiki environment can be used advantageously to 
administrate web space of online course as accessory of 
Learning Management System. LMS is good to keep for 
achieving of selected outputs relevant for academic crediting. 
But to manage activities and cooperation there is opened web 
space suitable to use. This role wiki fulfills greatly.   
Others. Many web application can be used when building 
own personal learning network. Some of them are unique; 
others are alternated in few modifications. By Top 100 Tools 
for Learning being elaborated every year the picture about 
them can be made. 
1. Students write their own notes out of information 
acquired to their PLN at different spaces on the 
Internet.   
2. They watch the work of their colleagues as for topic 
and discuss it.  
3. By teacher’s support they achieve agreement in so 
far work.   
4. They create and publish own material for the 
community of study subject’s online course.  
5. They write comments to colleagues’ materials.  
6. They achieve solutions and results by cooperative 
work 
Students develop their present Personal Network. At the 
university they go further and further from the closest 
surroundings to general audience. 
1. When entering the university the students are 
managed to build their own portfolio in such way to 
be seen by their schoolmates, potential members of 
working teams and their teachers.  
2. Later on their openness and outputs sharing should 
expand through grades as well as universities.  
104
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

3. And finally, their portfolios become opened to the 
general public. 
Each step of the way, their audience gets wider:  
1. Students start from a small circle of trust,   
2. get feedback,  
3. incorporate that feedback into their work,  
4. and venture into the next larger audience circle.  
5. By the time their work reaches the general audience, 
their portfolios have been vetted and debated by 
multiple audiences starting from the students´ closest 
circles of peers and mentors [8]. 
Next, we consider an exchange of opinions beneficial as 
for the objects, by which the portfolio concept should be 
receiving. In the frame of education there is an option to 
systemize a few portfolios, some of them individual, some 
connected with universities. Washington State University in 
its concept Eportfolios for Learning implements three areas: 
1. Student Portfolios promoting student’s engagement 
and ownership of learning.  
2. Teaching Portfolio offering a faculty a method of 
assessing, reflecting on, and improving teaching 
skills.   
3. Program Portfolios highlighting the alignment of 
learning outcomes on multiple scales. 
There is another, fourth option to develop above 
mentioned resulting from Innovation of Education Institute 
of VŠB – Technical University’s experience:   
4. 
 Researcher’s Portfolios promoting researcher’s 
engagement and ownership of research.  
In the research area the support of individuality and 
institution through Web 2.0 is even more uncommon. 
Researchers are tired of not ending results reporting by the 
databases to be filled with data because of insufficient 
integration and systems´ inability to generate such data to be 
used by different views and purposes. Practically there is no 
such a research being interactively supported by portfolios 
development enabling the author to invite the others to the 
space to give feedback or collaborate. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
As it can be seen, when going through internet sources, a 
growing number of institutions see the benefits of new 
technology and collaborative models and respect Web-
enabled transparency as a new force. The university may be 
going through the biggest change as well. Confirming case 
studies having been provided showed that it is possible to act 
similarly also in more conservative environment of Central 
Europe universities. Methodology of implementation of end-
users role in the processes of academic education has been 
proposed and proved. Respondents of statistically significant 
size declared significant changes as for their approach to 
study and its results. They were able to work more by 
themselves and independently, to find and use sources out of 
their community and the outputs of the others motivated 
them to better study etc. Quantitative and qualitative results 
analysis exposed an increase of significance of users-creators 
and effectiveness of educational activities compared to 
currently 
used 
educational 
model 
under 
Learning 
Management Systems. The results become touchable 
contribution to the graduates´ employment in a shape of their 
Personal Credit Portfolio.  
Academic life prefers idleness and pseudo-safety of a 
hierarchic structure and non-transparency and thus rejects the 
openness and sharing. The reason for such behavior is the 
fear of losing its exclusivity. It is widely known that the 
changes are brought about by the information and 
communication technologies. And while these seemingly 
uncomfortable changes are unwanted, it leads to rather cold 
acceptance of the corresponding new technologies. Such 
academic institution is far away from the model Technology 
Powered Learning. Institutions with this philosophy cannot 
gain more than a locally-limited significance and thus their 
importance naturally descends although they try to show the 
opposite by all the evaluation mechanisms. 
The way towards a new conception can be paved by a 
creation of personal virtual communication networks. 
Learners (also teachers and researchers) profit from Web 2.0 
applications’ effort and create their own mutually connected 
net of their individual learning, Personal Learning Networks 
(PLNs). Mush-ups of activities and continuous responses 
through open web applications are the content of their 
Personal Learning Portfolio.  
By continuous activity a man build his Structured 
Accountability System as showcase achievements for 
accountability or employment. The tools of Deep Web and 
Cloud Computing help by facilitating employment searches. 
Continuously interactive lifelong Personal Credit Portfolio 
(PCP) is built as an individual expression of Positive Digital 
Identity.  
Personality and its development are powered by 
technology. The result is the continuous development of 
personal credit and accountability in the labor market.   
This article offers to discussion the experiences resulting 
from acceptation of collectivism principles in university 
education and from the practice of supporting the building 
individual PLNs. Such observations are to disposal when the 
participants (students and pedagogues) have been managed 
to go outside their classes, work continuously even when 
they are not together in the class, to go beyond curriculum of 
presently studying subject. Concentration of content being 
prepared in advance has been shifted to the principle of 
users’ generated content as the centre of learning. It appeared 
the students wanted and was able to find other environments 
and people with the same interest. They carefully have been 
finding the effort of realized conversation (using different 
tools of social net) in the field they want to learn or – by 
pedagogue’s view – which is the aim of subject’s 
curriculum. This all greatly increased their internal 
motivation to learn.      
In real net connection of all participants during the 
education the literacy of the students has been developed and 
they have been able to build their own PLNs. Students 
gained skill to find people and sources in determined context, 
which can be trusted to, and the ability to connect own net to 
relevant and inspirational bundles.   
The ability to create one’s own Personal Learning 
Network or Personal Learning or Credit Portfolios is very 
useful for lifelong learning and employability support. A 
105
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

self-motivated approach to one’s own active systematic 
learning creates an environment known as a sustainable 
development of competencies [12]. The ability to create 
one’s own PLN supports the ability to be adaptable. And to 
be adaptive is to be perpetually current.  
Students are drifted by their own positive digital identity 
development on Web 2.0 cloud. They explore that learning 
starts to be the natural omnipresent part of their lives, change 
their life quality and improve their accountability or 
employment. Real development of their personalities is an 
indisputable fact – on Web 2.0 clouds.  
A Model of Learning Powered by Technology enables, 
motivates and inspires all students to leverage the power of 
technology. Experiences in how to provide personalized and 
student-centric learning and enable continuous and lifelong 
learning can be transferred further.  
Universities have to find by themselves how to reinvent 
the rules of business to survive the flat world created by a 
global Internet as those revolutionary changes have to accept 
all human activities. To improve university’s and its staff’s 
credit (and thus to increase their employability) means:   
• 
Open our activities to the world, actively build own 
Personal Credit Portfolios.  
• 
Support their aggregation into dynamically kept 
university credit – University Portfolio.   
• 
Declare 
the 
fight 
against 
such 
university’s 
presentation as the statistic websites are.   
• 
Open University Net to communicate with wide 
public.  
• 
Support the strategy of personal (and institutional as 
well) positive digital identity development on 
Web 2.0 cloud. 
Innovations being implemented from down to up can 
help to destroy university bureaucracy and support natural 
methods of research work. Our Experiences show that by 
implementation of such principles as openness, peering, 
sharing and acting globally [1] brings great results not only 
in business sphere but at universities as well. New principles 
contribute to university credit’s improvement not putting 
finances into the marketing.  The same principle governs 
one’s credit development – student’s, pedagogue’s or 
researcher’s. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Tapscott, Wikonomics; How Mass Collaboration Changes 
Everything. Penguin Books Ltd. ISBN 978-1-59184-367-2; 
2008. 
[2] T. Barlow, Web 2.0: Creating a classroom without walls. 
Teaching Science, 54(1), 46-48; 2008.  
[3] D. Boyd, The significant of social software. In T. N. Burge 
and J. Schmidt (Eds.), BlogTalks reloaded: social software 
research & cases (pp. 15-30). 2007. Norderstedt, Germany: 
Books on Demand. 
[4] M. Pankowska, Integrated Information and Computing 
Systems for Natural, Spatial, and Social Sciences, Claus-Peter 
Rückemann (ed.) IGI Global, Hershey, New York, 2013 (in 
printing). 
[5] H. Barret,  Balancing the Two Faces of ePortfolio. Available 
at: ttp://eft.educom.pt/index.php/eft/article/viewFile/161/102. 
Accessed 13.3.2011; 2010.  
[6] M. Karnjanaprakorn, Does The Online Education Revolution 
Mean The Death Of The Diploma? 2012. Available at: 
http://www.fastcoexist.com/1679315/does-the-online...  
Accessed 8. 4. 2012. 
[7] D. Tapscott and A. Caston, Paradigm Shift: The New Promise 
of Information Technology (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993). 
[8] Ch. Handley, A. Wilson, N. Peterson, G. Brown and J. 
Ptaszynski.  Out of the Classroom & Into the Boardroom. 
Higher 
Ed. 
Consorcium. 
2007. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.microsoft.com/presspass/events/educause/docs/Ed
ucauseWhitepaper.pdf. Accessed 31. 12. 2011. 
[9] W. Richardson, Five Things You Can Do to Begin 
Developing 
Your Personal Learning 
Network. 
2008. 
Available 
at: 
http://theinnovativeeducator.blogspot.com/2008/04/5-things-
you-can-do-to-begin-developing.html. Accessed 5. 4. 2011. 
[10] D. Bauerová, Web 2.0 and Competitiveness Improvement 
(Web 2.0 y la Mejora de la Competitivida); 291-296; in: 
10.3989/arbor.2011. Extra-3n3160. Vol. 187 - Extra 3 - d 
iciembre (2011). ISSN: 0210-1963.  
[11] D. Bauerová Danuše, Positive Digital Identity Development 
on Web 2.0 Cloud; 337-348, in: Antonio Méndez-Vilas, 
Education in a technological world: communicating current 
and emerging research and technological efforts (pp. 624); 
available 
from 
http://www.formatex.org/ict. 
Formatex 
Research Center, 2011. ISBN (13): 978-84-939843-3-5.  
[12] S. Schaffert, W. Hilzensauer, On the way towards Personal 
learning Environments: Seven crucial aspects. ELearning 
Papers, No 9, July 2008. 
106
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

