Co-Creating Interactive Virtual Reality Training Environments 
Reflections on a Model for a Participatory Design Process 
Elisabeth Frankus, Julia Schmid, Anna Gerhardus 
Science, Technology and Social Transformation 
Institute for Advanced Studies (IHS) 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: frankus@ihs.ac.at, schmid@ihs.ac.at, 
gerhardus@ihs.ac.at 
 
Klaus Neundlinger 
Department of Research 
Institute for Cultural Excellence (ICE) 
Vienna, Austria 
e-mail: klaus.neundlinger@institute-ce.at 
 
 
Abstract—This paper discusses the activities of an ongoing 
research project related to open science. Based on the 
involvement of team leaders, an interactive Virtual Reality 
training for social skills has been developed. Yet, the 
participatory and co-creative elements of the process 
encountered a series of limitations. Analyzing the difficulties of 
the case, we outline an ideal-typical model for the participatory 
development of socio-technical information systems. 
Keywords-virtual reality training; co-creation; participatory 
research; open science. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Any IT-based design is not limited to technological 
issues but has also specific societal and ethical implications. 
Such implications can and should be addressed in co-
creative processes, especially when novel technologies are 
developed, or new fields of potential applications emerge. 
Co-creative processes in this sense are value-based [1], i. e., 
they should include dialogue and discussion at eyelevel 
between developers and users on the ethical and societal 
aspects that are relevant for the respective design project. 
Since co-creation is not limited to the exchange of ideas 
among different stakeholders but should include methods 
and ways of common decision making, processes of value-
based co-creation include also participatory elements. 
In this paper, we present an ongoing implementation case 
of a co-creative design of a socio-technical information 
system. The research and development project Virtual Skills 
Lab, funded by the Austrian Research Promotion Agency, 
aims at developing an interactive Virtual Reality (VR) 
environment for the training of social skills for mid-level 
managers. The project was designed as a transdisciplinary 
process with co-creative and participatory elements. The 
rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we 
describe the structure of the research process, highlighting 
its co-creative and participatory aspects. In Section III, we 
present some considerations on the limitations of our case 
regarding co-creation. In Section IV, we outline a 
categorization of the building blocks of the process 
regarding co-creation, as well as participation and critically 
appraise the extent and intensity of co-creation in the Virtual 
Skills Lab. Based on this appraisal, in Section V, we will 
outline a process design for an ideal-typical co-creative and 
participatory 
development 
of 
an 
interactive 
VR 
environment. The paper concludes with Section VI, which 
contains an outlook of the project and future work of the 
authors. 
II. 
VIRTUAL SKILLS LAB – A TRANSDISCPLINARY 
PROJECT WITH CO-CREATIVE AND PARTICIPATORY ELEMENTS 
The idea of the Virtual Skills Lab was created in 
September 2018 in a five-day seminar structured in form of 
a sandpit named ‘Ideas Lab’ [2]. It was organized by the 
Austrian Research Promotion Agency. The overarching 
topic of the lab was the future of human-machine 
interaction, especially in working environments [3]. Within 
the seminar, a group of researchers, developers and 
practitioners, representatives of five organizations, was 
constituted around the idea of developing an interactive VR 
environment for social skills training. The group, later 
enlarged 
by 
other 
members 
of 
the 
consortium’s 
organizations, consisted of a software developer specialized 
in learning technologies, a human-computer interaction 
researcher specialized in user experience, a psychiatrist, a 
sociologist specialized in the sociology of technology and a 
philosopher with a specialization in corporate culture and 
social skills training.   
Together, this group worked out the proposal for the 
Virtual Skills Lab project, in which a VR prototype for the 
training of social skills should be developed. The idea was 
to use the interactive VR technology in combination with 
technologies like speech recognition and natural language 
processing, in order to create a learning experience for team 
leaders in which they find themselves in the simulation of a 
difficult 
communicative 
situation 
with 
a 
fictional 
collaborator.  
From the beginning, the structure of the project was 
conceived in terms of a co-creative process. This was 
especially the case for the Ideas Lab, in which the project 
idea was born, and for the two-months of writing the full-
length 
proposal 
required 
by 
the 
funding 
agency. 
Furthermore, co-creative elements were planned for the 
whole implementation period of the project, which 
continued to be based on a transdisciplinary approach.  
On the one hand, the members of the consortium 
contribute to the project by separately carrying out 
specialized tasks and work packages. On the other hand, 
many of these tasks are interrelated, so that there is a lot of 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

decentralized coordination and teamwork realized across the 
boundaries of disciplines and specialization.  
During the requirement analysis at the beginning of the 
project, a series of interviews were conducted with experts 
from diverse backgrounds: from VR-related research and 
development to business, training and trade unions. The 
interviewees were asked to express their views on the 
various stages of the project. Some of their statements were 
integrated into the development of the prototype and 
especially into the reflections on the ethical and diversity-
related aspects of the work.  
A special focus in terms of co-creation was given to the 
participation of potential users. This participatory activity 
consisted of a series of workshops with team leaders of an 
international organization, in which a storyline was 
developed. The development of the storyline was based on 
reflections of the team leaders on the everyday interaction 
with their team members and other colleagues in the 
organization. At the end of the workshop series, they 
decided that, among all the topics raised, “decline in an 
appreciative way” was the most relevant for creating an 
interactive scene. A scriptwriter worked out an office scene 
related to this topic, which was discussed together with the 
team leaders and further refined. At the end of this process, 
the scene was accepted as the basis of the prototypical 
interactive VR scene, in which the fictitious collaborator 
appears in form of a virtual non-playable character. 
In a common discussion process, the members of the 
consortium had to make a decision on the characteristics of 
the virtual non-playable character. The perspectives of the 
sociologists, the screenplay writer, the psychologist, the user 
experience researchers, and the VR-developers had to be 
aligned. Finally, the group decided to design the virtual non-
playable character as a woman aged about 30 years with a 
migration background. Furthermore, the decision was taken 
to design alternative characters according to the features of 
age, gender, body type, and realism for the evaluation phase 
of the prototype.  
For the involvement of other potential users, various 
studies in terms of usability and user experience were 
planned. The research group was invited to take part in two 
“science meets public” events organized by the city of 
Vienna in 2020. Both events that would have served not 
only as a presentation, but also for the testing of the scene 
by the public, had to be cancelled due to Covid-19. 
Not only gender and diversity, but also the reflection of 
ethical aspects was integrated into the research design. On 
this behalf, the sociologists have been organizing a series of 
workshops with experts from diverse backgrounds. In these 
workshops, issues such as the appearance and back story of 
the characters of the virtual non-playable character but also 
the co-creative design of the research process, are discussed 
and subject to critical appraisal. 
III. 
LIMITATIONS OF THE CO-CREATIVE APPROACH IN THE 
VIRTUAL SKILLS LAB 
Reflecting on the co-creative and participatory character 
of the Virtual Skills Lab, we can state that some 
achievements 
have 
been 
accomplished, 
particularly 
concerning the implementation of the transdisciplinary 
approach. In addition, the openness towards external views 
and critical stances concerning the project have been 
appreciated by the experts that have taken part in the 
interviews and workshops dedicated to ethical issues. Still, 
the research group has encountered several limitations to a 
fully co-creative and participative research process. 
A. Internal and external cooperation 
Although the project has been realized in a very open, 
transdisciplinary spirit and the coordination between the 
different actors works well, several stages of the 
implementation are solely carried out by the respective 
specialists. There could be more interaction, reflective loops 
and points of intersection between the different groups. 
Coordination is realized in a decentral, network-like, 
open and non-hierarchical form. Still, we have not explicitly 
set up decision-making and working methods that could 
have organized the development in a way to further increase 
the opportunities for reflecting, deciding, and implementing 
together. 
From our perspective, we have not sufficiently involved 
potential users, obviously because of the pandemic, but also 
because 
the 
gap 
between 
in-group 
(research 
and 
development team) and out-group (cooperating company) of 
potential users has not entirely been bridged. Furthermore, 
the motivation of the individual team leaders in the process 
has remained unclear. This could be also due to the limited 
possibility to meet the participants of the story workshops 
caused by the pandemic. The lack of communication with 
the participants and the organization’s representatives has 
caused some misunderstandings and irritations during the 
process. For example, participants often assumed the 
position of a customer that assesses a product, instead of 
feeling part of the research process. In addition, their 
expectations towards the design of the VR scene diverged 
significantly from the actual outcome. 
B. Technological options 
We did not involve potential users in the discussion of 
technological options. An interactive VR scene can be 
realized in three ways: either by using playable characters (i. 
e., as a live role play) [4] [5], or as an interaction with a 
non-playable character controlled by a computer [6] [7], or 
in the form of a 360° video. The decision to use a non-
playable character was taken in advance, also due to the 
necessities of the research proposal. However, we could 
have organized workshops in order to discuss the various 
options in terms of technology with the participants. This 
would have helped anyway to create a shared understanding 
of the training scenario and the possibilities of the VR 
technology. We did not realize this in the Virtual Skills Lab 
because in a first step we focused on co-creating the VR 
content, not realizing how important is would have been to 
involve also potential users in technical decisions. Beside 
the consequences of the pandemic, we lacked time and 
financial resources to ensure also the users’ perspective in 
this stage. Up to now, the gap between the experts’ 
specialized view on the technology and the lack of 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

involvement and information on the side of the participants 
remains. 
C. Resources 
For the realization of a fully participatory and co-creative 
research, more time and financial resources would have 
been necessary. In this way, more potential users from 
different organizations could have been involved from the 
beginning. Furthermore, the involvement of users in the 
development of the technological solution could have been 
realized. 
Due to the Covid-19 pandemic, organizations’ priorities 
shifted significantly, which resulted in a lacking willingness 
to organize participatory events like workshops and 
presentations. This has severely limited the possibilities to 
involve potential users and stakeholders in the research. 
IV. 
CATEGORIZATION OF CO-CREATIVE AND 
PARTICIPATORY ELEMENTS 
Generally, the co-creative and participatory organization 
of research has been practiced for a few decades. ‘Open 
Science’ and ‘Open Innovation’ are concepts that stand for a 
growing community of researchers and members of the 
public who carry out research projects intending to involve 
stakeholders from diverse backgrounds that go far beyond 
the academic field. Hence, Open Science aims at 
transparency regarding the use of data and methods applied.  
Still, the intensity and extent to which a research process 
is opened to non-experts varies. In a report on public 
participation in scientific research from 2009, Bonney et al. 
establish three categories to differentiate between a higher 
or lower degree of participation in such projects [8]. They 
define research projects as ‘contributory’ if they are 
designed by researchers and if members of the public just 
contribute data. In ‘collaborative’ projects, researchers are 
still responsible for the design, but involve members of the 
public in the refining of the design, in data analysis and the 
dissemination of findings. By contrast, ‘co-creative’ projects 
are such endeavors in which researchers and members of the 
public cooperate in the design and in all of the 
implementation steps. 
If we apply these categories to the Virtual Skills Lab, the 
project can be defined as contributory and collaborative. 
The project is characterized by many activities in which 
qualitative and quantitative data are created by potential 
users (in the story workshops as well as in the interviews on 
gender and in the evaluative user experience studies), but 
also by experts (in the expert interviews during the 
requirement analysis as well as in the workshops on ethical 
aspects). 
According to this categorization, the Virtual Skills Lab 
cannot be defined as co-creative as a whole, in that members 
of the public have not been involved in the design. 
However, as we have outlined above, there are co-creative 
and participatory elements in the design as well as in the 
implementation of the project. The sandpit method of the 
Ideas Lab, where the project idea was first conceived, has 
implemented a transdisciplinary dynamic that has been 
provoking discussions and reflections in the research group 
that are well comparable to the dynamic between experts 
and members of the public in co-creative projects as 
conceived of by Bonney et al. [8]. Because of the high 
diversity of academic disciplines, any expert of the group is 
at the same time a member of the public with respect to the 
other disciplines.  
Also, the process of creating a story for the VR scene can 
be defined as co-creative, in that the content was developed 
together with team leaders who eventually decided which 
topic should be worked out by the screenplay writer. In 
addition, the cooperation between the research group and 
the screenplay writer can be described as co-creative. The 
writer joined the research group at an early stage of the 
project, initially assuming the position of an external service 
provider. Still, during the process, she began to identify 
more and more with the research and eventually considered 
herself and her work as part of the research. 
Nevertheless, as already mentioned, the consortium has 
not succeeded to keep the borders between the in-group of 
the researchers and the out-group of potential users as open 
as it would be required in a truly co-creative process, 
limiting the openness of the process to contributory and 
collaborative activities – except for the transdisciplinary 
character of the research and the development of the story. 
TABLE I.  
CO-CREATION IN THE VIRTUAL SKILLS LAB PROJECT 
Virtual Skills Lab 
Building block 
Category [8] 
Method 
Conception 
Co-creative 
Sandpit Ideas Lab 
Requirement analysis 
Contributory, 
collaborative 
Qualitative 
interviews 
Transdisciplinary 
implementation 
Co-creative 
De-central 
coordination, 
discussion and 
cooperation beyond 
specialized tasks 
Target group 
involvement 
Collaborative, 
co-creative 
Workshops 
Usabilty and User 
Experience 
Contributory, 
collaborative 
Qualitative and 
quantitative 
evaluation 
Gender and Diversity 
Collaborative, 
co-creative 
Qualitative 
interviews, common 
decision on virtual 
non-playable 
character’s 
characteristics  
Ethics 
Collaborative 
Workshops 
 
Table I. gives an overview how co-creation was 
implemented in the Virtual Skills Lab project in the different 
building blocks. It also shows the single methods used. 
V. 
A MODEL FOR A CO-CREATIVE DESIGN OF 
INTERACTIVE VR-ENVIRONMENTS 
The categorization introduced by Bonney et al. [8] 
considers all three types of projects as participatory and 
distinguishes according to the extent to which members of 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

the public are invited to participate. It reserves the category 
‘co-creative’ for those projects in which members of the 
public are involved from the stage of designing and 
formulating 
the 
research 
proposal 
to 
the 
various 
implementation and evaluation stages.  
From our perspective, the term ‘participatory’ also refers 
to the various decision-making processes and methods 
applied during the different stages. A distinction between 
more or less participatory research projects could be drawn 
according to the extent to which non-hierarchical decision-
making methods are applied and formalized in the various 
phases. In this sense, not only the involvement in the design 
and the generation of quantitative or qualitative data should 
be considered, but also the way decisions are taken 
whenever there are diverse options or alternative ways in 
which the respective project can be continued. Research 
projects can be defined as more or less participatory 
according to the extent to which decisions on relevant topics 
of the research are taken together (in a transdisciplinary 
team or with members of the public), and if the decision-
making methods allow for openness and a non-hierarchical 
dialogue. 
Participatory decisions can be taken at any stage of the 
process, starting from the project idea and conception. In 
our project, the content of the interactive VR scene was 
developed together with members of the public. The same 
process could have taken place regarding the technological 
solution. Furthermore, the whole development process could 
have been organized in form of continuous participatory 
loops. Finally, also publication and dissemination activities 
could be organized involving specialized researchers, as 
well as members of the public. 
Conceiving an ideal-typical model for participatory 
research, we propose to introduce participatory decision-
making tools right from the beginning of the process. These 
can be derived from the commons research [9] or from new 
non-hierarchical organizational models and decision tools 
like sociocracy or systemic consensing [10] [11]. These are 
valuable methods and organizational forms for an effective 
shaping of discussion and creation processes in which 
specialized and non-specialized participants are involved. 
TABLE II.  
IDEAL-TYPICAL CO-CREATION MODEL 
Ideal-typical Model 
Building block 
Category [8] 
Method 
Conception 
Co-creative, 
participatory 
Sandpit, 
Systemic consensing 
Requirement analysis  
Contributory, 
collaborative 
Qualitative and 
quantitative 
interviews 
Transdisciplinary 
implementation 
Co-creative, 
participatory 
Non-hierarchical 
organization (e. g., 
sociocratic, systemic 
consensing) 
Target group 
involvement 
Co-creative, 
participatory 
Workshops, 
Systemic consensing 
Usabilty and User 
Experience 
Contributory, 
collaborative 
Qualitative and 
qualitative interviews 
surveys  
Ideal-typical Model 
Gender and Diversity 
Co-creative, 
participatory, 
collaborative 
Qualitative 
interviews, co-
creative design of 
characters, systemic 
consensing  
Ethics 
Collaborative 
Workshops 
 
Table II. shows an ideal-typical model of co-creation in a 
R&E project. Methods are suggested for every single 
building block. 
In this way, the co-creative and participatory potential of 
the design of socio-technical information systems could be 
further raised. Therefore, we propose to introduce decision-
making instruments like systemic consensing or the 
sociocratic organization of discussions for the conception of 
the project, the whole process of transdisciplinary 
implementation and especially for the involvement of target 
and stakeholder groups. This implies that researchers should 
acquire the skills necessary for moderating group processes 
and common decision-making, in order to be able to 
effectively connect the openness of scientific research with 
the openness of participatory approaches. In our view, it is 
highly recommendable for researchers engaged in co-
creative research to go through training in group dynamics 
and the moderation of non-hierarchical decision processes. 
Alternatively, these competencies could be provided by 
external professionals. 
VI. 
OUTLOOK AND FUTURE WORK 
Since the technology development and co-creation 
process of the Virtual Skills Lab project has been largely 
completed, the findings described in this paper will only be 
incorporated in the reflection on the overall project process. 
For future projects in the field of research and development 
- especially in technology development - special emphasis 
will be placed on co-creation with regard to technical 
implementation, 
which 
means 
involving 
different 
stakeholders, in particular potential users, in different steps 
of 
technology 
decisions. 
Not 
only 
appropriate 
implementation design, but also a corresponding resource 
planning is necessary, since co-creation in research and 
innovation processes is very time-consuming and thus 
particularly resource-intensive. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Spiekermann, “Ethical IT Innovation. A Value-Based 
System Design Approach,” Boca Raton, CRC Press, 2016. 
[2] K. Maxwell and P. Benneworth, “The construction of new 
scientific norms for solving Grand Challenges,“ Palgrave 
Commun 4, p. 52, 2018. https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-018-
0105-9. 2021.05.14 
[3] Forschungsförderungsgesellschaft 
Österreich. 
Pilot-
Ausschreibung Ideen Lab 4.0 (2018). [online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.ffg.at/ideenlab/ausschreibung2018/ 
2021.05.14. 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

[4] J. Fox et al., “Avatars Versus Agents: A Meta-Analysis 
Quantifying the Effect of Agency on Social Influence,” in 
Human-Computer Interaction 30 (5): pp. 401–32, 2015.  
[5] T. Allen et al., “CharismaTM: A Virtual Reality Training to 
Promote Social Brain Health in Adults,” in Social Skills 
Across the Life Span: Theory, Assessment, and Intervention, 
D. Nangle, C. Erdley, R. Schwartz-Mette,  Eds., Waltham: 
Elsevier, pp. 295–309, 2020. 
[6] D. Bombari, M. Schmid Mast, E. Canadas, and M. 
Bachmann, “Studying Social Interactions through Immersive 
Virtual Environment Technology: Virtues, Pitfalls, and Future 
Challenges,” in Frontiers in Psychology 6, 869-876, 2015. 
[7] M. Gillies and X. Pan “Virtual Reality for Social Skills 
Training,” in Proceedings of the Virtual and Augmented 
Reality to Enhance Learning and Teaching in Higher 
Education Conference, J. Hudson, R, Kerton, Eds., IM 
Publications Open LLP, pp. 83–92, 2018. 
[8] R. Bonney et al., “Public Participation in Scientific Research: 
Defining the Field and Assessing Its Potential for Informal 
Science Education. A CAISE Inquiry Group Report,” 
Washington, D.C.: Center for Advancement of Informal 
Science Education (CAISE), 2009. 
[9] E. 
Ostrom, 
“Governing 
the 
Commons,” 
Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
[10] T. Rau and J. Koch-Gonzalez, “Many Voices One Song,” 
Amherst, MA: Sociocracy for all, 2018. 
[11] Systemisches Konsensprinzip. Home. [online]. Available 
from: 
https://www.sk-prinzip.eu/. 
2021.05.14 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

