Using an Individual-Based Model of Uneven-Aged Forests for Studying Trade-off 
Between Timber Production and Deadwood Preservation
Bruno Bonté
Irstea, LISC and Irstea, EM
Clermont-Ferrand, France
bruno.bonte@irstea.fr
Valentine Lafond and Thomas Cordonnier
Irstea EM
Grenoble, France
[first-name].[last-name]@irstea.fr
Jean-Denis Mathias
Irstea, LISC
Clermont-Ferrand, France
jean-denis.mathias@irstea.fr
Abstract—Integrating the multi-functional  role of forests in 
forestry practices constitutes a challenging example of complex 
system  management.  Usually,  win-win  situations  between 
functions are seldom and trade-offs have to be considered. This 
paper proposes a framework to study dynamical relationships 
between two important functions in forests: timber production 
and biodiversity conservation. We built an individual-based 
model of uneven-aged forests that explicitly takes into account 
timber  harvesting  options  and  dead  wood  dynamics.  Dead 
wood  compartment  was  selected  because  it  represents  a 
relevant  surrogate  for  biodiversity  in  forests.  We  used 
dynamics  metrics  based  on  viability  theory  framework  to 
evaluate  simulations  that  contrasted  different  thinning 
intensities and thinning frequencies. Thanks to this model and 
the metrics used, we are able to discuss optimal strategies for 
preserving biodiversity while guaranteeing timber production.
Keywords-Individual-based  model;  complexity;  forest 
management; multi-functional performance.
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
Multi-functional  management  is  a  challenging  issue, 
which can be generalized for most social-ecological systems. 
The  multi-functional  paradigm  of  forest  management  is 
nowadays very common. Forests have multiple roles and 
provide multiple services  for society, including not only 
timber production but also species conservation. Proposing 
tools that allow forest managers to fulfill different functions 
in a given place is therefore of growing concern [1][2]. 
However, models cannot represent all functions and thus, 
simulation studies can hardly determine the best choice to 
make  [1].  Nevertheless,  models  can  be  used  to  better 
understand or evaluate different situations regarding to a 
specific point of view.
In this paper, we try to provide a common framework to 
researchers and decision makers, who want to evaluate forest 
management  units  regarding  to  two  functions:  timber 
production  and  biodiversity  preservation.  Our  aim  is  to 
Specify entirely the model and the indicators used, in order 
to enables researchers to modify both, silvicultural scenarios, 
and forest dynamics model parameters. Hence, it will be 
possible to evaluate and compare different contexts, based on 
the  common  rigorous  and  explicit  theoretical  framework 
provided by the model specification.
Consequently, the objective of this paper is: i) to propose 
an individual-based model that enables the evaluation of 
forest  management  within  the  framework  of  multi-
functionality;  ii)  to discuss the  trade-off  between  timber 
production and biodiversity preservation using a risk-based 
performance criteria to evaluate forestry practices. From the 
point of view of renewable resource management, we use the 
viability  theory  framework  of  resilience  [3]  to  establish 
system  performance  criteria  representing  ecological 
biodiversity resilience [4]. This kind of approach is also 
related  to  the  concept  of  permanence  already  used  to 
evaluate forest capacity to ensure several functions [5].
The paper is split in four parts. In Section II, we present 
the general method adopted. In Section III, we present and 
specify  the  model  used  to  simulate  forest  dynamics.  In 
Section IV, we present and specify the forest management 
algorithm. Finally, in Section V, we present  simulations 
results.
II.
MATERIAL AND METHOD
Forest  dynamics modelling and simulation have been 
widely studied during these past years,  providing spatial 
models of forests, validated for several  tree species and 
forest management types. Those models can be used to test 
and understand trade-offs offered by some given forestry 
practices, regarding to some given functionalities [6].
However, these models cannot take into account all the 
functions of the forest, which can be defined at different 
spatial scales. For this reason, instead of trying to find the 
best trade-off between ecosystem services [1][6], we rather 
try to identify the solutions that better provide all services 
considered, i.e., solutions that are not pareto-dominated. The 
set of solutions found can then be used as a reference to 
make decision. Following this approach, we do not need to 
use commensurable criteria to evaluate the different services 
provided by the forest. Particularly, it enables us to use 
dynamics metrics adapted to each service considered. We 
can thus represent  the fact that, for instance,  the timber 
production function can be averaged over time, whereas the 
175
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

insect  habitat  providing  function  must  be  permanently 
supplied. 
Consequently, our methodological proposal is to design a 
simple individual-based model  to simulate trajectories  of 
these indicators for forest stands managed under different 
silvicultural scenarios. Applying dynamics metrics to these 
trajectories, we are able to compare the criteria values for the 
different scenarios.
We  first  identify  the  indicators  to  be  monitored,  in 
relation  to  the  timber  production  and  biodiversity 
preservation  functions.  The  indicator  chosen  to  monitor 
timber production is the harvested timber volume (Vr) at 
each  time  t.  Only  the  mean  value  of  this  indicator  is 
important here: the dynamics of stand timber production is 
not important because wood supply permanency should be 
evaluated at a wider spatial scale than the one considered in 
silvicultural  management.  Consequently,  the  performance 
criteria  considered  for  timber  production  is  the  mean 
harvested timber volume over a given period ( ̄V r ). We 
chose two  indicators related to the biodiversity preservation 
function. In a review dedicated to indicators of biodiversity 
for ecologically sustainable management, Lindenmayer et al. 
[7]  suggests  two  categories  of  indicators:  taxon-based 
indicators based on the presence/absence of some species, 
and  structure-based  indicators  based  on  the  structure  of 
habitats at the stand or landscape scale. Here, we decided to 
focus our work on structure-based indicators. We focus on 
two  habitats  known  to  be  linked  to  the  biodiversity  of 
saproxylic beetles (beetles that depend on dead wood) [8][9]
[10]: the average dead wood volume in the stand, denoted I1, 
and the volume of adult dead trees in the stand (i.e., number 
of dead trees with diameter greater than 17.5cm), denoted I2.
Both indicators (I1 and I2) can be monitored over time. 
We use resilience criteria for providing a way to compare 
dynamic trajectories of the indicators. For each structural 
indicator I1 and I2, we consider a minimum value I1
min and 
I2
min and we compute a resilience criteria  γ(Ik)k={1,2}, as the 
percentage of time, during which the minimum acceptable 
value is not reached, over a given time period T (1).
γ(I k)=
E⟦∫0
T
μ(I k(t))dt⟧
T
(1)
 where ,
Mathematical  expected  value  E⟦∫0
T
μ(I k(t))dt⟧  is 
computed as an average  over  several  replications of the 
model, which involves stochastic processes. This resilience 
criterion highlights the ability of the system to continuously 
provide  saproxylic  habitats  despite  of  cyclic  timber 
removals.
III.
MODELLING FOREST DYNAMICS
We consider a mono-specific uneven-aged forest. We use 
a spatial individual-based model, which takes into account 
interactions between trees. It is a demographic model, which 
simulates the processes of growth, mortality and recruitment. 
We choose a diameter-based dendrometric model because it 
has a low computational cost, compared to more compex 
individual-based models. The growth sub-model is based on 
the  simplification of the  Samsara2 model developed for 
Norway spruce and Silver fir in French mountain forest [11]. 
Other processes are calibrated to obtain qualitative results 
similar to the Samsara2 model.
A tree k (adult or juvenile) is characterised by its position 
in the 2D space (we write xk∈R
2 ) and its diameter at breast 
height:  dk ∈R .  We  also  consider  coarse  woody  debris 
characterised by a volume  v w ,k , a diameter  d w ,k  and an 
age  aw ,k . Coarse woody debris can be either a dead tree 
(wind-throw, other natural death, ..) or parts of a tree that 
have been removed. We do not consider this distinction in 
this study. System state at time t is then characterised by the 
tree population of N t  trees  ( xk ,d k )1<k < Nt  and the coarse 
woody  debris  population  of  N w  coarse  woody  debris 
(vw ,k ,aw ,k ,d w ,k)1<k < Nw .
Thereafter, we use basal area instead of diameter without 
any loss of information. The basal area is a value commonly 
used in forest management and measures the cross-section of 
tree trunks and stems at 1.30m hight. Basal area of tree k is 
noted g k  and computed as specified in (2).
gk=
πd k
2
4
(2)
A diameter-volume function noted  V(d) enables us to 
convert diameter values to volume values. We used a simple 
classical volume tariff called Algan n°9 for diameters greater 
than 15cm and linearised this tariff for diameters smaller 
than  15cm.  This  function  is  parametrised  with  a 
circumference metric decrease of 6 cm per meter.
A.
Competition
For  all  processes,  a  perfect  one-sided  competition 
C (xk ,d k)  expressed  in  (m2/ha)  was  considered,  as 
specified in (3).
C (xk ,d k)=∑i∣di≥d k g iω(xi−xk)
(3)
where  ω is a light  interception  kernel  designed as a 
spatial kernel of parameter σ:
{
ω(x ' −x)= 1
πσ
2 , if ∥x '−x∥≤σ
ω( x '−x )=0, otherwise
(4)
μ(I k(t))=1 if I k(t)> I k
min
=0  otherwise
176
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

B.
Growth process 
The growth process equation used for all trees (diameter 
greater  than  7.5cm)  is  given  by  the  basal  area  growth, 
computed  as  a  potential  growth  Pot,  multiplied  by  a 
reduction function Red (5 to 7). The potential function used 
is the potential growth used in the Samsara2 model [11]. The 
reduction function Red has been chosen for its simplicity and 
calibrated  to  obtain  similar  simulation  results  as  the 
Samsara2 model using perfect one-sided competition.
dgk
dt (xk ,d k)=Pot (x k ,d k)∗Red (xk ,d k)
(5)
with
Pot(x k ,d k)=r0
d k
r1
1+r2 e
r 3 dk
(6)
and,
Red( x k ,d k)=u0 e
−u 1C( xk ,d k )
(7)
where,  (ri)(0≤i≤3) , and  (ui)(0≤i≤1)  are species specific 
parameters  related  respectively  to  potential  growth  and 
competition.
C.
Mortality process 
A logistic model is used for mortality. Probability of 
mortality per year P is given in (8).
P (xk ,d k )=max ( P1(xk ,d k), P2(xk ,d k))
(8)
This mortality function is composed of two functions P1 
and P2 designed respectively for young trees and old trees. 
P1 is based on the French forestry inventory data from IFN 
(the  regression  method  is  not  detailed  here).  Forestry 
inventories mostly contain small and medium diameter trees. 
According to literature, large tree mortality is higher than the 
mortality of small trees. Thus function P2, is used  to correct 
mortality  rate  for  large  diameter  trees.  P1(xk ,d k)  and 
P2(x k ,d k)  are given in (9) and (10).
P1(xk ,d k)=
1
1+e p0+ p1 .dk−p2.d k
2−z .C( xk , dk)
(9)
P2( xk ,d k )=
1
1+e
−p 3− p4 d k
2
(10)
where ( pi)(0≤i≤4)  and z  are species specific parameters 
related respectively to potential death and death linked to 
competition.
D.
Recruitment process 
Trees  are  recruited  with  a  diameter  of  7.5  cm.  The 
probability that a tree is recruited in a position x’ depends on 
the  past  environmental  conditions  at  this  position.  We 
consider the number of seeds that have been spread at this 
position and  the  competition that  this position has been 
subjected to over the past twenty-five years. At time t 0  each 
tree k can recruit a young tree situated in a free position x’ 
with the probability R(x ' , x k ,d k ,t0)  computed as in (11).
R(x ' , xk ,d k ,t0)=
b. g k∑t=t0−24
t0
ωD( x
'−xk )e
−sC (x ' ,7.5)
25
(11)
where  b  is  the  potential  recruitment  rate;  s  is  the 
sensitivity to light; C(x’,7.5) is the local competition for light 
on the position x’ for a tree of diameter inferior than 7.5 cm 
as presented in (3);  ωD -function is a dispersal function 
computed as a spatial kernel of parameter  σD  as the ω 
function presented in (4). 
E.
Coarse woody debris generation and decomposition
Each time a tree  (x k ,d k)  dies, a new coarse woody 
debris  i is  generated  with: v w ,i=V (d k) ,  d w ,i=d k  and 
ai=0 .
Once a coarse woody debris has been generated, it is 
subjected to natural decomposition and its volume decreases 
according to (12).
dvw ,k
dt
=−α.vw ,k
(12)
where  α  is the decomposition rate. Furthermore, any 
coarse woody debris with vw ,k<0.0001  m3 is removed from 
the system. Age of the dead wood piece increases with time 
as described in (13).
d aw ,k
dt
=dt
(13)
IV.
MODELLING FOREST MANAGEMENT
In this part, we model management actions on the forest 
stand. The minimum diameter for removal is noted Dmin. In 
the following, we note V r  the total volume removed. We 
consider a simplified view of forestry practices performed in 
the case of uneven-aged forest management (see [11] for a 
more complete simulation of uneven-aged management). A 
silvicultural  scenario  is  defined  by  a  removal  intensity 
(removal stops when a total of  Δba  per year has been 
removed) and the minimum interval during two removals 
(Δt) . To these forest management factors, we add 2 factors 
for dead wood management:  
177
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

•  pa  is the proportion of the dead wood basal area 
removed at each removal. This is related to the possibility of 
removing  some  recently  dead  trees.  This  parameter  is 
interesting regarding conservation strategy (i.e., dead tree 
retention or not);
• pe  is the proportion of wood volume exported when a 
tree is removed. Meaning that ( 1− pe ) stays on the stand. 
This parameter can be related to biomass energy practices 
(i.e., whole tree extraction or not).
A.
 Removal decision
At  time  t ,  we  note  V cwd  the  set  of  deadwood 
removable during the previous Δt  time period:
V cwd ={(vw ,k ,aw ,k ,d w ,k) ∣ d w ,k> Dminand aw ,k< Δt} (14)
Then  the  basal  area  available  for  removing  can  be 
approximated by the value BAa  :
BAa=∑i∣d i>Dmin g i+ pa∑ j∣(v w , j ,aw , j ,d w , j)∈V cwd π d w , j
2
4
(15)
The removal decision is the following:
“A removal is performed at time t if and only if at this  
time  BAa≥Δ ba  AND the time spent since the previous 
removal is greater than Δt .”
If  BAa<Δ ba  when the time step since the previous 
removal is Δt , the removal period is increased continuously 
until the date  t 0 , for which  BAa≥Δba . Then, the same 
procedure occurs at time t 0+Δt .
B.
 Removal process
First, dead trees to remove are successively withdrawn 
from the set V cwd  by decreasing order of diameter, until the 
proportion pa  of the total basal area of V cwd  is reached. 
Whenever a dead tree k is removed at time t, we observe the 
updates described by (16) to (18).
v w ,k(t+dt )=(1− pe)vw ,k (t )
(16)
d w ,k(t +dt )=Dmin
(17)
and 
V r(t+dt )=V r+ pe v w ,k(t )
(18)
Then, Δba
living  trees  with  diameter  greater  than
Dmin
 are randomly selected and harvested until Δba
 
is reached, unless Δba
 has already been reached with 
dead  trees.  The  probability  Pk  that  an  individual  k is 
removed at each successive step is given in (19) (see [11] for 
a justificaiton):
Pk=(
d k
maxi∈S di)
2
(19)
where S⊂{( xi,d i)∣d i≥Dmin}  is the set of trees that have 
not been removed. When a tree k is removed, a new dead 
tree l is created. Its volume is vw ,l=(1− pe)V (d k) , and its 
diameter is Dmin . Then, the removed volume is increased 
as follows:
V r(t+dt )=V r(t )+ pe V (dk )
(20)
where  V (d k )  is  given  by  the  volume  computation 
function.
V.
RESULTS
A.
Experimental design
We  performed  simulations  with  parameter  values 
described in Table 1. Initial states are obtained by simulating 
2000 years with no management, followed by 1750 years 
with the chosen management strategy. It enables us to reach 
pseudo-equilibriums  of  managed  forests.  With  this 
experimental  design, we tested three different  values for 
harvested  quantities,  presented  as  a  yearly  basal  area 
harvested (Δba), as well as for the minimum removal period 
(Δt). Tested values are presented in Table 2. Nine different 
strategies are defined from the combination of these factors. 
In addition, a scenario with no removal is presented.  Twenty 
replications were performed for each removal strategy.
TABLE I. VALUES OF THE PARAMETERS
Dmin
pa
pe
d0
d1
d2
d3
r0
r1
r2
27.5
0.9
0.9
-4.37
-0.014
4.10-4
-9
9.64
0.24
1.11
r3
u0
u1
b
s
σ
σD
α
-0.10
0.85
0.035
11
0.05
10
15
0.07
TABLE II. VALUES TESTED FOR THE TWO SIVICULTURAL 
FACTORS
Δbamin (m2.ha-1.year-1)
0.2
0.4
0.6
Δt (year)
5
10
15
For each combination of factors values, we computed the 
timber production criterion  ̄V r  and the two biodiversity 
preservation criteria  γ(I1) and  γ(I2). As said previously, the 
first indicator (I1) is the total volume of deadwood on the 
stand. It can be computed at any time step as presented in 
(21).
I 1=∑0≤k≤N w vw ,k
(21)
A minimum value of 15 m3/ha of dead wood in European 
forest  stands  seems to be  reasonable  regarding  to actual 
knowledge [12]. Consequently, I1
min is equal to 15m3 .
178
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

The second indicator (I2) does not correspond to a specific 
recommendation, but enables us to discuss about a qualitative 
aspect of the dead wood stock. As dead wood diversity plays 
an important role in saproxylic beetles diversity [10], we 
monitor the volume of adult dead trees on the stand:
I 2=∑{k∣d w , k>17.5}vw ,k
(22)
We chose a limit of 4 m3 corresponding to the mean 
volume of two adult dead trees. Consequently, I2
min is equal to 
4m3.
B.
Simulation results
The mean timber production and the resilience of the 
dead  wood stock  γ(I1) (% of time in which dead wood 
volume is greater than 15 m3) for each removal strategy are 
presented in  Figure 1. The scenario without any removal is 
represented in this Figure as a green diamond. We can see 
that in this case the production is null and the dead wood 
stock resilience is 100%, meaning that the volume of the 
dead wood stock (I1) is always greater than 15 m3  (I1
min) for 
this scenario.
Figure 1. Timber mean production and dead wood habitat resilience for 
different removal strategies.
We  first  notice  that  increasing  the  time  lap between 
removals has a low impact on production (less than 5%), but 
increases dead wood habitat resilience. It is mainly due to the 
fact, that increasing time lap between removals enables the 
system to regenerate deadwood, despite of the regular timber 
removals. However, for Δba =0.6, high time laps ( Δt =10 
and  Δt =15) between timber removals, lead to equivalent 
value of the resilience criteria. 
Then, increasing the harvest basal area leads to a non-
linear increase of the timber production, whereas it decreases 
the dead wood stock resilience indicator γ(I1) in most cases. 
However, increasing the harvest basal area from 0.4 m2.ha-
1.y-1 to  0.6  m2.ha-1.y-1 does  not  increase  the  production 
criteria, as much as increasing it from 0.2 m2.ha-1.y-1 to 0.4 
m2.ha-1.y-1. The first reason is that the higher the removal 
intensity is, the younger (and thus the smaller) the trees are. 
Consequently, for the same harvest basal area, the timber 
volume removed is lower. The second reason is that the 
whole basal area of 0.6 m2.ha-1.y-1 cannot be harvested at 
every removal period. Consequently the removal period is 
increased,  in respect  to the removal  algorithm, until  the 
harvest basal area is available. This is the reason why, even 
if the mean timber production is higher, resilience indicator 
γ(I1) for Δba =0.6 is higher than that for Δba =0.4. Interval 
between removals is increased and thus resilience is higher.
Figure 2 shows the same results but considering  the 
volume of adult dead trees, instead of the whole dead wood 
volume  (% of time in which adult dead trees (dw,k>17.5 cm) 
volume  is  greater  than  4m3).  Once  again,  the  resilience 
indicator is 100% in the scenario with no removal. Like γ(I1), 
γ(I2) increases when the time lap between removal increases. 
However, unlike  γ(I1), excepted for the five year removal 
period where the same phenomenon occurs, adult dead trees 
resilience  is  higher  for  an  average  harvest  basal  area 
(circles), than for a high removal (squares). This is due to the 
fact that, when high values of basal area are removed at the 
same time, most of adult trees are removed, and thus the 
forest is mostly composed of young trees.
Figure 2. Timber mean production and adult dead trees habitat resilience for 
different removal strategies.
Finally, Figures 1 and 2 enable us to identify silvicultural 
scenarios that are non-dominated by neither a criterion nor 
the other. These scenarios are linked by black lines in both 
Figures. In regard to these two functions,  preferred scenarios 
chosen  should  be  on  these  lines.  Furthermore,  pareto-
179
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

dominated scenarios  can be  compared  relatively  to their 
distances to the non-dominated scenarios for each criteria.
VI.
CONCLUSION
Multi-functional forest management raises several issues, 
at the political point of view, to design forest management 
policies at regional scales, as well as at the technical point of 
view, to design forestry practices at the management unit 
scale. 
We developed a simple individual-based model, in order 
to test the impact of forestry practices on indicators linked to 
timber production and biodiversity resilience. We showed 
that  this  model  enables  decision  makers,  to  discuss  the 
trades-off offered by different forestry practices, concerning 
timber  production  and  some  indicators  of  biodiversity 
preservation.
Beyond  forest  management,  the  multi-functional 
management issue can be extended to most social-ecological 
systems  [13].  Considering  the  more  general  problem  of 
multi-functional socio-ecosystem management, we think that 
this work provides an interesting point of view, where a 
generic model is designed to evaluate multi-criteria decisions 
when criteria are not commensurable and similar situations 
are numerous.
One of the main  advantages of this model lies in the 
spatialization of processes. It will enable us to consider more 
complex forestry practices. Besides, in future work, we plan 
to propose and test adaptive forest managements, relying on 
simple indicators that the forest manager can easily estimate, 
such  as  the  potential  biodiversity  index  developed  for 
assessing potential biodiversity in forest stands [2].
REFERENCES
[1]
J. Kangas and A. Kangas, “Multiple criteria decision support in forest 
management  -  the  approach,  methods  applied,  and  experiences 
gained”, Forest Ecology and Management, vol. 207(1-2), Mar. 2005, 
pp. 133-143.
[2]
L. Larrieu and P. Gonin, “The potential bioversity index (pbi) - a 
quick and simple method for assessing potential biodiversity in forest 
stands”, Revue Forestiere Francaise, vol. 60(6), 2008, pp. 727–748. 
[3]
S. Martin, “The cost of restoration as a way of defining resilience: A 
viability  approach  applied  to  a  model  of  lake  eutrophication”, 
Ecology and Society, vol. 9(2), 2004, art. 8.
[4]
C.  S.  Holling,  “Resilience  and  stability  of  ecological  systems”, 
Annual Review of Ecology and Systematics, vol. 4, 1973, pp. 1–23.
[5]
T. Cordonnier, B. Courbaud, F. Berger, and A. Franc, “Permanence 
of resilience and protection efficiency in mountain norway spruce 
forest stands : A simulation study”, Forest Ecology and Management, 
vol. 256(3), 2008, pp. 347–354. 
[6]
W.S.  Schwenk,  T.M.  Donovan,  W.S.  Keeton,  and  J.S.  Nunery, 
“Carbon storage, timber production, and biodiversity: Comparing 
ecosystem services with multi-criteria decision analysis”, Ecological 
Applications, vol. 22(5), 2012, pp. 1612–1627.
[7]
D.B. Lindenmayer, C.R. Margules, and D.B. Botkin., “Indicators of 
biodiversity  for  ecologically  sustainable  forest  management”, 
Conservation Biology, vol. 14(4), 2000, pp. 941–950.
[8]
C.  Bouget,  A.  Lassauce,  and  M.  Jonsell,  “Effects  of  fuelwood 
harvesting on biodiversity - a review focused on the situation in 
europe”, Canadian Journal of Forest Research, vol. 42(8), 2012, pp. 
1421–1432.
[9]
A. Lassauce, Y. Paillet, H. Jactel, and C. Bouget, “Deadwood as a 
surrogate  for  forest  biodiversity:  Meta-analysis  of  correlations 
between  deadwood  volume  and  species  richness  of  saproxylic 
organisms”, Ecological Indicators, vol. 11(5), 2011, pp. 1027–1039.
[10] A. Brin, C. Bouget, H. Brustel, and H. Jactel, “Diameter of  downed 
woody debris  does matter for  saproxylic beetle  assemblages in 
temperate oak and  pine forests”,  Journal of Insect Conservation, 
vol. 15 (5), 2011, pp. 653- 669.
[11] V.  Lafond,  G.  Lagarrigues,  T.  Cordonnier,  and  B.  Courbaud, 
“Uneven-aged management options to promote forest resilience for 
climate change adaptation: effects of group selection and harvesting 
intensity”,
 Annals  of  Forest  Science,  2013,  pp.  1-14, 
doi:10.1007/s13595-013-0291-y.
[12]  J.  Muller  and R. Butler, “A review of habitat thresholds for dead 
wood: a baseline for management recommendations in European 
forests”, European Journal of Forest Research, vol. 129(6), 2010, pp. 
981-992.
[13] E. Ostrom, “A general  framework for  analysing sustainability of 
social- ecological systems”, Science, vol. 325(5939), 2009,  p.p. 
419–422
180
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-283-7
ICCGI 2013 : The Eighth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

