ICT Utilization in Libyan Universities: A Report on Case Study Research   
 
Ali Bakeer 
School of Information Technology 
University of Misurata 
Misurata, Libya 
Ali.m.bakeer@gmail.com 
Martin Wynn 
School of Computing and Technology 
University of Gloucestershire 
Cheltenham, UK 
MWynn@glos.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract - There is a dearth of literature on the use of 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) in 
Libyan universities and this paper aims to help address this 
imbalance by exploring and analyzing how ICTs are used in 
Libyan universities. Process maps and systems profiling are 
employed to examine the current and potential uses of ICTs 
and a new model for assessing ICT utilization in Libyan 
universities is put forward and applied at the University of 
Misurata in northern Libya. This innovative approach to 
assessing ICT deployment in Libya has emerged from initial 
case study research that will be further developed as other 
universities in Libya are investigated.  
Keywords – information and communication technologies; ICTs; 
Libyan universities; process mapping; systems profiling; SCALE 
model 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
With the development and application of Information and 
Communications Technologies (ICTs), organisations have 
started to accept that it is important for them to embrace new 
technologies in order to achieve competitive advantage [1]. 
The term ICT emerged in the new millennium and is 
generally considered to encompass the recent developments 
in communications and e-business infrastructure as well as 
the more traditional core IT functions of an organisation. It 
thus can also be considered to include an organisation’s 
Information 
Systems 
(IS). 
“The 
term 
IT is 
used 
interchangeably with IS, or it may even be used as a broader 
concept that describes a collection of several information 
systems, users, and management for an entire organisation” 
[2]. However, “information and communications technology 
is often used as an extended synonym for Information 
Technology (IT), but is usually a more general term that 
stresses the role of unified communications and the 
integration of telecommunications (telephone lines and 
wireless signals), computers, middleware as well as 
necessary software, storage and audio-visual systems, which 
enable users to create, access, store, transmit, and manipulate 
information” [3]. It is this broad definition of ICT that is 
adopted for this study. 
The study investigates how ICT utilization can contribute 
to universities' overall performance. It is one of the few 
studies focusing on ICT utilization in the Higher Education 
Institutions sector in the developing World, in spite of the 
growing importance of this sector [4]. This research attempts 
to support the universities in developing more efficient ways 
of managing core organizational processes and associated 
information flows, and will also explore the cultural and 
operational implications of using ICTs more widely and 
more effectively.  
Following this introduction, an overview of some of the 
existing models relevant to this study is provided, leading to 
a statement of the three research questions that are 
subsequently addressed.  The qualitative case study approach 
employed in this research is then briefly discussed, followed 
by a section which summarises the findings to date, in the 
main derived from analysis of processes and systems at 
Misurata University. From these findings, a new conceptual 
model for analyzing ICT deployment in Libyan universities 
is presented, and the concluding section discusses how this 
exploratory research will be advanced through further studies 
of ICT deployment in the university sector. 
II. 
ORGANISATIONAL AND THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK 
In Libya, ICT has had an undoubted impact on university 
operations [5]. In recent years, a national strategic plan for 
developing ICT infrastructure in universities has provided 
new impetus for change in university administration,  
making its future exploitation a key component of university  
development plans [6]. Libyan universities still face 
significant challenges that affect their management and 
services, which in turn affect their reputation locally and 
internationally. 
These 
barriers 
include 
management 
capability, poor processes and procedures, lack of 
accountability, lack of technology strategy, poor technology 
skills, and budgetary constraints [7]. 
There are eleven public universities in Libya (see Table 
I), and, in addition, there is one fledgling private university 
that has yet to receive approval from the Libyan Ministry of 
Higher Education (LMOHE). For this reason, it is excluded 
from this study. The LMOHE fund and manage the eleven 
public universities in Libya, with a common management, 
financing and regulation system that aims to improve the 
universities’ management and services. In terms of using 
ICT applications, managers in Libyan universities generally 
face a number of barriers such as lack of skills to deal with 
educational problems and they tend to struggle with the 
management of institutional inefficiencies [8]. It has been 
suggested [9] that, in order for the Libyan universities to 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

meet international standards, it will be necessary to upgrade 
their ICT infrastructure. Barriers to the increased take-up of 
ICT applications in Libyan institutions include a lack of ICT 
infrastructure, a lack of qualified personnel and an 
institutional resistance to change [7]. The root cause of the 
current situation can be traced back to financial and cultural 
issues that have severely impeded technology adoption and 
associated process change. 
Top level process mapping and systems profiling have 
been used in a number of studies in the UK to assess the ICT 
status of organizations [10][11]. This approach has been 
applied in a Libyan context in studies of information systems 
deployment in Libyan banks [13] and Libyan oil        
companies [14].   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In addition, since the turn of the millennium, and 
influenced by the growth of the internet, a number of models 
have been developed to gauge organizations’ use of ICT 
and/or e-business [15][16]. Most of these e-business models 
have been designed in Western countries, where the 
technological and organizational environment is still 
significantly different to that in Libya. Heeks [17] is one of 
several authors to point out that systems designed and 
implemented in the West are often not appropriate for use in 
the developing world.  This ‘design-actuality gap’ arguably 
applies equally to some of these models, and this research 
attempts to build a new conceptual framework better geared 
to developing world organizations.  
The following Research Questions (RQs) will be 
addressed: 
RQ1: What is the current level of ICT utilization in 
Libyan universities?   
RQ2:  How appropriate are existing models for assessing 
the current and potential use of ICTs in Libyan universities?   
RQ3: Can a new conceptual and operational model be 
developed for ICT utilization in universities in Libya? 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY  
Research strategy can be defined as the general plan of 
how the researcher will go about answering the research 
questions [18]. The philosophical foundation of this study is 
based on the ontology of subjectivism, while the 
epistemological position will be interpretivism. The 
researcher is centrally involved in the phenomena being 
studied, and is a key player in the process of data collection 
and analysis to answer the research questions. In terms of the 
methodological approach, case studies are applicable when 
research addresses either a descriptive question such as 
“what is happing or has happened?” or an explanatory 
question such as “how or why did something happen?”    
[19]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It has also been asserted [18] that if a case study strategy 
incorporates multiple cases, then the resulting data can 
provide greater confidence in the research findings. The 
study population in this research is Libyan public 
universities, and the cases are likely to either produce similar 
results (literal replication), or produce contrasting results but 
for predictable reasons (theoretical replication).  
The research approach will be qualitative, which is in 
accordance with others similar studies [13][20]. Six 
universities are being considered, selected on the basis of 
size and geographical location. At each university, a range of 
activities is being undertaken to gather and analyze the data 
and information. These activities include assessment of 
overall university strategy, assessment of information 
availability, process mapping and systems profiling.  
In terms of research philosophy, this study is based on an 
inductive approach. The time horizon is cross-sectional as 
data is collected only once. For data collection, the study 
uses multiple-sources of evidence these include structured 
questionnaire, open qualitative semi-structured interviews 
with many different university employees and students, 
TABLE I. PUBLIC LIBYAN UNIVERSITIES IN ACADEMIC YEAR 2012/13 [12] 
 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

document analysis, observation and personal experience. The 
rationale for using multiple-sources is the triangulation of 
evidence. Triangulation increases the reliability of the data 
and the process of gathering it [19].  
IV. 
FINDINGS 
In this section, the first two RQs are addressed: What is 
the current level of ICT utilization in Libyan universities? 
And: How appropriate are existing models for assessing the 
current and potential use of ICTs in Libyan universities?  
Top level process mapping undertaken at the two case 
study universities studied to date (Misurata and Al-Mergab) 
suggests that seven main organizational processes can be 
identified (Fig.1). This process map can act as a framework 
for assessing how ICTs are supporting these processes, each 
one of which can be broken down into two or more sub-
processes. These processes appear to be fairly standard 
across the two universities studied to date, and derive from 
interviews with key staff and assessment of university 
departmental structures and operations. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 1.  Top level processes at Misurata and Al-Mergab Universities  
 
The overall picture is of organizations in the early stages 
of ICT adoption. There is some use of standalone office 
automation packages (word processors and spreadsheets) and 
there are some in-house developed systems, particularly for 
supporting the student records management and financial 
processes and functions. However, there are only very basic 
hard-wired networks, although these are currently being 
developed. Thus, systems are standalone and the use of email 
is limited. Both universities have a website, but only for 
providing basic information to the outside world. Knowledge 
and awareness of the capabilities of ICT is limited to a few 
individuals and there are but a few ICT training programmes 
for staff. 
Systems profiling, based on interview responses and first 
hand assessment of systems performance, suggests the 
majority of information systems now in place are in need of 
replacement or major upgrade. The problem is particularly 
acute in the student management process where the three 
sub-processes are supported by a mix of in-house systems, 
developed in Visual Basic and the Delphi programming 
language with the aid of external programmers over the past 
12 years,  and ad hoc developments in MS Excel and MS 
WORD.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 2.  Systems profiling in the student management process at 
Misurata University. 
R = Red, in need of replacement 
A = Amber, can possibly be retained, with upgrade/improvements 
 
There is a basic local area network, which allows multi-
user updates of these systems. In the engineering college, 
end-users have developed an in-house portal which allows 
students to edit and modify certain designated information 
regarding their courses and personal details. There is no 
electronic ID student card for identifying students as 
members of the university community. The in-house 
developed systems are not integrated nor interfaced with 
each other, leading to problems of data inconsistencies and 
multiple data updates. An assessment of these systems 
suggests they should be replaced, although the support 
spreadsheets and word-processed documents could remain 
(Fig. 2). 
Similarly, the human resource management process is 
supported by an in-house developed system using the Visual 
Basic and Delphi programming languages, with an 
underpinning SQL database, introduced in 2006. This 
provided a great opportunity for keeping and reporting staff 
records, but it is a stand-alone system which is digitally 
isolated from the University’s networks.  Data is gathered 
manually and organized by administrative staff using MS 
WORD or Excel before entry into the in-house system. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3.  Systems profiling in the human resources management process 
at Misurata University 
A = Amber, can possibly be retained, with upgrade/improvements 
G = Green, strategically sound technology deployment 
 
 
 
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

This is a time consuming process and there remains a high 
degree of manual and semi-manual processes and a lack of 
information sharing in the human resource management 
process (Fig. 3). The financial management process is 
arguably the most automated, with the majority of activities 
and procedures supported by systems developed in house 
(again in Visual Basic and Delphi) and/or in MS WORD and 
Excel. In house systems are the students scholarship and 
grants system; the national ID system; staff salary 
management; and year end budgeting. WORD and Excel 
systems are used for the preparation of disbursements; 
procurement; financial audit records; receipt and collection 
of various university incomes; cash rewards; grants and other 
activities. The university financial process and sub-processes 
are illustrated in Fig. 4. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4.  Systems profiling in the financial management process at 
Misurata University 
A = Amber, can possibly be retained, with upgrade/improvements 
 
ICT provision in the other processes at Misurata University 
follows a similar pattern, but in general is less well 
developed. The current ICT provision is a range of bespoke 
systems, running either in standalone mode or across 
disjointed networks, supported by ad hoc use of WORD and 
Excel. Use of email is limited to a few users, and there are no 
managed server based systems. From a strategic perspective, 
although WORD and Excel can be retained as strategically 
sound office automation tools, the majority of these systems 
are likely to be in need of replacement in the mid-term (3-5 
year horizon).  
Let us now discuss how appropriate existing models are 
for assessing the current and potential use of ICTs in Libyan 
universities (RQ2). Other studies [13][14] have applied 
Nolan’s model [21] to assess the overall status of the IT 
function in Libyan organizations.  An assessment of the two 
universities studied to date indicates both universities are at 
or beyond the Contagion stage, but have not yet reached the 
Control stage, when a centralized IT department is 
established to plan, manage and control ICT implementation.  
There are however, some support functions within some of 
the process areas, notably the financial management process 
at Misurata where systems support is combined with other 
job roles. The relatively limited impact of ICTs at process 
level and overall in the universities suggests that several of 
the models developed and applied in a developed world 
context may be inappropriate to gauge the current status of 
these universities.  However, some of these models can be 
used as the basis for developing a new conceptual model 
with a better fit to the organizational and technology 
adoption situation in Libyan universities. 
 
V. 
TOWARDS A NEW CONCEPTUAL MODEL FOR ICT 
UTILISATION IN LIBYAN UNIVERSITIES 
This section addresses RQ3: Can a new conceptual and 
operational model be developed for ICT utilization in 
universities in Libya?  Research to date suggests a stage 
model which scales down the levels of organizational 
development and ICT deployment would be of value in 
assessing and comparing universities’ ICT utilization in 
Libya. A SCALE (start-connect-access-leverage-enterprise) 
model (Table II) is put forward as a useful provisional 
framework for further analysis. This model allows better 
differentiation of the use of ICTs at process level, compared 
with the application of other models, such as the CPIT 
model [11][16], which would show most processes 
registering relatively little progress. 
 
Applying this model to Misurata University confirms 
that the three processes discussed above are the most 
advanced, with financial management being at the 
‘leverage’ stage with the majority of staff working in this 
area using one or other of the deployed systems (Fig. 5). 
Learning and teaching, arguably the core university process 
where ICTs have the potential to radically improve the 
student learning experience, has some evidence of ICT 
utilisation in the classroom - computers, data shows, and 
related technologies. However, there is still no use of the 
internet (there is no connectivity) and no online course 
materials or lectures that can be accessed 24 hours a day, 7 
days a week. In terms of the library resources, Misurata 
University is still in the early stage of ICT utilization – there 
is a library website, but access to learning resources is still 
reliant on printed books and other materials in the university 
site libraries. There is still a lack of electronic information 
on curriculum content and teaching materials that could be 
published and accessible via the Web, and there are neither 
e-learning applications nor educational portals in the 
University. 
VI. 
CONCLUDING REMARKS 
At the two Libyan universities studied so far, the 
utilization of ICTs remains limited and uncoordinated. There 
is a lack of electronic communication channels, such as 
email and web based media, networks are fragmented and 
systems are rudimentary and largely standalone. ICT 
knowledge and awareness is patchy amongst staff, and there 
has been a general lack of any overarching ICT strategy,  
 
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Characteristics
Stage
 
A clear organisational structure, with clearly defined roles and procedures. 
A general awareness of the availability of ICTs for day to day running of an organisation 
One or two individuals using standalone technologies (e.g., a laptop or mobile phone/i-pad). 
 
Start
 
A sound electricity network in the majority of the main buildings. 
A partial in-house data communications network (wired or wireless), facilitating multi-point access. 
Connectivity with the Internet allowing ad hoc access to websites and inter organisation email exchange. 
A few standalone users of basic office systems (e.g., a word processor or spreadsheet). 
 
Connect 
 
A wider take-up of office systems and the first use of transaction processing systems (often built in-house by end-
users). 
The first servers appear allowing access to systems and applications from the organisation’s network. 
Wider use of the internet and email. 
Problems with systems integration, data transfer, back-up procedures and version control. 
The organization sets up its own email/web address and may have a basic website  
An awareness of the need for formal ICT support and cross-organisation standards and policies. 
 
 
 
Access 
An ICT support function is established, at either departmental level, or centralized within the organisation as a 
whole. 
Policies and/or standards for products and services are introduced, and access, back up and version control 
procedures are introduced. 
A range of multi-user systems accessing centrally held databases on a number of servers. Use of cloud computing 
is considered and may be pursued. 
The need for systems integration and/or interfacing is recognized and partially addressed. 
The organisation develops its website, and network capability is extended to allow wider access to systems from 
both within and outside of the organization.  
 
 
 
Leverage  
ICTs and IS are in place to support all main processes/sub-processes, either using a range of integrated packages or 
in-house developments, or possibly via an off the shelf integrated system. 
Information availability plays a key role in supporting the organisation’s objectives and improving process 
operations; the end-user community includes information specialists. 
Data and information exchange within the organization and with business partners is the norm; external access to 
systems via the website is supported and controlled. 
Processes are improved and streamlined as new ICTs and IS are implemented and return on investment is 
monitored and controlled at organisational level. 
 
Enterprise  
Fig. 5. SCALE model applied to Misurata University processes 
The darker shading indicates the level or stage of ICT utilization in each process area. 
TABLE II. SCALE MODEL – STAGE CHARACTERISTICS 
 
169
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

with ICT spending and policies thus being ad hoc, short-term 
and limited in perspective. 
As noted at the outset, there is a general lack of 
literature and particularly a lack of evaluation studies in 
developing countries. “Until very recently, the entire 
literature on IS and developing countries would struggle to 
fill a single bookshelf… those who have the will to evaluate, 
such as academics, often lack the resources and capacity” 
[22]. This research has developed an innovative framework 
for assessing ICT utilization in Libyan universities, building 
upon existing models designed for, and applied to, western 
technology 
environments. 
Research 
case 
studies 
in 
developing countries “help to elaborate such models and, in 
so doing, contribute to underlying theory… cases from 
developing countries therefore provide fertile ground for 
helping understand the complex interplay of action and 
context that underlies all organizational change” [17]. This 
research will further develop the framework in a number of 
ways. First, the existing model will be applied and refined in 
several other Libyan universities. Second, the other 
dimensions will be explored and incorporated into the model. 
This will include an evaluation and classification of the 
barriers that universities have to overcome to progress their 
utilization of ICTs, and it will also look at how processes and 
people skills must change, if these universities are to better 
exploit 
the 
benefits 
of 
modern 
information 
and 
communications technologies.  
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Yang and S. Lee, “Entry barrier’s difference between ICT 
and non-ICT industries”, Industrial Management & Data Systems, 
113, (3), 2012, pp. 461-480. 
[2] E.Turban, E.McLean, and J.Wetherbe, Information Technology 
for Management - Improving Quality and Productivity. New York: 
Wiley, 1996. 
[3] Free Online Dictionary of Computing (FOLDOC), cited in 
Wikipedia.org 
Available: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Information_and_communi
cations_technology.  Retrieved: February, 2014. 
[4] O. Espinoza and L. Gonzalez “Accreditation in higher 
education in Chile”, Quality Assurance in Education, 21, (1), 2012, 
pp. 20-38.  
[5] A. Elzawi and J. Underwood, “How Higher Engineering 
Researchers in Libya Perceive the Use of Internet Technology”. In: 
Proceedings of The International Arab Conf. on Information 
Technology, University of Garyounis, Benghazi, Libya, December 
2010, pp. 89-98. 
[6] ITU, ICT adoption and prospects in the Arab region, Geneva: 
ITU Press office, 2012. 
[7] A. Kumar and M. Arteimi, “Potential Opportunities, Barriers 
and Enablers to Use E-Learning within Libyan Medical 
Educational Institutions”, The New York Times, 20th March, 2009. 
[8] A. Rhema and I. Miliszewska, “Towards E-Learning in Higher 
Education in Libya”, Issues in Informing Science and Information 
Technology, 7, 2010, pp. 423-437. 
[9] Monitor Group, National Economic Strategy, 9th February 
2006. United Kingdom: pp. 140-147. 
 
[10] M. Wynn and O. Olubanjo, “Demand-supply chain 
management: systems implications in an SME packaging business 
in the UK”, International Journal of Manufacturing Research, vol. 
7, no. 2, 2012, pp. 198-212.   
[11] M. Wynn, P. Turner, and E. Lau, “E-business and process 
change in the UK SME sector”, Journal of Small Business and 
Enterprise Development, vol. 20, iss. 4, 2013, pp. 913-933. 
[12] Libyan Ministry of Higher Education (LMOHE), Libyan 
Universities. 
Available 
at: 
http://highereducation.gov.ly/?page_id=108 
[Accessed: 
November, 2012]. 
[13] O. Sharkasi and M. Wynn, "Deployment evaluation of 
accounting information systems in Libyan commercial banks”, The 
African Journal of Information Systems, vol. 3, iss. 3, 2011, pp. 87-
106.  
[14] H. Akeel, M. Wynn, and S. Zhang, “Information systems 
deployment in Libyan oil companies: two case studies”, Electronic 
Journal of Information Systems in Developing Countries, 
(EJISDC), vol. 59, iss. 4, 2013, pp. 1-18. 
[15] Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), Business in the 
information age: International Benchmarking Study 2001, London: 
Booz Allen Hamilton, 2001. 
[16] M. Taylor and A. Murphy, “SMEs and e-business”, Journal of 
Small Business and Enterprise Development, 11, (3), 2004, pp. 
280-289.  
[17] R. Heeks, “Information Systems and Developing Countries: 
Failure, Success, and Local Improvisations,” The Information 
Society, 18, 2002, pp.101–112.  
[18] M. Saunders, P. Lewis, and A. Thornhill, Research methods 
for business students, 5th edn., 2009, England: Pearson Education 
Limited.  
[19] R. K. Yin, Applications of Case Study Research. 3rd edn, 
2012, London: SAGE Publications, Inc. 
[20] H. Al-Mobaideen, “ICT diffusion in Jordanian universities”. 
In: Proceedings of the European and Mediterranean Conference 
on Information Systems, Izmir, Turkey, July 2009, pp. 13-14. 
[21] R. L. Nolan, “Managing the crisis in data processing”, 
Harvard Business Review, 57 (2), Mar-April, 1979, pp. 115-126. 
[22] R. Gomez and S. Pather, “ICT Evaluation: are we asking the 
right questions”, Electronic Journal of Information Systems in 
Developing Countries (EJISDC), 50, 5, 2012, pp.1-14. 
 
 
170
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

