An Information-on-demand E-learning System 
Chien-Hsing Chen, Jun-te Huang, Hsiao Ping Lee 
Department of Applied Information Sciences 
Chung Shan Medical University, 
Taichung 402, Taiwan, R.O.C  
cy3331@gmail.com 
Tzu-Fang Sheu 
Department of Computer Science and Communication Engineering 
Providence University, 
Taichung 433, Taiwan, R.O.C 
fang@pu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—Due to the fact that Internet is widely 
developed, more and more people learn through 
network. Traditionally, an e -learning system is usually 
cooperated by Learning Management System (LMS), 
which is convenient for administrators to manage the 
course but difficult to get information there through. 
Until now, e-learning2.0 has become the main trend of 
current study. It indicates that users are being more 
interactive with each other. In this paper, we propose a 
novel information-on-demand e-learning system. The 
proposed system provides an audio-based information 
learning service, which lets us learn not only depend on 
text reading but auditory and visual learning. The 
proposed system searches and converts the customized 
information or user-specified articles on the Internet to 
audio, and no assistive tool is required on user sides. Via 
modern text-to-speech technology, the conversion can be 
done automatically. Moreover, our system provides the 
self-learning areas, in which the users can choose 
whatever material they like to upload. Our e-learning 
online platform has a large number of advantages 
including customized learning, convenience of acquiring 
information and abundant resources. The proposed 
system realizes the goal of ubiquitous and friendly access 
of the Internet for anyone from anywhere. We can learn 
wherever without time limitation.  
 
Keywords - e-Learning2.0; information-on-demand; self-
learning; text-to-speech 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
E-learning [1, 2] was proposed by CEO forum [3] on 
education and technology (ET CEO) in June, 1998. Since 
then, governments, enterprises and schools began to take part 
in online courses and distance learning [4]. Nowadays, more 
and more people get the latest information from the Internet 
anytime, anywhere. Nevertheless, the development of e-
learning is still slow, because people do not adapt themselves 
to the new way of learning and working. Therefore, the 
quality of e-learning is doubted no matter in academia and 
enterprises as a result e-learning still plays an assistant role. 
Even though the government offers large quantities of 
resources to develop e-learning and apply the system 
somehow, but they still ignore the most critical point that 
how to make people want to use e-learning to learn. That is 
to say, if people are not motivated, people would not have 
interests to learn actively and automatically.  
The term ―Web2.0‖ was brought up by Tim O'Reilly [5] 
with four concepts, which are:  
 
All the functions are operated through the browser. 
 
Users can distribute their own information. 
 
In-time sharing and interaction between users. 
 
User-centered. 
Currently, Web2.0 [6] is changing the learning and 
teaching methodology. Interactive web technology helps 
people to communicate easily. Suppose e-learning can make 
people connect to the issues they concern and be 
momentarily updated with latest information, it will provide 
a preferred and motivational environment for learners. On 
the other hand, Web2.0 [7] also emphasizes personalization, 
which everyone can pick subjects they are interested in and 
arrange the layout as per their preference. 
RSS [8, 9] (Really Simple Syndication) adopts these 
concepts of Web2.0 and become a main technique of 
information exchange. RSS is used to share news and 
content of Internet and interchange information for people 
who follow XML [10, 11] standard format.  
In this paper, we build an automatic web-based 
information-on-demand e-learning system (ODES) to assist 
the learner to learn the latest information through RSS. 
Computer science is the main learning resource of our 
system. First of all, we acquire the news information from 
RSS and we convert the information into audio type and 
capture the images through Google API. Then we can fulfill 
the requirement 
of 
e-learning 
with daily 
updated 
information.  
With the new e-learning method of our system, we hope 
to turn the traditional face to face instruction into a 
worldwide web learning platform, so as to make the user be 
more active in learning activities, and thus to effectively 
increase the interaction with the digital learning and realize 
the goal of learning everywhere and smart living. The rest 
of the paper is organized as follows. We discuss the present 
weakness of e-learning and the development of RSS service 
in Section 2. The implementation of information-on-demand 
e-learning system is presented in Section 3. The comparison 
of our ODES and other e-learning system is described in 
Section 4. Finally, we conclude the paper in Section 5. 
 
137
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

II. 
GROWTH OF E-LEARNING 
A. Traditional teaching and e-learning 
In the past, the learners must stay in the same space, face 
to face with their teacher in traditional instruction, and the 
learners have no freedom, which raise their spiritual pressure. 
The learners have less chance to arrange the time they want 
to spend on learning not to mention choosing places to learn 
for themselves. Nowadays Internet has been regarded as an 
interactive area for human to exchange their news and 
information. World Wide Web is also increasingly widely 
applied to teaching and learning. Learners do not have to go 
to school, not only stay at home, anyone can learn at any 
place. E-learning [12] has one of the best advantages is that 
people learn wherever without time limitation. When we use 
the Internet as a medium, we can reach any place in the 
world through web. Owing to our network, we can learn a lot 
of information by surfing the Internet. This will be the 
mainstream of education mode in the future. Users can build 
their own custom-made platforms according to their 
requirements. In addition, users can break the limitation of 
where they are, perfectly using their free time to learn. There 
are some benefits as follows: Reducing learning cost, 
resources being reused, and no spacious space needed.  
The platform of e-learning1.0 [13, 14] usually includes 
LMS (Learning Management System) and LCMS (Learning 
Content Management System). LMS is an online teaching 
platform for learner to manage their learning conditions. 
LMS provides a catalogue of online courses [15, 16] to 
control the learning schedule, a registration system to help 
learners record their learning conditions, and useful tools to 
assist learners, such as a test system which gives the learners 
a test on the platform, e-mail groups and forum services for 
learner to communicate with each other. LCMS is also a 
platform and used to manage or modify the teaching 
materials. The resource of elearning1.0 is provided by 
supplier. Due to the provision of teaching materials are 
unidirectional, which require abundant of time to pre-make 
those teaching materials. Then, learners may acquire the 
content of courses through LMS. E-learning2.0 was 
proposed by Stephen Downs [17] in 2006. E-learning 
changed the method of traditional instruction. The 
information was not unidirectional provided by teacher. 
Learners can also provide the information to others. This 
pattern will establish great interaction. E-learning2.0 [18] is 
composed of many primary elements such as wiki, blog, 
RSS, social networking, mash up, Ajax [19, 20]. Because 
the information relies on global digital resources it is 
updated with a high speed.  
 
B. RSS of e-learning 
In traditional web pages, learners only can learn from 
static web pages. Learners need to find significant resources 
in disordered data, so that they spend so much time filtering 
resources. These resources are scattered therefore learners 
cannot organize all the web content effectively. RSS is an e-
learning resource that uses technical framework of XML. 
This technology allows learners to subscribe the information 
they want to acquire so as to get the learning resources, and 
reduce the time of searching in unprocessed data. In 
tradition, if people want to know whether there is any new 
information in the websites or blogs, they have to link to the 
URL and check the information on the web in person. 
Suppose people want to obtain the information in more than 
one website, they have no choice but to check all the web 
pages one by one. Eventually, RSS was created by Netscape 
that can be used to integrate the significant information from 
webs and blogs. When information is updated by web 
administrators, 
RSS 
will 
automatically 
notify 
the 
subscribers of new information. The subscribers can easily 
learn the content of web pages without linking to the URL. 
RSS is also widely used on blogs. When authors of blogs 
write new articles, RSS will notify the subscribers of new 
articles in blogs.  
RSS gradually developed many new services, such as 
podcast [21]. The podcast is an audio-based online service. 
The podcast is, normally, a series of periodically released 
digital media files with some attributes, such as date, title 
and description. Users pick programs they like and decide 
when to listen or watch these programs through the 
podcasting service. In addition, any individual can create a 
podcast and make people who are interested in to subscribe. 
The subscriber can automatically receive new podcasts, 
without going to a specific site and downloading it there 
from. Podcasting is a broadcasting service on demand. E-
learning2.0 [22, 23, 24] brings a different method for users 
to learn. It focuses on interaction between people for 
building the best learning experience and result. Podcasting 
service can be described as a RSS link with media files. All 
of the content provided to the services must be pre-made by 
human beings. Therefore, podcast offers a learning method 
just like users listening to the Internet radio, they can only 
get information provided by other distributors, but not 
themselves. If one wants to find some certain specific 
information, it will be not easy to obtain the information he 
really needs. He still has to download the media files and 
check it one by one until the information be founded.  
In this paper, our system provides a search tool helping 
users to find the information they exactly want. It will be 
much better for users to spend their precious time learning 
than checking through all materials they do not need.  
III. 
THE INFORMATION-ON-DEMAND E-LEARNING 
SYSTEM 
      The information-on-demand e-learning system (ODES) 
is composed mainly of ﬁve modules. The system structure is 
presented in Figure 1. 
These five modules include information capturer, 
information parser, text-to-speech (TTS) engine [25], photo 
search engine and e-learning platform.  
138
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

  
Figure 1.  The architecture of the ODES system.  
E-learning platform module is an initial area that links 
the user and information. Here we provide two novel models 
for users to get their information.  
All of the modules are implemented in JAVA-based 
technology and techniques. The following introduces these 5 
modules and two learning models: 
 
A. Information capturer 
Really Simple Syndication (RSS) is a standardized 
format of web information, and our system will 
automatically capture the specific link so as to make our 
website updated immediately with latest news and 
information, such as blogs, news headlines, audios, and 
videos. Our system collect full text with publishing dates of 
RSS document from other website, RSS can be a 
transmitting agent via which people communicate with each 
other. Therefore, our system captures the information of the 
text and makes it a learning resource. In other words, our 
system collects information and provides a platform for 
integrating all the information to form an information pool.  
 
B. Information parser 
When the remote RSS is updated, the system will obtain 
the information from RSS, and then update to the system. 
After getting RSS documents, which will be saved as 
separate files of XML format, our system then gives those 
files to information parser for analyzing the XML format, 
which is packed into a data structure, and in turn abstracts 
the text information, such as the path, size, category, subject 
and updated date. There are many ways to parse XML, the 
traditional analysis method is DOM [26], which is a W3C 
standard way dealing with XML documents. However, the 
memory needs to read the entire file and transform it into a 
structure of tree, thus it will spend more time to analysis, and 
use excessive resources. Our system is using SAX [27, 28], 
which will be more efficiently in analyzing, reading and 
operating XML documents, because the files are analyzed 
right upon SAX reading the files. SAX is event-based 
processing model and functions with the generations of 
events. After processing via event handler, SAX changes the 
XML files into a series of events. When the events generate, 
only single corresponding event handler will be called to 
deal with them. Compared to parsing methods of DOM, 
SAX is more suitable for the system. The output of the 
module is in text format, and is delivered to both the TTS 
engine and e-learning platform. 
 
C. Photo search engine  
Information parser will deliver the significant sentence 
to photo search engine, and the photo search engine will find 
the pictures relating to the text by Google API. The picture 
will help users to understand the meaning of the foresaid 
sentence, and more to get information efficiently, as well as 
to enhance the absorption of learning. 
 
D. Text-to-speech (TTS) engine 
TTS engine can transform text into audio speech. The 
TTS engine is an implementation of Microsoft SAPI (Speech 
API) [29] interface, and is compatible with SAPI 5 
specification. After information parser separates the text 
which will be passing to TTS engine and processed to speech. 
The TTS engine module converts text data to speech in 
WAV or MP3 format. There are many speakers to be chosen 
from TTS engine, including male and female vocals. User 
can use different settings to change the vocal of the speech. 
After the text is changed into speech, it will be placed to e-
learning platform  
 
E. E-learning platform 
E-learning platform is the main core to this paper, and is 
a gateway that people can communicate with each other on it. 
On the platform we provide two learning methods as follows: 
The first one is to directly use the information that stored 
in our system, the integration of speeches, words, pictures, 
and to provide a quick access to different subjects, including 
computer science, information security, digital life, Android, 
mediaPC, software, wireless, magazines and English 
learning. When the information is updated, our system will 
start to update the information to the e-learning platform, and 
keep all the information latest. 
Our system has another feature, that is, English learning 
area. The English learning area is presented in Figure 2. 
There are many ways to learn English in the past; you may 
go to the language school etc., but all these ways will cost 
you a lot of money. If you use ODES, you can learn English 
for free, and you do not require any books or magazine to 
learn. With your computer and network, you will improve 
English ability, all on your own. Users will hear the voice to  
 
139
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

 
Figure 2.  The English learning of the ODES system. 
 
Figure 3.  The home page of the ODES system. 
read the English topic as well as the content of the article to 
study language from our learning area. 
The second way is self-learning. This area let users 
upload text files or paste their RSS hyperlinks, and the 
information parser will analyze the XML and convey the 
words required to TTS engine. TTS changes the text into 
audio, Finally, it presents readable information on e-learning 
platform. It is a different pattern of ways to learn from the 
past. This kind of way to learn plays a better role as a 
learning tool, because it is easy to operate and make the users 
be motivated by their own interests so as to reach the goal of 
self-learning. 
Except for the learning of general people, our system 
additionally helps the learning of the blind people. Because 
of physical disabilities, the blind cannot use those systems 
with visual interface. In order to allow those who visually 
disable to use our system, the information platform follows 
the 
Web 
Content 
Accessibility 
Guidelines 
in 
the 
specification, such as Access Key etc. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS 
The proposed ODES, except the TTS engine module, 
was implemented on a PC with one Intel Pentium 4 3.0GHz 
CPU, 768MB RAM and 80GB disk space. The operating 
system was Microsoft Windows XP home edition. The TTS 
engine was implemented on a PC with one Intel Core 2 Duo 
E6550 2.33 GHz dual-cores CPU, 2GB RAM and 160 disk 
space. The operating system was Microsoft Windows XP 
professional edition. All of the modules in the ODES were 
implemented in JAVA language [30]. The home page of the 
ODES system is presented in Figure 3.  
Our system is introduced to teachers from elementary 
schools to universities. By using our system, they can get the 
pictures and audios from the Internet as references, which 
make the courses more variously. Even students and ordinary 
people can make use of the system to obtain and learn the 
information they need in different ways. Through our system, 
we merge the information technology with education to offer 
multiple learning materials and develop different ways of 
learning. Moreover the traditional text-based instruction is no 
longer the main trend. Sounds and pictures make better 
learning result. User has the autonomy to make the best use 
of their time, and trigger the motivation of user’s self-
learning, so that e-learning can bring the maximal 
effectiveness of learning. To convey the information easily, 
our system hide the complexity of information. Our web 
interface of e-learning can clearly present the information; 
web pages can be operated mainly by a few buttons, 
including start, stop, next article, previous article, auto-play, 
and download. Except for using the mouse to manipulate the 
web, it can still be operated with the keyboard. As mentioned 
earlier, podcast must be pre-made by human beings. 
Compared 
to 
podcast, 
information 
of 
ODES 
are 
automatically acquired from RSS, so the cost is lower than 
podcast. TABLE I is the differences between podcast and 
ODES. 
TABLE I   THE DIFFERENT BETWEEN PODCAST AND ODES. 
Difference 
podcast 
ODES 
File output format 
MP3 
MP3 
Input file format 
MP3 
Text format file 
Program Quantity 
determined by the 
number of recorded 
determined by the 
number of RSS 
download 
Yes 
Yes 
Portability 
High Portable 
High Portable 
Human 
Demand 
Middle 
low 
Subscribe 
Yes 
No 
Timeliness 
On Demand 
On Demand 
Equipment 
Requirements 
support Podcast 
software 
network 
 
140
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORKS 
The system implementation, focusing on completing the 
following practical benefits: 
 
Learning anytime at anywhere. 
 
Assisting foreign language learning. 
 
Saving time from getting information. 
 
The easiest way to get the real-time information.  
 
Providing the customized area. 
 
Easier and more convenient way for users to learn. 
 
      Combining the above benefits, ODES is a very useful 
tool for us to acquire information or to learn foreign 
language. For example, if a person wants to teach himself 
English, he can find his most interested article in ODES, or 
upload articles himself. The system will automatically search 
pictures related to his article, enrich the original material. 
TTS engine can read this article for him, which he can listen 
to the practical pronunciation and imitate the speaker. He can 
also choose the voice and adjust the speed of reading 
according to his own level or habits. Our system offers a 
basically different idea which is customized and built as per 
the requirements of users not the one-way information from 
providers. This point will greatly motivate users to use our 
system. We also set up some buttons to help operating our 
system, such as button to play, replay, consistently play and 
if he wants to keep the audio in his own devices, then he 
click the save button and save the mp3 files to his notebook, 
mobile phone, and mp3 player. Therefore, ODES makes the 
learner learn anytime, anywhere, easier and more convenient. 
    
For the future, the site has the following plan: 
 
Build a customized voice area, according to the 
demand of every individual to build a more 
customized learning area, save personal settings and 
customized content, facilitate the convenience of 
management. Combine voice and customized RSS. 
 
Except for the above benefits of this system, the 
system will be more emphatic on functionality and 
humanized interface, allowing users more easily to 
apply our system at the first time access. 
 
Face to the era of information explosion that our 
technology is uninterrupted updating, whoever get the latest 
information will be the one catch the opportunity. Therefore 
humans keep on changing the way of learning and the 
method of acquiring news. Our system provide a new 
pattern of learning news and education, which reduces the 
time people spend on looking for the information they need 
and introduce a brand new way for people to change their 
behaviors from being passive to active. We believe it is the 
new mark of intellectual life and online learning. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
The authors would like to thank the National Science 
Council of the Republic of China, Taiwan R.O.C, for 
financially supporting this research under Grants NSC99-
2218-E-040-001. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Wikipedia. 
E-Learning2.0. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/E-
Learning_2.0. Retrieved 2011-01-27. 
[2] 
S. Britain and O. Liber. A Framework for the Pedagogical Evaluation 
of eLearning Environments, JISC, pp. 322–383, 2004.  
[3] 
CEO forum. E-learning history. http://www.ceoforum.com.au/article-
detail.cfm?cid=10348. 2008. Retrieved 2010-09-24. 
[4] 
J. S. Liu. A Probe into the RSS-based Online Learning, vol. 6, pp. 
62–64, December 2007.  
[5] 
O'Reilly. What is Web 2.0 Design Patterns and Business Models for 
the Next Generation Software. 
http://www.oreillynet.com/pub/a/oreilly/tim/news/2005/09/30/what-
is-web-20.html. 2005. Retrieved 2011-01-24. 
[6] 
Q. D. Ding. Research on the New Pattern of Internet Based on Web 
2.0. Graduate Degree Thesis of Beijing University of Posts and 
Telecommunications, pp. 4–5, March 2006.  
[7] 
S. Ma and M. He. E-Learning Based on Web2.0 Technical 
Characteristics. International Conference on E-Business and E-
Government, pp. 1–3, 2010. 
[8] 
D. Winer. Rss 0.93 specification. http://backend.userland.com/rss093, 
2001. Re trieved 2010-09-12. 
[9] 
D. 
Winer. 
Rss 
2.0 
specification. 
http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/rss/rss.html,2003. Retrieved 2010-09-14. 
[10] IETF. 
Xml 
media 
types, 
rfc 
3023. 
http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc3023#section-3.2, 2001. Retrieved 2011-
02-21. 
[11] D. Kohn, M. Murata, and C. Lilley. Internet drafts: Xml media types. 
IETF InternetDraft, 2009. 
[12] S. Carliner. Designing e-Learning. American Society for Training and 
Development, Virginia, 2002. 
[13] W. Liu. Ontology in E-Learning System Application Study [D]. 
Master's degree thesis at Northwestern University in 2006, 2006.2-3. 
[14] C. C. Chang and K. C. Hsiao. An e-Learning System for Information 
Management Education Based on Web Services, International 
Conference on Computational Aspects of Social Networks, pp. 48–51 
2010. 
[15] G. Ruan and Y. Lin. Peer Assisted Learning Model and Its 
Application in Construction of Peer Assisted Online Learning 
Community, China Educational Technology, vol. 11, pp. 34–37, 
November 2006.  
[16] T. Tian. Online Learning Environment Design Based on Multi-
intelligence  Theory,  Journal  of  Yangzhou  University  (Higher 
Education Study Edition), vol. 11, pp. 66–68, November 2007.  
[17] S. Downes. E-Learning 2.0. http://www.downes.ca/post/31741. 
October  2005. Retrieved 2011-03-24. 
[18] S. Wu, C. H. Song, H. D. Chen, and J. M. Zhan. E-Learning Teaching 
method Research and Ideas, International Conference on Web 
Information Systems and Mining, pp. 240-243, 2010. 
[19] C. Ullman and L. Dykes. Beginning Ajax. Wrox, 2007. W3C. World 
wide web consortium. http://www.w3.org, 2010. Retrieved 2010-12-
27. 
[20] E. Pascarello, D. Crane, and D. James. Ajax in Action. Manning 
Publications, 1 edition, 2005. 
[21] Oup.com. 
Oxford 
university 
press 
— 
podcast. 
http://www.oup.com/elt/catalogue/teachersites/oald7/wotm/wotm_arc
hive/podcast?cc=global. Retrieved 2010-12-27. 
[22] Y. H. Ma. Research on Individualized Online Learning System Based 
on Web Mining, Journal of Henan Agricultural Sciences, vol.3, pp. 
40–41, February 2007. 
141
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

[23] Q. Li, W. Rynson, H. Lau, W. C. Elvis, F.  Li, V. Lee, B. W. Wah, 
and A. Helen, Emerging Internet Technologies for E-Learning , IEEE 
Computer Society, pp.780-1089, September 2009. 
[24] S. Hiltz. Online Education: Perspectives on a New Environment New 
York: Praeger, pp. 133–169, 1990 
[25] T. Dutoit. An Introduction to Text-To-Speech Synthesis. Springer, 
2001. 
[26] P. L. HeGaret. The w3c document object model (dom). 
http://www.w3.org/2002/07/26-dom-article, 2002. Retrieved 2011-
01-25. 
[27] M. A. Bodie. The Book of SAX: The Simple API for XML. No 
Starch Press, 1 edition, 2002. 
[28] D. Brownell. SAX2. O’Reilly Media, 2002. 
[29] Microsoft 
Corporation. 
Microsoft 
speech 
api 
(sapi) 
5.3. 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/ms723627(v=vs.85).aspx, 
2010. Retrieved 2010-12-28. 
[30] J. Murach and A. Steelman. Murach’s Java Servlets and JSP. Mike 
Murach & AssociatesInc, 2 edition, 2008. 
 
142
ICCGI 2011 : The Sixth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-139-7

