ICT in Education: A New paradigm and old obstacle 
András Benedek  
Department of Technical Education 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
e-mail: benedek.a@eik.bme.hu 
György Molnár  
Department of Technical Education 
Budapest University of Technology and Economics 
Budapest, Hungary 
e-mail: molnar.gy@eik.bme.hu 
 
 
Abstract— In this paper, we review the phenomena and 
processes which, when viewed together, indicate the birth of a 
new education paradigm for students in higher education. Our 
approach to learning in particular is changed by digital tools. 
Our thinking process and learning methods are subject to 
development. This paper, while making references to this 
development, analyses the interactions between typical and 
atypical learning, in other words, formal and informal 
learning. It also explains the most important characteristics of 
the new education paradigm, which we symbolically call 
„Version 2.0” when addressing the new generation. When 
analysing these changes, we should review and interpret the 
most important participants and their roles (students and the 
teachers 
supporting 
them), 
old 
routines 
and 
future 
expectations and the new ICT solutions and their increasing 
role in supporting learning. 
Keywords-Digital education; Digital learning; E-learning; 
Competence; Education, Teaching; Learning, Learning styles; 
Learning network; Learning theory; Knowledge; Web 2.0. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The new methods of e-learning and „edutainment” could 
be born as a result of digital development. Edutainment is 
based on the idea of disseminating professional (or legal) 
information to students in an entertaining audio-visual 
environment provided by multimedia tools. The method is 
based on the realization coming from the latest results of 
education science that the efficiency of traditional teaching 
methods (with special regard to oral presentations) and 
additional electronic devices is multiplied when placed into 
an entertaining framework. The interest of students may be 
maintained continuously by impulsive presentations where 
information transfer is aided by music or visuals added at 
given points, facilitating emotional identification, active 
participation and retrieval of information from the memory 
later on. 
Being aware of new ICT trends and their constructive 
application are essential in modern teaching and learning; 
this is why a whole chapter is dedicated to these topics as 
well. Modernizing education and training does not mean 
that teaching and learning cannot be experiential. Another 
chapter formulates theories on „experiential education” in a 
digital environment and its results, also verified by feedback 
from students. 
The section on ICT (Information and Communications 
Technology) and Web2.0 opportunities in language learning 
reflects the reforms in the syllabus. The guide based on the 
modern methodology of language teaching may be useful 
for both students and teachers in computer aided language 
education [1][13].  
In our accelerated world, information transfer with 
special regard to presenting, communicating and receiving 
useful information items is of paramount importance. One 
of the most important practical issues in digital education is 
the development of micro-contents that correspond to the 
interests of students (culture, sport, specific professional 
topics) while fitting the screen of ICT tools and complying 
with content and format requirements. This is why the 
textbook on the topic written by András Benedek is now 
completed with a new chapter on developing and presenting 
micro-contents [2]. The information in this paper, presented 
without the reference to the books/papers, is our 
contribution and based on our own research explained in 
textbook cited. 
The study will begin by outlining the new learning 
theories and contexts by examining 
new learning 
environments, forms and specific processes. The following 
sections will set out the altered time and space of learning as 
well as the use of modern, digital teaching materials. The 
paper ends with conclusions. 
II. 
LEARNING THEORIES AND CONTEXT 
A. Learning and knowledge – a new context 
In our environment, new digital tools appear every day 
brining along new trends. This section explains how to 
recognize these trends and their potential uses. 
In the 21st century, people of the modern era found 
themselves in a new work environment. The social and 
economic networks surrounding individuals are more 
complicated than ever. Learning theory analysis typically 
examines the characteristics of social learning, where new 
learning methods and techniques meet, as a result of current 
changes, with special regard to developments in ICT. In 
such an increasingly rich learning space, learning how to 
apply 
new 
learning 
methods 
consciously 
and 
efficiently/successfully may prove to be an investment with 
a good return on the long run.  
Physical networks (like the urban environment) and their 
virtual counterparts have changed our lives in two important 
aspects.  
54
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

We are able to connect to and communicate with much 
more people than previously. This is partly the result of our 
accelerated lifestyle and partly of the sophisticated 
hierarchies organized around our multiple roles in life. 
A new, virtual dimension is now attached to learning. In 
this respect we should note that our multiple connections are 
now much less restricted in time and space. In the developed 
world in particular, we are now able to contact anybody, 
anywhere, exchanging information and organizing our lives, 
once the technical background is available (a smart phone or 
a broadband Internet connection will suffice; see Figure 1.) 
 
Figure 1. Changes in the system of our communication. 
By now, knowledge has become a dynamic concept and 
acquiring knowledge a process with ever increasing spatial 
and temporal dimensions. On the one hand, education has 
diversified, corresponding to increasingly high levels; on the 
other hand, the time spent in education has almost doubled 
in the past hundred years, from 6-8 years to 12-16 years [3]. 
B.  New Roles – Old Participants 
In education, with special regard to institutionalized 
education, typically in schools roles (those who teach and 
those who learn) and participants (teachers and pupils or 
students) are relatively well defined. According to their age 
and acquired and acknowledged qualifications, teachers are 
formally positioned in the organization that has been created 
to establish the right conditions for teaching and learning. 
Traditional elements of the organizational structure of 
education, i.e. schools where the youth is educated, were 
founded as early as in the Ancient World and their 
development in the centuries to follow was slow, always 
paying heed to traditions.  
Educational institutions perform several tasks related to 
preserving, transferring and updating knowledge. In 
addition to preserving knowledge and archiving its most 
valuable elements, participation in development is another 
important role of these institutions. It is only possible if 
education has a strong link with knowledge development 
and research, as several worthy traditions illustrate. The 
mission of higher education in this respect is particularly 
important; however, the quality of teaching and learning is 
also of paramount importance in primary and secondary 
education. In this respect, the direct and indirect, supportive 
presence of parents in addition to classic participants 
(teachers and students) is very important in the first school 
years, when the role of informal learning is taken over by 
formal education. In the period when the basics are learnt in 
particular, pupils, teachers and parents are the most 
important participants, with their roles and weight varying 
over time and according to specific conditions. 
The progressive approach to education claims the 
increasing success of student oriented systems that rely on 
the indirect support of parents and the direct contribution 
from teachers [4]. 
Teachers, as representatives of a unique profession 
model and significant human factors having a strong 
influence on social performance, stand in the cross section 
of public education and higher education. This subject 
remains in the focus of interest, its actuality guaranteed by 
the interactions of profession, job and profession and the 
actual practice representing challenges in several fields. 
Continuous reforms in the teaching profession are 
necessitated by changes and their management and new 
communication tasks.  
The quality of the applied educational process greatly 
depends on the qualification, preparedness and actual 
experience of teachers. Nevertheless, in the case of student 
centered education, the commitment, motivation and 
continuous learning activity of students are equally 
important. These factors are summarized in the table below. 
TABLE I. 
PARTICIPANTS IN THE LEARNING PROCESS. 
Most important direct and indirect participants  
of the learning process – ideal characteristics  
Teacher 
prepared, with practical experiences,  
committed to education  
Student 
open minded, continuously active in 
learning, 
 committed to fulfil learning objectives  
Parents 
support the learning process,  
also directly but mostly indirectly  
C. Learning Environment 
In addition to human factors, the direct environment of 
learning also significantly affects learning success. If we are 
asked about our learning environment, the answer is 
relatively simple. Those participating in institutionalized 
education usually refer to the features of their classrooms 
and list the tools available for them in the actual technical 
framework. The definition of „education tools” in 
Pedagogical Lexicon (Encyclopedia of Education) was 
phrased some 15 years ago but it still applies today. This 
definition offers a comprehensive, systemized approach and 
divides education tools into four major categories according 
to various criteria (physical nature of tools, their effect on 
sensory channels, required technical equipment and user). 
55
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

When 
defining 
the 
learning 
environment 
and 
interpreting the related development directions, the 
widespread use of the Internet, this unique „public utility” 
and the Web 2.0 movement may be considered those 
changes that have had the most significant impact on 
modern times [5][6]. 
One distinct feature of the new info-communication 
environment is this new, virtual learning system, which is 
increasingly capable of systemizing and transferring 
„learning objects” and organizing communication between 
teachers and students/pupils. 
These initiatives, also developing at institutional level, 
emphasis the expansion of the „space” for both teachers and 
students where the elements of teaching and learning that is 
creating interest, knowledge transfer, receiving knowledge, 
illustration-experience-experiment-research-practice, 
conclusion, systemizing may be arranged in some sort of a 
rigid didactic structure and organized according to pre-set 
algorithm. This change obviously affects teachers, too, they 
have to find a way to harmoniously use their various tools 
(traditionally in the framework of curricula and textbooks 
but now also the tools available in the new environment) in 
this expanding space, in institutionalised education in 
particular. In the new environment, students also occupy a 
specific position as they are opened to new information yet 
need orientation and possibilities to develop, see Figure 2.) 
 
Figure 2. New features of education informatics. 
As for future prospects, learning communities are 
expected to have an increasingly important role. These new 
communities are characterized by the common interest of 
the members above all. In these communities, learners 
interact, they learn together and create a shared collection of 
information sources. 
The learning network is not just educational principle 
but also an environment where learning efficiently supports 
acquiring and continuously updating one’s knowledge, 
using the new educational theory. Major current trends 
defining the interaction between education and informatics 
are: 
• 
Developed forms of human-machine interaction. 
• 
Independence in space and time. 
• 
General use of mobile devices. 
• 
Possibility to create complex, medial „learning 
environments” [7]. 
D. Learning Theories 
There is no simple answer to the question „is there a 
theory for learning?” The relevant scientific papers, some 
based on empirical tests, some offering theoretical concepts 
mostly from psychology experts but also from educational 
scientists of course could fill volumes. Learning is discussed 
from several aspects, from cell biology through formal logic 
to organization theory, to name but a few. Human learning 
is one of the most complex fields, seconded by the well-
known experiments on animal learning. In the present 
textbook we only discuss general theory though the results 
of animal tests are often applicable in the case of human 
learning . 
In an educational sense, learning means acquiring or 
developing some ability. The knowledge thus created is 
defined as a change to be evaluated (in performance, 
behaviour or knowledge) and a product of external impact, 
experience or practicing [8]. 
Human learning being such a complex discipline, 
several theories have been conceived about it. Some of these 
concern age related learning while others to different 
learning levels as determined by the quality of knowledge. 
One of the earliest and most comprehensive general theories 
phrased by psychologists is behaviourism. It is related to 
Piaget’s theory of cognitive development that emphasizes 
the importance of intrinsic motivation in learning. The 
concept states that human beings have an innate urge to see 
the world as coherent and stable and intellectual processes 
aim at creating equilibrium. 
According to the traditional view, elementary learning in 
human beings is essentially associative. Our norms and 
habits have developed for millions of years by successfully 
or unsuccessfully associating phenomena to activities. 
Indeed, the easiest way to learn is when at least two 
information inputs are active during the time of perception. 
In this case, the two processes are associated with each other 
in the brain. 
Constructivism is a philosophic approach having a great 
influence at the same time on institutionalized education and 
learning in school. The theory states that students build up 
(„construct”) their knowledge relying among others on 
„learning-by-doing”. This theory also emphasizes the 
importance of curriculum development and the important 
role of motivation to inspire students to acquire knowledge. 
The methodology of constructivism includes collecting and 
linking sources and the individual and group motivation of 
students. Constructivism offers a theoretical background for 
the teaching and learning of natural sciences and other 
educational programmes where experiments and project 
work are preferred. 
In past decades, institutionalized education was based on 
the theory of cognitive learning, complying with the 
development of complex learning systems with diverse 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

subjects and sophisticated organizational structures. The 
findings of cognitive psychology yielded numerous data 
proving the theory that learning is based on the human 
ability to form a mental picture of perceived phenomena and 
then manipulate these mental representations. Piaget’s work 
[15] in developmental psychology also indicated the 
existence 
of 
well-defined 
stages 
in 
the 
cognitive 
development of children. The location in time and contents 
of these stages may vary, yet they are a general feature and 
their order is invariably the same for everybody [9]. 
Modern educational theory „passed” the slowly 
spreading, century-old paradigm of continuous learning with 
one swift step around the Millennium. Influenced by ICT, 
modern theorists (Downes, Siemens [16]) made a 
significant, impulsive turn, recognizing the role of networks 
while still relying on classic psychological and philosophic 
schools such behaviourism, cognitivism and constructivism. 
In the past decade, the taking up of the idea of lifelong 
learning both in theory and practice contributed to the 
successful integration of informal and non-formal education 
into the methodology of early development, socialization 
and social capital development via educational practice.  
Connectivism (network based learning) has become an 
educational theory with a particularly significant impact 
providing an option for the educational exploitation of 
network theories, informatics and Web 2.0. According to the 
theory of George Siemens [16], published in 2005, 
connectivism is a learning theory specifically designed for 
the digital age. By defining the relevant terms, this theory is 
particularly important for the new educational paradigm as 
it focuses on network theory and its incorporation into 
knowledge management.   
The modern time uptake of connectivism as a learning 
theory is also related to the swift in educational methods 
observed in progressive educational institutions with special 
regard to higher education institutions, where e-learning has 
been adapted in its entirety or in parts in the past two 
decades, complying with student attitudes, habits and new 
learning forms. Its impact may be detected in the application 
of electronic environments impacting an increasing number 
of students and with continuously diversifying functions. 
(This topic is discussed in detail in the last chapter of our 
book, Chapter VIII–The Use of Electronic Learning 
Environments in Education [12]). These online or Web-
based learning support systems establish continuous, 
synchronous or asynchronous communication between the 
nodes of the network that is participants (teacher-student, 
teacher-teacher, student-student). 
According connectivism, learning is a process defined 
by informal information exchange between nodes organized 
into a network and supported by electronic tools. Acquiring 
knowledge is a process where specific nodes are linked to 
sources of information. Participation in the network and 
access to software that promote the interpretation if 
information putting it into a context offers a brand new form 
of learning based on cooperation and self-organizing; see 
Figure 3. 
 
Figure 3. The system and history of complex learning theories. 
Though the review in previous sections on educational 
theories is far from being comprehensive, it illustrates how 
diverse the topic is. These theories explain actual individual 
learning activities or the learning processes organized by 
institutionalized education together, sometimes slightly 
overlapping. The real processes become even more 
diversified when developmental stages are interpreted in a 
broader sense and the institutional framework of formal 
education is left behind. If we wish to use a simplified 
systemic approach we should conclude that modern 
educational theories originate in behaviorism, born more 
than a century ago, with constructivism catching up and 
showing an increasing impact with the development of 
institutionalized teaching and learning until cognitivism 
became the underlying concept of reforms in the second half 
of the 20th century. These days, with special regards to the 
years after the Millennium, the impact of connectivism has 
become 
increasingly 
important, 
specifically 
working 
through Web 2.0 and social activities and essentially 
defining the development of the new educational paradigm. 
E. Forms and Specific Processes of Learning 
It is also a useful approach to discuss learning in a less 
sophisticated way. How learning is incorporated into our 
lives? The answer claiming learning is the thing we do in 
school is oversimplified. It is more realistic and closer to the 
modern approach if we say learning is a basic human 
activity, which is present at each and every stage of our 
lives, even if to a varying extent. It is a fact that learning 
starts with life. The first and most important learning 
environment is our family. Basic skills (how to move, how 
to communicate) and behavioural norms are learnt in the 
initial stage of our lives. 
It is important to note that the key to fast and successful 
learning is learning in a profoundly informal community. 
Family in childhood and groups of modern times provide 
such motivating and evaluating environments.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Institutional education (nursery schools, schools) with its 
formal approach to learning and organized structure differs 
from informal learning. Though informal learning related to 
one’s interests is also typical in adulthood, either in the 
framework of one’ s family or group of friends, employers 
and other communities also offer learning options that 
comply with the needs of adults, known as non-formal 
learning.  
• 
Forms of learning change with life or complement 
each other in a way that facilitates both direct and indirect 
learning.  
• 
A well-defined learning strategy (such as being a 
student in higher education) manifests as a conscious effort 
made for career and success when selecting a profession or 
institution. 
Even though technology and its social application 
change asynchronously, developed educational systems 
realized around the Millennium that the transfer of 
knowledge that places the individual into the focus of 
lifelong learning and its success may be significantly 
affected by educational framework systems.  While 
traditional educational institutions have been mostly 
focusing on handing over knowledge, modern learning 
options and lifelong learning concentrate on individual 
abilities and the development of learning skills. The concept 
of lifelong learning focuses on enabling and encouraging 
people „to learn to learn”. 
 
Atypical learning is not necessarily related to some 
educational institution neither does it presume a 
premade schedule timetable or exam schedule. Atypical 
learning does not rely on classes, lectures or seminars in 
the classical sense; instead learners decide themselves 
on how to create their own learning environment to 
their objectives and goals. Atypical learning is a form 
of lifelong learning. As adults usually work by learning 
and also need time for their families they cannot always 
attend institutional (formal) education. 
 
In addition to the activities of informal learning 
performed outside formal education (the school 
system), atypical learning includes all the methods that 
influence the intellectual and physical development of 
an individual (distance education, opened learning). 
E-learning–is a learning process that combines traditional 
education distance education and the new options provided 
by the Internet. E-learning generally, means Internet 
applications that aim at communicating contents in new 
ways, administrating the learning process, monitoring 
individual learning in a way that facilitates evaluation and 
support and transparent operation at system level. The next 
figure, though only schematized, shows the varying impact 
of the 3 learning forms in time along the classic learning 
curve. We should note that any of the 3 forms may 
significantly contribute to acquire and update knowledge in 
any stage of life. As illustrated by the figure, early life is 
usually dominated by informal learning, followed by formal 
learning in the period before minimum school leaving time 
and while obtaining the highest school degrees. Adults 
typically learn in non-formal systems; see Figure 4. 
 
 
Figure 4. Lifelong learning as a function of time. 
In addition to referring the nature of the learning 
process, we may also use the terms typical learning 
(learning activities related to formal education) and atypical 
learning. These do not relate to major teaching or learning 
forms in the same way. Informal learning typically 
presumes atypical learning while the terms typical and 
atypical learning may be used for both formal and non-
formal education, depending on the actual activities of 
students. Terms referring to learning activities have a unique 
relevance in digital education where ICT use justifies the 
emphasized role of e-learning and m-learning methods. 
From the aspect of learning theory or learning forms, these 
are not more and not less than new, perspective methods 
that have a special relevance in modernizing education [10]. 
F. Learning–Time and Space 
An important trend in our modern age is rising life 
expectancy and the increasing ratio of education and 
training processes within one’s lifetime. People of the 21st 
century are expected to live 7-8 decades spending about one 
and a half or even two decades in formal education and 
returning to learning in adulthood increasingly often. In 
countries developing the learning environment in a broader 
sense and at the level of the whole society, social stability 
and coherence have reached a recognized high level while 
the state of economic development is also above the average 
(for 
example, 
in 
Northern 
European, 
Scandinavian 
countries). In these countries, the learning trail involves the 
entire life cycle of the social activities of an individual from 
the beginning of conscious activities till the end of social 
activities, all this according to a well-defined social and 
political strategy. This period may be as long as 60-70 
years. Though we think we essentially understand this 
paradigm, the traditional way institutions operate and are 
operated is extremely hard to transform into a new 
educational approach that focuses on the individual. It is the 
task of the state to create the suitable environment for this, 
depending on the wide or restricted range of available tools. 
We should emphasise that in this respect it is not the 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

magnitude of sources that matter but the approach that 
considers learning as an important activity in any life stage 
and is able to support learning by the appropriate tools. 
When approaching these issues from social dimensions, 
we may conclude that a new generation of users committed 
to online trainings is being born (it may have already very 
well reached the growing up stage in fact). This generation 
is much more skilled in navigating in the info-
communication space and is becoming increasingly 
informed and organized. Using this kind of knowledge, 
people may receive more information and support from each 
other than from any kind of institution. This is why the role 
of learning communities has been increasing and it is not 
too difficult to make projections for the future either. The 
new communities are essentially characterized by their 
members sharing the same interests. Learners can interact 
with each other in these communities, learning together and 
generating shared sources of knowledge. This newly 
formulating practice, however, is not incompatible with the 
learning possibilities offered by higher education structures 
currently being reformed [11][12]. 
G. The use of modern, digital teaching materials 
One of the main characteristic of the atypical e-learning 
forms lies in suitable and up-to-date digital teaching 
materials. Our institute renewed numerous curricula related 
to a number of university courses to meet needs of e-
learning. As a result, in 2012 and 2013 academic years 
Sharable Content Object Reference Model (SCORM) [1] 
standards-based e-learning materials were made available to 
students to support their learning with already familiar 
Moodle (Modular Object Oriented Electric Learning 
Environment) [4] e-learning environment. The following 
screenshot shows its appearance in mentioned learning 
environments; see Figure 5. 
 
Figure 5. SCORM curriculum in a Moodle System 
In autumn 2013, among students using the new curriculum, 
a satisfaction survey was carried using a digital micro-
environment. The survey was carried out after the first 
semester of curriculum’s introduction. The questionnaire 
was edited by Moodle (Modular Object Oriented Electric 
Learning Environment) system tools and the students were 
asked to send in responses using this system as well [14]; 
see Figure 6. 
 
Figure 6. Student replies in Moodle System. 
The survey aimed at examining the using efficiency of 
curriculum presented in new visual form. The survey results 
are shown below. About 70% of the respondents are fully or 
greatly satisfied with the use and professional accuracy of 
new developed curricula; see Figure 7. 
 
Figure 7. SCORM curriculum in Moodle System 
The vast majority of responding students engaged with the 
curriculum 1-2 hours per day; see Figure 8. 
 
 
Figure 8. Student responses in Moodle System 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Overall, based on the response of the students we found that 
they are responsive to a new type of digital teaching 
materials, which the same time motivates them. It is due to 
the functional design of media objects in teaching materials 
used. 
III. 
CONCLUSION 
In the framework of this paper, we place learning forms 
into the context of lifelong learning for students reaching the 
end of a long journey in the world of formal learning. We 
attempt to investigate why formal learning is losing its 
dominance and interpret the complementary role of informal 
and non-formal learning. We also demonstrate the learning 
forms and educational theories supported by virtual learning 
frameworks. A number of further key issues have been 
addressed, such as the possibilities of the rightfully 
demanded reform in education by means of analysing the 
impact of visual culture on learning combined with the 
analysis of the educational effects of demonstration in the 
context of the history of ideas. The change in approach is 
closely related to the new ICT application trends that 
generate changes almost immediately felt in expanding 
educational space. At the same time, the multimedia 
environment that can also be efficiently exploited in 
classroom education has a specific, efficient way to impact 
our individual worlds. This is what „experiential education” 
is about, already practiced at BME (Budapest University of 
Technology and Economics), and the methodology review 
that attractively describes the world of online language 
learning. 
The opinions above have been of course phrased from 
the aspect of teachers. Although they address students, a 
doubt may be raised that we are biased, representing the 
views of „one side” only. Hence, to promote professional 
credibility, we close this chapter with the thoughts of a 
student from not so long ago that may be interesting for 
both students and teachers.   
„… if you like learning, you will be able to get absorbed 
in almost any topic with the help of Web 2.0, utilizing 
blogs, Wikipedia and various content sharing sites. You can 
learn a lot from the experiences and writings of others as 
they followed the same track back when they were students, 
they wanted to learn and this way or that they acquired 
information they wanted. To increase the efficiency of 
learning, I think providing feedback to the authors is 
important, like for example sharing our experiences with 
them. If we are proficient enough in a topic and we feel like 
it, we can also start a blog or create a site to disseminate 
relevant items of information we find important so that 
others can exploit our knowledge. This is indeed the whole 
point: we should facilitate the flow of information.” 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Kommers, ICT as explicit factor in the evolution of life-
long 
learning. 
International 
journal 
of 
continuing 
engineering education and life-long learning, 20 (1/2010), 
pp. 127-144., [retrieved: 04, 2014] 
[2] A. Benedek (ed.): Digital pedagogy 2.0 – Typotex Budapest 
2013., pp. 18-23 
[3] M. Castells, „The Rise of the Network Society”. Classics of 
the Information Society. The Information Age. Economy, 
Society, Culture. Volume I. Thinking – Infonia, 01.2005, 
pp. 489 
[4] http://index.hu/tech/net/Web1214, [retrieved: 05, 2014] 
[5] http://ec.europa.eu/education/policies/2010/doc/keyrec_en.p
df, [retrieved: 03, 2014] 
[6] A. Benedek and Gy. Molnár: The empirical analysis of a 
Web 2.0-based learning platform, In: Constantin Paleologu, 
Constandinos Mavromoustakis, Marius Minea (ed.): ICCGI 
2011, The Sixth International Multi-Conference on 
Computing in the Global Information Technology, 
Luxembourg, June 19-24, 2011., ISBN: 978-1-61208-008-
6, 06.2011, pp. 56-62 
[7] I. Simonics, “eLearning and Presentation Techniques.” 
Óbuda University e-Bulletin, Vol. 1,01.2010, pp. 211-217. 
[8] Gy. Molnár: Collaborative Technological Applications with 
Special Focus on ICT based, Networked and Mobile 
Solutions., Wseas Transactions on Information Science and 
Applications 9:09.2012, pp. 271-281 
[9] Gy. Molnár: Flashes or steady light? Or the potentials of 
developing networked learning, In: Miguel Baptista Nunes, 
Maggie McPherson (ed.): Proceedings of the IADIS 
International Conference e Learning, IADIS international 
conference E-learning 2011, Volume II. Rome, Italy, July 
20-23, 2011, ISBN: 978-972-8939-38-0, 07.2011, pp. 405-
408 
[10] A. Buda, Attitudes of Teachers Concerning the Use of ICT 
Equipment In Education, Journal of social research and 
policy 1,02.2010, pp. 131-150.  
[11] Z. Szűts, An Iconic Turn in Art History - The Quest for 
Realistic and 3D visual Representation on the World Wide 
Web, In: A. Benedek and K. Nyíri (ed.):The Iconic Turn in 
Education (Visual Learning), Frankfurt: Peter Lang 
Internationaler Verlag der Wissenschaften, ISBN:978-
3631637715, 2012. pp. 59-66. 
[12] R. Ősz, New technologies mean new methods of learning?, 
In: Hamido Fujita, Jun Sasaki (ed.): Proceedings of the 12th 
International conference on Education and Educational 
Technology: Recent Advances in Modern Educational 
Technologies, Iwate, Japan, WSEAS Press, ISBN:978-1-
61804-180-07. 2013, pp. 59-63. 
[13] Z. Szűts, Changes generated and not generated by Printing 
Press in Europe and Korea, The Sixth International 
Conference of KACEEBS, Hungary, Central & Eastern 
Europe and Korea. Current Issues in Humanities and Social 
Sciences 17th-19th July, 2006, The Korean Association of 
Central & Eastern European and Balkan Studies, Korea 
Literature Translation Institute, Hankuk University of 
Foreign Studies, Seoul, Korea, 07.2006, pp. 38-46. 
[14] http://moodle.appi.bme.hu/ [retrieved: 05, 2014] 
[15] http://hu.wikipedia.org/wiki/Piaget_tanul%C3%A1selm%C
3%A9lete [retrieved: 04, 2014] 
[16] Siemens, G., Connectivism: A learning theory for the digital 
age. International Journal of Instructional Technology and 
Distance Learning; 04.2005, pp. 1-5  
 
 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

