Analysis of the Utilization of Web 2.0 Resources in Secondary Education 
and Advanced Vocational Training Studies  
Federico Banda -Sierra  
Department of ICT Engineering University Alfonso X El 
Sabio. Villanueva de la Cañada. Madrid 
fbandsie@myuax.com 
Antonio J. Reinoso 
Department of ICT Engineering University Alfonso X El 
Sabio. Villanueva de la Cañada. 
areinpei@myuax.com 
Abstract— This paper presents a study to address the use of 
Web 2.0 tools in education. The study focuses on secondary 
education and is limited to the region of Madrid (Spain). The 
main objectives of the study are to determine the involvement 
of both teachers and students in the use of Web 2.0 tools. 
Moreover, we will also examine the different parameters 
associated with the acceptance and application of Web 2.0 
resources. Finally, we will describe the different patterns of 
interaction of both students and teachers with respect to these 
digital platforms. As a result, we will be in position of assessing 
the convenience and acceptance of artifacts based on the Web 
2.0 paradigms to be used as effective resources to improve the 
students’ learning experience. 
Keywords-words: Web 2.0, Media Education, School 2.0, 
Knowledge Society. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION. 
The term Web 2.0 Websites comprises those Websites 
that facilitate information sharing interoperability, user-
centered design and collaboration in the World Wide Web. 
There are several tools that allow to share information in the 
Web 2.0 such as blogs, wikis or social networks as well as 
other sites that share resources like Google Drive for 
documents, Youtube for videos, or Dropbox for online 
storage. Among these tools, there are also learning 
platforms like Moodle or Claroline and virtual classrooms 
such as Edmodo, Virtual Virtual Teacher or Tutor. 
Our aims are to analyze the acceptance of Web 2.0 tools 
in the classroom and the involvement of teachers in their 
use. Therefore, the main objetives of the research activities 
reported in this paper are presented below: 
1. To perform a study of the use of Web 2.0 tools in the 
classroom in the region of Madrid and to assess the 
implication of teachers in their use. 
2. To evaluate the acceptance of Web 2.0 tools by 
teachers. 
3. To determine whether the use of Web 2.0 tools is 
widely accepted by students (according to teachers’ 
opinion). 
4. To identify predictive factors for a lower use of Web 
2.0 tools by teachers in the classroom. 
The rest of the paper is structured as described in the 
following. First, we will present the state-of-the-art after 
reviewing the previous research on the use of Web 2.0 tools 
by teachers. Then, the methodology used to carry out our 
study will be described. Finally, our main results and 
conclusions together with some threads to validity will be 
exposed. 
A Web 2.0 site allows users to interact and collaborate   
to join efforts in the process of creating contents that will 
remain available for a given virtual community. This 
approach radically differs from static websites where users 
are limited to the passive viewing of content that have been 
created for them. 
The main aspects featuring the Web 2.0 technologies are 
enumerated in the following [9]: 
1. The term Web 2.0 groups different interactive 
approaches that have in mind the social component 
of the net. Provided with these new mechanisms, 
Internet 
has 
acquire 
a 
more 
participative 
dimension, enabling the exchange of information 
and  several forms of contact among users through 
individual blogs, wikis, social network sites 
(Second Life, Facebook, etc), image or video 
sharing sites (Flickr, YouTube, etc.)  
2. The Web 2.0 is and attitude and not precisely a 
technology. It’s most relevant aspect is that it 
makes clear the next evolutionary steps of Internet. 
 
Facebook is an example of typical social networking 
projects that, in general, has been developed using the figure 
of social networks as the main support for students’ learning 
process. [11] 
Free Software is any software respectful to the freedom 
of its users and to the social solidarity of their communities. 
It is common to associate Free Software to software with no 
cost, but this is a mistake, because there are free software 
that you have to pay for using it. Not every free software is 
free. And above all not every no cost software is free 
software. [7] 
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

To sum up, free software is defined by the four freedoms 
of software users. 
Freedom 0: The freedom to run the program for any 
purpose.  
Freedom 1: The freedom to study how the program 
works, and to change it for any particular purpose.  
Freedom 2: The freedom to redistribute copies. 
Freedom 3: The freedom to improve the program, and 
release your improvements (and modified versions in 
general) to the public, so that the whole community benefits. 
Also 
you 
should 
have 
the 
freedom to 
make 
modifications and use them in your work or free time 
privately, without even have to announce that this 
modifications exists [8]. 
We will take as a reference some figures in the 
education 
in 
Europe 
and 
in 
Spain. 
That will show us how important can be the use  of the web 
2.0 tools for the  classroom. All of this will give us an idea 
of the current situation about this topic, in Europe and in 
Spain [10]. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
The Society of Information has risen as the result of the 
implementation 
of 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies (ICT) in daily life. The greater use of the ICT 
paradigms has changed, in many senses, the way of 
developing many of the activities of the modern society. 
The Knowledge Society arises in the context of the 
Society of Information. The main characteristics of the 
Knowledge Society are the open access to information, the 
freedom of expression and the linguistic diversity. 
Therefore, the fields of study of our research are 
Education, Communication and Web 2.0 supporting tools. 
We considered that it was important to investigate these 
fields 
due 
to 
the 
importance 
that 
the 
Regional 
Administration was giving to the introduction of ICT, 
particularly the Web 2.0 tools, in education. The 
incorporation of Web 2.0 tools in teaching is having a great 
impact in education and the use of these tools is expected to 
increase according to the principles of the Media Education 
and School 2.0, which will be explained later in this 
summary. 
In the Society of Information, a change in "what" we 
teach and "how" we teach is needed. This new Society 
forces us to rethink the role of teachers, students and taught 
subjects in education. Therefore, teachers should try to 
encourage collaborative works in the classroom, which can 
be supported by mechanisms such as the Web 2.0 tools. 
To the best of our knowledge, there are no studies 
addressing the particular use of Web 2.0 resources in 
Spanish secondary education. Therefore, our research study 
covers the lack of information regarding two relevant 
points: The Media Education and School 2.0. 
With respect to the Media Education, it is noteworthy 
that skills such as the ones related to the use of many 
languages, to critical thinking, and to the interaction with 
others in real and/or virtual modes, should be potentiated 
[1]. 
Concerning the Education 2.0, it is noteworthy that the 
advances occurred in education based on the communication 
model 2.0, .i.e., the Web 2.0, is based, inter alia, on the use 
of social networks. The active interactive joint of teachers 
and students is also closely related to collaborative learning 
and authorship for example blogs and wikis. 
Education and Education 2.0 are related through the 
emergence of the communicative model 2.0 in which both 
teachers and students are active participants in the 
communicative act, that is, a continuous exchange of roles 
where both teachers and students can be authors or co-
authors of the information and knowledge. According to 
Aparici et al. [1], the Web 2.0 has changed the rules of the 
game and allows Internet to contribute collaboratively in the 
construction of collective knowledge from individual acts of 
group communication that can occur in cyberspace and real 
space.  
The receiver and the transmitter of the information are 
transformed into an EMIREC which sends and receives 
messages [2]. In this model, the role of the students 
substantially changes. As the learning focuses on the 
students, they should take an active role building the 
teaching-learning process. It is expected that the students are 
able to exercise autonomy, to develop critical thinking, to 
adopt collaborative attitudes and to use the theoretical 
knowledge to solve real problems This model of 
communication enhances the possibility that the students 
cast its own messages through different languages, 
strengthening the educational proposal of personalized 
education, as well as affective and emotional processes that 
occur in all educational relationship.  
In addition, the digital literacy is a new concept that 
should be taken into account when considering the training 
of teachers in the Media School.  
Literacy is the education that everyone needs to live in 
society. A new model of literacy is needed in the digital 
society: the digital literacy. Furthermore, this new literacy, 
defined as the basic capacity to understand and to express in 
different 
languages 
and 
meanings, 
is 
constructed 
collaboratively between teachers and students, as defined in 
[4] 
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

What we teach and the way we teach it should be 
changed. Therefore, the role of the teachers, students and 
contents in learning should be redefined. 
Currently, we are part of a networked society, mainly 
due to the Internet, that has changed the processes, interests, 
values and social institutions in the way  we knew them. 
Internet has propitiated new ways of relationship, that 
wouldn´t have been possible without the tis technological 
advance As indicated in [5], Internet is the heart of a new 
paradigm that currently constitutes the base of our lives and 
of our ways of relationship, work and communication. 
Internet processes the virtuality and transforms it into our 
reality, constituting the network society, which is the society 
where we live. 
We cannot forget the importance of TIC in the 
school.  As specified in [6], The implementation of TIC 
needs several capacities such as cooperation, capacity of 
initiative and dynamism in the working places, to be able to 
work in groups, interactive learning between the members 
of the group, communication, to be able to work with 
abstract concepts, to identify and solve problems, aptitude to 
make decisions, being able to seek and to use the 
information, predisposition for the permanent training and 
other. 
The appearance of these technologies demands to train 
teachers, as most of them are not familiar with TIC 
resources and lack the necessary skills to use them. 
The immense majority of the administrators, educational 
managers and teachers are digital immigrants. (...). These 
professionals rarely use the digital technologies and are very 
resistent to modify their conception of the world of the work 
based on the industrial models of ends of the 19th century 
[1]. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
In the following, we describe the methodology 
conducted to perform our study. First of all, this is an 
observational study in which teachers from secondary 
schools in the region of Madrid have been electronically 
surveyed . No exclusion criteria were established. 
Data Collection 
To achieve the objectives of the study a questionnaire 
asking about different aspects, such as the professional 
profile, the opinion on the usefulness of Web 2.0 tools for 
teaching , the involvement of teachers in the use of Web 2.0 
tools and their perception of student interest in the use of 
these tools, was designed (Figure 1). 
Teachers from different schools of the Region of Madrid 
(both, public and private) were invited to fulfill the 
questionnaire. The questionnaire will consist of an HTML 
form heading to a PHP page which will register  received 
data received into a MySQL database. Later, every data will 
be exported to the SPSS statistic package. 
Statistical analysis 
For the descriptive analysis of quantitative variables the 
mean was calculated. Qualitative variables were expressed 
as 
percentages. 
Comparisons 
between 
means 
were 
performed using Student's T test for independent samples. 
Qualitative variables were compared using the chi-square 
(χ2) test and the Fisher's exact test. Statistical significance 
was considered at p < 0.05 for the all the comparisons. 
A binary logistic regression model was used to estimate 
the effect of the different variables on the use of Web 2.0 
tools. All the variables which reached the statistical 
significance in the univariate analysis were included in the 
multivariate analysis. Thus, in the multivariate analysis, the 
dependent variable was the use of Web 2.0 tools.  
The questions asked in the survey were selected considering 
the objetives of the study and their answers are coded. The 
data were analyzed with the statistical package SPSS. 
Questions 1, 2 and 3 aims to determine the most frequently 
used Web 2.0 tool, while questions 4, 5 and 6 are intended 
to characterize the use of Web 2.0 tools in the classroom. 
Finally, questions 7 and 8 will provide different information 
about the use of the tools. For example, whether they are 
being used, or not, for individual or teamwork purpose, 
 
Number 
Question 
1 
Are involved in the use of Web 2.0 tools in the 
classroom ? 
2 
Which are the Web 2.0 tools that you usually use? 
Why? 
3 
Do you think that the use of Web 2.0 tools in the 
classroom promotes the student learning ? Why? 
4 
Are students involved in the use of Web 2.0 tools? 
To work in group or to work individually? 
5 
Do you recommend the students to use Web 2.0 
tools or do you think that they are not necessary for 
learning? 
6 
In what subject are you using Web 2.0 tools? 
7 
When do you use Web 2.0 tools? In group or in 
individual activities? 
8 
Do you use Web 2.0 tools in the classroom 
regularly or sporadically? 
Figure 1: The questionnaire fulfilled by the teachers is shown above 
 
 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

IV. 
RESULTS 
Eighty-one teachers have fulfilled the questionnaire so 
far. The main characteristics of the teachers included are 
summarized in table 1. Forty-one (51%) were male, 34  
(42%) over 50 years and 19 (23,5%) with more than 30 
years of experience. The majority of them were officials and 
75% worked in public centers. Approximately half of them 
(54%) were teachers of Computing Science. 
Although most of the surveyed teachers (86%) declared 
that the use of Web 2.0 tools reinforces and benefits the 
students' learning process, only 63% of them acknowledged 
using these tools frequently. In addition, only 33% of the 
teachers being using Web 2.0 tools manifested to use them 
during whole sessions in the classroom. When focusing on 
teachers that used the aforementioned tools, only 59% of 
them did it to work in group. 
On the other hand, with respect to the interest shown by 
the students in the use of Web 2.0 in the classroom, the 
majority of teachers that used them (79%) considered that 
students are very enthusiastic about the use of these tools. A 
small proportion of teachers (6%) answered that the 
implication in the use of these tools varies widely and it 
depend on the characteristic of the student. In teachers’ 
opinion, the students that used Web 2.0 tools seemed to do 
it for both individual and group tasks. 
In the multivariate analysis, to be teacher of Computing 
Science was the only variable independently associated with 
the use of Web 2.0 tools in the classroom (odds ratio=7.9, 
confidence interval 95%=2.5-24.5). 
Up to 20% of teachers consider that Web 2.0 tools are 
useful for teaching. However, the majority of them do not 
use these tools probably because they are not accustomed to 
these technologies, they have no training or because they do 
not have enough resources. 
Only one third of the teachers that use the Web 2.0 tools 
do it throughout the whole class. 
 The majority of teachers that use Web 2.0 tools do it for 
working in group. This result should be underlined as 
suggests that teachers know the collaborative character of 
these tools. 
 Technological elements always seems atractive to the 
students (mainly at that age) and that should be use to 
introduce them in the classroom. Many teachers think that 
the use of these elements contribute to arouse interest of the 
students. In addition, these tools offer many facilities to 
promote and participate in group activities although 
obviously 
there 
are 
ways 
of interaction 
requiring 
presentiality such as debates, exhibitions, etc. 
 
TABLE 1 RESUMES THE MAIN CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 
TEACHERS THAT FULFILLED THE QUESTIONNARIE. 
Feature 
Categories 
% of participants 
Gender 
Male 
40 (49%) 
Female 
41 (51%) 
Age 
Over 50 years 
34 (42%) 
Under 50 years 
47 (58%) 
Experience 
Over 30 years 
19 (23,5%) 
Under 30 years 
72 (76,5%) 
Type 
Officials 
55 (68%) 
Interins 
26 (32%) 
Centers 
Public 
61 (75%) 
Private 
20 (25%) 
Area 
ICT 
44 (54%) 
Non-ICT 
37 (46%) 
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS 
Our results suggested that although most teachers 
believe that the use of Web 2.0 tools promotes the students 
learning, only half of them use these tools for teaching and 
only one third acknowledge to be implementing actively the 
use of these tools in the classroom. In general, teachers 
think that the use of Web 2.0 tools in the classroom is well 
accepted by the students. 
To teach Computing Science was the only factor 
independently associated with a greater use of these tools in 
the classroom (8-fold higher than among teachers in other 
specialties). The age of the teacher (older age) is associated 
with a lower use of Web 2.0 tools. 
This study underscores the need for action to generalize 
the use of Web 2.0 tools in the classroom, with particular 
emphasis on the older teachers and among teachers from 
other specialties from Computing Sciences. Future studies 
should aim to identify the handicaps for the implementation 
of these tools in order to adopt strategies (procurement, 
training courses, etc.) to avoid them. 
 
 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

REFERENCES 
1. 
Aparici Marino, R, Campuzano Canales, A, Antonio 
Ferres, J and García Matilla, A. Madrid. UNED. Julio 
2010. La Educación Mediática en la Escuela 2.0 
2. 
Clotier Williams, J (1975). L’ere D’emerec ou la 
communication audio-scritovisuelle a’ l’heure des self-
media (segunda ed). Montreal: Les Pres de L’Université 
de Montreal. 
3. 
Callejo Gallego, J  and Viedma Rojas, A (2006). 
Proyectos y Estrategias de Investigacion Social. UNED. 
2005. 
4. 
Gutiérrez Moraleda, A (2003). Alfabetización Digital. 
Fundación 
AUNA. 
http://fundacionorange.es/areas/28_observatorio/pdfs/JM
C_8.pdf 
y 
http://www.revistacomunicar.com/pdf/preprint/38/03-
PRE-13396.pdf. 
Retrieval date 20:16, June 01, 2014 de. 
5. 
Castells Olivar, M (2009). Comunicación y poder. 
Madrid: Alianza999 
6. 
Martin Artiles, A (2005). Cambios en la organización del 
trabajo, 
formación, 
cualificación 
y 
competencias. 
http://eytsc1011.pbworks.com/f/OTCOMPETENCIAS20
04.pdf. Retrieval date 20:16, June 01, 2014 de. 
Feltrero Oreja, R. (2006). La Filosofía del Software 
Libre. Vol. I: las Licencias de Software Libre y su 
desafío a los modelos vigentes de Propiedad Intelectual. 
Madrid. UNED. Retrieval date 20:33, June 01, 2014 de. 
7. 
Abella Garcia A and Segovia Romero, M. A. (2003). 
Junta de Extremadura.  Libro Blanco del Software Libre 
en España (II). 
Vicente Hinojosa, A and León Martinez J (2009). 
Conceptos sobre el Uso de las Tecnologías Web 2.0. 
(2013).http://reposital.cuaed.unam.mx:8080/jspui/bitstre
am/123456789/813/1/El%20Uso%20de%20la%20Tecno
log%C3%ADa%20en%20la%20web%202.0.pdf 
Retrieval date 20:45, June 01, 2014 de. 
8. 
Vicente Hinojosa, A and León Martinez J (2009). 
Conceptos sobre el Uso de las Tecnologías Web 2.0. 
(2013).http://reposital.cuaed.unam.mx:8080/jspui/bitstre
am/123456789/813/1/El%20Uso%20de%20la%20Tecno
log%C3%ADa%20en%20la%20web%202.0.pdf  
Retrieval date 21:02, June 01, 2014 de. 
9. 
Instituto Nacional de Tecnologías Educativas y de 
Formación del Profesorado. Programa Escuela 2.0 
(2013). 
http://www.ite.educacion.es/escuela-20. 
http://www.ite.educacion.es.  
http://recursostic.educacion.es/blogs/europa/ 
Retrieval 
date 21:10, June 01, 2014 de. 
10. Piscitelli, A, Adaime, I, Arribas Urrutia, A, Balestrini, 
M, Ciuffoli, C, Cobo Romani, l, Gruffat, C, Islas, O, 
Leal Fonseca, D.E, López, G, Primavera, H, Reig 
Hernández, D, Schimkus, R, Sued, G, Uman, I, Venesio, 
M. C.  
11. El Proyecto Facebook y la Posuniversidad. Sistemas 
operativos Sociales y Entornos Abiertos de aprendizaje 
(2010).http://www.fundacion.telefonica.com/es/que_hac
emos/convocatorias/sociedad_informacion/2010/mayo/p
df/EVEN_DYC_ARG_El%20proyecto%20Facebook%2
0y%20la%20posuniversidad_07_05_10.pdf 
 
Retrieval date 21:15, June 01, 2014 de. 
 
 
 
 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-346-9
ICCGI 2014 : The Ninth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

