The Application of Fuzzy Clustering in  Life Quality Assessment of Lung Cancer 
Patients 
 
Peiyu Chen 
College of Electronic Information and Control 
Engineering 
Beijing University of Technology 
Beijing, China 
530795037@qq.com 
 
Liying Fang, Pu Wang, Shuang Li 
College of Electronic Information and Control 
Engineering 
Beijing University of Technology 
Beijing, China 
 {fangliying, wangpu}@bjut.edu.cn,  
690736804@qq.com 
 
 
Abstract—In order to research the relationship between the 
FACT score and lung cancer patients’ tumor progression with 
the patients’ death situation, we manage to identify the 
variation tendency rules of the FACT score. This paper 
proposes a new, simple and efficient representation for the one-
dimensional numerical time series. The representation uses the 
improved fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm to cluster all the 
sequence segments, realizing the symbolization of the 
numerical data sequence. At last,we find the frequent patterns 
in the new symbolic FACT score sequence. The relation 
between the FACT score and the patients’ death situation can 
be found through the experiments. 
Keywords-fuzzy 
C-means 
clustering; 
time 
series; 
symbolization; GSP. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
This part contains a review of the data object, i.e., FACT 
score, and expounds the research necessity and significance. 
A. FACT score  
Life quality assessment of lung cancer patients has been 
widely focused, as the traditional disease evaluation and 
prognosis are not adapting the patients’ needs, the health 
concepts and nowadays medical mode any more. 
FACT is a Functional Assessment of Cancer Therapy 
which was developed by Cella etc. of the Chicago Rush-
Presbyterian-St. Luke Medical Center at United States. It 
contains a basic module, FACT-G, measuring the life quality 
of cancer patients and some specific cancer subscale. The 
FACT-G has 27 indexes, divided into four parts: the somatic 
condition (7 indexes), the social/family situation (7 indexes), 
the emotional status (6 indexes) and the functional status (7 
indexes). Specific cancer assessment contains the basic 
module and a specific module [1]. 
The FACT-L, a specific cancer assessment, that is a self-
assessment of the lung cancer patients which containing the 
FACT-G and the lung cancer specific module (9 indexes). 
The lung cancer specific module is mainly used to the 
patients who receive chemotherapy, radiation therapy and 
have been well-educated. Each index is the grade entry, the 
forward entry direct count from zero to four points and 
reverse entries reverse count when computing the score, i.e., 
four points to fill the first one grade within three points on 
two levels, etc. 
B. Overview 
The basic task of data mining is to find frequent patterns 
from the data set. This kind of problem is to decide which 
mode is frequent in a class of data set mode possible 
existence. Frequent pattern is found based on the symbolic 
sequence that including several basic item sets, however, the 
large number of the item sets will inevitably reduce the 
support and typicality of frequent pattern. In this way, 
finding frequent pattern from the numerical data sequence 
will be a great challenge. 
There are certain kinds of data types in the medical data 
source, such as the symbol type, the Boolean type, the 
numeric type, etc. Due to the limited number of basic item 
sets, the frequent patterns using the frequent pattern 
algorithm can be directly mined from the first two data types. 
The number of the numerical data in the basic set is hundreds 
of thousands that is not conducive to frequent pattern mining, 
so mining frequent patterns need to transforming dataset 
from numerical to symbol. 
This paper proposed a new representation of time series, 
and then mined data pattern from FACT score in lung cancer 
cases for above problems. The experiments show that the 
representation can re-paint the original sequence in a certain 
accuracy conditions and convenient for their pattern mining. 
In the second part, introducing the whole algorithm and 
detailed explain the each step of the algorithm. In the third 
part, the experiment is accomplished based on the algorithm 
and analysis. At last, the conclusion and future work is 
presented. 
II. 
PATTERN FIND BASED ON THE FUZZY 
CLUSTERIN 
During the process of finding the pattern, the first step is 
classifying the FACT score with tumor progression and 
death situation. Then symbolizes the original sequence to 
find the pattern. At last verifies the result, the sequential 
pattern, which is compliant with reservation requirements 
through the experimental results. If the results do not reach 
reservation requirements, it needs to re-select the dimensions 
308
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

and other parameters, until the condition is met.  Figure 1 
shows the flowchart: 
 
Figure 1.  The flowchart of Pattern find 
A. Data preprocessing 
Each patient has at most 4 treatment periods and 14 
follow-up periods, and the collected data content of each 
treatment and follow-up are the same. Preprocess the 
patients’ FACT score. Take out the ID number of patients 
and the corresponding FACT score while ignoring the 
missing point directly from the database which stores the 
each treatment and follow-up data of patients. 
B. Symbolic representation 
First handle the patient's data thus we could segment an 
N-dimensionality into an N-1 one by making every treatment 
and follow-up data a break-point. The slope of the segment 
represent the trend of the curve, which has a better result 
compared with the Euclidean distance, Pearson correlation 
coefficient etc. Extract the slope of the segment as the 
standard of clustering, and symbolize the segment that each 
line in the corresponding class.  
In this paper, we proposed an improved fuzzy C-means 
clustering algorithm used to cluster FACT score. Fuzzy 
clustering algorithm is based on the best practices function 
and it use calculus computing technology to get the optimal 
cost function. The fuzzy clustering algorithm defines the 
neighbor function between the vector and the cluster, and the 
membership function set provides the membership degree of 
the clustering vector. In the fuzzy method, the vector 
membership degree in the different cluster are interrelated. 
Simultaneously using the distance of slope of the segment 
replacing the traditional Euclidean distance could pay more 
attention to the trend of the FACT score in the clustering 
algorithm. 
The fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm’s input 
parameter is C and then divide N data objects into C 
clustering. Clustering results to meet high similarity in one 
cluster, and meet smaller similarity in the different clustering 
results [2]. 
Fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm: 
Input: the number of clusters C, and the data sets with N 
data objects. 
Output: the matrix of cluster centers and partition matrix. 
Algorithm process: 
Step 1: Initialize the partition matrix Uik with values in a 
random number between 0 and 1. 
Step 2: Calculate the cluster center. 
Step 3: Calculate the value function J.  If it is less than a 
certain threshold or the value change comparing with last 
value is less than a threshold, the algorithm stop. 
Step 4: Recalculate the partition matrix Uik, then return 
to step 2. 
Figure 2 shows the flowchart: 
U
Uik
Cluster 
centrt
Value 
function J
J>threshold
?
Y
Uik
N
Partition matrix
Finally partition 
matrix
Initial matrix
initialize
 
Figure 2.  The flowchart of Fuzzy Cluster 
The pseudo code of the algorithm: 
Initialize the number of clusters = 3; 
Initialize the partition matrix Uik; 
While J> threshold 
For each cluster: 
   
 
Calculate the cluster center; 
   
 
Calculate the value function J; 
Return Uik; 
In the algorithm, the data object is a sub-sequence after 
segment; the distance between the segments is measured by 
the change value of the two points of the segment [3]. The 
distance between segment il and 
jl  is: 
            
) 2
(
j
i
ij
s
s
D
−
=
      (1) 
C. Pattern find algorithm 
Frequent pattern find algorithm uses pruning strategies of 
redundant candidate pattern and special data structure-a hash 
tree realizing the fast memory access of candidate patterns 
that using the GSP algorithm, which is similar to Apriori 
algorithm [4][5].  
Algorithm process: 
Step 1: Scan sequence database, getting sequential 
pattern L1 whose length is 1 as the initial seed set. 
Step 2: According to the seed set Li, candidate sequential 
patterns Ci+1 whose length is i+1 by connecting operations 
and pruning operations; then scan the sequence database, 
calculating the support of each candidate sequence patterns 
and generate the sequence pattern Li+1 whose length is i+1 
which is used to be a new seed set;  
Step 3: Repeat the second step, until no new sequence 
mode or a new candidate sequence patterns. 
309
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

 
Figure 3.  The flowchart of GSP 
The pseudo code of the algorithm: 
Initialize the sequence L1; 
While generate new sequence 
 
Generate the candidate pattern Ci+1 
 
For each Ci+1 
 
   If the support of Ck>min_sup 
 
     
Ck is a FP; 
 
   Get the new sequence pattern Li+1; 
Return Li+1; 
In above flowchart, the initial sequence is the result of 
the fuzzy clustering after restored base on the original 
numeric sequence by the patients. 
III. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
Experimental data is FACT score which is in the 
treatment and follow-up cases of non-small cell lung cancer 
provided by the Beijing Chinese Medicine Hospital. All 
patients’ data were right-align (reversal the sequence), and 
only intercepting the first 4 data of the sequence. All cases 
have been deposited in the Oracle 10g database. 
There are 4 class patients which classified by tumor 
progression and death situation: first class is no tumor 
progression but death; second class is tumor progressed and 
death; third class is no tumor progression and live; forth class 
is tumor progressed but live. Every patient have a sequence 
whose length is between 4 and 17; then cluster the FACT 
segment by the fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm, while C 
is 3 that is increment, decrement and constant which are 
represented by a,b,c, respectively; at last, use GSP algorithm 
to finding the frequent pattern from the sub-sequence with 
four data. 
We use above algorithm to find the frequent pattern 
from FACT score. TABLE I shows the result: 
TABLE I.  
THE RESULT OF THE PATTERN FIND 
class (patients’ 
number) 
Support 
(percentage) 
Frequent sub-
sequence 
I(22) 
15(68.2%) 
<a c c> 
II(74) 
52(70.3%) 
<a c c> 
III (59) 
55(93.2%) 
<c c> 
IV (75) 
66(88%) 
<c c> 
From the table, it can be seen that a clear upward trend in 
the last follow-up data in Class I and II patient, and lead to 
death; however, Classes III and IV patient population in the 
last several follow-up FACT score value is always 
maintained a flat trend, and survived. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Transformed the numeric sequence to symbolic sequence 
by the improved fuzzy C-means clustering algorithm, and 
find the frequent pattern from the new sequence. The method 
shows the relationship between the FACT score and the 
patients’ death situation. But there are some disadvantages, 
such as the support of the frequent sequence <a c c> in class 
I and II is not enough. Further improvements of the 
algorithm we expect better results. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is supported by 2010 Program for Excellent 
Talents in Beijing Municipal Organization Department 
(2010D005015000001), 
the 
New 
Centaury 
National 
Hundred, Thousand and Ten Thousand Talent Project, and 
got the cooperation with Beijing Hospital of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine Affiliated to CPUMS. Special thanks have 
been given there. 
REFERENCES 
[1] C. Wan and C. Zhang, Development and evaluation of the Chinese 
version of the FACT-L (V1.0) for patients with lung cancer, Quality 
of Life Newsletter, pp. 19. 
[2] H. Chu and B. Chao, Novel Optimization Method for Fuzzy C-Means 
Algorithms, Journal of Information Engineering University, vol.12, 
No.3, Jun.2011. (in Chinese) 
[3] C. S. Mller-Levet, F. Klawonn, K. H. Cho, and O. Wolkenhauer. 
Fuzzy Clustering of Short Time-Series and Unevenly Distributed 
Sampling Points. in Advances in Intelligent Data Analysis V. 5th 
International Symposium on Intelligent Data Analysis, IDA 2003, 28-
30 Aug. 2003. 2003. Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag. 
[4] M. Xia and X. Wang, Research on sequential pattern mining 
algorithms, Computer Technology and Development, 16th ed., vol. 4. 
(in Chinese) 
[5] L. Liu and J. Cui, Comparison and Analysis between Algorithm of 
GSP and PrefixSpan, Journal of Liaoning Institute of Technology, vol. 
26, No.5, Oct. 2006. (in Chinese) 
 
310
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-202-8
ICCGI 2012 : The Seventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

