Considering Business Process Complexity Through the Lens of Textual Data 
 
Aleksandra Revina  
Faculty of Economics 
Brandenburg University of Applied Sciences 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
e-mail: revina@th-brandenburg.de 
 
 
Abstract— Organizations are challenged by a growing Business 
Process complexity as a result of new technologies and 
continuously generated data flows of various types and 
volumes. These are likely to result in the organizational 
performance decrease and loss of control. While textual data is 
reasonably considered one of the most typical data types in 
organizations, the mainstream of Business Process complexity 
research is driven by software complexity approaches, 
whereby textual data remains discarded. In our work, we 
explore the potential of textual data generated by the process 
participants from a linguistic perspective and suggest a textual 
data-based process complexity concept. We illustrate our 
proposition with the real-world IT ticket processing scenario 
and identify IT ticket complexity based on the IT ticket 
description texts provided by the customers. Our findings 
evidence sufficient prediction quality and positive influence of 
linguistic features on the prediction quality.     
Keywords-Business Process Management; Process Complexity; 
Natural Language; Text Understanding; Linguistics. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The overused concept of process complexity and 
strategies to solve this complexity gain new interest due to 
the rapid penetration of new technologies into Business 
Process Management (BPM) and resulting dynamics. The 
focus of BPM as a discipline has traditionally been on the 
modeling of organizational processes. Hence, the research on 
complexity is also mainly driven by this perspective [1]. The 
major complexity approaches in BPM, i.e., complexities of 
process models, event logs, work- and control flows, have 
been derived from the software complexity based on the 
graph-theoretic measures suggested by McCabe in the 1970s 
[2]. The observation demonstrates a strong focus on the 
technical artifacts prevalent in the BPM community. In these 
approaches, the social component expressed through the 
textual data massively generated by the business process 
(BP) participants in the process execution remains 
dismissed.  
With the maturity of Natural Language Processing 
(NLP), the attention of BPM research and practice shifts 
towards textual data. Despite that, the efforts dedicated to 
analyzing textual data have been mainly directed to support 
modeling activities [3].  
Recently, the studies considering both perspectives of 
natural language generated by process workers and process 
logs generated by information systems have started to 
appear, paving the way to further research. Hence, Fan and 
Ilk [4] suggest a text analytics framework for automated 
communication pattern analysis using conversation logs and 
natural language. In [5], the authors propose enriching 
Information Technology (IT) ticket resolution logs with the 
topical phrases extracted from comments to capture the 
underlying process interactions.  
On a positive note of such research directions and in line 
with “humanistic” enrichments of BPM in general and 
process mining in particular [6], we suggest inquiring into 
the potential of natural language generated in the processes 
and showcase our work from the unconventional viewpoint 
on process complexity based on natural language. 
The remainder of this extended abstract is organized as 
follows. Section II reflects the approaches used in our work 
as well as research methodology. Section III provides an 
illustrative application case. Finally, Section IV discusses the 
results and gives a short outlook.    
II. 
OVERVIEW OF APPROACHES 
In the present work, we propose to use textual data 
generated by BP participants as a valuable source of 
information allowing to identify the complexity of the 
process. Linguistics is the discipline concerned with the 
study of human language, its structure, usage, and history 
[7]. Traditionally, linguists define textual complexity in 
terms of 
the text readability, understandability, or 
comprehensiveness which is prevailingly based on the 
average sentence length and the proportion of complex 
words [8]. Whereas we partially make use of this traditional 
linguistic understanding, i.e., text understandability for the 
reader, we aim to extend and adapt it to the BPM context.   
In doing so, we consider the three levels of text 
understanding typically differentiated by the linguists [9] 
which can potentially indicate the BP complexity: 
(i) objective knowledge (the who, what, where questions), 
(ii) subjective knowledge (opinion, sentiment), and (iii) meta-
knowledge (what can be learned about the text other than its 
contents, mainly about its author). 
Our research methodology is based on a three-fold 
triangulation. First, we follow literature review process to 
determine and structure our approach as well as define the 
NLP techniques to be used in the study. Second, expert 
knowledge of both researchers and practitioners is used to 
adapt these techniques to the BPM and application case 
context. Third, we perform experiments applying our 
approach to a real-world process to demonstrate its practical 
value and evaluate the results.  
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Hence, according to the three above mentioned 
knowledge types, we use common NLP techniques and adapt 
them to the BPM context. Thus, we propose domain-specific 
taxonomy and taxonomy keyword-based pattern matching 
algorithm to extract objective knowledge and estimate 
cognitive (mental) efforts including professional contextual 
experience of the BP worker necessary to understand the task 
/ process at hand and successfully execute the task / process 
[10]. The taxonomy contains four basic elements of a BP 
text: (1) Resources (nouns indicating the specificity of BP 
elements), 
(2) Techniques 
(verbs of 
knowledge and 
information transformation activity affecting Resources), (3) 
Capacities (adjectives describing situation specificity of 
Techniques), and (4) Choices (adverbs determining the 
selection of the required set of Techniques). These four 
elements extracted from the BP text are then organized 
according to the three following levels: (i) routine, i.e., daily, 
activities, (ii) semi-cognitive, i.e., including some non-
routine BP elements, activities, and (iii) cognitive activities 
demanding much mental effort and involving complex 
problem-solving [10]. These levels of routine, semi-
cognitive, and cognitive also serve as a scale to formalize 
the objective knowledge extraction and measure the 
cognitive efforts.  
To extract subjective knowledge and assess attention 
efforts needed to be paid to particular BP elements and BP as 
a whole, we develop a domain-specific business sentiment 
lexicon and lexicon keyword-based pattern matching 
algorithm extended by semantic and syntactic rules and 
formalize it on the ordinal scale of low, medium, high [11]. 
Business sentiment [11] is suggested as an instrument to 
measure those business-related emotions implied by the BP 
text author and indicating urgency or importance of the task / 
process at hand.  
To obtain information regarding meta-knowledge and 
reading efforts (readability) needed to comprehend the text, 
we use stylistic patterns [12] expressed with a number of 
stylistic features, such as text length, unique parts of speech, 
and wording style [12]. We measure the readability on the 
ordinal scale of effortless, involving effort, and telegraphic, 
the latter indicating the texts written in the shortest possible 
way, as a rule, by professionals to professionals already 
knowing the specific professional jargon. Meta-knowledge 
is a naturally distinct type of knowledge. As defined above, 
objective and subjective knowledge is about extracting 
information contained in the text. Meta-knowledge indicates 
the latent information about text quality, i.e., information 
about the text author [9]. The text quality will likely be 
determined by the author’s professionalism, competence, 
and stress level. Obviously, a well-written explanation of 
task / process facilitates timely and successful execution. On 
the contrary, poorly written explanation will complicate the 
work.  
In the end, as shown on Fig. 1, it is suggested to 
aggregate the three extracted and formalized on the 
mentioned scales knowledge types to a BP complexity 
measured on the scale low, medium, high.    
III. 
ILLUSTRATIVE APPLICATION CASE 
To evaluate the suggested concepts, we use an IT ticket 
processing scenario of an IT Information Library (ITIL) 
[13] Change Management (CHM) department of a 
telecommunication company. As BP textual descriptions, 
we use customer requests for changes in IT infrastructure 
products or services of the company reaching CHM workers 
in a free text form, as a rule, per e-mail. For the evaluation 
purposes, we obtained two data sets with the textual 
customer requests comprising 28,157 and 4,625 entries 
correspondingly. Preprocessing and extraction of the 
knowledge types were conducted using Python 3.4. To 
obtain application case specific scale values for each of the 
knowledge types as well as IT ticket complexity (see 
Fig. 1), the handcrafted rules and thresholds were developed 
based on the qualitative (using the values manually assigned 
by the CHM workers) and quantitative (using historical 
ticket data in case of BP complexity identification) 
evaluation process implemented in the Microsoft Office 
Excel 2016 application. This rule-based approach evidenced 
the 
BP 
complexity 
prediction 
precision 
of 
approximately 65%.     
IV. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
In this study, to showcase those meaningful insights 
inherent in the BP textual data, we proposed that the three 
types of knowledge, i.e., linguistic levels of text 
understanding, can potentially indicate textual data-based 
BP complexity. We tested this proposition using the real-
world ITIL IT ticket processing scenario and developed the 
rule-based approach demonstrating 65% precision [14]. In 
our further work, we experimented with the semi-supervised 
machine learning using the suggested linguistic features as 
IT ticket text representation and available 90 labels with the 
 
Figure 1. Experimentations 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

assigned IT ticket complexity to train the classifiers and 
predict the complexity [15]. Based on the comparative 
analysis of various classifiers and text representation 
approaches, i.e., TF-IDF in our case, we managed to 
confirm the positive influence of our linguistic features on 
the prediction quality. In future work, we aim to compare 
the textual data-based and process mining-based process 
view, specifically in terms of complexity identification, and 
derive and analyse discrepancies and commonalities 
between these two views.     
REFERENCES 
[1] J. Cardoso, J. Mendling, G. Neumann, and H. Reijers, “A 
Discourse on Complexity of Process Models,” Business 
Process Management Workshops, BPM 2006, 2006, pp. 117–
128. 
[2] T. J. McCabe, “A Complexity Measure,” IEEE Transactions 
on Software Engineering, vol. SE-2, no. 4, pp. 308–320, 1976. 
[3] H. van der Aa, J. Carmona, H. Leopold, J. Mendling, and L. 
Padró, “Challenges and Opportunities of Applying Natural 
Language Processing in Business Process Management,” The 
27th International Conference on Computational Linguistics, 
2018, pp. 2791–2801. 
[4] S. Fan and N. Ilk, “A text analytics framework for automated 
communication 
pattern 
analysis,” 
Information 
and 
Management, vol. 57, no. 4, p. 103219, June 2020. 
[5] M. Gupta, P. Agarwal, T. Tater, S. Dechu, and A. Serebrenik, 
“Analyzing Comments in Ticket Resolution to Capture 
Underlying 
Process 
Interactions,” 
Business 
Process 
Management Workshops, BPM 2020, 2020, pp. 219–231. 
[6] W. Tang and M. Matzner, “Creating Humanistic Value with 
Process Mining for Improving Work Conditions - A 
Sociotechnical Perspective,” The 41st International Conference 
on Information Systems, ICIS 2020, 2020, pp. 1–9. 
[7] V. A. Fromkin, Linguistics: An Introduction to Linguistic 
Theory. Wiley, 2002.  
[8] T. Loughran and B. Mcdonald, “Measuring readability in 
financial disclosures,” Journal of Finance, vol. 69, no. 4, 
pp. 1643–1671, Aug. 2014,  
[9] W. 
Daelemans, 
“Explanation 
in 
Computational 
Stylometry,” International Conference on Intelligent Text 
Processing and Computational Linguistics, 2013, pp. 451–
462. 
[10] N. Rizun, A. Revina, and V. Meister, “Method of 
Decision-Making Logic Discovery in the Business 
Process 
Textual 
Data,” 
The 
22nd 
International 
Conference on Business Information Systems, 2019, vol. 
353, pp. 70–84. 
[11] N. Rizun and A. Revina, “Business Sentiment Analysis. 
Concept and Method for Perceived Anticipated Effort 
Identification,” The 28th International Conference on 
Information Systems Development, 2019, pp. 1–12. 
[12] N. Rizun, A. Revina, and V. Meister, “Discovery of 
stylistic patterns in business process textual descriptions: 
IT ticket case,” The 33rd International Business 
Information 
Management 
Association 
Conference, 
IBIMA, 2019. 
[13] AXELOS, ITIL® Foundation, ITIL 4 Edition. Norwich, 
UK: The Stationery Office, 2019. 
[14] A. Revina and N. Rizun, “Multi-criteria knowledge-based 
recommender system for decision support in complex 
business processes,” ComplexRec Workshop Proceedings, 
Recommender Systems Conference RecSys, 2019, pp. 
16–22. 
[15] A. Revina, K. Buza, and V. G. Meister, “IT Ticket 
Classification: The Simpler, the Better,” IEEE Access, 
vol. 8, pp. 193380–193395, 2020. 
 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-877-8
ICCGI 2021 : The Sixteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

