Why are Users Switching Among Different Types of Social Media?  
An empirical study from China
Xiongfei Cao 
School of Management 
USTC 
Hefei, China 
caoxf312@126.com 
Abstract—This paper aims to address what unique factors 
entice bloggers to switch to microblogging, and how they 
impact bloggers’ switching intention. Using the PPM 
framework as a general guideline, low social presence is 
posited to form blog’s push effects, while network size, 
and relative ease of use are posited to shape 
microblogging’s pull effects. Furthermore, by integrating 
status quo bias (SQB) theory and the dedication-
constraint dual model, this paper assumes that affective 
commitment, switching costs, and habit are important 
sources of inertia. Inertia is presumed to play a key role 
in mooring effects: it not only negatively influences 
switching intention, but it also attenuates the pull and 
push factors’ main effects. An empirical study of users 
who use blog and microblogging services concurrently 
provides general support for our hypotheses. Theoretical 
contributions of this paper are discussed. 
Keywords-IT switching; SQB theory; inertia; push–pull–
mooring framework
I.
INTRODUCTION
Rapid evolution across the spectrum of social media has 
stimulated unprecedented technology adoption pattern. On 
one hand, people may quickly converge on newly emerging 
technologies. Within 10 months after it was released in 
February 2004, Facebook had achieved one million active 
users, and this data had increased to 250 million by mid-
2009. On the other hand, concurrent with the emergence of 
new technologies, people often leave previously popular 
applications en masse. For instance, with the growing 
popularity of sites, such as Facebook and Twitter, blogs are 
slowly losing their foothold, especially among younger 
generation. Given the large number of bloggers who lost 
interest and have given up on regular updates, Microsoft’s 
Windows Live Space shut down in 2011 [1]. Similarity, 
Facebook has also been experiencing shrinking user base in 
its post-IPO era. A Global Social Media Impact Study 
reports that Facebook users are migrating to novel platforms, 
such as Instagram and WhatsApp [2]. As competing social 
media choices emerge in the digital market, users can easily 
switch to alternative services without a financial loss. The 
success of online communities depends on a critical mass of 
active users, while user migration and the subsequent change 
in the market share of social media is a strategic issue [3]. 
Investigating IT switching phenomenon is important because 
it is closely related to the survival of technologies.  
II.
RESEARCH MODEL
Existing IT research based on the push–pull–mooring 
(PPM) framework is insufficient to understand IT switching 
phenomenon [4][5]. First, most studies are concerned only 
with user switching within the same service, rather than 
across different services. Second, few researches have 
proposed theoretical explanation for mooring effects; the 
exact mechanism by which the mooring effects hamper 
switching decisions has also not been investigated so far. 
Third, most studies adopt single, general constructs (e.g., 
dissatisfaction and alternative attractiveness) to represent the 
push and pull effects, and they also fail to identify the factors 
unique to a particular research context.  
To fill these gaps, this paper investigates why users switch 
among different types of social media.  Specifically, we aim 
to address what unique factors entice bloggers to switch to 
microblogging, and how they impact bloggers’ switching 
intention. Using the PPM framework as a general guideline, 
low social presence is posited to form the push effect of 
incumbent social media, whereas larger referent network size 
and relative ease of use work together to shape the pull 
effects of fashionable social media. For the mooring effects, 
we identify an encompassing set of antecedents (affective 
commitment, switching costs, and habit) to inertia. Inertia is 
predicted to attenuate the main effects of pull and push 
factors. In addition, the effects of affective commitment, 
switching costs, and habit on switching intention are 
proposed to mediate fully through inertia.  
III.
SAMPLE AND RESULTS
To test the model, empirical data are collected from users 
who concurrently use blog and microblogging. The target 
population for this study comprises bloggers who are also 
using microblogging. We obtained samples from Sina blog, a 
mainstream blog service in China. At the height of Sina blog 
in 2007, its traffic hit 3.5 million visitors a day. Thus, this 
sample reasonably represented a major portion of the blog 
population. More importantly, Sina corporation’s other 
social media product, Sina Weibo, is the most popular 
microblogging service in China. As of September 2014, Sina 
Weibo has 167 million monthly active users. Given that Sina 
Weibo is widely and pervasively adopted, this approach is 
effective in accessing people who concurrently use blog and 
microblogging services and are consequently prone to 
switching behavior. 
Given that the user's list of blog and microblogging 
services is not accessible, we adopted the snowball sampling 
technique by spreading survey invitations with the URL of 
the questionnaire to Sina bloggers. This technique is 
appropriate when a study is concerned with a small and 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

specialized population of people who are knowledgeable 
about the topic. The invitation informed that only people 
who are using both services were eligible for the survey. A 
total of 239 valid responses were obtained. 
Our study has several important findings. First, our results 
suggest that low social presence pushes incumbent social 
media users away, whereas relative ease of use pulls them to 
fashionable social media. However, referent network size has 
no significant impact on user switching intentions. Although 
unexpected, this result is not surprising. The coexistence of a 
variety of social media platforms suggests that each type of 
social media has a specific user group, and a winner-take-all 
outcome to occur is impossible. For example, users may 
keep in touch with specific friends through blogs, and not via 
the total social circle. In addition, people may intentionally 
avoid using a popular social media, such as microblogging, 
which may make them look mediocre. Second, affective 
commitment, switching costs, and habit are important 
sources of inertia. However, inertia has a negative influence 
on user switching intention. Third, inertia exhibits significant 
negative moderating effects on the impact of push-pull 
factors (i.e., social presence and relative ease of use) on 
switching intention. The predictive power of push-pull 
factors will weaken depending on the strength of user inertia. 
Finally, the effect of habit on switching intention is fully 
mediated through inertia, which suggests that incumbent 
technology habit may not necessarily affect user switching 
decisions unless inertia is well developed. Contrary to our 
expectation, inertia only partially mediates the effects of 
affective commitment and switching costs on switching 
intention. As the fashion trend of blogs ebbed away, the 
remaining bloggers have greater loyalty and stickiness. Their 
affective commitment is enduring over time and stable in the 
changing environment. The connection between affective 
commitment and switching intention may happen without an 
individual being consciously aware of this connection. 
Meanwhile, given the resource constraints of users and the 
various social media platforms they can select from, users 
are likely to calculate the costs versus benefits of the known 
alternatives to make an optimal decision. Except for the 
indirect effect through inertia, affective commitment and 
switching costs could have direct effects on switching 
intention. 
IV.
THEORETICAL IMPLICATIONS
This study has several key research implications. First, this 
study is among the first to provide empirical validation of 
user switching from an incumbent social media to a 
fashionable one during fashion shifting. Unlike isolated users 
who make switching decisions individually, we regard social 
media users as virtual community members who are woven 
together to seek affiliation and socialization. Thus, specific 
factors related to the communal nature of social media that 
affect user switching decisions are identified. Second, by 
integrating SQB theory and the dedication-constraint dual 
model, we develop a better theoretical understanding of the 
mooring effects. Specifically, we expand the antecedents of 
inertia beyond cognitive determinants to include affective 
determinants, such as affective commitment, and explore 
mechanisms by which inertia operates in affecting switching 
intention. Finally, this study extends the applicability of the 
PPM framework to the context of user switching across 
different types of social media.  
V.
CONCLUSION
   This study explores the factors that affect user switch from 
an incumbent social media to a fashionable one, as well as 
the mechanism behind these factors. Our findings indicate 
that low social presence pushes incumbent social media 
users away, whereas relative ease of use pulls them to the 
fashionable one. Affective commitment, switching costs, 
and habit are important sources of inertia. In the context of 
this study, inertia fully mediates the relationship between 
habit and switching intention, and only partially mediates 
the effect of affective commitment and switching costs on 
switching 
intention. 
Furthermore, 
inertia 
negatively 
moderates the relationships between social presence, 
relative ease of use, and switching intention. 
To conclude, this study expands our understanding of 
online service switching mechanism, and identifies key 
factors in IT switching, such as social presence, affective 
commitment, and inertia. We believe that these mechanisms 
and key factors are not necessarily limited to online services, 
but are largely applicable to other contexts in which people 
interact with technology. Thus, this study builds a useful 
foundation for future research. 
REFERENCES
[1]
Li, D., and Walejko, G. Splogs and abandoned blogs: The 
perils of sampling bloggers and their blogs. Information, 
Community and Society, 11, 2 (2008), 279-296 
[2]
Kopytoff, V.G. Blogs wane as the young drift to sites like 
Twitter. The New York Times, 20 (2011) 
[3]
Iverson, R.D., and Buttigieg, D.M. Affective, normative and 
continuance commitment: can the ‘right kind ’ of 
commitment be managed? Journal of Management Studies, 
36, 3 (1999), 307-333. 
[4]
Jones, M.A., Mothersbaugh, D.L., and Beatty, S.E. Switching 
barriers and repurchase intentions in services. Journal of 
Retailing, 76, 2 (2000), 259-274. 
[5]
Hsieh, J.-K., Hsieh, Y.-C., Chiu, H.-C., and Feng, Y.-C. Post-
adoption switching behavior for online service substitutes: A 
perspective of the push–pull–mooring framework. Computers 
in Human Behavior, 28, 5 (2012), 1912-1920. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-513-5
ICCGI 2016 : The Eleventh International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

