Health Professional Students’ Acceptance of Mobile Information 
Communication Technologies for Learning - 
a Study Using the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) 
 
Lili Liu, Shaniff Esmail, Elizabeth Taylor 
Department of Occupational Therapy 
University of Alberta 
Edmonton, Canada 
e-mail: lili.liu@ualberta.ca, shesmail@ualberta.ca, 
liz.taylor@ualberta.ca 
 
 
Adriana M. Ríos Rincón, Antonio Miguel Cruz 
Department of Occupational Therapy 
University of Alberta 
Edmonton, Canada 
School of Medicine and Health Sciences  
Universidad del Rosario 
Bogotá, Colombia 
e-mail: aros@ualberta.ca/adriana.rios@urosario.edu.co 
miguelcr@ualberta.ca/antonio.miguel@urosario.edu.co
 
 
Abstract— The aim of this study was to examine what factors 
affect the acceptance behavior of mobile information 
communication technologies for learning by students in a MSc 
Occupational Therapy program in a Canadian university. The 
study addresses mobile and distance education, specifically, the 
function of mobile learning in higher education. A self-
administrated paper-based survey was created by adapting 
scales used in previous research based on the Unified Theory of 
Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT). Our research 
model was tested using the Partial Least Squares (PLS) 
technique. Social Influence was the strongest salient construct 
for 
behavioral 
intention 
to 
use 
mobile 
information 
communication 
technologies 
for 
learning, 
followed 
by 
performance 
expectancy 
of 
mobile 
information 
and 
communication technologies. Effort expectancy was not a 
salient construct for behavioral intention to use these 
technologies.  
Keywords-m-learning; UTAUT; health sciences; education. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Occupational 
therapists 
are 
regulated 
health 
professionals that work in a variety of public and private 
settings to address physical and psychiatric (mental health) 
issues to help people or populations maintain or return to 
their regular activities including work, leisure and self-care. 
In 2011, there were approximately 1,532 occupational 
therapists practicing in Alberta and 13,501 practicing in 
Canada [1]. The occupational therapy program is about two 
years (26 months) and located in Edmonton. In 2012, the 
Department of Occupational Therapy created a satellite 
program in Calgary which is 300 Km away south of 
Edmonton. At any one time, there are two cohorts (year one 
and year two). Each cohort has 98 students in Edmonton and 
22 students in Calgary. The program uses distributed 
learning approach where students at both sites receive 
instruction at the same time and follow the same curriculum 
through the use of high definition videoconferencing and 
other information and communication technologies. 
Information and communication technologies have the 
potential to enhance education and professional networks 
between healthcare professional including occupational 
therapists [2]. Our aim as educators is to prepare future 
generations of health professionals to perform their jobs in 
the community and in clients’ home environments. In 
essence, we wish to apply information and communication 
technologies 
to 
create 
meaningful, 
context-specific, 
community-based learning for our students who will work in 
teams or communities of practice. Information and 
communication technologies have been used for learning in a 
variety of disciplines. E-learning is based on the use of wired 
and wireless Internet. Mobile learning (or m-learning) is a 
part of e-learning. Mobile learning is defined as “any sort of 
learning that happens when the learner is not at a fixed 
predetermined location, or learning that happens when the 
learner takes advantage of the learning opportunities offered 
by mobile technologies” [4, p. 6]. Mobile learning refers to 
learning activities facilitated by the use of mobile 
information and communication technologies, such as cell 
phones, smart phones, palmtops, tablet personal computers, 
personal digital assistants and portable multimedia players 
[3]. Mobile information and communication technologies 
have the potential to provide educational opportunities for 
students in higher education because they can facilitate 
students’ access to information and interaction with 
instructors, peers and colleagues regardless the place where 
they are located [5]. Mobile information and communication 
technologies are expected to support the learning experience 
in several ways. They can: support, guide, and extend the 
students’ thinking process within and out of the classroom; 
enhance learner creativity, exploration and problem solving; 
facilitate the process for students to express their opinions; 
and enable learning with students’ preferred approach and 
108
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

speed of communication, making learning more autonomous 
and self-reliant [6].  
University students value the portability and immediacy 
of smart phones and tablets for obtaining and sharing 
information with peers [7]. Mobile information and 
communication technologies have been accepted by students 
in university lectures and are perceived as useful and easy to 
use. Additionally, students’ attention and motivation are 
higher with metacognitive supports provided via mobile 
technologies during class [8]. Research has revealed that the 
use of technologies for learning activities depends on 
students’ perception towards technologies [9]. However, 
little research has investigated the factors that determine 
students’ 
acceptance 
of 
mobile 
information 
and 
communication technologies for learning [3]. Much less 
attention has been given to the study of factors associated 
with adoption behavior of mobile information and 
communication technologies by 
occupational therapy 
students.  
Theories from the social sciences have explained how 
and why people adopt technologies, calling this construct as 
the behavioral intention to use technology [10]. The Unified 
Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) 
[11] integrates previous models with the behavioral intention 
perspectives and use of technologies. The UTAUT model 
has six constructs: 1) Performance expectancy (PE) defined 
as the degree to which a person believes that using the 
technology will help him or her to attain gains in job 
performance. 2) Effort expectancy (EE), the degree of ease 
associated with the use of the technology. 3) Social 
influence (SI), the degree to which a person perceives that 
important others believe he or she should use the technology 
under study. 4) Facilitating conditions (FC), the degree to 
which a person believes that an organizational and technical 
infrastructure exists to support use of the technology. 5)  
Behavioural intention (BI), the intention to do some 
Behavior and 6) Use, the overt behavior [10].  
According to the UTAUT model, four constructs play a 
role as direct predictors of behavioral intention to use the 
technology under study and two have a direct influence on 
the use. Performance expectancy (PE), effort expectancy 
(EE), and social influence (SI) are direct determinants on 
behavioural intention (BI); and facilitating conditions (FC) 
and Behavioural Intention (BI) to use the technology are the 
two determinants that have a direct impact on use of the 
technologies. Based on this theoretical framework, our study 
objectives were to develop a path model (path analysis) of 
mobile 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies 
acceptance by university students and to analyze the 
relationship of the UTAUT constructs, i.e., how performance 
Expectancy, Effort Expectancy, Social Influence determine 
students’ Behavioural Intention to use mobile information 
and communication technologies for learning.  In addition, 
some descriptive statistics related to m-learning use were 
also used to explain the Behavioural Intention. We think that 
our results might help program administrators and instructors 
implement strategies for m-learning. Thus, the aim of this 
study was to answer the following research question: 
What factors affect the acceptance behavior of mobile 
information communication technologies for learning by 
students in a MSc in occupational therapy program in a 
University in Canada? 
This paper is organized as follows: related works, the 
theoretical framework and the research objectives and 
question are presented in the first section. Materials and 
methods are presented in the second section. Results, 
discussion and conclusions are presented in the third, fourth 
and fifth section, respectively.     
II. 
MATERIALS AND METHODS 
In this study, we used a cross-sectional exploratory 
approach using a self-administrated paper-based survey. This 
study received approval from the University of Alberta 
Health Research Ethics Board. The target population 
consisted of all students at the occupational therapy masters 
program (MScOT). We tested the model using the Partial 
Least Squares (PLS) technique. We adopted guidelines for 
sample size where a minimum of 10 subjects should be 
surveyed per total number of dependent variable with the 
largest number of independent variables influencing it [12]. 
Therefore, the minimum sample size required for this study 
was 40 subjects.  
We created a survey questionnaire designed to measure 
the constructs and relationships contained in our research 
model. The 36-items were grouped into three sections. In the 
first section (section A1, items from 1-5), we asked for 
participant demographics and background or previous 
degree. In the second section (section A2, item 6 and 7) we 
inquired about the students’ experience using mobile 
information and communication technologies including 
mobile technology (e.g., smart phone, tablet, digital camera), 
and mobile applications and software (e.g., paid short 
message service, Skype, wiki), as well as the average daily 
use over the last week (in hours/day) of these technologies 
during personal and study time. In the third section (section 
B, items from 8-35), we created specific questions (items 8-
35) by adapting scales and items already validated and with 
high levels of internal consistency in previous research for 
each construct of the model (Performance Expectancy, Effort 
Expectancy, Social Influence, Facilitating Conditions and 
Behavioural Intention). Part B also included four items for 
assessing attitude towards and anxiety generated by mobile 
information and communication technologies [3] [11].  
Under the logic of PLS modeling, the model is formed by 
one or more blocks, which is a structure formed by a latent 
variable (each UTAT construct in this study) with its 
manifest variables (MV) (each questionnaire item per 
construct). The LVs can be exogenous, endogenous, or both. 
A latent variable is exogenous when it is not predicted by 
any other latent variable. A latent variable is endogenous 
when it is predicted in by one or more latent variables. The 
structural model is composed of the relationships or paths 
amongst exogenous and endogenous latent variables. In this 
research we had one outcome (endogenous) latent variable 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

(i.e., Behavioural Intention); and four independent latent 
variables (Performance Expectancy (questionnaire items 8-
11), Effort Expectancy (items 12-15), and Social Influence 
(items 16-19) were considered as direct latent variable 
(independent or exogenous variables) of Behavioural 
Intention. We measured Facilitating Conditions (items 20-
23), however, we did not use it in the path model because 
Facilitating Conditions is considered to be direct latent 
variable of use in the UTAUT model and we did not measure 
use behavior in this study. We measured attitude and anxiety 
toward using technologies, however, we did not include 
them in the path analysis in our study because it has been 
reported that these constructs are significant only when 
performance and effort expectancies are not included in the 
model [11]. 
Confounding variables were operationalized according to 
[13] methods as follows: Dichotomous variables were coded 
as “0” or “1” (e.g., student’s gender, and student’s year in the 
MScOT program). All items of section B of the 
questionnaire (items from 8-35) related to each dependent 
and independent latent variables were scored on a 7-point 
Likert scale, ranging from “strongly disagree (1)” to 
“strongly agree (7)” [14]. As we had four questions per 
construct, the numbers of items per construct exceeded the 
minimum three items required for proper calculation of 
measurement errors [15].  
Before sending out the surveys to participants we 
conducted a pilot study with six students (graduate and 
undergraduate) selected by convenience. We made minor 
changes to clarify some of the questionnaire items. We held 
a meeting with all potential study participants (230 MScOT 
students) where researchers distributed packages, including 
an information letter, informed consent form and the survey 
questionnaire to students. Students who agreed to participate 
filled out the survey at that moment. We used codes for the 
surveys instead of students’ names or ID in order to ensure 
anonymity and confidentiality. Students who were unable to 
attend the meeting were invited to sign the consent form and 
complete the questionnaire online. A list with the match 
between students’ identifiers and survey codes were stored in 
a locked file cabinet.  
Before the statistical analysis, a random sample of 20% 
of the entered data was compared to check coding accuracy. 
We used descriptive statistics to summarize demographic 
data. We conducted correlation analysis (Pearson or 
Spearman Rho as appropriate) to determine whether survey 
responses for Performance Expectancy, Effort Expectancy, 
Social Influence and, Behavioural Intention to use, were 
correlated with students’ age, gender, city of the program, 
year in the program, attitude and anxiety toward 
technologies, and average daily hours of mobile information 
and communication technologies use for personal purposes, 
and education purposes. Missing data was handled in the 
following manner: (1) missing data of continuous variables 
such as students’ clinical experience and age were replaced 
by the average values of these variables; and (2) for 
categorical and ordinal variables such as the discipline or 
type of the therapists, and their educational level, missing 
data were replaced by the medians of these variables. 
We tested the multivariate research model using the PLS 
technique [16]. The PLS measurement model evaluation was 
conducted by means of: (1) reliability measurement for each 
construct (Cronbach’s alpha); (2) convergent validity 
measurement of each set of items with respect to their 
associated construct will be assessed by examining the factor 
loadings of the items on the model’s constructs; and (3) 
discriminant validity was analyzed by using Average 
Variance Extract (AVE) indicator. PLS structural model was 
evaluated by means of (β) paths coefficients, the explained 
variance (R2) and the effect size (f2) for each path segment of 
the model. Also the Bootstrapping re-sampling method was 
employed to verify the statistical significance of (β) paths 
coefficients of the PLS model. The alpha level of 
significance was set at p ≤ 0.05. IBM SPSS® V 22.0 and 
SmartPLS V 2.0 M3statistics package were used to generate 
descriptive, univariate and bivariate statistics, and PLS path 
modeling respectively. 
III. 
RESULTS 
Regarding our sample size, considering that the potential 
subjects to be surveyed were 230 students, and that we 
retrieved 213 surveys, we achieved a 93% response rate and 
a statistical power of 100%. The only large effect size was 
the one for the path Social Influence Behavioural 
Intention: (f2=0.771) (see Table II). We achieved 99.5% of 
accuracy in data entering. Missing data was low (e.g., we had 
missing information in the students’ year (0.9% of 
respondents) and previous experience with of some 
information and communication technologies (between 0.9% 
and 2.2% of respondents). In part B of the survey, we had 
3.8% missing data. After using missing data procedures we 
found negligible changes in variables. 
 
TABLE I.  
STUDENTS PREVIOUS EXPERIENCE WITH TECHNOLOGIES 
ICTs used 
n (%) 
AHP[S.D.] 
AHE[S.D.] 
Mobile ICTs 
204 (96.2) 
9.00[9.00] 
6.08[4.12] 
Smart phone 
200 (94.3) 
3.3 [3] 
1.1 [1.8] 
Mobile phone 
6 (2.8) 
2.5 [2.1] 
5.5 [6.4] 
Laptop computer 
203 (95.8) 
2.5 [2.3] 
4.3 [2.3] 
Tablet  
56 (26.4) 
1.2 [0.9] 
1.7 [1.9] 
GPS navigation device 
49 (23.1) 
0.7 [1.1] 
0.1 [.31] 
Audio/Video recording  
12 (5.7) 
0.6 [0.5] 
0.0 [0.1] 
Digital camera 
33 (15.6) 
0.7 [1.3] 
0.5 [1.6] 
Other device 
5 (2.4) 
1.3 [1.5] 
0.7 [1.2] 
Paid short message service  
143 (67.5) 
2.2 [3.9] 
0.5 [2.6] 
Free mobile messaging app 
84 (39.6) 
1.6 [3.0] 
0.1 [0.8] 
Goniometer App 
3 (1.4) 
0.0 0 
0.00 
Skype 
64 (30.2) 
1.5 [2.7] 
0.0 [0.1] 
FaceTime 
63 (29.7) 
0.8 [0.7] 
0.0 [0.0] 
Blogs 
20 (9.4) 
1.2 [1.2] 
0.8 [1.3] 
Wiki 
35 (16.5) 
0.7 [0.9] 
1.0 [1.2] 
Other app  
5 (2.4) 
1.7 [2.5] 
1.3 [1.1] 
S.D: Standard deviation, Sample size: 212 
AHP: Average hours ICTs daily use for personal purposes 
AHE: Average hours ICTs daily use for education 
 
Overall, participants had an average age of 24.81years 
(SD 9.93), were mainly female (90.6%), and located in 
Edmonton (82.5%).   Table I shows the previous experience 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

of students with mobile devices and applications as well as 
students’ average daily hours of mobile information and 
communication technologies (devices and applications) for 
personal use in the last week. Overall: (1) almost all students 
had previous experience using mobile devices and 
applications; (2) the mobile devices most used by students 
were smart phones (94.3%) and laptop computers (95.8%); 
(3) the mobile applications most used by students were paid 
short message service (SMS) (67.5%), free mobile 
messaging app (39.6%) followed by Skype and FaceTime 
(30.2% and 29.7% respectively). Smart phones had the 
highest average weekly hours of personal use (3.3 hours), 
Mobile phones and laptop computers had the highest average 
of daily hours used for education (5.5 hours, and 4.3 hours 
respectively). 
We used the UTAUT constructs to examine the overall 
perceptions of students about mobile information and 
communication technologies for learning: (1) students 
thought that mobile information and communication 
technologies for learning will help them to increase their 
academic 
performance 
and 
learning 
(Performance 
expectancy:  78.2% Agree (Agree-strongly agree), Mode 
5.00; Mean 5.32 SD 1.20); (2) students perceived that mobile 
information and communication technologies for learning 
are easy to use or not complicated to use (effort expectancy:  
Agree (Agree-strongly agree: 76.7%), Mode: 5, Mean 5.30 
SD 1.08); (3) students tended to be either neutral or agree 
with the perception that the intention to use mobile 
information and communication technologies for learning is 
influenced positively by the opinions and perceptions of 
peers or instructors. (Social Influence:  agree (Strongly-
Agree: 35.9%), Neither agree or disagree: 37.5%), Mode: 4, 
Mean 4.14 SD 1.20); (4); students agreed that in the 
academic program under study, most of the conditions such 
as opportunities, resources, technical support and knowledge, 
as well as that the mobile information and communication 
technologies are compatible with their educational goals 
(facilitating conditions Agree (Agree-Strongly: 74.6%), 
Mode: 5, Mean 5.07 SD  1.18); (5) there was a strong trend 
in Behavioural Intention to use mobile information and 
communication technologies for education by students 
(Behavioural Intention: Agree (Agree-Strongly: 72.2%), 
Mode: 5, Mean   5.14 SD 1.26);  (6) in the same way 
students´ attitude towards using mobile information and 
communication technologies for learning is positive 
(Attitude: Agree (Agree-Strongly: 65.2%), Mode: 5, Mean 
4.88 SD 1.14); and (6) students disagree that mobile 
information and communication technologies generate 
anxiety in terms of apprehension, intimidation, hesitation or 
stress (Disagree (strongly-Disagree: 53.6%), Mode: 3; Mean: 
3.53, SD: 1.42). 
Although the UTAUT model includes gender, age, 
experience with the technology and voluntary use as possible 
moderators in the relationship between the four main 
constructs and the Behavioural Intention or use of 
technologies [11], we did not include age because age was 
homogeneous in our sample. Neither did we include gender 
because in a bivariate analysis the correlation was not 
significant (Spearman Rho: 0.049, p=0.24). As a measure of 
experience in the use of mobile information and 
communication technologies, we included as confounder 
variable in the PLS multivariate analysis the average hours 
of 
use 
of 
mobile 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies for education whose correlation with behavioral 
intention was found to be significant (Spearman Rho: 0.398, 
p=0.02).  
 The results of the structural model estimate are shown in 
Table II. We ran the PLS structural model using the 
bootstrap procedure with 500, 1000, 2000, and 5000 times of 
resampling and the magnitude and significance of the 
structural paths were consistent. The multivariate model in 
PLS structural model showed that: (1) that there is 
statistically significant and positive correlation between 
Performance Expectancy (PE) and Behavioural Intention 
(BI) to use mobile information and communication 
technologies for learning (PEBI=+0.237, p<0.000); (2) 
there is no statistical evidence to support the assertion that 
Effort Expectancy (EE) has a positive influence on 
Behavioural Intention (BI) to use mobile information 
communication technologies for learning (EEBI=+0.090, 
p<0.119); and (3) there is a strong statistically significant and 
positive correlation between Social Influence (SI) and 
Behavioural Intention (BI) to use mobile information 
communication technologies for learning (SIBI =+613 
p<0.000). Thus, Performance Expectancy and Social 
Influence constructs matter in Behavioural Intention to use 
mobile information communication technologies for learning 
by students, and whereas Effort Expectancy construct did 
not. 
 
TABLE II.  
STRUCTURAL MODEL. (PERFORMANCE EXPECTANCY (PE), 
EFFORT EXPECTANCY (EE), SOCIAL INFLUENCE (SI), BEHAVIOURAL 
INTENTION (BI), AVERAGE DAILY HOURS ICTS USE FOR EDUCATION 
(AHE)) 
 
 
Regarding the model validity and reliability, all item 
loadings were statistically significant at the 0.001 level and 
all item loadings were greater than 0.70, indicating good 
convergent validity at the indicator level. All internal 
composite reliability (ICR) values were greater than 0.70, 
indicating acceptable reliability. The square root of each 
average variance extracted (AVE) (shown on the diagonal in 
Path 
 
Path 
Coefficient 
 
t-value  
f2 
Q2 
R2 
PE BI 
0.237 
3.369** 
0.073 
0.475 
0.521 
EE BI 
0.090 
1.561 
0.011 
SI BI 
0.613 
6.361** 
0.771 
AHE BI 
0.108 
1.809 
0.024 
Endnotes 
* p<0.05; **p<0.01; f2: effect size 
;  
 
Q2: Stone  Geisser  indicator ; GoF: Goodness of fit 
 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Table III) is greater than the related inter-construct 
correlations in the construct correlation matrix, indicating 
adequate discriminant validity for all of the reflective 
constructs.  
 
TABLE III.  
 CONSTRUCT CORRELATIONS (PERFORMANCE 
EXPECTANCY (PE), EFFORT EXPECTANCY (EE), SOCIAL INFLUENCE (SI), 
BEHAVIOURAL INTENTION (BI), AVERAGE DAILY HOURS ICTS USE FOR 
EDUCATION (AHE))  SD= STANDARD DEVIATION; CA=CRONBACH’S 
ALPHA. 
 
 
The explained variance of the model (R2) was 0.521 for 
Behavioural 
Intention 
to 
use 
mobile 
information 
communication technologies for learning which do appear to 
be strong according to [17] criteria. The Stone–Geisser’s Q2 
value for Behavioural Intention to use mobile information 
communication technologies for learning construct was 
0.475, indicating good predictive relevance of our model 
(Q>0 indicates good predictive relevance). 
 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The aim of this study was to examine what factors affect 
the acceptance of mobile information and communication 
technologies for learning by students in a MSc program in 
occupational therapy at a University in Canada. We found 
statistical support to assert that performance expectancy (PE) 
and social influence (SI) affect the behavioural intention (BI) 
to use mobile information and communication technologies 
for learning. In our study, effort expectancy was not a 
determinant of Behavioural Intention to use mobile 
information and communication technologies. Previous 
research in acceptance of mobile information and 
communication technologies for learning are mixed. On one 
hand, a study using the UTAUT model with university 
students found that Performance Expectancy, Social 
Influence and Effort Expectancy were determinants of 
Behavioural Intention to use the free mobile messaging app 
for learning purposes [18].  However, another study using 
the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) found that neither 
perceived usefulness (Performance Expectancy in the 
UTAUT) nor perceived ease of use (Effort Expectancy in the 
UTAUT) had an effect on the Behavioural Intention of 
students who were taking e-learning courses [3]. In our case, 
our results that Performance Expectancy and Social 
Influence determine Behavioural Intention are aligned with 
the UTAUT model. The fact that Effort Expectancy did not 
determine the Behavioural Intention in our model can be 
explained by the fact that the constructs Effort Expectancy 
and Performance Expectancy were significantly correlated 
(Spearman Rho: 0.579, p=0.000), thus, these two constructs 
showed collinearity. In order to control this collinearity, we 
calculated a structural model in which Performance 
Expectancy was eliminated. This resulted in Effort 
Expectancy to become in a statistically significantly 
predictor of Behavioural Intention; however, without 
Performance Expectancy the model prediction was reduced 
in 8% (R2=0.487) which is not convenient. Thus, we decided 
to keep in our model both Performance Expectancy and 
Effort Expectancy with a R2 of 0.521.  
Students in our sample thought that mobile information 
and communication technologies have the potential to help 
them to increase their academic performance and learning. 
This result is consistent with previous research where 
university students in Canada and the USA tend to believe 
that mobile information and communication technologies 
such as cell phones, smart phones, and tablets are important 
to their academic success and use their devices for academic 
activities [5]. Students in our study also believed that mobile 
information and communication technologies for learning 
were easy to use, or not complicated to use (EE). This 
positive perception can be explained by the previous 
experience with the use of mobile information and 
communication technologies (mainly smart or mobile 
phones, laptops, SMS, WhatsApp and Skype) by students as 
we found a statistically significant correlation between effort 
expectancy (EE) and the average hours students used 
information and communication technologies for personal 
use (Spearman Rho: 0.213, p=0.005). In the same way, 
students demonstrated a positive attitude towards using 
mobile information and communication technologies for 
education and felt that they have the conditions (e.g., 
resources, opportunities and technical support) for using 
mobile information and communication technologies for 
learning. These results are encouraging for academic 
purposes because we can assume that students perceived that 
they have the basic skills and conditions for using mobile 
information and communication technologies. This can ease 
the implementation of learning strategies using information 
and communication technologies. Regarding location, we 
found a statistically significant negative correlation between 
city and Behavioural Intention, i.e., students in Calgary had 
higher behavioural intention (BI) to use the mobile 
information and communication technologies for learning. 
This result is not surprising because Calgary is a satellite 
program, Calgary students have the need to do more remote 
interactions with their instructors in Edmonton than those 
students living in Edmonton.   
On the other hand, we found that students in our study 
used mobile phones and laptop computers for education 
more than four hours per day. Other technologies such as 
tablets, smart phones, free mobile messaging apps, Skype, 
blogs and wikis were used less than 2 hours per day for 
education activities despite the literature reporting that these 
types 
of 
mobile 
information 
and 
communication 
technologies increases collaborative learning, leadership 
[19], immediacy for obtaining and sharing information with 
peers [7], and enhancing attention and motivation during 
lectures [8]. Therefore, our results invite reflections about the 
need for universities to increase the academic activities 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

where students have opportunities to benefit from the use of 
information and communication technologies.    
We propose further research to examine the additional 
mobile information and communication technologies to 
investigate how these strategies can facilitate small group 
learning approaches and interactions across distances. These 
strategies include the use of mobile technologies and apps 
for development of competencies in interviewing simulated 
clients with mental health conditions, and physical 
assessments of activities of daily living. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This study shows that performance expectancy (PE) and 
social influence (SI) affect the behavioural intention (BI) to 
use mobile information and communication technologies for 
learning by students in a MSc in occupational therapy 
program at a University in Canada. Our structural model 
achieved a strongly explained variance of Behavioural 
Intention, 
good 
convergent 
validity 
and 
acceptable 
reliability. In general, students had a positive attitude 
towards the use of mobile information and communication 
technologies for learning. However, currently they are using 
few mobile information and communication technologies 
devices and applications for academic purposes. Our results 
support the development of strategies to increase the use of 
mobile information and communication technologies for 
teaching and learning with university students in a health 
profession program. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study was funded by a University of Alberta 
Teaching and Learning Enhancement Fund (TLEF) 2013-
2015. The authors thank Miki Kobayakawa and Pranshu 
Arora for their assistance with data entry. 
REFERENCES 
[1]  Canadian Institute for Health Information, "Occupational 
Therapists in Canada, 2011 Occupational Therapist Provincial 
Reports 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://secure.cihi.ca/estore/productFamily.htm?locale=en&pf
= [Accessed 20 May 2015]. 
[2]  T. Hoffmann, L. Desha, and K. Verrall, "Evaluating an online 
occupational therapy community of practice and its role in 
supporting 
occupational 
therapy 
practice," 
Australian 
Occupational Therapy Journal, vol. 58, p. 337–345, 2011.  
[3]  S. Park, M.-W. Nam, and S.-B. Cha, "University students’ 
behavioral intention to use mobile learning: Evaluating the 
technology acceptance model," British Journal of Educational 
Technology, vol. 43, no. 4, p. 592–605, 2012.  
[4]  C. O’Malley, G. Vavoula, J. Glew, J. Taylor, M. Sharples, and 
P. Lefrere, "Guidelines for learning/teaching/tutoring in a 
mobile 
environment," MOBIlearn/UoN,UoB,OU/D4.1/1.0, 
n.p., 2003. 
[5]  J. Gikas and M. Grant, "Mobile computing devices in higher 
education: Student perspectives on learning with cellphones, 
smartphones & social media," Internet and Higher Education, 
vol. 19, p. 18–26, 2013.  
[6]  J. Rikala and M. Kankaanranta, "The Nature Tour Mobile 
Learning Application Implementing the Mobile Application in 
Finnish Early Childhood Education Settings," in 6th 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education 
CSEDU 2014, Barcelona, Spain, April  2014, vol. 3, pp. 171-
178,.  
[7]  P. Rebaque-Rivas, E. Gil-Rodríguez, and I. Manresa-Mallol, 
"How 
to 
Design 
a 
Mobile 
Learning 
Environment 
Recommendations Based on Student Perceptions," in 6th 
International Conference on Computer Supported Education 
CSEDU 2014, Barcelona, Spain, April  2014, vol. 3, pp.145-
152.  
[8]  F. Kapp, I. Braun, H. Körndle, and A. Schill, "Metacognitive 
Support in University Lectures Provided via Mobile Devices 
How to Help Students to Regulate Their Learning Process 
during a 90-minute Class," in 6th International Conference on 
Computer Supported Education CSEDU 2014, Barcelona, 
Spain, April 2014, vol. 3, pp.194-199.  
[9]  S. Hadjerrouit, "Wiki-mediated collaborative writing in teacher 
education assessing three years of experiences and influencing 
factors," in Proceedings of the 6th International Conference on 
Computer Supported Education CSEDU 2014, Barcelona, 
Spain, April 2014, vol. 1, pp.5-14.  
[10]  I. Ajzen, "The theory of planned behavior," Organizational 
Behavior and Human Decision Processes., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 
179-211, 1991.  
[11]  V. Venkatesh, M. Morris, G. Davis, and F. Davis, "User 
Acceptance of Information Technology: Toward a Unified 
View.," Mis Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 425-478., 2003.  
[12]  D. Peng and F. Lai, "Using partial least squares in operations 
management research: A practical guideline and summary of 
past research.," Journal of Operations Management, vol. 30, 
pp. 467-480, 2012.  
[13]  E. Biddis and T. Chau, "Multivariate prediction of upper limb 
prosthesis 
acceptance 
or 
rejection," 
Disability 
and 
Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 181-
192, 2008.  
[14]  P. Ifinedo, "Technology acceptance by health professionals in 
Canada: An analysis with a modified UTAUT model," in 45th 
Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Grand 
Wailea, January 2012, pp. 2937-2946.  
[15]  W. Chin, B. Marcolin, and P. Newsted, "A partial Least 
Squares Latent Variable modeling approach for measuring 
interactions effects: Results from a monte Carlo siulation study 
and an electronic-main emition / adotion study.," Information 
systems research, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 190-217, 2003.  
[16]  W. Chin, "The partial least squares approach to structural 
equation modeling," in Modern Methods for Business 
Research, Mahwah, NJ, Lawrence Brlbaum Associates, 1998, 
p. 295–336.. 
[17]  J. Hair, G. Hult, C. Ringle, and M. Sarstedt, A primer on 
partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM), 
L.A.: Sage, 2014.  
[18]  A. Bere, "Exploring Determinants for Mobile Learning User 
Acceptance and Use: An Application of UTAUT," in 2014 
11th International Conference on Information Technology: 
New Generations, Las Vegas, 2014.  
[19]  C. Davis and H. Goodman, "Virtual Communities of Practice 
in Social Group Work Education," Social Work with Groups, 
vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 85-95, 2014. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

