Smart Call Routing Utilizing a Multi-Agent Architecture  
 
Ahmed Kamel 
Concordia College 
Offutt School of Business 
Moorhead, Minnesota, USA 
Email: kamel@cord.edu 
 
 
Abstract— We present an agent-based architecture for routing 
incoming calls based on user needs and provider skill levels. 
We illustrate the use of the architecture in the context of 
routing Information Technology (IT) help desk incoming calls. 
The presented architecture reduces the need for involving 
clients in multiple iterations of assessment of their reported 
issues before a resolution is reached. 
Keywords - agents; decision-support; human-computer 
collaboration. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Traditionally, corporate computing systems consisted of 
hardware and software systems purchased from one or more 
vendors and maintained on site typically by local information 
technology staff. In recent years, a gradual shift occurred to a 
managed system model where corporations contract a vendor 
to install and support integrated IT systems [1]. This shift 
was accompanied by a shift of the help desk support from the 
corporate IT department to the vendor’s own staff. As a 
result, vendors set up large help desk installations where staff 
accept calls from personnel at a large number of corporate 
clients and attempt to troubleshoot a variety of issues [2]. 
Because of the diverse needs of the different clients and even 
the diverse issues that face each client, help desk personnel 
are trained to quickly attempt to identify the type of problem 
and route it to the appropriate staff for further evaluation. 
This process is often plagued with inefficiency with the same 
call often rerouted to multiple human agents, resulting in a 
high level of user frustration. In this paper, we present a 
multi-agent approach to automate the process of routing the 
call to the most appropriate human agent for the problem 
presented. Each computerized agent specializes in one type 
of problems corresponding to the expertise of a human staff 
technician and is tasked with identifying whether the 
problem presented falls within the scope of its area of 
specialty and thus routing the call to the associated staff 
technician. The goal of this process is to minimize the 
number of technicians a caller would interact with before 
their problem is solved. Given the large number of possible 
issues, a large number of agents is necessary. This paper 
presents a partial solution involving a subset of the needed 
agents. Section II of this paper describes the nature of the 
problem in detail, Section III describes the proposed 
solution, and Section IV presents the results of our research 
and outlines our future efforts. 
II. 
NATURE OF HELP DESK PROBLEMS 
As described above, the issues which have to be handled 
by help desk personnel span a very large range of problems, 
from hardware issues with diverse hardware architectures to 
software issues with a large number of software applications. 
This problem is often complicated by the fact that most 
corporate users who often call for help are non-technical 
staff without the necessary background to determine the 
nature of any issues they might be encountering. As a result, 
symptoms communicated to help desk staff are often vague 
and incomplete [2]. Due to the typically large number of 
calls at a typical call center, help desk personnel are often 
under pressure to handle the call by routing it to the 
appropriate troubleshooting personnel as fast as possible. 
Combined with the fact that the first line of help desk 
personnel is often the technicians with the least experience, 
this frequently results in calls routed to the wrong 
troubleshooting technicians who would then return the call to 
the intake staff for re-assessment. Clients report (in the post-
service surveys collected by our corporate client) that this 
process is often repeated multiple times resulting in high 
levels of dissatisfaction. Figure 1 shows the flow of a typical 
client call. From this diagram, we can see that there are 
multiple paths for reevaluation that can result in the same 
problem being evaluated many times, resulting in high levels 
of client dissatisfaction. This process is further complicated 
by having the entire help desk often located in a foreign 
country with help  desk staff for whom English is not the 
first language, resulting in even higher levels of 
dissatisfaction among clients. Frequently, help desks in 
different countries are utilized to allow for round the clock 
staffing, which often results in inconsistent response based 
on the level of skill and training at the different centers. 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICCGI 2023 : The Eighteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

III. 
AGENT BASED SOLUTION 
We were presented with this problem by the manager of a 
call system for a major solution provider (A confidentiality 
agreement prevents the disclosure of the provider). We ran 
an analysis on the performance of the first line personnel in 
routing the calls and determined that the average call is 
routed back to the first line personnel an average of 5.6 
iterations per call. Once the call is routed to even more 
specialized personnel, they are routed back to the first 
specialist an average of 1.7 iterations per call. By examining 
the data of a large number of historic calls, it was 
determined that the large number of repeated referrals is in 
many cases caused by the vague nature of the symptoms 
provided by the client. These vague symptoms make it 
possible for the cause of the issue to be one of many 
possibilities. Because of the large number of combinations 
of possibilities, a fully automated diagnostic system like 
these presented in [3] or [4] was deemed inappropriate. 
Additionally, a routing system based on fixed rules (similar 
to the manual referral system being replaced) was deemed 
too rigid. The manual system relied on over-simplified rules 
of the form “If the client is complaining about a slow 
response rate, refer the call to a hardware technician.” 
Instead, we focused on developing a decision support 
system for the first line personnel to aid in the diagnostic 
process. The proposed solution is based on an agent 
architecture consisting of a large number of agents with 
each agent specializing in a narrowly focused problem. Each 
of these agents is based on diagnostic information obtained 
from past cases. This design is based on a similar 
architecture we have previously used in managing 
agricultural systems [5], [6] and in controlling unmanned air 
vehicles [7], [8]. Once the first-line technician obtains the 
symptoms of the impending issue from the client, the 
technician enters the data into the agent intake system. The 
agent intake system passes the data to all the agent systems. 
Each agent system runs its independent assessment of the 
data to determine whether its area of specialty might be the 
culprit. Each agent is based on a simple set of rules to 
determine a confidence factor in the problem area falling 
within its area of specialty. The rules are designed to first 
examine rules that would eliminate the possibility of the 
problem falling within the area of expertise of the particular 
 
Figure 1. Original Flow of Client Incoming Call. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICCGI 2023 : The Eighteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

agent in order to minimize the probability of needing to 
collect more data from the user. Agents returning 
confidence factors of 50% or higher are considered for 
further evaluation. Every agent within that group provides 
an additional set of questions (if needed) to the intake 
technician to ask the user. This step ensures that as much 
data as possible is collected from the client up-front, 
reducing the need for involving the client in multiple 
iterations of re-evaluation. Responses to these questions 
assist the agent in refining its confidence factors. After this 
assessment, any agent whose confidence factor drops below 
the 50% threshold is eliminated from further consideration. 
The specialty areas of the remaining agents are then sorted 
in descending order of confidence factors. The top area of 
specialty is then referred to the specialty team of technicians 
for further assessment. Only if the team of specialists deems 
the problem not to be of their specialty, is the problem 
referred to the next team of specialists. Figure 2 shows the 
flow of information under this solution. If no agents exceed 
the 50% threshold, the case is handled by the intake 
technician agents using the traditional methods used prior to 
the implementation of the agent system. 
We implemented a prototype of this system using a 
limited number of agents. The initial prototype included 6 
agents.  Based on the encouraging initial results, we have 
been steadily expanding the number of agents, the system 
currently encompasses over 50 agents. In situations where 
the incoming calls fell within the area of specialty of the 
incoming agents, the number of iterations where additional 
data was needed from the client was significantly reduced 
and, in most cases, eliminated. The average number of 
referrals of each call back to in-take specialists dropped 
 
Figure 2. Agent-Based flow of Client Incoming Call. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICCGI 2023 : The Eighteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

from an average of 5.6 iterations per call  to 2.4 iterations 
per call. As a result, clients reported a much higher level of 
satisfaction as indicated by a voluntary client satisfaction 
survey that is administered to clients after completion of 
their calls. The same survey has always been used even 
before introducing the agent-system solution. These results 
are based on qualitative data. We are considering 
redesigning the survey to include numeric measures in the 
future. 
IV. 
CONCLUSIONS  
The limited prototype of the proposed architecture 
resulted in a higher level of satisfaction among clients whose 
problems fell within the scope of the implemented agents. 
Once the developed agents cover all existing systems, we 
expect the overall client’s level of satisfaction to increase 
substantially. This type of system is never completed since 
new software and hardware systems are constantly being 
introduced, needing additional agents. We expect a delay 
between the introduction of any new system and the 
development of appropriate agents for that system. This 
delay is necessary for the accumulation of a sufficient 
number of cases to be used as the basis for the knowledge of 
the necessary agents. 
Many solution providers utilize call centers in different 
countries to allow for call centers to be staffed around the 
clock. The availability of this agent system to the first-line 
technicians in all locations allows for a consistent 
performance among the different centers. 
The developed architecture is flexible enough to support 
other areas of needed technical support through the 
customization of the knowledgebases for the different agents. 
We plan to test this architecture on other application areas in 
the future. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Azarof, and Yuri Leokhin, “Approaches to Building the IT 
Infrastructure of a Digital Enterprise,” in  2020 International 
Conference Quality Management, Transport and Information 
Security, Information Technologies (IT&QM&IS), pp.  3-5. 
[2] Y.  Kotturi, H. Johnson, M. Skirpan, S Fox, J.  Bigham, and A. 
Pavel, “Tech Help Desk: Support for Local Entrepreneurs 
Addressing the Long Tail of Computing Challenges,” in 
Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, April 2022, pp. 15(1-15). 
[3] L. M. González, R. E. Giachetti and G. Ramirez, "Knowledge 
management-centric help desk: specification and performance 
evaluation," Decision support systems, vol. 40, no. 2, 2005, pp. 
389-405. 
[4] K.A. Delic, and B. Hoellmer, “Knowledge-based support in 
help-desk environments,” IT Professional, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 44-
48. 
 
 
 
[5] A. Kamel, "Agent-Based Design of Agricultural knowledge 
Based Systems," International Journal of Computers and Their 
Applications, no. 4, 2004, pp. 228-232. 
[6] A. Kamel, "Robust Agricultural Knowledge Based Systems 
Design Utilizing Distributed Agents," in ISCA 20th 
International Conference on Computer Applications in 
Industry and Engineering, San Francisco, California, 2007, pp. 
207-211.  
[7] A. Dargar, G. Christensen, A. Kamel and K. Nygard, "An 
AgentBased Framework for UAV Collaboration," in ISCA 
11th International Conference on Intelligent Systems and 
Emergent technologies, Boston, Massachussets, 2002, pp. 54-
59.  
[8] N. Huff, A. Kamel and K. Nygard, "An Agent Based 
Framework for Modeling UAVs," in ISCA 16th International 
Conference on Computer Applications in Industry and 
Engineering, Las Vegas, Nevada, 2003, pp. 139-144. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  ISBNFILL
ICCGI 2023 : The Eighteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

