Security Implications of Software Deﬁned Networking in Industrial Control Systems
György Kálmán
mnemonic AS
Oslo, Norway
Email: gyorgy@mnemonic.no
Abstract—Software-deﬁned Networking (SDN) is appealing not
only for carrier applications, but also in industrial control
systems. Network engineering with SDN will result in both
lower engineering cost, conﬁguration errors and also enhance
the manageabiliy of DCS. This paper provides an overview of the
applicability of SDN in an control system scenario, with special
focus on security and manageability. It also shows the possible
enhancements to mitigate the challenges related to network
segmentation and shared infrastructure situations.
Keywords–automation, infrastructure, manageability, DCS, SD-
N
I.
INTRODUCTION
Industrial Ethernet is the dominating technology in dis-
tributed control systems and is planned to take over the whole
communication network from ofﬁce to the ﬁeld level, with
sensor networks being the only exception at the moment.
Since its introduction in time critical industrial applications,
Ethernet’s performance has been questioned, mainly because
of the old, non-switched networks. Now these problems are
solved, automation networks are built with switches, have
plenty of bandwidth and the more demanding applications have
their speciﬁc technologies. These solutions provide intrinsic
Quality of Service (QoS), e.g., EtherCAT or try to implement
extensions to the Ethernet standards with, e.g., efforts to
implement resource reservation like the IEEE 802.1 Time-
Sensitive Networking Task Group.
With the industry moving towards Commercial Off The
Shelf (COTS) products in the networking solutions (both
hardware and software) opened for direct interconnection of
other company networks towards the automation systems [4].
This facilitated data exchange in an easier way, but also opened
the possibility to attack the previously island-like automation
systems from or through the company network [5]. As a result
of opening the automation network to be attacked through
other systems, a possible categorization of attackers is given
by [7]:
•
Hobbyists break into systems for fun and glory. Dif-
ﬁcult to stop, but consequences are low
•
Professional hackers break into systems to steal valu-
able assets, or on a contract basis. Very difﬁcult to
stop, consequences usually ﬁnancial. May be hired to
perform theft, industrial espionage, or sabotage
•
Nation-States and Non-Governmental Organizations
break into systems to gather intelligence, disable ca-
pabilities of opponents, or to cause societal disruption
•
Malware automated attack software. Intent ranges
from building botnets for further attacks, theft, or
general disruption. Ranges from easy to stop to mod-
erately difﬁcult to stop.
•
Disgruntled employees, including insider threat and
unauthorized access after employment.
Engineering efforts have been made to reduce the risks
associated with this interconnection, but it only gained mo-
mentum after the more recent incidents of, e.g., stuxnet and
repeated cases of Denial of Service (DoS) incidents coming
from external networks. The ﬁrst efforts were focused on
including well-known solutions from the IT industry: ﬁrewalls,
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), authentication solutions.
The challenge with these solutions is, that they were
designed to operate in a different network environment [6].
Amongst others, the QoS requirements of an automation
system tend to be very different than of an ofﬁce network. The
protocol set used is different and the typical protocol inside an
automation system runs on Layer 2 networking and not on the
IP protocol suite [8].
Beside the efforts on adopting IT security solutions to
industrial environments, several working groups are involved
in introducing security solutions into automation protocols and
protocols used to support an automation system (e.g., IEEE
1588v3 on security functions, IEC 61850 to have integrity
protection). The necessity of network management systems
are gaining acceptance to support life-cycle management of
the communication infrastructure.
In this landscape, Software Deﬁned Networking (SDN) is a
promising technology to support automation vendors to deploy
their Distributed Control Systems (DCS) more effectively, to
allow easier brownﬁeld extensions and to have a detailed
overview of the trafﬁc under operation.
The paper is structured as follows: the second section
gives a short introduction of Industrial Ethernet and SDN,
the third provides an overview of DCS structures, the fourth
provides a risk analysis of DCS with SDN, the ﬁfth proposes
mitigation solutions for the risks found. The last section draws
the conclusion and provides an outlook on future work.
II.
INDUSTRIAL ETHERNET AND SDN
Industrial Ethernet is built often as a special mixture of a
few high-end switches and a large number of small port count
discrete or integrated switches composing several network
segments deﬁned by both the DCS architecture and location
constraints.
Engineering of networks composed from small switches
results in typically a magnitude more devices than a compa-
rable ofﬁce network (e.g., a bigger reﬁnery can have several
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Figure 1. Low port count switches in automation
hundreds of switches with a typical branching factor of 4-
7) as shown on Figure 1. The engineering cost and the
possibility of conﬁguration-related delays has a big impact on
competitiveness.
In the majority of cases, the actual conﬁguration of the de-
vices can be described with setting port-Virtual LAN (VLAN)
allocations, Rapid Spanning Tree (RSTP) priorities, Simple
Network Management Protocol (SNMP) parameters and per-
formance monitoring [3]. These steps currently require manual
work.
SDN is a promising technology in this ﬁeld, as it has
already shown its capabilities for separating trafﬁc and control
on carrier networks, the possibility of deploying new services
without disturbing the production network and the appealing
possibility of having a full overview of network ﬂows from
one central controller.
With SDN, a telecom-like network structure is introduced
into distributed control systems with splitting the control
and the forwarding plane. In such a network, the ﬂows are
programmable through a central entity on the control plane.
This allows testing and resource reservation for speciﬁc ﬂows,
not just at commissioning, but also during operation. The
ability to isolate new trafﬁc ﬂows can be beneﬁcial from both
security and operational viewpoints. These possibilities are
appealing for the industrial automation systems, as they are
very much in line with the current trends of redundancy, QoS
and shared infrastructure.
As deﬁned by the Open Networking Foundation, SDN
offers the following features:
•
Directly programmable Network control is directly
programmable because it is decoupled from forward-
ing functions.
•
Agile Abstracting control from forwarding lets admin-
istrators dynamically adjust network-wide trafﬁc ﬂow
to meet changing needs.
•
Centrally managed Network intelligence is (logically)
centralized in software-based SDN controllers that
maintain a global view of the network, which appears
to applications and policy engines as a single, logical
switch.
•
Programmatically conﬁgured SDN lets network man-
agers conﬁgure, manage, secure, and optimize network
resources very quickly via dynamic, automated SDN
programs, which they can write themselves because
the programs do not depend on proprietary software.
•
Open standards-based and vendor-neutral When im-
plemented through open standards, SDN simpliﬁes
network design and operation because instructions
are provided by SDN controllers instead of multiple,
vendor-speciﬁc devices and protocols.
SDN architecture is typically represented with three layers
(Figure 2). Using several planes in a communication technol-
ogy is not new, it was present both in ATM, SDH or all the
digital cellular networks. What is new, that these management
possibilities are now available also in a much smaller scale. It
is expected that a network with a centrally managed control
plane can better react on changes in trafﬁc patterns and also
be more ﬂexible in network resource management. The for-
warding performance, however is expected to be very similar
or equivalent to the currently used switches, so the industrial
applications can run without disturbance in a stable network
state.
The normal communication trafﬁc is expected to be signiﬁ-
cantly larger than the control and signalling trafﬁc generated by
SDN and therefore not considered as a performance problem.
Typical communication on an industrial network supports the
mitigation of this performance threat, as most of the session-
s are periodic machine to machine (M2M), which can be
scheduled or event driven, with precisely deﬁned transmission
deadlines. The gaps between planned periodic trafﬁc are rarely
ﬁlled with event-driven communication.
Figure 2. Three layer SDN architecture [12]
III.
DCS ARCHITECTURE
Control systems are traditionally built using three network
levels. The plant, the client-server and the control network.
These levels might have different names, but they share the
following characteristics:
•
Plant network is home of the traditional IT systems,
like Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP), ofﬁce ser-
vices and other support applications. It is typically
under the control of the IT department.
•
Client-server network is the non-time critical part
of the automation system, where the process-related
workplaces, servers and other support entities are
located. It is ﬁrewalled from the plant network and
is under the control of Operations.
•
Control network includes everything close to the ac-
tual process: controllers, sensors, actuators and other
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

Controller
Controller
Plant network/intranet
Client/server network
Control network
Fieldbus
Workplaces
Servers
ERP, Remote control
Proxy
Figure 3. Traditional DCS network architecture
automation components. Typically, it follows a strict
time synchronization regime and contains the parts of
the network with time-critical components. It is acces-
sible through proxies from the client-server network
and under the control of Operations.
IV.
SECURITY LANDSCAPE
Industrial deployments were built traditionally as isolated
islands, thus security was more a question of doors and walls
then IT [7]. Employees from the operations department had
the responsibility to keep the communication network intact.
Security issues connected to computer networks came with,
amongst others, the Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition
(SCADA) applications, where remote access to industrial de-
ployments was granted. With the spread of Ethernet and IP-
based communication, more and more automation networks
could be connected to other networks, to allow easier man-
agement and new applications.
Threat analyses showed that industrial systems can be more
prone to DoS and related attacks due to the more strict QoS
requirements and lack of available processing power in the
devices [9]. Typically the deployed network infrastructure can
handle a magnitude higher trafﬁc than the end-nodes. This
helps in supporting the SDN operation with allowing the
trafﬁc, which does not match any of the forwarding rules to
be sent to the controller in the normally unused bandwidth.
The static trafﬁc picture will also allow the use of sharp
heuristics on new trafﬁc, categorizing unknown trafﬁc very
early as malicious and drop it early.
DoS attacks require no knowledge of the automation sys-
tem, only access to the infrastructure, which is a much larger
attack surface this case as DCS and especially SCADA systems
have a tendency to cover large areas, where enforcing of a
security policy (both physical and cyber) is a hard task [10].
This properties have focused the security efforts on pro-
tecting the leaves of the network and also on creating policies
to ensure the use of hardening practices.
Standard hardening procedures in current industrial deploy-
ments include:
•
Creation of a Security Policy following, e.g., the IEC
62443 standard. This allows to have a structured
approach for operating the network.
•
A standard way to introduce anti-virus solutions in the
automation network using central management.
•
Speciﬁc focus on the conﬁguration of server and work-
station machines with, e.g., policies and additional
software components.
•
Access and account management: using Role-Based
Access Control (RBAC), OS functions like the Group
Policy Object (GPO) or tools like a trusted password
manager.
•
Backup and restoration as a part of disaster recovery.
•
Network topology to support security levels in the IEC
62443, with using ﬁrewalls as separator.
•
Speciﬁc remote access solution and whitelisting of
both trafﬁc and nodes.
These tasks show that there is an understanding of the
importance of security in this ﬁeld and there are efforts on
standardization.
The problematic part of the process is, where these guide-
lines, policies and physical appliances need to be deployed in
a new or an existing installation.
Correctness of the implementation is crucial for future reli-
ability of the system. In a typical current workﬂow, conﬁgura-
tion and deployment of devices is a manual task together with
the as-built analysis under or before the Factory Acceptance
Test (FAT). At the moment there is no merged workﬂow and
software support for all of the steps mentioned earlier.
SDN can be part of the answer: the communication in-
frastructure, communication security and monitoring under
operation can be implemented using SDN, where the whole
or part of the tasks could be automated.
V.
SDN-RELATED CHALLENGES
SDN changes the security model considerably. To enable
automatic features, the operation and the way of controlling a
SDN system has to be analysed in the industrial context.
A. The plane structure
After the author’s view, the introduction of the separated
control and forwarding plane is the biggest enhancement for
network security in this relation. In the telecommunication
ﬁeld, separated planes are used since decades to support secure
service delivery with minimizing the possibility of a successful
attack from the user side towards network management.
In an industrial context, the split planes mean, that the
conﬁguration of the devices is not possible from the network
areas what clients can see, thus intruders getting access to,
e.g., the ﬁeld network through a sensor, will not be able to
communicate with the management interfaces.
Attacks at the data plane could be executed with, e.g.,
gaining access to the network through a physical or virtual
interface and try to execute a DoS attack or a type of fuzzing
attack, which might exploit a ﬂaw in the management or
automation protocols.
An attacker could also leverage these protocols and attempt
to instantiate new ﬂows into the device’s forwarding table. The
attacker would want to try to spoof new ﬂows to permit speciﬁc
types of trafﬁc that should be disallowed across the network
[18].
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

B. The SDN controller
The ﬁrst group of issues are related to the SDN controller.
To allow a central entity to control and conﬁgure the whole
network, it has to gain administrative access over the whole
network infrastructure conﬁguration and status. The SDN
controller’s ability to control an entire network makes it a very
high value target.
This can be problematic if the controller has to cross
several ﬁrewalls to reach all nodes under its control. In the
traditional DCS network architecture (Figure 3), in order to
gain control of the whole network, the controller has to pass
the ﬁrewall between the plant and the client-server network, the
proxy towards the control network and the controllers towards
the ﬁeld devices.
In a realistic situation, the controller of the DCS will not
be allowed to control also the plant network, but is expected
to reside inside the DCS, most probably on the client-server
network. Inside the automation network, ﬁrewalls and the
controllers can be conﬁgured so, that they pass the SDN
signalling.
Network intelligence is being transferred from the network
nodes to the central controller entity. This, if being imple-
mented inside a switched network, might only be a semantic
difference in network control, as it extends the possibilities of
a Network Management System (NMS), but it doesn’t need to
integrate more sophisticated devices in an industrial situation.
It is expected that a network with a centrally managed
control plane can better react on changes in trafﬁc patterns
and also be more ﬂexible in network resource management.
In addition to the attack surface of the management plane,
the controller has another attack surface: the data plane of the
switches. When an SDN switch encounters a packet that does
not match any forwarding rules, it passes this packet to the
controller for advice. As a result, it is possible for an attacker
who is simply able to send data through an SDN switch to
exploit a vulnerability on the controller [16].
To mitigate the single-point-of-failure what the SDN con-
troller represents, in most installations, it will be required to
deploy two of the controllers in a redundant installation.
Also shared infrastructure between different operators can
be a problem in this case. Legal issues might arise if the
audit and logging of SDN-induced conﬁguration changes is
not detailed enough.
C. Service deployment security
In an SDN case, the controller entity can change the
conﬁguration and forwarding behaviour of the underlying
devices. This possibility is a valuable addition to the existing
set of features, because an SDN system could deploy a new
service without disturbing the current operation, which would
reduce costs related to scheduled downtimes.
Also, the ﬁne-grained control of network ﬂows and contin-
uous monitoring of the network status offers a good platform
for Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), Managed Security
Services (MSS) or a tight integration with the higher operation
layers of the DCS.
D. Central resource management
Currently, SNMP-based NMSs are widely used for mon-
itoring the health and status of large network deployments.
Using SDN could also here be beneﬁcial, as the monitoring
functionality would be extended with the ability of actively
changing conﬁgurations and resource allocations if needed.
One of the most signiﬁcant technological and policy chal-
lenges in an SDN deployment is the management of devices
from different providers. Keeping the necessary complexity
and conﬁguration possibilities is hard to synchronize with
entities delivered from different providers.
With SDN’s abstraction layer one can hide differences
in features but also can introduce problems in logging and
audit. Network equipment manufacturers are not supporting
by default that their devices are managed by a third party.
Although, the rollout of new services would become safer,
as the system could check if the required resources are
available and the use of SDN is not expected to have a negative
impact on the reliability of the network the problems related
to shared infrastructure need to be elaborated further.
E. Security implications of shared infrastructure
As part of the universal use of Ethernet communication, it
is now common for vendors to share the network infrastructure
to operate different parts of an installation. For example, a
subsea oil production platform, which is controlled through
a hundreds of kilometres long umbilical, can have a different
operator for the power subsystem, an other one for the process
control and a third one for well control.
In the current operation regimes, the conﬁguration of the
networks is rarely changing and all vendors have a stable view
of their part of the network shared with the one being the actual
operator. With SDN, the network could be controlled in a more
dynamic way.
From the technological viewpoint, the biggest challenge is
to ﬁnd a solution, where both the controller and the devices
support encrypted control operations. If they support it, than
the logging and audit system has to be prepared for a much
more dynamic environment.
From a policy management viewpoint, the possibility of
fast per-ﬂow conﬁguration opens for new types of problems:
the valid network topology and forwarding situation might
change fast and frequently, which is not typical in the industry.
Logging has to provide the current and all past network con-
ﬁgurations with time stamping to allow recreation of transient
setups in case of communication errors.
In such a shared case, the use of SDN could reduce
risk in topology or trafﬁc changes, as vendors could deploy
new services without an impact on other trafﬁc ﬂows in the
network. It is possible to create an overlay network, which
follows the logical topology of an application or subsystem.
This would improve the control possibilities as the staff could
follow the communication paths in a more natural way.
F. Wireless integration
Another key ﬁeld currently is the integration of wireless
networks into industrial deployments. SDN could help with
integration of wireless technologies by checking if the needs
of a new service, e.g., can be satisﬁed with a path having one
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

or more wireless hops or a new rule has to be deployed into
the network to steer the trafﬁc of that service on a different
path.
G. Integrating Security in the preliminary design
In the bidding phase, the control engineer could leave the
planning of the network on a high level with having an SDN
rule set to check if the network can be built. The needed
security appliances and other entities would be added to the
list of required components following rules developed using
the relevant standards.
The control engineer could add the control processes and
the SDN software will check if the required resources are
available on the communication path. In contrast with current
methods, the acceptance of a communication session would
also give a proof that the required resources are available and
the security requirements are met.
H. Network simulation and capacity estimation
The use of SDN and the central management entities will
also lead to more detailed information on network trafﬁc
and internal states. The data gathered on operational network
not only supports the management of the current network,
but also can be used to ﬁne-tune the models used in early
steps of bidding and planning and can lead to a more lean
approach on network resource allocation. SDN could provide
better communication security by helping to avoid overloaded
network situations.
I.
Firewalls
A current limitation on the coverage of SDN is connected
to accountability. While automatic changes in the forwarding
table on layer 2 is not expected to cause big problems,
automatic rule generation for ﬁrewalls and other higher layer
devices might cause more problems than it solves.
Granting the control rights of network security devices
to the SDN controller is necessary to gain full control over
all network nodes. The challenge with this setup is, that
L2 forwarding can be described with relative few properties,
routing tables with some more, but still within a limited size,
ﬁrewall rules can contain a lot more properties and values to
ﬁll. If automatic generation is disabled, then the SDN network
split into several security zones, can only be partially managed
by the controller. If automatic generation is enabled, it can
cause security breaches (e.g., the early implementations of
Universal Plug and Play (UPnP)). This setup also potentially
requires cooperation from several companies, e.g., an MSS
provider running the security infrastructure and the operations
staff at the location focusing on automation.
From the practical viewpoint, there are several issues. The
ﬁrst is that in most cases, management protocols only offer
the implementation of security functions, but they are optional,
so having a required encryption (one cannot avoid this when
managing ﬁrewalls) might result in incompatibility already in
the communication. The second is, that one needs much more
complex support for ﬁrewalls in the management software than
for switches or routers.
J. Intrusion Detection Systems
Running IDS in an SDN network is promising. It can be
the IDS itself, if there is some logic running on the controller.
Current IDS implementations typically use distributed
wiretaps or other trafﬁc monitoring sources to watch for
malicious trafﬁc and might get aggregated trafﬁc information
(e.g., over NetFlow).
SDN can take this functionality into a whole new level. The
controller has a complete view of the L2 trafﬁc streams over
the whole network, thus not only has a wiretap everywhere,
but also has the control of the forwarding entities: it can make
changes in the forwarding decisions in real time. In extreme
cases this can result in, that the malicious packet cannot even
travel through the network to its destination, because at the
entry the IDS system classiﬁes it as potentially malicious and
in transit redirects it into an isolated network.
Industrial deployments are an excellent basis to develop
such a fast-reaction IDS: the communication is typically M2M,
the network trafﬁc is stationary (whole-new trafﬁc ﬂows are
not typical) and the topology is mostly static. The heuristics
of the IDS could be as a result, very sensitive on non-planned
trafﬁc, thus reacting fast on potential hazards.
If the SDN infrastructure is available because of network
management, the extension of providing IDS and ﬁrewall
management can also lead to cost reduction compared to
deploying and operating a separate solution for both.
K. Protecting the SDN controller
As it was mentioned earlier, the SDN controller represents
a single-point-of-failure in the network. As most of the indus-
trial deployments are redundant, it is natural to require also a
redundant deployment of the SDN controller.
This redundancy is required both from the availability
viewpoint (all crucial components have redundant counterparts
in most deployments) and also from network security: protec-
tion from, e.g., DoS attacks.
Transport security shall be ensured with up to date standard
protocols, e.g., TLS for web access or SSH for shell. An effort
shall be used to keep the cryptographic suites, which are used
by these protocols updated.
VI.
CONCLUSION
SDN is very likely to be the next big step in industrial
networks. It offers exactly the functionality automation engi-
neers are looking for: hiding the network and allowing the
planning and deployment of network infrastructure without
deep technical knowledge, based only on deﬁnition of network
ﬂows and automatic dimensioning rules.
With a complete view over the current network trafﬁc
situation, Quality of Service parameters can be checked in a
formal way with the help of the central management entity and
as such, provide a proof in all stages of the engineering work,
that the infrastructure will be able to support the application.
In brown ﬁeld extensions, SDN can reduce risks associated
with deploying new equipment and extending the current
infrastructure because of the isolation of trafﬁc ﬂows and the
complete control over the forwarding decisions.
Network security is the other main area, where, if properly
planned and implemented, SDN can provide a big step forward
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

in both security and operational excellence. With the real-time
overview on the network infrastructure, an SDN-based IDS
could react much faster on attacks.
Technological advancements are clearly moving towards a
more automated network infrastructure and in the industrial
case, SDN is a promising technology, which has to be taken
seriously.
REFERENCES
[1]
Gy. Kalman, Applicability of Software Deﬁned Networking in Industrial
Ethernet, in Proceedings of IEEE Telfor 2015, pages 340-343, Belgrade,
Serbia
[2]
Hirschmann, Reference Manual, Command Line Interface Industrial
Ethernet Gigabit Switch Release 7.0, Hirschmann, 2011.
[3]
A. Gopalakrishnan, Applications of Software-Deﬁned Networks in
Industrial Automation, https://www.academia.edu/2472112/Application_
of_Software_Deﬁned_Networks_in_Industrial_Automation,
Accessed
28.05.2015.
[4]
N. Barkakati, G. C. Wilshusen, Deﬁcient ICT Controls Jeopardize
Systems Supporting the Electric Grid: A Case Study, Securing Electricity
Supply in the Cyber Age, Springer, pages 129-142, e-ISBN 978-90-481-
3594-3
[5]
ABB, Security for Industrial Automation and Control Systems, White
Paper, ABB, Doc. Id. 3BSE032547
[6]
Cisco, Secure Industrial Networks with Cisco, White Paper, 2015.,
http://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/products/collateral/se/internet-of-things/
white-paper-c11-734453.pdf, Accessed 30.08.2015.
[7]
M. McKay, Best practices in automation security, White Paper, Siemens,
2012.
[8]
C. Alcaraz, G. Fernandez, and F. Carvajal, Security Aspects of SCADA
and DCS Environments, Critical Infrastructure Protection: Information
Infrastructure Models, Analysis, and Defence, LNCS 7130., Springer,
September 2012., pp. 120-149
[9]
R.C. Parks, E. Rogers, Best practices in automation security, Security &
Privacy, IEEE (Volume:6 , Issue: 6 ), 2009., pages 37-43.
[10]
I. Fernandez, Cybersecurity for Industrial Automation & Control Envi-
ronments, White Paper, Frost&Sullivan and Schneider Electric, 2013.
[11]
D. Cronberger, The software-deﬁned Industrial Network, The Industrial
Ethernet Book, Issue 84, 2014., Pages 8-13
[12]
Open Networking Foundation, Software-Deﬁned Networking: The New
Norm for Networks, White Paper, https://www.opennetworking.org/
images/stories/downloads/sdn-resources/white-papers/wp-sdn-newnorm.
pdf, Accessed 28.05.2015.
[13]
D.
Cronberger,
Software-Deﬁned
Networks,
Cisco,
2014,
http://www.industrial-ip.org/en/industrial-ip/convergence/
software-deﬁned-networks, Accessed 28.05.2015.
[14]
R.
Millman,
How
to
secure
the
SDN
infrastructure,
ComputerWeekly,
2015,
http://www.computerweekly.com/feature/
How-to-secure-the-SDN-infrastructure, Accessed 28.05.2015.
[15]
D. Cronberger, Industrial Grade SDN, Cisco, 2013, http://blogs.cisco.
com/manufacturing/industrial-grade-sdn, Accessed 28.05.2015.
[16]
D.
Jorm,
SDN
and
Security,
The
ONOS
project,
2015,
http://onosproject.org/2015/04/03/sdn-and-security-david-jorm/,
Accessed 28.05.2015.
[17]
G.
Ferro,
SDN
and
Security:
Start
Slow,
But
Start,
Dark
Reading Tech Digest, 2014, http://www.darkreading.com/operations/
sdn-and-security-start-slow-but-start/d/d-id/1318273,
Accessed
28.05.2015.
[18]
S.
Hogg,
SDN
Security
Attack
Vectors
and
SDN
Hardening,
Network World, 2014, http://www.networkworld.com/article/2840273/
sdn/sdn-security-attack-vectors-and-sdn-hardening.html,
Accessed
28.05.2015.
[19]
Open
Networking
Foundation,
Solution
Brief:
SDN
Security
Considerations
in
the
Data
Center,
ONF,
2013,
https:
//www.opennetworking.org/images/stories/downloads/sdn-resources/
solution-briefs/sb-security-data-center.pdf, Accessed 28.05.2015.
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-432-9
ICCGI 2015 : The Tenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

