Analysis of Cognitive Functions in the Encountered State of Driving Topics on 
Expressways 
 
Kazuhito Sato, Yuki Oomomo, Hirokazu Madokoro 
Department of Machine Intelligence and Systems Engineering, 
Faculty of Systems Science and Technology, Akita Prefectural University 
 Yurihonjo, Japan 
Email: ksato, m18a016, madokoro @akita-pu.ac.jp
Momoyo Ito 
Institute of Technology and Science, 
Tokushima University 
 Tokushima, Japan 
Email: momoito@is.tokushima-u.ac.jp 
Sakura Kadowaki 
 Smart Design Corp. 
Akita, Japan 
Email: sakura@smart-d.jp 
 
Abstract - For this study, we defined four situations that are 
likely to trigger accidents on highways as driving topics, i.e., 
breakdown vehicles, sudden appearance of small animals, 
falling objects, and lane decreases. Carrying out running 
experiments controlling the time period (daytime or nighttime) 
and the traffic flow (overtaking vehicle: Yes or No), we studied 
the comparative analysis for each driving topic, focusing on 
driving characteristics of young drivers and elderly drivers 
concerning to “cognitions”, “judgments”, and “operations”. 
Using evaluation experiments, we try to analyze the driving 
characteristics of elderly drivers for driving topics encountered 
on highways based on comparing to young drivers. 
 
Keywords - driving behavior; human engineering; elderly 
drivers; driving topic; highway 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Although the number of deaths due to traffic accidents in 
Japan is on a downward trend, traffic accidents caused by 
erroneous operations by elderly drivers and reverse runs of 
highways have become particularly problematic in recent 
years. Regarding deaths by age group due to traffic 
accidents in June, 2015, elderly people over 65 years old 
(1,006 people, the composition ratio was 53.1%) were the 
most frequent, followed by the 50s (200 people, the 
composition ratio was 10.6%), the 40s (169 people, the 
composition ratio was 8.9%) in this order [1]. Looking at 
the trend over the past 10 years, although the overall trend is 
in a decreasing trend (0.60 times in 2005), the rate of 
decrease in elderly people is low, it is reported that elderly 
people are the most frequent for eight consecutive years [1], 
even in the number of fatal accidents by age group such as 
automobile drivers. As described above, traffic accidents 
caused by elderly drivers are relatively frequent and have a 
high risk of leading to serious injury, so it is urgent to take 
countermeasures towards the arrival of a super aging society 
coming close to us.  
As a factor of traffic accidents by elderly drivers, there 
may be common points unique to the elderly, such as 
slowing down a series of driving operations related to 
cognitions, judgments and operations, miss operations of 
handles and brakes due to distribution of attention to 
multiple tasks and concentration, momentary driving due to 
carelessness and distraction. Recently, various traffic 
accident preventive safety systems have been studied, as 
symbolized by automatic driving efforts, and practical 
application of these systems has been accelerating. However, 
most of those systems collect and analyze external 
information of the vehicle, and there is a problem, which 
cannot adaptively deal with the driving characteristics of 
individual drivers. Also, with preventive safety technology 
based on a standard general driver, it is difficult to deal with 
the slowing down of the driving behavior peculiar to the 
elderly found in recognition, judgment and operation. 
Therefore, approaches to preventive safety systems 
dedicated to driving characteristics of elderly drivers are 
indispensable. 
In this research, we define the four driving situations that 
are likely to trigger accidents as driving topics, such as 
breakdown 
vehicles 
with 
road 
shoulder, 
sudden 
appearance of small animals, falling objects, and lane 
decrease, especially for highways with high mortality rate 
and easy to lead to serious accidents. Then, we carry out 
running experiments controlling the time period (daytime or 
nighttime) and the traffic flow (overtaking vehicle: Yes or 
No). Specifically, paying attention to a series of driving 
behaviors related to cognitions, judgments and operations 
for each driving topic, and we will compare and analyze the 
driving characteristics of young drivers and elderly drivers. 
Acquiring the head posture, face orientation, eye-gaze, 
which are less burdens on the driver as body information 
indicating the driving characteristics by unconstrained 
means, heartbeat as biological information, handle, brake, 
and accelerator as each operation, we will clarify the driving 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

characteristics of elderly drivers for driving topics 
encountered on highways. 
This paper is presented as follows. We review related 
work to clarify the position of this study in Section II. 
Section III presents a definition of the experimental 
protocols, driving topics, and running scenarios. In Section 
IV, we examine the correspondence relationship between 
measurement points of driver reaction and eye-gaze 
information, focusing on the reaction time required for each 
action, i.e., cognitions, judgments, and operations for the 
driving topics.  Additionally, we compare the average of 
reaction times of whole drivers, elderly drivers, and young 
drivers at each measurement point for "falling objects" 
which is one of the driving topics. Finally, we present 
conclusions and intentions for future work in Section V. 
 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
The cause of fatal accidents of elderly drivers is mostly 
unsuitable for driving operation and is attributed to physical 
characteristics, 
psychological 
characteristics, 
driving 
characteristics, 
and 
social 
characteristics. 
Physical 
characteristics indicate declining physical function such as 
vision and exercise ability. As such assistive technologies, 
systems reducing the operation load of steering, systems 
automatically reducing the speed and damage when there is 
a possibility of collision, they have been putting into 
practical use [2]. The psychological characteristics mean 
that elderly drivers are not good at parallel processing of 
multiple information and have a tendency to become self-
oriented. The driving characteristics refer to mismatch of 
consciousness and behaviors caused by "accustomed" or 
"driving that would be" based on past experiences. 
Additionally, the social characteristics refer to differences in 
characteristics by generations, such as a decline in 
communication skills and the influence of motorization [3]. 
As solutions to these characteristics of elderly drivers, the 
followings have been reported. It is possible to reform 
consciousness and motivate for safe driving by having each 
elderly participate in efforts for traffic safety with their own 
will rather than passive [3]. The elderly drivers are able to 
improve attention by pointing and designating the signs to 
recognize. 
Furthermore, as a study on the cognitive function of 
elderly drivers, Takahara et al. [5] analyzed the 
characteristics at the temporary stop location, and 
demonstrated the effectiveness of their system through the 
development of a voice guidance type temporary stop 
support system. In addition, Iida et al. [6] constructed the 
hypothesis of the reverse running process as an example of 
the elderly driver’s accidents on the expressway, they 
confirmed the psychological state and the road composition 
of the elderly driver when reverse running is easy to occur. 
However, these researches have not been analyzed focusing 
on the situations (driving topics) which are easy to induce 
accidents on highways, such as breakdown car on road 
shoulder, running-out of small animals, falling objects, and 
reduced lane during work. In this study, through driving 
experiments controlled the time zone and traffic flow, we 
analyze the series of driving behaviors related to cognitions, 
judgments and operations of these driving topics, and clarify 
the driving characteristics of elderly drivers. 
 
III. 
METHODS 
In this section, we define the experimental protocols and 
four driving topics easy to occur accidents. Next, we present 
running scenarios controlling daytime or nighttime, the 
presence or absence of an overtaking vehicle. 
A. Experimental Systems 
Though many people do driving behaviors every day, 
there are many difficulties to clarify individual driving 
characteristics from actual behaviors on the road in real 
environments. For example, driving behaviors vary 
depending on the road environment and traffic conditions at 
that time, and their conditions on the actual road cannot be 
reproduced constantly. Therefore, even if the behavior 
varies, it is not possible to clearly distinguish whether it is a 
variation due to a difference in traffic conditions or a 
variation among individuals. 
This study used a Driving Simulator (DS) to assess 
driving behaviors for freely set road environments and 
traffic conditions that affect driver behaviors. Figure 1 
portrays the experimental system configuration used to 
measure driver behaviors. The DS used for experiments has 
platforms corresponding to compact and six-axis motion, 
which is equipped with ordinary cars. The DS has three 
color liquid crystal displays mounted in the front of the 
cabin, and has a function reproducing pseudo-driving 
environments that are freely configurable to horizontal 
viewing angles. As Figure 1 shows, to measure body 
information, such as head poses, face orientations, and eye-
 
 
  
                
Figure 1. Experimental system for measuring driver 
behaviors. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

gaze movements without restraining drivers, we installed 
cameras to the left and right in the center of the three-color 
liquid crystal monitors mounted in front of the cabin. 
Additionally, we set an infrared pod on top of the 
instruments in front of the cabin. Here the camera heads and 
infrared pod are input-based sensors of a head-gaze tracking 
device (FaceLAB; Ekstreme Machine Corp.). Incidentally, 
through preliminary test runs by multiple subjects, we 
confirmed that installation of the stereo camera head and 
infrared pod does not interfere with visibility during driving 
operations. Furthermore, in order to capture the facial 
expressions of drivers, an USB camera (Xtion pro Live) was 
installed at the top of the liquid crystal monitor on the center 
in front of the cabin. 
B. Experimental Protocols 
Figure 2 depicts the experimental protocol outline. 
Initially, as individual characteristics of each subject, we 
conducted an examination of the following questionnaire 
methods: attitude, oriented, and concept to work on driving 
were performed using the driving style check sheet [20]. 
Regarding the types of operation burdens that were strongly 
felt, they were performed using a driving load sensitivity 
check sheet [21]. In one running test, for each target subject 
wearing a heart rate monitor (RS800CX; Polar), we 
measured the instantaneous heart rate of a normal state 
during 1 min in advance. Next, to improve the measurement 
accuracy for face orientations and eye-gaze movements of 
each participant, we calibrated the cameras of the head-gaze 
tracking device (FaceLAB). We recorded a face video while 
driving with the USB camera (Xtion Pro Live; ASUS Corp.) 
to analyze the facial expressions of the subject. After these 
preparations, each participant ran along the four running 
scenarios described later in Section III.C, by synchronizing 
the time base of each measuring device. Finally, using a 
questionnaire that specifically examines driving topics 
occurring at random, subjective reviews, a four-stage check, 
were also conducted when a driving topic occurred. After 
obtaining the approval of Akita Prefectural University 
Research Ethics Board, the experiment contents for all 
subjects were explained fully to participants in advance. We 
obtained written consent of participants. From each, we also 
obtained an agreement to publish a face image along with 
the consent to experimental participation. Subjects were 10 
young drivers (A, B, C, D, E, F, G, H, I, Q: average age 22 
years) and nine elderly drivers (J, K, L, M, N, O, P, R, S: 
average age 62 years) in total 19 people. 
C. Driving topics and Running scenarios 
The driving course used in the experiment is a straight 
course with no lane changes of two lanes on one side 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Outline of experimental protocols. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Measurement points of driver reaction to driving topics. 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

simulating the Tohoku Expressway, and starts running from 
the driving scene that converges from the acceleration lane 
to the expressway. Driving topics occurred in one running 
were set randomly, and the measurement points of the 
driver’s reaction for each driving topic were set as shown in 
Figure 3. Figure 4 presents the state of each driving topic. 
The falling object in Figure 4 (a) is installed in the center of 
the left lane, and interferes with the running course. The 
sudden appearance of small animals shown in Figure 4 (b) 
was set so that when the vehicle passed the fixed point, it 
emerged from the front left side of the vehicle and traversed 
to the right so as to close the driving path of the concerned 
vehicle. The breakdown vehicle in Figure 4 (c) simulated a 
state where a large truck was parked on the shoulder due to 
a failure. With the lane decrease in Figure 4 (d), the 
overtaking lane is unavailable due to in-work and decreases 
from 2 lanes to 1 lane. In the case where each driving topic 
and the concerned vehicle come into contact, characters of 
"collision" are displayed on the front screen, but running 
experiments can be continued. 
Subsequently, we present an overview of running 
scenarios in the following sentences. To take into account 
the differences in visibility due to time periods, we set the 
two conditions of daytime and nighttime, as well as the 
presence or absence of an overtaking vehicle as traveling 
conditions when encountering each driving topic. Figure 5 
    
 
(a) Falling objects                (b) Sudden appearance of small animals 
    
 
(c) Breakdown vehicles         (d) Lane decrease during work 
 
Figure 4. Driving topics for running test. 
 
    
 
(a) Sunny daytime, and no overtaking vehicles   (b) Sunny daytime, and overtaking vehicles available 
    
 
(c) Sunny nighttime, and no overtaking vehicles    (d) Sunny nighttime, and overtaking vehicles available 
 
Figure 5. Running scenarios. 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

presents four types of driving scenarios that controlled time 
periods (i.e., daytime or nighttime) and traffic flows (i.e., 
overtaking vehicles: Yes or No). The order of occurrence of 
each driving topic was two patterns of type A (i.e., falling 
objects → sudden appearance of small animals → 
breakdown vehicles → lane decrease) and type B (i.e., 
breakdown vehicles → sudden appearance of small animals 
→ falling objects → lane decrease). The running time for 
one scenario is about 7 to 10 minutes, and we gave 
instructions to each subject to observe the speed limit of 100 
(km / h). Additionally, maximum speed was automatically 
limited to 120 (km / h) on DS side. 
IV. 
EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND ARGUMENTS  
Based on safety confirmation behaviors due to the driving 
topics, we analyzed reaction times of whole drivers, elderly 
drivers, and young drivers at each measurement point. 
Finally, 
we 
discussed 
the 
differences 
of 
driving 
characteristics between elderly drivers and young drivers, 
focusing on "cognitions", "judgments", and "operations". 
A.  Measurement points and driver response for driving 
topics 
Focusing attention on eye-gaze behaviors for driving 
topics and safety confirmation behaviors due to lane change, 
we will examine the correspondence relationship between 
measurement points of driver reaction and eye-gaze 
information (i.e., heat maps, saccades) as shown in Figure 3. 
Figure 6 presents the time series changes of heat maps and 
saccades corresponding to each measurement point for the 
falling object. Each heat map represents the degree of gaze 
concentration in each of the following sections. They are 
from b) passing the reference point to c) falling object 
gazing, from c) falling object gazing to d) checking 
surrounding conditions, from d) checking surrounding 
conditions to e) avoidance actions. In addition, the time 
series changes of saccades are divided into two sections, i.e., 
from a) 5 seconds before passing the reference point to b) 
passing the reference point, from b) passing from the 
reference point to e) avoidance action. Focusing on the time 
series changes of heat maps and saccades in Figure 6, we 
are able to confirm driver states related to the attention to 
the falling object and the surrounding situation confirmation 
due to lane change. Consequently, based on the vehicle 
speed of b) the reference point during the passage, it is 
possible to estimate the reaction time required for each 
action, i.e., cognitions, judgments, and operations for the 
falling object.  
B. Analysis of Driver Response to Falling Objects 
Figure 7 shows the average of reaction times of whole 
drivers, elderly drivers, and young drivers at each 
measurement point for "falling objects" which is one of the 
driving topics. In Figure 7, the respective reaction times are 
as follows.  
1) from b) passing the reference point to c) falling object 
gazing, 
 
 
Figure 6. Time series changes of heatmaps and saccades corresponding to each measurement point. 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

2) from c) falling object gazing to d) surrounding 
situation confirmation, 
3) from d) surrounding situation confirmation to e) 
avoidance behavior 
When analyzing a series of driving behaviors related to 
cognitions, judgments and operations for falling objects, the 
elderly drivers generally tended to have longer reaction 
times than those of young drivers. Furthermore, by 
classifying each driver based on the average of the whole 
subjects and paying attention to the relationship with the 
driving style, we analyzed the existence of the following 
four groups.  
· Group A: Discovery and situation confirmation are quick, 
allowance 
for 
operation 
(i.e., 
cognition, 
judgment, and operation are all fast) 
· Group B: Discovery is late, but situation confirmation and 
handling are quick (i.e., cognition is slow, but     
judgment and operation are fast) 
· Group C: discovery and situation confirmation is late, 
operation is gradual (i.e., cognition, judgment, 
and operation are gentle) 
· Group D: all reactions are average (i.e., cognition, 
judgment, and operation are all average) 
The young drivers are classified into Group A and Group D, 
whereas the elderly drivers are more likely to be classified 
as Group B and Group C. In addition, we believe that the 
characteristics of driving behaviors will shift from group B 
to group C as the aging of driver progresses. 
C. Comparison of elderly drivers and young drivers 
In Section IV.B, as the result of analyzing a series of 
reaction times related to cognitions, judgments and 
operations for falling objects, we confirmed that each driver 
has a strong tendency to be classified as one of four groups 
(i.e., A, B, C, and D). In order to further clarify the driving 
characteristics of elderly drivers, we try to analyze each 
reaction time of elderly drivers and young drivers, for 
running scenarios that controlled the time periods (i.e., 
daytime or nighttime). However, we set the condition that 
no overtaking vehicle occurs in any case. We show reaction 
time (Z1) for "cognitions" in Figure 8, reaction time (Z2) for 
"judgments" in Figure 9, and reaction time (Z3) for 
"operations" in Figure 10 separately. In these figures, (a) 
shows the result of daytime, and (b) shows the result of 
nighttime. Focusing on the reaction time (Z1) pertaining to 
"recognition" in Figure 8, when the time period is daytime, 
the reaction time of the elderly drivers is significantly longer 
than that of the young drivers. On the other hand, when the 
time period is nighttime, the difference between the elderly 
drivers and the young drivers is hardly noticed. Generally, 
the visibility at nighttime is considered to be deteriorated. 
However, according to the questionnaire survey after the 
running test, the majority accounted for the elderly drivers 
as "the nighttime course was easier to recognize the falling 
objects". The reason for this trend may be attributed to the 
factor that eye-gaze targets during nighttime driving were 
limited. In the reaction time (Z2) related to "judgment" in 
Figure. 9, we can confirm that the reaction time of elderly 
drivers is significantly shorter than that of young drivers in 
both time periods (i.e., daytime and nighttime). This is 
because the elderly drivers are rich in driving experience 
compared to the young drivers, so we can infer that this 
trend is due to differences in their experiences. In the 
reaction time (Z3) related to "operation" in Figure 10, 
almost no difference is observed when the time period is 
daytime. On the other hand, it can be confirmed that there is 
a large variation in reaction time of the elderly drivers in 
nighttime. Comprehensively, analyzing the above results, 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Driver's reaction time to falling objects. 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

we confirmed that the reaction time (Z1) related to 
"cognition" of the elderly drivers is longer and the reaction 
time (Z2) related to "judgment" is shorter than those of the 
young drivers. 
Finally, the distance from the reference point to the 
falling object was calculated based on the reaction time (Z1) 
related to "cognition" and the speed at the time of passing 
through the reference point. The results are shown in Figure 
11. In this section, we calculated the moving distance for all 
subjects assuming constant linear motion. The clear 
difference can be confirmed as compared with the reaction 
time in Figure 8. As we can understand from Figure 11, 
among a series of driving behaviors, the driving 
characteristics related to "cognition" are greatly different 
between the young drivers and the elderly drivers. 
Consequently, we infer that the difference will greatly affect 
"judgment" and "operation" thereafter. Particularly, the 
elderly drivers have a high ability to judge based on their 
       
 
(a) Daytime / no overtaking vehicles              (b) Nighttime / overtaking vehicles available 
 
Figure 8. Cognitive reaction time (Z1). 
 
   
     
 
(a) Daytime / no overtaking vehicles                                               (b) Nighttime / overtaking vehicles available 
 
 Figure 9. Reaction time for judgments (Z2) 
 
         
 
(a) Daytime / no overtaking vehicles                                               (b) Nighttime / overtaking vehicles available 
 
Figure 10. Reaction time for operations (Z3) 
 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

experiences. The following framework is effective for 
elderly drivers, i.e., which will refine the gazing target 
necessary for safety driving appropriately, and direct 
caution resources to the gazing target at the same time. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
For this study, we defined four situations that are likely to 
trigger accidents on highways as driving topics, i.e., 
breakdown vehicles, sudden appearance of small animals, 
falling objects, and lane decrease. Carrying out running 
experiments controlling the time period (daytime or 
nighttime) and the traffic flow (overtaking vehicle: Yes or 
No), we studied the comparative analysis for each driving 
topic, focusing on driving characteristics of young drivers 
and elderly drivers concerning to “cognitions”, “judgments”, 
and “operations”. Results clarified the following points. 
・ The elderly drivers had longer reaction times than 
young drivers. Particularly, the reaction time regarding 
to “cognitions” was remarkable. 
・Based on the average of whole subjects, the existence 
of categories characterizing elderly drivers was 
confirmed from the relationship between the reaction 
time of each driver and driving style. 
・For elderly drivers, it is effective to narrow down 
gazing targets necessary for safety driving and allocate 
appropriate attention resources. 
In future work, we aim to evaluate the statistical superiority 
of the findings obtained in this research and aim to improve 
the accuracy of a dangerous driving prediction model. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported by technical research grant of 
East Nippon Expressway Company Limited. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
“Characteristics 
of 
Traffic 
Death 
Accidents 
and 
Criminal 
Investigation on Road Traffic Law Violation,” Japan National Police 
Agency, 
Available 
from 
URL: 
https://www.npa.go.jp/publications/statistics/koutsuu/index.html 
[retrieved: April, 2019] 
[2] 
K. Kamiji and N. Takahashi, “Achievement and Effort of Safety 
Traffic Society for Elderly Drivers by JAMA,” International 
Association of Traffic and Safety Sciences, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 221-
227, 2011. 
[3] 
H. Suzuki, “Motivating Senior Drivers toward Traffic Safety: the 
Traffic Sociology Viewpoint,” International Association of Traffic 
and Safety Sciences, vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 194-202, 2011. 
[4] 
Y. Nakano, T. Kojima, H. Kawanaka, and K. Oguri, “Improvement 
of Elderly Driver’s Ability by Pointing and Calling Method,” The 
Institute of Electronics, Information and Communication Engineers 
D, vol. J97-D, no.1, pp. 135-144, 2014. 
[5] 
M. Takahara, M. Kokubun, T. Wada, and S. Doi, “Effects of a 
Stopping-situation 
Assistance 
System 
for 
Elderly 
Drivers,” 
International Association of Traffic and Safety Sciences, vol. 36, no. 
1, pp. 6-13, 2011. 
[6] 
K. Iida, “Hypothesis Construction on Reverse Running Occurrence 
Process on Highway,” Grant Research by Takata Foundation 
ISSN2185-8950, 
Available 
from 
URL: 
http://www.takatafound.or.jp/support/articles/pdf/150626_10.pdf 
[retrieved: April, 2019] 
[7] 
M. Ishibashi, M. Okuwa, S. Doi, and M. Akamatsu, "HQL Driving 
Style 
Questionnaire: 
DSQ," 
Research 
Institute 
of 
Human 
Engineering for Quality Life, 2003. 
[8] 
M. Ishibashi, M. Okuwa, S. Doi, and M. Akamatsu, "HQL Workload 
Sensitivity Questionnaire: WSQ," Research Institute of Human 
Engineering for Quality Life, 2003. 
[9] 
G. Abe, K. Kikuchi, R. Iwaki, and T. Fujii, "Effects of Cognitive 
Distraction on Driver’s Visual Attention," The Society of 
Mechanical Engineers (JSME), Transactions of the JSME (c), Vol. 
76, No. 767, pp. 1662-1668, 2010. 
[10] R. Honma, G. Abe, and K. Kikuchi, "Characteristics of Visual 
Attention while Driving under the State of Drowsiness," Society of 
Automotive Engineers of Japan, Inc. (JSAE), Vol. 42, No. 5, pp. 
1217-1222, 2011. 
 
     
 
(a) Daytime / no overtaking vehicles                                           (b) Nighttime / overtaking vehicles available 
 
Figure 11. Distance from the reference point to the falling object. 
 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-718-4
ICCGI 2019 : The Fourteenth International Multi-Conference on Computing in the Global Information Technology

