A Digital Systems Approach Across eGovernment Services: The Australian 
Taxation Office and The Health Environment 
Samantha Papavasiliou and Carmen Reaiche 
Adelaide Business School 
University of Adelaide,  
Adelaide, Australia 
e-mail: samantha.papavasiliou@adelaide.edu.au, 
carmen.reaiche@adelaide.edu.au  
 
Abstract— The public sectors shift to digital first service 
provision has had a considerable impact on how individuals 
interact with public sector entities.  This research highlights 
the similar assistance requirements and concerns with 
different public sector digital services. Evidence for this 
research is presented through a case study on the Australian 
Taxation Office and two digital health platforms, MyAgedCare 
and My Health Record. By understanding the different issues 
and assistance seeking requirements across the public sector 
digital services, digital service designers and policy makers can 
better create services that meet the needs and expectations of 
users. A primary finding of this research highlights the 
expectations of users that human interfaces for assistance-
seeking are maintained, in order to maximise an individual’s 
capacity to interact with the system successfully. 
Keywords- 
Digital 
Health; 
Assistance 
Seeking; 
Digital 
Inclusiveness; Digital Ecosystem; Public Sector. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
As public sector services adopt new technologies and 
start to identify the considerable benefits associated with 
utilising digital services, the availability and use of legacy 
systems will decrease [1]. Public sector services are 
fundamental in a modern society and service availability is 
crucial. However, with the use of digital services in lieu of 
legacy systems, especially in the mandatory service space, 
users are becoming more and more limited in their choices 
[1]. Therefore, this paper argues that for governments to be 
truly inclusive, legacy systems must remain in place, to 
enable and provide access to all who require them.  
This paper explores the application of findings from an 
Australian Taxation Office (ATO) case study, used to 
understand the barriers and opportunities affecting digital 
service provision in the public sector. The findings are used 
to start the discussion on the digital health environment, 
including the most common Australian digital health 
platforms known as My Health Record and MyAgedCare 
[2], both services which are displayed with similar digital 
formats. This paper does not argue against the use of digital 
approaches for service provision, however it questions the 
inclusiveness of providing digital first services in mandatory 
service space (e.g., tax lodgement or aged care referrals).  
The purpose of transitioning public sector services to 
digital platforms is clear, to provide easy access to 
government services, and to promote the transformation and 
delivery of modern and future proof digital services to those 
who need them [1] [3]. There are millions of Australians 
who utilise online government services through the central 
platform “myGov”, as well as numerous state government 
online services [1]. The large numbers utilising the services 
demonstrate how Australian public sector digital services 
are well adopted within the community. However, there are 
still pockets of the community who are struggling to access 
necessary services [1].  
All Australian Public Sector Organisations were 
impacted by the introduction of the Australian Digital 
Continuity Policy 2020, mandating the use of digital first 
channels for every public sector service provided [4]. This 
policy put considerable pressure on both public sector 
organisations and service users. Through exploration of 
previous literature, a considerable gap was identified 
between what is known about digital service users and non-
users, and those individuals who are required to use them. 
Therefore, the impact of shifting mandatory public sector 
services to a digital first platform is still largely unknown. 
As digital first service provision is the way forward for all 
public sector organisations (especially in Australia), a 
holistic view of users is needed. Research needs to support 
and assist users, improve services and inform policy to 
increase long-term voluntary compliance obligations in a 
mandatory service space. To support this view, this research 
is exploring the relevance of previous research based on a 
case study on the ATO, and comparing them to different 
services provided by the Australian Department of Health.   
This paper will explore the barriers to digital adoption in 
the public sector space, specifically comparing mandatory 
and voluntary spaces. These comparisons will be based on 
understanding that ATO and MyAgedCare services are 
mandatory and My Health Record being voluntary. This 
research explores the common reported themes among 
digital barriers and proposes additional research to be 
undertaken to address the gaps. The themes will be derived 
from an ATO case study (conducted previously) and 
comparing to a pilot study undertaken on MyAgedCare. 
Additional research has explored the identified barriers to 
the use of My Health Record (a voluntary service), to 
understand the similarities across digital health and digital 
taxation, as well as mandatory and voluntary. Through the 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

use of thematic analysis outlining the barriers to digital 
adoption, links between the ATO case study and the digital 
health platforms are introduced to demonstrate the similar 
issues across the different eGovernment services. By 
exploring the various barriers and their links to the User 
Centred Model (Figure 1) the analysis provides lessons 
learned applicable to both policy makers and digital services 
designers.  
The structure of this paper is divided into six sections. 
Section one contains the introduction, section two outlines 
the literature reviewed, section three discusses the ATO, My 
Health Record and MyAgedCare, the fourth section outlines 
the methods, the fifth section highlights the results of the 
study and the final section is the conclusion.  
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A. Digital inclusion 
Inclusion is complex as it incorporates numerous 
concepts including; awareness, acceptance, respect and 
understanding, to provide equal participation opportunities 
[5][6]. An inclusive environment encourages people with 
different characteristics, backgrounds and ways of thinking, 
to work together to fulfil their potentials [5][6]. These 
environments require considering both internal and external 
stakeholder perspectives, and placing equal value on all 
perspectives regardless of where they originated [7]. Digital 
inclusiveness is also increasingly complex, as it involves 
multiple components within the specific digital ecosystem 
of an individual. Therefore, digital inclusion identifies the 
importance of access to information and communications 
technology and the resulting social and economic benefits 
for users [8]. An individual’s level of digital inclusion is 
impacted by digital skills, connectivity and accessibility. 
Digital skills include the capacity to use technology to 
connect with the services (internet and computer), 
connectivity 
involves 
having 
internet 
access 
(the 
infrastructure) and accessibility is the user friendly digital 
services that assist in accessing the service [9]. Thus raising 
the question, does digital health have potential negative 
implications on levels of digital inclusiveness?  
B. Digital divide 
One of the most significant issues towards the use of 
digital public sector services is the digital divide, whereby 
in Australia more than 2.5 million individuals are still not 
online [9] and the digital divide is largest in those older than 
65 [9]. The digital divide is defined as the gap between 
individuals or groups with limited access to digital 
information and services, compared to those who have 
effective access [9]. With the shift of government services 
to online delivery methods, there is considerable potential 
for older Australian’s to be disadvantaged from the greater 
use of emergent and dominant communication technologies 
[13], as digital services tend to leave older Australian’s out 
[10]. An aging population is vulnerable and in some cases 
reluctant to use digital technology, raising concerns about 
ability to use technology, scams, privacy, self-diagnosis 
resulting from misunderstanding of information and the 
desire for face-to-face explanations [11]. Thus raising the 
question, how do digital health platforms affect service use?  
The digital divide is an issue that effects lower income 
earners, individuals with poor access to the internet and/or 
those individuals who lack the skills to use technology, 
making it harder to access. Furthermore, lower levels of 
digital inclusion are associated with individuals who only 
access internet through mobile devices. Digital exclusion 
often exacerbates other forms of social exclusion; this 
includes unemployment, low education and poverty [12]. 
Therefore, the importance of digital inclusion is undeniable; 
all Australians require access to both technology and skills 
to ensure they can take part in every aspect of social and 
economic life. There are practical concerns for achieving 
equitable levels of access between different social groups 
and public services, as society is not homogenous, providing 
basic accesses to the community is not sufficient. Services 
provided to citizens by government need to align their 
design and application to the needs of the community, to 
encourage digital inclusiveness and begin to breakdown the 
digital divide.  
C. Barriers to eGovernment 
Previous research has explored the specific barriers to 
digital adoption within the eGovernment space. The 
European Commission, defines a barrier to eGovernment as 
the, characteristics within the contexts of legal, social, 
technological, or institutional which negatively impact the 
development of eGovernment [11, P.3]. This can be caused 
by users’ lack of demand and the obstacles preventing 
engagement with services, or disincentives for the 
government to supply the eGovernment services or 
prevalence of obstacles preventing its supply [12].  This 
research identified barriers and compiled them into seven 
key categories; leadership failures, financial inhibitors, 
digital divide and choice, poor coordination, workplace and 
organisational inflexibility, lack of trust and poor technical 
design [12]. However, research suggests that regardless of 
the platform, the impact of stakeholders (internal and 
external) can negatively influence its use [13]. Therefore, 
successful eGovernment platforms depend on understanding 
the environments in which they operate [14]. These 
elements including stakeholder inclusiveness should be 
considered more in-depth, with their relationship to the 
multiple barriers preventing eGovernment/digital service 
adoption and their applicability across disciplines.  
III. 
EGOVERNMENT SERVICES: ATO AND HEALTH 
For this research, mandatory environments are classified 
as “Public Sector Organisations who must by legislation 
provide Digital Platforms for their services” [15][16]. 
Whereas mandatory interactions are defined as “Users who 
meet certain characteristics and must by legislation interact 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

with the public sector service provider to meet these 
obligations” [15][16]. Therefore, users must engage with 
providers, but under the digital first mandate expectations 
around how they do so has changed. In contrast voluntary 
public sector services are similar to those provided by the 
private sector, in that an individual can decide whether they 
want to utilise the service or not.  
A. ATO 
The ATO was the first service provider to adopt digital 
first service provision, with the introduction of myTax for 
individuals, business portals, and tax agent portals. The 
ATO requires all individuals to interact annually with them 
to submit their tax return, all individuals who derive income 
within Australia. Since the digital first transition, the 
majority of services are digital and require an understanding 
of both taxation and computer systems. Taxpaying 
population is in Australia is over 16 million; of these 84% 
are individuals [16]. The ATO has high digital adoption 
rates of the MyTax platform, with 95% of individuals 
eligible to utilise the service [16], however there are still 
gaps within the population that need to be explored and 
understood.  
Progressively the myTax platform became more 
inclusive, through annual and ongoing adaptions, and the 
progressive changes in the manner in which digital adoption 
and service provision has occurred [17] [18]. Each iteration 
incorporates the feedback from users to ensure ongoing 
viability of the platform, while also ensuring ongoing 
success 
[24]. 
The 
iterative 
approach 
of 
ongoing 
improvements has been a key component outlining the 
success of the myTax platform, which makes the platform a 
good case study on the creation of inclusive government 
services. This is not to say that the platform is 100% 
inclusive, 
there 
are 
still 
issues 
with accessibility, 
understanding and willingness to change that impact its use 
[19].  
B. Digital Health  
Healthcare systems are becoming significantly more 
complex, with more professionals becoming involved in 
each individual patients care, and ever-changing healthcare 
needs of the population [20]. Healthcare is the product of a 
complex adaptive system, comprised of people, equipment, 
processes and institutions which all work together [21]. 
Healthcare systems operate at their best, by undertaking 
ongoing improvements. However, when the system fails to 
improve it negatively impacts the system [22]. Therefore, 
the research argues that through the application of a systems 
thinking lens, the complexity of the different interacting 
internal and external environments within organisations, 
health systems and society for example, can be better 
identified and understood. The systems complexity 
highlights both problems and opportunities and requires 
responsive organisations and systems capable of adjusting 
to changes. The ability of the system or components of the 
system to respond to changes, all depends on one’s ability to 
understand influences [23]. Systems thinking can provide a 
holistic view and assist in identifying areas requiring 
revisiting [24]. 
C. My Health Record  
My Health Record is an online platform containing a 
summary of an individual key medical and health 
information (including histories). The site provides 
information for individuals and health practitioners who 
opted into the service to view medical histories, previous 
tests, medication (history and current) and diagnosis. The 
My Health Record platform was piloted in 2016 [25]. The 
aim of the platform was to provide a single location for all 
medical details of a patient that is readily available for 
health practitioners and users. The service is voluntary, 
there was an opt-out process between 2018 and 2019, where 
eligible Australians indicated whether or not they wanted 
the service [25]. To be eligible an individual must be 
registered with Medicare. Although there are a number of 
benefits from the provision of the online health record, more 
than 2.5 million Australians opted out of the platform [26]. 
The primary reason was privacy concerns, specifically 
because not only doctors can view the records (any 
registered health provider can); data can be used for 
research; once created the record cannot be deleted and 
there is fear of hacking data [27]. 
D. MyAgedCare  
MyAgedCare is an online platform for individuals aged 
65 or older which is the starting point on an individual’s 
aged care journey [28]. The site provides information for 
government-funded services available at home to enable 
individuals 
to 
continue 
living 
independently. 
The 
MyAgedCare platform has undergone numerous changes 
since its launch in 2013, aiming to provide a consistent, 
streamlined and holistic assessment of clients. However a 
study published in 2018 demonstrates service demand 
significantly outweighs supply. With 127,748 on waitlists or 
not receiving adequate levels of assistance based on their 
needs [29], and the waitlist growing by 20,000 every six 
months [30]. Furthermore, 96,000 people waiting since 
2013 have found nursing home placements faster than their 
preferred option of home care, and more than 16,000 people 
died waiting for services [30]. Numbers are impacted by 
geographical location, types of services, financial outlay and 
availability of qualified staff. Although this backlog in 
services is important to note, it is not the key issue raised in 
this paper, this study focuses on the implications of 
MyAgedCare as a digital platform and how this, in turn, 
affects patient centred care.    
Both digital health eGovernment platforms under 
analysis are relatively new, having not undergone as many 
iterations as the ATO myTax platform. However, these 
platforms have a considerable impact on end users and the 
Australian population, as they are both critical for providing 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

information and links to information that outline individuals 
health profiles, where and how to access services and has 
the capacity to act as a facilitator of medical services in 
Australia. This research intends to highlight the key lessons 
learned from the ATO digital experience, to help inform 
digital health service designers, to provide avenues for 
designers and policy makers to obtain guidance on how to 
develop more inclusive digital services in this space. 
Simultaneously, other eGovernment platforms can take 
advantage of the key learnings from the ATO digital 
experience, as this is transferable to eGovernment. 
IV. 
METHODS 
A qualitative approach was applied to this research. An 
integration of both interpretative and exploratory approach 
to obtain an in-depth understanding of the key barriers to 
digital adoption and how they were overcome was 
considered appropriate to the ATO, MyAgedCare and My 
Health Record cases. This approach provides evidence to 
describe the eGovernment environment and provide insights 
to promote ongoing service adoption.  
This research has two components, the first component 
was the analysis of the ATO digital experience. The ATO 
study component for this research used primary data 
collected during a 4-week period over July 2018. A survey 
form was provided to 11 call centre operatives who 
populated numerous fields outlining reasons for call and 
demographics of callers; to understand why people were 
seeking assistance. Once collected the data (N = 3,990) was 
anonymised through aggregation techniques to group like 
individuals into similar groups to understand the population. 
As this research was designed to be exploratory in nature, 
the focus was to understand the different issues facing users, 
a thematic analysis was completed on the qualitative data 
obtained.  
The second component incorporates the Digital Health 
sector platforms, My Health Record and MyAgedCare. For 
the MyAgedCare component of this research, data has been 
collected from concerns, interpretations and perceptions of 
various stakeholders engaged with the MyAgedCare 
platform. Data analysed underpinned the actor’s perception 
on “What do they think of the MyAgedCare platform?”. The 
same method was utilised to explore the My Health Record 
platform which works on similar digital integration system 
approach. The main focus of the discussions was to 
understand what different actor’s perceptions are on “What 
do they think of the My Health Record Platform?”. The data 
was consolidated and anonymised when analysed to identify 
common themes and trends within the responses. The data 
collected for this component has been treated as a pilot and 
comparative form to the ATO digital environment and 
therefore was only based on answering a singular question. 
The additional analysis conducted was on existing data 
provided outlining environmental components. 
V. 
UNDERPINNING FINDINGS:  USER CENTRED MODEL 
The research adopted an interpretive lens to guide 
analysis with a systems view. Through the analysis of the 11 
call centre operatives’ surveys, a conceptual model is 
proposed for the complete integration of key stakeholders 
influencing end user digital adoption: User Centred Model 
(see Figure 1). The key factors and element of this model 
emerged by observation and interpretation of all the 
stakeholders and interactive elements within the system and 
all the parts of the broader environment.  The purpose of 
adopting a systems lens to build this model was to provide a 
user-centred research approach which can guide policy 
making as well as provide better support and understanding 
of the various needs of the different users. This conceptual 
model contributes to knowledge by initially identifying a 
number of factors within a user’s environment and their 
degree of impact on willingness or capacity to adopt 
mandatory digital services. 
 
 
Figure 1. User Centred Model 
 
TABLE I. ATO BARRIERS TO DIGITAL ADOPTION 
Theme 
Users comments 
Platform 
support 
and 
technical 
support 
- Do not know how to access the page 
- What are the security measures in place? 
- How do I link between the MyGov and MyTax platforms?  
- I have not used this before 
- where is my prefilled data ? 
- How do I change my details/or name?  
- The identification questions were incorrect  
- I am having technical difficulties  
Lacks 
computer 
skills, 
preference 
to use non 
digital 
- I want to use myTax by I don’t know how to use a 
computer  
- I have no email address or digital presence  
- Do not own a computer  
- How do I do this digitally?  
- I always do my taxes this way 
- Language barriers prevents the use of digital  
- Only completes old non digitalised forms 
Requires 
education 
in the 
system, 
platform 
awareness 
- How do I lodge?  
- Why do I need to?  
- How does tax work?  
- Why do I have to pay money?  
- How does income work?  
- Where do I put information on the form?  
- What are tax offsets? 
- How long does this take?  
- What is a deduction? 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Table 1 outlines the thematic analysis conducted within 
the ATO, this table demonstrates the different barriers 
individuals face when interacting with the myTax platform 
and creates a basis for the analysis of the digital health 
platforms. The thematic analysis demonstrates that 
individuals seek assistance and advice on both tax technical 
components and general platform and technical support. 
Both of these scenarios are relevant for the digital health 
space, as language used in services and information 
provided can have a considerable impact on end users.  
When comparing the themes outlined within Table 1, all 
themes influence an individual capability and willingness to 
utilise digital services. There are links within each section to 
legislation, mandatory services and the environmental 
impacts. From this, the research can infer that there is a lack 
of understanding of mandatory services, specifically what 
the legislation is requiring the shift to digital. Therefore, to 
address this, users need to be informed of the changes and 
the provision of transparent policies are required, these 
policies need to be easily interpreted by all users. 
Furthermore, by understanding how different policies 
interact with the mandatory services users can be more 
informed as to the security and safety of their data, without 
this understanding it is unclear how end users will feel 
confident and comfortable using the services.  
When comparing the findings within Table 1 to the 
preliminary findings within Tables 2-4, lessons can be 
learned in relation to the potential inclusiveness of digital 
services, especially when looking beyond mandatory 
systems and simply exploring the various policies and 
involvement of stakeholders. For example, in both 
mandatory and voluntary systems, an important issue for 
end users is the security concerns related to their private 
data, how they access the digital services and their level of 
digital literacy. The users for these services also differ 
considerably, which demonstrates interesting findings when 
it comes to across the board generalisability of barriers to 
digital inclusiveness.   
TABLE II. RESPONSES TO "WHY ARE YOU NOT USING DIGITAL SERVICES?" 
Theme 
Users comments 
Scams/Fraud 
/Security  
- Fear of scams  
- Not sure which is the real website and which is 
fraudulent  
- Computer/cyber security concerns 
No computer/ 
Internet access   
 
- Have no experience utilising a computer or accessing 
the internet  
- Unclear on what a digital health service is  
- Have no access to the internet of computer 
 
The results within Tables 1, 3 and 4, highlight how 
regardless of platform, the assistance required relates to end-
user concerns about terminology, accuracy of information 
and representation. Furthermore, there is a clear and direct 
relationship between digital awareness of the operations of 
online platforms (eGovernment) and the types of questions 
asked within the digital space (e.g., digital literacy 
questions, obtaining the correct information).  
TABLE III. RESPONSES TO “WHAT DO YOU THINK OF MYAGEDCARE?” 
Theme 
Users comments 
Phoneline 
- Rude staff 
- Staff demanding to speak to client directly despite 
acknowledgement of advocate availability 
- Hearing impairment impacting communication 
- Language barriers  
Confusing 
- Terminology used by staff 
- Questions deemed by clients as intrusive and unnecessary 
- Inaccurate information provided on website 
- Clients unable to understand the different services and costs 
involved – written information only with a lack of visual 
representation 
- Sometimes inaccurate representation of available services 
- Availability of services for under 65 years 
Difficultly 
accessing 
- Vision impairment 
- A lack of comprehension 
- Unreliable or no internet in the home (particularly rural and 
remote) 
- Mobility impairment - unable to leave home to use public 
access computer  
- Inability to express urgency 
TABLE IV. RESPONSES TO "WHAT DO YOU THINK OF MY HEALTH 
RECORD?" 
Theme 
Users comments 
Privacy  
- Confidentially and privacy concerns   
- Concerns for the ongoing privacy for their data stored online  
- Unhappy that it cannot be deleted once created  
- Unclear who can access my records and why?  
- Allied health services can access my records  
- What if my medical history is shared an 
Confusing 
- Terminology used online 
- Accuracy of information provided on online 
- Not every doctors client and hospital is represented  
Difficultly 
accessing 
- Vision impairment 
- Do not understand how to use the portal 
- Low levels of digital literacy 
- Unreliable or no internet in the home  
- Mobility impairment - unable to leave home to use public 
access computer  
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The preliminary findings from the digital health space 
in comparison to the ATO case study demonstrates 
significant similarities between the digital/online platforms 
and the issues associated with digital awareness, acceptance, 
assistance 
seeking, 
accessibility 
and 
support. 
As 
demonstrated within the results of the ATO case study, the 
value of face-to-face or human interaction based assistance 
is still a necessary component of the success of 
eGovernment service inclusiveness. Digital health too 
quickly removed the face-to-face component of assistance in 
regard to both My Health Record and My Aged care, 
decreasing the inclusiveness and making it difficult for 
individuals who preferred face-to-face support. Human 
interaction support is available in this space, however does 
not provide the same emotional support often expected 
within the delicate situations evident in healthcare.  
My 
Health 
Record 
and 
MyAgedCare 
have 
a 
considerable amount to learn from the ATO, who have 
maintained high adoption and satisfaction ratings within 
their digital service. Furthermore, through multiple 
iterations, ongoing improvements were made possible, 
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

while ensuring that different avenues for obtaining support 
and assistance were available to suit the user’s needs (e.g., 
in person, over the phone and through intermediaries). What 
this research has indicated is that the digital health services 
have moved too quickly in their transition from legacy to 
digital services. The ATO learned within their transition to 
digital first services, specifically what legacy systems they 
could do without and which ones they need to maintain and 
improve.  
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Digital Transformation Agency, Digital Delivery of Government 
Services: Digital Transformation Agency Submission to the Finance 
and Public Administration Committee. 2017. Available from: 
https://www.aph.gov.au/DocumentStore.ashx?id=9d695f6a-2354-
4cc5-be0d-913de41b25de&subId=516630. [Retrieved: 10 January, 
2020]   
[2] 
Department of Health, Evaluation of my Health Record Participation 
Trial 
Report, 
2016. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.health.gov.au/internet/main/publishing.nsf/Content/publi
cations-Evaluation-of-the-my-health-record-participation-trials/. 
[Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[3] 
C. Dilmegani, B. Korkmaz and M. Lundqvist. ‘Public Sector 
Digitalisation – The Trillion Dollar Challenge’, McKinsey Business 
Transition Office, 2014. 
[4] 
National Archives of Australia. Digital Continuity 2020, 2015. 
Available 
from: 
www.naa.gov.au/Information.management 
/Digital.Continuity.2020. [Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[5] 
S. Thompson. “Defining and Measuring ‘Inclusion’ Within an 
Organisation K4D; Helpdesk Report. Brighton”, UK: Institute of 
Development Studies, 2017. 
[6] 
W. Wallace and G, Pillans. Creating an Inclusive Culture: UK 
Corporate 
Research 
Forum, 
2016. 
Available 
from: 
http://www.crforum.co.uk/wpcontent/uploads/2016/11/11-Creating-
an-Inclusive-Culture-1.pdf. [Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[7] 
OECD. “Inclusive Government for a More Inclusive Society. In 
Government at a Glance 2015”, Paris: OECD Publishing, 2015. 
[8] 
J. Thomas et al. “Measuring Australia’s Digital Divide: The 
Australian Digital Inclusion Index 2018”, Melbourne: RMIT 
University: For Telstra, 2018. 
[9] 
UK Government. Policy Paper: Government Digital Inclusion 
Strategy, 
2014. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/government-digital-
inclusion-strategy/governmentdigital-inclusion-strategy. 
[Retrieved: 
10 January, 2020]  
[10] Aged Care  Guide. Digital Inclusion Leaves Older Australian’s Out, 
2017. Available From:  http://www.adedcareguide.com.au/talking-
aged-care/digital=inclusion-leaves-older-Australias-out/. [Retrieved: 
10 January, 2020] 
[11] European 
Commission. 
Breaking 
Barriers 
to 
eGovernment; 
Overcoming Obstacles to Improving European Public Services, 2007. 
Available 
from: 
https:/www.oii.ox.ac.uk/archive/downloads/research/egovbarriers/deli
verables/solutions_report/Solutions_for_eGovernment.pdf. 
[Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[12] S. Angelopoulos, F. Kitsios, P. Kofakis and T. Papadopoulos. 
“Emerging Barriers in eGovernment Implementation”, Proceedings 
of International Conference on Electronic Government (EGOV 2010), 
pp. 216-225, Lausanne Switzerland (29 August – 2 September). 2010. 
[13] M. Yildiz. 2007. eGovernment Research: Reviewing the Literature, 
Limitations, and Ways Forward, Government Information Quarterly, 
Vol. 24 No. 3.  
[14] S. Papavasiliou, C. Reaiche and P. Ricci. “Digital Adoption: The 
Need for Truly Inclusive eGovernment Services”, Proceeding of the 
2019 International Conference on E-Learning, EBusiness, Enterprise 
Information Systems & eGovernment. pp. 43-49. 2019. ISBN: 1-
60132-495-2 
[15] S. Papavasiliou, C. Reaiche and P. Ricci. “Digital Interactions 
Strategy: A Public Sector Case”, The Thirteenth International 
Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments. pp. 19-23. 2019. 
ISBN: 978-1-61208-685-9 
[16] Australian Taxation Office. Individuals, 2019. Available from: 
https://www.ato.gov.au/About-ATO/Research-and-statistics/In-
detail/Taxation-statistics/Taxation-statistics-2016-17/?page=7. 
[Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[17] B. Carmody. ATO Rolls Out myTax to Sole Traders and Contractors 
for 
the 
First 
Time, 
2017. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.smartcompany.com.au/finance/ato-rolls-out-mytax-to-
sole-traders-and-contractors-for-the-first-time/. 
[Retrieved: 
10 
January, 2020] 
[18] A. Coyne. ATO to Kill Off e-Tax, 2015. Available from: 
https://www.itnews.com.au/news/ato-to-kill-off-e-tax-401902.  
[Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[19] N. Olsen. Tax Administration in a Digital Age: The Australian 
Experience, 2018. Available from: https://www.ato.gov.au/Media-
centre/Speeches/Other/Tax-Administration-in-a-Digital-Age-The-
Australian-experience/. [Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[20] S. Leyshon and S. McAdam. “Scene Setter: The Importance of 
Taking A Systems Approach to Persons Centred Care”, BMJ. vol. 
350.  2015.  
[21] J. Clarkson, J. Dean, J. Ward, A. Komashie and T. Bashford,. “A 
Systems Approach to Healthcare: From Thinking to Practice”, Future 
Healthcare Journal. Vol. 5(3). Pp. 151-155. 2018.  
[22] J. Braithwaite. “Changing How We Think About Healthcare 
Improvement”, BMJ. vol. 361. 2018.  
[23] R.M. Lebeir. Health Care Management: The Contribution of Systems 
Thinking, University of Hertfordshire, 2006. 
[24] A. Gorod, L. Hallo and T. Nguyen. “A Systematic Approach to 
Complex Project Management: Integration of Command-and-Control 
and Network Governance”, Systems Research and Behavioural 
Science. Vol. 35, pp. 811-837. 2019. doi: 10.1002/sres.2520.  
[25] Department of Health. What is My Health Record?, 2019. Available 
from: https://www.myhealthrecord.gov.au/for-you-your-family/what-
is-my-health-record. [Retrieved: 10 January, 2020] 
[26] C. Knaus. More than 2.5 million people have opted out of My Health 
Record, 
2019. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.theguardian.com/australia-news/2019/feb/20/more-than-
25-million-people-have-opted-out-of-my-health-record. 
[Retrieved: 
10 January, 2020] 
[27] A. Bogle. My Health Record: Your Questions Answered on 
Cybersecurity, 
Police 
and 
Privacy, 
2019. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/science/2018-07-15/my-health-record-
questions-answers-security-privacy-police/9959622/. [Retrieved: 10 
January, 2020] 
[28] MyAgedCare. 
About 
Us, 
2019. 
Available 
from:  
https://www.myagedcare.gov.au/about-us. [Retrieved 10 August, 
2019]  
[29] National Aged Care Alliance. 2019 Federal Election Position 
Statement - Getting Aged Care Right for Everyone, 2019. Available 
from:https://agewellcampaign.com.au/wpcontent/uploads/2019/05/20
19-Federal-Election-Position-Statement.pdf. [Retrieved: 10 January, 
2020] 
[30] S. Lauder and V. Milton. My Aged Care Home Care Wait of Only 12 
Months has the Allens Considering Themselves Lucky, 2019. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2019-05-10/eunice-
and-john-allen-wait-for-home-care-package/11098848. [Retrieved: 10 
January, 2020] 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

