Digital Investigations for Enterprise Information Architectures 
 
Syed Naqvi, Gautier Dallons, Christophe Ponsard 
Centre d'Excellence en Technologies de l'Information et de la Communication (CETIC) 
29 Rue des Frères Wright, 6041 Charleroi, Belgium 
{syed.naqvi; gautier.dallons; christophe.ponsard}@cetic.be 
 
 
Abstract—This paper highlights the role of digital forensics in 
the enterprise information architecture. It presents a 
framework for embedding digital forensics analysis techniques 
at various stages of corporate information and communication 
technologies (ICT) lifecycle. A set of best practices for the 
corporate ICT security policy is also outlined to keep the 
operational costs of digital forensics at the optimal level. It also 
presents a detailed analysis of the risks to the competitive-edge 
of the companies that will not employ the forensics solutions to 
protect their business interests. This work also provides a high-
level roadmap for the adaption of digital forensics in the 
emerging core business technologies such as cloud computing 
and virtualization infrastructures. 
Keywords - digital forensics analysis, ICT security architecture, 
enterprise information architecture 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Crimes involving computers started to occur as soon as 
the computers started sprawling across the various activities 
of everyday life in the 1980s. United States Federal Bureau 
of Investigation (FBI) launched its Magnetic Media Program 
[1] to address the growing needs of analyzing computers 
especially storage media for their investigations of high-
technology crimes. The growth of networking technologies 
in the 1990s gave further impetus to the need for tackling 
crimes using sophisticated technological means. However, 
the overall scope of the digital forensics remained confined 
to the law enforcement agencies with the sole objective of 
collecting reliable evidences for the prosecution of the 
criminals involved in a court of justice. 
The interest of performing digital forensics analysis at 
the enterprise level has significantly grown nowadays. This 
trend can be seen as a logical evolution of white hat or 
ethical hacking that is performed by the businesses to ensure 
that their ICT infrastructure is free from vulnerabilities. 
However, the major driving force behind this trend is the fact 
that growing number of criminal offenses using ICT is 
overwhelming the computer crime units. It is not so easy to 
involve law enforcement agencies in a commercial 
environment where there are some suspicious activities; but 
no explicit computer crime is committed. Moreover, their 
involvement casts shadows on the business interests notably 
on the reputation of the company. 
Nowadays, enterprises are embracing considerable shift 
in their business approach where they have to not only adapt 
to non-traditional concepts such as virtualization, but also 
switch to more comprehensive security solutions to cope 
with the new security requirements as only pre-incidence 
measures, i.e., attack preventions is no longer be sufficient to 
protect their assets. They need to invest in the post-accident 
situation, i.e., digital forensics. It is evident that European 
enterprises can learn a lot in this area from their US 
counterparts who have acquired considerable experience of 
using digital forensic technologies in the business 
environment whereas digital forensics is still seen by a vast 
majority of Europeans as specialized tools for police to 
tackle cyber criminology. 
This nascent trend of in-house digital forensics analysis 
in a relatively non-criminal context has to prove its worth by 
providing some competitive edge to the businesses. Major 
challenges include the demarcation of exact role of the 
digital forensics in the overall corporate ICT security 
operations; reducing its functional costs both in terms of 
monetary expenditures incurred in the acquisition of 
corresponding technologies; and in terms of the time 
consumed in the subsequent investigations especially when 
the operations of core business line are directly affected. This 
paper pragmatically identifies the role of digital forensics in 
the overall security architecture of an enterprise. We propose 
to implant the corresponding digital forensics analysis 
features in the various components of the corporate ICT 
infrastructure. This scheme provides better organization of 
the security functionalities with minimal impact on the 
overall performance of the ICT operations. 
This paper presents a framework of digital forensics for 
enterprise information architectures and evaluates the scope 
of various methodologies and tools for these enterprise 
applications. It also presents a detailed analysis of the risks 
to the competitive-edge of the companies that will not 
employ the forensics solutions to protect their business 
interests. This work also provides a high-level roadmap for 
the adaption of digital forensics in the emerging core 
business technologies such as cloud computing and 
virtualization infrastructures. 
This paper is organized as follows: Section II describes 
the role of digital forensics in the enterprise information 
architecture. A digital forensics analysis framework for 
enterprise information security policy is presented in Section 
III. Section IV highlights the impact of digital forensics on 
the competitive-edge of enterprises. Section V identifies a 
range of challenges of investigating the emerging paradigm 
of virtualized infrastructures. A discussion on the recent 
trends in the area of digital forensics and their positioning 
with our approach is presented in Section VI. Finally, some 
conclusions are drawn in Section VII. 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

II. 
ROLE OF DIGITAL FORENSICS IN ENTREPRISE 
INFORMATION ARCHETCTURE 
The area of digital forensics analysis is considerably 
mature in the modern criminology; however, its scope in the 
commercial environment is still vague. Therefore, it is 
needed to precisely identify the role of digital forensics at 
various levels of the enterprise ICT operations so as to 
enhance the overall quality of protection without causing any 
substantial impact on the system’s performance. This section 
outlines major blocks of a typical enterprise ICT 
infrastructure followed by the identification of those blocks 
where digital forensics analysis has a role to play. These 
roles are elaborated for individual blocks. These roles can 
eventually be harnessed together to constitute various digital 
forensics analysis functions. 
Figure 1 shows a typical lifecycle of corporate ICT 
operations. These blocks are tagged to facilitate their 
subsequent usage. These operational blocks are subject to a 
number of internal and external requirements that have to 
meet in order to ensure the proper functioning of the overall 
business routines. We identify those blocks that require 
digital forensic analysis features for the improvement of the 
quality of protection offered by the corporate ICT security 
architecture. A magnified glimpse of these blocks is shown 
in the Figure 2. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Various phases of corporate ICT operations 
1) Design and Deployment 
The design and development phase should ensure that the 
ICT infrastructure is globally forensic-friendly – this implies 
that both design specifications and deployment parameters 
should provide some sort of explicit checkpoints to facilitate 
digital forensics analysis at any time instant without causing 
major disruption to their operational routines. 
The design and development phase also needs to ensure 
that chronological documentation (chain of custody) can be 
conveniently produced if deemed necessary. It can include 
some nonrepudiation techniques such as watermarking to 
justify that they are not tampered at any stage. 
The design and development phase should also include 
resilience planning so that the forensic analysis will have 
minimal impact on the functioning of routine operations. 
This feature is particularly important for today’s large-scale 
highly connected systems, such as Clouds, where disruption 
of entire ICT infrastructure in the aftermath of any incident 
will inflict huge damages. This feature also includes 
recovery time that is ideally kept at the minimum possible 
level. 
  
2) Auditing and Compliance 
The auditing and compliance is not only a prerequisite 
for launching a specific business but also a marketing tool to 
increase the customer base. Therefore, the auditing and 
compliance phase should provide means of justifying that the 
business is meeting all of its legal obligations. For example, 
the United States Sarbanes Oxley Act (SOX) [2] requires a 
formal process of using forensic analysis techniques for the 
investigation of incidents. This law has made significant 
impact on the security policies and incident management 
strategies of US based corporations [3]. 
Besides serving the compliance issues of the legal 
requirements, digital forensics can also play its role in the 
fulfillment of regulatory requirements that most of the 
corporations are required to comply with. For example, 
information security incidence management procedures are 
recommended by the ISO standard ISO27002 [4]. 
Likewise, the quality assurance practices can be 
improved by using digital forensics techniques such as 
analyzing 
the 
performance 
bottlenecks 
of 
network 
bandwidth, storage mediums, etc. They can be employed 
when some performance degradation is reported or they can 
be proactively used to ensure the execution of an optimal 
quality assurance plan. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Corporate ICT phases that can be improved by Digital Forensics 
3) Business Operations 
The business operations phase is crucial for meeting the 
company’s targets within the allocated resources. Therefore, 
it is important to explore newer techniques to improve this 
phase not only to facilitate the targets achievements, but also 
to provide a competitive-edge in this core operational phase. 
Several maintenance operations of corporate ICT 
infrastructure, such as disk cleaning operations, require 
reliable analysis solutions. Digital forensics analysis tools 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

can be employed to efficiently provide these maintenance 
operations. 
With the ever increasing evolution and expansion of the 
ICT scope in everyday life, the upgrades have become a 
routine activity. Moreover, data recovery from the obsolete, 
faulty, or broken equipment requires some reliable solutions. 
Digital forensics techniques can be employed for recovering 
data in these situations. 
Managing 
the 
ICT 
inventories 
in 
a 
corporate 
environment also requires efficient sorting solutions before 
discarding the useless lot. Digital forensics techniques can 
assist in securely disposing of equipment. 
 
4) Incident Management 
This is the privileged phase for employing digital 
forensic techniques as the general perception of the forensics 
is the post incident analysis. Digital forensics can be used by 
the administrator of a corporate ICT infrastructure to gather 
the digital traces and consequently analyze them to 
determine the causes of incident. All these actions should be 
carried out within the given legal framework. Another 
important role of the incident management team is to ensure 
business continuity ideally even during the incident phase. In 
real terms, it should at least ensure the continuation of core 
business operations during the adverse situations. 
III. 
A DIGITAL FORENSICS ANALYSIS FRAMEWORK FOR 
ENTERPRISE INFORMATION SECURITY POLICY 
Corporate security policy can play the pivotal role in 
outlining best practices for their ICT security teams. We 
suggest that organizational security policy of a modern 
enterprise should explicitly reflect the role of digital 
forensics as described in the section II of this paper.  
Figure 3 presents a placement of security and forensics 
team in a corporate ICT infrastructure where it interacts 
with the different phases that can benefit from various 
digital forensics analysis techniques. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Security and Forensics Team in a Corporate ICT Infrastructure 
It is essential that security and forensics team should be 
equipped with fine-grained forensics policy that can handle 
the peculiar requirements of the contemporary ICT 
infrastructures especially their complexities, scale, and 
decentralization. It is understood that highly dynamic 
environments such as Open Clouds give rise to enormous 
challenges of localization and demarcation of their 
boundaries that keep on changing in an amoeboid style. 
While research and development initiatives are needed to 
effectively address these specific challenges, ICT security 
teams of corporate sector can handle the digital forensics 
tasks by having clear vision and strategy of achieving the 
security goals. The current state of the tools support for the 
digital forensics activities is quite sparse. We therefore 
recommend using a set of tools for different tasks instead of 
looking for a comprehensive framework or toolkit that can 
provide a silver bullet kind of solution. 
We now present different phases of standard forensics 
analysis and their efficient implementation in businesses. 
They are presented in the context of incident management; 
however, we have already shown that these techniques are 
equally useful in a number of other ICT operations. 
A. Preparation phase 
Preparation phase mainly involves adequate planning by 
envisioning the security threats and the contingency plans 
followed by the deployment of necessary tools and 
procedures. This is a management task that requires regular 
re-evaluation and assessment as the threats picture changes 
rapidly especially in the dynamic environments such as 
virtual infrastructures. 
B. Detection phase 
Detection phase often includes collection mechanism as 
well. This phase requires up to date set of tools to monitor 
the company’s ICT resources and capture the various events 
followed by the identification of some abnormal activity that 
should be logged and the security manager be notified. 
C. Preservation phase 
Preservation phase generally involves the production of 
copies of the ICT resources being investigated. The original 
resources are preserved so that they can no longer be altered. 
The integrity of the original resources is indispensable in the 
follow-up procedures in the court of justice or even in the 
disciplinary action board. 
D. Analysis phase 
Analysis 
phase 
traditionally 
employs 
human 
interventions to note the sequence of events leading to a 
particular incident. However, the ever growing scale and 
scope of the digital data now necessitates the use of some 
semantic tools for the analysis of log files and traces. This 
phase also involves some artificial intelligent mechanisms 
for performing good quality analysis to avoid human errors. 
E. Recovery phase 
Recovery phase is generally not seen as an integral part 
of the forensics task. However, any emergency or incidence 
response cannot be completed if the system is not restored to 
its original functioning state. This situation is especially 
desirable when the core business of a company is halted due 
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

to some incidence and therefore there is immense pressure to 
restore the routine activities. 
F. Reporting phase 
Reporting phase is not necessarily the preparation of 
legal case against the attackers. A simple report of incidence 
for the line manager can also constitute this phase. The 
objective is to produce a record of the incidence that took 
place in the corporate ICT infrastructure. It can also be used 
as a feedback for the preparation phase, so that the reasons 
leading to the incident can be taken into account by the 
company's security team. 
IV. 
IMPACT OF DIGITAL FORENSICS ON THE 
COMPETETIVE-EDGE OF ENTERPRISES 
There are genuine ICT security concerns for enterprises 
especially when the scope of virtualization brings several 
challenges for its deployment including a lot of uncertainty 
as to how and where to implement security [5]. Security and 
dependability issues are a gauging factor for measuring the 
success of business endeavors. Classical security solutions 
and practices are getting obsolete in the face of the peculiar 
security requirements of virtualization infrastructures where 
physical resources are dynamically mapped to address the 
spontaneous business needs. The inherent nature of 
virtualization requires totally different security provisioning 
approach than the classical one developed decades ago. 
This section covers a set of threats mitigation techniques 
that can be employed by using digital forensics techniques 
and the risks of not using digital forensics in the enterprise 
environments. We maintain that it is becoming indispensable 
for the businesses to integrate digital forensics in the security 
architecture of their enterprise information architectures 
otherwise there could be devastating impact both in terms of 
security breaches and in the loss of business prospects. 
A. Threats Mitigation Techniques using Digital Forensics 
This section summarizes a set of major security 
challenges that can be addressed by using appropriate digital 
forensic technologies. 
 
1) Access Control 
Enterprise virtualization infrastructures offer promising 
features for the enterprises. However, virtual ICT resources 
are lot more vulnerable to malicious activities than the 
classical ones. Smart solutions for the monitoring of the 
access logs of an enterprise have become indispensable to 
know if its resources are the target of some malicious 
activity. It also includes insider threats such as frequent 
remote access to the company's resources outside the routine 
office hours. 
 
2) Steganalysis 
The ever-growing demand of bandwidth capacity for the 
contents rich applications is driving the conception of high 
speed internet backbone to enable seamless access to the 
applications using bulk of data. However, this capacity 
exposes enterprises to steganography where important 
corporate data can easily be stolen. The enterprises need to 
incorporate efficient steganalysis tools to protect its 
intellectual properties. 
 
3)  Multi-tenancy 
Multi-tenancy is quite new concept [6] that refers to the 
architectural principle, where a single instance of the 
software runs on a software-as-a-service (SaaS) vendor's 
servers, serving multiple client organizations. Assuring data 
isolation on a node is a challenging task for the security 
designers that include complete isolation of their execution 
environments and data storage including temporary storage 
of the execution data. Enterprises need to employ some 
analysis tools to trace the software instances for being 
assured of the protection of their data in the multi-tenant 
applications. 
B. Risks 
Analysis 
for 
Computing 
Impact 
on 
the 
competitive-edge of Enterprises 
The ISO27001 [7] standard defines the way to establish 
an Information Security Management System. Considering 
this standard, a company has to monitor its security in order 
to adapt the security policy to new threats. This standard 
considers not only IT security but also Information system 
security that is broader than the IT infrastructure. In this 
paper, we only consider IT security of the infrastructure 
used to operate the enterprise information system. 
ISO27001 requires enterprise to monitor its security 
state in order to monitor security breaches and to react 
accordingly. Security monitoring implies tracking of the 
security traces left by an attacker. Digital forensics analysis 
techniques and tools can facilitate this task. This standard 
requirement has the objective of reducing the risk linked to 
security for companies. If we consider a company with a set 
of computer business asset A = {a1, …, an}, each asset is 
concerned by security following four properties : 
Confidentiality (C), Integrity (I), Availability (D) and Legal 
force (L) (legal force is the ability of an asset to be used as a 
proof in the case of lawsuit). Each asset has some 
requirements concerning these properties. The risks are to 
loose one or more of these security properties. The risk of a 
particular enterprise can be summarized by ∑(Ic(ai)+ Ii(ai) 
+ Id(ai) + Il(ai)), where Ic is the financial impact function of 
confidentiality lose, Ii is the financial impact function of 
integrity lose , Ii is the financial impact function of integrity, 
Id is the financial impact function of availability and Il is the 
financial impact function of legal force lose. We can argue 
that a company that doesn’t use forensics techniques is 
exposed to a financial risk of ∑(Ic(ai)+ Ii(ai) + Id(ai) + 
Il(ai)). Now, the question is how digital forensics can reduce 
this risk. Digital forensics will be used as a curative tool. 
Forensics techniques will be used after the attack when an 
impact has been detected. In this scope, it will be only 
useful to demonstrate legally the cybercrime and to try to 
obtain compensation accorded by a court of law. If we 
consider our maximal financial risk will be reduced by an 
amount equal to the compensation obtained through a court 
of law; but some fees must be paid to the lawyers.  We can 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

therefore express this risk by of ∑(Ic(ai)+ Ii(ai) + Id(ai) + 
Il(ai)) – compensations + fees. This financial risk formula is 
interesting: 
- More ∑ Il(ai) is high, more compensations will be 
important due to difficulties to demonstrate the 
cybercrime 
- If fees are higher than compensations, the forensics 
analysis won’t be useful 
 
So, optimizing the benefit of forensics investigation 
implies to reduce the risk of losing legal force of an asset 
and its traces (ideally ∑ Il(ai) must be closer to 0). It is also 
important to reduce the lawyers’ fees by contracting a legal 
insurance. Legal insurance is marginal compared to 
cybercrime compensation. In this situation, our risk can be 
evaluated to ∑(Ic(ai)+ Ii(ai) + Id(ai)) – compensations. 
 Compensations are relative to security incident of some 
assets and are at less equivalent to direct damages. In this 
case, the security impacts of these assets are at least 
covered. The risk equation becomes ∑i<>j (Ic(ai)+ Ii(ai) + 
Id(ai)) - |delta| where delta is the difference between 
compensation and the impacts of assets aj. 
This formula demonstrates that forensics reduces 
significantly the financial risk by suppressing the risk of the 
assets that can be fully covered by forensics. And an extra 
reduction is induced by compensations. In an ideal and 
idyllic situation, each asset can be traceable and all the legal 
demonstration of cybercrime can be produced in this case 
forensics can generate an extra benefit equal to |delta|. 
V. 
CHALLENGES OF INVESTIGATING VIRTUALISED 
CORPORATE INFRASTRUCTURES 
The concept of virtualization is not new in the field of 
ICT. It dated back to the inception of programming 
language compilers that virtualizes the object code [8]. 
However, the concept of virtualization infrastructures, 
where physical resources are dynamically mapped to 
address the spontaneous business needs, is relatively new. 
Moreover, the scale and scope of this novel concept brings 
several challenges for its deployment including a lot of 
uncertainty as to how and where to implement security [5]. 
The inherent nature of virtualization requires totally 
different security provisioning approach than the classical 
one developed decades ago. 
Classical digital forensics techniques and solutions 
require precise information of the underlying infrastructure 
to perform investigation and conceive the sequence of 
events. They cannot be applied to these emerging 
infrastructures due to the intrinsic characteristic of 
virtualization that provides abstraction to the underlying 
resources and infrastructures. This section examines the 
challenge 
of 
investigating 
virtualized 
corporate 
infrastructures that will have to be addressed to ensure 
smooth and secure transition from the classical enterprise 
information architecture towards virtualized one. 
A. Conducting Security Audit Investigation of Future 
Internet-based Virtualization infrastructures 
Security audit assess the security of the networked 
system's physical configuration and environment, software, 
information handling processes, and user practices. While it 
is similar in terms of investigation, it is carried out before 
commissioning of a system and then on regular basis to 
ensure the desired functioning of a system. Whereas the 
investigations carried out by the digital forensics team is the 
post incident activity where a malicious activity successfully 
carried out its nasty action. However, in terms of 
investigating an ICT infrastructure, both have similar 
challenge of dealing with virtualization paradigm. We have 
therefore used our previous work on security audit [9] to 
leverage the work on applying digital forensics in the virtual 
infrastructures. 
B. Case-study: Payment Card Industry Data Security 
Standard (PCI-DSS) 
 Various security audit standards such as Payment Card 
Industry Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS) require audit of 
the physical controls [10]. The virtualization infrastructures 
provide an abstraction layer to the underlying lower-level 
details. This situation raises several security concerns such 
as multitenancy; lack of security tools [11]; and disparity 
with the classical IT security audit practices. 
There exist a number of generic monitoring tools such as 
hardware monitoring (e.g., HP Insight Manager, Dell Open 
Manage, VMWare Virtual Center, etc.), performance 
monitoring (e.g. VizionCore, Veeam Monitor, Vmtree, 
Nagios, etc.), machine state monitoring (e.g. Virtualshield, 
Logcheck, etc.), and security monitoring (e.g. intrusion 
detection, honeypots, etc.). However, these tools may not be 
suitable for security audit controls of virtualization 
infrastructures as physical controls can be distributed that 
will require onsite checks by the local controllers. There is a 
strong need of a new set of matrices for measuring security 
strength. With more reliable matrices, new check-pointing 
models need to be developed. Besides these technical 
requirements for carrying out security audit of the 
virtualization infrastructures, there is also a need of new 
regulations/legislations for the cross-border deployment of 
resources used in virtualization infrastructures. This work is 
the continuation of our previous work on analyzing the 
overall 
security 
requirements 
of 
deploying 
virtual 
infrastructures [12].  
VI. 
DISCUSSIONS 
The scope of digital forensics outside the criminology 
sphere was hardly explored in the past. However, the 
broadened scope of corporate ICT infrastructures and the 
reliance of core businesses on these infrastructures are 
pushing the paradigm shift in this domain. Some recent 
literature shows the exploration of digital forensics in the 
corporate sector [13,14]. However, these efforts are mainly 
focused on the philosophical possibilities. They do not 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

provide any concrete model or design approach towards the 
inclusion of digital forensics practices in the routine 
operations of corporate ICT infrastructures. Likewise, a set 
of best practices for computer forensics is proposed in [15] 
that describe some effective ways of carrying out the digital 
forensics analysis in the post-incident situations without any 
specific link to the commercial side of employing these 
techniques in the business environments. 
There are the genuine predictions that near future 
cybercrimes will be driven by the clouds and virtualization 
infrastructures [16]. We believe that businesses and law 
enforcement agencies won't be able to cope with this wave of 
contemporary crimes with the classical digital analysis 
approaches. Digital forensics is often a very painstaking task 
that consumes enormous resources and takes considerable 
time to develop a sequence of events that is acceptable by the 
courts. An example is the FBI investigation of ENRON 
scandal [17] where FBI gathered and analyzed 31 terabytes 
of digital data from 130 computers; thousands of e-mails; 
and more than 10 million document pages. The entire 
investigation took five years while the total monetary costs 
incurred remained largely unknown. With the proliferation 
of computing through virtualization infrastructures and the 
evident increase of related crimes, the law enforcement 
agencies will simply be overwhelmed with the demand of 
providing digital forensic analysis requests. Therefore, there 
is a strong need for the businesses to include digital forensics 
in their corporate security strategy. They should use these 
technologies within the legal framework covering their 
activities. 
We have carried out a risk analysis to show the impact of 
not using the digital forensic solutions by the enterprises. We 
proved that loss of clientele and sanctions from the 
regulatory bodies might severely harm the business interests 
of those enterprises who will not employ the digital forensics 
technologies for the protection of their business interests. A 
similar concern is reported in [18] that predict fall of forensic 
research behind the market in the next ten years if various 
disjoint research efforts are not harnessed together in a 
systematic way. 
VII. CONCLUSIONS AND PERSPECTIVES 
We have presented a non-classical approach towards the 
digital forensics analysis in this paper. We argue that 
enterprise information architectures can improve their overall 
quality of protection if digital forensics technologies are 
made their integral part. We presented a framework for 
embedding digital forensics analysis techniques at several 
stages of enterprise information lifecycle followed by a set of 
best practices for operating an enterprise information 
security policy together with the digital forensics techniques 
and tools. 
There are a number of open issues that we plan to address 
in the near future. The foremost is the use of digital forensics 
solutions in the virtualization infrastructures such as open 
clouds. Major challenges of virtualization infrastructures are 
the absence of a fix perimeter of the ICT resources; and the 
unknown details of the underlying physical infrastructure. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The research leading to the results presented in this paper 
has received funding from the Walloon Region of Belgium 
through the project CE-IQS (Centre d'Expertise en Ingénierie 
et Qualité des Systèmes) and the European Union's seventh 
framework programme (FP7 2007-2013) Project PONTE 
under grant agreement number 247945. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
K. S. Rosenblatt, High-Technology Crime: Investigating Cases 
Involving Computers, KSK Publications, ISBN 0-9648171-0-1, 1995 
[2] 
The United States Sarbanes Oxley Act 2002 – http://uscode.house.go 
v/download/pls/15C98.txt <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[3] 
J. Mullis, The Impact of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 on 
Computer Forensic Procedures in Public Corporations, University of 
Oregon, July 2009 – 
https://scholarsbank.uoregon.edu/xmlui/bitstream/handle/1794/9480/
Mullis-2009.pdf <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[4] 
International Organization for Standardization, Standard ISO27002: 
Code of practice for information security – http://www.27000.org/iso-
27002.htm <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[5] 
R. Adhikari, The Virtualization Challenge, Part 5: Virtualization and 
Security, TechNewsWorld, March 2008 
[6] 
F. Chong, G. Carraro, and R. Wolter, Multi-Tenant Data Architecture, 
Microsoft Corporation, June 2006 
[7] 
International Organization for Standardization, Standard ISO/IEC 
27001:2005 Information technology -- Security techniques -- 
Information security management systems -- Requirements 
[8] 
J. Bloomberg, Building Security into a Service-Oriented Architecture, 
ZapThink Whitepaper, ZapThink LLC Publisher, May 2003 
[9] 
S. Naqvi, G. Dallons, C. Ponsard, and P. Massonet, Ensuring Security 
of the Future Internet-based Virtualization Infrastructures (Position 
Paper), IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 2010, Oakland, 
CA, USA, May 16-20, 2010 
[10] Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI-DSS) 
https://www.pcisecuritystandards.org/ <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[11] E. Haletky, Virtualization Security – Security and Compliance within 
the Virtual Environment, DABCC online article 08 April 2009 
http://www.dabcc.com/channel.aspx?id=279 <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[12] S. Naqvi, P. Massonet, and J. Latanicki, Challenges of Deploying 
Scalable Virtual Infrastructures - A Security Perspective, CESNET 
Conference on Security, Middleware and Virtualisation, Prague, 
Czech Republic, September 25-26, 2008 
[13] B. Nikkel, The Role of Digital Forensics within a Corporate 
Organization, IBSA Conference, Vienna, Austria, May 2006 – 
http://www.digitalforensics.ch/nikkel06a.pdf <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[14] J. Heiser, Digital Forensics and Corporate Investigations, Gartner, 
November 2005 – www.gartner.com/teleconferences/attributes/attr_ 
144863_115.pdf <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[15] Scientific Working Group on Digital Evidence (SWGDE) Best 
Practices 
for 
Computer 
Forensics 
V1.0, 
2004 
– 
http://swgde.org/documents/swgde2005/SWGDE%20Best%20Practic
es%20_Rev%20Sept%202004_.pdf <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[16] Trend Micro Report: The Future of threats and Threat Technologies – 
How 
the 
Landscape 
is 
Changing, 
December 
2009 
– 
http://affinitypartner.trendmicro.com/media/34716/trend_micro_2010
_future_threat_report_final.pdf <retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[17] Federal Bureau of Investigations (FBI), Digital Forensics: It's a Bull 
Market, July 2007 – http://www.fbi.gov/page2/may07/rcfl050707.htm 
<retrieved: Nov. 2011> 
[18] S. Garfinkel, Digital forensics research: The next 10 years, Elsevier 
Science Directi Magazine Digital Investigation vol. 7, pp 64-73, 2010 
– http://www.dfrws.org/2010/proceedings/2010-308.pdf <retrieved: 
Nov. 2011> 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

