PROLOG: Evaluating Attentional Capacity in Special Working Centers 
Kinect technology tasks for cognitive assessment of disabled workers 
 
Anna Vilaro and Pilar Orero 
 
Catalan Centre for Research in Ambient Intelligence and Accessibility, CAIAC 
Autonomous University of Barcelona, UAB 
Barcelona, Spain 
anna.vilaro@uab.cat, pilar.orero@uab.cat  
 
 
Abstract—The 
PROLOG 
project 
aims 
to 
provide 
a 
complementary tool for the assessment of cognitive skills of 
mentally disabled working people. The project provides a 
platform to evaluate, in a quick and personalized way, the 
attentional performance of users through specific tasks. 
Interaction with the tests is done by Kinect technology. The 
platform records the worker’s performance on various tasks 
and presents the evolution over time in order to detect possible 
cognitive impairment. Longitudinal evaluation of cognitive 
impaired workers will help the existing unbalanced retirement 
practices. 
Keywords: cognitive impairment; evaluation; attention; 
Kinect. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Elder mentally disabled people may suffer cognitive 
impairment associated with premature ageing. This 
impairment is usually related to difficulties in maintaining 
attention and problems associated with memory, plus many 
other physical related challenges.  
The employment of cognitive impaired people -or mental 
illness- is a social objective that contributes to improve the 
quality of life of cognitive impaired workers, providing 
many benefits such as a full social integration [3]. The 
deterioration of these basic cognitive abilities may hinder the 
performance of job duties or even stay in employment. For 
example, the inability to maintain sustained attention 
(concentration) can hamper the worker to complete the tasks 
or steps in a process; or problems with memory may make it 
difficult to remember already learned tasks or learn new 
ones. Thus, there is a need to have a longitudinal assessment 
throughout the working life of these workers in order to 
ensure that the employee retains the skills that were 
described in the initial evaluation. Thus, tools to help assess 
the degree of disability and the development of the 
individual throughout his/her working history are required to 
optimize the evaluation process.  
The PROLOG project aims to provide a complementary 
tool for the assessment of cognitive skills of mentally 
disabled working people. The project develops an 
Information and Communication Technologies tool with a 
set of tests to assess cognitive impairment of people with 
intellectual disabilities working in special employment 
centres. PROLOG has its innovation in incorporating Kinect 
technology [6] that recognizes body movements and voice to 
interact with applications. This technology, as applied to the 
field of rehabilitation of disabled people, is being used for 
the first time to develop tests to assess attentional capacity.  
Currently, the tests used to assess attentional capacity are 
not adapted for people with cognitive impairments. 
Furthermore, the tests use to be paper-based and need to be 
carried out by a specialist, taking considerable administration. 
The project presents three important improvements 
regarding the current evaluation tools: 1) Creation of new 
interaction of existing attentional tests which are already in 
use for evaluation of workers with cognitive disabilities; 2) 
Creation of evaluation benchmarking to correlate the results of 
attentional tests. Values will be objective and numeric, 
allowing a longitudinal evaluation across the working life of 
the person; and 3) Creation of personalised exercises, 
complementary with tests, to exercise attention and maintain 
skills. Also, the user-centric approach of the project 
contributes to an added value, since it makes the application 
friendly for any group of users. 
In the following Methodology section, the content of the 
tests is presented. Then, the paper outlines the contribution of 
the project as well as future work.   
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
In this first stage of the project, we designed a series of 
new tests based on validated psychological tests. Specifically, 
attentional capacity was chosen because it is a fundamental 
cognitive function that is usually seen rapidly affected in the 
presence of cognitive impairment, making it difficult for other 
executive functions to take place. The project also provides a 
platform to record the execution of various tasks and users and 
their carers can see the evolution over time in order to detect 
possible cognitive impairment.  
Currently, the tests are being implemented and we expect 
to have a preliminary version of the tests ready for pilot 
testing by February 2014. 
We aim to create attractive and motivating tasks, using 
similar stimuli and goals presented in videogames. During 
the first year, three tests are being designed to evaluate 
different dimensions of attention. Specifically, the tests aim 
to evaluate sustained attention (two tests) and selective 
attention (one test). The design of such tests is presented 
below. 
A. Evaluating sustained attention 
Sustained attention can be defined as the ability to 
maintain attention during continuous and repetitive activity. 
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

We designed two tests aimed at assessing the ability to 
sustain attention over a period of time.  
We adapted the test Sustained Attention to Response 
Task, SART [2][4]. This test aimed at measuring the ability 
of a person to inhibit responses to infrequent and 
unpredictable stimuli during a period of rhythmic and rapid 
responses to a frequent stimuli (generally associated with the 
detection of an unlikely-to-occur stimuli). SART test 
presents only one digit at a time, and the participant's task is 
to quickly respond to all numbers except to one in particular 
(e.g., touching the screen in every trial, except when the 
number 3 is presented). Thus, it is a reaction time task that 
evaluates sustained attention through an element of response 
suppression. 
In our test adaptation, we replaced the digits for images 
(insects, for example) in order to make it more attractive to 
users. The goal of the game would be to hunt insects in a 
forest with a network hunt. During the test, images of insects 
appear rhythmically in various predetermined positions of 
the screen. Similar to SART test, the task is to “catch” all the 
insects, except one in particular. The user has to perform a 
motor response (i.e. raise the hand simulating the action of 
grasping) when the stimuli is detected, or do nothing when 
appropriate. Thus, the user has to pay attention to avoid 
hunting a pre-defined insect or element. The test finishes 
when the participant exceeds a determined number of errors, 
or when a time limit is over. After the test, performance 
results are presented such as for how long the test lasted or 
the number of errors during a predefined interval of time. 
In a second task, we adapted the TAP test [5]. This task 
requires the comparison of two subsequent stimuli in order 
to determine if these two stimuli have a predetermined 
feature in common. This procedure requires the use of 
working memory and flexibility and, in a more complex 
variant, the ability to divide attention, as two aspects of the 
stimulus must be taken into account. 
In our adaptation for Kinect, users ware presented with a 
background image (e.g., a forest) with some highlighted 
regions where the stimuli may appear. Following the 
example of the insects, the user's task is to detect as quickly 
as possible whether the stimulus is the same as before (e.g., 
same insect), or not. Thus, there are two possible answers 
(same or different) that the user perform raising right or left 
hand in order to activate buttons showed in the screen.  
When the tests finishes, results such as the percentage of 
correct answers, errors and omissions, as well as reaction 
time are presented. 
B. Evaluating selective attention 
Selective attention is the ability to attend one or two 
important stimuli, while deliberately suppressing the 
consciousness of the distracting stimuli. In order to assess 
selective attention, we adapted the Flanker Compatibility 
Effect [1]. This is an experimental task designed to study 
factors that may affect selective attention, and to what extent 
information processing of irrelevant information occurs. The 
experimental task is to attend a central stimulus flanked by 
other stimuli called flanks or distracters. The subject's task is 
to identify the central stimulus (for example, a letter) and 
ignore the side letters. 
In our adaptation of the test, the stimuli are images of 
insects that point to a particular direction (for example, 
images of three caterpillars pointing to the left). User task’s 
is to say whether the central insect looks to the left or right 
(caterpillars presented on the sides can point to the same 
direction or the opposite). The user must indicate if the 
direction of the track is to the right or left. At the end of the 
test, performance results would inform about percentages of 
correct responses, errors and omissions, as well as the 
average reaction time. 
In all tests, the results can be displayed for a particular 
session, or in graphical comparisons between multiple 
sessions (of the same or different users). Also, given the user 
centric approach of the application, the test parameters can be 
modified through a configuration screen before starting, and 
these parameters can be saved for each user in the platform in 
order to adapt the difficulty of the tests to different users. For 
example, it may offer the possibility to choose a category of 
stimuli (fruits, colours, shapes, etc.), or to define which 
particular element is defined as target stimulus within a 
category. Additionally, other parameters may be configured 
such as presentation time of the stimuli, the duration of the 
interval between stimuli, or the number of trials in each test. 
In the final phase of the project, we will conduct a 
validation test. In this sense, the tests will be carried out to 
employees of several special working centres in Catalonia. 
Two groups will be defined in order to compare tests results, 
one group showing signs of cognitive impairment or not. To 
verify the concurrent validity of the tests, the results of both 
groups will be compared with other existing assessments (e.g., 
ICAP test, medical evaluations, etc.), and potentially affecting 
variables will be controlled.  
III. 
CONTRIBUTION 
The PROLOG assessment tool will have an important 
impact. Health and safety risks will be monitored, and, when 
an employee is no longer able to work, it will be possible to 
show the progression in the deterioration, avoiding the 
existing reality of disabled workers having to work until the 
retirement age of 67, unable to perform any task, still having 
to go to work every day.  
IV. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The implementation of the evaluation tool, together with 
the platform to manage will allow working special centres to 
assess their employees and detect and confirm possible 
cognitive impairments. Despite the fact that the project it is in 
its first version, the usefulness of the tool had been 
appreciated by the psychologists from the special working 
centres. The first preliminary tests showed the value of the 
tasks as a complementary assessing tool as well as an 
engaging way of training attentional skills. 
In the future, it is planned to extend the number of tests to 
assess other cognitive skills such as memory or executive 
functions. Also, new exercises with Kinect will be created as 
training sessions to improve or maintain cognitive abilities.  
Regarding the platform, it is expected to provide support 
for a possible protocol to evaluate the continuity on the 
workplace, containing extra information from other medical 
and neuropsychological tests. Thus, the evaluation tool would 
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

be useful to the users themselves (to see their evolution), the 
company-employer, and finally the government. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The PROLOG project is being developed by the Centre 
d'Accessibilitat i Intel·ligència Ambiental de Catalunya 
(CAIAC), together with Indra, Adecco Foundation, PRODIS 
and UAB, and is part of the Cátedra INDRA de Tecnologías 
Accesibles.  
REFERENCES 
[1] B. A. Eriksen and C. W. Eriksen, “Effects of noise letters upon 
the identification of a target letter in a nonsearch task”, 
Perception and Psychophysics, vol. 16(1), pp. 143-149, 1974. 
[2] T. Manly, I. H. Robertson, M. Galloway and K. Hawkins, 
“The absent mind: further investigations of sustained attention 
to response”, Neuropsychologia, vol. 37(6), pp. 661-70, 1999. 
[3] M. Paredes Gascón, M. Fernández-Cid Enríquez and M. J. 
Ruiz Figueroa, “Prevención de riesgos laborales entre las 
personas con discapacidad intelectual en los centros especiales 
de empleo”, Cuadernos de Trabajo Social, 25 (1), pp. 249-260, 
2012. 
[4] I. H. Robertson, Manly, T., J. Andrade, B.T. Baddeley and J. 
Yiend, “‘Oops!’: performance correlates of every-day 
attentional failures in traumatic brain injured and normal 
subjects”, Neuropsychologia, vol.  35(6), pp: 747-758, 1997. 
[5] P. Zimmermann, M. Gondan, and B. Fimm (2002). KITAP, 
Testbatterie 
zur 
Aufmerksamkeitsprüfung 
für 
Kinder 
[Attention test battery for children]. Herzogenrath, Germany: 
Vera Fimm, Psychologische Testsysteme. 
[6] Z. Zhang, “Microsoft Kinect Sensor and Its Effect”, 
Multimedia at work. IEEE multimedia, pp. 4-10, April 2012. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

