 
 
Trust in Peer-to-Peer Digital Society: An Economics Perspective 
Dershing Luo 
Department of Information Management  
National Taiwan University 
Department of Information Management, 
China University of Science and Technology 
Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
dsluo@cc.cust.edu.tw 
Jen Wel Chen 
Department of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Department of Business Administration 
Chinese Culture University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
jwchen@sce.pccu.edu.tw 
Ching Cha Hsieh 
Department of Information Management  
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—Peer-to-Peer 
(P2P) 
technique 
manifests 
file 
sharing, distributed computing, and communication and 
collaboration between peers in contrast to client/ server 
architectures. P2P digital society is emerging in our life. It 
changes our way of living, work, and play. Meanwhile, the 
trust is still a core issue in P2P digital society. The objective 
of this paper is to survey trust in P2P digital society from the 
point of economics view. Through employing the framework 
previously proposed, some implications on trust in P2P 
applications are given from the economics perspective. In 
this paper, we analyze trust emerging in P2P digital society 
through the economics perspective from the following levels: 
technology, product, business process, market, and the 
macroeconomic. 
 
Keywords -  trust; peer-to-peer (P2P); economics. 
1. INTRODUCTION  
As a result of the quick transformation of the 
information society, human relationships and activities 
exhibit different styles than before. However, the concept 
of trust has remained fundamental for all social activities 
throughout human society. Trust is essential, especially in 
distributive information technology (IT) architectures as 
Peer-to-Peer 
(P2P) 
architectures. 
Research, 
both 
theoretical and empirical addresses the nature and role of 
trust, the moderators of trust, the antecedents of trust, as 
well as empirical methods in examining trust [5]. Whereas 
the economic analysis offers the researcher the opportunity 
to sort out explanations for changing market structure, to 
identify critical factors that result in firm success and 
failure, to interpret the speed and breadth of adoption of 
the new Internet technologies, and much more [9]. 
Kauffman and Walden [9] noted that many of the 
developments on the Internet seem new to most managers. 
But economic analysis provides a longstanding and well-
developed theoretical vantage point from which to observe 
and interpret these developments in the context of 
continuing technological innovation in the business 
economy. Wang, Hori, and Sakurai [22] also noted the 
economic and social characteristics of trust system in P2P 
applications. Through the way, they may have an accurate 
characterization of the structural properties of the network. 
This can be of fundamental importance to understand the 
dynamics of the system. Only we have a clear picture of 
the economics of trust that the significant improvements 
can be expected. The objective of this paper is to survey 
trust in P2P digital society through this systematic 
economics framework. 
Kauffman and Walden [9] proposed a comprehensive 
framework for electronic commerce (EC) research from 
the economics perspective. Though they aimed to survey 
EC researches, we employ their multiple levels of analysis 
from an economics perspective which is different from the 
usual technology-first perspective. Their level of analysis 
and relevant economic theories are noted in Table 1. In 
this paper, we will address the perspective of economics of 
P2P digital society. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section 2 introduces the trust and P2P applications. 
Section 3 describes the economics of the trust in P2P 
applications. Finally, future issues and applications are 
given in Section 4. 
2. PRELIMINARIES FOR TRUST AND P2P APPLICATIONS 
We firstly state the concept of trust and then describe 
the issues of trust in P2P Applications. 
2.1. 
 Trust 
The concept of trust has been studied in diverse 
contexts; therefore there are manifold definitions of trust. 
Trust has been defined in various terms, ranging from “the 
willingness to be vulnerable to the actions of another 
party” to “the probability one attaches to cooperative 
behavior by other parties” [18]. Trust has also been 
defined as the belief by one party that another party will 
behave in a predictable manner [13]. From the viewpoint 
of processes, trust may be also classified into two cases: 
one is general trust (developed between customers and 
140
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
 
companies over time and after experiences), the other is 
initial trust (developed after a customer’s first experience 
with the company’s web site). 
Actually, trust is a psychological status of involved 
parties willing to pursue further interactions to achieve a 
planned goal. However, the key concepts are twofold. 
Firstly, for the trusting party, there must exist uncertainty 
about a potential or existing relationship—business, social, 
or otherwise—that leads to a certain perception of risk or 
vulnerability. Secondly, this perception of risk is generally 
based upon the beliefs regarding the ability, integrity, and 
benevolence of the trustee [11]. 
 
TABLE 1  LEVEL OF ANALYSIS AND RELEVANT ECONOMIC   THEORIES 
COMPOSED BY KAUFFMAN AND WALDEN [8] 
Level of Analysis 
Relevant Economic Theories 
Technology 
Public goods theory, efficient pricing, game 
theory, negotiation, network externalities and 
standards 
Product 
Pricing theory, versioning, information goods, 
switching costs, network externalities and 
standards, economies of scale and scope 
Business Process 
Adoption theory, economics of design, cost-
benefit analysis, allocation of benefits, IT value, 
negotiation, economies of scale and scope, 
game theory 
Market 
Auction theory, industrial organization, 
transaction costs, market microstructure, 
intermediation, adoption and diffusion, perfect 
competition, returns to scale, optimal market 
structure 
Macroeconomy 
Monetary economics, taxation theory, labor 
economics, regulatory economics, public goods
 
2.2. 
 Trust in P2P Applications 
Casadesus-Masanell, Hervás, and Mitchell [1] gave a 
vivid description of trust in P2P environments. They 
mentioned that as of 2006, the term ‘pirate’ was used more 
frequently to describe a person downloading music, 
movies and software than a buccaneer robbing ships on the 
high seas. Eye patches, swords and talking parrots had 
been replaced with software such as Napster [23], Kazaa 
[24], Limewire [25], eDonkey [26] and BitTorrent [27]. 
The battle between proprietary systems and P2P file 
sharing seems to be forever prolonged.  
Trust also mediates the social relationships between 
websites and consumer characteristics and behavioral 
intent related to websites [10, 18, 21]. Reputation 
determines trust in an electronic store, which affects the 
attitude, risk perception, and in turn, the willingness to buy 
in an electronic store. The P2P reputation systems are 
closely related to the efforts of online communities, such 
as eBay, to develop incentive-compatible systems for 
rating the performance of a distributed set of users. Trust 
(and reputation) has related much with the incentives 
mentioned above. Kollock [10] proposed that the key 
design issues in evaluation are: evaluators, evaluations, 
history of evaluations, summary measures, and modifying 
evaluations. However, the design of reputation systems for 
P2P networks is complicated by two factors: one is that the 
distributed and intermediated nature of P2P network 
interactions makes it easy for users to conceal or change 
their identity, and the other is that in some fully distributed 
applications, the administration of the rating system must 
also be distributed throughout the network, making it 
vulnerable to coordinated gaming strategies. 
Tan and Thoen [20] proposed a generic trust model for 
the successful performance of the transactions. They 
argued that the agent’s trust in transaction is a combination 
of both external and internal factors. The external factors 
are the agent’s trust in the other party (both objective / 
subjective trust reason) and its trust in the control 
mechanisms (both objective / subjective trust reason). The 
internal factors are potential gain and risk, along with its 
attitude. In [16] argued that trust in the vendor is defined 
as a multi-dimensional construct with two inter-related 
components—trust beliefs (perceptions of the competence, 
benevolence, and integrity of the vendor), and trusting 
intentions—willingness to depend (i.e., a decision to make 
oneself vulnerable to the vendor). Three factors are 
proposed for building consumer trust in the vendor: 
structural assurance (i.e., consumer perceptions of the 
safety of the web environment), perceived web vendor 
reputation, and perceived website quality. 
The factors that determine trust are usually objective. 
Trust is built from experience (e.g., calculus), personal 
knowledge or bias (e.g., perception), and contextual 
elements (e.g., social characteristics) [13]. The evaluation 
of trust in a public key certification authority is already 
mentioned by [2]. They identified two major categories of 
trust factors, the first category being requirements for 
quality, quality of services offered, commitment, personnel 
responsibility and authority, and the second category being 
the conformance to qualified policy [13]. Krishnan, Smith, 
and Telang [12] noted the following approaches that 
provide quality of service differentiation to users based on 
a distributed mechanism that tracks user reputations: the 
evolutionary prisoner's dilemma (EPD), "stamp trading" 
mechanisms, "tit for tat" treatment, admission control 
system. 
Significant questions addressed in this section include 
the various costs of services or topologies, the role of 
incentives in improving network performance, the 
motivations of users who consume and provide resources 
in 
P2P 
networks, 
the 
application 
of 
trust 
and 
recommendation mechanisms to the unique environments 
present in P2P networks, and the balance among copyright 
holders, entrepreneurs, and consumers. All these above 
advantages and trends are highly related to a great level of 
trust in the peers. Without trust, there can be hardly any 
success in P2P environments. This leaves a necessity of 
understanding trust, in particular, from the perspective of 
economics. When we stand on the foundation of 
economics, we can find the equilibrium of technology and 
the ecology. 
3. ECONOMICS ON TRUST IN P2P DIGITAL SOCIETY 
In this paper, we employ the framework proposed by 
[9] to survey trust in P2P environments from the 
141
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
 
perspective of economics. Moreover, we will identify 
important areas of research integrating an economic 
perspective into the analysis of P2P environment. In their 
framework, Kauffman and Walden [9] noted that there are 
two prerequisite parties. They are firms and consumers. 
Firms use related technology to create new kinds of 
products (especially information goods (e.g., MP3 music 
recordings and digital newspapers) and to recreate services 
(especially information-intensive operational services). 
Consumers use technology in a variety of ways as 
individuals, in homogeneous groups and overall in society 
at large so as to take advantage of the leveraging benefits 
that are offered (e.g., for improved product search, to 
acquire more information, to enable infomediation and for 
enhanced personalization, etc.)  
Both Firms and consumers use technology to form the 
whole economic hierarchy. Besides the two players they 
mentioned, we think there is still one party which plays an 
important role. That is the third party, such as governments, 
and stand-alone organizations. They promote and maintain 
the stability of the whole economic hierarchy. Following 
these parties, we proceed to each analysis level from 
technology, to product, business process, and market, and 
moreover, to the macroeconomic. Through Lu’s work [13], 
the existing P2P systems may be classified into three 
categories, these being file sharing, distributed computing, 
and communication and collaboration. Our framework is 
depicted in Table 2. The issues in each cell are illustrated 
in the following paragraphs. 
3.1. 
 The analysis level of technology 
The technological innovations have impacts at a 
number of levels of analysis [8]. With regard to the 
economic characteristics, the services provided on P2P 
networks are different, hence there is a need for new 
theoretical models as well as empirical and experimental 
analyses in order to understand the behaviors of P2P users. 
The design of reputation systems for P2P reputation 
systems, such as eBay, is complicated by two factors. First, 
the distributed and intermediated nature of P2P network 
interactions makes it easy for users to conceal or change 
their identity. Secondly, in many some fully distributed 
applications, the administration of the rating system must 
also be distributed throughout the network, making it 
vulnerable to coordinated gaming strategies [12]. 
Based on an economic model, [22] proposed a VCG 
(Vickrey-Clarke-Grove)-like 
reputation 
remunera-
tion mechanism in order to stimulate rational peers not 
only to provide reputation feedback, but also to offer 
feedback truthfully. Considering that trust and reputation 
is subjective, they divided the trust into functional trust 
and referral trust, and extended the referral trust to include 
two factors: similarity and truthfulness, both which 
can efficiently reduce the trust inference error. 
P2P is merely a network architecture that could be 
deployed to a number of other applications such as 
distributed computing, instant messaging, voice telephony, 
spam filtering, and other commercial activities. In the 
category of file sharing, there are several cost/ benefits we 
have to consider. They are free rider, latency (benefit) cost, 
service cost, routing cost, topology maintenance cost, etc. 
Among these, the free rider matters trust most. For the 
category of distributed computing, we have to take quality 
of service into consideration in order to ensure the 
trustworthiness of computing. According to the category 
of communication and collaboration, both security and 
reputation mechanism are employed to guarantee the trust 
among peers. 
TABLE 2   THE ISSUES ON TRUST IN PEER-TO-PEER  APPLICATIONS 
FROM THE ECONOMICS PERSPECTIVE 
Level of 
Analysis 
file sharing 
distributed 
computing 
communication 
& collaboration 
Technology
● free rider 
● quality of service 
● reputation 
mechanism 
● Security 
Product 
● intellectual 
property 
rights 
● extent 
● balance 
● free-riding 
● privacy 
● specialization 
● collaborative 
filtering 
● semantic web 
● privacy 
● intellectual 
property rights 
● storage capacity 
● contents 
● recognition 
schemes 
● payment 
methods 
● privacy 
● quality of 
service 
Business 
Process 
● effect 
● presence 
management
● network 
management
● free-riding 
● simplicity 
● robustness 
● liability 
● motivation 
free-riding 
● efficiency 
● collaborative 
filtering 
● mobile agents 
● frequency of 
requests 
● semantic web 
assistance 
● collaborative 
filtering 
● mobile agents 
● type of services
● contents 
● quality of 
service 
● interaction 
● altruistic 
behaviour 
● regulation 
● rewards 
●recommen-
dation agent 
Market 
● user 
behaviour, 
● a third party 
● trust provider 
● social interaction 
● valuable 
information 
● the 
trustworthiness of 
the participants 
Macro-
economy 
● culture 
● intellectual 
property 
debate 
● social welfare 
● labour market 
 
3.2. 
 The analysis level of product 
In a traditional economy, we have a classification of 
goods as depicted in Table 3. However, information goods 
share the properties of both public goods and quasi-public 
goods (club goods). Due to P2P characteristics, the rivalry 
is hard to maintain. This causes a dilemma in trust. In P2P 
environments, the nonexcludability is accomplished on 
account of network resources and are typically provided to 
all members of the network equally. Given that a 
downloading user will share the content they download, 
the non-rivalry is accomplished because the net number of 
opportunities to download does not decrease for other 
users on the network. 
However, this non-rivalry property will not hold if 
some network users consume network resources but do not 
share their content in return. This phenomenon is known 
as free-riding, which is a common characteristic of P2P 
142
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
 
networks. It is also a fundamental tension between 
individual rationality and collective welfare. This causes 
both over-consumption and under-provision of community 
resources. It seems to extrapolate to P2P networks is the 
inability of individually rational behavior to bring about 
socially optimal outcomes. 
 
TABLE 3  KINDS OF GOODS IN DIFFERENT CHARACTERISTICS  
OF SUPPLY AND DEMAND 
                        Demand   
Supply 
Rivalry 
Non-Rivalry 
Excludability 
Private goods 
Quasi-public goods 
Non-Excludability 
Quasi-Private goods 
Public goods
 
In typical economic models, individual economic 
actors will only consider their private utility when making 
decisions about consumption and provision. They will not 
consider the impact (a.k.a. the externality) this decision 
will impose on other community members. Because of this, 
in the absence of external incentives, the self-interested 
consumption of public goods may deplete the overall 
public utility. This is known as the "tragedy of the 
commons". Common examples of such "tragedies" include 
over-grazing by farmers using public lands and over-
fishing of public waters [12]. Krishnan et al. [12] detailed 
the differences between resources provided over P2P 
networks and other typical public and club goods. 
Consequently, 
in 
P2P 
environments, 
the 
network 
externality has deftly solved the above problem. 
Information goods have characteristics that are 
different from traditional goods, and they prompt us to ask 
new questions related to their design, their pricing and 
their support in the marketplace [9]. In a network economy, 
the supply is unlimited on account the network 
externalities. Besides this, the consumption of the good by 
one user does not reduce the utility of other users. The 
Internet is exposing the impossibility of sustaining a 
transaction-based economy. As the net drives the cost of 
certain goods and services toward zero, it strips profit from 
transactions. We have to find out some advanced P2P 
business models, e.g., pricing strategy, the combination of 
brand loyalty and network effects [1,6,17]. 
The significant open questions addressed here is the 
balance between the rights of copyright holders, 
entrepreneurs, and consumers. It is increasingly important 
for coming researches. In the category of file sharing, the 
P2P technique impacts the intellectual property. The 
appropriate context the intellectual property should protect 
is always needed to be carefully defined. For the category 
of distributed computing, we still have to deal the 
following issues: specialization, collaborative filtering, 
semantic web, privacy, and storage capacity. As the 
category of communication and collaboration, contents 
recognition schemes, payment methods, privacy and 
quality of service will be core issues. 
3.3. 
 The analysis level of business process 
The firms are also able to take advantage of P2P 
capabilities, and make them available in the marketplace in 
the form of assistance for consumers' purchase of goods, 
and in the form of information services, as well [9]. This 
high-end computing power allows for real-time pricing of 
a variety of products (e.g., news and information access, 
excess inventory -- and not just stock prices), the 
technologies of electronic auctions (e.g., FirstAuction [28], 
MobShop [29] and Priceline.com [30]), comparison 
engines (e.g., MySimon [31], one-to-one marketing based 
on collaborative filtering (e.g., Net Perceptions [32]), and 
entirely new business models such as Yahoo [33] and 
eBay [34]. 
When used appropriately, the new technologies allow 
firms to streamline their business processes to achieve 
lower operating costs and increase sales revenue, as well 
as to improve channel coordination. The technologies also 
can beneficially impact the overall costs associated with 
doing business, e.g., creating a presence in the marketplace, 
replacing the physical infrastructure of a selling 
organization with a virtual infrastructure, and improving 
the immediacy and responsiveness of the firm while 
broadening its coverage in the marketplace. 
More and more firms take advantage of the P2P 
technique to transform their business process. However, 
there are some emerging trust issues. In the category of file 
sharing, there are effect presence management, network 
management, free-riding, simplicity, robustness, and 
liability. For the category of distributed computing, it still 
includes collaborative filtering, mobile agents, frequency 
of requests, semantic web assistance, collaborative 
filtering, and mobile agents. As the category of 
communication and collaboration, in order to have a closer 
relationship with provider, customers, and peers, they have 
to deal contents, quality of service, behavior interaction, 
altruistic 
behavior, 
regulation, 
rewards, 
and 
recommendation agents. 
3.4. 
 The analysis level of market 
The new business models for the firm and the 
transformed business processes associated with them 
influence, and, in turn, are influenced by the market 
context in which they exist [9]. The rapid technological 
changes create opportunities for disintermediation, as we 
have seen with the new electronic intermediaries in the 
travel industry, such as Microsoft's Expedia.com [35], 
Internet Travel Network / GetThere.com [36] and Preview 
Travel [37]. Meanwhile, the airlines are increasingly 
interested in providing producer direct electronic booking 
solutions, even to the point of cooperating with one 
another to attract booking. 
Tan, Yang and Veliyath [19] mentioned guanxi, a type 
of particularistic trust observed in Confucian societies has 
mostly been viewed as a static phenomenon. Based on 
neo-institutionalist trust perspectives, they argued that the 
role of guanxi also arose from the paucity of market 
system trust created by the absence of well-established 
market institutions during China's transition from a 
centrally planned to a market economy. Johanson [8] 
noted that a fundamental element of planned economies is 
the idea that exchange between units and firms should be 
143
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
 
planned by authorities remote from the performance of the 
exchange. The institutions, where plan governance is the 
main mechanism, are therefore assumed to affect how trust 
is developed and maintained in an economy. However, 
when the planned economy undergoes institutional 
changes and plan governance erodes, trust is likely to play 
a different role. He suggests that both inter-unit exchanges 
and inter-firm exchanges contain three dimensions, which 
are influenced by the degree of plan governance: 
knowledge use, interaction, and dynamics. His study 
shows that plan governance in various degrees influenced 
the exchanges, which, in turn, gave a different level of 
importance to the role of trust in the economy. 
The future of marketing is trust-based [6, 15]. The 
rapid technological changes create de-intermediation and 
re-intermediation in the market. The significant questions 
addressed here are as follows: the motivations of various 
actors, culture, and planned economy. User behavior is 
important for future researches in the category of file 
sharing. A third party trust provider for social interaction 
is urgent for the category of distributed computing. 
Valuable information about the trustworthiness of the 
participants 
is 
demanding 
in 
the 
category 
of 
communication and collaboration. 
3.5. 
 The analysis level of macroeconomic 
Kauffman and Walden [9] stated most observers 
recognize that the impacts are occurring at the 
microeconomic and macroeconomic levels. With the rapid 
adoption and diffusion of technologies and the Internet, 
along with the high levels of new business capital that are 
being made available for firms, the macro-level effects are 
likely to be substantial, even if they are difficult to track 
and accurately measure with today's tools and approaches. 
Business is not constrained by physical borders on 
account of information technology (IT). Globalization 
brought about by IT is a problem not traditionally faced by 
firms. Never before has a firm’s first digital storefront 
been accessible by customers on a global basis on its first 
day of operation. Much research remains to be done to 
understand how this pressure will shape firms in the future 
[8]. This creates issues that must be solved involving how 
to tax and regulate business across state lines and across 
national boarders. Meanwhile, the use of P2P technology 
is transforming the search characteristics of the labor 
market. Glaessner, Kellermann, and McNevin [7] noted 
developing public policy to improve or establish electronic 
security needs to be built. Macroeconomy level shifts 
occur in the demographics of employment and firm growth 
and value, as well as changes in the issues that government 
regulators must track to ensure that social welfare is 
maintained [9]. Digital money is made possible through 
encryption technologies. Current obstacles to electronic 
money involve adoption inertia and the characteristics it 
must have to be a substitute for traditional money. 
In [3] demonstrate the impact of Napster phenomenon 
on the ethic of digital delivery. It noted the connections of 
P2P techniques and culture, legacy, and industry. On the 
moving from print economy to digital economy of 
information, the economies of publishing have to find the 
balance 
points. 
The 
system 
quality 
and 
culture 
significantly affect trust in the IT artifact and point to rich 
possibilities for future research in these areas. As we can 
see, there are still many questions remain to be explored. 
In the category of file sharing, the culture and intellectual 
property debate will continued. For the category of 
distributed computing, the social welfare is ultimately 
concerned. As the category of communication and 
collaboration, the following issues are addressed: labor 
market, public policy, social welfare, digital money and 
monetary policy, tax and regulation across national 
boarders. 
4. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
The environment under the peer-to-peer (P2P) 
architecture is increasingly important. In this paper, 
through the survey of P2P, trust and their economics, we 
may see that environment employed P2P computing model 
is undergoing. In particular, we focused on the economics 
of the trust in P2P environment. We also identified the 
related variables as shown on Table 2 for the future studies. 
This paper is an opening effort to explore the economic 
issues on trust in P2P environment. 
As Table 2 shown, we analysis the economic issues on 
trust in P2P digital society through a comprehensive level. 
For the technology and product level, the issues are being 
researched relatively more than other levels. However, for 
the business process, market, and macroeconomic level, 
there are still many left to be studied both empirically and 
theoretically. In Table 2, the terms underlined mean 
already noticed now, while those not underlined means 
more changeable. This implies we have distinguished the 
factors which may influence the trust in P2P environments. 
So we may have a clear scheme for the future P2P 
environment. In the changeable variables, we may adjust 
the levels of trust. While in those not easily changed 
variables, 
showing 
inherent 
properties 
for 
P2P 
environment, it is most likely that we may hold the levels 
of trust constantly. 
Current trust mechanisms mostly are based on social 
control philosophy, that is, two peers collaborate each 
other in sharing information on services. However, this 
kind of mechanism lacks of service semantics. A Security-
By-Contract (SxC) mechanism based on security behavior 
and quality of service may be complementary [4]. Through 
SxC approach, the peers choose and trust according to 
service characteristics, as well as discover services 
according to interface and semantic description. The 
combination of the above two kinds of mechanism mean 
that trust between peers is based on both semantic and 
social approach [4]. In this way, we may model the 
evolution experiences in different collaboration stages. 
From the economics perspective, we also provide some 
implications on the future of P2P environment such as the 
influence factors, killer-applications, evaluations, etc. 
These are stated as follows: (1)  The existence of extensive 
free-riding on these networks has social and economic 
implication. 
New 
theoretical 
models 
as 
well 
as 
144
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
 
experimental and empirical data to understand user 
behavior are necessary. Thus we may build new models to 
understand the relationships between the characteristics of 
information goods and trust. Besides, the trust alteration 
between peers will be more dynamic than ever. A new 
approach based on a stronger (semantics-based) notion of 
trust is needed [4]. (2)  When specifying the important 
costs, their influence (or even collapsing) factors and the 
workable incentive mechanisms, both pricing and non-
pricing models should be taken into considerations. Thus 
we may draw a picture of what the killer applications for 
P2P systems. Besides, we may testify the relationships 
between the cost and trust. Owing to different essences 
than usual contracts, we depict that there should be some 
modifications for transaction cost theory and agent theory. 
(3)  Developing a formal representation of trust evolution 
between two peers in order to validate that whether the 
trust will regress in function on the peers' experience as 
well as the third party between two trust established peers. 
Other user contexts such as behavior, motivation, 
characteristics, culture, and public key infrastructure (PKI) 
are undergoing areas of research. All the stakeholders have 
to design new distribution mechanisms for information 
goods. The implementation with novel approaches on the 
effects of trust for the above contexts is worth further 
understanding. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Casadesus-Masanell, Ramon, Andrés Hervás, and Jordan Mitchell 
(2006). Peer-to-Peer File Sharing and the Market for Digital 
Information Goods. Harvard Business School, N2-706-479. 
[2] Chadwick, David W. and Andrew Basden (2001). Evaluating trust in 
a public key certification authority. Computer and Security. 20 (7). 
pp.592-611. 
[3] DeVoss, D`anielle Nicole, and James E. Porter (2006). Why Napster 
matters to writing: Filesharing as a new ethic of digital delivery. 
Computers and Composition 23 (2006) 178–210. 
[4] Dragoni, Nicola (2010). A Survey on Trust-Based Web Service 
Provision Approaches. Dependability (DEPEND), 2010 Third 
International Conference on , vol., no., pp.83-91, 18-25 July 2010. 
[5] Gefen, David, Izak Benbasat, and Paul A. Pavlou (2008). A Research 
Agenda for Trust in Online Environments Journal of Management 
Information Systems / Spring 2008, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 275–286. 
[6] Ghosemajumder, Shuman (2002). Advanced Peer-Based Technology 
Business Models A new economic framework for the digital 
distribution of music, film, and other intellectual property works. 
Massachusetts 
Institute 
of 
Technology 
Sloan 
School 
of 
Management. 
[7] Glaessner, Thomas, Tom Kellermann, and Valerie McNevin (2002). 
Electronic Security: Risk Mitigation in Financial Transactions 
Public Policy Issues. The World Bank Financial  Sector  Strategy 
and Policy Department, POLICY  RESEARCH  WORKING  
PAPER  2870. 
[8] Johanson, Martin (2008). Institutions, exchange and trust: A study of 
the Russian transition to a market economy. Journal of International 
Management 14 (2008) 46–64. 
[9] Kauffman, Robert J. and Eric A. Walden (2001). Economics and 
Electronic Commerce: Survey and Directions for Research. 
International Journal of Electronic Commerce, 5 (4). pp. 5-116. 
[10] Kollock, Peter (1999). The Production of Trust in Online Markets. 
In Advances in Group Processes (Vol. 16), edited by E. J. Lawler, 
M. Macy, S. Thyne, and H. A. Walker. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 
1999. 
[11] Koufaris, Marios and William Hampton-Sosa (2004). The 
development of initial trust in an online company by new customers. 
Information & Management. 41. pp. 377-397. 
[12] Krishnan, Ramayya, Michael D. Smith, and Rahul Telang (2003). 
The Economics of Peer-to-Peer networks.  JITTA : Journal of 
Information Technology Theory and Application. Hong Kong. 
Vol.5, Iss. 3, ;  pg. 31, 14 pgs. 
[13] Lekkas, Dimitrios (2003). Establishing and managing trust within 
the public key infrastructure. Computer Communications. 26, 
p.1815-1825. 
[14] Lu, Yiling (2003). Roadmap for Tool Support for Collaborative 
Ontology Engineering. Master thesis of the Department of 
Computer Science, University of Victoria. 
[15] Lyon, Fergus (2000) Trust, Networks and Norms: The Creation of 
Social Capital in Agricultural Economies in Ghana. World 
Development Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 663-681. 
[16] McKnight, D. H. V. Choudhury, and C. Kacmar (2002). The impact 
of initial consumer trust on intentions to transact with a web site: a 
trust building model. Journal of Strategic Information Systems. 11. 
pp.297-323. 
[17] Stalnaker, Stan (2009). The Next Evolution in Economics: 
Rethinking 
Growth. 
Harvard 
Business 
Review. 
http://blogs.hbr.org/hbr/hbr-now/2009/08/a-new-approach-to-
economics.html 
[18] Sultan, Fareena, Glen L. Urban, Venkatesh Shankar, and I. Yakov 
Bart (2002). Determinants and Role of Trust in E-Business: A 
Large Scale Empirical Study. eBusiness Research Center Working 
Paper 4282-02. December 13, 2002. 
[19] Tan, Justin, Jun Yang, and Rajaram Veliyath (2008). Particularistic 
and system trust among small and medium enterprises: A 
comparative study in China's transition economy. Journal of 
Business Venturing 24 (6), pp. 544-557. 
[20] Tan, Yao-Hua and Walter Thoen (2002). Formal aspects of a 
generic model of trust for electronic commerce. Decision Support 
System. 33. pp.233-246. 
[21] Tang, Zhulei, Yu (Jeferey) Hu, and Michael D. Smith (2008). 
Gaining Trust Through Online Privacy Protection: Self-Regulation, 
Mandatory Standards, or Caveat Emptor. Journal of Management 
Information Systems / Spring 2008, Vol. 24, No. 4, pp. 153–173. 
[22] Wang, Yu-Feng, Yoshiaki Hori, and Kouichi Sakurai (2008). 
Characterizing economic and social properties of trust and 
reputation systems in P2P environment.  Journal of Computer 
Science and Technology, 23(1),  pp. 129-140. 
[23] http://www.napster.co.uk/ Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[24] http://www.kazaa.com Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[25] http://www.limewire.com/en  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[26] http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/EDonkey_network Accessed on 2011/ 
01/ 08. 
[27] http://www.bittorrent.com/ Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[28] http://www.firstauction.com  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[29] http://www.mobshop.com  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[30] http://www.priceline.com  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[31] http://www.mysimon.com  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[32] http://www.netperceptions.com  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[33] http://www.yahoo.com  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[34] http://www.ebay.com  Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[35] http://www.expedia.com Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[36] http://www.getthere.com Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
[37] http://www.previewtravel.com Retrieved on 2011/01/08. 
 
 
145
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

