On Information Exchange for Virtual Identities: Survey and Proposal
Dawid Grzegorz W˛eckowski
Pozna´n University of Economics
Department of Information Systems
Email: dawid.weckowski@kie.ue.poznan.pl
Jacek Małyszko
Pozna´n University of Economics
Department of Information Systems
Email: jacek.malyszko@kie.ue.poznan.pl
Abstract—The emerging concept of User Virtual Identity on
the Web is inevitably related to information exchange between
different entities. Therefore, we analyze the current solutions of
an Identity-related information exchange, taking into consid-
eration categories of the information being exchanged, parties
involved in the exchange process as well as the exchange
protocols. The analysis allows us to deﬁne an information
exchange solution for the project Ego – Virtual Identity.
Keywords-virtual identity; information exchange;
I. INTRODUCTION
Ever increasing amount of information is exchanged every
day on the Internet. Users reveal bits of their interests and
preferences while surﬁng the Web and using e-services.
Building a Virtual Identity, which can comprehensively
deal with the user representation in that environment, is
inherently bound with information exchange [1].
We argue, that there is a need for a solution that will
assure user-centricity in the ﬁeld of Virtual Identity infor-
mation management at the same time providing a level of
anonymity. In this article we present an analysis of the state-
of-the-art Identity-related solutions with the aim of ﬁnding
the strengths and weaknesses of their information exchange
implementations. Than we propose an information exchange
model for the Ego – Virtual Identity system, that will pre-
serve user anonymity, still enabling robust personalization,
which potentially would allow building of a central Identity
information store supplied with information from various
sources. With this model the users can achieve a level of
anonymity and tracking protection that can’t be achieved in
current solutions.
The article is structured in the following way. In Section II
we consider personal information categories and accompa-
nying solutions. Section III comprises analyzes of parties
involved in the information exchange process. Details of the
processes in different solutions are presented in Section IV.
Then we present the information exchange model for the
Ego project in Section V. The article concludes with the
ﬁnal remarks.
II. INFORMATION BEING EXCHANGED BY VIRTUAL
IDENTITY
Type and amount of information being shared and ac-
quired by a user’s Virtual Identity is supposed to depend
on the user’s information needs and preferences regarding
sharing this information with services. That brings us to a
conclusion, that it is the user who is supposed to decide
which information is to be exchanged. The user is the ulti-
mate source of knowledge about the value of the information
based on his or her needs and preferences.
A. Personal Information Sources
Personal information can be perceived as an information
regarding a person and created by the person [2]. There
are several types of personal information depending on the
sources, from which such information is being acquired:
• Volunteered information — an information that is
shared by a person freely and explicitly, usually by
providing descriptive resources about oneself (e.g. ﬁll-
ing a form with one’s interests, publishing a CV) or
personally generated content (documents, music etc.)
• Observed information — an information that is gath-
ered by recording person’s activities, while he interacts
with various devices and applications (e.g. capturing
Internet-browsing history, GPS location). This informa-
tion is collected implicitly, with no additional user’s
actions.
• Inferred information — an information that is a result of
reasoning process based on other personal information.
It is often being performed by institutional bodies
for widening the knowledge about a user, eg. client’s
ﬁnancial history can be used to calculate credit scores
by a bank.
B. Personal Information Categories
In the literature there are many attempts to enumerate
types of personal information. The most popular approach
is to categorize the information according to functional
perspective, as it may be found in FIDIS deliverables [3],
GUMO ontology [4] or in the Marc Davis’ talk for the World
Economic Forum [2], [5]. More user-oriented approach can
be found in the work of Brusilovsky [6]. Additionally,
Mitchel et al. [1] consider types of volunteered information
being shared between enterprises and individuals.
We believe that, apart from personal information cate-
gories described by Nabeth [7], there is a more important
perspective that describes a user — the user’s perspective.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

This perspective categorizes the information with respect to
four essential characteristics of the users – who they are,
what they know, what they have and what they do – as it
was introduced by Anrig et al. [3].
Any superposition of pair of those characteristics can
be perceived as a category of personal information. Thus
the users can be characterized by the following types of
information:
• Attributes (are + has) – any user’s feature that can be
directly described by an observer or can be extracted
from any institutional records, including demographic
data or biological features.
• Acquisitions (have + know) – all knowledge and pos-
sessions, including physical and virtual goods, both
generated and consumed.
• Roles (are + do) – any relations that describe the user,
inclusive of profession, citizenship or social afﬁliation
and roles.
• Abilities (know + do) – any user’s competences related
to tacit knowledge the user has, as well as any user’s
activities that are indicators of those or any other user’s
features.
Additionally, we would like to propose two other cate-
gories as follows:
• Context (do + have) – information about user’s relations
to the external world and any objects of that relations,
including people, locations or events.
• Self (are + know) – meaning reﬂective consciousness,
any user’s features that cannot be observed directly but
rather can be deducted or frankly expressed by the user,
as features of that category are strongly related to the
user’s state of mind, such as personality, preferences or
interests.
The categories and corresponding essential characteristics
are shown in the Figure 1.
ARE
KNOW
DO
HAVE
SELF
ROLES
CONTEXT
ACQUISITIONS
ABILITIES
ATTRIBUTES
Figure 1.
Personal information categories from the user’s perspective
III. PARTIES INVOLVED IN THE PROCESS OF
INFORMATION EXCHANGE WITH THE IDENTITY
In this section, we will analyze different entities, that
exchange the information with the Identity. Such exchange
can be carried out in two directions; there can be an out-
bound ﬂow of information (from the Identity to the outside
entities) as well as an inbound transfer (external entities send
information about the user to the Identity).
A. The consumers of information
The most important class of entites, that is mentioned in
projects concerning the consumers of information stored in
the user Identity, are Service Providers. In many situations,
services need to learn attributes (permanent or temporary)
characterizing their users.
The “Service Providers” term covers a wide range of
entities with many different purposes for which they need the
information. Probably, the most important of such purposes
is authentication and authorization of users. For example,
with prototype created in one of the STORK project’s
pilot programs, students can use foreign university services,
proving their real Identity with eID cards, issued by their
domestic government Identity providers [8].
Currently, there are more and more services, which need
Identity information to fulﬁll other goals. Adaptive systems
personalize their content and other features to users’ needs.
The simplest example are personalized Web portals, for
example news sites. This domain is traditionally in interest
of user modelling; based on user attributes representing her
interest, the contents of a news site is adapted to match
user’s needs, as a result generating a personalized online
magazine [9], [10]. Here, the consumer of information from
an Identity is the provider of this web portal [11].
E-commerce services may use a so-called recommender
systems, which, based on a user preferences, inform the
user about products of the provider, which may best suit the
user’s needs [12]. These parties are consumers of Identity
information also in ProjectVRM [13], where users can
publish their needs (intents to buy speciﬁc items) on a so-
called Personal Request for Proposals platform, and any
vendors using the platform can thus learn users needs and
respond with a personalized offer [1].
Mobile and location-based services can utilize user’s
location and attrbiutes in many ways, for example alerting
the user when one of his friends is nearby [14].
Technically, it is possible to broaden described types of
services to more real-world entities [15], [16]. For example
in Ambient Intelligence vision, a temperature of water in
the shower in the hotel room can be automatically adjusted
to preferences of the roomguest, or music played in the
restaurant may depend on average preferences of its guests.
In these examples, service providers consuming the Identity
information would be devices in such places as restaurants
or hotels.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Another type of service providers are public institutions,
such as hospitals. In scenario described in [16], a person’s
up-to-the-hour health information collected by a medical
device attached to the person’s wrist can be transferred to
her hospital. Similarly, an information about user’s location
can be sent to the hospital during an emergency call [14].
The information about the users may be also transferred
between two Identity Providers in order to merge user
accounts or to reconcile differences between such identities.
This is the case in Federated Identity scenarios [17].
Finally, consumers of Identity information are also user
devices. The users may want to see their Identity information
and in such situation it must be transmitted to his device. The
information may be also transmitted to other users’ devices
and displayed there, if its owner agrees.
B. Information exchange – the inbound ﬂow
The goal of inbound ﬂow of information exchange is to
update the Identity with additional information about its
owner. Entities, that are sources of such information, can be
the users (when they manually input some information to
the Identity), a special sofware aiming to track the users’
behavior to learn their attributes, or, theoretically, even
Providers of services.
Editing information stored in the user model by it’s owner
is called explicit user modelling and was a traditional way
of building user models in many adaptive systems in the
past [18]. In this case, the information is transmitted from a
user’s device to the Identity.
The other method of feeding models with information
about the users is implicit user modelling, in which users’
behavior is analyzed (with or without their awareness and
consent) in order to learn their attributes, without users’
involvement [18]. This can be achieved in many different
ways: by monitoring web log ﬁles, tracking pages visited
by the users or queries their input to a search engine,
etc. [9], [19]. An interesting example here is a mechanism
of scrobblers used by Last.fm [20] portal, which maintains
user music proﬁles. Information is sent from many such
scrobblers installed on multiple devices used by the owner
of Last.fm account to a single proﬁle, stored on Last.fm
servers.We believe, that such tracking mechanism can be
extended to other user activities as well.
IV. INFORMATION EXCHANGE PROCESS
A. Front channel / Back channel
Identity-related information exchange involves passing
some assertions about a user from an Identity Provider to a
Service Provider and vice-versa. Most common approaches
to that process are [21]:
• Front channel – information being exchanged by a
redirection of a user’s browser from one site to another
with custom deﬁned parameters. User can be informed
in details about what is being exchanged.
• Back channel – direct information exchange between
an Identity Provider and a Service Provider, after
previously establishing an association, without a user
participation. The user has no knowledge on what is
being exchanged.
In subsequent sections we will analyze existing solutions
in the implementation of Identity-related information ex-
change process. We will focus on the most popular projects.
B. Authentication-oriented solutions
Currently, two main authentication-oriented Identity so-
lutions can be mentioned: popular and well-established
OpenID [22] , and WebID [23], which is currently being
developed.
The communication process, using authentication-oriented
solutions, can be summarized as follows [22], [24]:
1) A user requests resources from a Service Provider and
is asked to authenticate.
2) The user supplies the Service Provider with an iden-
tiﬁer of a Virtual Identity.
3) The Service Provider veriﬁes, if the user is the owner
of the claimed Virtual Identity, eg.:
• the OpenID redirects the user to the Identity
Provider’s website and veriﬁes the response as-
sertion, stating if the user has managed to login
successfully,
• the WebID compares user-provided certiﬁcate
with the user public key published on the Virtual
Identity website.
4) If the authentication succeeds, the user is provided
with the requested resource.
C. Authorization-oriented solutions
Another group of the Identity-related solutions are those
which allow for exchanging complex information for autho-
rization purposes, eg. SAML and OAuth.
SAML [25]is an OASIS standard, deﬁning a framework
for describing and exchanging security information with the
use of XML. While SAML can be used in different business
scenarios, our interest is mainly focused on establishing
Federated Identities and Multi-Domain Single Sign-On.
Another solution, OAuth, is a protocol allowing users to
authorize third parties (here called clients or consumers)
to access server resources, owned by the users, without
revealing their credentials to the clients [26], [27].
D. The Identity Metasystem
The Identity Metasystem is based on Kim Cameron’s
identity laws and uses Information Cards for representation
of Digital Identity [21], [28]. The exchange model is based
on SOAP messages and uses a number of OASIS standards
for Web services (WS-Trust, WS-SecurityPolicy and WS-
MetadataExchange) [29].
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

The central elements of the metasystem from a user’s
point of view are Information Cards, that are visual rep-
resentations of different digital Identities of the user. Such
cards are presented to the user by a software component
called Identity Selector, which allows users to easily choose
from available cards [21].
Also, many other, smaller Identity-related projects exist.
Example lists of such solutions can be found at: [30], [31].
Having analyzed the most popular solutions we developed
an information exchange model for the purpose of the Ego
project.
V. INFORMATION EXCHANGE MODEL FOR THE EGO
PROJECT
A. The goal of the Ego information exchange model
The Ego project aims to research the possibilities of
improvements in the area of instant personalization based on
exchange of an Identity information during everyday tasks
performed by the user during browsing the Web (for example
visiting different portals in search for interesting articles or
items). At the same time, we want to ensure, that the users
can achieve a complete anonymity and complete control in
terms of information, that service providers have about them.
Much research has been conducted on different aspects of
users’ privacy, anonymity, Identity management and global
user modelling. Still, we have noticed a serious drawback
in the current solutions. The Identity can store a lot of
information about the user, but at the same time service
providers store a lot of user-related information on their side,
building user models for their own needs. Such information
is treated by service providers as an important asset, giving
them a competetive advantage on the market. This fact has
two negative implications:
• users cannot easily learn, what Service Providers know
about them, or update such information, if it is not
accurate,
• users cannot reuse this information in another services.
In the following sections, we will describe our position
on how this situation can be changed.
B. User session at Service Provider’s website
The main goal, that we want to achieve with our informa-
tion exchange model, is that the information used for per-
sonalization should be stored on the Identity Provider’s side
and not on Service Provider’s servers. Thanks to that, users
would be able to easily see and change any information, that
different service providers may have about them.
To achieve that, the exchange model must be extended
to foster an exchange of information in both ways (inbound
and outbound). Service Providers must be encouraged or
enforced to send information, that they have about the user,
to the user’s Identity. We came to a conclusion, that they
would do that only in one situation: when using information
about the user gathered during a single session and stored
on their side would be impossible in next sessions. To
achieve that, Service Providers must not be able to link
different sessions of the same user; such situation is called
unlinkability [32].
We decided, that in our exchange scenario, the user will
not provide the Service Provider with his identitﬁer, but only
with URL to his Identity Provider. This can be thought as a
next logical step in assigning different identiﬁers to a user
based on a context, in which he is working (a so-called
unidirectional Identity) [28], [32].
With such an exchange model, the Service Provider would
have to send the information about the user, that he has
gathered, back to the Identity. At this point, a question
arises on what and how the Service Provider can store in
the Identity. It must be restricted to some degree, otherwise
the Service Provider would be able to put a user-speciﬁc
identiﬁer in the Identity (similarly as it is done in cookie
ﬁles), and based on that to use proﬁles stored on his side,
without sending it to the Identity. Some solutions that are
possible here are:
• the storage can have a speciﬁed structure, which would
restrict possible user characteristics to some predeﬁned
ones;
• user characteristics in the storage can be managed not
by the Service Providers directly, but set by some
Identity Provider modelling algorithms, which assign
appropriate values based on user characteristics sent
from the Service Provider,
• values sent to the Service Providers as responses to
queries can be slightly changed. Such changes may
be random or may be generated based on predictions
of future user needs, at the same time helping users
in ﬁnding new interesting items, similarly as in our
paper [33].
C. Steps in information exchange model proposed
In this section, we will discuss the most important steps
in our exchange model in greater detail.
1) Establishing a common user identiﬁer between Iden-
tity Provider and Service Provider
This is the ﬁrst and basic step in our information
exchange model. To enable exchange of information
between the Identity and Service Providers about the
user, an identiﬁer must be assigned to the user. Such
identiﬁer must be randomly generated, if we want to
force Service Providers to send information about the
users to the Identity. This process is shown in the
Figure 2.
2) Authentication of Service Provider request
The identiﬁer is now established and callable. It can
be exposed in a form of URL, to which the Service
Provider can send messages. Still, the identiﬁer is ded-
icated to only one Service Provider. It must be there-
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Figure 2.
The process of information exchange to establish an identiﬁer
fore ensured, that the messages, that are received at
the identiﬁer URL, are indeed sent from the intended
Service Provider. A Service Provider authentication
mechanism must be therefore established.
3) Service Provider’s request for information from the
Identity
One of two types of message exchange requests is a
query for Identity information. The Service Provider
needs this information to personalize its service. The
requests are sent by the Service Provider via back
channel when the user wants to access a certain re-
source and is received by Identity Provider at identiﬁer
URL. At this step it must be ensured, that the Service
Provider is authorized to use the identiﬁer and that the
transmission is secure.
4) Request for an update of the Identity by the Service
Provider
When the Service Provider has collected a new infor-
mation about the user, the information may be sent to
the Identity. This is a similar ﬂow to one speciﬁed in
previous step, but in the other direction. It’s important
to note, that the Service Provider must send it before
the identiﬁer expires.
5) Deletion of the identiﬁer
As the identiﬁer is tepmporary, at some point in time
it must be deleted. After that, the Service Provider
cannot get more information about the user or update
the Identity with new information. Such deletion can
be triggered by different events, such as:
• user can request deletetion of a speciﬁed identiﬁer
or all identiﬁers at Identity Provider’s website;
• the identiﬁer can be set for automatic expiration
trigger when a certain time passes since it was
created.
User should also have an opportunity to conﬁgure a
certain identiﬁer to be persistent, so that it would not
be deleted. Users may chose to do so for example, if
they want to have a long-term and closer relationship
with a certain Service Provider.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we have analyzed different issues related
to exchange of user’s personal information on the Web.
The most important existing solutions were presented in
terms of conceptual and technical means that they use to
exchange the Identity-related information. Based on that,
we have proposed our own information exchange model,
which enables users to gain better control on information,
that different entities may have about them. Our solution
ensures, that all information, that Service Providers have
about the user, will be stored in the user’s identity and under
the user’s control.
Our further research directions focus on development of
a reusable user model structure, which must be universal
enough to be usable by many different adaptive systems, for
example tech news portal, music recommender systems etc.
Apart from that, we plan to develop a mechanism that would
enable updating this model based on information sent from
Service Providers. A comprehensive policies mechanism is
also planned, that would allow users to clearly deﬁne con-
ditions, under which their personal data may be exchanged
with third parties.
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work published in this article was supported by the
project titled: “Ego – Virtual Identity” (http://kie.ue.poznan.
pl/en/project/ego-virtual-identity), ﬁnanced by the Polish
National Centre of Research and Development (NCBiR),
contract no. NR11-0037-10.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Andrieu and J. Clark, “The information sharing report,”
Kantara Initiative, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[2] World Economic Forum, “Personal Data: The Emergence
of a New Asset Class,” http://www3.weforum.org/docs/
WEF_ITTC_PersonalDataNewAsset_Report_2011.pdf,
Jan-
uary 2011, accessed: 11-02-2013.
[3] B. Anrig, E. Benoist, and D.-O. Jaquet-Chiffelle, “Virtual?
identity,” in FIDIS Deliverable 2.2: Set of use cases and
scenarios, T. Nabeth, Ed.
FIDIS, 2005, pp. 22–34.
[4] D. Heckmann, T. Schwartz, B. Brandherm, M. Schmitz, and
M. von Wilamowitz-Moellendorff, “Gumo — the general user
model ontology,” User Modeling 2005, pp. 428–432, 2005.
[5] K. Hamlin and M. Hodder, “PDEC response to FTC DNT
White Paper,” http://1.usa.gov/pdeDNT, February 18 2011,
accessed: 11-02-2013.
[6] P. Brusilovsky and E. Millán, “User models for adaptive hy-
permedia and adaptive educational systems,” in The adaptive
web, P. Brusilovsky, A. Kobsa, and W. Nejdl, Eds.
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, 2007, pp. 3–53.
[7] T. Nabeth, “D2.3: Models,” FIDIS, Tech. Rep., October 2005.
[8] D.
Berbecaru,
A.
Lioy,
M.
Mezzalama,
G.
Santiano,
E. Venuto, and M. Oreglia, “Federating e-identities across
europe, or how to build cross-border e-services,” 2011.
[9] W.
Abramowicz,
Filtrowanie
informacji.
Pozna´n:
Wydawnictwo Akademii Ekonomicznej w Poznaniu, 2008.
[10] J.-w. Ahn, P. Brusilovsky, J. Grady, D. He, and S. Y. Syn,
“Open user proﬁles for adaptive news systems: help or harm?”
in WWW ’07. New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007, pp. 11–20.
[11] M. Koch, Global Identity Management to Boost Personaliza-
tion, 2002, pp. 137–147.
[12] R. Burke, “Hybrid recommender systems: Survey and ex-
periments,” User Modeling and User-Adapted Interaction,
vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 331–370, 2002.
[13] http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/projectvrm/,
accessed:
11-02-
2013.
[14] A. Deuker, “D11.2: Mobility and lbs,” FIDIS, Tech. Rep.,
July 2008.
[15] W. Schreurs, M. Hildebrandt, M. Gasson, and K. Warwick,
“D7.3: Report on actual and possible proﬁling techniques in
the ﬁeld of ambient intelligence,” FIDIS, Tech. Rep., August
2005.
[16] P. Scholta, “Reﬁned swift scenarios, use cases and business
models,” SWIFT Project Deliverable, 2010.
[17] N.
Ragouzis,
J.
Hughes,
R.
Philpott,
and
E.
Maler,
“Security
Assertion
Markup
Language
(SAML)
V2.0
Technical Overview,” http://www.oasis-open.org/committees/
documents.php?wg_abbrev=security, 2006, accessed: 11-02-
2013.
[18] A. Kobsa, “User modeling: Recent work, prospects and haz-
ards,” HUMAN FACTORS IN INFORMATION TECHNOL-
OGY, vol. 10, pp. 111–111, 1993.
[19] M. Hildebrandt and J. Backhouse, “D7.2: Descriptive analysis
and inventory of proﬁling practices,” FIDIS, Tech. Rep., June
2005.
[20] http://www.last.fm/, accessed: 11-02-2013.
[21] C. Burton, “The Information Card Ecosystem: The Founda-
mental Leap from Cookies & Passwords to Cards & Selec-
tors,” http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/webid/spec/, 2011,
accessed: 11-02-2013.
[22] O. Community, “OpenID Authentication 2.0 - Final,” http:
//openid.net/specs/openid-authentication-2_0.html, 2007, ac-
cessed: 11-02-2013.
[23] http://www.w3.org/wiki/WebID, accessed: 11-02-2013.
[24] H. Story and S. Corlosquet, “Web 1.0. Web Identiﬁ-
cation and Discovery,” http://www.w3.org/2005/Incubator/
webid/spec/, 2011, accessed: 11-02-2013.
[25] http://saml.xml.org/, accessed: 11-02-2013.
[26] E. Hammer-Lahav (Ed.), “The OAuth 1.0 Protocol,” http://
tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5849, 2011, accessed: 11-02-2013.
[27] J. Camenisch, J. Riordan, and S. Sandra, “D 1.1.1: Analysis of
existing web protocols for trusted contents,” PrimeLife project
deliverable, Tech. Rep., August 2008.
[28] K. Cameron, “The laws of identity,” http://msdn.microsoft.
com/en-us/library/ms996456.aspx, 2005, accessed: 11-02-
2013.
[29] M. Jones and M. McIntosh, “Identity metasystem interoper-
ability version 1.0 (imi 1.0),” OASIS Standard, 2009.
[30] http://wiki.idcommons.net/Identity_Landscape, accessed: 11-
02-2013.
[31] http://personaldataecosystem.org/2011/06/startup/,
accessed: 11-02-2013.
[32] A. Pﬁtzmann and M. Hansen, “A terminology for talk-
ing about privacy by data minimization: Anonymity, un-
linkability, undetectability, unobservability, pseudonymity,
and
identity
management,”
URL:
http://dud.
inf.
tu-
dresden. de/literatur/Anon_Terminology_v0, vol. 34, 2010,
accessed: 11-02-2013.
[33] W. Abramowicz, J. Małyszko, and D. G. W˛eckowski, “Dis-
covering of users’ interests evolution patterns for learning
goals recommendation,” vol. 90, pp. 231–238, 2011.
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

