Customer Concerns in Telecommunications Contact Centers 
Information and Systems Factors 
Mike Hart, Grant Thavarajoo, Kgolane Thobejane 
Department of Information Systems 
University of Cape Town 
Cape Town, South Africa 
mike.hart@uct.ac.za, grant.thavarajoo@googlemail.com, thbkgo001@uct.ac.za 
 
Abstract—The contact center is a potentially strategic touch-
point between consumers and organizations, but often the 
service obtained leaves much to be desired. Effective use of the 
information and technology in our digital society appears to 
have many inhibitors – organizational, technological and 
human. This study analyses some 2150 incidents regarding 
telecommunications service providers reported by customers to 
a South African consumer portal. Their main concerns were 
information related issues: inadequate communication channel 
integration, limited functional integration and customer 
information inaccuracies.  System issues comprised system 
faults, 
system 
limitations 
and 
system 
unavailability.  
Compounding this in fewer cases were non-information 
service-related issues: incompetent or rude staff and lengthy 
delays. Although telecommunications products and contact 
center technology may be advanced examples of the digital age, 
unless there is sound 
management, organization and 
motivation, customers may not receive the service they expect.  
Keywords-contact center; information systems; channel 
integration; telecommunications; customer service 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Earlier telephone-based call centers were generally 
designed to save costs, but as they have moved to become 
contact centers or more optimistically, customer care centers, 
they have found themselves occupying an increasingly 
strategic role [1, 2, 3].  To satisfy today‟s digital society, they 
offer customers contact through email, text messaging 
(SMS), on-line self service, interactive voice recognition 
(IVR) self service, fax, chat, blogs, Twitter and Facebook 
amongst others, and have become the first line of customer 
contact for many organizations [1, 2, 4, 5]. Their 
management is sometimes torn between satisfying financial 
and performance criteria such as calls answered per agent per 
day, measures of customer service such as first call 
resolution (FCR), and surveys of consumer satisfaction [3, 
6]. With the increase in available technology and channels of 
communication has come an increased need for co-
ordination and management of customer information [7].  As 
consumers become more digitally aware and confident, their 
expectations of quality service rise accordingly.  
Internationally, in many developing as well as developed 
countries, there has been major recent growth in the use of 
cellular or mobile phones, for both personal and business 
use.  This has been demand-driven and clearly fulfils a need.  
Yet the telecommunications industry in many countries 
attracts a relatively large number of complaints.  A recent 
industry survey of US contact centers [8] shows that TMT 
(technology, media and telecommunications) was the 
industry grouping with the highest percentage of inbound 
calls that were complaints (27%). In South Africa the 
percentage of complaints about telecommunications service 
providers is similarly well above the average for all 
industries. This suggests that while society is being provided 
with a wider range of digital options, the management and 
coordination of those still leaves much to be desired.   
This raises the research question: “Given the wide range 
of available digital and technology options, what are the 
inhibitors to effective and efficient customer service in 
telecommunications cost centers?” 
As part of a larger study into customer service in contact 
centers in South Africa, over 2000 customer related 
complaints 
to 
a 
consumer 
portal 
about 
their 
telecommunications service providers were analyzed to 
determine what the major concerns were.  South Africa has 
recently expanded its service offerings as an offshore 
business process outsourcing (BPO) and contact center 
destination, and it is most important that industry levels of 
service are maintained and improved [9, 10, 11].  
This paper continues with a brief summary of some 
relevant background aspects, and then discusses the research 
methodology adopted for this study.  Following that, an 
analysis of incidents in telecommunications contact centers 
uncovers the main themes.  These are briefly discussed in 
relation to earlier literature, and the paper then concludes and 
makes some practitioner and research recommendations. 
II. 
BACKGROUND 
Telephone-based call centers have existed for more than 
two decades, their initial primary aim being a cost-saving 
centralization of the organization‟s external communications. 
They allowed for inbound customer calls as well as outbound 
calls, often for marketing purposes.  With the growth of the 
digital society many more communication options have 
become available, and call centers have become contact 
centers, sometimes hopefully also referred to as customer 
care centers [1, 7, 12, 13]. They may offer customers 
additional communication media such as email, SMS, on-
line self service, IVR self service, fax, chat, blogs, Twitter 
and Facebook [13].  
At the same time contact centers have become a key 
touch-point for many organizations [2, 14].  The interaction 
experienced by consumers has become increasingly 
76
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

important in determining whether they maintain an ongoing 
relationship with the organization, or whether there is 
“customer churn” [7]. Company management should 
therefore be allocating the necessary resources and efforts to 
their contact centers. 
For management and their employees (agents and 
supervisors) there is however often a tension between the 
motivation of cost saving, and those of customer service and 
satisfaction [2, 3, 6, 12].  Well motivated, trained and 
satisfied agents are critical to quality service [1], and 
customers look to them for empathy, assurance and 
responsiveness [13].  
Contact centers use a wide range of technology, 
including automatic call distributors (ACD), IVR and speech 
recognition, call recording, PBX, auto-diallers, workforce 
optimisation, helpdesk systems, telephony soft-switching, 
and workflow. Recently there has been a strong move to IP 
and VOIP [5, 14, 15]. Agents or consultants need 
information on customers, their products, transactions and 
past communications with the organization. This is provided 
(with varying degrees of agent access) by customer 
databases, knowledge management, customer relationship 
management (CRM) and ERP systems [5, 16].  While CRM 
has been pushed as a “technology silver bullet” for managing 
customer information and relationships, its practical success 
has been limited. “it is important to consider where the 
company might have failed to address the factors most 
closely associated with CRM success — people, processes 
and day-to-day customer management activity, while over-
investing in the factors which are, after all, only CRM-
enabling systems and data” [17, p. 349]. 
The variety of communication channels now available 
creates problems of information management [18, 19, 20]. 
Multi-channel integration is more talked about than 
practiced: a 2009 global survey of 554 contact centers found 
that less than 22% of centers had non-voice channels 
integrated into their universal queue [5].   
A relatively recent phenomenon is that of contact center 
outsourcing and offshoring [21].  This has primarily been for 
cost-saving reasons, but over time companies have realized 
the risks of considering cost alone if, for example, the overall 
image of the organization will suffer due to inexperienced, 
inefficient 
or 
“incompatible” 
contact 
center 
agents 
communicating with their customers.  First conducting a 
SWOT analysis of the potential outsourcing situation can be 
beneficial [11].  
A. South Africa in the Digital World 
South Africa‟s mobile cellular subscriptions increased 
from 16.8 million in 2003 to 45 million in 2008, and there is 
now effectively one mobile phone for every person in the 
country. At the same time the number of fixed lines 
decreased slightly to 4.3 million [22, 23]. South Africa has 
the highest ICT Development Index (IDI) in Africa for 
Skills, coming 3rd after Seychelles and Mauritius for the IDI 
Access and Use indices [22].  South Africa is rated 9th of 139 
global countries by the World Economic Forum for its 
financial markets and banking systems, 35th for its firm-level 
technology absorption, but only 76th for overall technological 
readiness [24], and is often referred to as a mix of 1st and 3rd 
world economies.  
III. 
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Following recent research into similar issues in the 
banking sector, this study focused on telecommunications 
service providers, mainly of mobile or cellular phones.  The 
research was exploratory, aiming to uncover the main 
information and systems-related concerns of customers 
dealing with telecommunications contact centers. The 
consumer portal HelloPeter [25] has in past research [26] 
proved a useful source of information for customer-related 
incidents. This portal enables consumers to register online, 
and then anonymously post a comment (complaint or 
compliment) in connection with service received from a 
supplier.  Companies who register (for a fee) are able to 
obtain the contact details of the customer, follow up with 
them, and respond publicly on the website if they wish. 
Based on the response received, the customer then has the 
option of giving their feedback on the supplier‟s response 
and their rating as either “over the moon”, “quite impressed”, 
“indifferent”, “unimpressed” or “utterly disgusted”. There 
are currently over 1200 companies registered on the site (up 
from 650 two years ago), and over 11,000 comments are 
received per month.  On average about 20% of comments are 
compliments, and the balance are complaints (fairly expected 
due to human nature).  However, amongst the cellular phone 
providers, the percentage of compliments is typically only 
between 5% and 12%. 
While almost all South Africans are cellular phone 
owners, far fewer use the Internet. Posting HelloPeter [25] 
incidents requires on-line access, and the motivation to 
submit to this website, and so the set of incidents cannot 
necessarily be considered to be representative of the full 
South African consumer community.  It does however 
describe a large number of actual incidents experienced by 
digitally aware telecommunications customers, and an 
opportunity to gain an idea of the variety and extent of 
information and system-related consumer issues in contact 
centres.  Incident details posted can be viewed by everyone, 
without passwords, and in addition the founder and owner of 
the site has given the author permission for the data to be 
used for research purposes. 
Over 2100 postings between November 2009 and March 
2010 to South Africa‟s six main telecommunications service 
providers (90% from four mobile and 10% from two landline 
operators) were selected for analysis.  While a largely 
qualitative approach was adopted in order to explore the 
incidents, there were some useful quantitative measures 
available to give context.  Being exploratory, the approach 
was inductive and cross-sectional, and thematic analysis [27, 
28] was used to iteratively derive major themes and 
subthemes.  Incidents were initially screened to ensure they 
all concerned contact center communication, information, 
technology and/or systems issues (others were excluded from 
analysis). Data was extracted from HelloPeter [25] to an 
Excel spreadsheet, and then imported to NVivo 8 CAQDAS 
software.  A six step iterative process [29] for identifying, 
analyzing, coding and grouping nodes and themes was 
77
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

followed until the final themes and subthemes shown in 
Figure 1 emerged.  These are discussed in the following 
section. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Themes and subthemes. 
IV. 
ANALYSIS OF INCIDENTS 
The two main themes that emerged were Information-
related Issues and Systems Issues. In addition certain Service 
Issues were often mentioned as compounding features of the 
incident description, and these have been included in a 
separate theme. All three were further divided into sub-
themes.  Each emergent theme and subtheme is now briefly 
discussed, with limited supporting quotes due to space 
considerations. It should be noted a few issues were often 
mentioned during the course of an incident, and many 
incidents were therefore coded under more than one node.  
These reflected the perceptions of consumers, whose 
assessment of the underlying cause might sometimes be 
inaccurate (although supplier response would often clarify 
matters). Numbers of incidents reflecting each theme is 
shown merely to indicate prevalence in the sample, and 
should not be generalized further. 
A. Information Related Issues 
1) Channel Issues: multiple communications channels 
used, but often limited channel integration (1268) 
In most cases, customers stated the channel(s) of 
communications they used to interact with the contact 
center, including (in order of utilization): Phone, Email, 
SMS, Website and Fax. Very few used the post, whilst 
SMS‟s were primarily used for customers „to get in touch‟ 
with agents with whom they had previously made contact. 
All complaints where multiple channels were used were 
coded here. The variety of digital communications media 
provides consumer flexibility, but demands efficient channel 
management and integration. Yet channel issues were the 
major cause of customer dissatisfaction. Agents lacked a 
„single view‟ of customer communication, which greatly 
limited their ability to resolve incidents.  Multi-channel 
integration was often limited or non-existent, and 
information sent via one channel appeared to have 
disappeared into a black hole when customers contacted the 
organization via a different channel. Some incidents showed 
repeated use of multiple channels to assist with queries. 
“...I phoned them, faxed a letter and e-mailed a 
letter of cancellation. I then phoned to make sure they 
received it and that it would be cancelled. I was assured 
that it would be. I then received an sms to confirm this, 
only to wake up this morning and receive an sms that 
my airtime was topped up. When phoning them I was 
told that it still shows as active.” (Q1). 
“...Called last Thursday and was told to send the 
necessary letter head with request which I did on 
Friday. Come Monday I called and was told they had 
not received it - so I sent it again. Tuesday I called them 
4 times!!!!! I eventually had to email them to a X. He 
said he sent them at 11h00 and it would take about 2 
hours to get them. ..... Well one week later I have still 
not received a thing.....and I am yet to get a call back 
from any of the agents I spoke to” (Q2). 
These types of interactions lead to a breakdown in 
communication, and frustration with the operators, and 
could be caused by bad processes, carelessness and human 
error, as well as poor channel integration.  
2) Information 
inaccuracies 
or 
unavailability 
of 
information (593) 
The second most common subtheme was inaccurate 
information stored on the operators‟ information systems. 
This relates to the ability of the agent to offer correct 
information to the customer and have the necessary (correct) 
information available to assist the customer with their query. 
“I applied for a new contract with X on the 25th of 
February 2010 and my contract was approved on the 
26th of February 2010. However, due to a mistake in 
the database records in X (phone description in 
database did not match phone available in stock), I was 
only able to obtain my phone on Tuesday 2nd March 
2010” (Q3). 
In rare cases the user may not necessarily have been 
negatively affected by the original issue, but the information 
accuracy may still lead to unexpected results: 
“After the second month I realised that they still had 
not taken the first 2 payments off and I also never even 
received an invoice. I called to see what the problem is 
and they said they don't know but will instruct the 
account department to take the amount immediately... I 
asked the account department to call back, they never 
did. I called again a week after and I said to the guy I 
have never heard of a company that the client actually 
needs to chase to take the money off his account...   
Yesterday, my service was suspended” (Q4). 
Information accuracy can be a function of poor 
processes or data quality management.  Information 
unavailability may indicate that agents are not given access 
to certain systems, or do not know how to access it. 
3) Functional Integration: information not integrated 
across organisational units or functions (256) 
 
78
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

The 
different 
organizational 
functions 
of 
telecommunications 
operators 
can 
include 
billing 
departments, performance management, retail stores as well 
as other partner sites. A query handled by different 
departments in an organization was often devoid of 
supporting information captured at previous points of 
contact. This often results in users being subjected to 
numerous call transfers in order to locate the resolving 
party, for example: 
“I've been trying to get through to the X upgrades 
department since last week Thursday already. I've been 
dialling the call centre number. Most of the time I get 
cut off and if I do get to speak to a consultant I then get 
cut off when they try to put me through to the relevant 
department, at one stage I was transferred 3 times, held 
on for ages each time only to get cut off yet again.” 
(Q5). 
This highlights the difficulty users can endure when 
being transferred to alternate departments or divisions 
instead of the initial agent resolving their call. Functional 
integration issues may lead to customer dissatisfaction either 
through lack of information integration within systems or 
due to restrictive company protocol: 
“Phoning X resulted in nothing - apparently the 
admin department requested legal department to close 
the account. Legal referred me to admin and vice versa. 
I went to the nearest branch (X), only to be told that the 
accountholder (deceased) must sign to transfer the 
number!!!! Eventually they insisted that I fill in forms 
and supply bank statements, even though I am a 
customer for the last 10 + years!” (Q6).   
A common cause for functional integration issues can be 
incompatible systems used between different business units, 
and unimaginative business processes. Lack of co-
ordination 
and 
distributed 
systems, 
and 
limited 
technological infrastructure may also hinder the ability for 
an organization to share its information.  
B. System Issues 
1) System Faults: technical faults or errors experienced 
during interaction with the customer and the agent’s 
information systems (527) 
In many cases customers complained about the technical 
state of the contact centers‟ hardware or software and its 
impact on the resolution of the query.  
 “They promised that this would all be corrected 
and the money I paid for the services would be refunded 
- fat chance as I am still waiting for this! In addition my 
contract would be cancelled on the 5 January 2010. 
Funny how I ended up getting a bill for February!!! this 
month I applied for finance on a car I wanted to get 
only to be told that I have a negative credit score and 
that no one will finance me - X blacklisted me for their 
error!!!! Useless.” (Q7) 
In situations like these, customer dissatisfaction is 
further compounded and could result in subscriber churn. 
2) System Limitations: restrictions or policy directives 
that prevent the system behaving in a manner that the 
customer expects (417) 
System limitations refer to the lack of perceived 
functionality of information systems to address customer 
complaint resolution. In particular several cases emerged 
that highlighted policy directives or the inability of the 
information system to address the customer query. The 
statement below is a case in point: 
“I called in several times requesting my bill via 
email and every time they sent me some link to 
download and I keep trying to tell them I can’t 
download it please sent it via pdf or something and 
when I check it’s the some link again. Friday I spoke to 
10 different people,  the bill has 8 pages she sends 1 
page is this a joke there’s something called 1st call 
resolution ...”(Q8) 
3) System Unavailability: downtime associated with 
contact centre information systems (464) 
Customers expect that information systems will be 
available during their interaction with the contact center or 
its related functions. Failure may be due to inefficient 
technical infrastructure or resources and in many cases leads 
to severe inconvenience and dissatisfaction.  
“Apart from the fact that they were offline and 
couldn’t accept payment and I had to go to Y to pay my 
cellphone account for which they felt no need to 
apologize..... In 5 months time my contract comes up for 
renewal. It will be insane to renew with X.” (Q9) 
In some cases users are also unable to make contact due 
to excessively long waiting times:  
“I tried calling back that night and they were offline 
so could not help me once again. I then tried calling 
again from yesterday morning and my calls have gone 
unanswered. I have held on for an average of 30 
minutes each time I call (before I hang up due to 
frustration!) and no one has answered the phone”  
(Q10). 
Issues of this nature demonstrate the mismatch between 
expectations of the user and the ability to offer customer 
service by the contact centre.  
C. Service Issues 
1) Rude Staff: dissatisfaction from customers interacting 
with rude or bad mannered agents (199) 
In addition to the above systems and information-related 
problems, a few customers specifically mentioned perceived 
rudeness of behavior or attitude to them by the agent. This 
usually compounded the negativity of the complaint. 
Reasons included perceived unwillingness to hear the 
customers‟ side of the story, or to escalate a problem to 
more senior staff, and a lack of respect or empathy.  
2) Incompetent Staff: agents that cannot perform their 
expected functions effectively (183) 
Examples included failure of agents to perform tasks 
properly, e.g., form submissions, return phone calls, valid 
explanations etc. A common complaint was the poor 
79
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

response from contact center agents to requests to diagnose 
technical issues with the customer‟s devices. 
3) Timeliness: ability of the agent to address, respond 
to, or follow up a customer complaint timeously (143) 
Customers expect queries, and their follow ups, to be 
handled in a timely, effective manner. However there were a 
number of incidents where operators took exceptionally 
long to address or resolve queries. In many cases the delay 
was attributed to system disruptions or agent incompetency, 
as well as functional integration issues, where calls had to 
be routed to another agent for resolution. 
 
These results will be discussed in the following section. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The dominant themes that telecommunications customers 
complained about concerned incorrect, missing or delayed 
information about themselves and their past communications 
with the organizations.  It was very clear that use of more 
than one communication channel often caused problems due 
to a lack of information integration.  The challenges of multi-
channel integration mentioned in [18, 19 and 20] were 
clearly not adequately addressed in most cases.  Different 
channels may be based on varied technologies and generally 
appear to be managed separately, if at all.  CRM software, 
while dealing with some customer information, does not 
seem to be integrating it satisfactorily across different 
channels. A common consequence is multiple submissions or 
requests for customer information, with resultant delays and 
customer irritation.   
Ensuring correctness of information should be part of a 
general drive for data and service quality in any organization 
[1, 13], and examples show there is clearly room for 
improvement here.  One of the other major causes of 
consumer unhappiness was the inability of the agent to 
achieve first call resolution [3], for a number of reasons.  
One may be that the organizational systems themselves are 
not adequately integrated – the main aim of ERP software. 
Alternatively, the agent may only be given access to certain 
modules, processes or functions.  There can be valid 
situations where the agent is required to obtain information 
from another person, or where the request needs to follow a 
controlled process through other business units.  This then 
needs to be well managed within the organization, with one 
person taking responsibility for resolution of the call, 
processes being re-engineered if necessary [15], and not 
sending the customer from pillar to post and cutting them off 
in the process.  Ideally the agent should have access to as 
much customer-related information as possible, through a 
user-friendly portal, and receive sound training in the 
effective use of ERP, CRM and knowledge management 
software [1, 2, 6, 7, 15, 16, 17]. 
Many customers also experienced system issues – faults, 
limitations and unavailability.  Because these are “customer-
facing” systems they deserve above-average attention, with 
meticulous design and meaningful service level agreements 
[5].  If they cannot operate and be available to service 
customers 24x7, this should be clearly publicized to 
customers, and top management should be involved in 
decisions of this nature.   
The first two service issues – incompetent and rude staff 
– are largely a function of agent training (classroom and on-
the-job), coaching, mentorship and motivation. Agents need 
an empowering environment [2, 6], with supportive follow-
up and quality monitoring of their communication.  Apart 
from training in product, organizational, systems and process 
knowledge, agents may require additional language, 
communication, life skills, math or computer literacy skills. 
Training in “customer care”, empathy [13] and customer 
responsiveness is currently recognized to be of major 
importance. 
The final service issue, timeliness, was only coded in 
more serious cases, but is the end result of most of the other 
problem areas noted, and a major customer irritant.  With 
proper measurement processes and criteria in place [3, 5], 
this should be greatly improved. 
It should be noted again that these incidents should be 
regarded as illustrative, and not necessarily representative. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The digital society is making wider use of a range of 
communication channels.  As contact centers provide more 
of these for their customers they need to ensure that customer 
communications are effectively and efficiently managed and 
fully integrated.  There is no point giving customers the 
“channel of their choice” if their past communications cannot 
be synchronized with others received and sent through the 
contact center.  Customers also often require information 
from a number of corporate systems. In theory this should be 
facilitated by ERP and CRM software, but in practice some 
systems are not cleanly integrated or may not be accessible 
by the agent, and the concept of a “single view of the 
customer” remains very elusive for many organizations. 
The telecommunications industry might be expected to 
have a relatively strong ability to cater effectively for 
customers in the digital society.  For whatever reason, 
possibly due to its rapid growth and regular technological 
change, it seems to engender an above average percentage of 
customer complaints, and come short in a number of 
technical, information and systems areas.  It is interesting 
that the local service provider with the smallest percentage of 
complaints is one which has had to “play catch-up” to the 
two much bigger established players (granted licenses much 
earlier), and currently appears to be making a concerted, and 
reasonably successful, effort to use customer service as a 
competitive weapon.   
Telecommunications companies should learn from their 
past interactions with customers [17] and use technology 
such as CRM more effectively in future.  But they should 
also realize that increased digital opportunities imply 
increased organizational and managerial effort and resources, 
and adopt a stronger customer focus. 
Further research could be carried out to obtain the 
perspective of the telecommunications organizations and the 
challenges they face in supplying better customer service.  It 
could 
also 
examine 
customer 
concerns 
with 
telecommunication contact centers globally. 
80
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The financial support of the South African National 
Research Foundation is acknowledged. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] R. Kantsperger and W. H. Kunz, “Managing overall service quality 
in customer care centers: Empirical findings of a multi-perspective 
approach”, International Journal of Service Industry Management, 
vol. 16, no.2, pp. 135-151, 2005. 
[2] H. J. Richardson and D. Howcroft, “The contradictions of CRM – a 
critical lens on call centres”, Information and Organization, vol. 
16, pp. 143-168, 2005. 
[3] M. L. Hart, B. Fichtner, E. Fjalestad, and S. Langley, “Contact 
centre performance: In pursuit of first call resolution”, Management 
Dynamics, vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 17-28, 2006. 
[4] Z. Aksin, M. Armony, and V. Mehrotra, “The Modern Call Center: 
A Multi-Disciplinary Perspective on Operations Management 
Research”, Productions and Operations Management, vol. 16, no. 
6, pp. 665–688, 2007. 
[5] Merchants, 
Dimension 
Data‟s 
Global 
Contact 
Centre 
Benchmarking Report 2009. Gauteng, South Africa: Dimension 
Data, 2009. 
[6] M. L. Hart, Y. H. A. Chiang, and M. Tupochere, “Balancing agent 
performance and customer service in contact centres”, Journal of 
Contemporary Management, vol. 6, pp. 151-169, 2009. 
[7] M. Meltzer, “A customer relationship management approach: 
integrating the call centre with customer information”, Journal of 
Database Marketing, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 232-243, 2000. 
[8] ContactBabel, US Contact Center Decision-Makers' Guide 
(2009/2010 - 3rd edition), 2010. Retrieved December 17 2010 from 
http://www.contactbabel.com. 
[9] C. Benner, “South Africa on-call: information technology and 
labour market restructuring in South African call centres”, Regional 
Studies, vol. 40, no. 9, pp. 1025-1040, 2006. 
[10] Deloitte and CallingTheCape, Contact Centres and Business 
Process Outsourcing in Cape Town: 2007/2008 Key Indicator 
Report. Cape Town: Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu, 2008. 
[11] S. Derakhshani and M. L. Hart, “Outsourcing Contact Centres to a 
Developing Country”, Proc. 16th Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (AMCIS), 12-15 August 2010.  Available at 
http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2010/2. 
[12] R. Batt and L. Moynihan, “The viability of alternative call centre 
production models”, Human Resource Management Journal, vol. 
12, no. 4, pp. 14-34, 2002. 
[13] P. Ramseook-Munhurran, P. Naidoo, and S. D. Lukea-Bhiwajee, 
“Employee perceptions of service quality in a call centre”, 
Managing service quality, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 541-557, 2009. 
[14] H. Bernett and M. Jaramillo, “Assessing web-enabled call center 
technologies”, IT Professional, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 24-30, 2001. 
[15] I. J. Chen and K. Popovich, “Understanding customer relationship 
management (CRM) People, process and technology”, Business 
Process Management Journal, vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 672-688, 2003. 
[16] M. Xu and J. Walton, “Gaining customer knowledge through 
analytical CRM”, Industrial Management & Data Systems, vol. 
105, no. 7, pp. 955-71, 2005. 
[17] L. T. Wright, M. Stone, and J. Abbott, “The CRM imperative - 
Practice vs theory in the telecommunications industry”, Journal of 
Database Marketing, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 339-349, July 2002. 
[18] H. Cassab, “Investigating the dynamics of service attributes in 
multi-channel environments”, Journal of Retailing and Consumer 
Services, vol. 16, pp. 25-30, 2009. 
[19] S. A. Neslin, D. Grewal, R. Leghorn, V. Shankar, M. L. Teerling, J. 
S. Thomas, and P. C Verhoef, “Challenges and opportunities in 
multichannel customer management”, Journal of Service Research, 
vol. 9, no. 2, pp. 95-112, 2005. 
[20] A. Payne and P. Frow, “The role of multichannel integration in 
customer 
relationship 
management”, 
Industrial 
Marketing 
Management, vol. 33, pp. 527-538, 2004. 
[21] D. Holman, R. Batt, and U. Holtgrewe, The global call center 
report: international perspectives on management and employment, 
2007. 
Retrieved 
December 
17, 
2010, 
from 
http://www.ilr.cornell.edu/globalcallcenter/ 
[22] International Telecommunication Union, “Information Society 
Statistical Profiles 2009: Africa”, ITU: Geneva, 2010 
[23] S. 
Esselaar 
and 
A. 
Gillwald, 
2007 
South 
Africa 
Telecommunications Sector Performance Review. University of 
Witwatersrand, 2007. Retrieved December 17, 2010, from: 
http://link.wits.ac.za/papers/TSPR2007.pdf 
[24] World Economic Forum, “The Global Competitiveness Report 
2010-2011”, Editor: Professor Klaus Schwab, WEF: Geneva, 2010. 
[25] www.HelloPeter.com 
[26] M. L. Hart, M. Mannya, and D. New, “Customer Information 
Concerns in Banking Contact Centres”, Proc International 
Conference 
on 
Information 
Management 
and 
Evaluation, 
(ICIME‟10), Cape Town, 25-26 March 2010. 
[27] J. Fereday and E. Muir-Cochrane, “Demonstrating rigor using 
thematic analysis: A hybrid approach of inductive and deductive 
coding and theme development”, International Journal of 
Qualitative Methods, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 1-11, March, 2006. 
[28] D. R. Thomas, “A general inductive approach for qualitative data 
analysis”, University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand, 2003. 
Retrieved 
December 
17, 
2010 
from 
http://www.fmhs.auckland.ac.nz/soph/centres/hrmas/_docs/Inductiv
e2003.pdf 
[29] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “Using thematic analysis in psychology”, 
Qualitative Research in Psychology, vol. 3, pp. 77-101, 2006. 
 
 
81
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

