Shadow IT 
Management and Control of unofficial IT 
 
Christopher Rentrop; Stephan Zimmermann 
Faculty of Computer Science 
HTWG Konstanz – University of Applied Sciences 
Brauneggerstr. 55, 78462 Konstanz, Germany 
rentrop@htwg-konstanz.de; stzimmer@htwg-konstanz.de  
 
 
Abstract—Shadow IT describes the supplement of “official” IT 
by several, autonomous developed IT systems, processes and 
organizational units, which are located in the business 
departments. These systems are generally not known, accepted 
and supported by the official IT department. From the 
perspective of IT management and control it is necessary to 
find out, which interrelations exist with shadow IT and what 
tasks are resultant. So far only little research exists on this 
topic. To overcome this deficit the presented project targets on 
a scientifically based definition of shadow IT, the investigation 
of best practices in several companies and the development and 
application of instruments for the identification, the assessment 
and controlling of shadow IT.  
Keywords- Shadow IT; IT Controlling; IT Governance; IT 
Service Management. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
IT management and control focus on the effective, 
efficient, 
transparent 
and 
compliant 
organization 
of 
information technology to achieve a best possible support of 
the business objectives [1]. This includes the minimization of 
risks and the recognition and realization of opportunities for 
improvements. The “official” IT infrastructure, developed, 
managed and controlled by the IT department, is 
supplemented in most companies by an unofficial IT. 
Business departments have a multiplicity of other hardware, 
software and IT employees. Generally these exist without the 
awareness, acceptance and support of the IT department. The 
resulting, autonomous developed systems, processes and 
organizational units are usually characterized as “Shadow 
IT” [2].  
From IT management’s perspective, some questions 
arise: What does the existence of shadow IT mean to its 
implementation? Does IT management have an influence on 
the growth or reduction of shadow IT? And what 
continuative tasks result from this subject?  
Shadow IT is not a new phenomenon, but due to some 
current trends its significance is increasing [2]: New and 
primarily web-based technologies allow an easy access with 
low initial costs – so, on the first look, it is easy for a 
business department to select and get admirable IT services 
by itself. In addition to this the end users themselves play a 
particular role for growing shadow IT. Especially young 
employees have a strong bond to the usage of IT, as they 
grew up with it and use it in their daily private life. Thus, 
however, the expectation regarding the IT environment in 
their job is going to increase [3]. If the IT department is not 
able to satisfy their needs, the “emancipated” users start to 
take care of their IT devices and applications by themselves 
[4][5]. 
In this paper, we present first results of our research 
project “Shadow IT” [6]. Apart from the theoretical analysis 
of some detailed questions on this phenomenon and its 
definition, it is particularly necessary to develop methods for 
the identification and evaluation of shadow IT. In addition to 
that best practices have to be collected and the developed 
approaches have to be assessed in business. Several 
companies will be analyzed for data collection and for the 
verification of the methods mentioned above. All these steps 
are important to build a stable basis for developing an 
integrated and practical approach to control shadow IT. So 
far, we have set up the research concept and worked on the 
definition and the layout of the methods. 
For this paper we will give a brief literature review in 
Section II. Based on this analysis, research questions are 
derived. In Section III we will present a detailed description 
of shadow IT and its occurrences. Section IV introduces the 
first concepts and developed methods for the identification 
and evaluation. Section V concludes with a brief outlook and 
next steps of the study. 
II. 
STATE OF THE ART 
This section examines the state of the art on the topic 
shadow IT. Therefore, an overview of the most considerable 
literature is given. Based on this, open research questions 
will be derived. 
A. Literature Review 
In spite of its rising significance, shadow IT has so far 
only attracted little attention in science. Some references can 
be found using the term shadow IT. But mostly, the topic has 
a tangential-role or it is only mentioned in connection with 
the main issue of the considered work. Most references are 
practical reports or blogs, which are based on the author’s 
experience with no scientific foundation. Table 1 shows the 
central contributions, which are often referred to or which 
provide a solid investigation of the topic. 
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE I.  
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Reference 
Main content 
Sherman, 
2004 [7] 
This article focuses on Business Intelligence shadow IT, 
e.g., Excel- or Access-based systems, used to add 
information to reports, which are not supplied from the 
official IT. The systems start small and grow continually 
over time, which makes them costly to maintain. The 
data shadow systems can be recognized through user 
interviews on how reports are created. Sherman terms 
several reasons for their development: 1) Missing 
fulfillment of user’s needs; 2) Shadow IT is easy to 
develop and seems to be “cost-free”; 3) A solution is 
needed, but the realization of official IT projects takes 
too long. To control shadow IT he suggests an improved 
communication between business and IT and the 
creation of data marts to secure consistent databases.  
Bayan, 
2004 [8] 
Bayan describes reasons and effects of shadow IT and an 
approach how IT can deal with it. As the main reason he 
mentions the combination of reduced IT budgets and 
increasing IT demands. This forces business departments 
to develop their own IT. Furthermore, shadow IT is 
more focused on the business needs, it seems to be 
cheaper from business view and it appears to be faster 
and more dynamic than official IT. He refers primarily 
to security risks as the main effect of shadow IT. In his 
approach Bayan suggests to search for shadow IT with 
technical scanning tools. Afterwards, security gaps in the 
identified systems should be detected and closed. 
Finally, the implementation of new shadow IT should be 
reduced by achieving a better fulfillment of the business 
needs.  
Jones et al., 
2004 [9]; 
Behrens/ 
Sedera, 
2004 [10]; 
Behrens, 
2009 [11] 
These publications refer to a study on a single shadow 
IT system in an Australian university [8]. The study 
describes an eight-year life cycle of a shadow software 
system, which was implemented and supported parallel 
to an official system. The work shows the possible 
reasons for its implementation and the opportunities and 
risks shadow IT can have. Furthermore, the work 
presents a few lessons learnt [10] on how management 
and the official IT should react on existing shadow IT. It 
is stressed that contrary to the common opinion shadow 
IT also has positive sides: It can be a source of 
innovation. 
Raden, 
2005 [12] 
In his work Raden concentrates on spreadsheets for 
Business Intelligence. In his opinion this is the most 
common kind of shadow IT. These spreadsheets occur 
due to a lack of satisfaction of business requirements, 
such as reporting. Spreadsheets are an expressive, 
universally used, autonomous, fast and portable 
opportunity to fill these gaps. He highlights different 
problems through the behavior of developing shadow IT 
spreadsheets, e.g., wasted time, inconsistent business 
logic and inefficiencies. He concludes that a company-
wide supply and integration of databases connected to 
all official IT systems can reduce the negative effects. 
Schaffner, 
2007 [13 ] 
Schaffner describes effects and reasons for the 
development of shadow IT. As effects he lists several 
risks, such as poor engineering techniques, inefficiencies 
and compliance problems. His main argument for the 
existence of shadow IT is an insufficient alignment 
between business and IT. Typical efforts to reduce 
shadow IT, like the prohibition of shadow IT or the 
locking of administrator rights, don’t have any effects. 
Schaffner suggests a closer cooperation between 
business and IT to increase the IT understanding of 
business processes and requirements.  
Reference 
Main content 
Worthen, 
2007 [14] 
Worthen focuses on web tools and private devices as 
shadow IT. He highlights security and compliance 
violations as central risks. He is not considering the 
prohibition of shadow IT, because this could cause 
conflicts between business and IT departments. Also, the 
potential of user-driven innovations, which represents an 
opportunity of shadow IT, would be ignored. Instead he 
underlines, that the IT management has to find a strategy 
to deal with this subject. Worthen makes some general 
recommendations on how IT could handle shadow IT. 
Shumarova/
Swatman 
2008 [15] 
In their study the authors focus on shadow collaboration 
systems, e.g., social software, wikis, etc. They explain 
the rising usage of these systems due to an easy and 
cost-free access and the growing merger of private and 
work life. They deduce and discuss three basic strategies 
on how to handle these shadow collaboration systems: 1) 
Rejection and banning; 2) Limitation and regulation; 3) 
Acceptance. 
Dols, 2009 
[16] 
The topic of this master thesis is the search for causes of 
compliance defects in companies. In an empirical study, 
which analysis Dutch and Belgian subsidiaries of PwC, 
shadow IT is identified as one of two reasons for such 
defects. The work shows the state of the discussion on 
the topic shadow IT. Additional effects, causes or 
recommendations on shadow IT are not compiled. 
B. Open Research Questions 
The analysis of the articles listed in Table 1 and further 
existing references indicate a number of relevant open issues. 
These open research questions are listed in this paragraph.  
1) Definition and theoretical framework: The term 
shadow IT is mostly described in an experience-related way. 
An academic, cohere and consistent definition of shadow IT 
and its classification according to a theoretical framework is 
missing. 
2) Methods to deal with shadow IT: There are no 
specific methods or tools on how to deal with shadow IT. 
The existing frameworks and best practice approaches, such 
as ITIL [17] or COBIT [18], do not offer solutions regarding 
shadow IT. To develop a consistent methodology for this 
subject, the first steps are to identify shadow IT in practice 
and to evaluate the collected data. The developed methods 
need to be empirically tested. Best practices in the examined 
companies could be collected, to find out how successful 
companies deal with this topic. The answers to the first two 
research questions should establish a detailed basis for the 
following research work. 
3) Business view: Most articles focus on shadow IT 
from IT view. The possibilities and consequences of the 
topic for the business are only analyzed occasionally. 
4) Positive effects: The existing work primarily 
associates shadow IT only with negative effects. There is 
barely a focus on the opportunities of shadow IT. 
Nevertheless, to identify the potentials of user-driven 
shadow IT, it is necessary to identify positive outcomes of 
99
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Figure 1.  Process-oriented Shadow IT Landscape - Example 
shadow IT like improved process orientation and faster 
adoption of technical innovations. 
5) Integrated 
approach: 
Mainly, 
the 
current 
contributions only focus on partial aspects of shadow IT. To 
handle the increasing phenomenon in practice and to give 
organizations an orientation on the controlling of shadow IT 
a balanced set of instruments and methods is necessary. 
Therefore, it is useful to collect best practices and develop 
an integrated, scientific approach including its relation to the 
different elements and tasks of IT management; IT 
governance and IT service management. 
III. 
DEFINITION AND OCCURRENCES OF SHADOW IT 
In Section I, we defined Shadow IT as a collection of 
systems developed by business departments without support 
of the official IT department.  
This definition of shadow IT includes a variety of 
different occurrences [2]. One aspect is the usage of “Social 
Media Software” for business communication and data 
exchange or other services offered by providers from the 
internet, e.g., Cloud Computing or Software as a Service 
[14][19]. Furthermore, shadow IT includes the development 
and operation of self-built applications. In many cases these 
applications are Excel or Access based [7] and implemented 
by employees in the business departments. Moreover, the 
subject includes purchasing, in-house development and 
support of business intelligence solutions [12]. In the field of 
hardware, shadow IT relates to the integration of self-
procured notebooks, servers, network routers, printers or 
other peripherals [13]. These devices are procured directly 
from a retailer, instead of being ordered via the official IT 
catalogue. A special case is the own purchasing of mobile 
devices, such as smartphones or tablets, and the usage of the 
related applications in the company network [20]. Finally, 
another occurrence is the development of own IT-support 
structures inside the business departments [12][13]: In case 
of IT incidents or problems technology-friendly colleagues 
are asked for help.  
For the definition of shadow IT it is necessary to 
differentiate the term from end user computing (EUC). In 
this concept, the development of applications is delegated to 
the end users [21]. In contrast to shadow IT, EUC is 
officially initiated and supported. Primarily EUC is applied 
for the development of very easy IT solutions based on 
official platforms or for basic, individual configurations 
concerning specific applications. 
The phenomenal description is one way to develop a 
definition for shadow IT. Another way is to consider existing 
work on informal organization [22] structures: Unofficial 
and hidden shadow IT processes are created in parallel with 
official structures. Similar to informal organization structures 
shadow IT differs from official policies and establishes own 
structures and processes. In addition, the emergence of both 
phenomena is linked with a distinct orientation towards 
employees’ needs and results often from a lack within the 
formal structures, e.g., the autonomous acting of business 
departments pictures an irregularity concerning the decision 
of centralization within the defined IT governance.  
Moreover, the emergence of shadow IT can be explained 
with information asymmetries and conflicts of interest 
between IT and business departments [23]. Information 
asymmetries associated with this relation exist as incorrectly 
understood business requirements by the IT and as a lack of 
knowledge by the business departments in general IT 
subjects and offered IT services. This asymmetry can lead to 
overpromised offers regarding service levels and software 
functionality and overcharged prices for IT services. The 
business departments experience these effects and therefore 
they try to reduce these risks. As a result, they deploy their 
own (shadow IT) solutions.  
IV. 
IDENTIFICATION AND EVALUATION OF SHADOW IT 
This section presents the current level of the research 
project in identifying and evaluating shadow IT. This refers 
to research question 2 and includes the collection of best 
practice data in the analyzed representative companies. 
A. Identification Methods 
Generally, there are three possible strategies for the 
collection of shadow IT information: 1) technical analyses 
[8]; 2) interpretation of help desk requests and 3) direct 
surveys of employees in the business departments [7].  
The first approach is to identify shadow IT hardware or 
software with technical tools. Existing license management 
software and a network analysis tool for shadow hardware, 
which has been already developed in cooperation with this 
project team, can be used. The second method is based on 
information retrieved form the company’s service desk. 
Incidents and problems identified there can be investigated 
on shadow IT as project experience proves that a remarkable 
number of calls is related to unofficial IT. 
The third approach is a process oriented survey. It is 
based on structured interviews and process monitoring, to 
find out, which IT tools employees use in their daily 
business. Based on the experience gained in these interviews, 
we will try to develop standardized questionnaires to collect 
more information on user behavior and the usage of shadow 
IT. 
The types of results from this identification phase are, 
e.g., graphical process descriptions with actual used IT tools 
and process-oriented IT landscapes with identified shadow 
100
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Figure 2.  Shadow IT Evaluation Portfolio - Example 
IT. Fig. 1 illustrates exemplarily the presentation of shadow 
IT in a process-oriented landscape on an abstract and high 
level. The identified shadow IT is assigned to one or several 
value chain activities [24], such as Operation or 
Administration. Also, the kind of shadow IT is shown. This 
type of representation can be refined on a level of 
departments and business processes to achieve a more 
detailed view. Thus, the process-oriented IT landscape 
allows picturing the shadow IT impact on business. 
The different methods for shadow IT identification have 
certain advantages and disadvantages. The technical and help 
desk analysis enables a direct and quick search for shadow 
IT within the company’s IT architecture. However, it is 
difficult to find all existing shadow IT occurrences with 
these techniques and it is not possible to define shadow IT 
related processes. In contrast to this, the structured 
interviews are based on the business processes and reveal the 
process-relation of identified shadow IT. However, this 
method depends on the knowledge and willingness of the 
interviewed users, e.g., the users might try to hide shadow IT 
applications from the interviewer. Furthermore, a lot of work 
and time is necessary to apply this method. Due to the 
described facts a combination of the methods is practical: 
The technical and the help desk analysis should be the 
foundation for the process survey. Thereby the expenses and 
disadvantages can be reduced and process-related results can 
be provided. 
B. Evaluation Methods 
After the identification of shadow IT, each specific 
system has to be evaluated. This validation is important to 
assess first needs of action due to risks. The evaluation 
results build the basic input for the development of 
guidelines and strategies. The following section briefly 
presents an evaluation model developed in the study.  
For 
the 
evaluation, 
it 
is 
necessary 
to 
collect 
comprehensive information on the company and the IT, its 
policies and strategies. The general aim is to define 
aggregated characteristics to evaluate located shadow IT. 
Based on shadow IT examples in literature and discussions 
with companies and due to existing interactions of shadow 
IT with risk management, IT governance and IT service 
management topics, several parameters can be derived as 
mayor evaluation criteria. 
The mayor criterion relevance describes the significance 
and importance of a located shadow IT instance for the 
investigated organization. Therefore, the analysis of the 
strategic relevance and the shadow IT criticality concerning 
the business processes, the IT security, the compliance and 
the IT service management is necessary. The mayor criterion 
quality refers to the system, the service and the information 
quality of the located shadow IT. Furthermore, the effects of 
shadow IT on the quality of business processing is of 
interest. The size of shadow IT is evaluated with regard to its 
use of resources and professionalism, its distribution in the 
company and its penetration with components and IT service 
processes.  
 
TABLE II.  
SHADOW IT EVALUTAION CRITERIA 
 
Apart from these criteria, it is essential to evaluate the 
innovative potential of the shadow IT instance. Finally, it is 
of interest to judge, if shadow IT is operated parallel to an 
existing, official IT-System or if it is complementary. Table 
II summarizes the different major and sub-criteria of this 
shadow IT evaluation model. 
All sub-criteria on the different levels need to be 
weighted individually for the regarded company and rated 
for each located shadow IT instance. For the specific criteria 
evaluation different procedures and models, such as maturity 
models, can be applied. The total ratings of the major criteria 
are based on the weighted ratings of their sub-criteria. With 
these results each shadow IT instance is transferred into a 
Shadow IT evaluation criteria 
Mayor criteria 
Sub-criteria level I 
Sub-criteria level II 
 
 
Relevance 
Strategic relevance 
Criticality 
Business process 
IT security 
Compliance 
IT service management 
 
 
 
Quality 
System quality 
Hard-/Software 
Engineering process 
Service quality 
Information quality 
Quality of business processing 
 
 
 
Size 
Use of resources and professionalism 
Number of users 
Shadow IT components 
Shadow IT service processes 
 
 
 
Innovative potential 
 
 
 
Parallelism 
101
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

portfolio as exemplarily shown in Fig. 2. The portfolio 
consists of the two axes relevance and quality, the size for an 
instance and the color for the innovative potential. A parallel 
existing instance is marked with two parallel lines. The 
portfolio indicates which shadow IT instances have to be 
addressed with a high priority and establishes a basis for 
further management approaches to control shadow IT. 
Furthermore, the development of shadow IT-related key 
performance indicators is an intended aim of the project. 
Based on this, it is possible to realize relevant benchmarks. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This paper introduced our research on shadow IT. The 
importance for IT management is shown and existing 
references are analyzed. As a result of this analysis, several 
open research questions could be pointed out. We have 
shown the initial steps and ideas of the research project with 
the focus on the definition, the identification and evaluation 
of shadow IT. 
For the next steps, the theoretical questions on the 
definition of shadow IT and its relation to IT management 
disciplines have to be compiled. Besides, a detailed 
development of the discussed methods and their empirical 
appliance in practice will be carried out. Best practices for 
the handling of shadow IT will be investigated in the 
companies involved. Based on the results of data collection, 
the research project aims at the development of an integrated 
and practical approach to control shadow IT. This enables 
the revelation of its innovative potentials and the further 
development to a “User-driven IT”. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research project is partially funded by the Ministry 
of Science, Research and Arts Baden-Württemberg [25]. The 
authors would also like to thank Cassini Consulting GmbH 
and Schutzwerk GmbH for supporting this project. Finally, 
we would like to thank the reviewers for their valuable input. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Zarnekow and W. Brenner, “Auf dem Weg zu einem 
produkt- und dienstleistungsorientierten IT-Management,“ 
HMD – Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, vol. 40, no. 232, 
2003, pp. 7-16. 
[2] C. Rentrop, O. van Laak, and M. Mevius, “Schatten-IT: ein 
Thema für die Interne Revision,” Revisionspraxis – Journal 
für 
Revisoren, 
Wirtschaftsprüfer, 
IT-Sicherheits- 
und 
Datenschutzbeauftragte, April 2011, pp. 68-76. 
[3] K. 
Quack, 
“Autoritätsverlust 
oder 
wahre 
Größe?” 
computerwoche.de, 
July 
08, 
2010, 
http://www.computerwoche.de/management/itstrategie/23490
55/index.html, checked on 22/08/2011. 
[4] Accenture GmbH, “Millennials vor den Toren – Anspruch der 
Internet-Generation an IT, ” Kronberg, 2009. 
[5] RSA Security Inc., “The Confessions Survey,” Bedford, 2007. 
[6] See for the research project “Shadow IT” our website   
www.schattenit.in.htwg-konstanz.de, checked on 22/08/2011. 
[7] R. Sherman, “Shedding light on data shadow systems,” 
Information 
Management 
Online, 
April 
29, 
2004, 
http://www.information-management.com/news/1002617-
1.html,checked on 22/08/2011.  
[8] R. 
Bayan, 
“Shed 
light 
on 
shadow 
IT 
groups,” 
techrepublic.com, July 09, 2004 http://www.techrepublic.com 
article/ hed-light-on-shadow-it-groups/5247674, checked on 
22/08/2011. 
[9] D. Jones, S. Behrens, K. Jamieson, and E. Tansley, “The rise 
and fall of a shadow system: Lessons for enterprise system 
implementation,” ACIS 2004 Proceedings Paper 96. 
[10] S. Behrens and W. Sedara, “Why Do Shadow Systems Exist 
after an ERP Implementation? Lessons from a Case Study”, 
PACIS 2004 Proceedings, Paper 136. 
[11] S. Behrens, “Shadow Systems: The Good, the Bad and the 
Ugly,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 52, no. 2, 2009, pp. 
124-129, DOI: 10.1145/1461928.1461960. 
[12] N. Raden, “Shedding light on shadow IT: Is Excel running 
your business?” Hired Brains Inc., Santa Barbara, 2005. 
[13] M. Schaffner, “IT needs to become more like "Shadow IT",” 
January 
12, 
2007 
http://mikeschaffner.typepad.com/ 
michael_schaffner/2007/01/ we_need_more_sh.html, checked 
on 22/08/2011. 
[14] B. Worthen, “User Management - Users who know too much 
and the CIOs who fear them,” CIO.com, 15/02/2007, 
http://www.cio.com/article/28821/User_Management_Users_
Who_Know_Too_Much_and_the_CIOs_Who_Fear_Them_?
page=1&taxonomyId=3119, checked on 22/08/2011.  
[15] E. Shumarova and P. A. Swatman, “Informal eCollaboration 
channels: Shedding light on “Shadow CIT”,” eCollaboration: 
Overcoming Boundaries through Multi-Channel Interaction, 
21st Bled eConference, June 15-18, 2008, Bled, pp. 371-394. 
[16] T. Dols, “Influencing factors towards non-compliance in 
information systems,” UAS Utrecht, 2009. 
[17] Office of Government Commerce, “ITIL - Service Strategy,” 
London: TSO, 2007. 
[18] IT Governance Institute, “COBIT 4.1,” Rolling Meadows, 
2007. 
[19] B. Stone, “Firms fret as office e-mail jumps security walls,” 
International 
Herald 
Tribune 
January 
11, 
2007, 
http://www.nytimes.com/2007/01/11/technology/11iht-
web.0111email.4167773.html?_r=1 checked on 22/08/2011. 
[20] N. Zeitler, “iPad & Co. am Arbeitsplatz: Strategie gegen die 
Schatten-IT,” 
CIO.de, 
November 
15, 
2010, 
http://www.cio.de/_misc/article/printoverview/index.cfm?pid
=157&pk=2250537&op=lst, checked on 22/08/2011. 
[21] J.C. Brancheau and C. Brown, “The management of end-user 
computing: Status and Directions,” ACM Computing 
Surveys, vol. 25, no. 4, 1993, pp. 437–482. 
[22] R. Lang: “Informelle Organisation,” in Handwörterbuch 
Unternehmensführung und Organisation, 
vol. 
IV, G. 
Schreyögg, A. von Werder, Eds. Stuttgart: Schäffer-Poeschel, 
2004, pp. 497–505. 
[23] V. Gurbaxani and C. F. Kemerer, Chris, “An Agent-Theoretic 
Perspective of the Management of Information Systems,” 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Second Hawaii Conference on 
Systems 
Science, 
vol. 
III, 
1989, 
pp. 
141-150, 
doi:10.1109/HICSS.1989.49234. 
[24] M. Porter: “Competitive advantage: creating and sustaining 
superior performance,” The Free Press, New York, 1985. 
[25] Ministry of Science, Research and Arts Baden-Württemberg, 
Germany – Website: http://mwk.baden-wuerttemberg.de, 
checked on 22/08/2011. 
 
102
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

