Motivations and Risks of Social Media Crowdsourcing in War-torn Societies: 
Evidence from Syria 
 
 
 
Khaled Saleh Al Omoush 
Al-Zaytoonah University of Jordan 
Amman-Jordan 
e-mail: k.Alomoush@zuj.edu.jo 
Saad Ghaleb Yassen 
Al-Zaytoonah University of Jordan 
Amman-Jordan 
e-mail: Saad.yaseen@zuj.edu.jo 
 
 
Abstract—This research aims to investigate motivations of 
social media crowdsourcing, potential risks, as well as the 
determinants of continuity of participating in online 
crowdsourcing communities via social media during civil 
wars. Maslow’s hierarchy of needs has been used for 
understanding motivations of social media crowdsourcing. 
The present research also investigates three major potential 
risks associated with social media crowdsourcing in civil 
war-torn societies, including direct personal threats, the 
penetration of terrorism ideology, and advocacy of hatred. 
The present study revealed that social media is not just a 
platform for social interaction or other traditional purposes 
that have been mentioned in the related literature. In the 
current Syrian crisis, social media crowdsourcing has been 
employed effectively in exchanging, disseminating, and 
sharing information, solutions, and advices to meet the basic 
Syrians' needs and how to deal with the different and 
complex features of the crisis. 
 
Keywords-social media crowdsourcing; motivation; risk; 
moral continuity of participation. 
 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
    The beginning of the 21st century has been marked by 
the repetitive occurrence of large-scale natural disasters 
and human-provoked emergencies, events commonly 
known as crises [1]. Civil wars and the spread of terrorism 
in different parts of the world are the most tragic human-
provoked disasters causing catastrophic humanitarian 
crises, where civilians are paying the highest price. 
According to Global Peace Index (2015), Syria has been 
named as the most dangerous country in the world on 
international levels of peace and violence for the year 
2015. An estimated hundreds of thousands of Syrian 
civilians were killed. The conflict has also contributed to 
expulsion and flight of millions of civilians from their 
homes into refugee camps.  
    With the absence of governmental institutions, millions 
of people are still steadfast in their country and struggling 
to survive using all means available. In such cases, 
citizens have only themselves to rely on, coping with 
unpredictable events, and encouraging each other to stay 
in their homes in spite of the risks. In such situations, the 
collaboration of citizens is becoming more and more 
indispensable, where citizens are moving from a reactive 
behavior to a proactive outlook characterized by free 
involvement and self-responsibility [2][3]. In such large-
scale and long-term crises, one of the greatest challenges 
to those involved in crisis management efforts, including 
citizens, is to have efficient, stable, and accessible tele-
communication platforms for reaching a large number of 
people on a limited amount of time and resources [2]-[4]. 
    The effectiveness of social media tools, including 
Social Networking Sites (SNSs), image and video hosting 
sites, Wikis, and blogs, has been increasing in every area 
of human life in recent years [5]. In the past few years, the 
initial role of social media as a means to keep in touch 
with friends, family and colleagues has evolved and they 
are becoming a more important means of communication 
and collaboration during emergencies, disasters, and 
crises [6]. Events of the current civil wars are showing a 
new kind of powerful crisis community, which is made 
possible by new social media that supports crowdsourcing 
approaches. 
    More than five years ago, social media has represented 
the artery for feeding the peaceful revolutions aiming to 
change regimes that protested many Arab countries.  Later 
on, 
it 
has 
played 
a 
role 
in civil 
war 
ignition as mobilizing tools on the basis of ethnic and 
religious identity behind one of the parties to the conflict. 
The most important good role that a social computing 
plays is enabling Syrian civilians to participate in the 
large-scale humanitarian 
crisis 
management 
that 
is 
sweeping across the country. Nowadays, Syrians are 
employing social media crowdsourcing effectively in 
exchanging, disseminating, and sharing information, 
solutions, and advices on how to deal with the different 
and complex features of the crisis.  
    The current Middle East crises constitute historical 
events for Information and Communication Technology 
(ICT) researchers to study the social media crowdsourcing 
in war-torn societies. Although there is an extensive 
interest in the role of social media in harassing 
crowdsourcing, little research exists on the role, uses and 
potential risks of social media crowdsourcing in war-torn 
societies. Therefore, the purpose of the present research is 
to investigate motivations of social media crowdsourcing, 
potential risks, and the determinants of continuity 
participating in the online crowdsourcing communities via 
social media during civil wars. The present study sheds 
light on the critical role of social media in providing the 
opportunity for society's members to participate in the 
crises management alleviating the hardship, miseries, and 
tribulations of civilians in War-torn Societies. 
 
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

II. AN OVERVIEW OF SOCIAL MEDIA 
CROWDSOURCING 
    Crowdsourcing is basically used to describe the act of 
taking a task traditionally performed by a designated 
agent and outsourcing it to an undefined, generally large 
group of people in the form of an open call [7]. The real 
power and uniqueness of crowdsourcing lies in the active 
participation of intelligent humans in a task assigned to 
them changing the way of solving problems, producing 
knowledge, generating ideas, and making them actionable 
[8]. The philosophy of crowdsourcing is grounded in the 
concept that every member of crowd has knowledge that 
some other person will find to be valuable, where unique 
and different perspectives derived from a diverse 
community represents a very powerful machine for 
collaborative problem solving [7]. The literature (e.g. [7] 
- [10]) has emphasized the role of social computing in 
empowering the concept of crowdsourcing. 
 
    The effectiveness of social media tools, including 
SNSs, image and video hosting sites, Wikis, and blogs, 
has been increasing in every area of human life in recent 
years [5]. They have provided a fertile ground for 
collaborating, accessing and disseminating information, 
and sharing knowledge. There is a rapid growth of online 
social networks and an explosion in user-generated 
content published on the social platforms. Image and 
video hosting sites, such as YouTube and Flicker enable 
anyone to upload content such as videos or pictures to be 
shared with everyone or with a restrictive community of 
users. Blogging and micro-blogging media also represents 
a free platform to share facts, values, emotions, ideas, 
opinions, and expectations. Actually, social media is 
providing unprecedented levels of citizen engagement and 
participation in their local and wider communities, 
revolutionizing the way problems are addressed, and 
allowing all actors to monitor and act upon almost 
anything, anywhere, in real-time [11]. These tools have 
provided unprecedented opportunities to bring individuals 
and 
groups 
of 
people 
together 
constituting 
the 
crowdsourcing communities seeing beyond the self. 
 
III. LITERATURE REVIEW 
    The review of literature indicates that crowdsourcing, 
as a new model to harnesses the creative solutions from 
the crowds, is receiving a growing attention. With the 
rapid development of social computing, and the increasing 
importance of social media in people life, social media 
crowdsourcing is gaining more and more attention from 
researchers in many fields. The unexpected flow and 
evolving nature of crises accompanied the revolutions that 
protested many countries did not provide the opportunity 
to study any aspect of the extensive adoption and 
contribution in social media crowdsourcing as a platform 
to participate in the crises management. 
 
Crowdsourcing is an emerging field of study and still 
in its early stages. The adoption and use of social media 
crowdsourcing in crises management has not yet received 
much research attention. However, much of the previous 
research (e.g., [10][12]) has focused on developing 
different applications to involve the crowds in the crises 
management. Another line of research (e.g. [9][13]) has 
been dedicated to describe the usage patterns of social media 
crowdsourcing in the crises and disasters. 
 
A considerable body of researches (e.g., [2][14]) were 
conducted to investigate the role of social media in the 
efforts of search, rescue, and emergency response. At a 
time that some crises, especially those arising out of civil 
wars, necessitate civilians' self-protection and resilience, it 
is worth mentioning that the majority of previous studies 
(e.g., [2][3][15]) have revolved around the existence of a 
wide range of authorities, such as police, fire, emergency 
medical and governmental authorities that can be relied 
upon to coordinate the efforts of crisis management. 
 
The previous research (e.g., [12][15]) agreed that 
appraising the contribution of social media to crisis 
management depends on the nature of the crisis and risks 
that people face, as there is no one-size-fits-all approach. 
This agreement confirms the need to study the harnessing 
of social media crowdsourcing for long term crises; 
especially those accompany with armed conflicts in civil 
war-torn societies, where very little efforts have been 
made in this area.  
Based on the previous literature review and following 
up on the Syrian crisis via social media, the present study 
has derived the constructs of research framework as 
shown in Table I. 
 
TABLE I. THE CONSTRACTS OF THE FRAMEWORK 
 
Constructs 
Dimensions 
References/ 
Evidences 
Motivations 
Survival 
[17]-[20] 
Safety  
[15] [21] 
Sense of Community 
[22]-[26] 
Cognitive Motivation 
[28]-[30] 
Self-actualization 
[1] [4] [28] 
Potential Risks 
Direct Personal Threats 
[4] [24] [32] 
The Penetration of 
Terrorism Ideology 
[33]-[35] 
Advocacy of Hatred 
[31] [34] [36] 
 
IV. RESEARCH MODEL 
     In civil war-torn societies that witness blind deadliest 
terrorist attacks threatening the life and survival of 
civilians, it is axiomatic that people are suffering and 
struggling to secure their basic humanitarian needs and 
avoiding risks. However, one of the prominent ways to 
explain motives for using social media crowdsourcing in 
civil war-torn societies is through Maslow’s need 
hierarchy theory. Maslow’s hierarchy of needs has 
enjoyed widespread acceptance in the area of human 
motivation. According to Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, all 
human beings endeavor to fulfil a hierarchy of five 
motivational needs consisting of physiological, safety, 
belongingness and love, esteem, and self-actualization. 
Following Maslow's logic, lower physiological and safety 
needs can come back into focus when facing complex 
crises, such as those arising out of civil wars, where the 
people can drop to a lower level that reflects needs of 
what was lost. Therefore, Maslow’s hierarchy of 
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

motivational needs is an appropriate choice to explain 
motivations of creating and participating in social media 
crowdsourcing during the crises in war-torn societies. The 
research model (Fig. 1) proposes that, during large- scale 
and long-term crises, such as those arising out of civil 
wars, social media crowdsourcing are motivated by five 
humanitarian needs consisting of survival, safety, sense of 
community, cognitive motivations, and self-actualization. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Motivations and risks of social media crowdsourcing in war-
torn societies  
 
     On the other hand, the present research proposes three 
major risks associated with social media crowdsourcing in 
civil war-torn societies that could threaten the participants 
and society as a whole. Furthermore, the research model 
suggests that participants continually negotiate and direct 
the tension between motivational needs and perceived 
risks to determine the continuity of participation value in 
social media crowdsourcing. 
A.  Motivations 
 
    Theories of motivation posit that an individual's 
behavior is driven by his needs that transformed into goal-
directed actions to fulfill these needs through available 
means [16]. There are different motivational theories that 
have been used to investigate the motivational issues of 
crowdsourcing. Each motivational theory has its unique 
ways 
of 
motivating 
factors. 
For 
example, 
Self-
determination theory (SDT) that has been developed by 
Deci and Ryan [16] distinguishes between intrinsic and 
extrinsic motivations. This theory represents a broad 
framework for the study of human motivations and 
explaining the reasons for 
online crowdsourcing. 
However, one of the lessons of the literatures is that there 
are no standard sets of motivations for adopting and using 
social media, where motivations vary across social media 
services, environments, situations, and cultures. In civil 
war-torn societies, people are forced to return to 
backwardness, disintegration, racism, absolutism eras, and 
early human communities' needs. On the other hand, using 
social media in general is mostly selective and motivated 
by self-awareness of the individual’s own needs and his 
expectation of satisfying them by particular types of 
media that give a certain advantage above other already 
known alternatives. Therefore, for the purpose of the 
present research, Maslow’s hierarchy of needs theory was 
adopted to clarify the needs that motivate people to 
engage in social media crowdsourcing in crises situations. 
Below, we discuss in more detail each dimension of these 
motivations. 
Survival 
 
    Maslow considered survival needs as being the first and 
foremost of all needs through obtaining air, food, drinking 
water, shelter, warmth, sleep, clothing and others. It is 
ironic that people who are forced to return to 
backwardness, disintegration, racism, absolutism eras, and 
early human communities' needs are thankful for most 
advanced technologies in securing their basic needs to 
stay alive and continue their resilience. In Syria, 
conflicting parties are using siege and starvation as a 
weapon of civil war. Inhabitants of the besieged cities 
have inquired about Fatwas (religious edicts) allowing 
them to eat cats, dogs and donkeys to stave off hunger.  
    The tools of social media that are used by Syrians 
include countless 
examples 
of 
disseminating 
and 
exchanging information regarding food, drinking water, 
medical assistance, pharmaceuticals for chronic diseases 
sources, fuel sources, transportation services to areas 
where needed, and temporary shelters for Syrians who had 
lost their homes. The international humanitarian aid 
organizations mainly depend on the interaction with the 
crowd through social media in addressing the shortage of 
human needs and utilities and launching humanitarian aid 
appeals to help the affected areas. The best examples of 
these organizations are International Committee of the 
Red Cross in Syria [17]; and Syrian Arab Red Crescent 
[18]. Furthermore, SNSs have been employed effectively 
to help find and collect information about missing and 
abducted persons. For example, a lot of groups and pages 
have been initiated on Facebook by volunteers, such as 
community Organization in Damascus [19] and Missing 
and Martyrs [20]. 
Safety 
 
    Safety represents the second level of Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs. This motivation represents the needs 
for security and protection from harm which is 
psychologically perceived to threaten life and survival. In 
the context of civil wars, such needs include freedom 
from danger, absence of threat, and stability. Many 
emergencies require an early warning which reaches 
people as quickly as possible. More and more evidence 
shows that citizen-driven emergency response is a critical 
part of an effective response to major disasters and 
emergencies [15]. In war-torn societies, civilians are 
looking forward to having guidelines on how to act and 
what kind of actions are expected from them [21].  
    Experiences from the current Syrian crisis show that 
social media plays an important role in providing to the 
general 
public 
up-to-the-minute 
information 
about 
emergencies, risks, and how to respond. It represents a 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

valuable channel for emergency services to send an alert 
and warning in real time and even to initiate actions. They 
are using it to raise awareness of the risks related to the 
geographical areas where the follower is located and 
provide recommendations if needed. Social media also 
used by crowd to send cautions, conduct situational 
wakefulness instantly, and to provide advice by posting 
information such as emergency phone numbers, location 
of hospitals requiring blood donations, evacuation routes. 
Sense of Community 
 
    The sense of community concept refers to individuals’ 
subjective feeling of attachment and belongingness to a 
bigger and stable structure which can be relied upon for a 
variety of purposes [22]. It meets the third level of 
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs, which is fulfilling the need 
for belonging and love, including friends, a family, and a 
community. Social media and, more specifically, SNSs 
can help create a sense of community that gives 
individuals the feeling that they are not alone in the crisis 
and that there are others experiencing similar hardships 
and difficulties [6]. The tools of social media have 
provided unprecedented opportunities to bring Syrian 
individuals and groups together constituting a new kind of 
societies seeing beyond the self. They have provided a 
fertile ground for sharing the pain of victims.  
    Social media has provided an open arena to these 
communities to target specific groups and the wider 
public to deliver messages about conflict prevention and 
reduction, disarmament, and reconciliation. It has allowed 
the voices of ordinary citizens to be amplified 
communicating and submitting human rights abuses and 
war crimes committed by all parties in conflict, and 
calling to neutralize civilians and populated residential 
areas. Examples of these groups are Syrian Network for 
Human Rights [23] and Raqqa is Being Slaughtered 
Silently campaign [24]. Innovative initiatives have been 
taken place on SNSs to support dialogue for conflict 
reduction and peace efforts, such as pray for Syria [25] 
and the Permanent Campaign for Peace in Syria [26], and 
Peoples Commission for National Reconciliation [27]. 
 
Cognitive Motivation 
    According to Maslow [28], cognitive needs that include 
perceptual, intellectual, and learning capacities represent 
a set of adjustive tools, which have, among other 
functions, that of satisfaction of basic needs. These 
cognitive needs explain the motivational role of desire to 
know and understand, curiosity, learning, philosophizing, 
experimenting or, in other word, to see rather than to be 
blind [28]. Actually, the cognitive needs have been 
considered as a major motivation to use social media 
[29]-[30].  
    The platforms of social media have contributed widely 
to build, raise, and share Syrians' awareness about the 
essence of the crisis, threats and risk, and gaining a 
broader understanding of the situation as a whole. 
Furthermore, the growing phenomenon of citizens’ 
journalism through social media has been a great value in 
providing the first-hand account of Syrian crisis events as 
they occur in the forms of images, video and audio 
messages, and information, thus contributing to the 
enhancement of the general public’ situational awareness. 
In fact, in the Syrian case, it has been of great value for 
Syrians and the world to satisfy the need to have the latest 
and unique information available during crises raising the 
situation awareness at real-time. 
 
Self-actualization 
 
    Maslow [28] believes that in the highest level of needs 
are self-actualization that leads to creativity and openness 
to experience. According to 
Maslow [28], self-
actualization refers to individual's aspirations to achieve 
self-fulfillment, namely, to the tendency for him to 
become actualized in what he is potentially. This tendency 
describes a desire that could lead to realizing one's 
capabilities potential to the fullest [28]. The increased use 
of social media during a crisis can often involves the 
recording of the self and others at the scene of a crisis [4]. 
The great advantage of social media as a driver of creative 
innovations is that anyone can create a platform to voice 
their thoughts and set up his own online initiatives.         
    According to Manso and Manso [1], citizens prove to 
be highly proficuous in launching and contributing to 
online innovative initiatives during crises, such as 
websites, Facebook pages and groups, Wikis, hashtags 
and tweets created by volunteers to place them at the 
services of society. These initiatives are highlighting the 
importance of social media in catalyzing people to be 
ideal citizens, accept and express of their inner core or 
self, provide aid and information to others, support 
dialogue for conflict reduction and peace efforts satisfying 
their self-actualization needs. The most striking example 
of self-actualizing efforts in the Syrian civil war is the 
growing phenomenon of citizens’ journalism through 
social media to communicate, track, and share factual 
information and hard facts in real time. Furthermore, 
millions of Syrians fled their country seeking beyond 
covering their basic humanitarian needs. Social media has 
driven the awareness to those outside the affected areas, 
generating 
volunteers 
and 
donors 
to 
enhance 
a 
community's resilience on the long run. 
B.  Potential Risks 
 
    When dealing with any form of outsourcing of tasks, 
including crowdsourcing, the risks are non-trivial 
especially for groups that are more distant geographically, 
culturally, and intellectually where many situations arise 
that cannot be foreseen [8]. According to Buecheler et al. 
[8], crowdsourcing is an extreme case of dealing with the 
unknown, where the individuals of the crowd are a priori 
unknown and contingency plans for unexpected behavior 
of this interacting mass cannot be fully prepared 
beforehand. The literature on crowdsourcing has raised 
different risk factors and sources. However, following up 
on the Syrian crisis, the present research identified three 
major 
potential 
risks 
that 
threaten 
social 
media 
crowdsourcing in civil war-torn societies. These are: 
 
Direct Personal Threats 
 
    Social media aggregates vast volumes of personal and 
social information, such as information about the family, 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

relationships, political views, social activities, and 
religion. Photos, video footage, message or status updates 
may contain a visual evidence of an individual being 
present and help identify his identity and disclosing of 
private and confidential personal details [4]. In civil war-
torn societies, user's anonymity is important if content is 
to be generated and disseminated without fear of 
recrimination [31]. Being able to locate individuals in 
particular places can associate them with certain activities 
that can put citizen journalists and other individuals at 
risk [4][32]. For example, the use of social media during 
the Arab revolutions met with resistance whereby some 
government authorities used citizens’ social media trails 
to identify, locate, and target online protestors [32]. In the 
periods of political unrest or civil wars, activists on social 
media are encountering a wide range of risks and threats, 
including, but not limited to, exposing the private 
information, online attacks, imprisonment, harassment, 
threats to relatives, torture, kidnapping, and death. 
 
In the Syrian civil war, unfortunately, social media are 
used to identify and target the online antagonists and, in a 
lot of cases, anti-war activists. According to the website 
of "Raqqa is being slaughtered silently" (2015), the 
terrorist Daash (Arabic acronym for ISIS) has launched 
electronic cells to tail the online anti-activists and gather 
information leading to arrest and prosecute them. These 
cells launch fake websites and depictive pages and groups 
on SNSs opposed to ISIS, attracting and hunting the anti-
activists within the city of Raqqa to reveal their true 
identities. Usually, such people are sentenced to death by 
beheading. In 30 October 2015, Raqqa is Being 
Slaughtered Silently campaign has announced that two 
activists of the group were found beheaded in the Turkish 
town of Urfa, in what is believed to be the terror group’s 
first assassination out. The Syrian Observatory for Human 
Rights (2015) reported that Daash elements have 
executed a girl in Deir al-Zour because they found a 
conversation against via the application “WhatsApp” on 
her mobile phone with her brother and another relative. In 
many instances, the use of social media by members of 
the public can result in harm to specific individuals who 
were erroneously identified through vigilante justice and 
potential harm to responders, including members of the 
public, who may be operating in a crisis [4]. 
The Penetration of Terrorism Ideology 
    The spread of terrorist ideology and the ability 
of terrorists to penetrate the most fortified segments of 
societies represent one of the most complex risks facing 
not only the Middle East but also the entire world. 
Terrorism ideology can be thought of as the virus that is 
looking for hardware to settle in. Unfortunately, social 
media has provided a unique opportunity to disseminate 
the terrorist ideology across borders and recruit hundreds 
of thousands of fighters and sympathizers from around the 
world under cover of religion. It became one of the 
strategic 
factors 
driving 
the 
efforts 
of 
terrorist 
organizations for a wide range of purposes, including 
recruitment, radicalization, indoctrination, and incitement 
to terrorism [33]-[35].  
One of the primary uses of the social media by terrorists 
is for the dissemination of propaganda to validate the 
terrorist cause in religious, political and ideological terms 
in the context of conspiracy theories [33]. For example, 
According to the Atlantic Website (2015), one of Daash's 
more successful ventures is an Arabic-language Twitter 
app called The Dawn of Glad Tidings, or just Dawn as a 
way to keep up on the latest news about the jihadi groups. 
The tweets include links, hashtags, and images, and the 
same content is also tweeted by the accounts of everyone 
else who has signed up for the app. Propaganda generally 
takes the form of multimedia communications providing 
ideological 
or 
practical 
instruction, 
explanations, 
justifications or promotion of terrorist activities. The 
visitors' number of Daash official Website has reached by 
October, 20015 to more than 3,425,032. Propaganda 
videos for Daash are disseminated on the Youtube, where 
users can view over 144,000 videos ranging from 
messages, interviews by prominent leaders and fighters to 
videos of beheadings and other terrorist operations using 
advanced cinematic techniques.  
Social media represents an effective platform for the 
recruitment of minors, who comprise a high proportion of 
users in the Middle East. According to UN [34], terrorist 
organizations and their affiliates have employed social 
media effectively to target minors using a variety of 
tactics, such as mixing cartoons and children’s stories, 
mixing blaring religious songs and terrorist operations, 
computer games with messages promoting the terrorism 
ideology. Moreover, several studies [33]-[35] have 
described the influential role of the social media in 
enhancing the likelihood of self-radicalization. Behr et al. 
[35] clarified the impact that watching terrorists' videos on 
a daily basis and having constant access to terrorists' 
online platforms have on the speed of self-radicalization 
without even socializing with radical groups. 
Advocacy of Hatred 
While hatred is found in almost all societies, including 
those where the risk of violence is limited, the concept of 
hate speech aims at isolating acts that have a significant 
probability of catalyzing violence by one group against 
another [36]. In this context, the purpose of hate speech is 
to 
intimidate, 
create 
a 
fear 
denigrate the dignity, 
humiliate, harass, and put antagonists under psychological 
and social pressures. Many of international civilian 
institutions as well as researchers have expressed their 
concern over the spread of hate speech in the social media 
[31][34][36]. Hatred represents the spirit of Middle East 
conflicts, especially the current civil wars. It is the 
dominant motivation for the continuation of destructive 
Syria's civil war. In the Syrian civil war, social media has 
become a platform for organized hate groups to recruit 
and organize attacks against their antagonists.  
Syrian religious population is made up of many faiths 
and sects, including Sunni, Alawites, Shia, and Ismaili, as 
well 
as 
Christians. 
The Syrian population also 
has traditionally been composed of a rich diversity of 
ethnic communities, such as Arabs, Kurds, Armenians, 
Chaldeans, 
Assyrians, 
Turkmen, 
and 
Circassians. 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Actually, many of Syrian antagonists are using social 
media to disseminate, incite, and justify all forms of 
hatred including aggressive nationalism, discrimination, 
ethnocentrism, 
and 
hostility. 
The 
online 
ruthless 
campaigns are targeting, particularly, families of minority 
communities to force them to leave their cities and towns 
in an attempt to change the demographic map of the 
Syrian society structure, carrying out widespread ethno-
religious cleansing. Terrorist organizations are depending 
to a large extent on social media to stir up panic and 
hatred of other members' branches and religions to keep 
and maintain the sectarian clashes. The terrorist social 
media platforms have exploited, in the most horrendous 
manner imaginable, hatred against followers of other 
branches and religious communities to attract fighters 
and a popular incubator among the Syrians.  
 
C. The Continuity of participation in Social Media 
Crowdsourcing 
    Many of previous studies (e.g., [37] [38]) confirmed 
that satisfaction of users' needs is the major driver to 
continue using social media through perceived usefulness 
and conformation of expectations. At the same time, prior 
studies (e.g. [37] [39]) revealed that perceived risks are a 
critical determinant to the decision of continue adopting 
and using social media. In essence, by engaging in social 
media crowdsourcing, the members decide to deal with 
various degrees of risk of the free actions of others.  
The literature (e.g. [32][40]) reveals that participants 
continually negotiate and direct the tension between 
perceived risks and expected outcomes of using social 
media. A number of researchers (e.g. [39] [40]), agreed 
that because of the perceived risks, users may change their 
evaluation of participating in social media crowdsourcing 
over time. Therefore, the present research suggests that, in 
war-torn societies, civilians and activists are constantly 
evaluating the value of using social media and building 
their own perceptions towards the beneﬁts and risks of 
participating in social media crowdsourcing. The 
consequences may affect their inner thoughts concerning 
the value of continuity of participation in such crowds. 
 
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
    Although there is an extensive and evolving interest in 
the social media crowdsourcing in the normal stable 
conditions, comparatively little research exists on 
harnessing social media crowdsourcing to participate in 
crises management in war-torn societies. The purpose of 
the present research was to investigate motivations of 
social media crowdsourcing in war-torn societies and 
potential risks as the determinants of continuity of 
participating in online crowdsourcing communities via 
social media during civil wars. The present study revealed 
that social media is not just a platform for social 
interaction or other traditional purposes that have been 
mentioned in the related literature. Maslow’s hierarchy of 
needs has been used for understanding motivations of 
social media crowdsourcing. The present research also 
investigates three major potential risks associated with 
social media crowdsourcing in civil war-torn societies, 
including direct personal threats, the penetration of 
terrorism ideology, and advocacy of hatred.  
     There are some limitations which can serve as 
directions for future research. The research framework 
needs to be tested empirically. Furthermore, the present 
research did not address all possible motivations and risks 
that have been discussed in previous studies. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Manso and B. Manso, “The Role of Social Media in Crisis: A 
European Holistic Approach to the Adoption of Online and Mobile 
Communications in Crisis Response and Search and Rescue 
Efforts,” Proceedings of the International Command and Control 
Research and Technology Symposium (ICCRTS), June 19 - 21, 
2012, Fairfax, Virginia, USA, 2012, pp. 1–50. 
 
[2] C.-M. Huang, E. Chan, and A. A. Hyder, “Web 2.0 and Internet 
Social Networking: A New tool for Disaster Management? Lessons 
from Taiwan,” BMC Medical Informatics & Decision Making, 
10(1), 2010, pp. 57–61. 
 
[3] S. Wigley and W. Zhang, “A Study of PR Practitioners’ Use of 
Social Media in Crisis Planning,” Public Relations Journal, 5 (3), 
2011, pp. 1–16. 
 
[4] H. Watson, L. Baruh, R. Finn, and S. Scifo, “Citizen (In)security?: 
Social Media, Citizen Journalism and Crisis Response,” Proceedings 
of the 11th International ISCRAM Conference –, May 2014, 
University Park, Pennsylvania, USA, S.R. Hiltz, M. Pfaff, L. 
Plotnick, and P. Shih, eds, 2014, pp. 294–298. 
 
[5] A. Eksi, S. Çelikli, and G. Kıyan, “The Effects of Social Networking 
on Disaster Communication Used by the Emergency Medical and 
Rescue Staff,” The Journal of Academic Emergency Medicine, 13 
(2), 2014, pp. 58-61. 
 
[6] K. Sedra, “The Role of Social Media & Networking in Post-Conflict 
Settings: Lessons-Learned from Egypt,” Proceedings of the World 
Bank/TDRP – African Development Bank Conference, June 5-6, 
Tunis, 2013, pp. 1–12. 
 
[7] J. Howe, “Crowdsourcing: Why the Power of the Crowd is Driving 
the Future of Business,” New York, 2008. NY: Crown Business.  
[8] T. Buecheler, J. Sieg, R. Füchslin,, and R. Pfeifer, “Crowdsourcing, 
Open Innovation and Collective Intelligence in the Scientific 
Method,” Proceedings of the 12th International Conference on the 
Synthesis and Simulation of Living Systems, Odense, Denmark, 19 
23 August, 2010, pp. 679-686.  
[9] S. Vieweg, A.L. Hughes, K. Starbird, and L. Palen, “Microblogging 
during two Natural Hazards Events: What Twitter may Contribute to 
Situational Awareness,” Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on 
Human Factors in Computing Systems (2010, April) ACM, 2010, 
pp. 1079–1088. 
[10] J. Rogstadius, et al., “CrisisTracker: Crowdsourced Social Media 
Curation for Disaster Awareness, ” IBM Journal of Research and 
Development, 57 (5), pp. 2013, 4:1–4:13. 
[11] M. Boulos, et al., “Crowdsourcing, Citizen Sensing and Sensor 
Web Technologies for Public and Environmental Health 
Surveillance and Crisis Management,” International Journal of 
Health Geographic, 10(1): 67, 2011, pp. 1-29. 
 
[12] L. Sweta, “Early Warning Systems and Disaster Management using 
Mobile Crowdsourcing,” International Journal of Science and 
Research, 3(4), 2014, pp. 356-365. 
 
[13]   K. Starbird, L. Palen, A. Hughes, and S. Vieweg, “Chatter on the 
Red: What Hazards Threat Reveals about the Social Life of 
Microblogged Information,” Proceedings of the ACM Conference 
on Computer supported cooperative work, 2010, pp. 241-250. 
 
[14]   M. Latonero and I. Shklovski, “Emergency Management, Twitter, 
and Social Media Evangelism,” International Journal of 
Information Systems for Crisis Response and Management, 3 (4), 
2011, pp. 1–16. 
 
[15] I. Kotsiopoulos, “Social Media in Crisis Management: Role, 
Potential and Risk,” Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE/ACM 7th 
International Conference on Utility and Cloud Computing, 8-11 
Dec, London, 2014, 681 – 686. 
[16] R. M. Ryan and E. L. Deci, “Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivations: 
Classic 
Definitions 
and 
New 
Directions,” 
Contemporary 
Educational Psychology 25(1), 2000, pp. 54–67. 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

[17] https://ar-ar.facebook.com/ICRCsy [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[18] https://www.facebook.com/SYRedCrescent 
[retrieved: 
March, 
2016]. 
[19] https://www.facebook.com/missing.syria[retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[20] https://ar-ar.facebook.com/MissingAndMartyrs [retrieved: March, 
2016]. 
[21] A. Flizikowski, W. Hołubowicz, A. Stachowicz, L. Hokkanen, T. 
Kurki, and N. Päivinen,“Social Media in Crisis Management  the 
iSAR+ Project Survey” Proceedings of the 11th International 
ISCRAM Conference, University Park, Pennsylvania, USA, S.R. 
Hiltz, M.S. Pfaff, L. Plotnick, and P.C. Shih, eds, 2014, pp. 707-
711. 
[22] https://www.facebook.com/snhr [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[23] https://ar-ar.facebook.com/vdcsy [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[24] https://twitter.com/Raqqa_SL [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[25] https://www.facebook.com/prayforpeaceSYRIA [retrieved: March, 
2016]. 
[26] https://www.facebook.com/-\lرno-jk-مia[ا-efأ-cd-ة_Y`aY[ا-WXYZ 
[\ـ 389850064469574-ـ/timeline/ [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[27] https://www.facebook.com/PeoplesCommissionforNationalRec 
onciliation [retrieved: March, 2016]. 
[28] A. Maslow, “A Theory of Human Motivation,” Psychological 
Review, 50(4), 1943, pp. 370-396. 
[29] Z. Tufekci, “Can You See Me Now? Audience and Disclosure 
Regulation in Online Social Network Sites,” Bulletin of Science, 
Technology & Society 28 (1), 2008, pp. 20–36. 
[30] J. Hart, C. Ridley, F. Taher, C. Sas, and A. Dix, “Exploring the 
Facebook Experience. A new Approach to Usability,” Proceedings 
of the 5th Nordic Conference on Human–computer Interaction: 
Building Bridges, 18–22 October 2008, Lund, Sweden, 2008, pp. 
471–474. 
 
[31] A. Skuse and T. Brimacombe, “Social Networking, Social Media 
and 
Complex 
Emergencies,” 
Australian 
Civil-Military 
Center,https://www.acmc.gov.au/wp-content/uploads/2014/09/ 
Social-Media-and-Complex-Emergencies-Annotated 
Bibliography.pdf, 2014, pp. 1–76. 
 
[32] E. Iskander, “Connecting the National and the Virtual: Can 
Facebook Activism Remain Relevant after Egypt’s January 25 
uprising?,” International Journal of Communication, vol. 5, 2011, 
pp. 1225–37. 
 
[33] A. Aly, “The Terrorists‘Audience: A Model of Internet 
Radicalisation,” Journal of Australian Professional Intelligence 
Officers, 17(1), 2009, pp. 3–19. 
[34] United Nations Office on Drugs and Crimes, “The Use of the 
Internet for Terrorist Purposes,” United Nations, New York, 
2012,https://www.unodc.org/documents/frontpage/Use_of_Inter 
net_for_Terrorist_Purposes.pdf, 2012, pp. 1–158. 
 
[35] I. Behr, A. Reding, C. Edwards, and L. Gribbon, “Radicalisation in 
the Digital Era: The Use of the Internet in 15 Cases of Terrorism 
and Extremism,” (RAND Research Reports, RR-453-RE), 2013, 
pp. 1–76. 
 
[36] I. Gagliardone, D. Gal, T. Alves, and G. Martinez, “Countering 
Online Heat Speech,” UNESCO, France, 2015, pp. 1–73. 
 
[37] T. Hu and W. Kettinger, “Why People Continue to Use Social 
Networking Services: Developing a Comprehensive Model”, 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS), Paris, France, 14-17 December, 2008, pp. 1–11. 
 
[38] Cao, H., et al., “Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs Analysis of Social 
Networking 
Services 
Continuance,” 
Journal 
of 
Service 
Management, 24(2), 2013, pp. 170–190. 
  
[39] F. Stutzman, R. Capra, and J. Thompson, “Factors Mediating 
Disclosure in Social Network Sites,” Computers in Human 
Behavior, 27(1), 2010, pp. 590–598. 
[40] K. Al Omoush, S. Yassen, M. Alma’aitah, “The Impact of Arab 
Cultural Values on Online Social Networking: The Case of 
Facebook,” Computer in Human Behavior, 28(6), 2012, pp. 2387–
2399. 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

