The Evolution of the e-ID card in Belgium: Data Privacy and Multi-Application 
Usage 
 
Alea Fairchild 
Vrije Univ. Brussel (VUB) 
Brussels, Belgium 
Alea.fairchild@vub.ac.be 
Bruno de Vuyst 
Vrije Univ. Brussel (VUB) 
Brussels, Belgium 
Bruno.de.vuyst@vub.ac.be
 
 
Abstract: Since mandating in 2004 that all Belgian citizens 
carry electronic identification cards (e-ID), Belgium has been 
at the forefront of trends in electronic identification.  As an e-
ID card has become a necessity for service provisioning, the 
government has also started with distribution of e-ID cards to 
non-Belgians and children under the age of 12.  Up until quite 
recently, the e-ID card only held the basic information of 
citizenship.  This paper will examine the evolution of the e-ID 
card, and discuss the privacy issues of multi-application data 
on one card as the recent announcement of data for additional 
applications reopens the discussion of data linkage and data 
privacy for a card that is mandatory in usage.  
 
Keywords- e-ID; privacy; transparency; applications. 
I. 
 EVOLUTION OF BELGIAN E-ID 
As this paper focuses on the evolution of e-ID in 
Belgium, we will not go into the concept of citizen 
acceptance of identity cards (paper or digital), as there are a 
number of papers that cover this from social and political 
aspects [1] [2] [3]. Acceptance has never been the issue, 
unlike in the UK [4],  as Belgium has mandated the use of 
identity cards with the creation of a National Register of 
natural persons in 1983 [5]. The register issues unique 
identifiers 
for 
each 
Belgian 
citizen 
in 
the 
form 
YYMMDDNNNCC, where YYMMDD refers to the date of 
birth of the citizen, and NNN is an even number for females 
and odd for males.  CC is a checksum so errors can be 
detected when processing the number automatically.  The 
register also keeps track of current and past addresses and 
keeps a record of all the citizen's identity-related documents: 
passport, driving license and other relevant data.  So citizens 
and residents cannot opt-out, but must carry the e-ID for 
identification and for service to be provided [4]. So choice is 
not part of our discussion.  
In terms of acceptance, Belgians have already been used 
to showing national ID cards for identification for services, 
but the use of these paper-based ID cards have been on an 
event-oriented basis, and these respective events have not 
been tracked on a longitudinal basis.  For example, a citizen 
may make a photocopy of his ID card for his bank to open a 
bank account.   But that particular event of opening the bank 
account using the ID card is not recorded on a digital format 
in a public data facility where someone can use this event on 
a longitudinal basis [6]. 
For reasons of both efficiency and service provisioning, 
Belgium decided in early 2000 to be an early adopter and to 
trial the concept of a digital version of the paper-based 
national ID card. In Spring 2003, a pilot project across 11 
municipalities 
was 
a 
trial 
of 
the 
e-ID 
and 
its 
implementation.  In Spring 2004, the Belgian government 
decided, after approval of its legislative body, to mandate 
the e-ID for the whole country.  A timeline of the e-ID 
implementation can be seen in Figure 1. 
Although at the e-ID launch, there was only one 
application one can use the card for, ‘Tax-on-Web’ [7],  it 
was envisioned that this will be the basis for future service 
provisioning for several layers (federal, regional, local) of 
Belgian governance. However, this was initially concerning 
to Belgians because of ‘digital trails’: how the numerous 
events of usage of their ID card are used, and by whom.  
This paper will examine the transparency of what data is 
held on the card, as who has the right to use/view that data 
have been concerns for the changeover from paper-based to 
digital ID cards. We discuss what data is held on the e-ID 
card, and what applications are available for e-ID at present 
in Belgium. We end with an explanation of privacy and 
transparency in Belgian e-ID cards, and how multi-
application usage may be in the near future of this card. 
II. 
E-ID IDENTITY DATA 
The initial paper-based document included the following 
pieces of information on the citizen: name (family name, up 
to two given names, and the initial of a third name), address, 
title, nationality, place and date of birth, gender, and a photo 
of its holder.   
For the e-ID card, it is visually similar to the previous 
identity card and shows the same information as the paper-
based document, except for the address.  It also contains a 
hand written signature of its holder and also of the civil 
servant who issued the card. It also mentions the validity 
dates of the card (the card is valid for five years), the card 
number, the national number of its holder, and the place of 
delivery of the card [8]. 
All this information is also stored on the chip in a so-
called “identity file”. The identity file is around 200 bytes 
long, and is signed by the National Register (RRN). In 
addition to the identity file, there is also an address file 
(about 150 bytes). This address file is kept independently as 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

the address of its holder may change within the validity 
period of the card. The RRN signs the address file together 
with the identity file to guarantee the link between these two 
files. The corresponding signature is stored as the address 
file's signature. As biometric feature, Belgium decided to 
use a photo (3 KBytes, JPEG format). This photo is 
(indirectly) signed through the RRN, as its hash is part of 
the user's identity file [8]. An example of a Belgian citizen 
can be seen in Figure 2. Cards for kids and for foreigners 
look differently. 
Kids cards contain a unique safety feature to contact 
parents in case of emergency. This feature allows third 
parties to enter a list of preset phone numbers by way of a 
unique phone number and the child’s RRN, both visible on 
the kids-ID card. If a child is injured the parents can then be 
easily be contacted. The child’s parents are the ones that  
determine the preset list of phone numbers via a secure 
online database [9].  
For usage of the e-ID card, there have been initial 
teething pains, with police cars needing to be equipped with 
readers in their glove compartment so people stopped for a 
possible violation can have their e-ID card read.  When first 
issued, citizens had to carry an extra piece of paper with the 
e-ID card, as a police officer without a reader could not see 
the address of the citizen, which is one of the fundamental 
pieces of information requested from the ID card [6]. 
 
III. 
DATA HANDLING AND E-ID BENEFITS 
The basic identity data are now digitally included in a 
microchip on the identity card, with a reader mechanism 
that allows a person to identify himself digitally and to place 
an electronic signature using the card and a password. In 
this way, storage and usage of citizens’ data becomes a bit 
more user-centric.   
According to the National Register [10], the benefits of 
an e-ID card are: 
 
• 
Self identify on Internet;  
• 
24/7 availability of particular documents via 
Internet;  
• 
Ability for the card holder the possibility to check  
information regarding themselves, that in the 
register or in the Rijksregister of the natural 
persons stands, to consult, and in order to know, 
which authorities, institutions and persons during 
the last six months have consulted or improved 
have, with exception of the municipal and judicial 
authorities, that entrusted are with the investigation 
and the repression of punishable facts; 
• 
A 
protected 
electronic 
connection, 
online 
information exchange with the authorities or with 
private enterprises; 
• 
A protected manner via the Internet commercial 
operations export, as well as a buyer as in the 
quality of seller (online buy and sell);  
• 
Via the web numerous forms fill in: load 
declaration, request of a study appropriation or of 
an excerpt from the register;  
• 
Through self to identify, get entry to various 
places: container park, building of an enterprise, 
library, sporthal ….;  
• 
Mails sign or recorded send mails.   
 
The development team at FEDICT (the Federal ICT 
office) has developed add-ons in Mozilla and other browsers 
to enable the citizen use of e-ID.  It is already supported on 
several operating systems, including Linux (Open SUSE). 
IV. 
MULIT-APPLICATION E-ID CARDS 
Having an application that is mission critical to the 
citizen is one driver to get users to want to switch from 
paper to digital form.  By promoting government 
applications such as “tax on web”, registered mail, social 
security registration of new personnel, online consultation 
of government data, as well as  the distribution to twelve-
year olds of a free smart card reader when they get their e-
ID card, the home penetration with readers was expected to 
increase in the short term [9]. 
These new applications offered by use of the eID are 
expanding, and the government feels that it will create a 
surplus value form for the citizen and for the concerned 
authority.  But it is not clear if the citizens feel the same 
way, especially with data linked for different applications on 
the same card.  
In August 2011, it was reported in the press [11] that the 
amount of personal information being stored on the 
compulsory Belgian ID card is being extended. In future 
personal social security information will also be stored on 
the e-ID card. The SIS (social security) card is being 
discontinued. Within the next year, pharmacies and doctors 
will start using e-ID cards instead of the SIS card in order to 
obtain personal social security information about their 
patients and customers. The two systems will operate in 
parallel for a while, and then the current SIS card will 
disappear by the end of 2013. The social security authorities 
and health insurance bodies are already paving the way for 
the switch-over [11]. At the time of the e-ID initial launch, 
although it was technically feasible to integrate the SIS data, 
at the political level it was considered to be too high an 
infringement on personal privacy and the integration was 
blocked [9]. The question might be at this time, what has 
changed? The willingness of the public, or the need for cost 
efficiency? As the public cannot opt-out, the sensitivity of 
the use of e-ID for multiple data applications needs to be of 
concern to the government. 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

V. 
PRIVACY AND TRANSPARENCY 
Unlike the Austrian e-ID, which from the onset has 
attempted to be privacy-friendly through the use of 
unlinkability schemes, the Belgian e-ID card has not 
addressed any aspects of privacy such as unlinkability, or 
anonymity, as discussed by Pfitzmann et al. [13]. At present 
no other national e-ID card design scheme in Europe puts 
emphasis on privacy beyond data protection and retention 
[4]. 
Where event-based transaction data is retained in 
identified form, it can result in a collection of data that 
reveals a great deal about the individual and their behaviour. 
Such 'data trails' may be used to trace back over a person's 
past, or analysed to provide an abstract model of the person, 
or 'digital persona'. This digital persona may then used by 
government agencies as a means of social control, for 
example. 
Since the 1980s, basic mechanisms for privacy-enhancing 
identity management under control of the user have been 
proposed [12] [13] [14]. Control by the user requires that he 
firstly knows about actual and potential processing of his 
personal data and secondly that he in principle can decide 
case-by-case on data disclosure to specific parties, possibly 
in the limits given by law and society. The most effective, 
yet not always realistic way to protect one's privacy is data 
minimisation, i.e., to disclose as little personal data as 
possible.  
From a privacy point of view, the main issue in addition 
to the data-minimisation principle is the purpose-binding 
principle – data should only be collected and used for a 
specific purpose.   
In Belgium, the citizen can ask for and use his data, see if 
they are correct and see who has used them, as government 
workers also have to use their own e-ID card to provide the 
service. There is a website maintained by FEDICT, the 
national IT organization, that allows citizens to track their 
national ID number and who has been using it for what 
purpose.  With their e-ID card, the citizen can open the data 
cabinet in which his data are safely stored with his 
identification key. The citizen can verify the data, 
eventually ask for correction, use his data, and see who, and 
at what time, entered the data cabinet. This level of 
transparency of the process and privacy authentication has 
been important in the enforced uptake.  
A data privacy error was made in Belgium by including 
the structured register number in the certificates stored in 
the electronic ID card.  This is something that must be 
avoided: the number leaks too much personal information 
about the citizen; in this case, age as the register number 
uses the date of birth in the number. 
The only biometric included on Belgian e-ID cards is the 
holder's photo, which is about three kilobyte in size and not 
suited for automatic recognition of the cardholder.  Correct 
implementation of biometric features is a very complicated 
issue, and may not be realistic and cost-effective.  The 
Belgian eID card costs about €12.50, including the chip, 
maintenance of the infrastructure and two certificates per 
cardholder with a validity of five years [8]. 
The authorities have switched over on 17 October 2008 
to the production of e-ID cards on the New Belgium Root 
certificate. As each e-ID card has been initialized with a 
genuine copy of the Belgian Root CA certificate, the e-ID 
card can be used as a “trusted source” as users can verify the 
chain of trust within the Belgian PKI system by loading the 
Belgium Root CA certificate from her/his smart card.  Apart 
from revoking the use of an e-ID card's keys when it is 
stolen, card holders also have the possibility to have the 
electronic signature capability of an e-ID card revoked, even 
before using a card [8]. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS ON THE FUTURE OF MULTI-
APPLICATION DATA 
The data from the SIS card will add information on the 
kind of health insurance the citizen holds (and that the 
citizen is insured, which is required in Belgium).  Health 
records are not stored on the e-ID card.  But the e-ID card is 
the linkage to the Crossroad Banks of Belgium, which are 
internal governmental information brokers on social security 
status, business information and car registration.  
The question remains how cross linking of data may be 
used in a manner not fit for purpose, and what kind of 
legislation or audit trails will be utilized to protect citizen 
data privacy going forward as the government pushes to add 
multiple application usage to the e-ID card. 
By promoting government applications, registered mail, 
social security registration of new personnel, online 
consultation of government data, together with the 
distribution to twelve-year olds of a free smart card reader 
when they get their e-ID card, the home penetration with 
readers is expected to increase in the short term. 
However, privacy in a technological sense has not yet 
been included in the current version of the e-ID card.   
Belgian reliance on e-ID as a form of authentication and 
access means that no one can opt-out of the scheme, which 
makes security, transparency and privacy paramount to 
longer term interoperability within the EU. As new 
applications are added to the card, Belgians may get more 
wary of what can and cannot be linked together on the same 
card. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Walker, G. de Q. “Information as Power: Constitutional 
Implications of the Identity Numbering and ID Card Proposal”, CIS 
Policy Report, (1986) Vol. 2 No. 1, Centre for Independent Studies, 
St Leonards, NSW, February. 
[2]  
Clarke, Roger “Human Identification in Information Systems 
Management Challenges and Public Policy Issues”, Information 
Technology & People, 1994, Vol. 7(4), p. 6-37. 
[3]    UK Performance and Innovation Unit (PIU), ‘Privacy and Data-   
sharing: The way forward for public services’, published by the PIU 
in April 2002. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

[4]  
Arora, S. National e-ID card schemes: A European overview, 
Information Security Technical Report (2008) Vol. 13, p. 46-53. 
[5]      Belgisch Staatsblad , 28 March 2003. Retrieved 3 Dec 2011 at: 
http://eid.belgium.be/nl/binaries/WT1_tcm147-9980.pdf 
[6]  
Fairchild, A and de Vuyst, B. Privacy, Transparency and Identity:  
The Implementation of the e-ID card in Belgium, Proceedings of the 
9th European Conference on Electronic Government (ECEG 2009), 
University of Westminster, London, UK, June 29-30. 
[7]   
Tax-on-Web, Federal portal, Retrieved 3 Dec 2011 at: 
http://www.tax-on-web.be  
[8]  
De Cock, Danny; Wolf, Christopher; and Preneel, Bart  (2007) The 
Belgian Electronic Identity Card (Overview), Working Paper of 
ESAT/COSIC, KU Leuven.   
[9]      Marien and Van Audenhove. The Belgian e-ID and its complex path 
to implementation and innovational change, Identity in the 
Information Society,2010, Vol. 3(1), p. 27-41. 
[10]   Rijksregister, Retrieved 26 Nov 2011 from URL: 
http://www.ibz.rrn.fgov.be/index.php?id=141&L=1 
[11]  
FlandersNews.be. More personal info on electronic ID card soon. 
(20 August 2011). deredactie.be. Retrieved September 3, 2011, 
from 
http://www.deredactie.be/cm/vrtnieuws.english/news/1.1091792 
[12]      Chaum D. Security without identification: transaction systems to 
make big brother obsolete. Communications of the ACM, vol.28;   
Oct. 1985. no. 10, p. 1030–1044. 
[13]  
Pfitzmann B,Waidner M, Pfitzmann A. Secure and   anonymous 
electronic commerce: providing legal certainty in open digital 
systems without compromising anonymity, IBM research report 
RZ 3232 (#93278) 05/22/00 computer science/mathematics. 
Zurich: IBM Research Division. 
[14]  
Leenes R, Schallabock J, Hansen M, editors. PRIME white paper, 
Retrieved 3 Dec 2011 from:  https://www.prime-
project.eu/prime_products/whitepaper/; 2007. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Timeline—Introduction and development of eID in Belgium [9] 
 
 
Figure 2. Belgian eID card's visual aspects [8] 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

