Soft Skills: A Key Driver for Digital Transformation
Richa Gulati
Business School
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
e-mail: richa.gulati@adelaide.edu.au
Carmen Haule Reaiche
Business School
University of Adelaide
Adelaide, Australia
e-mail: carmen.reaiche@adelaide.edu.au
Abstract - This paper focuses on exploring the value of
intangible (soft skills) investments to aid successful digital
transformation in organisations. The human capital of a
business
or
an
organisation
is
the
key
catalyst
for
implementing change. It is, therefore, important to have a
skilled workforce which is capable of adopting and coping with
changes such as digital transformation. This research focuses
on the importance of soft aspects of digital transformation.
Gioia method was adopted to guide the analysis of the data
(interviews) for this research. The results are indicative of the
important
soft
skills
required
to
embrace
digital
transformation
and
its
potential
impact
on
successful
implementation.
Keywords-intangible
investment;
soft
skills;
digital
transformation; project managers.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Technology and society are evolving faster than business
can naturally adapt and digital transformation is one aspect
of this evolution. Technology has changed relationships
between customers and organisations, deeply affecting
organisational models and management systems [1] [6]. It is
an exponential change, which is not just the job of a person
or a team, but a collective effort of the whole organisation. It
is about the overall improvement of ways of working and
efficiency of an organisation [2]. Due to the scale of change
and ease of its management, it is often divided into smaller
projects, which are then managed to adopt the change [3]. It
is worth considering that given the awareness and planning
of change, if organisations are ready to face it. And more
importantly: What drives it? A single thread that weaves in
everything to ultimately produce the outcome is the soft
aspect of the organisation. Digital transformation is probably
less about digital and more about transformation, which is
led by people. Technology is a tool but its actual strength is
soft skills [4][5]. This research seeks to address the gap
pertaining to soft aspects of digital transformation, which
hinders
successful
implementations
and
changes
management in organisations. It aims to instill the value of
investing in intangible aspects of an organisation, which in
turn play a key role in their success.
This paper is further divided into four sections, namely,
Background,
Significance
and
Research
Contribution,
Research Approach and, Preliminary Findings and Future
Research. Firstly, the background section provides an insight
into current situation and context of this research leading to
the significance and research contribution section. This
section
then
establishes
the
importance
and
possible
contributions of this project. The next section of research
approach elaborates on the process of data collection and
method used by researchers. Lastly, the preliminary findings
and future research section summarizes the primary findings
of this research and provides insight into the future steps for
this project.
II.
BACKGROUND
Digital transformation has become an integral part of
organisations in pursuit of growth, expansion, quality and
sustainability [1]. One on hand, it allows organisations to
enhance organisational efficiency and customer experience,
but, on the other hand, it brings tremendous pressure as it
demands changes in organisational models and management
systems
[6][7].
Many
organisations
adopt
a
project
management approach wherein change management is the
key focus [8][9]. However, the key element is the people
who drive, accept, adopt and implement this transformation,
i.e., the human capital of the organisation [7]. In line with
adoption strategies and careful planning, human capital
strategies play an important role as well. The project
manager needs to plan how to manage, organize, develop,
and align people at work to deliver successful customer and
employee experiences [10]. It is probably not the strongest of
the species that survives, not the most intelligent that
survives. It appears to be the one that is the most adaptable to
change [11].
Some of the skills required by a manager in order to
successfully manage digital transformation are: critical
thinking, complex communication, creativity collaboration,
flexibility and adaptability, productivity and accountability,
building a team that thrives, cultivating a growth mindset,
influence,
ability
to
navigate
innovation
and
change,
effective collaboration with leaders and across teams. In
addition to these, adaptability, creativity, action-oriented,
passion, curiosity and management skills also play an
important role while managing the team and projects [6]
[11]-[15]. From the customer’s orientation, it is important to
create memorable and meaningful experiences. The most
valuable assets for service and experience creation are
people, ideas and collaboration [16]. There has been some
emphasis on people’s aspect in vivid literature, however, the
importance of soft skills has not gained much focus as a key
driver or backbone of digital transformation, although, it has
been a recommendation in those research studies. Thus, this
research aims to establish the importance of soft skills in
managers.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

III.
SIGNIFICANCE AND RESEARCH CONTRIBUTION
This research contributes to knowledge by identifying the
moderating role of soft skills in digital transformation. The
research aims to establish the importance of “people” and
their “soft skills” in an organisation by investigating the
value of investing in intangible assets, i.e., soft skills of their
employees. Prior research has identified key drivers that
support digital transformation, however, there has not been
enough attention on developing and acquiring the skills
needed to maneuver this change. Having an adaptable
workforce
has
become
a
necessity
for
business
and
organisations in order to cope with the changes in their
respective domains [12].
IV.
RESEARCH APPROACH
This
is
an
exploratory
research,
which
has
been
conducted in two phases. In the first phase, we explored
secondary data comprising of literature and various case
studies. This was followed by a second phase of qualitative
data collection concentrating on interviews. Prior to running
the interviews, a pilot study was conducted to validate the
interviews questions.
A.
Data
Firstly, a pilot was conducted in which a qualitative data
set of nine interviews was collected. The narratives of these
interviews were then analysed to verify if the findings were
indicative of the information being sought by researchers.
Secondly,
a
total
of
ten
interviews
were
conducted
particularly focusing on project managers in a variety of
fields, and this forms the actual data set for this research.
B.
Method
Gioia method was used to analyse the data for this
research. Gioia is a systematic approach to new concept
development and grounded theory articulation [17]. During
the analysis, we sieved 1st order concepts, followed by 2nd
order themes and finally derived aggregate dimensions. This
three step process was adopted to bring in transparency and
rigor to the process of inductive research (see Figure 1 for
the steps of this process) [18].
In the 1st order concept analysis, researchers adhered to
informants terms, with little attempt to distil categories. After
data collection, the interviews were transcribed to obtain the
first order concepts. As a result, a large number of categories
were derived in this step. These were then analysed to
identify the themes emerging from data. Once we had 2nd
order themes, the finding were then checked against
literature to verify that these were “new”, i.e., a contribution.
As the research progressed to the 2nd order theme, it sought
similarities and differences among the 1st order concepts.
Upon confirmation that the findings are new, further
literature review, and identifying similarities and differences,
the aggregate dimensions were finalized. This eventually
reduced the number of categories, which were then given
labels or phrasal descriptors. Once this data structure of
themes and concepts was created, we investigated to distil
them further into aggregate dimensions.
Figure 1. Method.
V.
PRELIMINARY FINDINGS AND FUTURE RESEARCH
A successful digital transformation initiative needs to
holistically look into customer experience, organisational
culture, business model, processes, technologies, leadership
and capabilities, and size of the company [7][12][14][19]. In
order to have an edge over such rapid changes, companies
need to ensure that they are ready to embrace disruptions and
fill skills gaps in their organisations. Skills are the most
valuable and essential resource in knowledge economy [5].
With markets becoming increasingly complex, complex
problem solving, coordinating with others and people
management become crucial aspects [20].
From
the
dataset
collected
and
analysed,
project
managers have emphasized the importance of soft skills at
various avenues. Additionally, they have also shed light on
factors, which can impact skills development culture in an
organization,
for
example,
the
size
of
the
company.
“Environment plays an important role in skills development;
we might pick up skills according to the need of the
environment”, indicates the importance of organisations
being conducive of developing their workforce. Project
managers have highlighted other factors such as size of
projects, mentoring, guidance, etc., during the interviews. It
was well supported across various domains, such as defense,
construction, information technology, etc. Some soft skills
considered important by project managers (derived from
interviews) are listed in Table I.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE I.
ESSENTIAL SOFT SKILLS:PM PERSPECTIVE
Essential Soft Skills: PM Perspective
Communication
Emotional Intelligence
Empathy
Leadership
Motivation
Resistance
Conflict Resolution
Professionalism
Negotiation
In
absence of organisational efforts to develop
a
workforce,
project
managers
mentioned
that
self-
performance, reflection, individual personality, lessons learnt
from past projects, type of people they work with, zeal to
learn more aid as the factors that motivated them to develop
soft skills. One of the key findings also indicated that the
majority of the project managers realized the importance of
soft skills during their experience and had little or no
knowledge prior to work experience. This certainly had some
exception for people who were natural leaders or in cases
where their upbringing included elements like leadership
opportunities, were taught to stand up, parental guidance to
manage, sports etc. Some of the motivators mentioned by
project
managers
during
the
interviews
have
been
summarized in Table II below.
TABLE II.
SOFT SKILLS MOTIVATORS
Soft Skills Motivators
Conducive Environment
Reflection : Past Projects
Self – Assessment
Need of Environment
Communication is the Key
Team Management
New Industry/Environment
Collaboration
Mentoring
Team Members
Individual Personalities in Team
Employee Engagement
Though some factors helped practicing project managers
to identify the importance of soft skills, in absence of proper
training, they struggled with certain issues like the level of
comfort colleagues have when getting to the people’s side of
things, judgmental point of view, underestimating soft skills,
being
mistaken
as
trying
to
micromanage
and
most
importantly finding the right balance of expression. These
are some of the preliminary findings from the interviews
conducted thus far. A detailed and comprehensive analysis
will be conducted once the data collection is complete.
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH
In this research, we have been able to identify some
emerging themes from the data collected thus far, which are
indicative of the importance of soft skills in digital
transformation
projects.
Essential
soft
skills
such
as
communication, emotional intelligence, leadership, etc., have
been derived from the data set as well. Additionally, the data
set is also reflective of soft skills motivators and suggestions
for training project managers to groom their soft skills. Even
though the data set looks promising at this stage, this
research is an ongoing research and future steps have been
planned, wherein the researchers aims to conduct a total of
30 interviews (inclusive of 10 already conducted) with
project managers across various domains. These interviews
will also be analysed using the Gioia method to obtain the
findings of the project. The results of this research will not
only contribute to the overall development of organisations
by identifying key soft skills required by project manager,
but also provide a competitive edge over their competitors.
This would also aid organisations by encouraging them to
reinvest the cost of recruiting new managers into their own
assets and developing them further.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Shinde, S. Kimbahune, D. Singh, V. Deshpande, D.
Piplani,
and
K.
Srinivasan,
mKRISHI
BAIF:
Digital
transformation in livestock services. In Proceedings of the
India HCI 2014 Conference on Human Computer Interaction,
pp. 148-153, December 2014.
[2]
S. Sandeep, IYC World Soft Infrastructure Pvt Ltd. Learning
System for Digitalisation of An Educational Institution. U.S.
Patent Application 13/122,620, 2011.
[3]
P. Parviainen, M. Tihinen, J. Kääriäinen,
and S. Teppola.
Tackling the digitalization challenge: how to benefit from
digitalization in practice. International journal of information
systems and project management, 5(1), pp.63-77, 2017.
[4]
T. Berger, and B. Frey. Digitalisation, jobs and convergence
in Europe: Strategies for closing the skills gap (Vol. 50).
Oxford: Oxford Martin School, 2016.
[5]
F. KOHLBACHER. Skills 4.0: How CEOs shape the future of
work in Asia, 2017.
[6]
E. Piccinini, R.W. Gregory, and L.M. Kolbe, Changes in the
producer-consumer
relationship-towards
digital
transformation. Changes, 3(4), pp.1634-1648, 2015.
[7]
A. Ustundag and E. Cevikcan, Industry 4.0: managing the
digital transformation. Springer, 2017.
[8]
H. Shaughnessy, Creating digital transformation: strategies
and steps. Strategy & Leadership, 2018.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[9]
A. Bounfour, Digital futures, digital transformation. Progress
in IS. Cham. Springer International Publishing, 10, pp. 978-3,
2016.
[10] G. Westerman, D. Bonnet and A. McAfee, The nine elements
of
digital
transformation. MIT
Sloan
Management
Review, 55(3), pp. 1-6, 2014.
[11] R.S. Schuler, Repositioning the human resource function:
transformation
or
demise?
Academy
of
Management
Perspectives, 4(3), pp. 49-60, 1990.
[12] G. C. Kane, D. Palmer, A. N. Phillips, D. Kiron, and N.
Buckley,
Strategy,
not
technology,
drives
digital
transformation. MIT Sloan Management Review and Deloitte
University Press, 14(1-25), 2015.
[13] P.R. Harris and K.G. Harris. Managing effectively through
teams. Team Performance Management: An International
Journal, 1996.
[14] A. M. Townsend, S. M. DeMarie, and A. Hendrickson,
Virtual
teams:
Technology
and
the
workplace
of
the
future. IEEE Engineering Management Review, 28(2), pp.69-
80, 2000.
[15] I. L. Panel, Digital transformation: A framework for ICT
literacy. Educational Testing Service, pp.1-53, 2002.
[16] A. Singh and T. Hess, How Chief Digital Officers promote
the digital transformation of their companies. MIS Quarterly
Executive, 16(1), 2017.
[17] D. A. Gioia, K. G. Corley and A. L. Hamilton, Seeking
qualitative rigor in inductive research: Notes on the Gioia
methodology. Organizational research methods, 16(1), pp.15-
31, 2013.
[18] K. G. Corley and D. A. Gioia, Identity ambiguity and change
in the wake of a corporate spin-off. Administrative science
quarterly, 49(2), pp.173-208, 2004.
[19] J. Loonam, S. Eaves, V. Kumar and G. Parry, Towards digital
transformation:
Lessons
learned
from
traditional
organizations. Strategic Change, 27(2), pp.101-109, 2018.
[20] P. Lagadec, Learning processes for crisis management in
complex organizations. Journal of Contingencies and Crisis
management, 5(1), pp.24-31, 1997.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

