Building Trust in the Cloud Environment:  Towards a Consumer Cloud Trust 
Label 
 
 
Lisa van der Werff, Theo Lynn, HuanHuan Xiaong, Graham Hunt, John Morrison, Philip Healy, David Corcoran 
 
Irish Centre for Cloud Computing and Commerce 
Dublin City University 
Dublin 9, Ireland 
e-mails: {lisa.vanderwerff@dcu.ie, theo.lynn@dcu.ie, huanhuan.xiong@dcu.ie, graham.hunt@.dcu.ie, j.morrison@cs.ucc.ie, 
p.healy@cs.ucc.ie, david.corcoran22@mail.dcu.ie} 
 
 
Abstract— Low consumer trust presents a significant barrier to 
cloud service adoption and the growth of the cloud industry. 
The cloud environment is generally perceived to have high 
levels of uncertainty and risk. Trust plays a central role in 
allowing consumers to overcome this risk when making 
adoption decisions. This paper discusses the characteristics of 
cloud services that form the basis for consumer trust decisions 
and argues that service providers need a more transparent, 
accessible method of communicating these characteristics to 
potential consumers. As such, this paper is directly relevant to 
conference tracks discussing consumer-oriented digital services 
and in particular the topic of consumer trust in digital society. 
Drawing on the nutrition label concept and aspects of previous 
computational trust models, we propose a dynamic trust label 
for cloud computing. The cloud trust label aims at present real 
time and cumulative metrics to consumers in an easily 
understandable format. In doing so, the label can be used to 
aid knowledge based trust decisions and ultimately encourage 
adoption of cloud services. 
Keywords-cloud computing; trust; nutrition label; risk. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing can be described as “a model for 
enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand network access 
to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., 
networks, servers, storage, applications, and services) that 
can be rapidly provisioned and released with minimal 
management 
effort 
or 
service 
provider 
interaction” 
(National Institute of Standards and Technology, NIST [1]). 
The information technology (IT) related savings for cloud 
computing include lower implementation and maintenance 
costs; cost of power, cooling, storage and paying only for 
what is used [2]. There are also operational benefits due to 
the flexibility and agility of cloud computing. According to 
the European Commission, cloud computing has the 
potential to generate €250 billion in gross domestic product 
(GDP) with the creation of 2.5 million jobs by 2020 [3].  
A number of factors are cited as barriers to wider cloud 
adoption by consumers. These include issues with trust, 
security and transparency [4], which introduce high levels of 
risk and uncertainty and prevent more widespread cloud 
adoption. Improving our understanding of the factors 
underlying consumer trust decisions is vital to capitalising 
on the potential benefits of cloud computing. 
Previous research aimed at improving trust in the Cloud 
has focused predominantly on technical aspects of data 
handling and assigning accountability for potential issues to 
specific parties in the chain of service provision [5]. This 
focus emphasises methods of preventing and handling trust 
violations but fails to explain the role of consumer 
expectations and perceptions in driving their initial trust and 
adoption decisions. This paper takes a consumer-oriented 
view of trust in cloud computing and examines the risks 
inherent in the cloud environment and the characteristics of 
cloud technology which consumers are likely to assess in 
making trust judgements. Building on work done on 
nutrition labels and computational trust models, we propose 
the use of a trust label for cloud computing that will allow 
Cloud Service Providers (CSPs) to signal dynamic 
trustworthiness information to consumers. 
The remainder of this paper is organised into three 
sections. First, we will discuss issues of risk and uncertainty 
in the cloud environment including the selection of CSPs, 
the characteristics of cloud computing and the legal issues 
which impact consumer cloud experiences. Second, we will 
explore the theoretical underpinning of consumer trust 
perceptions and provide a brief overview of relevant 
literature on trust in the field of information systems. 
Finally, we examine previous research into the use of 
nutrition labels to communicate information in the context 
of information systems and outline our plans to develop a 
label specific to developing trust within the Cloud industry. 
II. 
RISK AND UNCERTAINTY IN THE CLOUD 
ENVIRONMENT 
Cloud computing provides compelling benefits and cost 
saving options for consumers [4]. However, adopting cloud 
computing services presents new risks and uncertainty that 
increases the perceived complexity of the adoption decision-
making process and cloud provider selection [2]. The Cloud 
can introduce a single point of failure as demonstrated by 
Amazon EC2 outage in 2011 [6] and raises concerns over 
the security of data as demonstrated by the recent 
157
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

controversy over NSA surveillance [7]. CSPs need to look 
for mechanisms that can address such risk factors.  
In adopting cloud services, the user is making a 
commitment to a CSP and needs to understand the possible 
impact of selecting the wrong CSP, security and data 
privacy risks that are inherent in the cloud environment, as 
well as the legal issues that are currently leading to 
uncertainty.  
 
A.    Cloud Service Provider Selection 
For enterprise consumers, the economic appeal of 
adopting cloud computing is often depicted as “converting 
capital expenses to operating expenses” [8]. The perceived 
benefit is that by removing the up-front capital expense the 
user 
transfers 
the 
risk 
of 
overprovisioning 
or 
underprovisioning and frees up capital for core business 
activities [8]. However, accurately comparing CSP’s pricing 
schemes can be challenging with providers using different 
pricing models making the selection process difficult [9]. 
Although cloud computing is cost effective and cost 
transparent, incorrect CSP selection will lead to a user 
paying more than expected [9]. Consumers can easily 
become locked-in and dependent on a vendor such that they 
cannot 
terminate 
the 
relationship 
without 
incurring 
substantial financial costs [10]. This is a significant concern 
for consumers as it reduces their flexibility to move between 
CSPs and reduces the consumer’s bargaining power [11]. 
CSPs will often design lock-in into their services through 
the use of closed architectures to reduce portability and ease 
of data migration [11]. As a result, selecting a CSP is most 
likely the beginning of a long-term relationship that will be 
difficult to break. 
 
B.    Cloud Computing Characteristics  
The five essential characteristics of cloud computing as 
set out by NIST [11]: on-demand self-service, broad 
network access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity and 
measured service suggest flexibility and ease of use for the 
consumer. However, these characteristics convey a 
contradictory message in the context of technology 
decision-making by introducing new risks and uncertainty 
[5]. For example, in outsourcing to a CSP the consumer 
faces similar concerns to those involved in a traditional 
outsourcing decision whereby they are limiting their control 
over the service while still retaining responsibility for it [5]. 
They are paying for a measured service yet have no control 
over its measurement. Hosting application and data in a 
multi-tenant environment increases consumer uncertainty 
related to privacy, compliance, integrity and confidentiality 
among other concerns [2]. 
 
C.    Legal Issues 
As a result of lack of consumer control over cloud 
resources, they must rely on contracts or other formalised 
trust mechanisms to try encourage appropriate usage [5]. It 
has been suggested that the contract between the consumer 
and CSP can often lead to further uncertainty [11]. One of 
the difficulties is that existing legislation was not written 
with the Cloud in mind [11]. A number of common legal 
issues are outlined below. 
 
• Security and Data Protection are continually ranked 
among the top barriers to cloud adoption [2][4]. For 
many consumers, the perceived risk is still too high to 
place critical personal information in the Cloud. 
Possible risks include increased vulnerability of data 
being accessed by third parties through surveillance by 
national security agencies, malicious users, data 
leakages, failure of electronic and physical transport 
systems for data and back up (if carried out) [2]. In 
many cases, legal agreements for cloud services seek to 
place the responsibility for security and data protection 
on the data owner, i.e., the consumer, to ensure a level 
of security appropriate to the risks represented by the 
processing of the data [11][12]. Another factor causing 
uncertainty is many standard terms of CSPs do not 
necessarily require security incidents to be reported to 
the consumer [13]. Consumers must also consider the 
security and location of their data while in transit. Many 
cloud legal agreements specify that data will be stored 
and processed within certain regions but do not specify 
that they will not be transferred outside these limits 
[11]. 
• 
Service Levels and Performance – The Service Level 
Agreement (SLA) will typically contain a defined list of 
services delivered, performance targets, auditing 
mechanisms and any compensatory mechanisms [11]. 
However, uncertainty is introduced as many SLAs rely 
on the chain of service provision; this may mitigate any 
commitment by the CSP to performance [11]. Many 
CSPs, typically, reserve the right to amend contract 
terms unilaterally where continued use is deemed 
acceptance resulting in continued uncertainty for the 
consumer [14]. Often consumers cannot monitor 
performance levels and are reliant on information 
provided by the CSP [11]. 
 
• 
Data integrity refers to maintaining and assuring the 
accuracy and consistency of data over its life cycle [15]. 
Many consumers consider the Cloud as a safe method 
of backing up their data. As a result, data integrity is 
core to consumer expectations [11]. A recent study 
found that the majority of CSPs place the legal 
responsibility for preserving the data integrity with the 
client increasing their potential risk [14].  
 
• 
Choice of jurisdiction – The nature of cloud 
computing assumes that data will be stored across 
multiple data centres by a CSP introducing a degree of 
jurisdictional uncertainty even if stated in the contract 
[11]. With almost 50 per cent of CSPs choosing US 
158
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

jurisdiction, there is a disincentive for consumers to 
take legal action due to the high costs of dispute 
resolution [11]. In many cases, CSPs that choose a US 
state as applicable law seek to deny any liability for 
damage as far as possible and restrict compensation to 
service credit [14]. This can result in significant 
financial losses for the consumer. However, it should be 
noted that EU law, typically, does not allow providers 
to contractually avoid liability to the extent of the US 
legal system. 
 
• 
Termination – A commonly cited issue for consumers 
is the ability to retrieve and transfer their data on 
leaving the CSP [11]. Most providers fail to provide 
assistance in off boarding data and those that do tend to 
charge for it. This increases the chances of a consumer 
becoming locked-in to the CSP. Furthermore, the 
standard terms of the contract often provide little grace 
period for consumers to migrate their data [11]. 
 
To increase cloud adoption, the above risks and 
uncertainty need to be addressed.  
III. 
SIGNALLING TRUST IN THE CLOUD 
In contexts where individuals perceive high levels of 
risk and uncertainty, trust provides a vital basis for 
interdependence and cooperation between two parties in a 
relationship [16]. Indeed the existence of risk is a necessary 
condition of trust in another party. Improving consumer 
trust in cloud services provides an important opportunity for 
consumers themselves, and for the cloud industry as a 
whole, in overcoming high levels of risk and uncertainty 
and paving the way for cloud adoption. 
Trust is considered a three stage process consisting of 
the forming of positive expectation, the decision to make 
oneself vulnerable to another party and a risk taking act 
[17]. This sequencing of events has important implications 
for the approach that cloud service providers might take to 
increasing consumer trust and reducing perceptions of risk 
and uncertainty in the cloud environment. In order to 
encourage cloud adoption, which might be seen as a risk 
taking behaviour, providers must focus on how to increase 
positive expectations (stage 1) and drive consumer 
willingness to be vulnerable (stage 2) despite the risks 
perceived in their environment. 
A considerable body of literature in the field of 
interpersonal and organisational trust has been devoted to 
uncovering the factors which contribute to positive trust 
expectations. The dominant model in the trust literature was 
put forward by Mayer et al. [18] and proposes that 
expectations consist of trustworthiness perceptions formed 
on the basis of the perception of characteristics of the other 
party. Specifically, three key characteristics are assessed: 
ability – the competence, knowledge and skills of the other 
party; benevolence – the extent to which the other party is 
expected to act in the trustor’s interests; and, integrity – the 
other party’s adherence to a set of acceptable principles and 
rules. 
Although this model was originally designed to capture 
the interpersonal trust process, it has proven to be robust 
across levels of analysis [19] and is frequently applied to 
improving our understanding of trust in organisations across 
a range of industries. A small body of literature has recently 
developed and adapted the trustworthiness model to the 
context of trust in technology [20][21]. The primary 
difference in this context is that the party in which trust is 
placed is incapable of consciousness or moral agency which 
prevents it for example from making a decision about 
whether or not to behave in a benevolent manner [22]. 
However, trust is a psychological state [23] that exists in the 
mind of the trustor. Accordingly, theorists [22] suggest that 
interpersonal theories of trust are useful in understanding 
trust relationships between humans and technology as long 
as the human party is making the trust assessments and 
decisions. In other words, it is logical to apply existing trust 
theory to understand humans trusting technology but not 
vice versa.  
The traditional trustworthiness model of ability, 
benevolence and integrity has been adapted in the 
information systems literature to provide a more suitable 
assessment of the trustworthiness characteristics of an IT 
artefact [20][22]. It is suggested that assessments of 
trustworthiness in this context are built on consumer 
perceptions of performance, helpfulness and predictability 
[22]. Performance relates easily to the original dimension of 
ability in that it refers to the consumer’s perception of the 
competence of the product and its ability to help them to 
carry out the required task. Helpfulness is proposed as a 
substitute for benevolence and describes the consumer’s 
perception that support in the use of the product is available. 
Finally, predictability, related to the original dimension of 
integrity, refers to the consumer’s perception that they can 
both understand and predict the behaviour of the 
technological product. Together knowledge and perception 
of these three characteristics provide a basis for consumer 
trust in technology. 
Trust built on knowledge of the characteristics of a cloud 
service has an important advantage over trust built on a 
simple calculation of the risks and benefits of cloud product 
adoption. Knowledge based trust is likely to be less 
suspicious and fragile than that based on pure calculation of 
potential costs and benefits [24][25]. Building robust trust 
relationships with consumers is advantageous for cloud 
service providers as it allows a greater threshold for the 
acceptance of small violations of consumer expectations. 
Knowledge based trust is also advantageous for cloud 
consumer as once the trust relationship is established less 
time is needed for the vigilant monitoring of the service 
allowing users to fully realise the benefits of the service. 
However, the online environment is a context in which an 
overwhelming array of information is available to 
159
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

consumer. Although consumers are motivated to evaluate 
the trustworthiness of information they access online, the 
thoroughness of this evaluation is limited by time and 
cognitive resource constraints. In order to realise the 
benefits associated with trust, the challenge for the cloud 
industry 
lies 
in 
devising 
an 
effective 
means 
of 
communicating trustworthy characteristics to the consumer.  
For a thorough review of trust in online environments see 
Grabner-Krauter and Kalushcha [26] and Beldad et al. [27]. 
Computational trust models have existed in the field of 
information systems for many years, typically known as 
reputation mechanisms [28]. Information related to past 
behaviours of users is used to determine the reputation of 
those users in terms of availability, reliability, good quality 
and security. The mechanism is generally implemented 
based on a centralized rating model so that the customers 
and sellers can rate each other using numerical scale or 
feedback comments (e.g., Amazon, eBay, Taobao, etc.).  
Within the cloud computing literature, researchers are 
beginning to recognize the need for a mechanism to build 
consumer trust in the Cloud. The traditional reputation 
mechanism has been extended to distributed systems to 
meet the challenges of cloud computing [29]. Vu et al. 
proposed peer-to-peer (P2P) web service discovery that uses 
Quality of Service (QoS) data and user feedback to rank and 
select services [30]. The use of SLAs and business activities 
monitoring is suggested as a method to guarantee the quality 
of cloud services [31]. In a similar vein, Bogataj and 
Pucihar suggest a trust building mechanism for cloud 
computing adoption, which consists of authentication, 
system security, service quality and non-repudiation [32]. 
Lynn et al. [33] recently outlined the use of a trustmark to 
help consumers of cloud computing to build trustworthiness. 
Trustmarks typically involve one or more of six elements: a 
declaration of best practice, a subscription to a code of 
conduct, scrutiny for membership, sanctions for failure, 
recourse for wrongful revocation, and a remedy for 
aggrieved customers [33].  They are proposed to build trust 
by providing evidence of third party certification and have 
been demonstrated as an effective mechanism for increasing 
credibility and consumer trust online [34]. 
IV. 
A NUTRITION TRUST LABEL FOR CLOUD COMPUTING 
In the United States, a Nutrition Labelling and Education 
Act (NLEA) [35] was signed into law in 1990 that gives the 
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) [36] authority to 
require nutrition labelling of the majority of food products. 
The purpose of the food nutrition label is to play a role in 
informing consumers about their food purchasing decisions 
by supporting and supplementing other nutrition education 
strategies [37]. For instance, offering nutrient content claims 
and certain health messages, providing quantitative 
information about nutrients and making it easy to compare 
between a small set of items. The provision of Nutrition 
information on food packaging allows consumers to make 
more informed decisions about their nutrition and adapting 
their purchase behaviour to suit their individual dietary 
needs [38].  The typical nutrition label is shown in Figure 1.  
The nutrition labelling mechanism has gained wide 
recognition around the world, and built a broader 
understanding of practices used in designing and defining 
labelling requirements [39].  
 
 
Figure 1. the Food and Drug Administration’s Nutrition Fact panel as 
regulated by the NLEA, [41] 
Carnegie Mellon has demonstrated the transferability of the 
nutrition label concept to the technology industry in their 
recent development of a privacy nutrition label [39]. Their 
work builds on the Platform for Privacy Preferences (P3P) 
expandable Grid that presents a “nutrition facts” pattern 
where consumers can investigate and explore the privacy 
policy of websites [40]. P3P was created by the World Wide 
Web consortium for encoding and sharing online privacy 
160
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

policies in a standard format (i.e., XML Schema Definition 
Standard), which can be retrieved automatically and 
interpreted easily by consumers [42]. Drawing on this, a 
privacy nutrition label was proposed aiming to simplify the 
P3P Expandable Grid to enhance user experience by 
reducing clutter and simplifying symbols [39]. An early 
stage, simplified label is shown in Figure 2. 
 
  
Figure 2. the simplified Privacy Nutrition Label, [39] 
CMU’s proposed Privacy Nutrition Label represents 
three main concerns: 
 
• 
What kind of information is collected, such as IP 
address, email address, name. 
• 
Who will share or use this information, such as 
current company or third party. 
• 
How this information is used, such as regular 
navigation, 
tracking, 
personalization 
or 
telemarketing. 
• 
Contact Information to allow the user to obtain 
further information and support. 
CMU’s privacy nutrition label provides a good example 
of how the nutrition label concept increases clarity and 
availability of information in a technology context. As such, 
it provides a useful basis for how we might develop a label 
specific to developing consumer trust in CSPs. However, a 
number of important questions still remain. It is not yet clear 
how people will use the label in practice or what quantifiable 
information provides the best basis for consumer decision-
making. In addition, thus far nutrition labels are typically 
presented as a static representation or logo. In the context of 
cloud computing, access to real time metrics provides a 
unique opportunity to present consumers with a continuously 
updating, dynamic label. Building on this foundation, we 
propose the use of the nutrition label concept to design a 
trust label for cloud computing to provide clarity and greater 
consumer access to information on which to base trust and 
adoption decisions. 
 
V. 
THE IC4 CLOUD TRUST LABEL PROJECT 
In November 2013, the Irish Centre for Cloud 
Computing and Commerce (IC4) established a research 
project to develop and test such a trust label. This project 
seeks to use a qualitative online Delphi study of cloud 
industry experts and users to determine the most appropriate 
format for a cloud trust label, and establish how the risks 
discussed in Section II can be overcome.  The project 
comprises five rounds of anonymous online interaction 
between the industry experts and users: 
 
• 
Round 1 - Brainstorming: Discussion to be focused 
on brainstorming label content. 
• 
Round 2 – Identifying Label Features: Finalising a 
list of label content and discussing the optimal way 
to communicate this to users. 
• 
Round 3 – Label Refinement: Presentation of a 
draft label design for discussion by the group. 
• 
Round 4 – Final Label Distribution: Discussion of 
label refinement following Round 3. 
• 
Round 5 – Evaluation: Evaluation of the final label 
and process. 
 
Once consensus on label has been agreed, a further 
research project will be conducted to empirically examine 
the impact of the label on consumer trust expectations and 
decisions and to investigate their impact on cloud adoption 
rates. The theoretical potential of the cloud trust label is 
clear. However, as consumer perceptions are key, 
demonstrating the label’s practical significance and utility in 
terms of actual impact on consumer attitudes will be a vital 
step towards encouraging widespread adoption by CSPs. 
Separate research on technical systems for monitoring, 
transferring, analysing and surfacing cloud service data to 
the trust label securely is required. In particular, attention 
needs to be given to how the monitoring and analysis 
performed to calculate the trust metrics can be made 
minimally 
intrusive 
and 
tamper 
evident. 
Finally, 
consideration will need to be given to the best way of 
deploying the label and encouraging CSPs to display and 
communicate 
this 
information. 
Providing 
convincing 
evidence of the practical utility of the label for both experts 
and non-experts will be central to this process. In addition, 
the label will provide an important benefit to quality service 
providers by providing an easier means of comparison across 
services and a clear map of how CSPs might differentiate 
themselves from their competition. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
This paper proposed a trust label as a means for cloud 
service providers to communicate trustworthiness to 
consumers. In the cloud environment, consumers encounter 
high levels of risk and uncertainty when making decisions 
about adopting cloud products. Trust theory suggests that  
161
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

cloud adoption behaviours will be based on consumer 
knowledge of trustworthiness characteristics that provide a 
foundation for trust decisions. The effective communication 
of these characteristics to consumers is vital to improving 
trust in the cloud environment and maximizing cloud 
adoption. The dynamic nutrition trust label proposed in this 
paper provides a means of meeting this communication need.  
Future research will address the specific content and features 
of the label and empirically examine its impact on consumer 
trust and cloud adoption practices.  
REFERENCES 
[1] P. Mell and T. Grance, “The NIST definition of Cloud 
Computing,” National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
U.S Department of Commerce, 2011 
[2] M. Carroll, A. Van der Merwe, and P. Kotze, “Secure cloud 
computing: Benefits, risks and controls,” Information Security 
South Africa (ISSA), IEEE, August, 2011, pp. 1-9. 
[3] European Commission, “Unleashing the potential of cloud 
computing in Europe” 2012   
[4] D. Bradshaw, G. Folco, G. Cattaneo, and M. Kolding, 
“Quantitative estimates of the demand for cloud computing in 
Europe and the likely barriers to up-take” IDC, 2012. 
[5] S. Pearson, and A. Benameur, "Privacy, security and trust 
issues arising from cloud computing." Cloud Computing 
Technology and Science (CloudCom), IEEE, 2010, pp. 693-
702. 
[6] 
J. 
Pepitone, 
“Amazon 
EC2 
outage 
downs 
Reddit, 
Quora,”Available: 
http://money.cnn.com/2011/04/21/technology/amazon_server
_outage/,  2011 [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[7]  G. Greenwald and E. MacAskill, “NSA Prism program taps in 
to user data of Apple, Google and others,” Available: 
http://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/06/us-tech-
giants-nsa-data, 2013 [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[8] A. Fox et al., “Above the clouds: A Berkeley view of cloud 
computing,” Dept. Electrical Eng. and Comput. Sciences, 
University of California, Berkeley, Rep. UCB/EECS, 28, 
2009. 
[9] U. Onwudebelu and B. Chukuka, “Will adoption of cloud 
computing put the enterprise at risk?” Adaptive Science & 
Technology (ICAST), IEEE 4th International Conference, pp. 
82-85, October 2012. 
[10] K. Zhu and Z. Zhou, “Lock-in strategy in software 
competition: Open-source software vs. proprietary software,” 
Information Systems Research, 2011, pp. 1- 10. 
[11] T. Leimbach, D. Hallinan, A. Weber, M. Jaglo, L. Hennen,  
M. Nentwich, S. Strauß, R. Øjvind Nielson, T. Lynn, and G. 
Hunt. (2013) “Impacts of Cloud Computing. Bericht-Nr. 
Deliverable No.3 of the STOA Project European Perspectives 
on impacts and potentials of Cloud Computing and Social 
Network Sites (Interim Report – Phase III)”, Science and 
Technology Options Assessment, European Parliament. 
[12] Directive 95/46/EC on the protection of individuals with 
regard to the processing of personal data and on the free 
movement of such data. 
[13] W. Hon, C. Millard, and I. Walden, “Negotiating cloud 
contracts: Looking at clouds from both sides now,” Stanford 
Law Review, vol. 16(1), 2012, pp. 79-129. 
[14] S. Bradshaw, C. Millard, and I. Walden, “Contracts for 
clouds: comparison and analysis of the terms and conditions 
of cloud computing services.” In International Journal of Law 
and Information Technology, vol. 19(3), 2011, pp 187-223. 
[15] J. E. Boritz, “IS practitioners' views on core concepts of 
information integrity,” International Journal of Accounting 
Information Systems, vol. 6(4), 2005, pp. 260-279. 
[16] P. P. Li, "Towards an interdisciplinary conceptualization of 
trust: A typological approach," Management and Organization 
Review, vol 3(3), 2007, pp. 421-445. 
[17] B. McEvily, V. Perrone, and A. Zaheer, “Special issue: Trust 
in an organizational context. Organization Science,” vol. 
14(1), 2003. 
[18] R. C. Mayer, J. H. Davis, and F. D. Schoorman, "An 
integrative model of organizational trust." Academy of 
Management Review, vol. 20(3), 1995, pp. 709-734. 
[19] F. D. Schoorman, R. C. Mayer, and J. H. Davis, "An 
integrative model of organizational trust: Past, present, and 
future," Academy of Management Review, vol. 32(2), 2007, 
pp. 344-354. 
[20] D. H. McKnight, M. Carter, J. B. Thatcher, and P. F. Clay, 
“Trust in a specific technology: An investigation of its 
components 
and 
measures,” 
ACM 
Transactions 
on 
Management Information Systems (TMIS), vol. 2(2), 2011, 
pp. 12-33. 
[21] M. Söllner, A. Hoffmann, H. Hoffmann, and J. M. Leimeister, 
“Towards a theory of explanation and prediction for the 
formation of trust in IT artifacts,” In 10th Annual Workshop 
on HCI Research in MIS, Shanghai, China, December, 2011, 
pp. 1-6. 
[22] M. Söllner, P. Pavlou, and J. M. Leimeister, “Understanding 
trust in it artifacts – A new conceptual approach,” Academy 
of Management Proceedings in Florida, USA, August 2013. 
[23] D. M. Rousseau, S. B. Sitkin, R. S. Burt, and C. Camerer,  
“Not so different after all: A cross-discipline view of trust,” 
Academy of Management Review, vol. 23(3), 1998, pp. 393-
404. 
[24] R. J. Lewicki and B. B. Bunker, “Developing and maintaining 
trust in work relationships,” Trust in Organizations: Frontiers 
of Theory and Research, Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE 
Publications, Inc., 1996, pp. 114-139. 
[25] G. Dietz, “Partnership and the development of trust in British 
workplaces,” Human Resource Management Journal, vol. 
14(1), 2004, pp. 5-24. 
[26] S. Grabner-Krauter and E. A. Kaluscha, “Empirical research 
in on-line trust: a review and critical assessment,” 
International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol 58, 
2003, pp. 783-812. 
[27] A. Beldad, M. de Jong, and M. Steehouder, “How shall I trust 
the faceless and the intangible? A literature review on the 
antecedents of online trust,” Computers in Human Behavior, 
vol 26, 2010, pp.857-869. 
[28] J. Sabater and C. Sierra, “Review on computational trust and 
reputation models,” Artificial Intelligence Review, vol. 24(1),  
2005, pp. 33-60. 
[29] P. Resnick and R. Zeckhauser, “Trust among strangers in 
Internet transactions: Empirical analysis of eBay’s reputation 
system,” Advances in Applied Microeconomics: A Research 
Annual, vol. 11, 2002, pp. 127-157. 
[30] L. H. Vu, M. Hauswirth, and K. Aberer, “Towards P2P-based 
semantic web services discovery with QoS support,” 
Workshop on Business Processes and Services (BPS), in 
conjunction with the Third International Conference on 
Business Process Management, Nancy, France, September 
2005. 
[31] M. Alhamad, T. Dillon, and E. Chang, “SLA-based trust 
model for cloud computing,” 13th International Conference 
on Network-Based Information System, pp. 321-324. 
Takayama, Japan, September 2010. 
[32] K. Bogataj and A. Pucihar, “Business model factors 
influencing cloud computing adoption: Differences in 
opinion,” 25th Bled eConference Doctoral Consortium, Bled, 
Slovenia, June 2012. 
[33] T. Lynn, P. Healy, R. McClatchey, J. Morrison, C. Pahl, and 
B. Lee, “The case for cloud service trustmarks and assurance-
as-a-service,” 3rd International Conference on Cloud 
Computing 
and 
Services 
Science 
Closer'13, 
Aachen, 
Germany, May 2013. 
162
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

[34] K. D. Aiken and D. M. Boush, “Trustmarks, objective-source 
ratings, and implied investments in advertising: Investigating 
online trust and the context specific nature of internet 
signals,” Journal of Academy of Marketing Science, vol. 
34(3), 2006, pp. 308-323. 
[35] Nutrition Labeling and Education Act (NLEA) 
Requirements, Available: 
http://www.fda.gov/iceci/inspections/inspectionguides/ucm07
4948.htm, 1994 [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
 [36] FDA, “Labeling & Nutrition”, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration, Available: 
 
http://www.fda.gov/Food/IngredientsPackagingLabeling/Labe
lingNutrition/default.htm, 2013 [retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[37] R. Rothman, R. Housam, H. Weiss, D. Davis, R. Gregory, T. 
Gebretsadik, 
A. 
Shintani, 
and 
T. 
Elasy, 
 
“Patient 
understanding of food labels: the role of literacy and 
numeracy”. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, vol. 
31(5), 2006, pp. 391-398. 
[38] A. Gracia, M. Loureiro, and R. M. Nayga Jr., "Do consumers 
perceive benefits from the implementation of a EU mandatory 
nutritional labelling program?" Food Policy, vol. 32(2), 2007, 
pp. 160-174. 
[39] P. G. Kelley, J. Bresee, L. F. Cranor, and R. W. Reeder, “A 
‘Nutrition Label’ for privacy,” Symposium on Usable Privacy 
and Security (SOUPS), Mountain View, CA, USA, July 2009. 
[40] R.W. Reeder, “Expendable grids: A user interface 
visualization technique and a policy semantic to support fast, 
accurate security and privacy policy authoring,” PhD thesis, 
Carnegie Mellon, Available:  
http://www.robreeder.com/pubs/ReederThesis.pdf , 2008 
[retrieved: February, 2014]. 
[41] S. B. Keller, M. Landry, J. Olson, A. M. Velliquette, S. 
Burton, and J. C. Andrews, “The effects of nutrition package 
claims, nutrition facts panels, and motivation to process 
nutrition information on consumer product evaluations,” 
Journal of Public Policy & Marketing, vol. 16(2), 1997, pp. 
256-269. 
[42] W3C, the Platform for Privacy Preferences 1.1 (P3P1.1) 
Specification, Available: 
 
http://www.w3.org/TR/P3P11/, 2006 [retrieved: February, 
2014]. 
 
 
163
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

