Smart Cities, Big Data and Smart Decision-making 
Understanding “Big Data” in Smart City Applications 
 
Lasse Berntzen, Marius Rohde Johannessen 
Department of Business, History and Social Sciences 
University College of Southeast Norway 
Horten, Norway 
e-mail:{lasse.berntzen; marius.johannessen}@usn.no 
Rania El-Gazzar 
Department of Business and Law 
University College of Southeast Norway 
Hønefoss, Norway 
e-mail: rania.el-gazzar@usn.no
 
 
Abstract—Smart decision making is based on data combined 
with analytics to improve decision-making. This paper examines 
several application areas of smart cities, and related data 
sources used for decision-making. In many cases, systems may 
make decisions on their own. Such systems may play an 
important role in the development of smart cities. In other cases, 
the data can be combined with historical data or other open data 
sources to play a role as the foundation for decision-making. 
Our findings are presented as an analytical framework, which 
will be used for further empirical studies into this domain. 
Keywords-smart decision-making; smart cities; big data; sensors; 
analytics. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
This paper presents an analytical framework for smart or 
(intelligent) decision making in the context of smart cities. 
The framework is based on a review of literature, white papers 
and news sources covering the topic, as well as empirical data 
from a study on air quality monitoring. The analytical 
framework shows areas in need of further study and forms the 
basis for future research projects. 
Smart decision-making uses a systematic approach to data 
collection and applies logical decision-making techniques 
instead of using intuition, generalizing from experience, or 
trial and error. 
“Smart cities” is a multifaceted concept and has been 
defined in many different ways; more than 100 definitions of 
smart cities have been analyzed by the International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU)’s focus group on smart 
sustainable cities [1][2]. The mandatory requirement for smart 
cities is to improve quality of life and achieve sustainable 
development (economic, social, and environmental) through 
the use of Information and Communications Technology 
(ICT) and intelligence [3]. Definitions emphasized the 
technological aspect of a smart city as being "a 
technologically interconnected city" or Internet of Things 
(IoT) using big data is promoted to achieve the efficiency and 
intelligence in managing cities' resources [4][5]. 
A smart city is a city that is characterized as an 
“instrumented, interconnected, and intelligent” [6]-[8]. This 
can be conceptualized as three layers, as shown in Figure 1. 
These characteristics are enabled by use of ICT, which 
constitute the heart of a smart city [9]. The “instrumentation” 
layer does data acquisition through sensor-based systems that 
provide real-time data through sensors, meters and cameras, 
but also from social media and open data sources. The 
instrumentation layer enables capturing and filtering data 
from various sources for timely response. The inputs from the 
instrumentation layer are integrated and transformed into 
event-related information at the “interconnection” layer to 
provide 
rich 
insights 
for 
decision-making. 
The 
interconnection layer provides all forms of collaboration 
among people, processes, and systems to enable a holistic 
view supporting decision-making. At the “intelligence” layer, 
business intelligence and analytics are applied to the 
information provided by the interconnection layer and other 
city-relevant data and, then, the analyzed information is 
visualized to understand the city requirements and city 
policies, hence, make informed decisions and take actions. 
The intelligence layer is focused on deep discovery, analyses, 
and forecasting. These three layers that build up the smartness 
in a smart city are constructed by smart technology solutions 
and ICT infrastructure, such as IoT, big data, and Internet. 
 
 
 
 
Intelligence layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Interconnection layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Instrumentation layer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sensors 
Location 
data 
Social 
media 
Open data 
sources 
 
 
Figure 1. Three-layer model. 
 
Regarding the intelligence layer that is concerned with 
decision-making, a review of studies on smart city and 
decision-making resulted in nine articles. This indicates that 
smart city and decision-making is an area that deserves further 
investigation on how to make a big impact from big data [10]. 
In this paper, we elaborate on smart or intelligent decision-
making in the context of smart cities. Smart decision-making 
relies on data and analytics to make better decisions. By using 
autonomous systems, the decisions can be implemented in real 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

time. Human intervention can be reduced to oversee the 
decisions and take over if the system is malfunctioning. 
The main focus of this paper is on the instrumentation 
layer, and the data sources used by this layer. The data is 
refined through the interconnection layer and processed by the 
intelligence layer to enable decision-making. The three-level 
model provides a systematic approach to collecting facts and 
applying logical decision-making techniques, instead of 
generalizing from experience, intuition (guessing), or trial and 
error. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section 2 
discusses 
methodology. 
Section 
3 
focuses 
on 
the 
instrumentation layer, including identification of common 
data sources. Section 4 describes some selected smart city 
application areas. Section 5 presents our analytical 
framework. Section 6 contains our conclusion, some 
limitations, and ideas for future work.  
II. 
METHODOLOGY 
The purpose of this paper is to begin exploring how typical 
application areas of smart cities use, analyze and visualize 
data. Data analysis and visualization is essential for decision-
making and intelligence in smart cities [6]-[8]. However, our 
literature review reveals little research in this area. 
Figure 2 shows how data is analyzed and visualized. The 
analytics typically stores data for future use, e.g., for 
predictions. The visualization is used for human decision-
making. 
 
 
 
Figure 2. From data to decisions. 
 
Thus, an analytical framework outlining the possible data 
sources, analytical and visualization techniques could be a 
valuable contribution to decision-making, as well as for future 
studies in this domain. Our research question for this study is 
“Which data sources are applicable to the different 
application areas of smart cities?” 
Data collection was done through several iterations. 
Initially, we planned on conducting this study as a pure 
literature review. However, there are few studies of this area 
so far. We were only able to identify nine research papers 
(referenced in Table 1), using the search phrases “smart city” 
and “decision-making” in the title. Thus, we had to rely on 
additional data sources and conduct a document analysis of 
industry white papers, as well as industry, technology and 
regular news sources. In addition, we applied existing 
empirical data from a previous study on air quality 
monitoring.  
This exploratory approach led us to three themes, which 
we summarize in Section 3, Table 1. Further, the examined 
news sources and white papers identified eight application 
areas of data analysis in smart cities; parking, speed 
monitoring, 
public 
transport, 
traffic, 
environmental 
monitoring, energy management, waste handling, and crime 
prevention.   For analysis, we have applied literature, findings 
from the air quality monitoring study, as well as data from 
industry to map potential data sources for each of the eight 
categories. This allowed us to create an initial framework of 
data sources for the eight identified categories.  
III. 
DATA FOR DECISION-MAKING 
At the instrumentation layer, data for decision-making 
may originate from many different sources. Laney [11] 
defines big data as data having high volume, high velocity 
and/or high variety. High volume refers to large amounts of 
data demanding both specialized storage and processing. High 
velocity refers to streams of real-time data, e.g., from sensor 
networks or large-scale transaction systems. Finally, high 
variety is about dealing with data from different sources 
having different formats. 
Big data may originate from sensors. Another important 
source for big data is the world-wide-web. Web mining can be 
used to retrieve unstructured data (text) related to everyday 
events happening in a city. In this context social media, such 
as Facebook and Twitter can provide information about 
problems and citizen sentiments. Many government 
organization and private companies offer open data sets online 
that can be used for analysis and decision- making. 
Marr [12] argues that the real value of big data is not in the 
large volumes of data itself, but in the ability to analyze vast 
and complex data sets beyond anything we could ever do 
before. Due to recent advances in data analysis methods and 
cloud computing, the threshold for using big data has 
diminished. 
A. Sensors 
Sensors and sensor networks are important for smart 
decision-making. Sensors provide real time information about 
weather, traffic, air quality, energy consumption, water 
consumption, and waste. Data from sensor networks are 
structured and easy to process. According to Cambridge 
dictionary, the word “sensor” means a device that is used to 
record that something is present or that there are changes in 
something. IoT is an infrastructure with interconnected units 
that may among other things act as sensor platforms. 
Botterman [13] defines IoT as: 
“A global network infrastructure, linking physical and 
virtual objects, through the exploitation of data capture and 
communication capabilities. This infrastructure includes 
existing and evolving Internet and network developments. It 
will offer specific object-identification, sensor and connection 
capability as the basis for the development of independent 
federated services and applications. These will be 
characterized by a high degree of autonomous data capture, 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

event transfer, network connectivity and interoperability”. 
(p.12). 
B. Location data 
Location data places an object in a specific position. 
Location is important both for stationary and mobile objects. 
For mobile objects, location data comes from the Global 
Positioning System (GPS) or from triangulation of radio 
signals, e.g., belonging to a mobile network. 
C. Social media 
Another possible data source for smart decision-making is 
social media. Social media has been defined differently 
among scholars [14]. However, we adopt the definition by 
Kaplan and Haenlein [15]: “Internet-based applications that 
build on the ideological and technological foundations of Web 
2.0, and that allow the creation and exchange of User 
Generated Content” (p.62).  
Data retrieved from social media will mostly be 
unstructured (text, images, video), but also structured meta-
data providing additional information, e.g., tags containing 
author, 
content 
type, 
title, 
date/time 
and 
location. 
Unstructured data from social media may provide insight in 
the perceptions and sentiments of smart city citizens. 
D. Open Data Sources 
Open data is data that can be freely used, reused and 
redistributed by anyone - subject only, at most, to the 
requirement to attribute and share alike. Open data has the 
following characteristics [16]:  
• 
Availability and access: The data must be available as a 
whole and at no more than a reasonable reproduction cost, 
preferably by downloading from the Internet. The data 
must also be available in a convenient and modifiable 
form. 
• 
Reuse and redistribution: The data must be provided 
under terms that permit re-use and redistribution. 
• 
Universal participation: Everyone must be able to use, re-
use and redistribute - there should be no discrimination 
against fields of endeavor or against persons or groups.  
• 
Interoperability: The ability to interoperate - or intermix 
- different datasets (i.e., one piece of open material 
contained therein can be freely intermixed with other 
open materials). 
E. Decision-making in Smart Cities 
In the context of smart city, decision-making has been 
given less attention in the literature; Google Scholar found 
nine articles discussing decision-making in smart cities (See 
Table 1). The nine articles investigated various aspects of the 
three layers described earlier. 
Studies related to interconnection layer have highlighted 
various collaboration aspects that are important for smart 
cities. Ojasalo and Tähtinen [17] proposed a model of an open 
innovation platform for public sector decision-making in a 
city. The authors identified three different kinds of 
relationships that are present and partly interwoven in open 
innovation 
platforms 
(i.e., 
governing, 
sparring, and 
collaboration). The proposed model helps organizing the three 
types of relationships of an innovation platform with the city’s 
decision-making and external actors, by combining different 
decision-making cultures between the public and private 
sector. 
 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING LITERATURE TO SMART CITY LAYERS 
Ref. 
Instrumentation 
layer 
Interconnection 
layer 
Intelligence 
layer 
Others 
[17] 
 
X 
 
 
[18] 
 
 
X 
 
[19] 
 
 
X 
 
[20] 
 
 
X 
 
[21] 
X 
 
 
 
[22] 
X 
 
 
 
[23] 
X 
X 
X 
 
[14] 
 
 
 
X 
[22] 
 
 
 
X 
 
At the intelligence layer, Eräranta and Staffans [18] 
discussed knowledge creation and situation awareness in 
collaborative urban planning practice, and how digitalization 
changes it. The authors argued that smart city planning is not 
only a data-driven super linear scaling practice, but an 
integrative and collaborative learning process facilitated by 
face-to-face interaction, advanced analyses and visualizations 
of available data, ongoing processes, and local history and 
stories. The authors brought in collaboration at the 
intelligence layer. 
At the intelligence layer, Passe et al. [19] attempted to 
understand human behavior and decision-making about the 
built environment within an expanding range of spatial, 
political, and cultural contexts. The authors emphasized the 
importance of participation by a broad range of stakeholders 
in making decisions for the future of smart cities. The authors 
argued for the need to consider social dynamics in addition to 
building-occupant interactions, which requires investigating 
multiple scales and types of data to create new methodologies 
for design and decision-making processes. This approach 
moves data collection, analysis, design, and decision-making 
away from hierarchical relationships and utilizes the expertise 
of all stakeholders. 
Also at the intelligence layer, Honarvar and Sami [20] 
talked about the various sensors embedded in different places 
of smart cities to monitor and collect data about status of 
cities. Mining such data to extract valuable knowledge creates 
a challenge because various sources of data in smart cities are 
big, independent, heterogeneous and no semantic is integrated 
and annotated to them. The authors proposed an approach to 
leverage linked open data and semantic web technologies, 
data mining mechanisms, and big data processing platforms. 
At the instrumentation layer, Khan et al. [21] emphasized 
the role of citizen participation as an important data source for 
social innovation and co-creating urban regeneration 
proposals through innovative IT systems. Those IT systems 
can use open government data, visualize urban proposals in 
3D models and provide automated feedback on the feasibility 
of the proposals. Using those IT systems as a communication 
platform between citizens and city administrations offers an 
integrated top-down and bottom-up urban planning and 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

decision-making approach to smart cities. In the same line, 
Foucault and Moulier-Boutang [22] proposed a governance 
model called “Smart City – organological”. The model 
consists of an adaptive device built around a differentiation of 
smart sensors and tags to improve human decision-making. 
The device is taking into account both “physical sensors” and 
“economic and social sensors” to capture the explicit or 
implicit needs.  
At the level of the three layers, Nathali Silva et al. [23] 
worked on an area of concern regarding the continuous growth 
of the complex urban networks that is challenged by real-time 
data processing and intelligent decision-making capabilities. 
The authors proposed a smart city framework based on big 
data analytics. The framework operates on three levels: 
instrumentation layer (data generation and acquisition level), 
interconnection layer (collecting heterogeneous data related to 
city operations, data management and processing level), and 
intelligence layer (filtering, analyzing, and storing data to 
make decisions and events autonomously, and initiating 
execution of the events corresponding to the received 
decisions).  
Some other topics were studied in the literature, e.g., Gang 
and Yang [24] studied design issues to improve the 
intelligence layer of city emergency management. Kurniawan 
et al. [25] investigated the development and optimization 
possibilities of Makassar City smart operation room. The 
authors used fuzzy multi-criteria decision-making to illustrate 
the project priority rank and further to determine the 
alternative optimal option in conducting the project. 
IV. 
APPLICATION AREAS 
In order to understand more about data sources and 
decision-making techniques, we have examined some 
common application areas connected to smart cities (See 
Table 2). The first four areas are connected to transport: 
• 
Smart parking 
• 
Speed monitoring 
• 
Smart public transport 
• 
Smart traffic 
The rest of the application areas represent the broadness of the 
smart city concept: 
• 
Environmental monitoring 
• 
Energy management 
• 
Waste handling 
• 
Crime prevention 
A. Smart Parking 
Smart parking assists drivers to find a nearby parking spot. 
The information provided to the driver can have many 
different forms, from public displays placed next to roads to 
mobile apps directing the driver to a free parking spot 
[26][27][28]. 
Smart parking data is sensor based. Outdoor sensors may 
be magnetic sensors located in capsules embedded in the 
ground, detecting the presence of a car, or cameras detecting 
if a parking spot if free or not. Indoor parking spots may 
instead have infrared or ultrasound sensors to detect the 
presence of cars. 
Smart parking may also include payment solutions based 
on mobile phone apps, use of SMS, or dedicated devices like 
SmartPark™ [29]. The payment solutions may give the user 
the opportunity to pay for time actually used instead for 
paying for a fixed time period. 
Smart parking sensor data provides information to city 
planners and car park companies about the occupancy of 
parking spots over time. The collected information can be 
used for decision-making regarding the construction of new 
parking sites, and to decide on pricing. 
B. Vehicle Speed Monitoring 
Vehicle speed monitoring warn drivers about their driving 
speed. The idea is to make drivers slow down if they are 
driving at excess speed. Speed monitoring units may be stand-
alone, but state-of-the art units are connected to the Internet 
and provides real-time information on driving habits [30]. 
Several technologies have been demonstrated for vehicle 
speed monitoring including use of cameras, RADAR, LIDAR, 
and underground sensors [31]. A measurement station is put 
in a fixed position, and excess speed is shown on a display 
device. 
Another approach is to install mandatory units in all 
vehicles. The driver can then be alerted of excess speed 
directly by the unit. Such units can also upload speed data 
through some kind of network [31]. 
(Some GPS devices warns the driver about excess speed, 
but such data are not relevant, since data are not uploaded for 
use by traffic authorities.) 
Vehicle speed monitoring data can be used by traffic 
authorities and police to decide on traffic control locations. 
Such data can also be used to implement speed reducing 
measures, such as speed bumps or traffic lights, and even 
control such measures in day-to-day operations. 
C. Smart Public Transport 
One important measure to reduce environmental footprint 
is to reduce car traffic, in particular the use of private cars. A 
well-developed public transport infrastructure can be an 
incentive to reduce traffic load. Car owners may also be 
discouraged by the toll charges or congestion charges 
implemented in many cities. 
Smart public transport uses technology to provide public 
transport users with a better user experience [32]. Use of 
sensors and GPS technology can provide real time data on 
arrivals and departures of public transport vehicles. 
Smart ticketing solutions may use smart cards or mobile 
phones equipped with Near Field Communication (NFC) to 
make ticketing more efficient from a user point of view [33]. 
Online route planners may help users choose the most 
efficient route from one location to another location. 
The data collected from smart public transport can be used 
for real time situation reports and may also be used by public 
transport planners to adjust time tables, change routes, create 
new routes, and adjust fares. 
Social media may be mined to find citizen perceptions of 
the public transport system. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

D. Smart Traffic 
Smart traffic is about using technology to ensure more 
efficient traffic management. Traffic management may use 
road lights and signs to optimize traffic flow in real time [34]. 
Commercial car navigation systems provide information on 
fastest and shortest routes. Some navigation systems collect 
information from other cars real time to detect bottlenecks and 
provide alternative routes. 
Data may come from sensors embedded in the roads. The 
most common technique is to detect traffic density by 
embedding coils under the road surface to pick up passing 
cars. Alternatives are to use camera or radar technology to 
detect traffic. 
Data may also come from the vehicles themselves, by 
using radio transmissions or a cellular network [35]. 
The data collected may be used by the city-administration 
for road-planning, adjusting intervals of traffic lights. Data 
can also be used by transport companies to decide on best 
schedules for pick-ups and deliveries. 
Mining social media may provide some information on 
how citizens experience traffic situation.  
E. Air Quality Monitoring 
Monitoring 
air 
quality 
and 
other 
environmental 
parameters is important for decision-making. Some cities are 
enforcing restrictions on traffic when pollution levels reach a 
certain threshold [36]. 
In most cases, the air quality monitoring is done by fixed 
monitoring stations located throughout the city, but may also 
be done by mobile handheld units, or units installed in cars. 
Measurements include gases: CO, CO2, NOX, and dust 
particles, normally 2,5 PM and 10 PM. 
Collected data can be combined with other data sources, 
e.g., meteorological data, to provide real time situation reports 
and make forecasts for future pollution levels. Data can be 
visualized and be made available to the public. Such data is 
particularly valuable for citizens with respiratory problems. 
Social media may be mined to find citizen perceptions of 
air quality.  
F. Energy Management 
Smart power grids 
contribute 
to better energy 
management and reduced environmental footprint. An 
essential part of the smart grid is smart meters. Smart meters 
are devices that continuously measure power consumption of 
households and buildings. Household appliances can 
communicate with the smart meter to schedule activities when 
the load on the power grid is low. The smart meters also 
communicate with energy management systems to optimize 
energy consumption [37]. Buildings can also take part in 
energy production through use of solar panels and other 
alternative energy sources. 
Sensor data may be combined with location data and open 
data sources to make forecasts. Social media data plays a 
minor role in the context of energy management. 
G. Waste Handling 
Sorting waste materials for recycling has become common 
practice. Garbage collection can be improved by only 
collecting waste when necessary. “Intelligent” waste 
containers can report their state of becoming full and get 
included in the schedule of trucks collecting the waste 
[38][39][40]. 
The recycling process itself can provide valuable data on 
types and amounts. 
Data from the waste collection process can be used to 
decide on container size and pick-up patterns. Data may also 
be made public to show timeliness and efficiency of the waste 
handling, from garbage collection through recycling. 
Social media data mining can be used to detect sentiments 
about the garbage collection. 
H. Crime Prevention 
Crime prevention is about allocating police resources to 
areas most likely to get victims of crime, but also to find out 
where to establish surveillance by video cameras and other 
means. 
Data used for crime prevention will mostly be former 
reported crimes combined with open data sources, e.g., 
demographic data, property values, income levels of citizens, 
street light coverage, etc. [41][42]. 
Social media may be mined to find indications of 
unreported crimes. 
TABLE II.  
MAPPING APPLICATIONS TO DATA SOURCES 
 
Application 
areas 
Data sources 
Sensor data 
Location 
data 
Open data 
Social 
media data 
Smart 
parking 
X 
X 
- 
- 
Speed 
monitoring 
X 
x 
- 
- 
Smart 
public 
transport 
X 
X 
- 
x 
Smart traffic 
X 
x 
- 
x 
Air quality 
monitoring 
X 
x 
X 
x 
Energy 
management 
x 
x 
x 
- 
Waste 
handling 
X 
X 
- 
x 
Crime 
prevention 
- 
X 
X 
x 
 
X   major data source 
x   minor data source 
-    not applicable 
 
 
V. 
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK 
The purpose of our case studies is to examine data sources 
and methods used to analyze data. Seven examples of smart 
city applications show the importance of sensor data, but also 
the opportunities of using open data sets combined with sensor 
data to improve analysis and enable forecasting. Web mining 
and social media has limited use in these cases, but can be 
used to alert city administration about potential problems and 
sentiments. 
The crime prevention case does not rely on sensor data, 
but on reports of crimes. Combining different open data sets 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

can provide better insight related to crime prevention. The 
reported crimes can provide patterns, but combining data sets 
may shed light on underlying factors, like property values, 
incomes, absence of street lights and other factors. 
In this study, we have examined mainly the 
instrumentation and interconnection layers, finding a set of 
data sources used in different smart city application areas, as 
shown in Table 2. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Analytical framework. 
 
When we map these finings to the three layers in Table 1, 
we have the outline of an analytical framework as shown in 
Figure 3. The resulting analytical framework may guide future 
research efforts in the field. Existing research and white 
papers provide examples of how big data can be applied for 
decision making, but as our framework shows, there is a need 
for both synthesizing existing studies as well as conducting 
new empirical studies to create a roadmap for decision-
makers. This roadmap would list relevant data sources and 
analytical techniques for different users and contexts. The 
framework forms a possible foundation for future studies in 
this area. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION, LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, we used eight typical application areas of 
smart cities to explore their use of data. We examined relevant 
data sources, and their use. Data collected from sensors are 
very important for seven of the chosen application areas. Open 
data is often a valuable supplement to collected data. In some 
cases, location data are combined with other types of data. 
Social media data mining may play a role to show user 
perceptions and sentiments. 
The collected data need to be processed and analyzed to 
be useful for decision-making. 
Data will often be used for automatic decision-making. In 
seven of the chosen application areas, we found examples of 
data used for automatic decision-making: 
• 
Smart parking: Automatic update of displays directing 
drivers to available parking spots. 
• 
Speed monitoring: Automatic regulation of traffic lights, 
or even photographing speeding vehicle to issue a speed 
ticket. 
• 
Smart public transport: Automatic updates of screens 
showing arrival and departure times. 
• 
Smart traffic: Automatic control of signs and traffic lights 
to redirect traffic. 
• 
Air quality monitoring: Automatic alerts to citizens in the 
areas, through signs or SMS service. 
• 
Energy management: Automatic start of household 
appliances, based on grid load. 
• 
Waste handling: Automatic updates of garbage truck 
schedules based on amount of garbage in each container. 
 
For strategic and long-term decisions done by humans, the 
results of the processing and analysis need to be visualized in 
a meaningful way, e.g., through graphs, bar charts, pie charts 
often combined with a map or even embedded in a Geographic 
Information System (GIS) front-end. 
This paper studied application areas of smart cities to 
examine use of (big) data. The study is not exhaustive. We 
used example of application areas from literature, but as 
“smart cities” have ambiguous definitions, we may have 
overlooked some areas. Further, as we had to start examining 
white papers from industry it is likely we have missed 
interesting data from relevant sources even after our rigorous 
search in the most well-known big data/analytics companies. 
In the future, we intend to investigate how data can be 
analyzed using different methods and techniques, so that we 
can present a comprehensive model of possible combinations 
of data sources, actors and contexts, and analytical techniques. 
REFERENCES 
[1] ITU-T. Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
T/focusgroups/ssc/Pages/default.aspx [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[2] ITU-T Focus Group on Smart Sustainable Cities. “Smart 
sustainable cities: An analysis of definitions. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-
T/focusgroups/ssc/Documents/website/web-fg-ssc-0100-r9-
definitions_technical_report.docx, 
2014. 
[retrieved: 
2018.02.04]. 
[3] A. Vesco and F. Ferrero, Eds., Handbook of Research on 
Social, Economic, and Environmental Sustainability in the 
Development of Smart Cities. IGI Global, pp. xxv-xxxi, 2015. 
[4] Deloitte. Smart Cities: Big Data. [Online]. Available from: 
https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/fpc/Docume
nts/services/systemes-dinformation-et-
technologie/deloitte_smart-cities-big-data_en_0115.pdf, 2015. 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[5] F. Bonomi, R. Milito, P. Natarajan, and J. Zhu, “Fog 
Computing; A Platform for Internet of Things and Analytics,” 
in Big Data and Internet of Things: A Roadmap for Smart 
Environments, N. Bessis and C. Dobre, Eds. Studies in 
Computational Intelligence, 546, Springer, pp. 169–186, 2014. 
[6] V. Albino, U. Berardi, and R. M. Dangelico,. “Smart Cities: 
Definitions, Dimensions, Performance, and Initiatives,” 
Journal of Urban Technology, 22(1), pp. 3–21, 2015. 
[7] IBM. A vision of smarter cities. [Online]. Available from:  
https://www-
03.ibm.com/press/attachments/IBV_Smarter_Cities_-
_Final.pdf, 2010. [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[8] M. Kehoe et al., Smarter Cities Series: A Foundation for 
Understanding the IBM Approach to Smarter Cities, IBM 
Redguides for Business Leaders, pp. 1–30, 2011. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

[9] E. Negre and C. Rosenthal-Sabroux, “Smart Cities: A Salad 
Bowl of Citizens, ICT, and Environment,” in Handbook of 
Research 
on 
Social, 
Economic, 
and 
Environmental 
Sustainability in the Development of Smart Cities, A. Vesco 
and F. Ferrero, Eds., IGI Global, pp. 61-78, 2015. 
[10] H. Chen, R. H. L. Chiang, and V. C. Storey, “Business 
Intelligence and Analytics: From Big Data to Big Impact,” MIS 
Quartely, 36(4), pp. 1165–1188, 2012. 
[11] D. Laney, 3D Data Management: Controlling data, volume, 
velocity, and variety. Technical Report. META Group, 2001. 
[12] B. Marr, Big Data – Using Smart Big Data Analytics and 
Metrics to Make Better Decisions and Improve Performance. 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, 2015. 
[13] M. Botterman, Internet of Things: An Early Reality of the 
Future Internet, Workshop Report, European Commission, 
Information Society and Media Directorate, 2009. 
[14] J. W. Treem and P. M. Leonardi, 7 Social Media Use in 
Organizations Exploring the Affordances of Visibility, 
Editability, Persistence, and Association. Communication 
Yearbook, 36, pp. 143–189, 2012. 
[15] A. M. Kaplan and M. Haenlein, “Users of the world, unite! The 
challenges and opportunities of Social Media,” Business 
Horizons, 53(1), pp. 59–68, 2010. 
[16] Open Knowledge International. Open Data Handbook. 
[Online] http://opendatahandbook.org/guide/en/what-is-open-
data/ [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[17] J. Ojasalo and L. Tähtinen, “Integrating Open Innovation 
Platforms in Public Sector Decision Making: Empirical Results 
from 
Smart 
City 
Research,” 
Technology 
Innovation 
Management Review, 6(12), pp. 38–48, 2016. 
[18] S. Eräranta and A. Staffans, “From Situation Awareness to 
Smart City Planning and Decision Making,” Proceedings of the 
14th International Conference on Computers in Urban 
Planning and Urban Management (CUPUM 2015), J. Ferreira 
and R. Goodspeed, Eds., Paper 197, pp. 1-17, 2015. 
[19] U. Passe et al., “Methodologies for Studying Human-
Microclimate Interactions for Resilient, Smart City Decision-
Making, “  Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference 
on Passive and Low Energy Architecture, P. La Roche and M. 
Schiler, Eds., pp. 1735-1742, 2016. 
[20] A. R. Honarvar and A. Sami, “A Multi-source Big Data 
Analytic System in Smart City for Urban Planning and 
Decision Making,” International Conference on Internet of 
Things and Big Data, Doctoral Consortium (DCIT), pp. 32-36, 
2016. 
[21] Z. Khan et al.,  “Developing Knowledge-Based Citizen 
Participation Platform to Support Smart City Decision Making: 
The Smarticipate Case Study,” Information, 8, 47, pp. 1-24, 
2017. 
[22] J.-P. Foucault and Y. Moulier-Boutang, “Towards economic 
and social ‘sensors’: Condition and model of governance and 
decision-making 
for 
an 
organological 
Smart 
City,” 
International Conference on Smart and Sustainable City and 
Big Data (ICSSC), pp. 106-112, 2015. 
[23] B. Nathali Silva, M.  Khan, and K. Han, Big Data Analytics 
Embedded 
Smart 
City 
Architecture 
for 
Performance 
Enhancement through Real-Time Data Processing and 
Decision-Making. Wireless Communications and Mobile 
Computing, pp. 1–12, 2017. 
[24] L. I. Gang and L. I. Yang, “Construction of Emergency 
Decision-making Intelligence System Against the Background 
of Smart City,” Journal of Library Science in China, 3(4), 2016. 
[25] F. Kurniawan, A. P. Wibawa, Munir, S. M. S. Nugroho, and 
M. Hariadi, “Makassar Smart City Operation Center Priority 
Optimization using Fuzzy Multi-criteria Decision-making,” 
4th International Conference on Electrical Engineering, 
Computer Science and Informatics (EECSI), pp. 1-5, 2017 . 
[26] Smart 
Parking 
Ltd. 
Company 
website. 
[Online]. 
http://www.smartparking.com [retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[27] Fybr. Company website. [Online]. http://www.fybr.com 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[28] WorldSensing. 
Company 
website. 
[Online]. 
https://www.worldsensing.com/industries/parking-operators/ 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[29] SmartPark. Company website. [Online] https://smartpark.co.nz 
[retrieved: 2018.02.04]. 
[30] C. H. Schaffer, Customer Success Is Key – How a small 
manufacturer transformed an Internet of Things (IoT) solutions 
provider and unlocked $2 million is SaaS revenue. (Kindle 
edition) amazon.com, 2015. [retrieved: 2017.12.01]. 
[31] G. Kirankumar, J. Samsuresh, and G. Balaji, “Vehicle Speed 
Monitoring System [VSM] (Using RuBee Protocol),” IACSIT 
International Journal of Engineering and Technology, Vol. 4, 
No. 1,  pp. 107-110, 2012. 
[32] R. 
M. 
John 
et 
al., 
"Smart 
public 
transport 
system," International Conference on Embedded Systems 
(ICES), pp. 166-170, 2014. 
[33] P. Chowdhury, P. Bala, and D. Addy, "RFID and Android 
based 
smart 
ticketing 
and 
destination 
announcement 
system," Advances in Computing Communications and 
Informatics (ICACCI), pp. 1-5, November 2016. 
[34] R. Hawi, G. Okeyo, M. Kimwele, “Smart Traffic Light Control 
using Fuzzy Logic and Wireless Sensor Network,” Computing 
Conference, London, pp. 450-460, 2017. 
[35] K. Kumarmanas, S.  Praveen, V. Neema, and S. Devendra, “An 
Innovative Device for Monitoring and Controlling Vehicular 
Movement in a Smart City,” Symposium on Colossal Data 
Analysis and Networking (CDAN), pp. 1-3, 2016. 
[36] A. Florea et al., “Low cost mobile embedded system for air 
quality monitoring - air quality real-time monitoring in order to 
preserve citizens' health,” Sixth International Conference on 
Smart Cities, Systems, Devices and Technologies, (SMART), 
IARIA, pp. 5-12, 2017. 
[37] C. Meinecke, Potentiale und Grenzen von Smart Metering. 
Springer. 2015. 
[38] F. Folianto, Y. S. Low, W. L. Yeow, "Smartbin: Smart Waste 
Management System," IEEE Tenth International Conference 
on Intelligent Sensors, Sensor Networks and Information 
Processing (ISSNIP), pp. 1-2, 2015. 
[39] A. S. Wiaya, Z.  Zainuddin, and M. Niswar, “Design a smart 
waste bin for waste management,” 5th International 
Conference on Instrumentation, Control, and Automation 
(ICA), pp. 62-66, 2017. 
[40] H. Poddar, R.  Paul, S. Mukherjee, B. Bhattacharyya, “Design 
Of Smart Bin For Smarter Cities,” International Conference on 
Innovations in Power and Advanced Computer Technologies 
[i-PACT2017], IEEE Press, pp. 1-6, 2017. 
[41] F. Wang, Ed., Geographic Information Systems and Crime 
Analysis, Idea Group Publishing, 2005. 
[42] S. Chainey and J. Ratcliffe, GIS and Crime Mapping, Wiley, 
2005. 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

