Insights from the Technology System Method for the Development Architecture of 
e-Textbooks 
Ching-Cha Hsieh1, a, Jen Wel Chen1,2, b, Dershing Luo1,3, c 
1Department of Information Management  
National Taiwan University 
2Department of Business Administration 
Chinese Culture University 
3Department of Information Management, 
China University of Science and Technology 
Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
a cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
b jwchen@sce.pccu.edu.tw 
c luoder2008@gmail.com 
 
Chia-Ching Lu 
Institute for Information Industry  
Taipei, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
gaty@iii.org.tw 
 
 
 
 
 
Yun Long Huang 
Department of Recreation and Leisure Industry Management 
National Taiwan Sport University 
Taoyuan, Taiwan (R.O.C.) 
ylhuang@mail.ntsu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—Textbook market is considered to be the next wave 
of digital-reading. However, the textbooks have their own 
learning purposes, user habits and applications. Whether the 
development of electronic textbooks (e-Textbook) may 
continue the current path of development of e-book technology 
is of concern in this stud. Besides, from the experiences of e-
book development, we aim to build the next wave of e-textbook 
system architecture. This study analyzes key milestones in the 
e-book history to explore the success of Amazon Kindle and its 
characteristics. Through the concept of technology systems 
proposed by Thomas P. Hughes, we elaborate a framework for 
the development of e-Textbooks. 
Keywords 
- 
e-Textbooks; 
Development 
Architecture; 
Technology System 
 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In 2007, Amazon launched Kindle e-book reader with its 
online sales mechanism, digital reading technology and 
hardware [1,2]. It triggers the development of e-books and 
digital reading of the trend in global. The market research 
firm, In-Stat, forecasts, the global e-book device shipments 
in 2008 was about one million units and will be nearly thirty 
million units in 2013. The revenue is more than 1.1 billion 
U.S. dollars [3]. The largest user groups--textbooks, will 
become the next market of e-book. The research institution, 
Forrester, estimates that the textbook will be the largest 
market for e-book reader in five years [4].  
However, there are specific attributes of textbooks: 
learning purposes, user habits and application developments. 
We concern about how to build the next generation of e-
textbooks system based on current technology. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II reviews the literature related to key development 
of e-books. Section III describes analytical framework of e-
book development and surveys the characteristics of Amazon 
Kindle.  Section IV introduces the concepts of technology 
system, then we analysis Amazon kindle's functions and 
services based on Hughes’s view of technology system.  In 
Section V, we propose our framework of e-Textbooks 
through the technology system. The conclusion and future 
suggestion are offered in Section VI. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
The development of e-books has been already 42 years 
since Alan Kay proposed the concept of Dynabook [5,6,7] e-
books in 1968. Because of exertion from different concepts, 
methods and technology by academia, industry and 
government, e-books presents rich and diverse definitions 
and appearance [8,9,10]. E-books can be denoted as digitized 
books, online databases, CDROM or portable storage media 
content, browse information on portable hardware device or 
the digital content. Therefore the orientation of e-books 
could be digital content (content), integrated device 
(composer), vehicle (container), access interface (channel), 
or mechanism (consultant) [7]. Because of different 
definitions, positioning and technological, e-books have been 
confined in small minority groups or different areas in the 
past decades [11]. 
Because Amazon launched Kindle e-book reader with its 
online sales mechanism in 2007, e-books and digital reading 
reached a new situation. The electronics giant Sony restarted 
its e-book development: promoting new e-book products and 
following e-PUB specifications [12]. At the same time, 
Barnes and Noble launched its own brand of e-book reader 
Nook in 2009. E-reader has successfully established the 
205
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

concept of digital reading. It is an inevitable trend that the 
electronic textbook – combined of learning and textbooks 
will be the next largest market for e-book readers.. 
III. 
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK OF E-BOOKS 
DEVELOPMENT  
Textbooks are basically paper books. They seem easy to 
follow the development of e-books flourish. In order to 
understand whether e-Textbooks can follow the same trend, 
we review several representative electronic keys to the 
development process.  
In 1945, Bush proposed Memex concept of a working 
table installed in the microfilm equipment and readers to 
provide people to unrestrained and easily collect, view and 
search information [7,13]. In 1968, Allen Kay, working with 
PARC, proposed the concept of personal portable notebook – 
Dynabook. Dynabook is like a book, it can carry possessed 
interaction and run teaching software and reading materials, 
which is designed by Smalltalk [14]. Smalltalk is an object-
oriented programming language. It concretely presents the 
prototype of today's electronic platform, Dynabook is 
considered to be the beginning of a portable e-book [5,6,7]. 
In 1971, Hart noted the concept of digital books have great 
impact on exchange of knowledge [15]. He began to promote 
the Gutenberg project. Some books do not advocate 
copyright, especially classical literature, religious books and 
references to books. They were scanned as image files by 
volunteers and then compiled manually enter the nuclear 
school e-book text file, via the Internet access methods for 
free [7,16]. In 1976, one project of Oxford University – 
Oxford Text Archive, planned to provide students to 
download electronic textbook files to speed up the exchange 
of knowledge and preservation [7,17]. In 1985, Egan’s 
project SuperBook, developed new software for running in 
PC. The software can be stored on disk, tape and CD [7,18]. 
From 1998 to 2003, NuvoMedia release commercial 
products -- Rock eBook based on the concept of Dynabook 
[7,19]. Users could import digital data (special format) into 
Rock eBook for reading. In the mean time, there were 
products provided by other companies whose size is similar 
to books. Those products could download authorized files 
provided by company’s web site through built-in modem or 
via adapter on PC. Because many readers reflected that it is 
tired for readers to read on the LCD display for a long time 
[20], a new technology – to display a screen similar to the 
paper was developed in the 1970s. It made e-book employed 
by e-ink being popular [20]. On March 2004, Sony released 
the first e-ink reader, Sony LIBRIé. At the end of 2007, 
Amazon launched Kindle [20]. 
The main e-book technology milestones of e-books are: 
Content (information), Composer (software necessary to 
create an e-book), Container (the distribution medium and / 
or file format), Storage, and Access (the technology and 
software used to provide access to the content).  
We can generalize them into four parts: Digital content, 
Carrier, Storage, and Access, as depicted in Figure 1. We 
analysis the milestones of the development of eBook on 
Figure 2. 
 
Figure 1. Inducted dimensions of e-books technology development 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Development of e-Books 
Digital content
Carrier
Storage
Access
content
Composer
container
channel
consultant
206
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

From the above analysis in the two figures, we can not 
find out the reasons why Amazon Kindle was sold more than 
Sony LIBRIé [21]. There should be other dimensions not 
having been yet evaluated. 
IV. 
CONCEPTS OF TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM  
The definitions of e-books vary in academic researches. 
As stated above, e-books can be digitized books, online 
databases, CDROM or portable storage media content, 
browse information on portable hardware device, or just 
digital content. Different definitions of the e-books and 
different cognition on Kindle’s e-books product, much like 
Edison invented the light. The invention of the light acted as 
a representative of electricity in the era. Because impact of 
bring light to human, we took it as a key innovation-- effects 
in civilization. Because of the success of Amazon Kindle’s 
digital reader, we took e-books as an ideal framework. We 
usually inference framework of e-Textbooks based on e-
book. In this viewpoint, there is expected to be a single 
technological achievements and will made many R & D 
(research and development) staffs worked tirelessly to find a 
breakthrough innovation. 
However, in 1989, Thomas P. Hughes [22] changed the 
view of invention for the light is the key to the development 
of civilization of view of electricity. Hughes studied the 
history of electrification in U.S. and proposed the concept of 
System Theory of Technology. 
Based on Hughes's study, Edison not only invented the 
high-impedance filament technology but built up a concept-- 
holistic conceptualization theory to consider large electrical 
equipment, transmission and distribution lines which did not 
exist at that time. Edison thought about technology of 
electric light bulb, systems cost of planning and installation. 
It made overall social atmosphere, with the government 
system to implement this innovative technology ideas. The 
team of Edison deliberately calculated the cost of scientific 
knowledge and experimental point of view the overall 
planning considerations, combined with inventors, engineers, 
management, finance, public relations professionals in 
different roles, completed with electric lighting system is one 
big target. Therefore the social, economic and technical can 
create a comprehensive system to replace gas lighting lamp 
lighting system, and thus contributed to the electrification of 
the United States. The concept of systems for innovation and 
technological 
development 
are 
of 
great 
inspiration, 
innovation and technology development can come from 
broader perspective thinking and planning thus better ensure 
the success of technological innovation. 
Based on Hughes’s technical system concept, the 
development of science and technology is not just 
technology, but also considers the management level and 
financial level of planning, which is very similar to the idea 
of John Law: 'The argument is that those who build artifacts 
do not concern themselves with artifacts alone, but must also 
consider the way in which the artifacts relate to social, 
economic, political, and scientific factors. All of these 
factors are interrelated, and all are potentially malleable [22; 
p112].  
There are three dimensions in Thomas P. Hughes’s 
technology system concept: 1. Inventor Entrepreneur, 2. 
Manager Entrepreneur, and 3. Financier Entrepreneur. But 
Hughes's study was based on the division of people. This 
paper considers John Law’s claim and tries to add the fourth 
dimension of e-books technology development on Hughes’s 
three concepts: technical, managerial and financial areas. In 
this way, we analyze the design, planning and systems 
architecture of Amazon Kindle. In order we can find out the 
reasons of its critical role in e-books. 
We got following data from Amazon Kindle’s web site 
as well as classified technology functions and services. We 
analysis them based on Hughes’s view of technology system. 
The result is shown in Figure 3. Except the analysis of 
technology, we add two levels of management and financial, 
we can see clearly Amazon Kindle also provided a lot of 
functions and services in management and finance. Thus 
when we talk about development of e-books, in addition to 
focusing on technology for handheld devices, we should not 
neglect the technology-related management systems and 
financial supporting planning. Since a single light bulb could 
not be effective without a reasonable price, electricity 
transmission and distribution lines. Thus the following 
policies made by Amazon Kindle in leading position: to U.S. 
9.9 dollars for digital-book, provide network management 
stacks, file conversion service, convenience and access to 
services of books, etc. The introduction of technical systems 
makes us gain more insights, thus we can have a clearer 
understanding on the Amazon Kindle's success. 
V. 
BUSINESS SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE OF E-
TEXTBOOKS UNDER TECHNOLOGY SYSTEM 
Technology system provides a clear framework for 
understanding of technical functions. Therefore, we try to 
view through the technology system when thinking about e-
Textbooks [19]. 
First of all, we believe that the development of electronic 
textbooks should start from digital publishing and then 
technology of teaching and learning activities, such as notes, 
priorities, study records, etc. For functions of the rapid 
response learning [23] and Internet, we consider the Mobile 
Internet Device (MID). We emphasize functions of 
management and financial from the view points of technical 
systems. For teaching, we suggest function of main control, 
synchronization and group functions. It enables the teacher’s 
group students in MID devices to display teaching materials 
through the master control and synchronization. 
 
 
207
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
Figure 3. Technology System analysis of Amazon Kindle System function 
 
Thus, it should provide function of cloud bookshelf; data 
was kept in the network and synchronized to the 
programmed group terminals. By the way, function of 
courses management is needed. For financial level, in 
addition to Amazon's online sales management, Push Service, 
the discount of purchase of electronic textbooks and teaching 
materials on electronic textbooks is also very important. 
Reading milestone certification, the cloud stacks of 
authorizing, 
printing 
on 
Demand 
(POD) 
and 
the 
authorization certificate-- students can legally print chapters, 
photocopying manufacturers and textbook publishers can 
share the profits. Therefore, the need for sales on the chapter, 
POD printing the profit sharing mechanism and bonus points 
for the readers of financial functions. Figure 4 shows the 
viewpoints of technology system of textbook business 
structure. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE SUGGESTIONS 
This study is a government e-learning development plan 
application under the e-books reader technology and the 
electronic learning plan of the bookcase. Through the 
concept of technology system, we can have better insights 
for the holistic perspective. Not only the original e-books 
reader attached to a particular technology R&D team, but 
thinking beyond the technology development and broader 
way of regarding as a single point. Therefore, we can 
complete construction of those concepts in a holistic way.  
Under the holistic conceptualization point of view, we 
think the future operations of the mechanisms of electronic 
textbook. From the technology needed to start learning 
technology, and gradually incorporated into management 
capabilities and financial technology capabilities, we develop 
Figure 4, the electronic textbook of rich business framework. 
After successfully complete the project. We try to propose a 
framework of electronic textbooks from technology system 
concept and rendering systems and applications of bookcase.  
The impacts of this framework are two-fold. One is that 
there is always a first-mover advantage for this framework. 
We mean the first players involved in this framework will 
benefit as well as establish a firm basis. The other is the 
negative impacts of e-Textbook will be the issues worth 
further studies. From the preliminary experiences we met, 
there are quite different roles and functions in the classroom 
owing to the engagement of e-Textbooks.  
Thus the original innovation-- brainstorming, while in the 
agitation, has been thinking of positioning the direction of 
rich/ innovative content and speed up the process of 
innovation. The concept of systems analysis, help us to 
understand the proposition Law-- a successful R&D is not 
simply a matter of developing technology, but uses a broader 
and comprehensive perspective of thinking and planning, to 
ensure the success of technological innovation. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
208
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
Figure 4. The framework of electronic books from technology system perspective 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This study is conducted under the Project Digital 
Convergence Service Open Platform of the Institute for 
Information Industry which is subsidized by the Ministry of 
Economy Affairs of the Republic of China. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Kindle: Amazon's Original Wireless Reading Device (1st generation) 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Amazon_Kindle, 
Last 
accessed 
2010/12/10 
Amazon Kindle. http://www.amazon.com/dp/B000FI73MA, Last 
accessed 2010/12/10 
[2] 
E-Book Semiconductor Opportunity to Reach $1.1 Billion in 2013, 
Says In-Stat.  http://www.instat.com/newmk.asp?ID=2536,.   Last 
accessed 2010/12/10 
[3] 
Textbooks 
will 
be 
the 
next 
frontier 
for 
e-reader 
sellers 
http://www.startribune.com/business/70673177.html, Last accessed 
2010/12/10 
[4] 
Ryan, B. 1991. Dynabook revisited with Alan Kay. Byte, pp. 16.  
[5] 
Goldberg, A. 1979. Educational uses of a dynabook. Computers & 
Education, 3: pp. 247-266  
[6] 
Noorhidawati, A. 2008. A Study into Usability of Tools for Searching 
and Browsing E-books with Particular Reference to Back-of-the-
Book Index. pp.15-28 
[7] 
Borchers, J.O. 1999. Electronic books: Definition, genres, interaction 
design patterns. In ACM CHI 1999, Electronic Book Workshop. . 
Pittsburgh, PA.: Citeseer.  
[8] 
 Lemken, B. 1999. Ebook: the missing link between paper and screen. 
ACM CHI 1999, Electronic Book Workshop. Pittsburgh, PA.: 
Citeseer  
[9] 
Henke, H. 2001. Electronic books and ePublishing: a practical guide 
for authors: Springer Verlag. pp.19  
[10] Chien, C. "A Research Strategy and Framework for Prospected E-
book Industry in Taiwan." The 2009 International Joint Conferences 
on e-CASE and e-Technology, 2009, Singapore 
[11] Quint, B. 2009. "Google Book Search Expanding Outlets in Deal 
With Sony."." Information Today NewsBreaks & the Weekly News 
Digest 30. 
[12] Bush, V. "As We May Think!", Atlantic Monthly, Vol.176 No.1, 
1945, pp.101-108.  
[13]  http://www.gutenberg.org/wiki/main_page Last accessed 2010/06/15.  
[14] Kay,  Alan and  Adele Goldberg 1977. Personal Dynamic Media. 
Computer, 10 (3), 31 – 41. 
[15] Hart, Michael S. (23 October 2004). "Gutenberg Mission Statement 
by Michael Hart". Project Gutenberg. Retrieved 30 October 2010. 
[16]  http://ota.ox.ac.uk/ Last accessed 2010/06/15.  
[17]  Egan, D., Remde, J., Gomez, L., Landauer, T., Eberhardt, J., and 
Lochbaum, C. 1989. Formative design evaluation of superbook. ACM 
Transactions on Information Systems (TOIS), 7: 57.  
[18] http://www.planetebook.com/mainpage.asp?webpageid=15&TBToolI
D=1115 Last accessed 2010/06/15.  
[19] Abdullah, N. and F. Gibb 2008. Students' attitudes towards e-books in 
a Scottish higher education institute- part 1. Library Review, 57: pp. 
593-605.  
[20]  Tonkin, 
E. 
2010. 
eBooks: 
Tipping 
or 
Vanishing 
Point? 
http://www.ariadne.ac.uk/issue62/tonkin/ Last accessed 2010/06/15.  
[21] Hughes, T. 1979. The electrification of America: the system builders. 
Technology and Culture, 20: pp. 124-161.  
[22] Law, J. 1989. Technology and heterogeneous engineering: the case of 
Portuguese expansion. In: Bijker, W., Hughes, T., & Pinch, T. (Eds) 
The Social Construction of Technological System. MIT Press, pp. 
112 – 118.  
[23]  McFall, R. 2005. Electronic textbooks that transform how textbooks 
are 
used. 
The 
Electronic 
Library, 
23: 
pp. 
72-81.
 
209
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

