A Longitudinal Analysis of the Determinants of
Citizen Acceptance of Contact Tracing Mobile
Apps
Grace Fox
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: grace.fox@dcu.ie
Pierangelo Rosati
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: pierangelo.rosati@dcu.ie
Theo Lynn
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: theo.lynn@dcu.ie
Lisa van der Werff
Irish Institute of Digital Business
Dublin City University
Dublin, Ireland
email: lisa.vanderwerff@dcu.ie
Abstract—A signiﬁcant number of governments worldwide
have introduced mobile contact tracing apps in an attempt to
contain the spread of COVID-19. The use of these government
surveillance technologies provides clear beneﬁts for citizens,
health bodies and governments but also raises privacy concerns,
which may ultimately undermine the adoption of such technolo-
gies. This research comprises two discrete longitudinal studies;
the ﬁrst study explores the inﬂuence of privacy perceptions and
positive beliefs on citizen acceptance of mobile tracing apps while
the second study focuses on the antecedents and behavioural
intentions related to trust and privacy perceptions. Preliminary
evidence suggests that perceived beneﬁts, social inﬂuence and
trust are positively related to adoption and disclosure intentions
while privacy concerns have a negative effect. Both studies
offer valuable theoretical contributions to the academic literature
on privacy and technology adoption, and practical and timely
contributions to government bodies and practitioners.
Keywords—Privacy; Government Surveillance; COVID-19; Con-
tact Tracing; Mobile Application.
I. INTRODUCTION
It is well established that from the outset COVID-19 posed
signiﬁcant challenges for healthcare systems due to the uncer-
tainty in transmission, pathogenicity and lack of strain-speciﬁc
control options. As a result, governments focused on non-
pharmaceutical interventions including social distancing and
social isolation. For the ﬁrst time, governments and health
agencies were able to leverage the widespread adoption of
mobile technologies and contact-tracing apps to support these
efforts on a national scale. While contact tracing apps provide
clear beneﬁts in containing the spread of COVID-19, they
constantly track users’ location and social interactions and
therefore can be seen as a potential form of government
surveillance. As such, they generate understandable privacy
concerns, which may ultimately undermine adoption, and
consequently reduce the potential beneﬁts of these apps in
the ﬁght against the virus [1]. In this research, we combine
Privacy Calculus Theory (PCT) with Social Exchange Theory
(SEC), and separately with Procedural Fairness Theory (PFT),
to explore the inﬂuence of privacy perceptions, positive beliefs
and trust on citizen acceptance of mobile tracing apps. These
theoretical frameworks are brieﬂy presented in Section II.
Section III and Section IV present the sample used in the
two studies and some preliminary results respectively. Finally,
Section V presents some concluding remarks.
II. THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
Technology
adoption
is
one
of
the
most
developed
streams of research within the information system literature
comprising
well
known
and
widely-used
theories
[2].
Diffusion of Innovation theory, the Technology Acceptance
Model, the Theory of Planned Behaviour, the Uniﬁed Theory
of Technology Acceptance and Use have been used to
investigate the determinants of individuals’ acceptance of
a wide range IT innovations and surveillance technologies
[3]. Due to the relatively novel context and early stage of
diffusion, factors in extant adoption theories may not be fully
applicable to mobile contact tracing apps for pandemics.
For this reason, our studies focus on contextually relevant
factors, such as social inﬂuence and trust that are important
factors in health and government surveillance research. More
speciﬁcally, we combine PCT with SEC (Study 1) and PFT
(Study 2).
PCT posits that individuals compare the costs and beneﬁts
associated with adopting a new technology or disclosing
personal information before they engage in such a behaviour
and are likely to do so as long as the beneﬁts outweigh the
costs [4]. Consistent with the core values of PCT, SET seeks
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

to explain human behaviour with an emphasis on social struc-
tures and norms, and posits that individuals expect reciprocal
beneﬁts when being required to adhere to social norms [5].
In our ﬁrst study, we combine PCT and SEC to unravel the
combinatory effect of privacy concerns and social factors on
intention to adopt and use a mobile contact-tracing app.
Our second study focuses more on the role of trust as an
antecedent of intention to adopt and use the app. In order
to do so, we combine PCT with PFT, which posits that an
individual’s perception that a particular activity is conducted
fairly is an important driver of risk appraisal [4]. In the context
of contact tracing apps and privacy, the idea of fairness mostly
refers to the perception that data are collected and used fairly.
III. DATA COLLECTION AND SAMPLE
The Irish Health Service Executive (HSE) launched a na-
tional contact tracing application called COVID Tracker on 6
July 2020. Within 48 hours of its initial launch, over 1 million
people (almost 50% of adult smartphone users in Ireland) had
downloaded the app, and 300,000 people had checked-in [6].
Data was collected using two surveys, one prior to the intro-
duction of the app (T1) and one after the launch (T2). We used
existing scales when developing our instrument with minor
wording amendments to adapt items to the context. The T1
survey focused more on perceived privacy concerns, situational
variables, and propensity to trust and adopt the app. The T2
survey focused more on future intention to use the app.
Responses were collected using an online panel of Irish
residents provided by Qualtrics with age, gender and regional
quotas to ensure the sample was representative of the popu-
lation of Ireland. A total of 1,109 complete responses were
collected at T1. All the respondents were then re-contacted
at T2. The ﬁnal sample consisted of 405 complete responses
(37% response rate). Table I provides an overview of the
characteristics of the ﬁnal sample.
TABLE I
SAMPLE OVERVIEW
Gender
#
Age Range
#
Male
189
18-20
4
Female
225
21-29
29
Rather Not Say
0
30-39
66
30-49
79
40-59
86
60+
89
Employment Status
#
Education Level
#
Employed
186
Secondary School
157
Self-employed
26
Trade
5
Unemployed
36
Diploma
32
Student
11
Bachelor degree
133
Unavailable for work
42
Other Qualiﬁcation
64
Retired
104
Doctorate degree
14
Responses were analysed using Conﬁrmatory Factor Anal-
ysis and Partial Least Squares Structural Equation Modelling
(PLS-SEM).
IV. PRELIMINARY RESULTS
Preliminary results from Study 1 suggest that social inﬂu-
ence, reciprocal beneﬁts and perceived health beneﬁts (i.e.,
positive beliefs) have a positive effect on individuals’ intention
to download the application. On the contrary, negative beliefs
related to privacy concern such as risk does not have a
signiﬁcant inﬂuence on individuals’ intention to download
the application. Our results also show individuals’ future
intentions regarding the use of the application were inﬂuenced
by their prior adoption intentions and reciprocal beneﬁts, while
privacy concern only has a negative inﬂuence (at the .10 level).
Study 2 focused the role of trust as an antecedent of intention
to adopt and use the contact tracing app. Preliminary ﬁndings
suggest that propensity to trust technology, perceived gov-
ernment motives, perceived need for government surveillance
through the contact tracing app, and perceived control have a
positive effect on perceived trust in the mobile contact tracing
app. In contrast, perceived intrusion through the mobile contact
tracing app has a negative effect on perceived trust. Results
also suggest that perceived trust and privacy have a positive
effect on intention to adopt but do not directly inﬂuence usage
intention, and that perceived trust and intention to use have
a positive effect on users’ willingness to disclose personal
information.
V. CONCLUSION
By leveraging a longitudinal dataset, our research adopts
a broader conceptualisation of user acceptance that includes
both intention to adopt and use over time thus overcoming the
typical limitations of cross-sectional samples. Furthermore, we
extend PCT by combining it with SEC, and separately PFT, to
capture the complexity of privacy consideration and the impor-
tance of fairness consideration in the context of government
surveillance technologies. The ﬁndings of our studies provide
useful insights for practitioners and policymakers as they
clearly highlight the importance of transparency, perceived
beneﬁts, and reciprocity in fostering adoption. Policymakers
and public health agencies need to carefully consider what
communication and control mechanisms can be introduced to
build (and repair) trust, remediate potential sources of distrust
in the development and design of such apps, communicate the
health and public beneﬁts of using the app and how data will
and will not be used, and ensure that collected data is deleted
when no longer necessary.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Zastrow, “Coronavirus contact-tracing apps: can they slow the spread
of covid-19?” Nature, 2020.
[2] A. Jeyaraj, J. W. Rottman, and M. C. Lacity, “A review of the predictors,
linkages, and biases in it innovation adoption research,” Journal of
information technology, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 1–23, 2006.
[3] N. Thompson, T. McGill, A. Bunn, and R. Alexander, “Cultural fac-
tors and the role of privacy concerns in acceptance of government
surveillance,” Journal of the Association for Information Science and
Technology, vol. 71, no. 9, pp. 1129–1142, 2020.
[4] Y. Li, “Theories in online information privacy research: A critical review
and an integrated framework,” Decision support systems, vol. 54, no. 1,
pp. 471–481, 2012.
[5] E. M. Church, R. Thambusamy, and H. Nemati, “Privacy and pleasure:
a paradox of the hedonic use of computer-mediated social networks,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 77, pp. 121–131, 2017.
[6] C. Brennan. (2020) Hse’s covid-19 tracing app passes 1m downloads.
https://www.irishexaminer.com/news/arid-31010089.html (last accessed
on 28 June 2021).
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

