Preconditions for the Structural Deployment of (Digital) Technology for Healthcare 
in a Participatory Society 
Validation of methodological and practical challenges 
Martijn Hartog 
eSociety Institute 
The Hague University of Applied Sciences 
The Hague, The Netherlands 
m.w.hartog@hhs.nl
Bert Mulder
eSociety Institute 
The Hague University of Applied Sciences 
The Hague, The Netherlands 
a.w.mulder@hhs.nl
Abstract—This article describes the threats and practical 
challenges of diversity in target groups and the models for the 
adoption for technology for healthcare in The Netherlands. 
With the sense of urgency created by the participatory society, 
in which citizens are responsible for their own direction for 
health, government and the quality of life within The 
Netherlands, digital solutions become more and more part of 
the society and relationship between citizens and governmental 
bodies. Its mere focus is on validation methodological 
approaches and practical challenges in order to stimulate 
vitality and healthy independent living for a longer period of 
time. 
Keywords-healthcare; digital technology; quality of life; 
participatory society; methodology; practical challenges. 
I.
TARGET GROUPS IN A DIGITAL
PARTICIPATORY SOCIETY 
 
The development of the participation society makes 'own 
direction' and 'own responsibility' increasingly important for 
residents. The described interventions are aimed at taking 
care for health and quality of life yourself. However, 
equipping citizens for the participation society is not self-
evident. Because 'own direction' and 'own responsibility' of 
citizens presuppose that they act themselves, they must have 
sufficient motivation, knowledge, skills and potential for 
action. In that context, the Scientific Council for 
Government Policy [1], introduces the term ‘doing ability’ 
next to 'thinking ability'. The Council states that citizens 
need ‘doing ability’ to be able to set goals, to formulate 
steps and implement them. Most online sources now 
facilitate knowledge and thereby stimulate 'thinking ability'. 
Stimulating ‘doing ability’ is something else. For example, 
there are initiatives to make road maps available online [1], 
for living a longer vital, health and independent life. 
 
According to the National Social Media Research, the 
use of social media is intensive: ten million Dutch people 
use WhatsApp and Facebook, of which 80% daily; more 
than seven million use YouTube, of which 20% daily [2]. In 
2016, The Netherlands has the relatively largest number of 
online shops [3], and the largest number of online therapies. 
This high degree of digitization of the Netherlands and the 
Dutch people means that the active use of digital solutions 
at the urban level is a real possibility - the use of the internet 
is spread so widely that all population groups of all ages (up 
to 75 years) are online. That creates opportunities but also 
challenges. Recent research by Stichting Pensioenfonds 
Zorg en Welzijn (PGGM) among 30,000 professional care 
workers shows that only 10% of them use digital resources 
in their work. In the consulting rooms of general 
practitioners, patients do not very often suggest e-health [4]. 
 
The next section describes the possible models of 
technology. Section three will threat the methodological and 
practical challenges in the applicability of health models 
focussing on participation. The final section will conclude 
on the awareness and motivation of possible solutions.  
II.
MODELS FOR THE ADOPTION OF
TECHNOLOGY 
 
The literature describes a number of models for the 
adoption of technology. Some are too general (such as 
Venkatesh's Technology Acceptance Model) while others 
focus more on organizations [5]. Such models do not focus 
on the practical introduction into a larger urban 
environment. An interesting model for gaining insight into 
aspects of adoption is the 'eHealth Value Framework for 
Clinical Adoption and Meaningful Use' (in short: 'eHealth 
Value Framework') of the University of Victoria in Canada 
[6]. Originally developed to map the aspects of adoption of 
Electronic Patient Dossier (EPD) systems, it is sufficiently 
generic to get an overview of the aspects that are important 
in stimulating a diversity of applications on an urban scale.  
 
In addition to implementation itself, there is a broader 
context for the deployment of technology at the urban level, 
an interest that extends beyond the current project. For the 
stimulation of health in urban environments, literature refers 
to its own character in size, density, diversity and 
complexity and advocates a tailor-made approach that does 
justice to this [7]. In 'theory of smart cities', Harrison and 
Donnelly [8] describe how new technology creates 'making 
the invisible visible' and thereby creates the possibility for a 
new way of (more real time) thinking about the city. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Harrison and Donnelly [8] also propose to think in an 'urban 
information model' as a way to structure and classify the 
many different types of information contained or flowing in 
the network. This makes it possible to describe urban 
development’s statistically not only on a macro level, but 
also through new observations and new models on a more 
individual level. The recent collaboration between the 
Municipality of The Hague and the Statistics Netherlands 
(CBS) as an Urban Data Centre, is in line with this notion. 
Another possibility is the Extramural Leids Academic 
Network (ELAN) data network, in which General 
Practitioners information is made available anonymously. 
III. VALIDATION: METHODOLOGICAL AND
PRACTICAL CHALLENGES 
 
The project explicitly aims to validate the results to 
show whether and to what extent the chosen interventions 
contribute to longer independent living. Here, a number of 
methodological challenges are described that must be taken 
into account when realizing this ambition. 
 
Validating single applications is easier than validating 
the effect of multiple applications at the urban level. 
Validating is easiest in the situation where an individual 
client uses a single intervention for a clearly defined (health 
care) need, e.g., added value of digital glucose meters in 
diabetes sufferers, use of apps in people with sleep problems 
or home automation in elderly people 
who live 
independently. Much evidence-based research focuses on 
such direct applications. 
 
Validating the effect of multiple applications on an 
urban scale is more complex. This complexity arises from 
the multidimensional character of concepts such as: 'longer 
independent at home', 'quality of life', 'social strength' or 
'vitality'. In addition, this complexity is created by the scale 
of applications: longer independent at home is not only 
realized by individual users but equally strongly in groups 
of users such as client systems, or in the social networks of 
neighbourhoods or districts. In both cases, the number of 
factors that contribute to an improvement in quality is often 
much greater than a single (digital) technology that is used. 
A direct causal relationship is particularly difficult to 
demonstrate. This, therefore, requires new or different 
analysis techniques and smart use of epidemiological 
analyses. The dimensions of positive health try to give new 
frameworks in which measurements can be made. This is in 
line with the observation that the added value as determined 
by professionals is not always that of users. For example, 
there is no evidence-based long term research for the effect 
of online 'brain training', but it does noticeably contribute to 
the feeling of rehabilitation patients that they 'do something' 
and for that reason it is sometimes included in the treatment 
regime (personal communication from a rehabilitation 
doctor and -psychologist). It is a fundamental question, 
which is also described by the Council for Public Health and 
Society [9]. 
 
With regard to e-health, the National Competence Centre 
for eHealth (Nictiz) outlines the dilemma in its report 
‘Evaluation of eHealth technology: in the context of policy’, 
the broad definition of e-health, the diverse nature of the 
stakeholders and their different need for evidence [10]. In 
the report, several methodological approaches are described 
in which way an investigation could be designed. This 
includes a number of specific methodological solutions 
(such as the use of Social Return on Investment (SROI) 
[11]). There are other statistical possibilities (such as the N 
= 1 method [12]) to be able to determine validity in complex 
situations, but these can only be taken into account when 
determined which form of validation is required: when is 
healthy and vitally longer independent living successful? 
IV. CONCLUSION 
 
A number of conclusions can be drawn: 

There are existing and available digital and 
technological 
solutions 
that 
can 
support 
independent living for longer. 

A reasonable number of those solutions have been 
examined and found useful. 

Each user has his or her own needs that can and 
must be customized. 

The urban scope of the project creates a number of 
specific challenges. 

Validation 
requires 
attention 
through 
methodological complexity. 
 
The fact that digital solutions deliver added value is in 
itself insufficient precondition for success. The project is 
preferred to encourage the use of 'existing' solutions among 
residents, which means that such solutions not only have to 
'exist', but that citizens must know them and be able to use 
them. This presupposes the creation of awareness and 
motivation, making knowledge and skills available and 
facilitating the possible solutions to actually purchase, pay, 
install and use: 

Awareness - information via media, professionals 
and organizations. 

Motivation - indicating added value. 

Knowledge - explanation and courses tailored, 
direct and online. 

Skills - instruction, direct and online. 

Practical use - financing, installation, management 
and maintenance. 
 
For example, the use of digital solutions is always 
supported by a coherent set of activities. If these are not 
present and use is still desirable, compensation will have to 
be made for this. Three scenarios can be distinguished when 
stimulating digital solutions: 

Stimulating a broad approach aimed at the use of 
digital solutions in general by the entire population. 

Stimulating a specific target group to use specific 
digital solutions. 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments


Or a mix of both. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
Scientific Council for Government Policy (WRR), 
“Knowing is not doing. A realistic perspective on self-
reliance”, The Hague, April 2017. 
[2]
Newcom Research, “National Social Media Research”, 
2016. 
[3]
Kompass Benelux, retrieved December, 2017 from 
<https://retailtrends.nl/news/44759/nederland-heeft-
relatief-meeste-webwinkels>  
[4]
Smarthealth, 
“Newsroom: 
onderzoek 
30.000 
zorgmedewerkers, 10% past eHealth toe”, retrieved 
January 
2018 
from 
<http://www.smarthealth.nl/2017/01/31/ehealth-mhealth-
nieuws-week-5-2017/> 
[5]
T. Greenhalgh et al., “Diffusion of innovations in service 
organizations: systematic review and recommendations”, 
Milbank Q, vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 581–629, 2004. 
[6]
University of Victoria, Human and Social Development, 
“eHealth Value Framework for Clinical Adoption and 
Meaningful 
Use”, 
retrieved 
January 
2018 
from 
<http://ehealth.uvic.ca/methodology/models/valueFrame
work.php>  
[7]
D. Vlahov et al., “Urban as a determinant of health”, 
Journal of Urban Health, vol. 84, no. 1, pp. 16–26, 2007. 
[8]
C. Harrison and L. Donnelly, “A Theory of Smart 
Cities”, Proceedings of the 55th Annual Meeting of the 
ISSS, Hull, UK, pp. 1–15, 2011.  
[9]
Council for Public Health and Society (RVS), “Without 
context no evidence – on the illusion of evidence based 
practice in health care”, retrieved December 2017 from 
<https://www.raadrvs.nl/publicaties/item/zonder-context-
geen-bewijs> 
[10] National Competence Centre for eHealth (Nictiz), 
“Evaluation of eHealth technology: in the context of 
policy”, May 2017; Esteves, A. M. et al., “Social impact 
assessment: the state of the art”, Impact Assessment and 
Project Appraisal, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 34–42. 2012.  
[11] R. Millar and K. Hall, “Social Return on Investment 
(SROI) 
and 
Performance 
Measurement”, 
Public 
Management Review, vol. 15, no. 6, pp. 923–941, 2013. 
[12] E. Schuringa et al., “The N = 1 statistics behind the 
patient follow system at FPC Dr. S. van Mesdag”. GGzet 
Wetenschappelijk, vol. 2, pp. 70–77, 2011. 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

