A Proposal for Implementing an IMS-based IPTV system over an IPv6/MPLS network
Using Open Source Software
Bayron Fabio Villanueva Ocampo,
Danilo Alfonso López Sarmiento
Laboratorio de Investigación y Desarrollo en Electrónica y Redes - LIDER
Universidad Distrital Francisco José de Caldas
Bogotá, Colombia
bfvillanuevao@correo.udistrital.edu.co,
dalopezs@udistrital.edu.co
Abstract—The continuous development of communication
networks has allowed the emergence of IPTV has an innovative
service which together with IMS, promises to change radically
the TV experience for consumers. The main intention of this
paper is to propose a design of an IMS-based IPTV system using
completely open source software for its development and using
an IPv6/MPLS core network to provide the transport of
multimedia content. For this purpose, we first study the related
work in the area, and then we present the proposed design
describing 
the 
devices 
and 
software 
available 
for 
the
implementation of the prototype. We have identified a lack of
research in IPTV concerning IPv6 and we propose a prototypical
implementation in order to answer the actual concerns about this
subject and generate more research in the area. This work is a
first approach on an IPTV framework and it is limited only to
the design of an IPTV system, which is the starting point of
several future work on IPTV traffic analysis.
Index Terms—Core Network, IMS, IPTV, NGN, Open Source.
I. INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, packet switching networks based on Internet
Protocol are being deployed worldwide; this has enabled the
emergence of a new kind of services, ready to be offered to
clients. One popular service, which is still under continuous
development, is the so called IP Television. IPTV represents a
set of multimedia services that are transported over IP
networks and are managed so as to guarantee (up to a certain
extent) quality of service, security, interactivity and reliability
[1].
IPTV has become a strong competitor against legacy
television providers (like cable or satellite) in countries where
this technology has been adopted, providing traditional Live
TV service together with a set of supplementary services such
as video on demand (VoD), private virtual record (PVR) and
interactivity services, which have improved TV experiences for
users.
Currently, there are several Telco providers who have
implemented IPTV services
over their already-deployed
networks; normally IPv4-based networks. Given the increasing
popularity of IPTV, the amount of users has rapidly grown, and
Telco providers are now realizing that the IPv4 addressing
scheme is falling short. IPv6 [2] is the latest version of protocol
IP and unlike IPv4 [3], which has a 32 bit address space; IPv6
has an address space of 128 bits. Such an unimaginable amount
of IP addresses permits getting rid of the NAT system; hence, it
is important to start the migration from the current IPv4
networks to the new IPv6 model so as to be able to cope with
the increasing customer demand. An example of this is NTT, a
Japanese Internet service provider that has deployed a next-
generation-IPv6 network and has recently offered an IPTV
service called Hikari TV, which runs completely over its own
IPv6 infrastructure.
Convergence is another key point in the deployment of
IPTV. Nowadays, there is the need to offer several services to
users wherever they are regardless of the type of device they
use (TV, smartphone, tablet, PC). The concept of ITU-T Next
Generation Networks (NGN) [4] is intended to deal with this
issue by providing a solid architecture to separate the Service
Layer from the Transport Layer, allowing several services to be
transported regardless of the network infrastructure. This will
enable IPTV services to be delivered to several devices through
different kinds of packet-based networks (fixed, wireless,
mobile). NGN has adopted the IP Multimedia Subsystem
(IMS) as a tool to provide a standard way of delivering
signaling messages over networks, using Session Initiation
Protocol (SIP) [5] in order to establish and control the
multimedia session.
In this paper, we propose the implementation of an IMS-
based IPTV system using Open Source Software. The main
idea is to design an IPv6/MPLS core network to provide the
transport of multimedia content using both QoS mechanisms
and TE. Subsequently, the traffic generated by the IPTV
system over such core network is evaluated.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows:
Related work is discussed in Section II. In Section III, our
prototypical implementation is proposed. Section IV discusses
the
validity
of
the proposed
implementation. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. RELATED WORK
Many studies on IMS-based IPTV systems have been
conducted recently; some of these studies have dealt with the
complete IMS architecture proposed by ETSI/TISPAN [6], as
well as the standardization efforts made so far. Such studies
were mainly intended to suggest
a new architecture,
specifically designed for IPTV systems and having the IMS
Core 
component
at 
its
heart
[7].
Additionally,
the
implementation of a prototype to evaluate such architecture has
also been suggested [8]. Other authors have investigated the
convergence capabilities of IMS-based IPTV systems,
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

proposing and/or deploying hybrid platforms that could
provide services to both fixed and wireless networks [9-11]. It
can be observed that in most of these proposals very few
authors worked over IPv6 networks; their main focus was on
the study of the IMS platform itself, rather than analyzing the
effects of IPv6 on their implementations.
Other related works focused on the transport layer instead
of the service layer. Murcia, et al., proposed and implemented a
video transmission platform over IPv4 networks using MPLS-
TE and other management mechanisms to guarantee some
level of end-to-end QoS to video traffic [12]. Some researchers
studied the re-convergence techniques on MPLS networks and
analyzed ways of improving QoS, whereas others preferred to
implement VPLS networks over IPv4 for a content-delivery
network due to its capabilities in dealing with different classes
of services and its fast restoration procedures [13, 14].
For the purposes of this paper, it is also interesting to study
related works about IPTV traffic measurement. Young J. Won,
et al., measured commercial IPTV traffic on four different
residential broadband access networks and presented gathered
traffic statistics of the IPTV service. These authors also provide
a mathematical description of traffic behavior and bandwidth
demand for IPTV VoD services [15]. Another particular study
focused on measuring multicast traffic collected from an Italian
IPTV service provider. Different kinds of IPTV flows were
encountered, characterized, and measurements of QoS factors
were made according to variables such as jitter, packet loss rate
and delay [16]. Other authors explored several aspects that
helped model IPTV services and presented a synthetic video
trace generator that accurately resembles IPTV streaming itself
[17].
As related work was being explored, we realized that there
were very few IPTV implementations that cover the study of
IPv6 networks over MPLS [18] and that implement the IMS
architecture for controlling the service layer.
III. PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, we describe the devices, tools and design
employed to implement a prototype of an IMS-based IPTV
system at Universidad Distrital Francisco José de Caldas
(U.D.F.J.C).
A. CECAD
CECAD is an acronym in Spanish that stands for High
Performance Computer Center. It is a computing laboratory
created by U.D.F.J.C to promote research and innovation in
several areas, providing high performance computational tools
for undergraduate, graduate and PhD students [19].
B. The Devices

DELL HPCC Server: CECAD has a powerful Dell
High-Performance Computing Cluster that is utilized
to promote research in the campus. This platform will
support different kinds of servers that are used in the
IPTV prototype.

Cisco 2911: The 2911 is an integrated-services router
that offers voice-and-video-capable digital signal
processor slots,
embedded hardware encryption
acceleration, and other new characteristics that support
a 
wide 
range 
of 
connectivity 
options 
and
communication protocols; including IPv6, MPLS,
OSPF, EIGRP, Multicast protocols, etc.

Cisco 2821: The 2821 is an integrated-services router
that has been optimized for the secure and wire-speed
delivery of concurrent data, voice, video, and wireless
services. The 2800 series provides IPv6 support as well
as MPLS routing and multicast capabilities.

Cisco 1841: The 1841 is an integrated-services router
part of the 1800 series, it is a cheap and good choice
for implementing a research laboratory for its price and
its IPv6 and MPLS capabilities.

Cisco 3750G: This is a Layer-3 Gigabit Ethernet
switch, with smart multicast capabilities and IPv6
compatibility.

Raspberry Pi: It is a credit card size computer powered
by a 700 Mhz microprocessor and a 512 Mb  RAM,
this computer has a HDMI port and works using a
Debian based distribution.
C. Open Source Software

Open IMS Core: The Open IMS Core is an Open
Source implementation (made by Fraunhofer FOKUS)
of IMS Call Session Control Functions (CSCFs)
together with a Home Subscriber Server (HSS). These
two systems form the core elements of all IMS/NGN
architectures, as currently specified by 3GPP and
ETSI/TISPAN [20]. The IMS Core is the main
component
within the IMS architecture and it
transports all the signaling traffic (SIP, SDP, Diameter)
of the network.

UCT Advanced IPTV: The UCT Advanced IPTV
software is an attempt at a standards-compliant
implementation of an IMS based IPTV service, created
by the Communications Research Group at University
of Cape Town. This software provides a SIP-based
Application Server specifically designed for IPTV
[21].

VLC Server: VideoLAN is a complete software
solution for video streaming and playback, developed
by students at Ecole Centrale Paris under the GNU
GPL. VLC can stream MPEG-2 and MPEG-4 files,
DVDs, digital satellite channels, digital terrestrial
television channels and live videos on the network in a
unicast or multicast fashion and has full support for
IPv6 [22].

UCT IMS Client: The UCT IMS Client has been
developed by the Communications Research Group at
University of Cape Town in order to be used with the
FOKUS Open IMS Core. The client supports AKA
authentication
and emulates IMS signaling. The
current version supports voice and video calls as well
as session-based instant messaging, Presence, IPTV
viewers, and an XCAP client; however, it works with
IPv4 only [23].
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society


myMONSTER TCS: The Telco Communicator Suite
is a Java-based framework that delivers a unified
communication experience for all forms of IP-based
telecommunication,
ranging
from 
Multimedia
Telephony to other types like rich Presence, Group List
Management, and IPTV applications. It is extremely
powerful, yet lightweight enough to run on both fixed
and mobile devices; it also includes IPv6 support[24].
D. Design
Our intention is to design an IMS-based IPTV prototype by
using the available devices and open source software tools
described above. Our first attempt to design the IPTV system
considers that, at present, few IPv6/MPLS-capable routing
devices are available. Figure 1 depicts the physical layout
(interconnection) of the devices that compose the IPTV
prototype.
The Live TV and VoD Servers will be located on the
content production side of this layout; both servers use VLC.
There will also be a SIP Application Server using UCT
Advanced IPTV, which may be located at the same server as
the VoD service.
Finally,
there will be a server for
implementing the IMS core (using Open IMS Core), which
will be the key point in the IPTV platform session
establishment. The HPCC Server, which will contain the
servers
already mentioned,
is
currently installed and
interconnected through a Cisco 3750 layer-3-capable Switch,
located at CECAD.
We have available three routing devices, namely a Cisco
2911 router, a Cisco 2821 router and a Cisco 18411 router. Our
proposal is to construct a private network using this two
devices and take advantage of their IPv6 and MPLS
capabilities in order to design a robust core network for the
IPTV prototype. Attached to the 2821and 1841 Routers,
several LAN networks will be placed; these networks will
serve the clients of the IPTV system.
Fig. 1. Physical interconnection of the proposed IPTV prototype.
Figure 2 shows the logical connections between the
components described above. The connection process for IMS
clients is well known, namely the IMS clients send SIP-based
messages to the IMS Core and request the IPTV service; the
IMS Core authorizes and authenticates users and connects
them to the Application Server (AS), which keeps all
information about contents and the media servers.
Fig. 2. Logical connections of the proposed IPTV prototype.
The AS communicates with the IMS Core’s HSS to obtain
information about the user profile; it also
presents
a
personalized content guide to the client. From this content
guide, the client choses a channel and sends a request to start
receiving the channel’s content. The IMS Core transfers this
request to the AS, and then returns
an appropriate
multicast/unicast IPv6 address to the client so as to start
listening to that specific address and receive the content as
requested.
The clients will be implemented using several devices such
as Personal Computers and Set Top Boxes in order to install on
them the IMS client software. Our first intention was to use
commercial Set Top Boxes in order to implement several
clients, but such devices were incompatible with the current
IMS Client software; so as to be able to emulate a STB we are
going to use the Raspberry Pi to create our own STB IMS
compatible which thanks to its capabilities is available to
connect to any HD TV.
IV. DISCUSSION
In this paper, we have proposed a prototypical design for an
IMS-based IPTV service over an IPv6/MPLS network. The
main purpose is to implement such design with real equipment
so as to assemble a first platform intended for researchers
(U.D.F.J.C students and members) to work on subjects like
IPTV6 and Next Generation Networks.
Nowadays, all communication systems
converge on
networking, and IP-based networks are the key in this new
convergent architecture. NGN and IMS emerge as a potential
solution
that
provides
service-and-network
convergence
through the use of IP networks and SIP communication.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Through this investigation, we have realized that there is a
lack of research on IPv6/MPLS core-networks implementation
over IMS-based IPTV systems. In the IMS implementations
mentioned, there was a marked trend towards IPv4, and few
studies were intended to study the effects of IPv6. Moreover,
most of such studies carried out their implementation avoiding
the use of proper core networks, and focused their attention on
the session establishment process rather than on the effects of
the core network on the IMS system.
The main intention of our proposal is having implemented
the framework presented in Figure 1, focusing in the core
network so as to be optimized to work in an IMS IPTV
environment; task that will be accomplished by using several
tools such as MultiProtocol Label Switching (MPLS); diverse
queuing techniques; and resource reservation techniques such
as Resource ReSerVation Protocol (RSVP).
As we wrote this paper, the design was being implemented
with the available equipment, but the ultimate goal is to obtain
another IPv6/MPLS routing device so as to implement the
design shown in Figure 3. By including another routing device,
we can build a more complex network and study the effects of
the IPTV multicast traffic on IPv6/MPLS core networks in a
more precise way.
There are several advantages of using Open Source
Software in this design; mainly the costs involved get reduced
greatly and also the availability of the source code and the right
to modify it brings flexibility working with the software.
Fig. 3. Physical interconnection of the intended prototype.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
IPTV has emerged as a novel technology that allows the
transmission of Live and VoD contents over IP-based
Networks, bringing additional interactive and personalized
services to users, which renovates users’ experience of
television. The growing amount of users demanding IP-based
services is forcing providers to migrate towards IPv6 networks,
allowing a major number of users to be accepted in a particular
network. Additionally, with the implementation of NGN IMS,
networks are converging to form a unique big network that can
provide several services to several kinds of users and devices.
During this investigation we realized that there is an important
lack of research in IPTV concerning IPv6 and there is no much
information in this subject available.
We 
have 
proposed
an 
IMS-based 
IPTV 
service
implementation, which represents the first step towards further
extend research on IPTV platforms and networks. From this
intended prototype there emerge comprehensive research
studies on IPTV systems will be conducted. This paper claims
to be a first approach in the implementation of an IPTV
system; we currently are in a so early stage of our work so we
only 
present 
the 
framework’s 
design
leaving 
the
implementations results and the framework’s optimization to
future papers,
Future work will attempt to analyze traffic behavior on the
IPTV system running over the IPv6/MPLS core network. A
model for predicting the future IPTV traffic using ARIMA
Time Series will be proposed. We are also considering future
implementations of additional services (such as VoIP, Presence
and IM) provided by the IMS system.
REFERENCES
[1]
International Telecommunication Union-Telco. Available on:
www.itu.int/ITU-T. [retrieved: 10, 2012]
[2]
S. Deering, and R. Hinden, “Internet Protocol, Version 6 (IPv6)
Specification,” IETF RFC 2460, Dec. 1998, www.ietf.org/ rfc/
rfc2460.txt.
[3]
J. Postel, “Internet Protocol Darpa Internet Program Protocol
Specification,” IETF RFC 791, Sept. 1981, www.ietf.org/rfc/
rfc791.txt.
[4]
ITU-T, “ITU-T's Definition of NGN,” 2008. Available on:
www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/gsi/ngn/Pages/definition.aspx. [retrieved:
12, 2012]
[5]
J. Rosenberg, H. Schulzrinne, G. Camarillo, A. R. Johnston, J.
Peterson, R. Sparks, M. Handley, and E. Schooler. “SIP: session
initiation protocol,” IETF RFC 3261, June 2002, www.ietf.org/
rfc/rfc3261.txt.
[6]
ETSI ES 282 007, Telecommunications and Internet converged
Services and Protocols for Advanced Networking (TISPAN); IP
Multimedia 
Subsystem 
(IMS); 
Functional 
architecture,
European Telecommunications Standards Institute, 2006.
[7]
E. Mikoczy, D. Sivchenko, B. Xu, and J. I. Moreno, “IPTV
systems, standards and architectures part II: IPTV services over
IMS: architecture and standardization,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 46, pp. 128–135, 2008.
[8]
E. Mikoczy, D. Sivchenko, B. Xu and V. Rakocevic, “IMS
based IPTV services: architecture and implementation,” Proc.
3rd
Int’l 
Conf.
Mobile 
Multimedia 
Communications.
(MobiMedia '07), ICST, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 1-7, August
2007.
[9]
A. Al-Hezmi, F. Carvalho de Gouveia, and T. Magedanz,
“Provisioning of multimedia services over open NGN testbed”,
Proc. 1st Int’l Conf. Ambient media and systems. (Ambi-Sys
'08), ICST, Brussels, Belgium, pp. 1-5, 2008.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

[10] K. Choi, W. M. Kim, J. K. Kim, K. S. Kim, "Design and
implementation of IMS service continuity between IPTV and
mobile," Proc. 13th Int’l Conf. Advanced Communication
Technology. (ICACT '11), IEEE CS, Phoenix Park, Republic of
Korea, pp. 977-980, Feb. 2011.
[11] E. Mikoczy, S. Schumann, P. Podhradsky, T. Koski, and M.
Heinikangas, “Hybrid IPTV Services with IMS - Integration of
IMS based IPTV with Broadcast and Unicast Mobile TV
Services Using DVB-H,” Proc. 5th Int’l Conf. Next Generation
Mobile Applications and Services. (NGMAST '11), IEEE CS,
Wales, UK, pp. 76-82, Sept. 2011.
[12] V. Murcia, M. Delgado, T. R. Vargas, J. C. Guerri, and J.
Antich, “VAIPA: A video-aware internet protocol architecture,”
Proc. 12th IEEE Int’l Conf. High Performance Switching and
Routing. (HPSR '11), IEEE, Cartagena, Spain, pp. 140-145, July
2011.
[13] S. Pompei, M. Teodori, A. Valenti, S. Di Bartolo, G. Incerti, and
D. Del Buono, "Experimental implementation of an IPTV
architecture based on Content Delivery Network managed by
VPLS technique,"
Proc.
Int’l
Congress Ultra
Modern
Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops.
(ICUMT '10), IEEE, Moscow, Russia, pp.576-581, Oct. 2010.
[14] Y. Wang, K. Liang, H. Young, S. Cheng, M. Chen, and Y.
Huang, “Quality-Assured Provisioning of IPTV Services in
Ethernet-Based Broadband Networks,” Int’l Conf. Network and
Service Management. (CNSM '10), IEEE CS, Niagara Falls,
Canada, pp.266-269, Oct. 2010.
[15] Y.J. Won, M. Choi, B.C Park, J.W. Hong, H.W. Lee, C.K.
Hwang, and J.H. Yoo, “End-User IPTV Traffic Measurement of
Residential Broadband Access Networks,” Network Operations
and Management Symposium Workshops. (NOMS Workshops
'08), IEEE CS, Salvador da Bahia, Brazil, pp. 95 – 100, April
2008.
[16] M. Mellia and M. Meo,   "Communication Networks
Measurement of IPTV traffic from an operative network,"
European Transactions on Telecommunications, vol. 21, pp.324-
336, June 2010.
[17] A. Reaz, D. Murayama, K. Suzuki, N. Yoshimoto, G. Kramer,
and B. Mukherjee, “Synthetic traffic generation for streaming
video to model IPTV,” 5th Int’l Conf. Advanced Networks and
Telecommunication Systems. (ANTS '11), Bengaluru, India, pp.
1-6, Dec. 2011.
[18] E. Rosen, A. Viswanathan and R. Callon, “Multiprotocol Label
Switching Architecture,” IETF RFC 3031, Jan 2001, www.ietf.
org/rfc/rfc3031.txt.
[19] Centro de Computación de Alto Desempeño. Available on:
http://cecad.udistrital.edu.co. [retrieved: 12, 2012]
[20] Open 
IMS 
Core. 
Available 
on:
www.openimscore.org.
[retrieved: 11, 2012]
[21] UCT Advanced IPTV. Available on: http://uctimsclient.berlios.
de/uctiptv_advanced_howto.html. [retrieved: 12, 2012]
[22] VideoLAN. Available on: www.videolan.org. [retrieved: 12,
2012]
[23] D. Waiting, R. Good, R. Spiers, and N. Ventura, “The UCT IMS
client,” 5th Int’l Conf. Testbeds and Research Infrastructures for
the Development of Networks & Communities and Workshops.
(TridentCom '09), IEEE, Washington, DC, USA, pp.1-6, April
2009.
[24] myMONSTER - Telco Communicator Suite. Available on :
www.monster-the-client.org. [retrieved: 12, 2012]
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

