New Tourism System Across Industries in Nikko, Japan
Yuko Hiramatsu, Fumihiro Sato
Faculty of Economics
Chuo University
Hachioji, Tokyo, Japan
e-mail: {susana_y, fsato} @tamacc.chuo-u.ac.jp
Atsushi Ito
Department of Information Science
Utsunomiya University
Utsunomiya, Tochigi, Japan
e-mail: at.ito@is.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp
Yoshikazu Nagao
Department of Agriculture
Utsunomiya University
Moka, Tochigi, Japan
e-mail: ynagao@cc.utsunomiya-u.ac.jp
Takeo Watanabe
A cooperative of livestock farming
Utsunomiya, Japan
e-mail: t-watanabe@tochiraku.or.jp
Abstract—Tourist phobia has become a serious problem in
Japan. Too many tourists visit Japan’s world heritage sites.
Meanwhile, the population is decreasing in rural areas where
there are beautiful natural features, farms, and animals. In
conjunction with rural residents, we have devised a new
scheme for enticing tourists away from famous places to a
cattle farm in the mountains of Nikko, Japan. We plan to
collect data about cows at the farm using sensors and LoRa
technology, which is a spread spectrum modulation technique.
Through a production information cooperation policy, these
data,
which
reflect
food
quality,
will
be
shared
with
restaurants near the world heritage sites. This is a gateway to
learning about the rural area.
Our goals are to develop
regionally branded products, cultivate markets for them, and
inform tourists of their availability. Such cross-sectional
collaboration will create a new agritourism system.
Keywords- Society 5.0; agritourism; tourism phobia; LoRa.
I.
INTRODUCTION
A lot of things are interconnected, resulting in a great
amount of virtual data that is analysed using Artificial
Intelligence (AI).
This information exposes us to a new
world. Primary, secondary, and tertiary industries are no
longer separate; they connect and perform not only in the
context of seamless service by Internet, but also with regard
to new businesses connecting and analysing multiple scenes.
For example, through AI analysis of big data consisting of
diverse information, such as personal allergies, information
on
food
products,
food
products
stored
in
family
refrigerators, retail store inventories, and market conditions.
In Japan, this is called Society 5.0. It was proposed in the 5th
Science and Technology Basic Plan as a future society to
which Japan should aspire. It follows the hunting (Society
1.0), agricultural (Society 2.0), industrial (Society 3.0), and
information societies (Society 4.0) [1].
The 2020 Olympics will be held in Tokyo. A lot of
tourists will visit there. Meanwhile, the rural population is
diminishing. We suggest a new system for attracting tourists
to rural areas using the connection of Society 5.0.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
2, we identify some tourism problems in Japan. In Section 3,
we present our new agritourism and Society 5.0 system. We
conclude in Section 4.
II.
TOURISM PROBLEMS
International
visitors
to
Japan
have
been
steadily
increasing in the last years. The number spiked to 18 million
in 2016—a significant step towards the long-term target of
25 million by the start of 2020 (2010 performance: 8.61
million, 2011 estimate: 6.22 million [2]). However, this
exponential increase has been accompanied by what seems
like
tourism phobia.
Nowadays,
tourism
phobia is
a
significant worldwide problem. Concrete problems that are
associated with the phenomenon are mainly traffic and the
rising costs of room rent and restaurant dining.
In addition, people who live in tourist areas feel
uncomfortable, as though they are not in their own town.
This feeling is amplified by the use of smartphones.
Specifically, since many travellers use smartphone devices
on their trips, they do not ask residents for directions to their
destinations; rather, they use smartphone applications and
take photos. Research has been conducted in Nikko, which is
one Japan’s world heritage sites. We developed applications
to solve such kind of communication gap involving the
area’s residents using a Bluetooth low energy beacon [3][4].
In this work, we present a new system that will not only
serve the people who live in the central area of Nikko and the
tourists who visit famous places near the local station, but
also the people who live farther away in the rural area. We
collaborated with the Oozasa cattle farm at Kirifurihkogen in
Nikko. This large, beautiful farm is located in the mountains.
III.
A NEW AGRITOURISM AND SOCIETY 5.0 SYSTEM
Based on Society 5.0, we intend to develop a new system
that widely involves members of the Nikko area. It follows
the hunting, agricultural, industrial, and information societies
(Society 1.0 to 4.0). Using Internet access, these can all be
connected. The plan is as described in the upcoming
paragraphs.
A lot of tourists limit their visits to famous places at the
world heritage sites. They have lunch or dinner or buy
souvenirs nearby. However, such places can trigger tourist
visits to other rural areas in Nikko where they can experience
new agricultural dishes or goods at the restaurants or shops.
Many original products are made at local farms, including
cattle farms. We can provide information about those areas.
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

In addition, we can send effective, pertinent messages. As
shown in Figure 1, farms (primary industry), factories
(secondary
industry),
and
restaurants/shops
(tertiary
industry) communicate using information tools. This is
Society 5.0 in Japan (Figure 2). In order to offer visitors a
marvellous experience, we aim to construct a food chain
using the information flow from raw products (such as milk,
meat, and vegetables), thus bringing new value to the food.
We will then entice tourists away from the busy main streets
in Nikko to the serenity of the natural farms and high plains.
Food is one of the most important tourist attractions. For
example, Travel Trade News reported that among Thai
people’s
motivations
for
visiting
Japan,
television
programmes or movies that featured Japan were responsible
for 65%, closely followed by Japanese food at 61% [5].
Chinese people use Social Network Service (SNS) and they
try
to
take
new,
original
photos.
They
will
receive
information using our application and have a chance to visit
rural areas.
In the world of Society 5.0, the type of information
mentioned above is gathered via a sensor network using a
low-cost wide area network such as LoRa and analysed using
AI. It is then transferred to consumers via the Internet of
Things (IoT). For example, through cooperation with the
cattle farm, we intend to work to verify the quality of milk
that their grazing cows make. It is said that the quality of
milk that is produced by grazing cows is superior to milk
from cows that are housed in a barn; however, more
information is needed to confirm this. To that end, using
LoRa, which is suitable under the circumstances because it
offers low-cost wide area communication features, we will
collect data about each cow on the field at the cattle farm
(200ha). The research has begun and 80% of the area can be
covered now. We will place sensors on cows and prove the
superiority of the farm’s methods through data analysis.
Quantification for the quality of milk can help the cattle farm
and restaurants explain why their dishes are special, i.e.,
because the ingredients are sourced from a cattle farm in
Nikko. Foreign tourists tend to choose authentic traditional
Japanese food; however, milk is not a traditional Japanese
food. For instance, foreign tourists like Japanese beef, which
is known as Wagyu beef, despite the fact that beef, like milk,
is not one of our traditional foods. In fact, Japanese beef is
not much different from the American beef. Nevertheless,
Wagyu has become a Japanese brand, and we intend to
develop our project involving cows and milk in much the
same direction. Furthermore, given that milk is a raw
material for making cheese and butter, and milk is itself a
basic food for making various dishes, the success of this
project will benefit restaurants, cake shops, and supermarkets.
IV.
CONCLUSION
Nowadays, many tourists are very interested in food
quality. Rural areas are beautiful and often viewed as
beneficial to visitors’ health. However, instead of extending
a direct invitation, we will attract tourists using clear data
and information. Quantitative data is particularly persuasive.
This project aims to connect natural, high-quality foods,
mobility, and the cattle farm. By linking several industries
using Information and Communication Technology (ICT),
we will contribute to the whole area’s activity level. This
system will vitalise the local economy and support the
modernisation of the countryside with an eye towards
tourism.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
A portion of the research results were obtained from
commissioned
research
by
the
National
Institute
of
Information
and
Communications
Technology
(NICT),
JAPAN. This research is also supported by JSPS KAKENHI
Grant Number JP17H02249 and JP18K11849.
REFERENCES
[1]
Cabinet Office in Japan, What is Society 5.0, [Online].
Available
from:
https://www8.cao.go.jp/cstp/english/society5_0/index.html
[Accessed February 2020]
[2]
Japan Travel Agency, The Tourism Nation Promotion Basic
Plan,
[Online].
Available
from:
https://www.mlit.go.jp/
kankocho/en/kankorikkoku/kihonkeikaku.html,
2017.2.16
[Accessed January 2020]
[3]
Y. Hiramatsu et al., “A Service Model using Bluetooth Low
Energy Beacons - To Provide Tourism Information of
Traditional Cultural Sites”, pp. 14-19, Service Computation
2016, March , Rome, Italy.
[4]
Y.
Hiramatsu
et
al.,“Outdoor
Studying
System
Using
Bluetooth Low Energy Beacon - To Feel Cultural Sites”,
HCII 2017, Part 1, pp. 340-352, July 2017, Vancouver,
Canada.
[5]
Japanese Travel Trade News, September 24, 2015 [Online].
Available
from:
https://www.travelvoice.jp/english/japan-
tourism-marketing-survey-shows-the-ratio-of-thai-repeaters-
to-japan-is-close-to-7,
[Accessed
December
2019]
Figure 1. Extending Agriculture to Tourism.
Figure 2. Society 5.0 in Nikko.
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

