Customizing eGovernment Support Services: A Value Co-Creation Perspective   
 
Maryanne Scutella 
Adelaide Business School 
University of Adelaide 
Adelaide, Australia 
e-mail: maryanne.scutella@adelaide.edu.au 
Carolin Plewa and Carmen Reaiche 
Adelaide Business School 
University of Adelaide 
Adelaide, Australia 
e-mail: carolin.plewa@adelaide.edu.au,                                       
carmen.reaiche@adelaide.edu.au
 
 
Abstract— Small businesses are an important part of the 
Australian economic landscape. Therefore, it is important that 
small businesses be supported to encourage sustainability and 
growth. One of the complexities in designing and delivering 
relevant e-Government support services in this context is the 
diversity of small businesses, in particular when considering 
their existing resource base (such as experience, knowledge 
and skills), the resources they are seeking and the way they 
integrate 
their 
own 
resources with 
those 
of 
others. 
Customization is proposed to address the diverse nature of 
resources and resource integration, as it presents resources 
that are specific and relevant to the business. Indeed, the lack 
of perceived relevance is understood to act as a barrier to small 
businesses accessing support services that may be overcome by 
customization. However, research is yet to consider the role of 
customization of support services as a way to maximizing 
resource integration and value co-creation for small businesses. 
This research aims to address this limitation by developing a 
framework for increasing value-in-use from support services in 
the context of e-Government digital support systems. The 
suggested framework can then build the foundation for future 
empirical research in this area. 
Keywords- customization; e-Government; value co-creation; 
resource integration; information overload. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
 
Small businesses are complex and diverse in nature, and 
thus differ greatly in how they derive value from support 
services. Indeed, some research focuses on small business as 
a homogenous group [1], treating customers as a broad and 
rather undefined mass [2]. Even where the research has 
attempted to look at the clients more closely, there is a 
tendency to only use socio-demographic and digital divide 
factors. This is despite general recognition of the 
heterogeneous nature of small businesses, considering 
variations not only in the business’ size, age, industry also in 
regards to the capabilities and motivations of their owners 
and managers [3].  
Not only are small businesses more than ‘scaled-down’ 
versions of larger firms and need to be treated differently [1], 
they also differ more broadly in the resources that form part 
of each firm’s make-up. Hence, understanding the 
complexity and diversity of small business and their 
resources will be a key focus of this research. 
Notably, while limited, existing research suggests a 
positive impact of public agency support services on small 
business success and growth [3] as well as employment 
creation and labor productivity [4], thus indicating the 
importance of understanding the use of such services and the 
value small businesses generate as part of that usage process. 
This importance of small business support is recognized by 
governments around the world, who offer different types of 
support services, such as Business Link in the UK [5], many 
of which are offered online through websites or online 
portals. Many of such portals seek to cover as many possible 
facets and questions as possible, so as to account for the 
diversity of small businesses and their requirements for 
resources and support.  
However, barriers to small businesses exist, limiting their 
ability fully realize value from such services. In particular, 
the impact of support services on the effectiveness of small 
business support programs depend both on the actual content 
and, importantly, the delivery method [6]. For example, a 
Canadian study found that more than half the respondents 
thought the support services offered to small business by 
public agencies was not suited to their needs, questioning the 
relevance of the service and related information provided [7]. 
Furthermore, the number of support services available to 
small business, together with an accompanying plethora of 
information, may limit their ability to generate value from 
these services. Whilst giving small businesses the 
opportunity to access the information they require; the sheer 
volume can also be a barrier to finding and utilizing these 
resources. This concept is commonly referred to as 
“information overload’ and occurs as there are limits to how 
much information humans can process and use in a certain 
timeframe [8].  
To overcome these issues, research has suggested 
tailoring content to the user, so that the information provided 
conforms to businesses better, especially for those 
experiencing information overload [9]. Indeed, it is the 
personalization techniques that “can reduce information 
overload and, hence, increase user satisfaction” [9]. For 
example, customizing the content to the user may make the 
service not only more relevant, it may also make it quicker 
and easier to find the right material [10]. Customization can 
be defined as “some level of adaptation or tailoring of the 
process to meet the individual consumer’s needs” [11]. 
Research has shown that support services may experience 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

greater usage if “support becomes more customized and 
suitable to problems and needs of SME” (Small Business) 
[3]. Indeed, research in digital services has demonstrated that 
the impact of human factors in the value co-creation process 
is greater at the front-end phase of the production of digital 
products and services [12].  
However, although previous research notes the potential 
importance of customization for small business utilization of 
support services, research is yet to consider how it enables 
small businesses to generate value from these services. This 
is important, however, given that the advancement of small 
business – may it be in sustainability, growth or other goal – 
depends on their ability to gain value from the services they 
draw upon. Furthermore, customization research to date has 
focused mostly on the offering organization’s perspective 
and not on the user/customer [13][14]. 
To advance our knowledge, this research draws on the 
theoretical grounding of value co-creation and resource 
integration to conceptualize the role of customization in the 
value co-creation process, providing a user centric approach 
that has been an identified gap in the existing customization 
literature. It will also contribute to small business, e-
Government and support services research by advancing our 
conceptual 
understanding 
and 
related 
managerial 
recommendations aimed at maximizing the benefits small 
businesses derive from support services. Building on the 
conceptual development outlined here, future research can 
offer empirical support for the appetite of customized small 
business support and the relationship with factors central to 
the value co-creation process; a key focus and contribution 
of this research, which will be introduced in this working 
paper and expanded in future research.  
Indeed, much of the research on customization and value 
co-creation has occurred in the commerce or retail 
perspective. However, there are significant differences 
between e-Government and e-commerce [15]. For example, 
a pivotal goal of commerce is gaining of profit, which is not 
a consideration for government. There is also not 
competition between government departments as each has 
their own specialty and often actively promote other 
government departments and services, thus warranting 
research specifically investigating this context. 
Finally, this research will answer calls for research in the 
value co-creation literature. In particular, [16] call for the 
role of the customer and their resources that are integrated, 
with [17] pointing to the need to further investigate the 
contribution of the customer, which is still underrepresented 
in the literature. Furthermore, researchers have called for 
studies into the role of customer participation in the value co-
creation process, particularly this from a “business customers 
has been largely unexplored” [18]. They highlight that more 
research is needed into business to business offerings, and in 
particular from the consumer business perspective as much 
of the previous research at that point was from the seller’s 
perspective.  This has also been cited as a limitation in e-
Government research with limited research examining e-
Government success from a citizen-based perspective [19].   
This paper is divided into four sections. Section I 
contains the introduction, Section II presents the literature 
review and proposed framework, Section III discusses future 
research, and Section IV conclusions. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW AND PROPOSED 
FRAMEWORK 
 
Significant research has examined value co-creation - 
“the process by which actors (firms and customers) integrate 
their resources to generate value” [20] - in recent years, 
emphasizing the role of actors (such as customers) as part of 
this process. Founded in Service Dominant logic (S-D), 
value co-creation reflects on the notion that customers are 
not just passive receivers of value, but that they instead they 
have a crucial active role in creating value for themselves 
[21]; both through direct and indirect inputs across multiple 
stages of utilizing or creating services [22]. Therefore, it is 
not the service itself that has value but it is a function of how 
the user utilizes it [23]. Within the S-D logic framework, 
value-in-use is seen as the outcome of resource integration 
[17] and the resource integration is a fundamental aspect of 
the value co-creation process [24]. Hibbert, Winklhofer and 
Temerak [25] posit that “resource integration is the process 
by which customers deploy resources as they undertake 
bundles of activities that create value directly or that will 
facilitate subsequent consumption/use from which they 
derive value”. Hence, the organizations’ role is to ensure that 
the service is designed, delivered and marketed in such a 
way as to facilitate the customer integrating resources and 
thus creating value from the service [26]. 
The way actors integrate resources and co-create value is 
by means of value co-creation behavior, and thus the 
“concrete representation of resource integration that assists 
in building knowledge about specific behaviors that 
customers engage in for co-creation of value” [27]. Value co-
creation behavior can be defined as customers’ participation 
in the value co-creation process, and as consisting of two 
higher order dimensions, participation behavior and 
citizenship behavior [28]. This research will focus on the 
subdimensions of participation behavior as this is more likely 
to appear when the client interacts with online support 
systems. This approach has been taken in previous studies 
with relation to e-shops [29]. There are four key elements to 
customer participation behavior. The first is information 
seeking, the effort to obtain or improve resources. The 
second is information sharing, third responsible behavior and 
fourth personal interaction, and thus the relationship between 
the customer and service provider [28]. While building an 
important foundation for understanding value co-creation 
behavior, it is recognized that it may not fully reflect the case 
of business to business customers [27][28]. This research 
will therefore examine this concept from a business client 
perspective. 
This research will draw on a recent framework proposed 
by [30], as it provides a view of the different stages of 
resource integration and it is proposed that customizations 
fits naturally into this framework. The first phase relates to 
an actor matching their resources and what they require with 
that of the offering organization [30]. This logically requires 
the actors to be aware of what the potential resources are that 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

may be of relevance. Matching primarily concerns 
interaction between the actor and the organization’s 
resources. One of the key aspects of resource integration 
therefore is for the client to be able to find the right resources 
for them from the offering organization that they can match 
and then integrate with their existing resources and thus 
create value.  
It is proposed here that customization mainly occurs 
during the matching phase and will assist in this process by 
making it easier for actors to match the available resources 
with their existing resources and specific requirements. This 
would then have a flow-on effect to the other two phases.  
Resourcing is the second phase in the [30] framework 
and focuses specifically on the integration of resources 
process. This phase importantly includes the removal of the 
barriers to resource integration [30]. In the context of this 
research, customization is proposed to assist in this phase by 
removing the barrier that may be created by customers 
perceiving a lack of relevance of services or relevant support 
material. The assessment of value by the actor themselves 
forms the main component of the third and final phase.  
The framework is highlighted in Figure 1 and 
conceptualizes the role of customization for value co-
creation. In brief, the user brings their existing resources, 
along with an understanding of the resources they require, to 
the offering system or organization. The customized offering 
of the organization then allows the user to utilize their value 
co-creation behaviors (information seeking, sharing and 
responsible behavior) to match the resources of they require 
and have to that being offered, utilize this resource 
(resourcing), perform a value assessment and thereby derive 
value from the service and use this to achieve their initial 
goals (value-in-use). This may then lead to greater 
satisfaction with the offering organization and other 
consequences. 
 
 
Figure 1. Framework 
 
III. 
FUTURE RESEARCH 
Value co-creation behavior, resource integration and 
customization literature and current approaches were 
reviewed to develop a possible framework that could be 
tested empirically in future research - to determine the 
validity of the framework generally, and specifically with 
relation to e-Government small business support. 
Future research will look at the case study of an 
Australian government department and specifically at small 
business. The data that will be used are from two surveys 
that have previously been conducted by the organization. 
The first is on general small business engagement and the 
second with relation to their specific small business support 
digital offerings. The two surveys contain discrete 
populations and will be analyzed separately to address 
different components of the research questions. Both 
surveys, however, do contain a variable pertaining to the 
customers appetite for customization. Whilst the two surveys 
were conducted for a different purpose, several questions 
from both surveys have been identified as variables of 
interest that can be used to investigate the research 
framework. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
This research seeks to understand e-Government small 
business support from the user perspective and how 
customization can be used to increase the value small 
businesses drive from these services. A value co-creation 
framework is used, with a specific focus on resource 
integration, as a way to frame a customized support service. 
This research forms basis for proposed future quantitative 
research. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] S. Holmes and D. Gupta, "Opening Aladdin’s cave: 
Unpacking the factors impacting on small businesses," in 
Small Business Conditions and Finance A. M. a. J. Simon, 
Ed., ed Sydney: Reserve Bank of Australia, 2015, pp. 37–56. 
[2] B. Distel and J. Becker, "All citizens are the same, aren’t 
they? – Developing an e-government user typology,"  vol. 
10428, ed. 2017, pp. 336-347. 
[3] Z. Rakićević, J. Omerbegović-Bijelović, and D. Lečić-
Cvetković, "A model for effective planning of SME support 
services," Evaluation and Program Planning, vol. 54, pp. 30-
40, 2016. 
[4] T. Cravo and C. Piza, "The impact of business-support 
services on firm performance: a meta-analysis," Small 
Business Economics, pp. 1-18, 2018. 
[5] K. F. Mole, M. Hart, S. Roper, and D. S. Saal, "Broader or 
Deeper? Exploring the Most Effective Intervention Profile for 
Public Small Business Support," Environment and Planning 
A, vol. 43, pp. 87-105, 2011. 
[6] S. Sawang, R. Parker, and D. Hine, "How Small Business 
Advisory Program Delivery Methods (Collective Learning, 
Tailored, and Practice‐Based Approaches) Affect Learning 
and Innovation," Journal of Small Business Management, vol. 
54, pp. 244-261, 2016. 
[7] J. Audet and E. St-Jean, "Factors affecting the use of public 
support services by sme owners: Evidence from a periphery 
region 
of 
Canada," 
Journal 
of 
Developmental 
Entrepreneurship, vol. 12, pp. 165-180, 2007. 
[8] N. K. Malhotra, "Information Load and Consumer Decision 
Making," Journal of Consumer Research, vol. 8, pp. 419-430, 
1982. 
[9] T.-P. Liang, H.-J. Lai, and Y.-C. Ku, "Personalized Content 
Recommendation 
and 
User 
Satisfaction: 
Theoretical 
Synthesis and Empirical Findings," Journal of Management 
Information Systems, vol. 23, pp. 45-70, 2006. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[10] V. Krishnaraju, S. Mathew, and V. Sugumaran, "Web 
personalization for user acceptance of technology: An 
empirical investigation of E-government services," A Journal 
of Research and Innovation, vol. 18, pp. 579-595, 2016. 
[11] Y. Ding and H. T. Keh, "A re-examination of service 
standardization versus customization from the consumer’s 
perspective," Journal of Services Marketing, vol. 30, pp. 16-
28, 2016. 
[12] M. Saunila, J. Ukko, and T. Rantala, "Value co-creation 
through digital service capabilities: the role of human 
factors," Information Technology & People, vol. 32, pp. 627-
645, 2019. 
[13] P. Kristensson, J. Matthing, and N. Johansson, "Key strategies 
for the successful involvement of customers in the co-creation 
of new technology-based services," International Journal of 
Service Industry Management, vol. 19, pp. 474-491, 2008. 
[14] E. N. Torres, P. Lugosi, M. Orlowski, and G. Ronzoni, 
"Consumer-led experience customization: a socio-spatial 
approach," Journal of Service Management, vol. 29, pp. 206-
229, 2018. 
[15] H. Alshibly and R. Chiong, "Customer empowerment: Does it 
influence electronic government success? A citizen-centric 
perspective," 
Electronic 
Commerce 
Research 
and 
Applications, vol. 14, pp. 393-404, 2015. 
[16] N. Löfberg and M. Åkesson, "Creating a service platform – 
how to co-create value in a remote service context," Journal 
of Business & Industrial Marketing, vol. 33, pp. 768-780, 
2018. 
[17] J. Petri and F. Jacob, "The customer as enabler of value (co)-
creation in the solution business," Industrial Marketing 
Management, vol. 56, pp. 63-72, 2016. 
[18] M. Mustak, E. Jaakkola, and A. Halinen, "Customer 
participation and value creation: a systematic review and 
research implications," Managing Service Quality: An 
International Journal, vol. 23, pp. 341-359, 2013. 
[19] M. Scott, W. Delone, and W. Golden, "Measuring 
eGovernment success: a public value approach," European 
Journal of Information Systems, vol. 25, pp. 187-208, 2016. 
[20] M. Paredes, J. Barrutia, and C. Echebarria, "Resources for 
value co-creation in e-commerce: a review," Electronic 
Commerce Research, vol. 14, pp. 111-136, 2014. 
[21] C. Park, H. Lee, J. Jun, and T. Lee, "Two-sided effects of 
customer participation: roles of relationships and social-
interaction values in social services," Service Business, vol. 
12, pp. 621-640, 2018. 
[22] K. Ranjan and S. Read, "Value co-creation: concept and 
measurement," Official Publication of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, vol. 44, pp. 290-315, 2016. 
[23] D. T. de Oliveira and M. N. Cortimiglia, "Value co-creation 
in web-based multisided platforms: A conceptual framework 
and implications for business model design," Business 
Horizons, vol. 60, pp. 747-758, 2017. 
[24] M. Kleinaltenkamp, R. J. Brodie, P. Frow, T. Hughes, L. D. 
Peters, and H. Woratschek, "Resource integration," Marketing 
Theory, vol. 12, pp. 201-205, 2012. 
[25] S. Hibbert, H. Winklhofer, and M. S. Temerak, "Customers as 
Resource Integrators: Toward a Model of Customer 
Learning," Journal of Service Research, vol. 15, pp. 247-261, 
2012. 
[26] S. Iyanna, "Insights Into Consumer Resource Integration And 
Value Co-Creation Process," Journal of Applied Business 
Research, vol. 32, pp. 717-728, 2016. 
[27] G. Laud and I. O. Karpen, "Value co-creation behaviour – 
role of embeddedness and outcome considerations," Journal 
of Service Theory and Practice, vol. 27, pp. 778-807, 2017. 
[28] Y. Yi and T. Gong, "Customer value co-creation behavior: 
Scale development and validation," Journal of Business 
Research, vol. 66, pp. 1279-1284, 2013. 
[29] T. Fotiadis, "Customer Participation, e-Service Quality, 
Satisfaction: (e)Service Dominant Logic Trinity," Journal of 
Promotion Management, vol. 25, pp. 394-418, 2019. 
[30] A. Caridà, B. Edvardsson, and M. Colurcio, "Conceptualizing 
resource integration as an embedded process: Matching, 
resourcing and valuing," Marketing Theory, vol. 19, pp. 65-
84, 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

