Social Networking Service for Helping Each Other in the Neighborhoods
A User Experience Approach to the Elderly People
Mariana Alejandra Varela
Graduate School of Media and Governance
Keio University
Fujisawa, Kanagawa. Japan
mariana@sfc.keio.ac.jp
Katsuhiko Ogawa
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies
Keio University
Fujisawa, Kanagawa. Japan
ogw@sfc.keio.ac.jp
Abstract— This research focuses on the use of Social Network 
Services among the elderly people in Japan, as a solution that 
could  help  to  bridge  the  digital  divide  in  that  country.  It 
proposes  the  creation  of  a  Social  Network  Service  for 
neighborhoods, in which the relationship among the young and 
the old is promoted. Existing design and usability guidelines 
for senior citizens and culture-related issues are highly taken 
into consideration. User-centered design method is applied to 
tailor the  tool  for testing. This  paper hopes  to  bring  new 
insights about how elderly people use Social Network Services 
in  Japan  and  the usability challenges that they face  when 
trying to use it.
Keywords— Social Network Service; Elderly People; Usability; 
Japan.
I.
 INTRODUCTION 
The present paper addresses the problem of the aging 
population as a starting point. This situation affects many 
countries in the world, but in the case of Japan, is relevant 
how the population over 65 years old has been increasing 
year after year. According to the official statistics [1], will 
become about 30% of the population by 2030. 
Although Japan has always been famous worldwide for 
its great scientific and technologic advances, the statistics 
show that there is a significant technologic gap between 
generations. Observing the numbers [2], even though 78% of 
the population over 60 years old in Japan have a computer, 
only 23.5% say that use it very often. It is encouraging that 
over 80% of them believe that the use of Internet is very 
important. In contrast, in United States of America [3] only 
53% of  citizens over 65 years old use Internet or email, but 
70%  of  them  use  it  on  a  daily  basis.  This  remarkable 
difference shows that having a computer at hand does not 
necessarily mean its usage.
This papers aims to find a way how the elderly people 
can  integrate  better  to  the  Information  Communication 
Technologies. The main Hypothesis is: It possible through 
the  use  of  social  networks  between  older adults  and 
younger generations to bridge the technologic gap that 
separates each other. It is vital to learn how to design the 
best  user  experience,  how  to  successfully  improve  their 
everyday lifestyle and how to introduce them in a better way 
to the digital world. This is a topic that still has not been 
investigated in full as a possible solution to the digital divide 
among the senior citizens in Japan.
Some existing services, statistics and researches helped 
to discover the current state of art. According to the statistics 
[2], only 7.7%, of the seniors online in Japan use Social 
Network Services like Facebook, Mixi or Twitter. Among 
those who use it, they prefer to use Social Networks that 
include all range of age [4][5] and not those specially made 
or designed for the seniors (Slownet, Senior Wings, Senior 
Navi, Senior Com, among others reviewed for this paper). 
The  contrast  with  the  elderly  people  in  America  is 
significant, in which among the active population of senior 
Internet  users,  34%  of  them  use  Social  Networks  like 
Facebook.
The project “Bring Dich Ein!” in Germany [6], which 
explores the possibility of the elderly people to post in 
Internet  requests  to  get  favors  done  around  the 
neighborhood, was a great inspiration to recreate a similar 
situation in Japan, specially the aspect of geographically 
limited/closed community and collaboration among them. 
Parallel to our research with Japanese people, we found 
many coincidences as the concern for privacy information 
security and the need of an intuitive design and navigation 
system. Other similar online services (for example, Ayoudo, 
Taskrabbit and Kutoto) were also reviewed even they are 
not specially aimed at senior citizens. 
Regarding the use of Internet in general, accessibility 
barriers that the elderly people go through certainly couldn't 
be overlooked in this research, specially those related to 
Independency (to be able to use on their own), Inclusiveness 
(to be able to use the same technologies as young people) 
and Terminology (vocabulary easy to understand) [5]. This 
last barrier, related closely to vocabulary, represented a great 
concern among the elderly Japanese Internet users.
The  paper  structure  is  explained  as  follows:  First, 
Section II describes the main point that this projects wants 
to  aim.  Secondly,  the  idea  generation  and  selection 
processes explain the diverse phases that the project went 
through until now (still ongoing). The background research 
accounts for not only the bibliographical research but also 
the field observation and informal interviews. A complete 
description of the created tool is made, with some examples 
of scenarios of  use is presented in Section IV. Section V 
164
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

reports on how the experience with the users was made. The 
results and some future work are explained in Section VI.
II.
CONCEPT
For  setting  the  boundaries  of  this  research,  after 
researching about online and offline communities, it was 
decided to make the project in a closed environment: the 
neighborhood. One can see that the neighborhood is one of 
the most basic forms of communities, preceded by Family 
environment and School/Work environment. Working with 
a small scale was vital to manage this research, given our 
resources. Also, it was decided that we would aim at only 
those  persons  who  actually  used  or  wanted  to  use 
computers, Internet  or  technology, as it  was not of our 
interest to find a way to change the attitude of people who 
are not concerned in overcoming the digital divide.  
By  talking  to  the  elderly  people,  some  initial 
assumptions were made: First, one of the reasons why some 
people are not fond of talking to strangers online is because 
they have never met face to face in real life and they do not 
share any bond or reason for interacting. But, if that strange 
person online is somebody they might have seen around in 
the  neighborhood,  they  may  feel  more  comfortable  and 
talkative. Elderly people are more likely to stay at home 
rather than young people, so they may know the faces of the 
people of the neighborhood. 
Second, we found that they feel a little ashamed to ask 
basic questions related to the technologies, ashamed of not 
knowing.
By questioning how combining the social environment 
of the elderly people and their difficulties to for using the 
technology, we tried to create a nexus where they can meet 
and eventually settle a solution. For this, we created a two-
axis framework: First, an ethnographical study, and second, 
review and test the design guidelines specifically made to 
this type of user  but applied to this kind of situation and in 
this country. The design guidelines help as a starting point 
of what expectations should be considered for designing for 
the elderly people, and,  additionally, we want to discover 
the  cultural  and  language  issues  that  attain  only  to  the 
Japanese elderly people.
III.
IDEA GENERATION 
A.
Idea generation 
The  idea  generation  process  was  inspired  by  Bill 
Buxton's book about User Experiences [7]. It is advised that 
many ideas should be considered at first; for later choosing 
the best among them. The complete process of deciding 
which was the best idea to pursue took around one year, 
meanwhile bibliographic and field research was made.
There were 7 main ideas generated for the kick-off of this 
project, always focusing on the elderly people (email service, 
e-commerce  system,  social  network  service,  dating  site, 
search engine, online dictionary and online learning site), 
that  were  considered,  compared,  refined  and  some 
discharged. Two of them were continued for testing and 
discussion, and later on, the current project was decided. 
We found that without a clear motivation it was going to 
be hard to test if they could immerse in the Internet and 
Social  Network  Services  like  young  people  do.  We 
discharged the idea of a service similar to Facebook for the 
elderly people (they were not interested and current services 
like that do not show impressive results) and other kind of 
services like a Dating Site did not include as much users as 
we hoped to test. On a final term, it was decided to follow 
the concept of weak bonded generations and the emergence 
of a tool that works as a node to connect people, rediscover 
the neighbors and harvest a solidarity spirit among them. (see 
Section IV for a full description on the idea).
B.
Background research 
Some papers and publications were taken into account 
for defining the concept and helped to outline the state of art. 
However, as a reference to design the User Experience, we 
considered the usability guidelines for the elderly people that 
exist up to now. The basis are taken from the Handbook of 
Human Factors and Ergonomics Methods [8], which gives a 
wide foundation to start working on, and the Web Content 
Accessibility Guidelines (WCAG) created by W3C [9]. 
Regarding  the  products  and  services  focused  on  the 
senior citizens, Docomo's RakuRaku Smartphone [10] was 
examined, as much as the books by ”Compyuta Obaachan” 
(Computer grandma), who explains easily step by step how 
to operate devices or websites (a special publication about 
Facebook was reviewed) [11]. A few catalogs and shops 
were visited, in order to survey which are the physical needs 
that they suffer, and what they choose in order to make their 
everyday life easier. Design shape, ergonomics, materials, 
colors and patterns were analyzed. Needless to say, a wide 
range  of  websites  and  phone/tablet  applications  were 
searched online regularly, with special emphasize on those 
that are a channel for communication among users.
Up to now, three interviews were made and recorded 
with the Owner and Director of “Mamion”, Mrs. Mori, who 
runs a small school in the center of Tokyo that teaches basic 
informatics  specially  to  the  elderly  people. Long  and 
substantial discussions about the senior user were made with 
Mrs. Mori, who gave us her professional point of view and 
advice about which are their needs, the concepts that they 
have difficulties with, and what brings them to learn how to 
use the computer. She also helped recruiting users for the 
tests (See section V for a the Testing description)
Above  all, and  constantly,  observation of the  elderly 
people  was made in  public places  like parks, cafeterias, 
shopping malls, trains and post offices. In addition to taking 
pictures,  also  was  noted  how  they  communicate,  body 
language, how long they take to make simple and difficult 
tasks (for example, from operating an elevator control to 
recharging credit in train card or withdrawing money from 
an ATM machine). 
165
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

IV.
SYSTEM EXPLANATION
The  concrete  tool  that  is  being  created,  tested  and 
analyzed  is  an Internet-based  Closed  Social  Network 
Service for local communities, with a very strong focus on 
the senior citizens, but  where everybody can participate 
regardless of the age. As a reminder, our main hypothesis is 
that if old and young people can get together in one virtual 
space,  they  can  enhance  the  communication  and  try  to 
bridge the gap among young and old generations.
The main boundary is that only people from a certain 
area (neighborhood) can participate, after going through a 
registration system for verifying the account. Setting this 
boundary so closed is vital to gain trust among the users and 
not to fear that outsiders may interfere with their privacy.
Their main motivation expected for participating on the 
website is helping each other (neighbors helping neighbors) 
with  their  needs,  doing  small  favors  or  just  lending  a 
helping hand, where communication and cooperation are the 
main  keywords  for  making  it  work,  as  money  is  not 
involved. 
The system is called “Manada”. It means in Spanish 
“Large group of animals that move and do things together”, 
Even though the word itself has no meaning in Japanese, it 
was important to use something easy to pronounce but with 
a meaning behind that represents the project somehow.
The starting point for conceiving this concept revolves 
among the idea that young people (younger than 45 years) 
may  already  know  Social  Network  Services  (Facebook, 
Twitter among others) and are familiar with this kind of 
communication technologies, but older people still do not. 
For some of them, it may be difficult to understand the 
concept  of  an  online  Social  Network  because  the 
relationships  “face  to  face”  are  their  main  way  of 
communication.
This is a very simple scenario of use to illustrate the 
idea: User A is an old lady who needs some help for a 
certain  task  that  she  can  not  do  because  of  a  physical 
difficulty. She posts the message asking for help (This posts 
are called “Onegai” , which means “a favor” in Japanese) 
and waits for a reply. User B is a neighbor who lives very 
close and sees the “Onegai” posted in the Social Network. 
He  replies  and  helps  her.  Another  example  shows  that 
Seniors can also help, and not only receive help: User C is a 
young housewife who posts an  “Onegai” on the Social 
Network Service, and it happens to be something that User 
D, even though being much older, can do perfectly. He 
replies and feels good knowing that he can still be useful for 
someone. 
Next, it was important to start making the first tests to 
evaluate the concept and check if the communication and 
support across or inter generations is possible through the 
Social  Network  Service,  creating  bonds  within  the 
community, and build a theory based on that findings. As 
many as possible existing design guidelines are being tested 
and put in practice, in order to verify their validity or not 
among the Japanese users. 
V.
TESTING EXPERIENCE
According  to  the  user-centered  design  [12],  it  is 
important to include the final user as soon as possible in the 
design process, in order to analyze their needs and hear their 
opinion. That is the reason why, after making the first design 
attempts, it was vital to meet some users, hear their opinion, 
ideas and test their abilities with our tool. 
A.
Users
A basic Persona was created to serve as a guide for 
finding subjects for the test:
1.
Be 65 years or older;
2.
Be an active user of the computer, without any 
education restriction, and
3.
Japanese native.
B.
Testing
The testing was conducted in September and October 
2013 in Tokyo and  Kanagawa,  Japan. Three users were 
students of the Informatics School “Mamion” and the other 
two  subjects  were  contacted  separately  (Fig.  1).  Some 
testings took place at the school and some at the house the 
users for their comfort.
The users at the School were two men (69 and 83 years 
old) and a woman (73 years old). They were active students 
of the School and were taking courses because of different 
reasons: want to keep updated (still feeling young), want to 
fight boredom, or communicate with family abroad. The 
other pair of users (Male, 75 years old and Woman 74 years 
old) did not go to class but learned alone and with the help of 
their families. 
Before starting the test, they were asked to complete a 
form with some personal information (name and age), and 
multiple choice questions. On the first question they had to 
answer what terminal they could use (Personal Computer, 
smartphone or iPad) because we were concerned  to know if 
this kind of project was worth to be applied for mobile 
terminals. We also asked about the use of Internet, because 
we  were  interested  in  discovering  if  they  used  it  for 
socializing and communicating with others or if they did 
other activities. The next question was about exactly which 
Social Network Services they used (if any), mentioning the 
most famous in Japan (Facebook, Twitter, Mixi, Line). Also, 
it was vital to know who they talked to through internet, 
mentioning from the closest friends and family to unknown 
people. Next part was about the knowledge they had about 
words and icons: They had to check the words they knew 
about  the  Internet  vocabulary.  Some  of  them  were 
“Download” or “Home”, but also other words that appear in 
the Japanese version of Facebook, for example “Share” or 
“Activity log”.  Also, we asked them to write the meaning of 
seven icons that are ordinarily used online and offline, for 
example, “telephone”, “mail”, “comment”, “print”, “delete”, 
“edit” and “accept”. Lastly, we asked how they came over 
the  difficulties  they  find  in  Internet,  if  they  turned  to 
166
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

someone (and who) or if they solve it themselves (and how). 
This questions were key to lay a ground and better interpret 
their actions during the testing.
They were asked to read a short explanation of what was 
the test about and how it was going to be conducted. On the 
last page, it was detailed what they had to do: “Imagine that 
you are Mr/Mrs Akai, and you have just bought a new TV.  
You have no idea how to connect the cables, so you use  
Manada Social Network Service to ask for help to your 
neighbors and see if someone has time to help you”. Three 
pictures were shown to help them to imagine the situation: A 
photo of a new TV, a photo of an instruction sheet, and 
finally an old person scratching his head with a lost look. 
This set of pictures was on sight all the time, as a reminder of 
what they had to do.
Many doubts were cleared before staring and, in order to 
to  follow  the  Think  Aloud  technique  [13],  they  were 
encouraged to say aloud about what they were thinking about 
while doing the test. All  the  sessions  were recorded  by 
camera.
The  testing  was  made  using  the  technique  of  paper 
prototypes (Fig. 2) [14]. The prototypes were made using 
Adobe Illustrator and had the appearance of a high definition 
wireframe.
Figure 2: Paper Prototypes
All the text written was readable text (not dummy test) 
in Black color 14pt font. Buttons were colored boxes of 
rounded borders with the text in bold. Each part of the 
website was represented with a piece of printed paper. The 
only part that was always visible was the Internet Explorer 
bar and the Website's head menu. The width of the paper 
“screen” was of around 25 cm. They touched with a finger 
the buttons to imitate the mouse click.
Each  test  lasted  around  20-30  minutes  with  each 
participant. It was intended to make it short in order not to 
exhaust the mental concentration of the individuals.
All of them completed the task (to post an “Onegai” on 
Manada) on the expected time satisfactory and were relieved 
to hear that they did everything correctly, even though it was 
informed to them that it was fine to fail. The wrapping up 
was followed by some oral questions regarding what they 
think  about  the  concept,  if  they  would  use  the  Social 
Network Service and finally if they felt that it was easy or 
hard to use. 
VI.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
1) According to the questionnaire answers, they were 
not familiar with the use of Social Network Services in 
general; so, they did not select any. Also, they indicated that 
they communicate only with friends and family, what proves 
right our initial assumption that they do not talk to strangers. 
As  expected  because  their  lack  of  knowledge  in Social 
Networks, words like “Share” and “Update” were also new 
for them (The Japanese equivalent was used for the testing), 
as the results with the icons that are related to posting and 
editing comments. Regarding the difficulties in using the 
Internet, they seem not very keen on asking for help, they 
prefer to find the answers alone searching online.
2) When explaining the task, it was very useful to show 
pictures to help them imagine the situation. Visual aids were 
important and it was vital to take the time to explain the 
same  thing  several  times  as  they  forgot  or  could  not 
understand it at the first attempt. This is something that we 
will keep on using in the future testing.
3) They mentioned on the closing talk that they felt it 
was still difficult to understand how the system worked, 
even though they could read very clearly all the texts. There 
were  some  doubts  about  the  button's  labels  and  titles, 
specifically when they had to manage their “Onegai” they 
did not understand whether the  “Onegai”  was finished or 
not once they posted. In other words, they could not grasp 
the dynamics of an Social Network Service completely.
4) The majority of them thought that this kind of service 
would be very useful and would like to try it “in real life” 
but they fear that not many elderly people are familiar with 
the computer, even themselves feel a big insecurity when 
facing the possibility of having the ability to use it or not.
Regarding the Usability functionalities that are being 
affected in this research, so far the Learnability factor is the 
one that is being more compromised. Users not only have to 
learn how to use the website but also understand a new 
concept which is how a Social  Network Service works. 
Additionally,  because  of  their  age  and  lack  of  english 
education in their school days, they have serious difficulties 
understanding  the  Internet  Vocabulary,  which  consists 
mainly  in  English  words  written  in  Katakana:  a  sound 
transcription of foreign words that do not have an equivalent 
in  Japanese  language.  Also  the  Memorability factor  is 
affecting due to the use of foreign words, given that they 
have to learn by heart not only what action is expected after 
clicking a certain word but also not being able to associate 
that word to any known synonym in their own language. 
Keeping in mind the fact memory decline is normal among 
senior citizens, this represents a double challenge.
The next step in this work in progress is to make a new 
design iteration to solve the difficulties presented during the 
test. An extra focus will be made on the labeling, as many 
common vocabulary was avoided because japanese elderly 
people may not be familiar with english words.  The total 
elimination  of  Katakana  words  is  impossible,  but  better 
suitable  synonyms  should  be  implemented.  This was  an 
obstacle expected to arise, so is the difficulty that it presents.
Moreover, it is necessary to keep on working on the 
interface, in order to put it in a simpler and friendlier way, 
expecting to make them feel that they have the ability and 
confidence to use it.
167
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Also,  with  this  test,  the  paper  prototype  phase  is 
considered finished to move on to an electronic interface to 
be tested on the computer. One of the subjects pointed out 
that if the test was made on the computer it “would not be so 
easy”; so, we are looking forward to test on a digital device 
in the next design iteration with at least 15 users, rising the 
prototype fidelity and adjusting even more the design.
REFERENCES
[1]
Ministry of Internal Affair and Communications. Statistics 
Bureau,  Director-General  for  Policy  Planing  &  Statistical 
Research Training Institute of  Japan, Statistical Handbook of 
Japan, 2012, Retrieved on January 21st 2014  from
 http://www.stat.go.jp/english/data/handbook/c02cont.htm
[2]  GF Corporation. Report No.0083000067  Investigation Related 
to the Use of Internet Among the Elderly, 2013, Retrieved on 
January 21st 2014 from http://reposen.jp/3530/13/83.html.
[3]    K. Zickuhr and M. Madden. Older adults and internet use. 
Pew Internet & American Life Project, 2012, Retrieved on 
January
 
21st 
2014
 
from 
http://www.pewinternet.org/Reports/2012/Older-adults-and-
internet-use/Summary-of-findings.aspx. 
[4]    L. Gibson, W. Moncur, P. Forbes, J. Arnott, C. Martin and A. 
Bhachu. Designing Social Networking Sites for Older Adults, 
Proceedings  of  the  24th  BCS  Interaction  Specialist  Group 
Conference (BCS ’10). British Computer Society, Swinton, 
2010.
[5]    S. Sayago and J. Blat. About the relevance of Accessibility 
Barriers in the Everyday Interactions of Older People with the 
Web, Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibility (W4A) ACM, 2009, pp. 104-
113. 
[6]    P. Koene, F. Köbler, S. Esch, J. Leimeister and H. Krcmar, 
Design  and  evaluation  of  a  service-oriented  collaborative 
consumption platform for the elderly, Proceeding of CHI EA 
'12  CHI  '12  Extended  Abstracts  on  Human  Factors  in 
Computing Systems, ACM, 2012, pp. 2537-2542 
[7] 
 B. Buxton, S. Carpendale, N. Marquardt and S. Greenberg, 
Sketching  Users  Experiences  –  The  workbook,  1st  ed., 
Waltham, MA: Morgan Kaufman, 2012, pp.9-12. 
[8] 
 G. Salvendy, Handbook of Human Factors and Ergonomics, 
4th ed., Hoboken, NJ: Wiley, 2012, pp. 1442 – 1465.
[9] B. Caldwell, M. Cooper, L. Guarino Reid and G. Vanderheiden, 
Web Content Accessibility Guidelines 2.0 (2008), Retrieved on 
January 21st 2014 from: http://www.w3.org/TR/WCAG20/.
[10]   Fujitsu  Corporation.  Fujitsu  Introduces  Raku-Raku 
Smartphone  2,  Tokyo,  August  14,   2013.  Retrieved  on 
February
 
3rd 
2014
 
from: 
http://www.fujitsu.com/global/news/pr/archives/month/2013/2
0130814-02.html 
[11] 
 K. Okawa, Let's learn with Computer Grandma How to 
Create Own Digital Life History in Facebook, 1st Ed., Tokyo: 
ASCII, 2012.
[12] 
 J.  J.  Garret,  The  Elements  of  User  Experience:  User-
Centered Design for the Web, 2nd Ed., Peachpit Press, 2002, 
pp. 19-24.
[13]  J. Preece, Y. Rogers, H. Sharp, D. Benyon, S. Holland and T. 
Carrey,  Human-Computer  Interaction,  1st  ed.,  England: 
Pearson Addison Wesley, 1994, pp.621-626.
[14] 
 C. Snyder, Paper Prototyping: The Fast and Easy Way to 
Design and Refine User Interfaces. 1st ed. San Francisco, CA: 
Morgan Kaufmann, 2003.
Figure 1. Users taking the test in Tokyo and Kanagawa
168
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

