Design and Evaluation of a “Play Place Sound” service 
that Changes the Image of a City by Music and Sound 
 
Saori Aisawa 
Graduate School of Media and Governance 
Keio University 
Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: saoaiai@sfc.keio.ac.jp 
Katsuhiko Ogawa 
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies 
Keio University 
Kanagawa, Japan 
e-mail: ogw@sfc.keio.ac.jp
 
 
Abstract—According to The Image of the City, which is one of 
the most representative works of Kevin Lynch, paths, edges, 
districts, nodes, and landmarks are important elements that 
constitute the image of a city. Actually, these elements are very 
strong and seem to influence not only the image of the city but 
also our actions. Therefore, we propose to add sounds to a city 
experience as new elements could make a great impact that can 
change the existing strong image of the city. We call this 
“change” the city. We developed a Web service called Play 
Place Sound (PPS). By using this service, users can hear the 
sounds plotted for an arbitrary spot on the website 
automatically when they approach that spot in the real world. 
Then, we performed an experiment to define the differences in 
the cognitive map between walking in the city while using the 
PPS or without it. A cognitive map is the collection of beliefs, 
experiences, and information that a person uses to orient 
himself or herself within an environment such as a social 
setting. As a result, when people use the PPS, the cognitive map 
is more detailed. Furthermore, when the content increases 
significantly, edges tend to appear in the cognitive map. 
Keywords-sound scape; cognitive map; urban design. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
In Japan, there are several places where we can see 
people who walk, jog, or run alone while listening to music 
on their portable music players or mobile phones. However, 
it is a fact that jogging in the same way while listening to the 
same music becomes boring as time passes, and there is no 
novelty. We feel it is regrettable that the act becomes usual 
and boring though we come in touch with the real city. 
In The Image of the City [1], which is one of the most 
representative works of Kevin Lynch, he proposed that the 
role of the scenery of the city is to be seen, memorized, and 
please people. With that in mind, to consider the 
configuration of the image of the city, he performed an 
experiment with a cognitive map in three cities of the United 
States of America—Boston, Jersey City, and Los Angeles. 
Then, he stated that the following are important elements to 
configure the image of the city: paths, districts, nodes, edges, 
and landmarks, and these make for a study about whether he 
can change the appearance of the city and its importance. 
After this, in Japan, there have been several studies to 
consider spatial awareness through the cognitive map, and 
there are many studies about the association of sound and 
image, and their point of interest is also different  [2]-[5]. In 
addition, studies about harmonization of the image and 
music have done [6][7]. However, there are few studies that 
consider changing the existing cognitive map by adding new 
elements to the city.  
Therefore, using a new form of art that redesigns the city 
by sounds, we propose a Play Place Sound (PPS) service for 
individuals to enjoy the experience of the city. Instead of 
simply enjoying music, the PPS is a service for enjoying the 
sounds that can be heard only at a particular location. So, the 
user can listen to the sounds attached to a certain location 
only by going to the place. Information services that display 
a message according to the location have already been used 
in art museums, but there are few studies that add a sound to 
a particular place. 
This way, by adding sounds as a new fascination of the 
city, we examine how this novel factor can affect the existing 
image of the city and what are the changes as represented by 
the cognitive map.  
This paper describes the concept of PPS and service 
design. Then, we pick the peripheral port of Yokohama as 
the sample spot and consider the relationship of the pasted 
sound content and location through some samples. Section 2 
describes the concept of the PPS, and in Sections 3 and 4, we 
describe our experiments. Finally, we present the conclusion 
and future work in Section 5. 
II. 
THE CONCEPT OF “PLAY PLACE SOUND (PPS)” 
Like The Image of the City, when we undertake city 
planning or investigate the existing city, especially in the 
architectural field, paths, buildings, and open spaces like 
parks are emphasized as elements of the city. The same may 
be said when we consider what kind of impression of the city 
people have. Actually, these elements are very strong, and 
our actions and impressions regarding the city are strongly 
influenced by them. As a result, our actions and images tend 
to be limited or patterned. Therefore, by adding sounds as a 
new element, we want to change the city and its rules that 
have been made by the existing physical environment such 
as paths and buildings. 
A. Usage of the PPS 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

PPS is intended to be used with smartphone. When the 
user approaches a spot, he or she can hear the installed sound 
through the earphone connected to his or her smartphone. 
Figure 1 shows an example of the use of PPS. In this 
sample, users who are jogging on the same route every day 
follow this routine with PPS. With regard to the relation 
between the area and sound, four sounds are assigned to each 
area, from area 1 to area 4, and the user can hear sounds in 
each area. This way, we expect that the user will feel like 
going on a different street from his or her usual routine or 
spend more time jogging. 
Figure 1.   How to Use the PPS 
B. System Configuration 
The mechanism that should be prepared in advance is a 
system to plot sound files on the map. This system acquires 
the positional information of a place, plots sounds using 
JavaScript, and plays these sounds in HTML5.  The flow 
chart of this system is shown in Figure 2. 
Figure 2.  Flow Chart of PPS 
This system sends the present location of a user, as 
detected by the Global Positioning System (GPS) function of 
the cellphone, to the Web server. When the user approaches 
the place where the sound has been plotted, it is played 
automatically.  
III. 
PRELIMINARY EXPERIMENT 
In proposing the PPS, it is necessary to consider what 
kind of sound is suitable for what kind of place. We 
performed a pre-experiment as the first step. In this 
experiment, we prepared sounds used in a movie as content 
and posted these sounds along two plot patterns. Then, we 
investigated how the PPS affects our behavior and what kind 
of impression was provided when we walk in these areas. 
Three people were the subjects of the first pattern and five of 
the second pattern. Both areas were near the port of 
Yokohama. This area is called Minato Mirai and is being 
continuously developed since 1965. We show the famous 
view of Minato Mirai in Figure 3. 
Figure 3.  Image of Minato Mirai 
There are not only offices of various companies, but also 
amusement facilities such as an amusement park, concert 
①Start the PPS when you start jogging.
Play
Place
Sound
 
▪Flow Chart
Start
Get All Locations
of Content[i] (i=1...n)
Sence User Location
Calculate Distance[i]
Distance[i] = User Location - Content[i] Location
Distance[i] < 10
Play Content[i]
i = i + 1
Finish?
End
Yes
No
No
Yes
 
 
START
②When users are jogging on the
route showed in the figure, they can
hear the sound assigned to each area
they pass through.
music1
area2
music2
area3
music3
area4
music4
Jogging Route
area 1
 
area2
area4
③The sound of a fun atmosphere
is played in area 2 where there is
a lot of pedestrian traffic and it is
lively.  The sound of a refreshing
song is played in area 3 where there
is a park with green vegetation.
Users can enjoy the sound assigned
to each area.
 
④User will feel like going on a different
street from his or her usual routine(1) or taking
a detour(2) or spend more time jogging(3).
(2)
(1)
(3)
 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

hall, hotels, and a large shopping mall. Hence, this area is 
one of the most famous sights of Japan. 
A. Sound Content 
Before conducting this experiment, we considered the 
sound content. In this experiment, we took up three kinds of 
sound— music, sound effect, and dialog—used in the movie 
Star Wars. Michel Chion carefully considered what sound to 
be used in a movie, and we refer to his consideration [8][9]. 
Generally, a movie is being edited a lot, even if it is a live-
action movie. Thereby, the producer can convey something 
that cannot be represented only through pictures, such as the 
atmosphere of scenes, feelings of characters, or clues. This 
research is intended for an experience in real space. We 
consider that the way of sound arranging in a movie is 
similar to the way of sound arranging in this study. A movie 
director removes unnecessary noise and adds various sounds.  
First, the music we used as content included not only 
famous theme songs such as “Main Title” or “Imperial 
March” but also various music used in the movie as 
Background Music (BGM). Then, for sound effects, for 
example, the subjects could hear the sounds of warriors 
wielding their weapons, ray guns, robots waking up, and so 
on. Each of these sounds had a characteristic feature, and we 
could understand the sound source just by hearing the sound. 
Finally, dialog could be heard through the voices of 
characters. Humans and many other characters, including 
robots and aliens, appear in Star Wars. In many cases voices 
are edited, and they resemble a sound effect. However, the 
primary difference between dialog and sound effects is that 
there are meanings to the former. For example, in this 
experiment, we used a line of one of the main characters, C-
3PO: “Help!!!”. In this case, it was not only an electronic 
sound but also meant that someone is asking for help. 
B. Plot Pattern 
As a sample of the change in Minato Mirai area by 
sounds, we proposed two plot patterns of content. We show 
the map plotted with sound along pattern 1 in Figure 4. 
Figure 4.  Plotting Map of Pattern 1 
In pattern 1, we plotted sounds along the street in the 
order of their use in the movie and kept the story arbitrary for 
the user. In this sample, the user started from Sakuragicho 
Station and walked to the Yamashita Park via the Canal Park, 
Nippon Boulevard, and Osanbashi (international passenger 
terminal). 
For the second pattern, we plotted sounds, in particular 
sound effects and dialog that were not limited by existing 
ways. In this design example, we designated two areas, a 
good area with a focus on the hero and a bad area with a 
focus on the old enemy. For example, sounds that are used in 
the hero's hometown scene were plotted near the center of 
the good area, the theme music of the evil side was plotted 
near the center of bad area, and the sounds used in the battle 
scene were plotted along the contact surface of each area. 
We expected that the user will feel, “What kind of sound will 
I hear if I go to that place?” We show the map plotted with 
sound content along pattern 2 in Figure 5. 
Figure 5.  Plotting Map of Pattern 2 
C. Result of the Preliminary Experiment 
In pattern 1, although we supposed that users will walk 
down the street with plotted sounds, we wanted to give 
arbitrary instructions using only automatic sounds. Then, we 
started the experiment without notifying users which street 
has the plotted sounds. As a result, three users who 
completed this experiment could not find the street to go to 
and had lost their way. Obviously, since six users were 
scheduled to participate in this experiment, we were stopped 
unavoidably. This experiment underlined that it is too 
difficult to guide a person to the intended way only by 
sounds. Of course, to prevent users from getting lost, we 
plotted sounds at about 10m intervals in a straight line and at 
about 20m intervals at the corner of the street. Yet, there 
were many spots where we could not hear anything, and 
hence, the user became anxious each time. As a result of 
walking here and there, users got lost. In addition, in this 
case, PPS became a tool to find a specific way desperately 
rather than making town walking fun. 
Sakuragicho STA.
Alliance Military
Imperial Military
BATTLE OF YAVIN
Millenium Falcon
LIGHTSABERS
DEATH STAR
DARTH VADER
FORCE
FORCE
Jedi
 
Alliance Military
Imperial Military
BATTLE OF YAVIN
Millenium Falcon
LIGHTSABERS
DEATH STAR
DARTH VADER
FORCE
FORCE
Jedi
Sakuragicho STA.
...Music
...Sound Effect, Voice
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
GOAL
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Similarly, in the second pattern, users walked around the 
area with plotted sounds. In this pattern, we informed where 
the sounds were plotted in advance, and it took about 15 
minutes per person. The following is a list of opinions about 
this experiment. 
Postive Opinions 
• 
A sound of the breathing of Darth Vader is similar to 
that of snorkeling. I associated it with a snorkeling 
partly because the area was close to the sea. 
• 
When I heard the voice say, “Run Luke, run,” I was 
on the lawn, and I wanted to run unintentionally. 
• 
As for me, it was interesting because I didn’t know 
what kind of sound I would hear next. 
Negative Opinions 
• 
There is not much association with this place. It may 
be because the sphere of Star Wars is space. 
• 
I felt uneasy when I heard nothing. 
• 
I didn’t know what kind of rule the sounds were 
plotted along. 
• 
These sounds were boring for me because I am not 
very knowledgeable about Star Wars. 
 
With this result in mind, we considered a new plot 
pattern for the next experiment. Specifically, we thought that 
we would inform subjects of the way to walk in advance and 
use content of a longer duration. 
IV. 
MAIN EXPERIMENT 
In keeping with the result of the pre-experiment, we 
performed the main experiment. The aim of this experiment 
was to define the difference between walking the city as 
usual and while using the PPS. In this experiment, we used a 
cognitive map as a method, because it was used by Lynch, as 
well to investigate the spatial perception of the city. 
The plot pattern of this experiment was designed to 
address the negative opinions of the pre-experiment. First, 
about the relation between sounds and the place, the user had 
obtained information from both eyes and ears. When the 
hearing information deviated from the sight information, this 
system might have become boring. Next, in order to remove 
uneasiness, we plotted sounds along a predetermined street, 
similar to the first pattern of the pre-experiment, and 
informed users of this street. About the content, when we 
used film music, the impressions of the system varied 
depending on whether the user knew the movie or not. Hence, 
we used music that everyone knows or can enjoy even 
though they do not know it.  
A. Experimental Method 
The area of this experiment was Minato Mirai (refer to 
Figure 3.), as in the case of the pre-experiment. We chose the 
route beforehand and plotted three pieces of content along it. 
The subjects of this experiment were eight people with ages 
between 20 and 50 years old, and we divided them into two 
groups, A and B. The subjects of group A only followed the 
guide and walked the route. The subjects of group B 
followed the guide while using the PPS and listening to the 
music content. The subjects of both groups drew a cognitive 
map on A3 paper just after the walk. This experiment was 
conducted from the beginning to the middle of December, 
2015. In Japan, sunset occurs at about 16:30 during this time, 
and when we performed the experiment, the area was already 
dark, and the illuminations of the city were turned on. 
B. Sound Content and Place 
The first piece of content was “The Phantom of the 
Opera Theme Song” from The Phantom of the Opera. This 
content started at the half-way mark of Kishamichi 
Promenade where we can view Minato Mirai at night and 
ended at Navios Yokohama Hotel, which is a hotel in the 
shape of an arch. This content is in a minor key and is made 
magnificent by the powerful operatic singing voice. It shows 
an upsurge steadily towards the climax. We wanted to 
research how the strangeness of this content fitted the 
existing atmosphere and influenced the impression of the 
town. 
The second piece of content was the BGM of Pocket 
Monster, which is a handheld video game developed and 
manufactured by Nintendo Co., Ltd. This content is heard 
when users walk through the area where there is nothing but 
lawn. This BGM is electronic music, which reminds us of an 
8-bit game. We wanted to investigate the change of 
impression that resulted from plotting funny BGM at a dull 
place.  
The third piece of content was a medley of Christmas 
songs that included “Santa Claus is Coming to Town” and 
“We Wish You a Merry Christmas”. Both these are basic 
Christmas songs in Japan and almost all Japanese people 
know them. The place we plotted was the open space 
between two warehouses. It was Christmas season when we 
carried out this experiment, and a Christmas market and a 
skating rink reproduced a European setting. We wanted to 
define the change of the impression of the place that already 
had a Christmas atmosphere by adding festive songs. The 
map plotted with the sound content in Figure 6. 
Figure 6.  The Map of the Main Experiment 
C. Result 
It is true that there were individual differences in the 
ability of the subjects to grasp nuances about the space and 
Sakuragicho STA.
START
GOAL
1
2
3
The Phantom of the Opera Theme
Pocket Monster Medley
Christmas Medley
1
2
3
Cosmo Clock
Yokohama
Red Brick Warehouse
Navios Yokohama
 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

their drawing skills. However, there were many common 
points in the elements and the form drawn on the map, and 
we were able to clarify some tendencies by examining these 
points. First, we counted the elements that the subjects wrote 
on a blank paper one by one and arranged them to ascertain 
which subject wrote what. We assumed the elements that 
were written by more than four subjects were a major 
element and assumed anything other than that to be a minor 
element. We assigned serial numbers from 1 to 28 for each 
element and alphabetical letters A to H for each subject. In 
addition, subjects A, B, C and D did not use PPS, and 
subjects E, F, G, and H used PPS. We show this in Tables 1 
and 2. 
TABLE I.  
MAJOR ELEMENT 
Major Element 
Type of 
element 
No PPS 
Use PPS 
A B C D E F G H 
1 Yokohama Red Brick Warehouse 
Landmark * * * * * * * * 
2 Navios Yokohama Hotel 
Landmark * * * * * * * * 
3 Cross Walk 
Node 
 * * * * * * * 
4 Cosmo Clock ;wheel 
Landmark * * * * *  * * 
5 Queen’s Square ;shopping mall 
Landmark * * * * 
 *  * 
6 World Porters ;shopping mall 
Landmark 
 
 
 * * * * * 
7 Railroad Bridge 
Landmark 
 * * * * *  
 
8 Landmark Tower ;office building 
Landmark 
 
 * * 
 *  * 
9 The Other Side of Warehouse 
Edge 
 
 
 
 
* * * * 
10 Skating Link 
District 
*  
 
 
* * *  
11 Inter Continental Hotel 
Landmark * * * * 
 
 
 
 
12 Christmas Tree in Market 
Landmark 
 
 
 
 
* * * * 
13 Anniversaire ;wedding hall 
Landmark *  
 * *  *  
TABLE II.  
MINOR ELEMENT 
Minor Element 
Type of 
element 
No PPS 
Use PPS 
A B C D E F G H 
14 Illumination for Kishamichi 
Path 
 *  * 
 *  
 
15 Christmas Tree of World Porters 
Landmark 
 *  
 
 * *  
16 Right side of Kishamichi 
Edge 
 
 * * 
 *  
 
17 Shape of Kishamichi 
Edge 
 
 
 
 
 
 * * 
18 Arch of Christmas Market 
Landmark 
 
 
 * 
 
 *  
19 Asuka ;luxuly liner 
Landmark 
 
 
 
 
 * *  
20 People met on the way 
Landmark 
 
 
 
 
*  *  
21 Nipponmaru ;exhibited ship 
Landmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
22 Reflection on the surface of water 
District 
 
 
 
 
*  
 
 
23 Lawn 
District 
 
 
 
 
 *  
 
24 Sound Source of the City BGM 
Node 
 
 
 
 
 *  
 
25 Christmas Market Stalls 
Path 
 
 
 
 
 
 *  
26 Santa Clause in Christmas Market Landmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 *  
27 Objrct near the World Porters 
Landmark 
 
 
 
 
 
 *  
28 Cosmo World ;amusement park 
District 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 
For example, Yokohama Red Brick Warehouse and 
Navios Yokohama Hotel are elements written by all subjects. 
The note about the far end of the Yokohama Red Brick 
Warehouse is characteristic in Table 1. All the subjects of 
Group B did a note about the square or sea or ship spread to 
the other side of warehouse as well as the warehouse. On the 
other hand, Group A did not have the person who made a 
note about scenery of the other side of the warehouse. There 
is the goal in the place where they have finished passing 
through the open space of the warehouse, and it is the scene 
which is completed while the Christmas medley that is the 
third contents becomes lively at the climax when they use 
PPS. In Table 2, there are many numbers of elements that 
subjects of Group B write in at cognitive map, and they 
wrote in unique elements that were not cover by others. In 
Tables 1 and 2, we classify these elements into 5 types 
proposed by K. Lynch. Most elements recorded are classified 
as "landmark", and as it becomes the unique element, the 
ratios of other type increase. In particular, the element 
classified as "edge", is written in the cognitive map of only 
the subjects of Group B. We show the example of the 
cognitive map that a subject really made. Figure 7 is the 
cognitive map of a subject who did not use PPS, and Figure 
8 is the cognitive map of a subject who used PPS. 
 
Figure 7.  Cognitive Map of Subject C 
Figure 8.  Cognitive Map of Subject G 
As seen in Figure 7, all the subjects of Group A 
expressed elements by an illustration or a letter. On the other 
hand, as for the subject of Group B, three of four people left 
not only the illustration but also comments. 
D. Consideration 
We compared the cognitive maps of Groups A and B and 
analyzed them. First, the primary feature was that the 
 
 
 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

subjects of Group B made their cognitive maps in more 
detail than those of Group A. When we walk the city, we 
depend on our sight for the most information, and though we 
always hear some sounds, we are not conscious of hearing 
them unless they are very loud. However, when we use PPS, 
the subject walks the city while being conscious of not only 
the sight information but also the hearing information 
because of the clear music. In this way, meanings and 
impressions are added to elements that had no meaning for 
the subjects when they just looked. Although music might 
not necessarily harmonize with scenery, there is a previous 
study that even if a feeling is incongruous BGM affects to 
remember the image [10]. Actually, almost all of the 
comments written in the cognitive map of Group B were 
descriptions that the subjects gave not only through sight but 
also through the image of the music. For example, a certain 
subject left a comment that she associated a kidnapped bride 
with the marriage ceremonial hall, because she had been 
listening to “The Phantom of the Opera Theme” when she 
looked at the hall.  As a result of the questionnaire, we 
deduced that the reason why the cognitive map of group B 
has more comments with expressive sentences is because the 
best way to express the feeling in suit is to leave comments. 
Next, we considered the notes about the other side of the 
warehouse that was featured only in the cognitive maps of 
Group B. Though the city does not have an area and a 
boundary line, we predicted that the cognitive maps of 
Group B have three areas divided by content.  However, 
there was no cognitive map to show that.   
However, when subjects heard the content reach a climax 
and end, they tended to draw an edge at that spot. There is a 
study that termination feeling of the music affects the 
termination of the video product [11]. In this experiment, the 
first and third pieces of content corresponded to that.   
As mentioned earlier, the first piece of content played at 
the Navios Yokohama Hotel. This landmark has a very 
impressive external appearance and shape and all the 
subjects experienced this; not only subjects of Group B but 
also Group A did not forget to draw it.  
Though this hotel is just a landmark for Group A, for 
Group B, it tended to perform a role as the end of the first 
area. This is because three subjects of Group B left notes on 
this hotel and perceived it as the end of the first piece of 
content.  
About the point that subjects of Group B drew edges for 
the other side of warehouse, we considered that they grasped 
the range where they could hear the third piece of content as 
one area, and also, it was a spot where the music increased 
and concluded in a particularly impressive manner. 
Therefore, edges were expressed there. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
We performed some experiments using the new form of 
art that changes the city through sounds. As a pre-experiment, 
we proposed two patterns of PPS. The first was a pattern that 
plotted sounds used in Star Wars in a sequence along the 
street. The second was a pattern that assumed a good-man 
area and a bad-man area and plotted sounds focused on the 
sound effect and character’s voice. Based on the outcome of 
the pre-experiment, we performed the experiment with the 
cognitive map. In this experiment, we defined the difference 
between the cognitive maps while walking the city as usual 
and while using PPS. The contents used were “The Phantom 
of the Opera Theme”, Pocket Monster BGM, and a medley 
of Christmas songs. These contents were plotted for 
Kishamichi, a lawn, and the square of a red brick warehouse. 
As a result, we defined that the cognitive map drawn by the 
PPS user has more information, and when the PPS user hears 
the content reach its climax and end, he or she tends to draw 
an edge at that spot. 
We inspected the movement of the PPS. We confirmed 
whether the sound played at the desired volume 
automatically when the user approached the assigned spot. 
Although sometimes it took several seconds for the sound 
file to be read, we confirmed that the service functioned 
normally. An aim of PPS is to create a fun experience and 
add fascination for a city where we do not feel novelty any 
more. We want to ensure that every user can plot sounds that 
will make a place more fun and create an original channel of 
PPS. Then, a user who is an audience can search for a 
favorite channel made by another user. In sharing the 
channels with each other, PPS will become a communication 
tool through the real space that uses sounds. For that, we 
want to first show a guideline for the user to plot sounds. 
In the pre-experiment, we defined that user’s feelings are 
influenced by the content. However, the change of feelings 
was not tied to the image of the city. As a result, the image of 
the city did not change. In the next experiment, we found 
that the sound could not change the image of the city, but 
amplified that. However, this fact is dependent on this city. 
In the future, we need to perform a qualitative and 
quantitative evaluation such as a required time and junction 
on the cognitive map. In addition, the number of 
combinations of sound content and plotted places was not 
enough. It is necessary to examine more content and plotted 
spots and define more differences of the image of the city by 
adding sounds. Then, we want to define the guide of what 
kind of sound is suitable for what kind of place.  
REFERENCES 
[1] K. Lynch, “The Image of the City,” MIT Press, 1960. 
[2] S. K. Marshall and A. J. Cohen, “Effects of musical 
soundtracks on attitudes toward animated geometric figures,” 
Music Perception, vol. 6, 1988, pp. 95-112. 
[3] S. D. Lipscomb and R. A. Kendall, “Perceputual judgement of 
the relationship between msical and visual components in 
film,” Psychomusicology, vol. 13, 1994, pp. 60-98. 
[4] A. J. Cohen, “Associationism and  musical soundtrack 
phenomena,” Contemporary Music Review, vol. 9, 1993, pp. 
163-178. 
[5] M. G. Boltz, “The cognitive processing of film and musical 
soundtracks,” Memory and Cognition, vol. 32, no. 7, 2004, pp. 
1194-1205. 
[6] V. J. Bolivar, A. J. Cohen, and J. C. Fentress, “Semantic and 
formal congruency in music and motion pictures,” Effects on 
the interpretation of wisual action. Psychomusicology, vol. 13, 
1994, pp. 28-59. 
[7] S. D. Lipscomb, “Cognition of musical and visual accent 
structure alignment in film and animation,” Proceedings of 4th 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

International Conference of Music Perception and Cognition, 
1996, pp. 309-313. 
[8] M. Chion, “The Sound in Cinema,” New, revised and 
corrected edition. [N. p.]: Cahiers du Cinema Livres. 
[9] M. Chion, “The Music of Cinema,” Les chemins de la 
musique. Paris: Fayard. 
[10] M. Boltz, M. Schulkind, and S. Kantra, “Effects of 
background music on the remembering of filmed events,” 
Memory and Cognition, vol. 19, no. 6, 1991, pp. 593-606. 
[11] W. F. Thompson, F. A. Russo, and D. Sinclair, “Effect of 
underscoring on the perception of closure in filmed events,” 
Psychomusicology, vol. 13, 1994, pp.9-27. 
 
71
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

