Towards a Smart City Blueprint Template
Christian Pfister 
baeriswyl tschanz & partner ag 
Bern, Switzerland 
e-mail: christian.pfister@btpag.ch 
Stephan Haller, Eduard Klein 
E-Government Institute, Bern Univ. of Applied Sciences 
Bern, Switzerland 
e-mail: { stephan.haller, eduard.klein }@bfh.ch
 
 
Abstract— A common approach transforming a city into a smart 
city is to study successful transformation approaches. However, 
there is no recommended adaptation process for smart city 
transformation, thus often resulting in manual, project-based 
and costly efforts. In this paper we propose a methodology, tools 
and a process which guides through the documentation and 
transformation process when transferring smart city innovation 
to other cities. Considering public value as main result of the 
smart city value chain, an adaptation of the business canvas to 
a smart city canvas allows a holistic view on the most important 
aspects during smart city transformation. Moreover, a 
blueprint template is proposed together with a process which 
has proven to be a valuable tool for the adaptation of successful 
smart city concepts to other cities. The approach has been 
validated in the context of a large-scale smart city innovation 
project. 
Keywords- Smart City; Blueprint Template; Transformation 
Process; Public Value. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
An increasing number of cities use data from citizens and 
devices in order to use resources efficiently and design smart 
services, thus becoming a smart city. Although there is no 
shared definition of smart city available, in [1] a taxonomy of 
pertinent smart city application domains is elaborated. Instead 
of just automating routine functions for individuals, buildings 
or traffic systems, a smart city should monitor, understand, 
analyze and plan its situation in order to increase efficiency, 
equity and the quality of life for its inhabitants in real time [2]. 
Often, smart cities are seen as a composite of various 
networks, which continuously collect data regarding the 
movement of people and materials and use them for decision-
making. Cities, however, can only be smart if they have 
intelligent tools which are able to integrate and synthesize data 
for a specific purpose. 
It is common to use smart city platforms to process sensor 
data, open (government) data, social media data, as well as 
data from third party providers and private users. Many smart 
city projects describe the need for such a platform [3][4] as a 
valuable driver in the promotion of smart city innovation.  
Within the CPaaS.io research project [4], the developed 
smart city platform had to be validated through several large-
scale use cases from different contexts such as (high) water 
management, (sports) event management, emergency medical 
care, smart parking and public transportation [5]. Instead of 
starting from scratch for every use case, the authors searched 
for ways to re-use knowledge and experiences from prior use 
cases. 
Although there exist information frameworks for the 
creation of smart cities (e.g., [6]), to date there is no common 
process or even a recommendation for developing a smart city 
project beyond the commonly acknowledged trinity data – 
platform – smart applications. Often, the wheel is re-invented, 
although the transformability of use cases and applications 
from city to city would be possible thereby re-using 
experience and know-how. The following research question 
was used as guidance throughout the research: "How can 
successful smart city concepts be used for smart city 
transformation?". Or, more precisely: "Which are appropriate 
methods, tools and processes for performing and documenting 
smart city transformation?". This paper proposes a blueprint 
process and a template covering technical and organizational 
aspects. 
Since every city has specific characteristics, smart city 
applications are not transferable without adaptation to its 
context. To support the documentation and adaptation of 
smart city applications, a blueprint approach is proposed, 
guiding through the problem-solving cycle and assisting in the 
abstraction and concretization process of a smart city 
application and thus in the adaptation process. 
The blueprint template covers important categories along 
the value chain [7] of smart city applications. The objective of 
the blueprint template is to create a description of the system 
without enforcing specific implementation methods. It 
considers processes, architecture views, hardware, software, 
possible project and communication plans. Further aspects 
support the creation of public value within a smart city 
application as well as the operation and optimization of an 
application set in place. 
To simplify the adaptation of a smart city blueprint, a so-
called One-Pager shows the most important aspects of the 
blueprint. The One-Pager guides through the development of 
the blueprint and shows which aspects need to be re-evaluated 
when adapting an existing blueprint to another city. 
The paper is structured as follows: After presenting the 
research design conducting our findings in Section 2, the tools 
and processes are introduced in Section 3, where the 
derivation of the smart city value chain is also discussed, and 
the blueprint template based on it is justified. In Section 4, the 
checklist-based adaptation process is presented, and in 
Section 5, the validation of the approach is discussed within 
the context of a practical, large-scale smart city innovation 
project. 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

II. RESEARCH DESIGN 
The development of the blueprint template and process 
was conducted in a classical three-step approach: analysis, 
design and validation. In the analysis phase, relevant literature 
was searched on smart city blueprints, on public value of 
governmental initiatives, on the value chain of smart city 
applications, on the future of smart cities and on specification 
guidelines in the smart city context. The literature research 
was conducted in various online resources in spring 2018. 
However, in none of the papers a blueprint template, 
framework or specification guidelines for smart city 
applications was presented. 
Additionally, papers on best-practice methodologies on 
innovation creation, architecture guidelines, specification 
guidelines, business model creation and operation models 
were searched in the same way for importance on the planned 
template design. 
During the design phase, a generic grid was suggested 
based on the value creation of smart city applications 
according to [8]. The definition of vision, mission and strategy 
is an adaptation of the Business Model Canvas from [9] with 
focus on the generation of public value.  
As a result, a four-phase blueprint template is suggested 
considering the phases initialization, conception, realization 
and deployment and operation, as common in project 
management [10], accompanied by a process guiding users 
through the development of a blueprint instance. 
During the third step the blueprint template process is 
validated against use cases of the CPaaS.io project [4], in 
which the authors of this paper participate. This validation 
process is still ongoing, initial results are promising as they 
confirm the usefulness of the tool in capturing information and 
some of the cities we are in contact with have expressed 
interest in using such templates for their upcoming application 
implementations. These activities will help us to improve the 
blueprint template further. 
III. THE SMART CITY BLUEPRINT TEMPLATE 
The blueprint template covers important categories along 
the value chain of smart city applications. The objective of the 
blueprint template is to create a description of the system 
without enforcing specific implementation methods. It 
considers processes, architecture views, hardware, software, 
and possible project and communication plans. Further 
aspects support the creation of public value within a smart city 
application as well as the operation and optimization of an 
application set in place. 
A. Value Chain of Smart City Applications 
In business, the concept of a value chain is commonly 
used. Porter [7] defined five primary activities of a company 
that lead to profit: sourcing logistics, production, distribution 
logistics, marketing and sales, and customer services. In 
addition, he defined the following supporting activities: 
infrastructure, human resources, technology development, 
and procurement. A city however has different goals 
compared to a business-oriented company: While a company's 
primary goal is to increase profits, a city strives to create 
public value. Introduced by Moore [11], the concept of public 
value describes the value an entity contributes to society, e.g., 
increasing the quality of life for its population, supporting 
transparency and democratic processes, or other useful 
services a city may provide to residents or enterprises. Such 
services are especially important where market mechanisms 
alone are not providing the desired service levels, like in 
health care or public transportation [12].  
So how could a value chain for a smart city be defined? 
The base currency for a smart city is data, which leads to 
information and insights, and thus to new services and better 
and faster management of city processes. Laaboudi and 
D’Ouezzan [8] postulate that the value chain of a smart city 
consists of the following elements: 
• 
Data Collection: Data collection from a wide range of 
devices such as mobile devices, sensors, home 
applications, vehicles or data from 3rd party applica-
tions via interfaces. 
• 
Data Carriage: Network technologies like fiber, 
wireless, telecommunication infrastructure or Low-
Power Wide-Area Network (LPWAN) or other 
connectivity components to transfer the collected 
data. 
• 
Data Storage: Data centers, cloud or other storage 
capabilities to store the collected data. 
• 
Data Analytics: The heart of the value chain that 
brings smartness into a smart city application. 
Dedicated platforms are used for standardization, 
communication of information and transforming data 
into linked data with semantic context. 
• 
Data Marketplace: Exposing data, authenticating 
users, authorizing access as well as possible billing or 
booking capabilities. The marketplace is a central 
element to open data strategies for cities. 
• 
Application Layer: The application layer is dedicated 
to creating, developing and improving a smart city 
application. It represents the tools and services, as 
well as APIs for the city and the users.  
All these elements need to be considered when creating a 
smart city application generating public value. However, not 
every element may be essential for value creation in every 
smart city application, some applications may only address a 
few elements. Usually however, most elements of the smart 
city value chain need to be addressed.  
Regarding supporting activities, the following can be 
identified: sourcing of vendors (hardware and software), 
governance and risk management, data protection and 
security, as well as financing. Thus, the model of Porter is 
adapted as shown in Figure 1. 
Sustainable and optimal development of a smart city 
application is based on a city’s vision with focus on public 
value, a network of organized actors, a set of codes and 
technologies and values that governs all stakeholders. In this 
sense, governance is needed around a common vision for the 
transformation of cities. 
B. Structure of the Smart City Blueprint Template 
The smart city blueprint template consists of four parts 
(see Figure 2) which relate to the four typical phases of most 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

projects [10] plus a One-Pager giving a summary and 
overview of the blueprint and its use case. In the following, 
we will describe these parts in more detail. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Smart city value chain (adapted from [7, 8]), generating public 
value based on data usage and on supporting activities. 
 
 
Figure 2.  Structure of a smart city blueprint and relationship to project 
phases 
C. Smart City Application White Paper 
The Business Model Canvas defined by Osterwalder and 
Pigeur [9] is a well-recognized tool in the business world for 
the creation of innovation and the associated development of 
new business fields. With few adjustments due to the different 
goals for business and cities discussed above, a similar 
conceptualization for the smart city context is proposed (see 
Figure 3). 
Contrary to the business model canvas, in the smart city 
canvas the focus is on the public value proposition, and on 
beneficiaries instead of customer segments. For the same 
reason also the customer relationships and channels elements 
of the Business Model Canvas are replaced with a single 
relationships element which is used to capture all stakeholder 
relationships, both positive and negative, as Smart City 
projects 
typically 
involve 
a 
multitude of 
different 
stakeholders. 
This smart city canvas is the central piece and starting 
point of the smart city application white paper within the 
initialization phase (see Figure 2). In addition to the canvas, 
the white paper should provide an overview of services, 
standards and technology, especially on IT topics. This 
includes user descriptions, case studies and market research 
results. 
 
Figure 3.  The smart city canvas is an adaptation of the business model 
canvas of Osterwalder and Pigeur [9] 
D. Requirements Specification 
The following specification guidelines are based on the 
IREB Standard, which includes a toolset of different 
methodologies for the management of requirements [13]. The 
requirement specification should begin with the description of 
the planned system, giving an overview of the application to 
be created. Furthermore, it should be ensured that the system 
boundary and the system context are defined before the 
requirements are collected. This is relevant for the definition 
and understanding of the requirements of the system under 
consideration. 
To structure the requirements catalogue in a uniform and 
retrievable manner, they are categorized according to the 
elements in the value chain of smart city applications. Such a 
split is also helpful when developing the application, as each 
part may possibly be developed as a separate component. As 
a first step, it is thus advisable to identify which elements of 
the value chain are affected and play an important role in the 
application at hand. Table I provides a simple but useful tool 
for such analysis, also listing initial questions to help elicit 
requirements. In addition, for each element a sentence 
template for how to formulate the requirements has been 
defined. For example, the sentence template for the Data 
Collection element looks as follows: 
 
The system can/should/must collect data from <source> about <topic>. 
 
Sentence templates are an easy-to-learn and easy-to-use 
approach to reduce linguistic effects [13] – an important issue 
in multi-stakeholder projects as smart city applications 
typically are – and are also commonly used in agile 
approaches like SCRUM. 
E. Realization Concept 
An important step for the realization concept is listing 
selected technology toolsets for realizing the application. 
Similar tables as used in the requirements specification (cf. 
Table I) can also be used for summarizing the technology 
options, however, instead of listing requirements, possible 
solutions are listed here, thus spanning a solution space from 
which elements can be selected during a transfer and 
adaptation project. In addition to technology options, the 
realization concept must also tackle the issues of project 
methodology, development road map and architecture. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
TABLE I.  
CHECKLIST TO DETERMINE THE APPLICATION 
REQUIREMENTS ACCORDING TO THE SMART CITY VALUE CHAIN  
Value 
Chain 
Element 
Requirements 
Element 
affected? 
Data 
Collection 
Is the planned application dependent on 
collecting data?  
What types of data are required to 
implement the smart city application? 
Where, how (e.g., sensors) and by whom 
(e.g., 3rd parties) is the data collected?  
 
  yes 
Data 
Carriage 
Is the transfer of data needed for the 
application? 
All functional and non-functional 
requirements related to data transmission.  
 
  yes 
Data 
Storage 
Is persistent storage of data relevant to 
the application? 
How is the data stored? How sensitive is 
the data? How fast must the data be 
retrievable? Does the data have to be stored 
in a certain form? Which semantic 
standards or guidelines must be observed? 
 
  yes 
Data 
Analytics 
Does the application require the data to 
be analyzed in order to provide value? 
How must data be aggregated? Which data 
is relevant for the analysis? What does the 
data curation processes look like? 
 
  yes 
Data 
marketplace 
Is it intended to sell data? 
Who should have access to the collected 
data? How is the operator of the application 
remunerated for providing the information? 
What are the price models and payment 
modalities? 
 
  yes 
Application 
Layer 
Is an interface / API necessary to provide 
another application with information? 
Which interfaces are required? Are 
actuators required for the application? Is a 
user interface provided? What actions are 
users or actuators performing?  
 
  yes 
 
 
Project methodology 
Identifying a project methodology for implementing a use 
case is crucial for the realization concept. There are various 
project methodologies in use, from classical waterfall-like 
models to agile approaches like SCRUM. In this context, it is 
important to decide, to what extent citizen participation should 
be encouraged, and if co-creation approaches are useful. 
Since smart city projects are mostly highly complex 
projects with multiple stakeholders and sometimes unproven 
technology, agile project methods are very suitable, as they 
are designed to deal with changing requirements, to integrate 
a balanced set of stakeholders and use a controlled, iterative 
procedure to offer an appropriate, situational response. On the 
other hand, government agencies often have regulations and 
standards how public projects have to be executed (e.g., 
HERMES in Switzerland) that mandate more classical, 
waterfall-like models of project management. 
 
Project Roadmap 
According to Galati [14], smart city planners should 
develop a realistic path to move from the concepts of their 
smart city architecture to achieving the application objectives. 
When planning the roadmap, project managers must consider 
that there may be delays in projects and that unexpected 
obstacles may arise. Furthermore, all expenditure should be 
meticulously managed and monitored. The roadmap in the 
realization concept must give the necessary, high-level 
guidance, possibly also coordinating with other smart city 
applications being developed in parallel. The selection of 
common platforms, which should be used in a given setting is 
a typical element of such a roadmap. 
 
Architecure 
A sound architecture of the overall smart city application 
landscape is crucial, since any newly developed application 
needs to fit into the landscape. In particular when a common 
smart city platform is already deployed or is planned to be, a 
common architecture like the functional architecture 
developed in the context of the CPaaS.io project becomes very 
useful. The realization concept must address how the 
application is integrated into the existing landscape. Using 
views and perspectives as defined by Nick Rozanski and Eoin 
Woods [15] is recommended to describe the application 
architecture. Of particular importance for smart city 
applications are the following perspectives: security, 
regulation, performance and scalability, usability, availability 
and resilience, as well as evolution. 
 
Operational Concept 
According to [16], the following aspects should be 
considered when defining an operational concept: 
• 
Determination of operational requirements 
• 
Description of the system technology 
• 
Description of the organizational plan 
• 
Description of business processes 
• 
Treatment of disorders 
• 
Description of safety aspects 
 
The IT4IT operating model [17] proves to be well suited 
within the realization concept due to its flexibility, because it 
can be integrated into existing operating models such as ITIL 
and COBIT but focuses on the clear embedding and obligation 
to integrate new applications and suppliers into the operating 
model. The great benefit of IT4IT as a reference architecture 
for the IT function lies in its application as a guide. 
For a smart city application landscape, it is important to 
think about the transfer and operation of the platform in 
advance. By using the IT4IT reference model, a future-proof 
operation of the application is achieved in view of necessary 
extensions. In [17], a template is given according to which 
IT4IT could be implemented. 
F. Smart City One-Pager 
For orientation, the extensive information described in the 
previous sections is summarized in the so-called smart city 
blueprint One-Pager, as shown in Table III. It forms the basis 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

for any transfer, as a city official interested in a specific 
application can quickly gauge if that blueprint is relevant for 
his or her city, and if yes, it provides an initial list of issues 
that need to be tackled, and thus to an initial roadmap and 
project plan. An example of a One-Pager is discussed in 
section V. 
IV.  
ADAPTING AN EXISTING SMART CITY BLUEPRINT 
Developing a blueprint for a targeted city is guided by an 
adaptation process (see Figure 4), starting with the selection 
of an appropriate existing One-Pager. The next step focuses 
on the gaps between that One-Pager and the targeted 
implementation, where those aspects are identified that must 
be validated against the blueprint template of the targeted 
implementation. Finally, the blueprint can be enhanced (e.g., 
with new options for the realization phase), adapted or 
completed in an appropriate way. 
In Figure 4, the adaptation process is modeled in BPMN 
notation. Note that it is crucial to take the technical 
possibilities as well as the cultural context of a city or its 
region into account. 
 
 
Figure 4.  Adaptation process of a smart city blueprint during smart city 
transformation. 
Checklists can assist in identifying existing gaps between 
the blueprint and the needs of the city that wants to adapt a 
blueprint. An initial version of such a checklist is given in 
Table II, referring to sections in the One-Pager. It might be 
necessary to continuously update this initial checklist with the 
experience gained in the actual blueprint adaptation processes. 
V. SMART CITY BLUEPRINT VALIDATION 
The smart city blueprint template provides a tool to guide 
developers of smart city applications in the initial process, 
giving a structure for a project plan and listing all aspects that 
should be considered. Using the blueprint template already at 
this early stage allows also capturing important information 
and experiences gained along the way, and thus provides the 
basis for the transfer to another city.  
To validate the practical use, the first step is to fill out the 
template for selected use cases, leading to concrete blueprints. 
In a second step, we need to adapt these blueprints to the 
requirements and the context of other cities and use this 
adapted template in the implementation of the use case in the 
respective city, thus verifying that the blueprints significantly 
facilitate and speed up the implementation process.  
In Table III, a preliminary One-Pager is shown for the 
Amsterdam water management use case from the CPaaS.io 
project, illustrating the basic use of the blueprint template. 
Currently, this blueprint and blueprints for other use cases are 
being detailed and completed. Several cities show interest in 
using this blueprint approach in their smart city activities, 
where its usefulness can be demonstrated. Specific interest 
exists also in using the Smart City Canvas and the One-Pager. 
For example, we are currently talking to a larger Swiss city to 
use and adapt the smart parking blueprint originally developed 
for the implementation in the city of Murcia, Spain. 
Furthermore, the water management use case shown in Table 
III has raised the interest of some cities in Japan. The 
questions listed in Table II will guide this adaptation process. 
TABLE II.  
CHECKLIST FOR BLUEPRINT ADAPTATION 
Section 
Checklist questions 
Vision 
• Does the value proposition cope with the needs of 
urban environment? 
Requirement 
Specification 
• Are there any additional special security risks? 
• Are frameworks in use, which are not applicable 
for us? 
• Are sourcing and vending partners considered who 
are not suitable for us? 
• How is the project financed? 
Realization 
• Is it possible to use the project methodology used 
for implementation? 
• Can the implementation period be similar or is a 
massively shortened implementation period 
targeted? 
• Can the same software be used? 
o Yes 
o No  Does the software intended for use have 
the same functionality as the one used in the 
other city? 
Tools & 
Technologies 
• Is data collected independently or obtained from 
existing systems that cannot be used by us? Do we 
depend on the same data? 
• Is the technology used for data transmission 
available in our region and does it operate in the 
same frequency band? 
• Does the data storage meet our expectations 
regarding queries and does it have sufficient 
protection mechanisms against external access? 
• Is the syntax and semantics used sufficient for data 
analysis? 
• Is recorded content made available to other parties 
and does the marketplace support your 
requirements for data transfer or provision? 
• Should the end application be structured as it is 
used in the other city? Can the software and any 
actors involved also be used? 
Operation 
• How can the smart city application be operated 
after introduction?  
• What does the organization look like? 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
With the presented blueprint approach, a methodology, 
tools and a process are available for documenting and 
transferring smart city innovations to other cities. Based on 
well-proven concepts, such as Osterwalder's Business Model 
Canvas, Jenny's project phase concept and Pohl's work on 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

specification, the proposed smart city value chain together 
with the blueprint template are well suited for specifying a 
holistic picture of a specific smart city implementation. 
Moreover, the proposed checklist guides through the 
adaptation process and helps identifying gaps between an 
existing blueprint and the needs of a city that is aiming at 
adapting the blueprint. 
To date, all the proposed concepts are developed and 
documented, and have been validated in the context of a smart 
city innovation project [4]. By capturing the information of 
the use cases in the project, we could validate that these tools 
can not only be used to capture information about specific use 
cases, but that the structure of the tool is helpful in doing so. 
Currently, the approach is applied for various other city 
contexts and use cases for validation purposes, in order to 
evaluate and possibly adapt the proposed tools and processes. 
Respective stakeholders from different cities have shown 
specific interest in the Smart City Canvas as well as the One-
Pager. This will enable the next step of validation, applying 
and adapting an existing blueprint in the context of another 
city. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work is supported by the Horizon 2020 EUJ-02-2016 
Research and Innovation Action CPaaS.io; EU Grant number 
723076, NICT management number 18302.
 
TABLE III.  
SMART CITY BLUEPRINT ONE-PAGER FOR AMSTERDAM WATER MANAGEMENT USE CASE 
 
Smart City Blueprint One Pager 
Value Proposition –  
Creation of Public Value 
Extreme rainfall and periods of continued drought are occurring more and more often in urban areas. Because 
of the rainfall, peak pressure on a municipality’s sewerage infrastructure needs to be load balanced to prevent 
flooding of streets and basements. With drought, smart water management is required to allow for optimal 
availability of water, both underground as well as above ground. 
Requirement Specification 
Ownership / Contact 
WaterNet (water utility) 
Affected Value 
Chain Elements: 
Data Collection 
Data Carriage 
Data Storage 
Data Analytics 
Data Marketplace 
Application Layer 
[x] yes 
[x] yes 
[x] yes 
[x] yes 
[ ] yes 
[x] yes 
Supporting Activities 
 
Sourcing  
LoRa Network (The Things Network), Polderdak (water buffers) 
 
Governance & 
Risk Management 
tbd 
 
Data Protection & 
Security 
Remote-control access to valves must be secured, data transmission over secure channels 
 
Financing 
Government-level funding 
Realization 
Project organisation 
Led by WaterNet 
Roadmap 
Prototyping individual sites, then boader roll-out  
Architecture 
PaaS (Platform as a Service), using CPaaS.io / FIWARE components (e.g., FogFlow for distributed edge 
computing 
Chain link specific tools and technologies used: 
 
Data Collection 
Data Carriage 
Data Storage 
Data Analytics 
Data Marketplace 
Application Layer 
1. Water-level 
sen-sors (in 
buffers as well 
as in sewage 
systems) 
2. Weather data 
LoRaWAN 
transmissionon 
(EU 863-870MHz 
ISM band) 
Storing the Data in 
the FIWARE 
Orion context 
broker 
Control water 
buffer valves 
based on fill 
levels, expected 
weather data, and 
status od sewage 
system. 
 
FIWARE APIs 
(NGSI-10) 
Operation 
Currently in prototype stage, determining parameters for continuous operation. 
 
 
 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
P. Neirotti, A. de Marco, A. C. Cagliano, G. Mangano, 
and F. Scorrano, “Current trends in Smart City 
initiatives: Some stylised facts,” Cities, vol. 38, pp. 25–
36, 2014. 
[2] 
M. Batty et al., “Smart cities of the future,” The 
European Physical Journal Special Topics, vol. 214, no. 
1, pp. 481–518, 2012. 
[3] 
Nokia, Nokia - Smart City. [Online]. Available from: 
https://networks.nokia.com/smart-city. 
[retrieved: 
January 2019]. 
[4] 
CPaaS.io, City Platform as a Service - Integrated and 
Open: Horizon 2020 EU-Japan Research & Innovation 
Action. [Online]. Available from: https://www.cpaas.io/. 
[retrieved: January 2019].  
[5] 
CPaaS.io, Use Cases of the CPaaS.io project. [Online]. 
Available 
from: 
https://cpaas.io/?page_id=280. 
[retrieved: January 2019]. 
[6] 
J. Jin, J. Gubbi, S. Marusic, and M. Palaniswami, “An 
Information Framework for Creating a Smart City 
Through Internet of Things,” IEEE Internet Things J., 
vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 112–121, 2014. 
[7] 
M. E. Porter, Wettbewerbsvorteile: Spitzenleistungen 
erreichen und behaupten = (Competitive Advantage), 
8th ed. Frankfurt am Main: Campus-Verlag, 2014. 
[8] 
K. Laaboudi and S. D’Ouezzan, “White Pater: Smart 
City Value Chain,” 2016. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.e-madina.org/wp-
content/uploads/2016/11/White-Paper-e-Madina-3.0-
Value-Chain-of-Smart-cities.pdf. [retrieved: January 
2019].  
[9] 
A. Osterwalder and Y. Pigneur, Business Model 
Generation: A Handbook for Visionaries, Game 
Changers, and Challengers, 1st ed. New York, NY: 
John Wiley & Sons, 2013. 
[10] B. Jenny, Projektmanagement: Das Wissen für den 
Profi, 3rd ed. Zürich: Vdf Hochschulverlag, 2014. 
[11] M. Moore and S. Khagram, “On creating public value: 
What business might learn from government about 
strategic management,” John F. Kennedy School of 
Government, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 
Working Paper no. 3, 2004. [Online]. Available from: 
http://www.hks.harvard.edu/m-
rcbg/CSRI/publications/workingpaper_3_moore_khagr
am.pdf. [retrieved: January 2019]. 
[12] A. C. Neuroni, S. Haller, W. van Winden, V. Carabias-
Hütter, and O. Yildirim, “Increasing Public Value 
Creation for Smart Cities Using an Ecosystem 
Approach,” in Setting Foundations for the Creation of 
Public Value in Smart Cities, M. P. Rodriguez Bolivar, 
Ed.: Springer, 2019. 
[13] K. Pohl, Requirements engineering: Grundlagen, 
Prinzipien, Techniken, 2nd ed. Heidelberg: dpunkt-
Verlag, 2008. 
[14] S. R. Galati, “Funding a Smart City: From Concept to 
Actuality,” in Smart Cities, S. McClellan, J. A. Jimenez, 
and G. Koutitas, Eds., Cham: Springer International 
Publishing, 2018, pp. 17–39. 
[15] N. Rozanski and E. Woods, Software systems 
architecture: 
Working 
with 
stakeholders 
using 
viewpoints and perspectives, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 2013. 
[16] H. Mourgue d’Algue, G. Eicher, and B. Kruschitz, 
Hermes 5.1: Projektmanagementmethode für alle 
Projekte 
: 
Referenzhandbuch, 
1st 
ed. 
Bern: 
Eidgenössisches 
Finanzdepartement 
EFD 
Informatiksteuerungsorgan des Bundes ISB and 
Vertrieb BBL Verkauf Bundespublikationen, 2014. 
[17] M. 
Andenmatten, 
“IT4ITTM 
– 
das 
agile 
Betriebskonzept der IT der Zukunft,” HMD, vol. 54, no. 
2, pp. 261–274, 2017. 
 
 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

