Carbon Emission Trading for Community Contribution
Ichiro Satoh
National Institute of Informatics
2-1-2 Hitotsubashi Chiyoda-ku Tokyo 101-8430 Japan
Email: ichiro@nii.ac.jp
Abstract—The reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG), including
CO2 , has been recognized as the task to be solved by the
world. This paper presents an approach to enable citizens
to use carbon emission credits or allowances for community
contribution, e.g., schools and non-proﬁt organizations. It
assigns a small amount of carbon emission credits or allowances
to RFID tags or barcodes attached to speciﬁc products and
show how must credits that tag is worth like coupon for
mitigating GHG emissions. People, including students, who
want to support communities, including schools, collect these
tags or barcodes and then redeemed the credits assigned to
them to offset the GHG emitted from their communities. The
approach was constructed and evaluated with real customers
and real carbon credits with real communities.
Keywords-Carbon
emission
credit;
Carbon
emission
al-
lowance; RFID tag; Barcode.
I. INTRODUCTION
The reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG), including CO2
, has been recognized as a common task to be solved by
the world. Public organizations, e.g., schools, museums,
civil halls, community centers, and local governments, are
required to work for public purposes, but they are not avoid
to emit greenhouse gases for their activities like commercial
activities. For example, schools need to consume energy for
lighting and heating in their buildings. Although they should
reduce their GHG emissions as much as possible, their mis-
sions are to provide people, including local communities and
students with services as much as possible. In public sectors,
approaches to reducing GHG emitted from communities
may be different from those from commercial sectors. This
paper proposes an approach to helping public communities,
e.g., schools and non-proﬁt organizations, to offset their
GHG emissions. The approach assigns a speciﬁed amount of
carbon emission credits to RFID tags or barcodes attached
to speciﬁc products and show how must credits that tag or
barcode is worth like coupons. People, including students,
who support public communities, including schools, collect
these tags or barcodes and then redeem the credits assigned
to them to offset the GHG emitted from their communities.
This paper proposes an approach to enable citizens to
use carbon emission credits or allowances for commu-
nity contribution, e.g., schools and non-proﬁt organizations,
where carbon emission credits or allowances are economical
values and can be traded [6]. The key idea behind it is
to assign a small amount of carbon emission credits or
allowances to RFID tags (or barcodes) attached to speciﬁc
products by using RFID-tags [8][9], which was a scheme
for reducing GHG emissions from the home and individual
sectors and offsetting GHG emissions from public sectors, so
that tags or barcodes can be worth like coupon for mitigating
GHG emissions. People, including students, who want to
support communities, including schools, collect these tags
or barcodes and then redeemed the credits assigned to them
to offset the GHG emitted from their communities. The
approach was constructed and evaluated with real customers
and real carbon credits with real communities.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section
II states the problems that the paper addresses and the
requirements of the approach. Section III surveys related
work. Section IV presents basic approach outlines the basic
ideas of the approach. Section V describes the design and
implementation of the approach and Section VI presents our
experiences with the approach. Section VII discusses on the
approach and Section VIII gives some concluding remarks.
II. PROBLEM STATEMENTS
We brieﬂy outline conventional carbon emission credits
before explaining our approach. Carbon emission credits
are not carbon emission allowances, which are limits on
emissions that are lowered over time. A government sets
limits on the amount of CO2 that companies are allowed
to emit CO2 . If a company emits an amount of CO2 due
to their activities below its limit, it can sell the excess
capacity, which is the difference between the limit and the
amount has emitted, to companies whose emissions are over
their limits. They represent a certain volume of absorbed or
reduced emissions by different people or organizations that
have reduced excessive amount of GHG in the atmosphere
in the short- or long-term. For example, developed countries
or companies ﬁnancially or technically support projects that
aim to reduce GHG emissions in developing countries. They
can, in turn, offset their emissions by credits generated
from the projects. These projects might involve installing
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

renewable energy technologies, implementing energy efﬁ-
ciency measures, or removing CO2 from the atmosphere
through carbon sequestration. Emission credits can be traded
in voluntary markets to reduce overall GHG emissions while
still allowing countries or companies that may have difﬁculty
doing so to have outlets for transition. However, existing car-
bon emission credits and their trading have several problems:
• Carbon trading is usually provided through electric
commerce systems, but existing trading systems are too
complicated and difﬁcult for end-users to sell or buy
carbon credits for reasons unique to carbon credits.
Since carbon credits are tradable, the systems must
authenticate whether the creditors that demand credits
to be transferred to them are the credits’ current owners
or their certiﬁcating agents. Carbon credits also have
speciﬁed expiration dates, e.g., one or two years, for
institutional reason for carbon credits. The price of the
credits is based in part on the validation process and the
sophistication of the fund or development company that
acted as the sponsor of the carbon project. Therefore,
fees for trading carbon credits tend to be expensive,
where in Japan, a fee of 6,200 yen (about 72 US dollars)
is charged for one carbon credit trading independently
of the number of credits. Existing systems allow pro-
fessional carbon traders to sell or buy large amounts of
emission credits.
• The minimal units of existing trading credits are more
than one hundred or one thousand tonnes of CO2
. However, the amount of CO2 an average person
emits throughout his/her life for one year is less than
one tonne. Each end consumer product should have
less than one kilogram of credits. However, there are
currently no approaches to trading small amount of
carbon credits, e.g., one gram or one kilogram except
for ours. However, each ﬁnal settlement process in
existing approach needs time and effort, because the
process needs receive RFID tags, which are physical
certiﬁcates for carbon credits. The approach proposed
in this paper needs to reduce the cost of settlement
process.
• Carbon credits can already be traded through e-
commerce, but existing trading systems have been de-
signed of professional traders, called carbon providers
or carbon agencies. Since credits are virtual values, it
is too difﬁcult and complicated to authenticate whether
the stakeholders that claim the credits are the credits’
current owners or their certiﬁcating agents. Therefore, it
almost impossible for communities and end consumers,
in additions to small companies and NPOs/NGOs to
sell or buy credits. Furthermore, current personal-level
carbon emission trading has not been designed for
communities. To support communities, carbon emission
credits should be easily exchanged within communities.
• Carbon offsetting has gained some appeal mainly
among end-consumers in western countries who have
become aware and concerned about the potentially
negative environmental effects of energy-intensive
lifestyles and economies. However, existing schemes
for carbon offsetting products assume they only support
end-consumers so that they experience problems at
companies. They lack any mechanism for transferring
the carbon credits linked to the products to the con-
sumers. Instead, dealers or manufacturers, who assign
the credits to products, offset the credits on behalf of the
consumers of the products. Therefore, the consumers
have no chance of owning the credits and they do not
know whether the credits have been properly offset by
the dealers or manufacturers.
III. RELATED WORK
There have been several attempts for trading small amount
of carbon emission allowances instead of carbon emission
credits. So, we survey carbon allowances. The notion of
carbon emission allowances has been useful in existing
schemes such as the European Union (EU) Emissions Trad-
ing Scheme (EUETS) for EU countries or similar schemes
elsewhere [1]. Several countries, e.g., the U.K. and Ireland,
have proposed schemes for carbon emission trading in the
home/end user sector to Conferences of the Parties (COP)
of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change (UNFCCC). Personal Carbon Trading (PCT) is
a general term referring to personal versions of carbon
emission trading in the home/end user sector. The original
notion of Carbon emissions allowances is an economical
approach to reducing the amount of GHG emissions in
industrial sector. The allowances are limits, often called
carbon emission caps, where a government authority ﬁrst
sets limits on the amount of CO2 that companies are allowed
to emit. If a company emits an amount of CO2 below its
limit, it can sell the excess capacity, which is the difference
between the limit and the amount of CO2 that has really
emitted, as carbon allowances to companies whose emissions
are over their limits. If a company emits an amount of
CO2 beyond its limit, it must pay a penalty or buy carbon
allowances from someone so that it can comply with its
allowances.
On the other hand, PCTs support carbon emissions al-
lowances allocated to individuals rather than companies. If
individuals emit at a level above that permitted by their
initial allocation, they need to purchase additional carbon
emission allowances from those using less, creating a proﬁt
for those individuals who emit at levels below those per-
mitted by their initial allocation. Several researchers and
organizations have proposed different kinds of PCT in the
last ﬁve to ten years.
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

• Cap and Share was originally developed by the Foun-
dation for the Economics of Sustainability (Feasta)
[2] and supported the use of fossil fuels. Individuals
received certiﬁcates from the government and fuel
suppliers required corresponding certiﬁcates equal to
emissions from the use of fossil fuels to sell fuel.
• Personal allowance (PCA) was proposed by Hillman
[4] and it was a proposed downstream carbon cap and
trade policy instrument suggested for the U.K. There
represented a mandatory policy whereby all individuals
received an annual carbon emissions budget for their
personal use. The PCA scheme only covered emissions
under direct personal control, e.g., household energy
use (electricity and gas) and private transport (not
including public transport).
• Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs)[3] assumed that in-
dividuals would receive certiﬁcates and if they used
fewer certiﬁcates, they could sell their surplus. All
fuels and electricity had carbon ratings in units. When
individuals buy energy, their certiﬁcates are deducted
according to the amount of CO2 emitted from the use
of that energy.
• Household carbon trading [5] was a yearly carbon
emission cap to set for residential energy use based on
emissions reduction targets. Allowances are allocated
to each household on an equal per household alloca-
tion basis via utility service providers who place the
allowances in each user’s account.
• Tradable transport carbon permit [7] was a cap that was
set for emissions from private transport. Allowances
were allocated to all individuals to comply for free, but
these were not any equal basis. Allowances are trans-
ferred to the regulating authority for every purchase of
fuel to cover the CO2 equivalent of a liter of fuel and
cancelled. Participants bought and sold permits through
intermediates like banks or buy them at gas stations.
Although the concept of PCT was expected to reduce the
GHG emissions from homes and individual sectors, existing
PCT have several serious problems that must be solved
before applying schemes can be applied to the real world.
Since existing PCT has aimed at reducing GHG emitted
from energy, i.e., their spending electric power from thermal
power plants and refuelling their private cars, they have mis-
matches with existing carbon emission trading and carbon
emission reduction schemes in companies, although reduc-
ing GHG emissions is a global issue. For example, suppose
that a supermarket sells beverages or mineral water from
room temperature shelves in addition to refrigerated shelves
to reduce the amount of GHG emitted from electricity for
the latter and to obtain surplus carbon emission allowances.
When customers intentionally select and buy beverages or
mineral water from normal temperature shelves, they should
share the surplus allowances with the supermarket. Never-
theless, there is no way to share surplus allowances with
supermarkets in existing carbon emission trading schemes,
including PCT. Furthermore, existing approaches aimed at
personal-level or company-level trading but not community-
level.
IV. BASIC APPROACH
Our previous paper [9] enabled a small amount of carbon
emission credits or allowances attached to products or ser-
vices to be transferred to consumers who buy these products
or products. The approach proposed in this paper is to
enable people to donate their own carbon emission cred-
its/allowances to communities and the communities to mit-
igate their GHG emissions with the credits/allowances.@It
provides communities with a method to collect a volume
of RFID tags or barcodes as credits for the rights to claim
credits with low costs in addition to the key ideas of our
approach.
• The previous approach introduced RFID tags or bar-
codes as a certiﬁcate to claim carbon emission credits
or allowances attached to products in in supply chains.
It could directly use the RFID tags or barcodes that had
already been attached to products.
• The approach proposed in this paper supports a do-
nation of carbon emission credits or allowances to
communities to mitigate their GHG emissions by giving
the RFID tags or barcodes that are certiﬁcates to claim
carbon emission credits or allowances.
A. RFID tags/barcodes as certiﬁcates in donating carbon
emission credits
Whereas the previous approach introduced RFID tags
(or barcodes) as certiﬁcates for carbon emission credits
[8][9], the approach proposed in this paper is designed for
certiﬁcating carbon emission credits. The former is assigned
by the government, but the latter is voluntarily generated
by certiﬁcated projects to reduce GHG. Therefore, the latter
is essentially various. To claim credits dominated by RFID
tags (or barcodes), we need to return these RFID tags (or
barcodes) to the stakeholders that assigned credits to the
tags (or barcodes). RFID tags (or barcodes) can be used as
certiﬁcates for carbon emission credits. For example, when
sellers want to attach carbon offsetting credits to products,
they place RFID tags (or barcodes) on them that represent
the credits for the products. Therefore, purchasers, who buy
the products, tear the RFID tags (or barcodes) from them
and return the tags to the sellers (or the stakeholders of
the credits). When the sellers receive the RFID tags (or
barcodes) from the purchasers, they transfer the credits to
any accounts for payments that the purchasers specify. It is
difﬁcult to replicate or counterfeit RFID tags (or barcodes)
whose identiﬁers are the same, because their identiﬁers are
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

unique and embedded into them on the level of semicon-
ductors.
B. Community-based collection/lump-settlement for certiﬁ-
cates for carbon credits
When a purchaser has peeked an RFID tag (or barcode)
from a product, which might have been attached to a product
that he/she purchased, our approach permits the purchaser to
resell the tag (or barcode) to others. Instead, the new holder
of the tag can claim the credits attached to the tag from
the stakeholder of these credits or resell them to someone
else. Note that trading or donating RFID tags (or barcodes)
corresponds to trading or donating carbon emission credits
that can offset GHG emitted from the receivers. To offset
GHG emitted from a community, e.g., school and council,
according to the Kyoto protocol, holders of tags donate
certiﬁed credits to the community by giving the RFID tags
(or barcodes) assigned to credits to the community. Next, the
community donate a volume of credits to the government via
a complicated electronic commerce system or carbon agency.
C. Procedure
Figure 1 explains our approach to attach carbon credits
to products with RFID tags (or barcodes), which involves
seven steps:
1. A seller places an RFID tag (or barcode) on a product
(or a volume of products) if the product has no tag.
2. It sets a certain amount of credits for offsets for a
product and registers the amount and the identiﬁer of
the tag in a database.
3. It sells the product with the RFID tag to a purchaser.
4. The purchaser tears the tag from the product that it has
bought.
5. It only gives its tags to a community, e.g., school and
non-proﬁt organization.
6. The community collects tags and sorts tags according to
the sellers that their credits should be paid to, because
the identiﬁers of the tags discover the sellers.
7. It returns the tags to their sellers.
8. The seller receives the tag and then ﬁnds the amount
of credits coupled to the tag in the database.
9. It transfers the amount to the account speciﬁed by the
community and removes information on the identiﬁer
from the database so that the tag can be reused.
Note that in our approach RFID tags can be reused even
when their identiﬁers are static because the database removes
information on the identiﬁers after the tags are returned.
V. DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION
The proposed approach enables sellers at steps in a supply
chain to sell their products with RFID tags (or barcodes)
coupled to carbon emission credits to customers, including
raw materials and components. Anyone can access infor-
mation about the credits attached to the products, because
the credits are transferred to purchasers who return the
tags themselves to the sellers. The sellers should provide
information about the credits, e.g., their amounts, expiration
dates, and sources. When customers can read RFID tags (or
barcodes) with web-enabled terminals, they see information
on the credits attached to the tags.
• Our approach requires each RFID tag (or barcode) to
have its own unique read-only identiﬁer. Most RFID
tags (or barcodes) used in supply chain management
already have such identiﬁers.
• To support carbon offsets, the amount of credits at-
tached to a product need to be equivalent to the total
or partial amount of CO2 emissions resulting from the
use or disposal of the products.
This approach assumes to have agents, called carbon
credit agents, to enable customers to access the information.
They have two databases. The ﬁrst maintains credit accounts
and the second maintains information about assigned credits.
They can only be connected to certain RFID agents and
other account agents through authenticated and encrypted
communications.
Some readers may worry that returning RFID tags (or
barcodes) to their stakeholders is more costly than returning
the identiﬁers of tags (or barcodes) via a network. There are
two ﬂows that are opposite to each other between sellers and
purchasers at each stage in real supply chains: the ﬂows of
products and the ﬂows of receipts or containers for the prod-
ucts. Our approach can directly use the latter ﬂow to return
tags (or barcodes) from purchasers to sellers. Therefore, our
cost and extra CO2 emissions are small. Actually, returnable
containers, which deliver parts or components from sellers
and then return them to sellers, are widely used in real supply
chains.
VI. EXPERIENCES
The proposed approach was already evaluated through a
social experiment with real retailers, end consumers, local
communities, e.g., elementary school, local government, and
non-proﬁt organizations. We asked an elementary school,
called Kita-sunamachi, in Kouto-area of Tokyo. The school
announced students that several beverage cans are sold
in a super market, supermarket (Kitasuna branch of Ito-
yokadou), which is one of the biggest in Tokyo area, with
seals assigned with 300, 500, or 700 g carbon emission
credits. It was carried out for two weeks from 9 am to
10 pm and more than ﬁve thousand goods were sold with
carbon. Figure 2 shows beverage cans with barcodes in
a showcase at the supermarket. In this experiment, the
credits are called Japan Veriﬁed Emission Reduction (J-
VER), where J-VER credits were generated from thinning
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Donating
Manufacturer
Retailer
Consumer
Carbon emission credit agent
Community
e.g., school
Peeling off
Putting RFID tags
on products
Carbon credit
(J-VER)
The Japan
forest agency
Forest
Selling
carbon credit
Consumer
Consumer
Peeling off
Peeling off
Donating
Donating
Carbon credit
(J-VER)
Selling
Selling
Selling
Claiming
(Giving RFID tags)
Proposed Approach
Figure 1. Community-based carbon credit attachment and settlement
forest and were traded on the domestic market and managed
by the Forestry Agency.
RFID-tag seal for 
carbon credit
Figure 2. Beverage with RFID tag (or barcodes) seal for carbon credits
When students bought the beverage cans, they should tear
off the seals from cans and put them collecting boxes located
at the school as shown in Fig. 3.
• The supermarket attached RFID tag seals on cans and
sold them to real consumers, where each seal displayed
small amount of its carbon emission credits.
• The customers bought cans with RFID tag seals like
other items.
• They peeled the seals from the cans that they bought,
where the seals could easily be unattached from prod-
ucts by them.
• Students, who had the seals, attached the seals on
certain mount papers and return the seals on the mounts
to boxes located at the school.
• The school collected seals from about three hundred
students and returned to the supermarket and informed
its carbon credit account.
• The supermarket read the identiﬁers of the seals and
then transferred the carbon credits to the accounts.
• They could see the balances of their carbon account
through a web site for carbon account management.
Figure 3. RFID tag/barcode seal collecting box
The supermarket totally sold 5320 cans, where the sales
volumes of cans with carbon credits in two weeks was
three times more than usual at the supermarket. Thirty-
ﬁve percent of RFID tags or barcodes were returned to the
supermarket by customers who claimed the credits. About
750 tags among them were donated to the school through
our approach. There were many lessons learned from the
experiment, but most problems in the experiment were not
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

technical. For example, many consumers asked us about the
notion of carbon credits so that we spent a lot of time to
dealing with their questions. We could considerately reduce
the cost of settlement of RFID tags, because the school
collected many tags from students and returned a volume of
the tags to the supermarket in comparison with our previous
approach [8][9], which lacked any techniques for donations
to third parties like the approach presented in this paper.
VII. DISCUSSION
Our approach intended a supermarket to use carbon credits
as an incentive to sell products. We expected end consumers
to explicitly select products with more credits, which were
in proportion to the amount of reduced CO2 emissions. The
approach also allowed existing RFID tags for logistics to be
directly used as certiﬁcates for credits so that its environment
cost was minimal. The approach had to be as simple as possi-
ble so that participating parties could easily understand how
the approach worked and what they should to. The trading
of RFID tags in the approach corresponded to the trading of
credits. RFID tags could be used as monetary values, where
money is generally considered to have three functions, as
a medium of exchange, as units of accounts, and as stores
of values. RFID tags in our approach could be exchanged
because they were physical and tradable entities in the real
world. The tags could be coupled to a certain number of
credits. The tags were durable and able to be stored and the
information stored in the tags could not easily be erased. The
approach restricts sellers to assign more carbon credits to
RFID tags than the amount of credits that they have because
assigned credits are withdrawn from their carbon accounts.
The approach permitted anyone to access information about
credits, e.g., their amount, expiration dates, and sources via
RFID tags and only the holders of the tags could claim
the credits. The approach allowed purchasers, including end
consumers, to claim credits by returning the tags coupled to
them to the stakeholders of the tags without any complicated
authentication mechanisms. End consumers did not need to
read the RFID tags, because they could sell the tags to
others, including sellers. The buying and selling of products
is often done where networks and electronic devices may
not be available, i.e., in warehouses, on streets, and in
stores. Account agents need to be always connected to the
system, but sellers and purchasers do not. The reader may
worry whether the accuracy and correctness of carbon credits
attached to products can be ensured at the supplier level.
Consumers can select products according to the amount
of carbon credits attached to them and they can know
information about the credits through our identiﬁers assigned
to small amounts of carbon credits.
VIII. CONCLUSION
We proposed a scheme to bridge the gap between
personal- and company-level carbon emission credits or
allowances and trading by using information technology, in
particular RFID tags, barcodes, and telecommunication. The
key idea underlying our approach was to combine ofﬂine and
online approaches. The former was to introduce RFID tags
(or barcodes) as physical certiﬁcates for the rights to claim
carbon allowances, including carbon emission allowances
and caps. The latter was to support the transfer of small
amounts carbon emission allowances via e-commerce. When
purchasers buy products with allowances for carbon offsets,
they can claim the allowances by returning the RFID tags
(or barcodes) coupled to the allowances to stakeholders, e.g.,
sellers or agencies, without the need for any complicated
authentication. The approach could collect small amount
of carbon credits by using communities, e.g., schools and
non-proﬁt organizations. The approach was designed to help
communities to offset their GHG emissions. Finally, we
would like to identify further issues that need to be resolved
in the future. We plan to carry out more public experiments
on the approach in other supply chains. We need to estimate
the social cost in implementing and operating the approach.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Brohe, “Personal Carbon Trading in perspective: potential
pitfalls and compatibility with the EU ETS Framework,”
International Energy Agency Workshop, Paris, 2008.
[2] “The Foundation for the Economics of Sustainability (festa):
Cap & Share: A fair way to cut greenhouse emissions,” festa,
2008.
[3] D. Fleming, “Energy and the Common Purpose (Descending
the Energy Staircase with Tradable Energy Quotas (TEQs))
,” The Lean Economy Connection, 2005.
[4] M. Hillman, “Carbon budget watchers,” Town and Country
Planning, Vol.67, No.9, 1998, pp. 305.
[5] D. Niemeier, et al., “Rethinking downstream regulation:
California’s opportunity to engage households in reducing
greenhouse gases,” Energy Policy, Vol.36, 2008, pp. 3436-
3447.
[6] “Personal Carbon Trading,” Y. Parag and T.Fawcett (eds),
Routledge, 2010.
[7] C. Raux and G. Marlot, “A System of Tradable CO2 Permits
Applied to Fuel Consumption by Motorists,” Transport Policy,
Vol. 12, No. 3, 2005, pp. 255-265.
[8] I. Satoh, “RFID-enabled carbon offsetting and trading,” Per-
vasive and Mobile Computing, 2013, Vol. 9, No. 1, pp. 149-
160.
[9] I. Satoh, “IT-enabled Personal-level Carbon Emission Al-
lowance,” in Proceedings of the 5th International Conference
on Ambient Systems, Networks and Technologies (ANT
2014), the 5th International Conference on Sustainable En-
ergy Information Technology (SEIT-2014), 2014, pp. 665-
672.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

