Perceived Benevolence Trust, Perceived Competence Trust, and Onshore
Information Sytems Development Project Success
The Mediating Effect of Knowledge Transfer
Solomon A. Nurye, Temtim A. Desta
Information Systems Track
Addis Ababa University
Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
e-mail: Selemonabe@yahoo.com
e-mail: abtemtim@gmail.com
Shegaw A. Mengiste
School of Business
University of South Eastern Norway
Borre, Norway
e-mail: sme@usn.no
Abstract— Despite the increased organizational spending on
information systems outsourcing, delivering business values
from outsourcing initiatives is still a challenge for business
managers in a developing economy. In recent studies, there has
been much interest in addressing the challenge from a
relational perspective. This study examines whether perceived
benevolence trust and perceived competence trust affect
knowledge
transfer,
which,
in
turn,
impacts
onshore
information systems development outsourcing success within
the context of Ethiopia. Drawing from the social exchange
theory,
knowledge
transfer,
and
information
systems
literature, a conceptual model is developed and it reveals that
knowledge
transfer
mediates
the
effects
of
perceived
benevolence trust and perceived competence trust on onshore
information systems development outsourcing success. The
findings contribute to research and practice in information
systems outsourcing relationships.
Keywords-Perceived
Benevolence
Trust;
Perceived
Competence Trust; Outsourcing; Information Systems.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Information Systems Development (ISD) has become an
important organizational activity for strategic and operational
purposes [1]. Due to the highly competitive and rapidly
changing business environment, organizations have been
under great pressure to seek out strategies for the successful
development and delivery of Information Systems (IS)
products and services [1]. One of the popular strategies
devised by client organizations is outsourcing [2].
Information Systems Development Outsourcing (ISDO)
refers to a contractual agreement between a client and a
vendor organization for the provision of IS development
and/or implementation services, whereby the client contracts
all or part of its ISD activities to the vendor [3]-[5]. ISDO
approaches and practices are becoming well established and
accepted business practices for reducing operational costs
while gaining business value [6]. In the year 2017,
worldwide
Information
Technology
Outsourcing
(ITO)
contracts that worth USD 137.2 billion were signed [7]. The
growth rate of ITO is estimated to be 2.4% Compound
Annual Growth Rate (CAGR) from 2017 to 2021 [8].
Besides, a market survey by Gartner shows that ITO has a
60% contribution in the worldwide IT services market and
with its higher contribution the market is estimated to reach
$1.1 trillion in 2021 [9]. A rising trend of ITO in some
developing countries like India, China, Brazil, Russia, and
Malaysia has also been observed in recent years. On the
other hand, the revenues from the outsourcing sector in
Africa reached nearly US$ 2 billion in 2014, projected to
grow at 30–40% annually, but Ethiopia has yet to reap the
benefits from the sector [10].
Although ISDO market in Ethiopia is immature, most
software development projects are undertaken by means of
onshore outsourcing [11]. For example, in the five-year
strategic plan (2011-2015), the Government of Ethiopia had
shown a commitment for the implementation of 219 e-
government projects with an estimated budget of 201.5
Million US dollars [12] by inviting local vendors to some of
these ISD projects. Nevertheless, Information Systems
Outsourcing (ISO) failures are reported in developing
countries [13] [14].
In spite of the high failure rate of ISDO projects, business
managers
have
continued
to
increase
their
ISDO
investments, as they perceive value in it [15]. However,
exhibiting the values of outsourcing remains a challenge for
both the service provider and the client organizations [16]
[17]. For example, Nuwangi et al. [18] described ISDO as
complex
process
mainly
due
to
multiple,
and
often
conflicting client requirements, incongruence in interpreting
client requirements, changes and uncontrolled growth in a
project's scope and the existence of many user groups.
Primarily, ISD is a knowledge-intensive work [19] and the
required
knowledge
is
dispersed
across
domains
of
specialization (e.g., business and technical knowledge) [20]
[21]. Clients have rich business domain knowledge, but
shallow technical knowledge. On the other hand, technical
knowledge is mainly owned by vendor organizations, but
they typically lack business domain knowledge [22]. Due to
these factors, providing the agreed deliverables on time and
with the required quality has become extremely difficult for
vendors [23]-[25].
Prior studies have given attention to exploring the values
of ISDO from the relational perspective because building
and sustaining a flexible relationship can help outsourcing
partners to overcome outsourcing challenges [17][26]. To
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

successfully build the system, therefore, outsourcing partners
need to interact and cooperate with each other [21] [26].
Their interaction and cooperation are highly required for
exchanging knowledge about business needs, preferences,
approaches to problems, as well as use and technical
possibilities of the new information system [26] [27].
Some
knowledge
transfer can
take place between
outsourcing partners due to contractual obligations [16].
However, it is harder to formalize and communicate tacit
knowledge (e.g., business processes and technical know-
how) [28]. This type of knowledge creates difficulties on
actors to formalize as well as to communicate as it is deeply
rooted in action, commitment and involvement in a specific
context [16] [29]. Hence, contractual requirements are
insufficient
for
effective
knowledge
transfer
to
occur
between parties engaged in ISO deals [17]. Lee et al. [17]
further argued that it is difficult to specify every rule and
agreement in a contract due to the complexity of outsourcing
contracts. As a result, outsourcing partners need to pay heed
to unwritten contracts to supplement the more formal
contracts to achieve a successful outsourcing relationship.
According to [30], trust is one of the intangible factors that
could not be easily captured in the formal contract.
Trust has been widely studied in the social exchange
literature as one of the relational factors that lead to
successful business relationships [17]. As clients and vendors
rely on each other's knowledge, trusting each other enables
partners to work together and to transfer the necessary
knowledge during
the
outsourced
information
systems
development
projects.
Ko
[26]
suggests
that
trusting
relationships lead to greater knowledge exchange as it
facilitates voluntary exchange, which promotes knowledge
transfer activities.
Although several scholars demonstrated the importance
of clients' trust in vendors for successful knowledge transfer
(e.g., [17] [26]), the impact of the perceptions of the vendors
being trusted by their clients on knowledge transfer to the
clients is a potentially critical, but overlooked issue.
According to Serva et al. [31, p. 627], “trust forms in the
mind of the trustor", and therefore others cannot observe it.
In the client-vendor relationship, the vendor is the main
source of technical knowledge (e.g., technical know-how and
ISD methodology) and the client is the recipient of the
vendor's technical knowledge. In this study, the vendor is a
knowledge source and the client is a knowledge recipient.
During their relationships, the vendor may or may not feel
trusted by the client although the client has trust in its
vendor. This unidirectional conceptualization of trust (i.e.,
knowledge recipient's trust in a knowledge source) cannot
provide a complete picture of the knowledge transfer
behavior of actors engaged in a social exchange relationship.
Knowledge recipients' trust in the knowledge sources needs
to be expressed in actions so that knowledge sources can
aware of recipients' trust in them and get actively involved in
the knowledge transfer process. Thus, it is the observed trust-
related actions of a partner that influence the level of trust
formed in another partner [31].
Furthermore, literature so far has mainly focused on
knowledge transfer in the offshore information systems
development context of developed countries [2], where both
the outsourcing markets and knowledge transfer experience
are
relatively
matured
when
compared
with
that
of
developing economies. In addition, there appears to be a
major shift toward domestic outsourcing [1]. Addressing this
gap from the context of a developing economy is significant
to create an understanding of outsourcing practitioners on
how to facilitate knowledge transfer successfully across
organizational boundaries and to drive greater business value
from their ISO initiatives. Therefore, it is necessary to
examine the kinds of social contexts in a developing
economy in general, and Ethiopia, in particular, that can
enhance knowledge sources’ perception of being trusted by
their recipients and how this felt trust is related to knowledge
transfer and ISDO success. Therefore, this study seeks to
address the following research question: To what extent does
knowledge sources' perception of being trusted in their
competence and benevolence by their recipients impact
knowledge transfer, and, ultimately, onshore ISDO success?
In the following sections, a presentation of the conceptual
underpinnings of the theoretical model that draws upon
multiple areas of research, including information systems,
trust, and social exchange theory is made. Then, the research
model
is
developed
and
hypotheses
are
formulated.
Thereafter, a plan for further study is briefly described.
Finally, the paper concludes with a discussion of the
implications of the study.
II.
BACKGROUND LITERATURE
A.
Information Systems Outsourcing Success
Defining information systems outsourcing success has
been a challenge for the field of IS. Previous studies defined
ISO success in different ways. For instance, outsourcing
success
is
described
as
the
attainment
of
strategic,
technological and economic benefits through outsourcing
activities [32]. By extending Grover et al.’s [32] model of
outsourcing success, Lee and Kim [33] introduced business
perspective
and
user
perspective
as
dimensions
of
outsourcing success. Additionally, overall satisfaction is
integrated into the ISO success definition [34]. In sum,
different studies show that ISDO success is a multi-
dimensional construct consisting of strategic, economic,
technological, and relational benefits and overall satisfaction
from the ISDO arrangements.
B.
Trust
Due to the complex nature of trust, prior research has
given
diverse
interpretations
of
trust.
According
to
McAllister [35], there are two key dimensions of trust: (1)
affect-based, or benevolence trust, and (2) cognitive-based,
or competence trust. Affect-based is relationship-oriented
[36] and it is largely based on ‘‘emotional’’ bonds between
individuals [37]. This dimension of trust is the belief about
reciprocated care and concern [35]. In contrast to affect-
based, cognitive-based trust is the belief about exchanging
partner’s competency [35]. It is mainly task-oriented [36].
According to Chowdhury [37], a separate investigation of
these two dimensions of trust is important as each has a
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

distinct pattern of association with knowledge transfer.
Besides the complexity of trust, the literature is ambiguous
about the multilevel nature of trust [38]. Zaheer et al. [38]
empirically find that the effects of trust in the inter-
organizational context are distinct from the individual level
of analysis. Thus, this study focuses on inter-organizational
perspective of trust.
Earlier IS studies have examined trust as an antecedent of
knowledge transfer [17] [26]. In order to ensure successful
transfer of knowledge, the existence of trustful relationship
between outsourcing partners is necessary [39]. Knowledge
transfer as a mediator factor is introduced between trust and
onshore ISDO success. This assumption is consistent with
prior works (e.g., [17] [26]). Empirical evidences have also
shown that both benevolence and competence trust have a
positive influence on knowledge transfer at the dyadic, team,
and individual levels [37] [40] [41]. Accordingly, this paper
proposes a trust-based relationship model (see Figure 1) for
onshore ISDO success.
III.
SOCIAL EXCHANGE THEORY (SET)
There are a number of theories to be used by researchers
to gain a comprehensive understanding of the relationships
among trust, knowledge transfer, and ISDO success. Social
exchange theory (SET) is one of the most prominent theories
to understand the social behavior of humans in an economic
context. According to SET, actors exchanging resources
voluntarily via a social exchange relationship by expecting
some future returns [42]. SET builds on essential social
norms’ constructs, for example, trust. Trust is one of the
relational exchange variables that leads to a successful
exchange relationship [43]. It assumes that both parties
involved in the exchange relationship invest without any
guarantee that such an investment will produce a future
return so that the risk of this investment requires trust [44].
While the origin of SET is at the individual level, it has also
been used to explain inter-organizational behavior during
economic undertakings [42]. Creating inter-organizational
relationships helps organizations cope with resource scarcity
while
achieving
goals
of
reducing
vulnerability
and
uncertainty [45].
Social exchange theory has served as an underlying
theoretical model for examining outsourcing relationships
and client-vendor exchanges [45]. In ISDO relationships,
clients and vendors carry out different tasks for one another
and exchange valuable resources [45]. Here, resources could
consist a variety of things including knowledge, ISD
methods and approaches, and software packages. In the
context of this particular research, the resource exchanged
between clients and vendors would be knowledge and the
outsourced
ISD
project
is
viewed
as
an
economic
undertaking. It is often argued that clients bring in business
knowledge and vendors bring in technical knowledge [30].
In addition to the social exchange of knowledge, clients and
vendors need to act on each other’s knowledge, combine it
during the development of the outsourced project [46] or
implementation of the system [26] [47].
In
conclusion,
this
paper
proposes
a
trust-based
relationship
model
(see
Figure
1)
for
onshore
ISD
outsourcing which includes (1) perceived benevolence trust,
(2) perceived competence trust, (3) knowledge transfer as a
mediator between perceived benevolence trust, perceived
competence trust and onshore ISD outsourcing success, (4)
onshore ISD outsourcing success as the dependent variable.
Figure 1. Conceptual Model
IV.
RESEARCH MODEL AND HYPOTHESES
The research model as illustrated in Figure 1 proposes
that knowledge transfer mediates the relationship between
perceived benevolence and perceived competence trusts and
onshore ISD success.
A.
Perceived Benevolence Trust
In this paper, with respect to the knowledge source,
perceived benevolence trust is defined as the perception of
the knowledge source being trusted by the recipient to have
goodwill or positive intentions toward it [31]. When a client
is perceived to have benevolence (goodwill) to the vendor,
the vendor will be more sensitive to its clients' needs and
expectations and more willing to help the client [41]. For
example, when clients engage in risk-taking behaviors such
as reduced controlling and monitoring of vendors' system
development activities, vendors can get signals about how
much clients trust them, and this felt trust could have
positive exchange outcomes [48]. Hence, such perception of
trust will alleviate the problem of knowledge hoarding and
motivate the vendor to engage in the knowledge transfer
process [41].
Conversely, when vendors' felt not trustworthy about
their benevolence, they tend to be less interested to know the
knowledge requirements of a client firm, which, in turn,
impacts the quality of knowledge to be transferred to the
client. In this regard, Chini [49] argues that effective
knowledge transfer necessitates proper identification of the
knowledge requirements of a knowledge recipient by a
knowledge source. By doing so, the knowledge source can
provide "what is appropriate, in a form that is appropriate"
[49, p. 65]. Thus, it can be argued that when vendors
perceived that their clients see them as not having goodwill
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

or positive intentions to them, the vendors will not be
encouraged to take risks by performing actions that result in
their being vulnerable to the clients. Taking the above into
consideration, the following hypothesis is formulated:
H1: Knowledge source's perceived benevolence trust is
positively associated with knowledge transfer.
Additionally, a direct effect of perceived benevolence
trust on onshore ISD project success is proposed. Vendors'
perceptions of being trusted by their clients can contribute to
outsourcing success as it improves openness and working
relationship, gives room for flexibility, and reduces the cost
of coordinating activities [50]. On the other hand, when
vendors' perceived benevolence trust is low, they become
skeptical of the sustainability of their relationships with their
clients. Thus, they might give less attention to the acquisition
of knowledge about the long-term business strategies of their
clients. According to Lacity and Willcocks [51], vendors’
deliveries of the promised high-quality software product is
hampered by the inadequacy of knowledge about the long-
term business strategy of the clients. In general, a short-term
oriented relationship of vendors will hamper the values to be
derived from the ISO initiatives of the client firms. However,
vendors seeking long-term relationships with their clients are
committing resources to an ISD project and investing extra
time and effort on it [52]. These vendors strive for improving
customer value. They give priority to achieving client
satisfaction by properly managing their customer value
improvement process which is aimed at showing their
competence and gain their market reputation [52]. This will
generate value and enhance the outsourcing performance to
clients.
Feeling
of
not
trusted
can
also
make
vendors'
development efforts limited to the officially agreed technical
systems specifications. In other words, the vendor will be
reserved to come up with innovative technical solutions to
the client's business problem as the outsourcing service
provider may feel that it will be harmed in this particular
relationship. Sedera et al. [6] suggest that client satisfaction
in outsourcing deals doesn’t necessarily mean the delivery of
the formal specifications, rather it entails delivering business
value beyond that, for example, the introduction of new
business processes and adding new software components.
Therefore, only the clients' trust in the vendors is not leading
to a successful transfer of knowledge to clients, which, in
turn, affects ISO success. Rather, the trust-related behaviors
exhibited by the recipient matters. Clients can be shared the
value generated by vendors [53] when their trust in vendors
is practically demonstrable, for example, alignment of risks
and
incentives
associated
with
contracts.
Thus,
it
is
hypothesized that:
H2: Knowledge source's perceived benevolence trust is
positively associated with onshore ISD success.
B.
Perceived Competence Trust
Empirical studies in ISO settings show that knowledge
recipient’s perception of a knowledge source’s expertise is
positively associated with knowledge transfer (e.g., [26]
[54]). However, it is unclear what will happen to knowledge
transfer to the recipient when the knowledge source has the
perception of not trusted by the recipient. Concerning the
knowledge source, perceived competence trust is defined as
the perception of the knowledge source being trusted by the
client about its expertise to accomplish outsourcing tasks and
reliability to carry out its promises [35] [55]. Vendors as
knowledge sources are more likely to show positive
knowledge transfer behavior when they felt trusted by their
clients. For instance, if vendors' perception of being trusted
by their clients about their competence is high, they tend to
be motivated to work together and to put in extra effort for
transferring the necessary knowledge to the client [17].
Moreover,
vendors’
willingness
to
assist
clients
to
understand
their
technical
knowledge
during
the
IS
development activities will be increased, thus knowledge
transfer
to
clients
will
be
facilitated
[56].
Vendors'
perception of being trusted in their competence will facilitate
knowledge transfer to clients as it increases vendors'
willingness to transfer knowledge and collaborate whenever
necessary [57]. Positive perception of being trusted by
clients will improve the client-vendor relationship. This
trusting relationship will increase the vendor's engagement
with the client’s business problem and lead to a greater
amount of knowledge transfer to the client [47].
Contrarily, when vendors felt that their clients are in lack
of trust about their development capability, they will be less
motivated to work collaboratively with the client. This lack
of collaboration
can
create difficulties
in
outsourcing
partners to properly identify and implement the most
efficient and applicable technical solution for the problem at
hand [6]. Based on the above arguments, the following
hypothesis is proposed:
H3: Knowledge source's perceived competence trust is
positively related to knowledge transfer.
In this paper, the direct effect of trust on ISO success is
also proposed. Empirical studies show that a high level of
competence trust in a social exchange relationship improves
ISO performance (e.g., [26]). However, the effect of
vendors’ perceptions of being trusted by their clients about
their competence on successfully accomplishing onshore
ISD projects is not empirically investigated. A higher level
of
vendor's
felt
competence
trust
makes
the
vendor
cooperative and willing to work closely with the client [50].
As a result, the vendor tends to provide immense support to
its client. Besides, the vendor is more likely to work hard to
meet its client expectations. These trust related actions of the
vendor will motivate the client to engage in a more open and
effective communication [50], which enables the vendor to
obtain a better understanding of its client's expectations on
its tasks and to achieve a higher task performance. Taking
the above into consideration, it can be argued that when
vendors felt trusted by their clients, they tend to act more
responsibly to fulfill the expectations of their clients, thus it
leads to higher ISO success. Hence, the following hypothesis
is formulated:
H4: Knowledge source's perceived competence trust is
positively associated with onshore
ISD success.
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

C.
Knowledge Transfer and Onshore ISD Success
Studies on information systems suggest that knowledge
transfer is one of the key factors that impacts ISO success. In
this study, onshore ISD success refers to the overall
organizational benefits obtained from outsourcing by a client
firm [58]. These include the client’s satisfaction with the
developed system, delivery of the project within the agreed
time in the contract, derived values from the outsourcing
relationship,
relationship
satisfaction,
and
overall
satisfaction. On the other hand, knowledge transfer is defined
as the flow of knowledge from a knowledge source so that it
is applied by a recipient [47]. Table I summarizes the
definitions of each construct of the research model.
TABLE I.
CONCEPTUAL DEFINITION OF THE CONSTRUCTS
Knowledge transfer in ISO relationships increases the
level of shared knowledge [59], reduces development costs,
and creates a strong relationship between partners [57].
When essential knowledge is transferred effectively between
clients and vendors, they can better practice their outsourcing
activities and develop a long term outsourcing relationship
[17] [60]. Moreover, Teo and Bhattacherjee [16] argue that
transferred knowledge will generate value for clients when it
is effectively utilized. Similarly, Park and Lee [54] suggest
that knowledge transfer can improve information systems
development performance due to improved decision making
and coordination. In sum, a successful transfer of knowledge
will increase the chance of ISO success [61]. Taking the
above
into
consideration,
the
following
hypothesis
is
proposed:
H5: Knowledge transfer is positively related to onshore
ISD success.
V.
A PLAN FOR FUTURE WORK
The proposed research model will be tested empirically
with data collected through a survey of client and vendor
project managers in a matched-pair sample. A step-by-step
procedure recommended by MacKenzie et al. [62] will be
used to develop the survey instrument. Measures of ISO
success will be adapted from Xu and Yao [63]. For the
knowledge transfer, the instrument developed by Teo and
Bhattacherjee [16] will be adapted. The measures of
perceived
benevolence
trust
and
measure
perceived
competence trust will be adapted from Ko [26]. All
constructs of this survey will be measured using multi-item
scales with seven-point Likert rating scales.
The unit of analysis of this study is onshore information
system
development
outsourcing
projects
in
Ethiopia.
Therefore, project-level data on each project will be
collected from two members from the same project: a client
project manager and a vendor project manager. The data will
be analyzed by using Smart-PLS 3.0. Using the Smart-PLS
software, data will be analyzed at two stages. In the first
stage, the measurement model will be tested to ensure that
the constructs had sufficient psychometric properties (i.e.,
reliability and validity of the measures). In the second stage,
an assessment of the structural model will be done to test and
provide statistics on the strength of the hypothesized
relationships among the constructs.
VI.
CONCLUSION
This study aims to examine the extent to which the
effects
of
perceived
benevolence
trust
and
perceived
competence trust on onshore ISD project success are
mediated by knowledge transfer in a client-vendor dyad. The
conceptual model is an attempt to provide an alternative lens
for viewing trust in a client-vendor relationship. This study is
expected to have implications for theory and practice.
Theoretically, this paper extends prior trust research by
introducing the concepts—perceived benevolence trust and
perceived competence trust— as essential aspects of trust in
a dyadic business relationship. Moreover, it shows that
knowledge source's perceived benevolence and perceived
competence trusts play important roles in influencing
knowledge transfer to the recipient that in turn affects
onshore ISD project success. Practically, the results of the
study are expected to provide useful insights on how IS/IT
managers of a developing economy can create trusting
relationships
with
outsourcing
partners
for
effective
knowledge transfer to take place and to ensure onshore ISD
project success. First, the study shows that an outsourced IS
development project is knowledge-intensive work and its
success depends on the successful transfer of the requisite
knowledge. This can
be achieved
through
a
trusting
relationship between outsourcing partners that encourages
closer
cooperation
&
open
discussions
and
avoids
opportunistic
behavior.
Second,
this
study
shows
the
importance of paying due attention to tacit knowledge that is
difficult
to
codify
and
articulate,
but
outsourcing
practitioners can only transfer it successfully through their
direct interactions.
REFERENCES
[1]
L. Kappelman, E. McLean, V.
Johnson, R. Torres, C.
Maurer, and K. Kim, “The 2018 SIM IT Issues and Trends
Study,” MIS Quarterly Executive, vol.18, no.1, pp. 51-84,
2019.
[2]
J-J Wang, N. Sasanipoor, and M-M Wang, “How PMBOK
standard and partnership quality
influence
IT
outsourcing
success:
An
investigation
of
the
mediated
moderation
effects,”
Journal
of
Global
Information
Technology
Management, pp. 1-19, 2018.
[3]
L. Bergkvist
and O. Fredriksson, “Outsourcing terms: A
literature review from an ISD perspective,” ECIS 2008
Proceedings, Paper 129, 2008.
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[4]
S. M. Nuwangi and D. Sedera, “Lessons from a filed IS
outsourcing project,” Twenty-Third Pacific Asia Conference
on Information Systems, 2019.
[5]
S. U. Khan, M. Niazi,
and R. Ahmad,
"Barriers in the
Selection of Offshore Software Development Outsourcing
Vendors: An Exploratory Study Using a Systematic Literature
Review," Information and Software Technology, vol.53, pp.
693-706, 2011.
[6]
D. Sedera, S. Lokuge, H. Krcmar, and S. C. Srivastava, The
future of outsourcing in the
Asia-Pacific
Region:
Implications for research and practice—panel report from
PACIS 2014, 2014.
[7]
KPMG, "Global IT-BPO Outsourcing Deals Analysis: annual
analysis
for
2017,"
https://assets.kpmg/content/dam/kpmg/in/pdf/2018/05/KPMG
-Deal-Tracker-2017.pdf (accessed July 25th 2017).
[8]
A. Yan, “Effective outsourcing governance: A configurational
approach,” PACIS 2018 Proceeding, 147, 2018.
[9]
I. Gartner, “ Forecast: IT Services, Worldwide, 2015-2021,
2017
Update.
Gartner,
Stamford,
USA,”
URL:
htttps://wwwgartner.com (visited on 16/01/2019).
[10] M. Lixi, and M. Dahan, "ICT as an enabler of ICT as an
enabler of transformation in Ethiopia,", 2014,
Washington,
DC:
World
Bank
Group,
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/93846146825673
1409/ICT-as-an-enabler-of-Transformation-in-Ethiopia
(visited on 25/04/2019).
[11] S. A. Nurye, A. Molla, and T. A. Desta, “Factors Influencing
Knowledge Transfer in Onshore
InformationSystems
Outsourcing in Ethiopia,” African Journal of Information
Systems, vol.11, issue 4, article 2, pp. 279-298, 2019.
[12] United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(UNCTAD), 2013,
retrieved January 30, 2019 from http://
unctad.org/meetings/en/Presentation/CSTD_2013_WSIS_Ethi
opia_E-Gov_Strategy.pdf.
[13] K. Billy Mathias BM, O. Oludayo O,
and K. Ray M,
"Identifying Critical Success Factors: the case of ERP
Systems in Higher Education," The African Journal of
Information Systems, vol. 6, issue 3, Article 1, 2014.
[14] D. Beyene,
S. Negash, T. Bandyopadhyay, "Information
Technology outsourcing
Risk
Management
Practices
in
Higher Educational Institutes in Ethiopia-a qualitative study,"
Twenty-first Americas Conference on Information Systems,
Puerto Rico, pp. 1-12, 2015.
[15] C. Schwarz,“Toward an understanding of the nature and
conceptualization of outsourcing success,” Information and
Management, vol.51, pp.152–164, 2014.
[16] T. S. Teo and A. Bhattacherjee, “Knowledge transfer and
utilization in IT outsourcing partnerships: A preliminary
model
of
antecedents and
outcomes,” Information
and
Management, vol. 51, pp.176-186, 2014.
[17] J-N Lee, M. Q. Huynh, and R. Hirschheim, “An integrative
model of trust on IT outsourcing: Examining a bilateral
perspective,” Information Systems Frontiers, vol. 10, pp.145-
163, 2008.
[18] S. M. Nuwangi, D. Sedera,
and S. C. Srivastava, "Multi-
layered
Control
Mechanisms
in
Software
Development
Outsourcing,” PACIS 2018 Proceedings. 167, 2018.
[19] A. Tiwana and E.R. McLean, " Expertise Integration and
Creativity in Information Systems Development," Journal of
Management Information Systems ,vol., no. 22, pp. 13–43,
2005.
[20] Y. Li, Yang, B. Yang, Y. Feng, and G. Li, "Organizational
Structure and Absorptive Capacity in Offshore Outsourcing,"
PACIS
2014
Proceedings,
307,
doi:
aisel.aisnet.org/pacis2014/307.
[21] L-G. Pee, A. Kankanhalli, and H-W. Kim, "Knowledge
Sharing in Information Systems Development: A Social
Interdependence Perspective," Journal of the Association for
Information Systems ,vol. 11, Issue 10, pp. 550-575, 2010.
[22] L.P. Willcocks, J. Hindle, D. Feeny, and M. Lacity, "IT and
Business Process Outsourcing: The Knowledge Potential,"
Information Systems Management, vol. 21, no. 3, pp.7-15,
2004.
[23] R. T. Nakatsu and C. L. Iacovou, "A Comparative Study of
Important Risk Factors Involved in Offshore and Domestic
Outsourcing of Software Development Projects: A Two-Panel
Delphi Study," Information and Management, vol.46, pp. 57-
68, 2009.
[24] P. Savolainen, J. J. Ahonen,
and I. Richardson, "Software
Development Project Success and Failure from the Supplier's
Perspective: A Systematic Literature Review," International
Journal of Project Management, vol. 30, pp. 458-469, 2012.
[25] S. C. Srivastava and T. S. H.Teo, "Contract Performance in
Offshore
Systems
Development:
Role
of
Control
Mechanisms," Journal of Management Information Systems,
vol. 29, pp. 115-158, 2012.
[26] D-G Ko, "The mediating role of knowledge transfer and the
effects of client-consultant mutual trust on the performance of
enterprise
implementation
projects,
Information
and
Management, vol.51, pp.541–550, 2014.
[27] I. Rus, and M. Lindvall, "Knowledge Management in
Software Engineering," IEEE Software, vol. 19, no.3, pp. 26-
38, 2002.
[28] E. Duggan,"An investigation into the impediments to tacit
knowledge transfer," Level 3, vol. 12, issue 2, Article 3, pp.
1-14, 2015, doi: arrow.dit.ie/level3/vol12/iss2/3.
[29] A-L.
Chua
and
L.S.
Pan,
"Knowledge
transfer
and
organizational learning in IS offshore sourcing," Omega, vol.
36, pp. 267 – 281, 2008.
[30] T. Goles, "The Impact of the Client/Vendor Relationship on
Outsourcing
Success,"
Unpublished
PhD
Dissertation,
University of Houston, Texas, USA, 2001.
[31] M. A. Serva, M. A. Fuller, and R. C, Mayer, “The Reciprocal
Nature of Trust: A Longitudinal Study of Interacting Teams,”
Journal of Organizational Behavior, vol. 26, no.6, pp.625-648,
2005.
[32] V. Grover, M. J. Cheon, and J. T. Teng,“The effect of service
quality and partnership on the outsourcing of information
systems functions,” Journal of Management Information
Systems, vol.12, pp. 89-116, 1996.
[33] J. N. Lee and Y. G. Kim,“Effect of partnership quality on IS
outsourcing success: Conceptual framework and empirical
validation,” Journal of Management Information Systems,
vol.15, pp. 29-61, 1999.
[34] C. Qi, "Relationship and contract issues of IT outsourcing ─ 
An empirical study in China," July 29, 2012, AMCIS 2012
Proceedings, Paper 3.
[35] D. J. McAllister, “Affect- and cognition-based trust as
foundations for interpersonal cooperation in organizations,”
Academy of Management Journal, vol.38, no.1, pp.24-59,
1995.
[36] V. Ribière and F. Tuggle, “The Influence of Organizational
Trust on the Use of KM Systems and on the Success of KM
Initiatives,”
In:
Knowledge
management
in
Modern
Organizations. Hershey: Idea Group Publishing, pp.96-120,
2007.
[37] S. Chowdhury, “The Role of Affect-an d Cognition-based
Trust
in
Complex
Knowledge
Sharing,”
Journal
of
Managerial Issues, vol. 17, no.3, pp.310-326, 2005.
[38] A. Zaheer, B. McEvily, and V. Perrone, "Does Trust Matter?
Exploring
the
Effects
of
Inter-organizational
and
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Interpersonal Trust on Performance, Organization Science,
vol. 9, no. 2, pp.141-159, 1998.
[39] K. D. Joshi, S. Sarker, and S. Sarker, “Knowledge Transfer
Within Information Systems Development Teams: Examining
the Role of Knowledge Source Attributes,” Decision Support
Systems, vol. 43, no. 2, pp.322-335, 2007.
[40] T. Mooradian, B.
Renzl,
and
K. Matzler,
“Who Trusts?
Personality, Trust and Knowledge Sharing,” Management
Learning, vol. 37, no. 4, pp.523–540, 2006.
[41] W.-L. Wu, B-F Hsu,
and
R-S Yeh, “Fostering the
determinants of knowledge transfer: a team-level analysis,”
Journal of Information Science, vol. 33, no. 3, pp.326–339,
2007.
[42] C.-C. Liu, T-P Liang, B. Rajagopalan, V. Sambamurthy, and
J. C.-H. Wu, “Knowledge Sharing as Social Exchange:
Evidence from a Meta-Analysis,” Pacific Asia Journal of the
Association for Information Systems, vol. 3, issue 4, Article 3
pp. 21-47, 2011.
[43] C. J. Lambe, C. M. Wittmann, and R. E. Spekman, “Social
Exchange Theory and Research on Business-to-Business
Relational
Exchange,”
Journal
of
Business-to-Business
Marketing, vol. 8, no.3, pp.1–36, 2001.
[44] P. M. Blau, Exchange and Power in Social Life, New York:
John Wiley and Sons Inc, 1964.
[45] J. Goo, R. Kishore, K. Nam, H. R. Rao, and Y. Song, “An
investigation of factors that influence the duration of IT
outsourcing relationships,” Decision Support Systems, vol.42,
pp.2107–2125, 2007.
[46] Faraj, S. and Sproull, L., “Coordinating expertise in software
development teams”, Management Science, vol. 46, no. 12,
pp. 1554-68, 2000.
[47] D.-G. Ko, L. J.
Kirsch,
and W. R. King, “Antecedents of
knowledge transfer from consultants to clients in enterprise
system implementations,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 29, no.1, pp.
59-85, 2005.
[48] T.-Y. Kim, J. Wang, and J. Chen, “Mutual Trust Between
Leader and Subordinate and Employee Outcomes,” Journal of
Business Ethics, 2016, doi 10.1007/s10551-016-3093-y.
[49] T. C. Chini, "Effective Knowledge Transfer in Multinational
Corporations," Palgrave Macmillan, 2004.
[50] H. M. Khamseh, and D. R. Jolly, “Knowledge transfer in
alliances:
determinant
factors,”
Journal
of
Knowledge
Management, vol. 12, no.1, pp. 37-50, 2008.
[51] M. C. Lacity and L. P. Willcocks, "Information Systems and
Outsourcing: Studies in Theory and Practice," Basingstoke,
Hampshire: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009.
[52] J.-N. Lee,
“Exploring the Vendor’s Process Model in
Information Technology Outsourcing,” Communications of
the Association for Information Systems, vol.22, no. 31, 2008.
[53] N. Levina, and J. W. Ross, “From the Vendor's Perspective:
Exploring the Value Proposition in IT Outsourcing,”
MIS
Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 3, pp.331-364, 2003.
[54] J.-G. Park and J. Lee, “Knowledge sharing in information
systems
development
projects:
Explicating
the
role
of
dependence and trust,” International Journal of Project
Management, vol.32, pp.153–165, 2014.
[55] R. Krishnan, X. Martin, and N. Noorderhaven, “When does
trust
matter
to
alliance
performance?”
Academy
of
Management Journal, vol. 49, no. 5, pp.894–917, 2006.
[56] P. J. Lane, J. E. Salk, and M. A. Lyles, “Absorptive Capacity,
Learning, and Performance in International Joint Ventures,”
Strategic Management Journal, vol.22, pp.1139-1161, 2001.
[57] J.
W.
Rottman,
“Successful knowledge transfer
within
offshore supplier networks: A case study exploring social
capital
in
strategic
alliances,”
Journal
of
Information
Technology, vol.23, pp.31-43, 2008.
[58] J.-N. Lee, “The impact of knowledge sharing, organizational
capability and partnership quality on IS outsourcing success,”
Information and Management, vol. 38, pp.323-335, 2001.
[59] S.
Blumenberg,
H.
T.
Wagner,
and
D.
Beimborn,
“Knowledge transfer processes in IT outsourcing relationships
and their impact on shared knowledge and outsourcing
performance,”
International
Journal
of
Information
Management, vol. 29, no. 5, pp.342-352, 2009.
[60] M. S. Al-Azad and J. Ahn, “A research framework of vendor
firms body of knowledge (BOK) and its impact on offshore IT
outsourcing performance,” PACIS 2014 Proceedings, Paper
308, 2014.
[61] W. Wang and C. Gan, "Study on knowledge transfer in
knowledge process outsourcing (KPO)," PACIS Proceedings,
Paper 188, 2010.
[62] S. B. MacKenzie, P. M. Podsakoff,
and N. P. Podsakoff,
“Construct Measurement and Validation Procedures in MIS
and Behavioral Research: Integrating New and Existing
Techniques,” MIS Quarterly, vol. 35, no. 2, pp.293-334,
2011.
[63] P. Xu and Y. Yao, “Knowledge sharing in offshore software
development: A vendor perspective,” Journal of Global
Information Technology Management, vol. 16, no. 1, pp. 58-
84, 2013.
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

