Moving E-Commerce Towards E-Commodity 
A Consequence of Cloud Computing 
 
Robert Neumann, Konstantina Georgieva,  
Reiner Dumke 
Department of Distributed Systems 
Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg 
39106 Magdeburg, Germany 
{robneuma, ina, dumke}@ivs.cs.ovgu.de 
Andreas Schmietendorf 
Berlin School of Economics and Law 
Fachbereich II 
10245 Berlin, Germany 
andreas.schmietendorf@hwr-berlin.de
 
 
Abstract—Many people believe that nowadays everything can 
be purchased online, but the reality could not be further from 
the truth. A recent survey that we have conducted in two 
medium-sized German cities revealed that only about 12% of 
all businesses are able to accept online orders. While 100% of 
all large enterprises run their own online store, only 6.9% of 
all micro, small and medium enterprises are able to receive 
online orders. The obvious outcome of such an e-commerce 
disparity is that consumers can only very rarely place online 
orders at their favorite local stores. In this article, we will 
describe the idea of providing electronic commerce as a 
commodity service to micro, small and medium enterprises. 
We will identify business-side as well as technology-side 
problems that exist in current e-commerce and discuss 
strategies to mediate them. 
Keywords-E-commerce; e-commodity; micro small and 
medium enterprises; cloud computing; product definition; agile 
e-commerce. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
In the Internet era, electronic commerce (e-commerce) 
plays an important role for both consumers as well as 
suppliers. E-commerce enables individuals to purchase 
goods from their computers at home and get them delivered 
to their address. Suppliers on the other hand benefit from a 
distribution channel that is cheap and very close to the 
customer.  
The number of internet users has increased considerably 
since the mid-1990s. At the same time, the revenue that is 
generated by internet-based e-commerce has increased 
steadily and keeps increasing [1]. While this development is 
remarkable, contemporary e-commerce is limited to goods 
that are easy to describe, standardized and that have low 
asset specificity [2]. Adler adds that products that qualify 
best for e-commerce are so called “search products”, which 
can be purchased based only on search qualities [3]. Products 
and services that do not meet above requirements or are no 
search products and are not frequently or not at all traded on 
the internet.  
Especially, so called micro, small and medium 
enterprises (MSMEs) -that are enterprises with less than 250 
employees [4]- do not very often draw benefit from the 
development that has taken place in e-commerce. Reasons 
for that can be found in MSMEs (especially micro 
enterprises) often dealing with goods and services that are 
considered as being difficult to trade on the internet as well 
as in the complexity and cost related to the maintenance of e-
commerce systems.  
With 99% of all European businesses being MSMEs [4] 
and the vast majority of them not being able to accept online 
orders, end-consumers are seldom able to purchase those 
goods online which they normally buy from local stores 
around the area they live in. Goods that consumers buy on a 
daily basis (e.g., groceries, toiletries, etc.) are not yet often to 
be found on the internet. Appointments with local craftsman, 
practitioners, barbers or other service providers can still not 
be booked online. We have referred to a kind of e-commerce 
where those products and services that individuals buy on a 
daily basis can be purchased online as day-by-day e-
commerce (DBDE-Commerce) [5]. 
In accordance with our vision of DBDE-Commerce, 
throughout this article we will provide a new perspective on 
how to turn e-commerce into commodity (“e-commodity”). 
We will refer to the concept of making e-commerce available 
to each and every business as E-Com-E-Com (“e-commerce 
as e-commodity”). Inspired by the fundamental ideas behind 
cloud computing to make computational power become 
utility (similar to electricity out of a socket), we will 
introduce a prototype for an intelligent cloud platform that 
aims at providing virtual storefronts to businesses as 
commodity service. 
II. 
OVERVIEW AND RELATED WORK 
The development which has taken place in the field of 
electronic commerce goes back to the progress of the World 
Wide Web. With the upcoming of hypertext and hypertext-
enabled web browsers it became possible to provide product 
information online and to conduct purchases as well as sales 
over the internet. In the period between 1994 and 1999, 
many enterprises have moved to the internet while they were 
expecting an increase in sales caused by their online shops 
[6]. Amongst these enterprises, only a few succeeded in 
establishing a global platform for international trade with a 
diverse variety of products and services that can be 
32
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

purchased online. The most prominent examples can be 
found in the US-based enterprises eBay or Amazon, which at 
the moment can be considered as leaders in their field of 
business.  
Both the internet as well as internet-based commerce 
keep growing continuously and the number of people who 
have access to web-based virtual storefronts is increasing 
steadily. According to a report of the German federation of 
information technology, telecommunication and new media 
(BITKOM), currently two thirds of all German individuals 
have permanent access to the internet [7]. Furthermore, the 
E-Commerce Guide, published by a consortium of different 
members who are engaged in e-commerce, mentions that 
about 70% of all German individuals with broad band 
connection are frequently purchasing goods and services 
online [8]. The business volume of electronic commerce in 
1999 summed up to 1.3 billion €. In 2009, it rose up to 17.3 
billion € while the 2014 sales forecast for Germany predicts 
27.2 billion € worth of online orders [9]. The Online 
Shopping Survey (OSS) of the GfK, the largest German 
market research institution, revealed that the most popular 
products of electronic trade in 2009 were books (14,9 million 
individuals), clothes (14,7 million individuals), event tickets 
(12,5 million individuals), music (8,5 million individuals) 
and hotel reservations (7,4 million individuals) [10]. 
Given the Online Shopping Survey of the GfK, it appears 
that today’s e-commerce is dominated by easy-to-describe 
search products [2]. Though we believe that it is more 
difficult to also expand e-commerce into those product 
domains that deal with more complicated products and 
services, we are convinced that it is possible.  
III. 
FEATURES OF TODAY’S E-COMMERCE 
Different e-commerce suites have different functionality, 
but in general all of them provide certain base level features. 
These features include: 
 
- 
Product/service information 
- 
Usability 
- 
Customer support 
- 
Order fulfillment and payment 
- 
Logistics 
- 
Marketing 
- 
Trust with security and privacy 
 
When consumers browse websites with the intent to 
conduct online purchases, it is important to provide them 
with rich product and service information. Today's online 
shops have a lot of features for product presentation. Among 
the most popular ones are high-resolution images, webcasts 
or video tours for product configuration engines and online 
showrooms. Pricing information is always up to date and can 
change on a daily basis.  
Primary reasons for leaving a website are due to long 
load time, poor navigation, inconvenient coloring or bad 
page design. To improve the duration of stay of a visitor on a 
website, developers are given tools and guidelines to create 
their design in a robust and appealing manner. Many 
storefronts support multiple languages to reach a large 
number of customers in different countries. Options for 
searching, filtering and sorting of product information 
enhance the end-user experience and provide for an easier 
way of finding the desired item.  
Reoccurring product-related questions are addressed in 
frequently asked questions (FAQs). In addition, hotlines, 
web forms or live chats are available to customers for getting 
in contact with the vendor. In case of asynchronous 
communication, replies are normally guaranteed to be sent 
within 24 - 48 hours. Weblogs aim at equipping customers 
with an instrument to obtain information on products while 
those are still under development or for trouble shooting 
after the product was purchased.  
Advanced online shops have an integrated order and 
payment system or at least feature the possibility to connect 
an order and payment system via certain interfaces. Today's 
online shops track shopping baskets throughout the entire 
session of the customer and at the end of the online purchase 
gather logistics and payment information. Several online 
payment options exist (e.g., invoice, prepayment, debit entry, 
cash on delivery, credit card, PayPal or Click & Buy).  
Many shops provide fast delivery services offered by 
partnering logistics enterprises. Most frequently mentioned 
are DHL, UPS, or GLS. This way, it is possible to dispatch 
orders within 24 hours and provide order tracking services. 
Furthermore, certain enterprises (e.g., Alternate) offer short 
message services to confirm the order or to inform the 
customer about the status of the delivery.  
While several aspects of traditional commerce had to be 
adapted to new and different requirements in online 
commerce, marketing also had to come up with new selling 
strategies. Marketing techniques for online commerce 
include search engine optimization (SEO) to be ranked 
among the top entries of search engine results. Cross selling 
aims at recommending similar or complementary products to 
the customer. Google has developed AdWords to include 
semantic information in the placement of ad banners, so that 
users of a website get presented advertisement that 
corresponds with the semantic context and topic of the site. 
Several enterprises have started integrating social media, 
such as twitter or Facebook, in their online marketing. Others 
provide shopping club memberships (e.g., Limango or 
brands4friends), which suggest potentially interesting offers 
or hot deals to members. Word-of-mouth recommendation 
(e.g., TRND) is a new way of electronic product marketing, 
where members are given the opportunity to test products 
and recommend them to their friends. Members can test 
products, share them with friends and post the results on 
trnd.com. Another online marketing strategy is based upon 
enterprise coupon services, where every day vendors provide 
a new "Deal of the Day" (e.g., DailyDeal, CityDeal or 
Groupon).  
Finally, most online shops have features that aim at 
establishing a feeling of trust, security and privacy to their 
customers. To build up trust, online shop providers use seals 
of quality, such as Trusted Shops or Safer Shopping. Another 
helpful instrument to establish trust are guest books where 
customers can leave comments and feedback regarding 
previous purchases. Additionally, online shop owners use 
33
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

digital security certificates to protect users against data theft 
or interception.  
Together, all of the features above form an all-in-one 
package to earn user satisfaction and establish a long-lasting 
customer relationship. Though e-commerce in general and e-
commerce technology in particular have made an impressive 
development over the last two decades, we still do not see e-
commerce having become commodity. E-commerce is yet 
too much driven by industry and there are still too many 
factors within an organization that determine whether or not 
to run a virtual storefront. The end-user experiences 
supported by most online shops might seem acceptable to the 
majority of online customers, but at the same time this is 
where the caveat lies. If future e-commerce technology was 
capable of attracting a more diverse group of online 
customers while providing a larger number of products and 
services online, the functionality and features of today’s e-
commerce would expand even further into our daily 
shopping experience. Towards the end of this article, we are 
going to provide a list of novel features which we are going 
to support with our next generation e-commerce platform 
“Goliath”. 
IV. 
E-COMMERCE AS E-COMMODITY STUDY 
In June 2010, we have reviewed 1859 (Table 1) 
enterprises in two German cities, namely Magdeburg and 
Freiburg. We have chosen Magdeburg (population 230.000) 
and Freiburg (220.000) since both have a similarly big 
population, a similar number of businesses and since we 
have researchers in both areas who conducted the analysis. 
We have split the enterprises in both cities into 1757 
MSMEs as well as 102 large enterprises (LE). For the 
classification of MSMEs and LEs, we have employed the 
European Commission’s definition, where MSMEs are 
considered as enterprises with <250 employees and LEs as 
enterprises with >=250 employees [4]. Table 1 features the 
percentages of MSMEs with no own website (38.4%), 
enterprises with own website but now online shop (53.6%), 
enterprises with online shops (6.9%) and enterprises that use 
their website to promote special website deals (1.1%).  
 
TABLE I.  
NUMBER OF ANALYZED MSMES 
Information 
Magdeburg  
MSMEs 
Freiburg  
MSMEs 
Total 
MSMEs 
No website 
199 
475 
674 
Only website, 
no online shop 
629 
312 
941 
Online shop 
52 
70 
122 
Special deals 
20 
0 
20 
Total 
900 
857 
1757 
 
 
 
 
Out of the 900 MSMEs reviewed in Magdeburg, 199 
(22.1%) have no own website, 629 (69.9%) have an own 
website but are not able to accept online offers, 20 (2.2%) 
have a website to inform about special offers and deals (or 
limited features) and only 52 (5.8%) enterprises run their 
own electronic storefront (Figure 1).  
 
 
Figure 1. MSME e-commerce in Magdeburg. 
In case of the city of Freiburg, out of 857 MSMEs 475 
(55.4%) have no own website, 312 (36.4%) have an own 
website but do not accept online offers and only 70 (8.2%) 
have an online shop (Figure 2). 
 
 
Figure 2. MSME e-commerce in Freiburg. 
With merely 5.8% of all MSMEs in Magdeburg and 
8.2% in Freiburg being able to accept online orders, the 
results are very similar. It is also important to note that out of 
the 1859 enterprises reviewed in both cities, only 102 (5.4%) 
can be considered as large enterprises that in one way or 
another act as retailers. Among those large enterprises, the 
websites of all 102 businesses (100%) feature an online 
ordering system. 
While 93.1% of all MSMEs (together in Freiburg and 
Magdeburg) not being able to accept online orders seems to 
be quite a large percentage, we are next going to hypothesize 
in our KULI model reasons for MSMEs to yet reject the 
option of electronically exposing their products and services 
on the internet.  
V. 
BUSINESS-SIDE E-COM-E-COM FACTORS 
When enterprises consider the introduction of an 
electronic storefront for their business, there are many 
aspects that play into the decision making process. An online 
shop might, for example, only be feasible for enterprises 
which do not depend too much on drop-in customers, 
34
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

enterprises which offer products that are easy to describe or 
enterprises which have access to appropriate logistics 
facilities or logistics service providers. Another problematic 
aspect is that, as most enterprises do not have IT as their 
major field of business, a significant portion of MSMEs 
might lack the knowledge and technical understanding that is 
required for running e-commerce. Others might be too 
focused 
upon 
maintaining 
their 
existing 
business 
infrastructure to investigate the possibilities of e-commerce 
or might simply lack the time to take related initiatives. 
Again others might find e-commerce to be an appealing 
option for extending their market, but might have products 
that require certain agility from logistics service providers 
(e.g., perishable goods, such as food). Last but not least, 
running an online shop might simply be too expensive for 
certain MSMEs (cp. TCO of e-commerce in [5]) where this 
could mean that -due to the structure and products of the 
business- the e-commerce facility does not generate enough 
return on investment (ROI) to be an option to pursue or to 
even come up for the running cost of the online shop. 
VI. 
KULI MODEL OF E-COMMERCE MATURITY 
In our KULI model, we have picked up above thoughts, 
whereby KULI stands for Knowledge, Unawareness, 
Logistics and Investment. With KULI, we try to raise 
attention for the problems and difficulties MSMEs might 
face with respect to a possible adoption of e-commerce. 
Knowledge: In order to setup, run and maintain an 
online shop, a variety of technical skills is required. Starting 
with the creation of a database and the setup of a web server 
towards the installation of the online shop software and the 
deployment to the web server, the majority of MSMEs 
would already get lost before they have specified even their 
first online product. Enterprises could compensate their lack 
of technical expertise by purchasing service hours of 
specialized companies and consultants. As we will see later, 
the cost for outsourcing the technical administration 
represents another major barrier for MSMEs towards the 
adoption of e-commerce. 
Unawareness: As we have indicated earlier already, 
many MSMEs might simply be unaware of the chances e-
commerce could bring to their business. We hypothesize that 
this is most often due to the size and the limited revenue 
MSMEs operate upon, so that no or only very limited 
resources exist within the organization that could deal with 
strategic questions and new technologies. To our opinion, it 
has always been and it will always remain a core problem of 
all e-business related research to communicate the many 
benefits of e-commerce to MSME decision makers in a way, 
so that they can access them and clearly identify where 
information system technology could add value to their 
organization.  
Logistics: The third aspect the KULI model tries to point 
out is logistics. If enterprises depend on an own logistics 
facility in order to dispatch their online products, they will in 
most cases have to run their own fleet. Running an own fleet, 
however, is expensive and thus most enterprises would 
immediately withdraw this option, if no positive ROI was 
within sight. For certain businesses, however, it turned out to 
be an appealing extension of their business model to run e-
commerce in addition to their traditional distribution 
channel. Pizza deliveries, restaurants or even pharmacies, for 
instance, offer to immediately dispatch their orders by using 
their own fleet. Businesses that wanted to online expose their 
products to a local market (as in the case of the pizza 
delivery) would also need to be able to rely upon an own 
fleet, or at least a logistics service provider that is capable of 
rapidly dispatching orders to local customers [11]. In this 
context, one should also evaluate the feasibility of a shared 
logistics provider or fleet that could be owned by a 
conglomerate of local businesses. This way, local MSMEs 
could share the cost for a fleet, which might at the same time 
be a solution for overcoming the cost barrier of an 
instantaneous dispatch handling. For many MSMEs, a shared 
logistics model could even represent the enabler for a future 
e-commerce go-live. 
Investment: Last but not least, the KULI model of e-
commerce adoption points out the role of the initial 
investment that is to be brought up for introducing e-
commerce in an enterprise. Though several MSMEs might 
already have thought about adding e-commerce to their order 
handling, another significant number might find the 
investment for software, hardware, administration and 
consulting services to be out of proportion in the respective 
case of their business. In an earlier work, we have referred to 
this phenomenon where MSMEs might be attracted by the 
chances and possibilities of e-commerce, but on the other 
hand might not be able to bring up the initial investment as 
“MSME dilemma” [12]. Though critics might argue that 
nowadays there exists a variety of open source online shop 
software that can be procured for free, we would like to 
emphasize that MSMEs would still need to know how to set 
up the software (refer to “KULI/Knowledge”). Though so 
called rental shops, which represent online shops that are 
deployed and hosted by specialized companies, eliminate the 
procurement and installation of soft- and hardware on the 
MSME’s side, the majority of enterprises will still not know 
how to customize the software to reflect their individual 
requirements or how to model products in their online shop. 
Again, the services of administrators or companies 
specialized on content management would need to be 
purchased. One large-enterprise real-world example for this 
can be found in the German T-Systems that not only hosts 
large-scale e-commerce suites, but also handles the content 
management for their customers. Though similar service 
providers have appeared in the small and medium segment 
(e.g., Open IceCat), services offered might yet be too 
expensive, of a limited functional scope or simply assume 
MSMEs to at least have basic level of information system 
support available in their organization. 
We have summarized all four KULI factors in Figure 3, 
where we propose one question for each KULI factor. Only 
if all four questions are answered with “Yes”, an MSME is 
mature enough to start running an online shop or engage in 
e-commerce. 
 
35
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Figure 3. KULI model of e-commerce maturity.
With the questionnaire above, MSMEs are given a tool to 
evaluate and review their KULI maturity. Enterprises with a 
positive KULI maturity (overall “Yes”) should se
considering an introduction of e-commerce to their business. 
Enterprises with a negative KULI maturity (overall “No”) 
should start analyzing how to increase their maturit
example, 
increasing 
their 
knowledge 
or 
awareness. 
Furthermore, MSMEs with a negative KULI maturity should 
evaluate how to deal with “logistics” or how to bring up the 
funds necessary for the initial investment. 
VII. TOWARD AN E-COM-E-COM 
In the previous section, we have introduced 
outlining the reasons of why traditional e
technology is not yet accepted at large scale by micro 
businesses. In a related work, we have talked about Organic 
Product Catalogs (OPCs) [13] that aim at providing a smooth 
entry for MSMEs to electronic commerce.
section, we are going to detail the behinds of organic product 
catalogs and will demonstrate how a cloud platform serves as 
the ideal platform to develop upon. 
VIII. ORGANIC PRODUCT CATALOGS
The concept of organic product catalogs (OPCs) tries to 
provide a platform that is very close to the end
operates at minimum cost. The closeness is expressed as 
OPCs being driven by their user community; thei
made by the community for the community. The general 
intention behind this closeness argument is that if person A 
has created something in the OPC that could be useful for 
person B, B can very easily reuse this for his purposes. We 
will later detail how this could look in practice.
One fundamental requirement to an OPC is universality: 
No matter how easy or complicated a product or service is, it 
must be describable in the OPC. Therefore, OPCs at their 
very basis expose a universal product defi
(PDL) to the user that allows for the description of any 
arbitrary product or service. The assumption that underlies 
the PDL is that each and every product can be expressed in 
hierarchical form as a composition of attributes. In 
accordance 
with 
the 
“divide-and-conquer” 
principle, 
complex 
products 
are 
expressed 
as 
a 
hierarchical 
composition of attributes. Figure 4 is featuring a simple PDL
 
commerce maturity. 
With the questionnaire above, MSMEs are given a tool to 
evaluate and review their KULI maturity. Enterprises with a 
positive KULI maturity (overall “Yes”) should seriously start 
commerce to their business. 
Enterprises with a negative KULI maturity (overall “No”) 
should start analyzing how to increase their maturity by, for 
example, 
increasing 
their 
knowledge 
or 
awareness. 
MSMEs with a negative KULI maturity should 
evaluate how to deal with “logistics” or how to bring up the 
funds necessary for the initial investment.  
OM DESIGN MODEL 
In the previous section, we have introduced a model for 
the reasons of why traditional e-commerce 
technology is not yet accepted at large scale by micro 
In a related work, we have talked about Organic 
that aim at providing a smooth 
entry for MSMEs to electronic commerce. Throughout this 
section, we are going to detail the behinds of organic product 
catalogs and will demonstrate how a cloud platform serves as 
ATALOGS 
The concept of organic product catalogs (OPCs) tries to 
provide a platform that is very close to the end-user and 
operates at minimum cost. The closeness is expressed as 
OPCs being driven by their user community; their content is 
made by the community for the community. The general 
intention behind this closeness argument is that if person A 
has created something in the OPC that could be useful for 
person B, B can very easily reuse this for his purposes. We 
detail how this could look in practice. 
One fundamental requirement to an OPC is universality: 
No matter how easy or complicated a product or service is, it 
must be describable in the OPC. Therefore, OPCs at their 
very basis expose a universal product definition language 
(PDL) to the user that allows for the description of any 
arbitrary product or service. The assumption that underlies 
the PDL is that each and every product can be expressed in 
hierarchical form as a composition of attributes. In 
conquer” 
principle, 
complex 
products 
are 
expressed 
as 
a 
hierarchical 
is featuring a simple PDL 
tree of a car that consists of the attributes “make”, “cost”, 
“color” and “engine”, whereby some of the attributes have 
one or multiple child attributes.
 
Figure 4. A sample PDL tree featuring a car.
Furthermore, the PDL allows
specification of dynamic behavior. When designing a 
product description for a product or service, users can bind 
so called attribute handlers to each and every attribute. The 
attribute handlers modify, update or interpret the att
value before it gets returned to the calling instance. Attribute 
handler definitions are available in the OPC’s attribute 
handler repository and can be freely bound to each attribute. 
In above example, the attribute “cost” could, for example, 
have an attribute handler “GetInCurrency” that returns the 
cost of the car in a user-specified currency by applying 
always up-to-date exchange rates.
While the PDL corresponds to the universality 
requirement, at the same time it violates another 
requirement: ease of use. Even though users are now given a 
tool to describe whatever product they have, most of them 
will most likely not “speak” the PDL. It is complicated, it is 
complex and it is something that needs to be learned. In 
order to design the OPC in a way s
majority of potential users, templates of commonly defined 
product descriptions are generated from the PDL. Hence, 
users, if they want to input their products into an OPC, first 
of all try to find a template that corresponds wel
product. In the next step, they customize the template (e.g.
provide concrete values for placeholders) and save it to the 
OPC.  
If a template for a product does not yet exist, the user can 
author a new template by using the PDL. He can submit
template to the OPC where it is going to be automatically 
reviewed and possibly added to the standard template base. 
This way, the own-authored template of one user becomes 
available to the whole community. If similar templates 
already exist, the OPC suggests using those or will try a 
merge resulting into a new template. As over time, users 
keep providing new or modifying existing product templates, 
tree of a car that consists of the attributes “make”, “cost”, 
“color” and “engine”, whereby some of the attributes have 
one or multiple child attributes. 
 
. A sample PDL tree featuring a car. 
Furthermore, the PDL allows for an on-attribute-level 
specification of dynamic behavior. When designing a 
product description for a product or service, users can bind 
so called attribute handlers to each and every attribute. The 
attribute handlers modify, update or interpret the attribute 
value before it gets returned to the calling instance. Attribute 
handler definitions are available in the OPC’s attribute 
handler repository and can be freely bound to each attribute. 
In above example, the attribute “cost” could, for example, 
n attribute handler “GetInCurrency” that returns the 
specified currency by applying 
date exchange rates. 
While the PDL corresponds to the universality 
requirement, at the same time it violates another 
e of use. Even though users are now given a 
tool to describe whatever product they have, most of them 
will most likely not “speak” the PDL. It is complicated, it is 
complex and it is something that needs to be learned. In 
in a way so that it is usable for the 
majority of potential users, templates of commonly defined 
product descriptions are generated from the PDL. Hence, 
users, if they want to input their products into an OPC, first 
of all try to find a template that corresponds well with their 
product. In the next step, they customize the template (e.g., 
provide concrete values for placeholders) and save it to the 
If a template for a product does not yet exist, the user can 
author a new template by using the PDL. He can submit the 
template to the OPC where it is going to be automatically 
reviewed and possibly added to the standard template base. 
authored template of one user becomes 
available to the whole community. If similar templates 
suggests using those or will try a 
merge resulting into a new template. As over time, users 
keep providing new or modifying existing product templates, 
36
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

the repository of product templates gains momentum. It is 
unpredictable how many templates the OPC will 
and with that which products are maintained at a time t. The 
closeness to the community ensures that OPCs continuously 
reflect what is required by their users. 
IX. 
CLOUD IMPLEMENTATION 
So far, we have discussed how OPCs can add value to 
MSMEs. We have, however, not shown
ensure a minimum cost for participation, so that they are 
accessible to every business, regardless of the size. Our 
solution to the problem of minimizing the cost for 
participation aims at minimizing the 
Ownership (TCO) of OPCs.  
Ensuring easy-to-access maintenance and extension for 
future efforts [14] is one component of optimizing the TCO. 
Building OPCs as applications in the cloud, however, would 
probably grant the major portion of cost benefits. 
depictures that we designed our reference implementation as 
a cloud application as we are convinced by the many benefits 
of this paradigm with respect to the OPC scenario. 
Figure 5 provides two perspectives on a cloud
OPC. In the horizontal perspective, based on the cloud 
platform, the tenant layer ensures that each participant has 
access to an own customized content area.
 
Figure 5. Cloud stack of an OPC 
The actual EPC distinguishes and individually manages 
the product descriptions for each client 
provides full support for multitenancy. 
enabling many “tenants” to use a central utility, in this case 
the OPC. The rationale behind multitenancy is scaling: In 
applications that are built to scale well, the operatin
each client (the per-tenant TCO) will drop as more clients are 
added [15]. Furthermore, the OPC provides a general 
purpose product description language (PDL) that can be used 
to describe the products and services of each tenant. In most 
cases, however, tenants will use templates that were created 
by other tenants earlier for describing their products. Finally, 
the bottom-most layer of our OPC centrally stores all product 
descriptions that a tenant is maintaining. The vertical 
the repository of product templates gains momentum. It is 
unpredictable how many templates the OPC will consist of 
and with that which products are maintained at a time t. The 
closeness to the community ensures that OPCs continuously 
MPLEMENTATION PLATFORM 
So far, we have discussed how OPCs can add value to 
shown yet how OPCs can 
ensure a minimum cost for participation, so that they are 
accessible to every business, regardless of the size. Our 
solution to the problem of minimizing the cost for 
participation aims at minimizing the Total Cost of 
access maintenance and extension for 
is one component of optimizing the TCO. 
Building OPCs as applications in the cloud, however, would 
probably grant the major portion of cost benefits. Figure 5 
depictures that we designed our reference implementation as 
a cloud application as we are convinced by the many benefits 
of this paradigm with respect to the OPC scenario.  
provides two perspectives on a cloud-hosted 
OPC. In the horizontal perspective, based on the cloud 
platform, the tenant layer ensures that each participant has 
access to an own customized content area. 
 
. Cloud stack of an OPC [13]. 
The actual EPC distinguishes and individually manages 
 separately and thus 
provides full support for multitenancy. Multitenancy means 
enabling many “tenants” to use a central utility, in this case 
the OPC. The rationale behind multitenancy is scaling: In 
applications that are built to scale well, the operating cost for 
tenant TCO) will drop as more clients are 
. Furthermore, the OPC provides a general 
ption language (PDL) that can be used 
to describe the products and services of each tenant. In most 
cases, however, tenants will use templates that were created 
by other tenants earlier for describing their products. Finally, 
PC centrally stores all product 
descriptions that a tenant is maintaining. The vertical 
perspective (or the per-tenant perspective) visualizes that on 
each layer in the horizontal perspective, tenants are provided 
with their own customized (multitenant) ex
X. 
PROJECT GOLIATH 
Inspired by the idea of providing MSMEs with an 
instrument to easily and cost
their products and services on the internet, we are now 
planning the rollout of our OPC prototype to a d
economic entity, such as the city of Magdeburg or Freiburg. 
We refer to this effort as the “Goliath Project” 
we will eventually be trying to capture and “digitize” all 
products and services provided by the businesses in one city 
(“The Protocity”) and make them available for online 
purchase. 
For that, we are adding a website frontend to our OPC 
that will allow citizens of the Protocity to browse through all 
online offerings and place orders. If physical goods are 
ordered, another, not yet raised issue is complicating things: 
logistics. Up to now, we were only dealing with the software 
side and have completely neglected the fact that the orders 
would also need to get dispatched in a timely manner. In 
reality, however, we would need to be able to support a 
variety of logistics-related scenarios. Ho
would need to get dispatched within a very short time, 
medicine ordered from an online pharmacy maybe even 
faster. For that reason, we have developed a model that tries 
to reflect the different requirements of physical goods that 
could potentially be purchased online. 
As the main focus of the Goliath project lies upon the 
technology that is necessary for “digitizing” a city, we were 
looking for an elegant way to deal with the logistics problem. 
Part of our solution was to leave the int
required for route planning and way optimization to the 
logistics service providers (LSPs) themselves. The LSPs on 
the other hand can offer their parcel services on the Goliath 
platform by modeling them with our PDL
other service would be modeled. While Goliath provides the 
information system infrastructure for LSPs to offer their 
services and get booked for a delivery, it is our hope that 
from an LSPs’ point of view Goliath will become an 
interesting market to advertize t
we would in particular encourage semi
that do not primarily act as LSPs (e.g.
pharmacies)), as well as smaller local LSPs to take their 
chances and expand their markets into the Goliath bu
network. Though we would appreciate large LSPs, such as 
DHL, UPS or Fedex, to also participate in Goliath, we 
believe that as they would need to bring up significant 
investments to create an agile and locally operating fleet that 
can dispatch orders within minutes, in the beginning large 
LSPs will rather hesitate to join the Goliath effort. For this 
reasons, we anticipate the first LSPs to adopt Goliath being 
local LSPs or semi-LSPs that would like to expand into new 
markets.  
XI. 
CONCLUSION AND 
In this article, we have introduced an approach to turn e
commerce into e-commodity and referred to this as E
tenant perspective) visualizes that on 
each layer in the horizontal perspective, tenants are provided 
with their own customized (multitenant) experience. 
OLIATH – THE DIGITAL CITY 
Inspired by the idea of providing MSMEs with an 
instrument to easily and cost-effectively model and expose 
their products and services on the internet, we are now 
planning the rollout of our OPC prototype to a delimited 
economic entity, such as the city of Magdeburg or Freiburg.  
as the “Goliath Project” [11] where 
we will eventually be trying to capture and “digitize” all 
products and services provided by the businesses in one city 
(“The Protocity”) and make them available for online 
r that, we are adding a website frontend to our OPC 
that will allow citizens of the Protocity to browse through all 
online offerings and place orders. If physical goods are 
ordered, another, not yet raised issue is complicating things: 
we were only dealing with the software 
side and have completely neglected the fact that the orders 
would also need to get dispatched in a timely manner. In 
reality, however, we would need to be able to support a 
related scenarios. Hot food, for example, 
would need to get dispatched within a very short time, 
medicine ordered from an online pharmacy maybe even 
faster. For that reason, we have developed a model that tries 
to reflect the different requirements of physical goods that 
potentially be purchased online.  
As the main focus of the Goliath project lies upon the 
technology that is necessary for “digitizing” a city, we were 
looking for an elegant way to deal with the logistics problem. 
Part of our solution was to leave the intelligence that is 
required for route planning and way optimization to the 
logistics service providers (LSPs) themselves. The LSPs on 
the other hand can offer their parcel services on the Goliath 
platform by modeling them with our PDL, just like every 
service would be modeled. While Goliath provides the 
information system infrastructure for LSPs to offer their 
services and get booked for a delivery, it is our hope that 
from an LSPs’ point of view Goliath will become an 
interesting market to advertize their services. In this sense, 
we would in particular encourage semi-LSPs (fleet owners 
that do not primarily act as LSPs (e.g., pizza deliveries, 
pharmacies)), as well as smaller local LSPs to take their 
chances and expand their markets into the Goliath business 
network. Though we would appreciate large LSPs, such as 
DHL, UPS or Fedex, to also participate in Goliath, we 
believe that as they would need to bring up significant 
to create an agile and locally operating fleet that 
within minutes, in the beginning large 
LSPs will rather hesitate to join the Goliath effort. For this 
reasons, we anticipate the first LSPs to adopt Goliath being 
LSPs that would like to expand into new 
ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this article, we have introduced an approach to turn e-
commodity and referred to this as E-Com-
37
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

E-Com. We have argued that the fundamental idea of E-
Com-E-Com is to provide e-commerce as a commodity 
service to micro, small and medium enterprises with the 
intention to one day cover the vast majority of all products 
and services offered in a city.  
With our KULI model of e-commerce maturity, we have 
tried to outline the business-side E-Com-E-Com factors that 
determine an MSME’s e-commerce readiness. Though we 
believe that the only way for MSMEs to achieve KULI 
maturity lies in the businesses adjusting the factors they are 
short on by themselves, we have also stated that technology-
side E-Com-E-Com factors can at least make it easier for 
MSMEs to achieve KULI maturity.  
While having local businesses equipped with e-
commerce technology would allow end-consumers to benefit 
from a variety of new and exciting digital shopping 
experiences (e.g., order delivery at a specified time by a local 
retailer), there are also aspects we need to carefully consider 
when continuing our work on E-Com-E-Com, OPCs and the 
Goliath project.  
One of the biggest challenges we will be facing is 
providing local retailers with a way to dispatch their orders 
in an agile and timely manner to their customers. Though we 
have ideas of how to mitigate this problem (e.g., binding 
semi-LSPs and other local ISPs to our platform), we are not 
sure yet whether the business model behind will work out in 
practice. Another problem that might evolve from our 
approach of how to deal with logistics is trust. We need to 
find a way to ensure that those businesses that offer to 
dispatch orders for other businesses become a reliable and 
trustworthy part of the Goliath business network. 
Since the development of our OPC and the preparations 
for Goliath are still under development, we plan on rolling 
out our platform to the first tier of MSMEs in the beginning 
of 2011.  
REFERENCES 
[1] Fritz, W. 2004. Internet-Marketing und Electronic Commerce. 
Gabler Verlag. Wiesbaden, Germany. 
[2] Benjamin, I. and Wigand R. 1995. Electronic Markets and 
Virtual Value Chains on the Information. Sloan Management 
Review, Winter 1995, pp. 62-72. 
[3] Adler, J. 1996. Informationsökonomische Fundierung von 
Austauschprozessen. 
Eine 
nachfrageorientierte 
Analyse. 
Gabler Verlag. Wiesbaden, Germany. 
[4] European Commission. 2005. The new SME definition – User 
guide and model declaration. Enterprise and Industry 
Publications. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://ec.europa.eu/ 
enterprise/policies/sme/files/sme_definition/sme_user_guide_
en.pdf [Accessed: Dec. 30, 2010]. 
[5] Neumann, R., Schmietendorf, A., and Dumke, R. 2010. 
Cloud-based Organic Product Catalogs – A Highly Pervasive 
E-Business Approach for Micro Enterprises. Proceedings of 
the 2010 International Conference on e-Learning, e-Business, 
Enterprise Information Systems, and e-Government, Las 
Vegas, USA, pp. 123-129. 
[6] Access eCommerce. Ecommerce Trends. 2010. University of 
Minnesota. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.access-
ecom.info/article.cfm?id=85&xid=MN. [Accessed: Dec. 30, 
2010]. 
[7] BITKOM 
- 
Bundesverband 
Informationswirtschaft, 
Telekommunikation und neue Medien e.V. Zwei Drittel aller 
Haushalte nutzen Ende 2010 Breitband. Berlin, Germany.  
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.bitkom.org/de/themen 
/54890_62900.aspx [Accessed: Dec. 30, 2010]. 
[8] Stahl, E., Breitschaft, M., Krabichler, T., Breitschaft, M., and 
Wittmann, G. 2009. E-Commerce-Leitfaden - Erfolgreicher 
im elektronischem Handel. ibi research. University of 
Regensburg. Regensburg, Germany. [Online]. Available: 
http://www.ecommerce-leitfaden.de/studien [Accessed: Dec. 
30, 2010]. 
[9] E-Commerce-Center 
Handel 
(ECC 
Handel). 
2010. 
Definitionen zu E-Business und E-Commerce. Cologne, 
Germany. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.ecc-
handel.de/definitionen_zu_e-business_und__e-
commerce.php. [Accessed: Dec. 30, 2010]. 
[10] Statista GmbH. 2009. Populärste Produktkategorie im Online-
Handel nach der Anzahl der Käufer in Millionen 
(Hochrechnung). Berlin, Germany. [Online]. Available: 
http://de.statista.com/statistik/daten/studie/153035/umfrage/po
pulaerste-produktkategorien-im-online-handel/ 
[Accessed: 
Dec. 30, 2010]. 
[11] Neumann, R. and Sokolova, K. 2009. Goliath – The Digital 
City. Painting the Picture of a New Era of E-Commerce 
(Whitepaper), Otto-von-Guericke University Magdeburg. 
Magdeburg, Germany. 
[12] Neumann, R. 2010. The EBF Application Foundation: An 
Approach towards the Design of an E-Commerce Framework 
for Small and Medium Enterprises. Lambert Academic Press. 
Saarbrücken, Germany. 
[13] Neumann, R., Schmietendorf, A., and Dumke, R. 2010. 
Organic Product Catalogs - Towards an Architecture for 
Cloud-based Micro Enterprise E-Commerce. IEEE Cloud 
2010 - The 3rd International Conference on Cloud 
Computing, Miami, USA, pp. 530-531. 
[14] Neumann, R., Günther, S., and 
Zenker, N. 2009. 
Reengineering Deprecated Component Frameworks: A Case 
Study of the Microsoft Foundation Classes, Proceedings of 
the WI2009. Vienna, Austria, pp. 737-746. 
[15] Chong, F. and Carraro, G. 2006. Architecture Strategies for 
Catching the Long Tail. MSDN. [Online]. Available: 
http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/aa479069.aspx 
[Accessed: Dec. 30, 2010].  
38
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

