Effects of the Digital Divide in E-Participation Development in the UN Countries 
Explanatory Factors of E-Participation for UN Countries  
Rosario Pérez-Morote  
Business Administration and Management Department 
 University of Castilla-La Mancha, UCLM 
Albacete, Spain 
email: rosario.pmorote@uclm.es 
Carolina Pontones-Rosa 
Business Administration and Management Department 
University of Castilla-La Mancha, UCLM  
Albacete, Spain 
email: carolina.pontones@uclm.es 
Esteban Alfaro-Cortes 
Applied Economics Department  
University of Castilla-La Mancha, UCLM 
Albacete, Spain  
Email: esteban.alfaro@uclm.es
Abstract— E-government offers citizens the potential for 
greater access to their representatives and confers policy 
makers the possibility to make G2C relationships more 
inclusive. However, the real translation into governance 
outcomes will depend on policy makers’ consideration of the 
environmental complexity and the singular characteristics of 
the target population. This paper analyses the relationships 
between e-participation development and the variables 
associated to the digital divide in a sample of 178 countries for 
the period 2008-2016. The authors use a multiple linear 
regression model and the UN’s E-participation Index as the 
dependent variable. The test of the hypotheses shows the 
significant 
and 
positive 
effect 
of 
telecommunications 
infrastructure and age and a significant negative effect of 
education and rural condition. Results reveal that Gender and 
Political freedom and Democracy are not influential.  
Keywords- E-participation; UN’s E-participation Index; digital 
divide; linear regression 
I.
INTRODUCTION 
E-government (EG) can be an instrument to improve the 
relationship between people and their government. In the 
achievement of public governance, EG aims at increasing 
participation in decision making and making public 
institutions more transparent and accountable. From the 
perspective of the principal-agent theory, EG provides 
citizens with a basis to decide, participate and engage with 
government actions, which in turn may strengthen their trust 
and reinforce Government-to-Citizen (G2C) relationships, 
increasing public authorities´ legitimacy [25][26]. However, 
Dawes [10] pointed to a multi-dimensional digital divide 
that posed challenges to governments trying to provide 
equitable access to information and services as well as 
opportunities to broaden participation in political processes.  
Although recognizing the growing interest and literature 
in the field, there is a relative low number of papers focused 
on the analysis of citizen e-participation from a quantitative 
perspective. In this context, our article wants to contribute to 
the existing research and enhance the understanding of the 
drivers affecting e-participation dynamics. With that aim, 
the UN’s E-participation Index (EPI) is taken as indicator 
for e-participation in order to study its evolution over the 
period 2008-2016 in a sample of 178 countries. EPI 
measures the availability of e-participation tools on national 
government portals [48]. This legitimized index remains 
meaningful in that it enumerates the diverse levels of the 
online activity of civil participation. The index has been 
used in previous research [15][18][50]. 
In this research, panel data is used to conduct ordinary 
least squared linear regression model in order to test 
hypotheses as to the relationship between the evolution of 
EPI and that of economic and socio-demographic variables 
of the context, which relate to the digital divide 
(telecommunication infrastructures, education, location, age, 
gender, and political freedom and democracy). 
Apart from the introduction section, the paper is 
structured in six more sections. Section 2 corresponds to 
literature review, in Section 3 we propose the model and the 
hypotheses developed, Section 4 describes the methodology 
applied, in Section 5 we show the main results, Section 6 
corresponds to the discussion of the results and finally we 
present the main conclusions in Section 7. 
II.
LITERATURE REVIEW 
A broad line of research have described and measured the 
attributes of government websites trying to assess their 
maturity in terms of EG development [9][12][13][19][22] 
[36][39]. Generally, these researches have also investigated 
the factors affecting that development, considering politic, 
socio-economic and demographic variables, mainly. 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

A less abundant amount of publications have studied, 
from a quantitative perspective, the potential of EG to permit 
citizen participation [33][34][35]. Pina, Torres and Royo 
[29] in their web maturity assessment in UE local 
governments, 
obtained 
similar 
results: 
democratic 
participation and citizen dialogue presented the lowest 
scores. For their part, Pina, Torres and Acerete [28], Bonsón, 
Torres, Royo and Flores [4], Girish, Yates and Williams  
[15], Zhao, Ning and Collier [50] or Jho and Song [18] 
analyzed EG development in terms of e-participation and 
connected it with economic, socio-demographic, cultural and 
information society factors, among others. 
III.
CONCEPTUAL MODEL AND HYPOTHESES
DEVELOPMENT
The main objective of this section is on the one hand to 
clarify the concepts of the E-participation and the Digital 
Divide and on the other hand, to raise the research 
hypotheses. 
A.
E-participation and the digital divide. 
Generally, E-participation is defined as the use of ICT to 
support democratic decision [23][24]. Following Reddick 
[33], our research considers different forms of participation 
in government ranging from the one-way interaction 
(managerial), two-way interaction directed from government 
(consultative), and finally the highest form of e-participation 
of the two-way interaction directed from citizens to 
government and vice versa (participatory). 
According to the UNDESA 2016 EG Survey [48], the 
digital divide refers to the gap among individuals, 
households and businesses at different socio-economic levels 
with regard to both their opportunities to access ICTs, and 
their use of the Internet for a wide variety of activities. It also 
refers to disparities between developed and developing 
countries, as well as within and among groups in a country, 
especially countries with greater rural populations. In 
general, it could be said that the digital divide refers to the 
unequal access of citizens to ICT, and uneven possession of 
skills and experience required for using it. It can take many 
forms and be described variously in terms of gender, 
location, skills, and income [1]. 
B.
Determinants of e-participation: hypotheses. 
From the above, it can be drawn that EG-enabled citizen 
participation 
is 
influenced 
by 
socio-economic 
and 
demographic and political factors that, in turn, might be 
associated to the existence of a digital divide [7][37].  A 
research question arises and leads us to investigate if 
governments are considering this digital divide when 
designing their national portals. In particular, are the 
variables associated to the digital divide an influential factor 
for the inclusion of participation tools in the webs? 
Using the EPI as indicator of web maturity in terms of 
citizen 
participation, 
the 
relationship 
between 
e-
participation and telecommunications infrastructure, education, 
age, location, gender and political freedom and democracy will 
be explored. 
Experience suggests that the implementation of EG 
demands 
significant 
investments 
in 
technical 
and 
administrative infrastructures. Holzer and Kim [16] 
indicated that economically advanced countries had more 
emphasis on citizen participation, compared to less 
developed countries. Similarly, Siau and Long [36] and Das, 
Singh and Joseph [9] identified significant differences in EG 
development for countries with different levels of 
telecommunication infrastructure. Akin to them, the analysis 
of Jho and Song [18] showed that the level of ICT is a 
crucial variable in determining the level of e-participation. 
After this reflexion the first hypothesis in this research is set 
out:  
H1. The investment in telecommunications infrastructure is 
associated with EG-enabled citizen participation.  
The literature on the digital divide has claimed that 
internet 
use 
relates 
to 
higher 
educational 
levels 
[3][6][38][48].  Similarly, authors like Kim [22] refer to the 
need of knowledge and skills for the use of the EG-related 
technologies. Developing countries’ lower literacy rates 
hamper the necessary changes that must take place for the 
appropriate development of EG projects, leading to their 
failure [8]. According to this idea, the second hypothesis is 
set out: 
 H2. Education is associated with web-enabled citizen 
participation  
There are large regional and rural/urban differences with 
regard to access to and possession of information 
technology [2]. Rural population is often associated with 
lower levels of EG usage and, subsequently, e-participation. 
Educational levels might be one factor behind this fact, 
considering that education is frequently concentrated in 
large cities. Taipale [38] reached this conclusion when 
observed that rural people, who would benefit most from 
EG services, are not using them, while in cities that have 
been able to maintain office services, people also use e-
services. Taking the above into account, our third 
hypothesis is as follows: 
H3. Location is associated with web-enabled citizen 
participation 
The age of the population has been studied in connection 
with levels of political participation, citizen engagement and 
trust [30]. Specifically, within the abundant research on EG, 
it is easy to find publications that have investigated its 
relationships with the age factor. Literature on the digital 
divide points to older populations facing significant 
disadvantages in the use of EG compared to younger people 
[11][14]. The following hypothesis investigates the 
relationship between age and e-participation:
H4. Age is associated with web-enabled citizen participation. 
Previous research has been inconclusive regarding the 
existence of a relationship between gender and EG. 
Although many discard this connection [3][6][32][38][49], 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

other works confirm a positive relationship between 
masculine gender and use of EG. Some studies point out to 
the fact that women in many parts of the world lack an equal 
access to ICT services [1]. To contribute to this debate, a 
fifth hypothesis is drawn: 
H5.
Gender is associated with web-enabled citizen 
participation. 
The approach of deliberative democracy or pluralist 
democracy addresses citizens as active participants and as 
co-producers of policies [28]. In this regard, digital 
government has the power to increase citizen input to 
government [20]. However, unless civil liberties are widely 
permitted, e-government would not perform beyond a 
billboard as one-way communication with the public, and 
citizens might be afraid of voicing their opinions and 
monitoring 
government 
programs 
and 
services. 
To 
contribute to this debate, the last hypothesis is set out: 
H6. Political freedom and democracy are associated with 
web-enabled citizen participation.
IV.
METHOD
The research has used secondary data drawn from the E-
Government Survey, published biannually by United 
Nations. The Survey is the most extensive world survey on 
EG to date, covering 191 countries [48]. Other data sources 
used are the World Bank and the World Bank Group. 
A panel data has been complied for the period 2008-
2016, for a group of 178 countries. The number of cases 
observed is 890. The high number of countries studied and 
the longitudinal character of the analysis allows our research 
contribute to understanding the e-participation development 
factors on a global scale. Figure 1 shows the variables 
analysed, their correspondent indicators and the data source.
Figure 1.  Variables, indicators and source 
In order to study the e-participation, the EPI has been 
selected as the dependent variable. As it was explained 
before, the EPI is elaborated by the UN within the EG 
surveys [40] [41][42][43][48]. 
As regards the independent variables, the first one is the 
level of telecommunications infrastructure of a country, 
which is measured by the Telecommunications Infrastructure 
Index (TII), also extracted from the UN’s EG surveys, yet 
the primary data source is the ITU. The second independent 
variable is the level of education of a country’s population, 
measured by the Human Capital Index (HCI), which is 
extracted from the UN’s EG surveys as in the previous cases. 
Data to measure the next three independent variables have 
been extracted from the World Bank. The predictor variable 
Location reflects the percentage of rural population over the 
total population. The variable Age takes as indicator the 
percentage of population above 65 years over the total 
population of a country. The variable Gender is measured by 
the percentage of females over a country’s total population. 
Political freedom and Democracy makes up the last 
independent variable, measured by the indicator “Voice 
Account Rank”. This is one of the Worldwide Governance 
Indicators calculated by Kaufmann, Kraay and Mastruzzi in 
2010 [21] for the World Bank Group. 
In addition to this, the variable Year has been included as 
a controlling factor in order to reflect the variations derived 
from the economic scenarios. 
V.
RESULTS 
The ordinary least squared multiple regression model for 
EPI has been conducted using R statistical program [31].  
Figure 2 offers the results for the Ordinary Least Squares 
(OLS) model. 
Figure 2.  Linear Model
From the results, it can be observed that about 68% of the 
countries in the sample started the period with an EPI value 
of 22 ± 14 points and increased almost 2.36 % every year. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

The seven variables included explain a 56.4 % of the 
variance of EPI, according to its adjusted R squared. The 
beta coefficients shows the significant positive influence of 
Year, TII and %Pop.>65 and the significant negative 
influence of HCI and %Rural. The 95% confidence intervals 
for their coefficients are [0.43, 0.68] for TII, [0.17, -0.00] for 
HCI, [0.02, 0.68] for %Pop.>65 and [-0.33, -0.17] for 
%Rural. 
VI.
DISCUSSION 
In this section, our results will be explained and 
discussed against literature of reference in the general field 
of EG and in the particular area of e-participation. 
Focusing on our results, the variable Year positive 
influence reflects that, in a good proportion of the sample, 
EPI improves over the time for the period considered.  
The coefficients for TII (beta 0.55) are statistically 
significant at the 0.05 level and indicate that throughout the 
period 2008-2016, there is a strong connection between the 
telecommunications infrastructure of a country and the level 
of e-participation allowed on national government portals. 
When holding all other variables constant, a one-unit 
increase in a country’s TII increases a country’s score on the 
EPI by 0.55. Consequently, hypothesis 1 is verified. This 
positive and significant influence of technology and 
telecommunications on the specific topic of e-participation 
has not been confirmed by any of the works consulted, yet 
Jho and Song [18] identified a positive effect of a country’s 
online population over EPI. Notwithstanding, Siau and 
Long [36], Pina et al. [28] and Das et al. [9] concluded TII 
was influential on EG development in general.  
As regards the second predictor variable, Education, 
measured through Human Capital Index, it results 
significant with a beta value of -0.09. According to the 
digital divide phenomenon, educational levels affected 
positively e-participation, but with a different sign. Our 
second hypothesis is confirmed but not in the expected way. 
One possible explanation would be that education solely is 
not enough to increase e-participation, meaning that 
governments need to work to make citizens aware of the 
benefits of using EG [17].  
 Following the results, the indicator used to measure 
Location, % Rural population, shows a significant negative 
influence in EPI (beta -0.25) along the period of study, 
confirming our third hypothesis that belonging to rural areas 
is associated to lower levels of e-participation and vice 
versa. These results support the digital divide paradigm [48] 
that conveys that rural areas are generally associated with 
low levels of ICT and telecommunications [39] and 
education [38], which, in turn, generate barriers for EG 
access and usage. Besides, our results are consistent with 
those obtained by previous research [15][22].  
As far as the variable Age is concerned, the results point 
to a significant and positive influence of the percentage of 
population over 65 in EPI (beta 0.35), at the 0.05 level. In 
other words, when holding all other variables constant, a 
one-unit increase in a country’s %Pop.>65 increases a 
country’s score on the EPI by 0, 35. This strong connection 
confirms our fourth hypothesis, although in a different sense 
from the expected according to the digital divide approach, 
which claims that older populations face significant 
disadvantages in the use of EG compared to younger people 
[11][14]. On the contrary, our results suggest that ageing 
relates to increased e-participation in government portals. 
Piewtrosky and Van Ryzn [27] could not confirm that older 
people demanded more transparency from Governments. 
The authors have not found previous works that tested the 
effect of ageing on the specific area of e-participation, with 
the exception of Reddick [33], who also pointed to the not 
significant effect of age in the participatory model 
constructed by the author. 
Focusing now on the values obtained for the indicator 
percentage Female, used to measure the effect of Gender. 
The results do not permit to verify the fifth hypothesis. This 
contradicts the existence of a digital divide between men 
and women, in the sense that women in many parts of the 
world lack an equal access to ICT services [1] or men are 
more prone to use EG services than women [5]. Reddick 
[33] also discarded a statistically significant influence of the 
gender in e-participation. 
Finally, political freedom and democracy come up as not 
significant according to our research. It is surprising that 
civil liberties are not required for the full development of 
EG. It cannot be confirmed that countries that do not 
guarantee civil liberties and democracy are associated with 
low levels of EPI. Consequently, our last hypothesis is 
rejected. Previous work is inconclusive about this issue. 
Girish et al. [15] and Jho et al. [18] have studied the topic in 
relation to EPI. The former detected a significant and 
negative influence for the political freedom variable coupled 
with a positive coefficient for democracy aspects. As Das et 
al. [9] pointed out; the evidence that EG can develop without 
significant dependence on governance alerts us that the type 
EG that is being developed is primarily for the billboard.  
As a synthesis of the above, Figure 3 collects the test of 
the hypotheses put forward in this research. 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 3. 
Summary of the test of the hypothesis 
VII.
CONCLUSIONS 
From the test of the hypotheses, some practical 
implications may be drawn: 
In general, it is important for governments to identify 
demographic groups with unequal access to the benefits of 
EG services. This will provide them with the ability to 
target future policies and initiatives to narrow the digital 
divide and increase the population that can actively engage 
with public services. 
The positive and significant coefficient of the TII 
permits to verify the first hypothesis. In this regard, 
inclusive EG polices should be supported with investment 
plans in ICT in order to raise the number of people with 
Internet access. 
The results for the HCI predictor were significant but 
unexpected. It could be argued that education is only a 
minimum requirement but does not imply use of EG. 
Governments must consider this fact and implement policies 
to increase awareness about the benefits of the use of EG for 
citizens. 
The percentage of rural population over all population 
resulted significant with a negative influence on EPI. 
Interpretation of this finding advises policy makers to pay 
appropriate regard to the special condition of the rural 
population, normally associated to reduced government size 
and budget to develop e-participation tools. 
The results for the older population go against the 
existence of a digital divide due to age. However, 
interpretation must be careful. More aged countries are also 
associated to higher degrees of life expectancy, ICT 
infrastructure and education, which may be behind these 
results. It seems that the elderly living in developed countries 
are increasingly adopting EG, reducing the digital divide. 
As regards for the gender, the results lead to discarding 
an influence of this variable in the level of e-participation. 
Similar conclusions apply for the “voice account rank”.  
Civil liberties and democratic institution are not 
necessarily associated to EPI scores, which seems 
incoherent with the foundations and objectives of EG and e-
governance in particular. 
REFERENCES
[1]
E. Abu-Shamad and N. Al Jamal, “Exploring the Gender Digital 
Divide in Jordan”, Gender, Technology and Development, vol. 19, 
no. 1, pp. 91-113, 2015.   
[2]
F. Amagoh, “An Assessment of E-Government in a West African 
Country: The Case of Nigeria”, International Journal of Public 
Administration in the Digital Age (IJPADA), vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 80-99, 
2015. 
[3]
F. Belanger and L. Carter, “The impact of the digital divide on e-
government use”, Communications of the ACM, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 
132-135, 2009. 
[4]
E. Bonsón, L. Torres, S. Royo and F. Flores, “Local e-government 
2.0: Social media and corporate transparency in municipalities”, 
Government Information Quarterly, vol. 29, no. 2, pp. 123-132, 2012. 
[5]
J. Choudrie and Y. Dwivedi, “A survey of citizens’ awareness and 
adoption of e-government initiatives, the Government Gateway: A 
United Kingdom perspective”, In EGovernment Workshop’05 
(eGOV05), 2005. 
[6]
S. E. Colesca and L. Dobrica, “Adoption and use of e-government 
services: The case of Romania”, Journal of applied research and 
technology, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 204-217, 2008. 
[7]
M. Crutcher and M. Zook, “Placemarks and waterlines: Racialized 
cyberscapes in post-Katrina Google Earth”, Geoforum, vol. 40, no. 4, 
pp. 523-534, 2009. 
[8]
D. Dada, “The failure of e-government in developing countries: A 
literature review”, The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in 
Developing Countries, vol. 26, no. 7, pp. 1-10, 2006. 
[9]
A. Das, H. Singh and D. Joseph, “A longitudinal study of e-
government maturity”, Information and Management, vol. 54, pp. 
415–426, 2017. 
[10] S. S. Dawes, “Governance in the digital age: A research and action 
framework for an uncertain future”, Government Information 
Quarterly, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 257-264, 2009. 
[11] T. Friemel, “The digital divide has grown old: Determinants of a 
digital divide among seniors”, Media and Society, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 
313-331, 2014. 
[12] I. Gallego, L. Rodríguez and I. M. García, “Are determining factors 
of municipal E-government common to a worldwide municipal view? 
An intra-country comparison”. Government Information Quarterly, 
vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 423-430, 2010. 
[13] J. L. Gandía and M. C. Archidona, “Determinants of web site 
information by Spanish city councils”, Online Information 
Review, vol. 32, no. 1, pp. 35-57, 2008. 
[14] M. Geana and A. Greiner, “Health information and the digital 
divide”, Journal of Management and Marketing in Healthcare, vol. 4, 
no. 2, pp. 108–112, 2011.
[15] J. Girish, D. J. Yates and C. B. Williams, “Understanding the impact 
of political structure, governance and public policy on e-
government”. In System Science (HICSS), 45th Hawaii International 
Conference, pp. 2541-2550. IEEE, 2012. 
[16] M. Holzer and S. T. Kim, “Digital governance in municipalities 
worldwide. A Longitudinal Assessment of Municipal Websites 
Through the World”. The E-Governance Institute, National Center for 
Public Productivity, Rutgers, the State University of New Jersey, 
Global e-Policy e-Government Institute, Graduate School of 
Governance Sungkyunkwan University, retrieved: August, 2017. 
[17] P. T. Jaeger and K. M. Tompson, “E-government around the world: 
Lessons, challenges, and future directions”, Government Information 
Quarterly, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 389-394, 2003. 
[18] W. Jho and K. J. Song, “Institutional and technological determinants 
of civil e-Participation: Solo or duet?”, Government Information 
Quarterly, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 488-495, 2015. 
[19] S. Jorge, P. M. Moura, A. F. Pattaro and R. P. Lourenço, “Local 
Government financial transparency in Portugal and Italy: a 
comparative exploratory study on its determinants”. In 13th Biennial 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

CIGAR Conference, Bridging Public Sector and Non-Profit Sector 
Account, pp. 9-10, 2011. 
[20] E. Kamarck, “Government innovation around the world”, 2004. 
[21] D. Kaufmann, A.  Kraay and M.Mastruzzi, “The Worldwide 
Governance Indicators: A Summary of Methodology, Data and 
Analytical Issues”, World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 
5430. 
(Available 
at 
http://papers.ssrn.com/ 
sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1682130, retrieved: June, 2018. 
[22] C. 
K. 
Kim, 
“A 
Cross-national 
Analysis 
of 
Global 
E-
government”. Public Organization Review, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 317-329, 
2007. 
[23] A. Macintosh, “Characterizing e-participation in policy-making”. 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences, IEEE, 2004, pp. 10. 
[24] R. Medaglia, “E-Participation research: Moving characterization 
forward (2006–2011)”, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 29, 
no. 3, pp. 346-360, 2012. 
[25] A. J. Meijer, “Publishing public performance results on the Internet: 
Do stakeholders use the Internet to hold Dutch public service 
organizations to account?”. Government Information Quarterly, vol. 
24, no. 1, pp. 165-185, 2007. 
[26] G. Misuraca, C. Codagnone and P. Rossel, “From practice to theory 
and back to practice: Reflexivity in measurement and evaluation for 
evidence-based policy making in the information society”, 
Government Information Quarterly, vol. 30, pp. 68-82, 2013. 
[27] S. Pietrowsky and G. G. Van Ryzin, “Citizen Attitudes toward 
transparency in local government”, The American Review of Public 
Administration, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 306-323, 2007. 
[28] V. Pina, L. Torres and B. Acerete, “Are ICTs promoting government 
accountability?: 
A 
comparative 
analysis 
of 
e-governance 
developments in 19 OECD countries”, Critical Perspectives on 
Accounting, vol. 18, no. 5, 583-602, 2007. 
[29] V. Pina, L. Torres and S. Royo, “E-government evolution in EU local 
governments: a comparative perspective”, Online Information 
Review, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 1137-1168, 2009. 
[30] R. D. Putnam, “Bowling alone: The collapse and revival of American 
community”, New York: Simon and Schuster, 2001. 
[31] R Development Core Team. R, “A Language and Environment for 
Statistical Computing”. R Foundation for Statistical Computing, 
Vienna, 2018. 
[32] C. G. Reddick, “Citizen interaction with e-government: From the 
streets to servers?”, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 22, no. 
1, pp. 38-57, 2005. 
[33] C. Reddick, “Citizen Interaction and e-government. Evidence for the 
managerial, consultative, and participatory models. Transforming 
Government”, People, Process and Policy, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 167-184, 
2011.  
[34] R. A. Rodríguez, L. Welicki, D. A. Giulianelli and P. M. Vera, 
“Measurement 
framework 
for 
evaluating 
e-governance 
on 
municipalities websites”. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 
2nd International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic 
Governance, 2008, pp. 381-387. 
[35] R. Sandoval-Almazán and J. R. Gil-García, “Are government internet 
portals evolving towards more interaction, participation, and 
collaboration? Revisiting the rhetoric of e-government among 
municipalities”, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 29, pp.72-
81, 2012. 
[36] K. Siau and Y. Long, “Factors Impacting E-Government 
Development”, Journal of Computer Information Systems, vol. 50, 
no. 1, 98-107, 2015.
[37] M. Stephens. Gender and the Geoweb, “Divisions in the Production 
of User-Generated Cartographic Information”, GeoJournal, vol. 78, 
pp. 981–996, 2013.  
[38] S. Taipale, “The use of e-government services and the Internet: The 
role of socio-demographic, economic and geographical predictors”, 
Telecommunications Policy, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 413-422, 2013. 
[39] C. J. Tolbert, K. Mossberger and R. McNeal, “Institutions, Policy 
Innovation, and E‐Government in the American States”. Public 
Administration Review, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 549-563, 2008.
[40] United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UNDESA), Division for Public Administration and Development 
Management, “United Nations e-Government Survey 2008. From e-
Government to Connected Governance”, 2008. 
[41] United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UNDESA), Division for Public Administration and Development 
Management, “Leveraging e-government at a time of financial and 
economic crisis”, 2010. 
[42] United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UNDESA), Division for Public Administration and Development 
Management, “E-Government for the People”, 2012. 
[43] United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UNDESA, Division for Public Administration and Development 
Management, “E-Government for the future we want”, 2014. 
[44] United Nations Public Administration Network (UNPAN), (2014). 
http://www.unpan.org/Library/MajorPublications/UNEGovernmentS
urvey/tabid/646/Default.aspx, retrieved: January, 2018. 
[45] United Nations, “Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable 
Development. 
2015”. 
A/RES/70/1. 
sustainabledevelopment.un.org, retrieved: March, 2018. 
[46] United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UNDESA), Population Division. “World Population Prospects: The 
2015 Revision”, DVD Edition. 
[47] United 
Nations 
Public 
Administration 
Network 
(UNPAN).  
http://www.unpan.org/EGovernment/UNEGovernmentSurveys/Prepa
ratoryProcessof2016UNEGovernmentSurvey/EGovernmentSurvey20
16OnlineConsultationForm/tabid/1789/language/en-US/Default.aspx, 
retrieved: December 2017. 
[48] United Nations. Department of Economic and Social Affairs 
(UNDESA). Division for Public Administration and Development 
Management. 
“E-Government 
in 
support 
of 
sustainable 
development”.2016. 
[49]
J. Van Dijk, W. Pieterson, A. Van Deuren and W. Ebbers, “E-
services for citizens: the Dutch usage case”. In International 
Conference on Electronic Government, pp. 155-166, 2007 Springer, 
Berlin, Heidelberg.
[50] F. Zhao, K. Ning and A. Collier, A, “Effects of national culture on e-
government diffusion—A global study of 55 countries”, Info 
Information and Management, vol. 51, pp. 1005–1016, 2014.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

