Towards an Interoperability Evaluation Process for Mobile Contactless City Service 
Serge Chaumette, Damien Dubernet, Jonathan Ouoba 
LaBRI, University of Bordeaux 
Bordeaux, France 
{serge.chaumette, damien.dubernet, jonathan.ouoba}@labri.fr 
Erkki Siira, Tuomo Tuikka 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
Oulu, Finland 
{erkki.siira, tuomo.tuikka}@vtt.fi
 
 
Abstract— Interoperability of mobile contactless city services 
has been emerging as a topic of discussion in many of the 
recent events by the representatives of industry and city 
organizations. Evidently, the interoperability has a connotation 
of a world where systems and devices interoperate or work 
together seamlessly. In the real world, such interoperability is 
a myth, and must always be built by considering the 
specificities of the existing artefacts. This paper studies and 
defines interoperability in the context of mobile contactless city 
services. We present three piloted mobile contactless city 
services to identify which kind of interoperability issues can be 
raised. Based on this analysis, an interoperability framework is 
proposed first by delineating the set of relevant entities and 
then by presenting four dimensions of the interoperability 
issues between the entities. We believe that this framework 
helps finding other related elements to make a coherent picture 
of interoperability in this context.  It also leads to the definition 
of a relevant evaluation process. The goal of the paper is: (1) to 
properly define interoperability in our context; (2) to propose a 
set of evaluation criteria; (3) to propose an overview of an 
evaluation process 
Keywords-interoperability; seamless; cities; contactless; NFC; 
mobile services; user 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Mobile phones have become a commodity and are 
increasingly in use by urban dwellers. One of the emerging 
technologies for the mobile services is contactless 
technology, already known in city or smart cards. This can 
be considered to be the next paradigm change in the smart 
city end-user services. When the mobile contactless 
technology becomes more common, also other smart city 
services will appear, combining payment, loyalty, and city 
services. 
Mobile contactless services in smart cities are and will be 
based on Near Field Communication (NFC). NFC means, 
simply put, an upgrade to usability of a mobile device; the 
user can touch a reader with the mobile in a similar manner 
as with a contactless card [13]. 
The work presented in this paper is carried within the 
Smart 
Urban 
Spaces 
Project 
abbreviated 
as 
SUS 
(www.smarturbanspaces.org). One of the objectives of the 
SUS project was to reach a certain level of interoperability 
regarding mobile contactless city services deployments and 
interactions. Then, it was necessary to define a framework. 
The role of the framework is to help understand the 
environment of mobile contactless city services, to analyze 
the relations between the different stakeholders (in legacy 
systems and services to be deployed) and also to provide 
relevant information concerning the level of interoperability 
that can be reached. For an end-user, interoperability simply 
means that the services and systems work together so that a 
service 
can 
be 
accomplished. 
Looking 
simply 
at 
technological interoperability does not help sufficiently 
when mapping the service opportunities or analyzing the 
smart city services. Technological level, which consists of 
hardware and software, will not guarantee service level 
usability or the service success. Taking into account all 
these factors deserve a more general approach and a clear 
view of the environment where the services exist. Then, in 
our attempt to unfold the term interoperability through a 
framework dedicated to mobile contactless city services, it 
was essential to enlarge the focus on aspects such as 
usability, business cases, regulations, etc. 
The questions that have guided our work and that lie at 
the core of this paper are as follows: what are the elements 
to consider when building such a framework to analyze the 
interoperability in the context of contactless city services? 
What should be the form of the evaluation process, related 
to the interoperability framework, which needs to be 
implemented? The work presented in this paper details the 
main basis and the first practical elements regarding the 
development of a complete evaluation process. 
In the following section, we give elements related to the 
mobile services context. We more precisely expose the 
mobile contactless city services concept and we shortly 
explain how the NFC technology that enables it operates. 
Section 2 also provides a definition of interoperability, 
presents in more details the interoperability issues raised by 
the specificities of the SUS project and propose an approach 
to address these problems. Section 3 mainly deals with the 
interoperability framework proposal and section 4 describes 
the resulting evaluation process. Eventually, section 5 
presents the next steps to follow in the complete 
achievement of the evaluation process.  
II. 
CONTEXT 
A. Mobile Contactless City Services 
City services around the world are different and they are 
dependent of the local culture, laws, etc. Transform a city 
service into a mobile city service requires a certain amount 
of technological advancement and maturity that is not the 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

same for each city service. For example, SMS-based 
information and ticketing services have been around over 10 
years already. As technology has gone forward, the NFC 
technology has become a promising enabling technology for 
various city services. From the user perspective it is a new 
mean of interaction with the environment that is based on 
the touching paradigm [14]. Mobile phone is essential in a 
sense that it is the central mean for the user to connect to the 
content information or make an action such as payment [6]. 
NFC, which is a wireless communication technology 
derived from Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), has 
three kinds of modes: the reading and writing tags mode, the 
peer-to-peer mode which enables connections between two 
mobile phones, and the card emulation mode. These modes 
are all enablers for new city services, e.g., for tagging the 
city [8], access control [7], home care with sensors [12] or 
city tourism [2].  
Initiatives, which are mainly research demonstrations 
and pilots, have shown the interest in contactless services 
for the benefit of citizens in cities. The SmartTouch project, 
that brought together European industrial and academic 
partners, has particularly proved the added value of NFC in 
ticketing and transportation by contributing to the 
deployment of real services on the field [11]. Another 
notable example is the Cityzi project [3] allowing users to 
access in French cities of Nice and Strasbourg, a bunch of 
contactless services (in the field of transport, event 
management, car parking and banking) by using their NFC-
enabled mobile phone. 
B. Interoperability Overview 
Interoperability is usually defined as Wegner does in 
[15] as “the ability of two or more software components to 
cooperate despite the differences in language, interface, and 
execution platform”. Consequently, the most usual approach 
to interoperability is to consider it simply as a technological 
issue. 
For 
instance, 
securely 
managing 
smartcard 
applications in NFC devices [9], considerations on how to 
develop applications on top of an operating system [4], the 
ecosystem perspective [10], or multi-application approach 
as done by [1] are some examples. This approach generally 
leads to propose a service assessment model [5] based on 5 
levels: the signature level, the protocol level, the semantic 
level, the quality level, and the context level. 
Aforementioned view seems too restrictive in our 
context because it only takes into consideration the technical 
aspects. Of course, interoperability of mobile contactless 
city services is an issue that comes up in discussions 
especially on tourist scenarios when a tourist would need to 
use a local bus or to buy a train ticket. However, the 
interoperability concept is a larger issue in the mobile 
contactless city service context, though. In addition to 
interoperability of technology, such as software architecture, 
protocol level or looking at how devices and services 
communicate between each other, a ubiquitous and 
contextual contactless mobile service deserves a deeper 
consideration on the emerging services themselves. As far 
as we know, there is a lack of appropriate models to study 
the role of the essential players interacting in the context of 
the deployment and the use of contactless services for smart 
cities. Our conception of interoperability goes beyond the 
traditional approach, in that it is necessary to provide 
background 
information 
and 
analysis 
taking 
into 
consideration the whole ecosystem (at the legal and business 
level for example) that represents a city or even a network 
of cities. 
C. Examples of Issues in Interoperability in the Context of 
SUS Project 
There were 49 piloted and planned services in the SUS 
project. From there we can see the challenges in the 
interoperability of a mobile contactless city service concept. 
The difficulty lies in the fact that it is necessary to take into 
account all aspects of interoperability that could affect the 
deployment of such services and analyze the interactions 
between the different players involved in the development 
and 
the 
exploitation. 
To 
highlight 
some 
of 
the 
interoperability issues that may arise, we give examples of 
SUS city services: Daycare, Small Event Ticketing and 
Open Europeans 2011. The Daycare service provides a 
solution for registering children to the day-care by using 
passive NFC tags and mobile phones. The Small Event 
Ticketing service proposes a system to manage ticketing 
operations (issuance and validation) for small events with 
NFC-enabled 
mobile 
phones. 
Regarding 
the 
Open 
Europeans 2011, it provided a control access system (with 
smart cards and mobile phones) for the sailing competition 
held in Helsinki. 
Technical interoperability issues were not uniform. One 
service was encountering standardization failures within 
NFC ecosystem (the Small Event Ticketing service that uses 
the NFC peer-to-peer mode) while the other was 
encountering the difficultness to integrate legacy backend 
systems refitted to be mobile and contactless (Daycare). 
Usability and social interoperability issues were also raised 
and demonstrated the need to motivate and educate the 
users. For example, the Daycare case needed 1200 
employees to be trained and the motivation to use the 
system was in the reduction of routine paperwork that 
allows the employees to spend more time in the real work 
with the children. A learning curve for users has been 
observed in all of the services. From the business side of 
interoperability, the presented services had different kind of 
parties involved. For the sailing competition case, the local 
transportation authority smart cards were used during the 
piloting phase. Thus, the sailing competition access control 
case was dependent of the business decisions of another 
company. 
D. An Approach to Analyze the Interoperability 
We have been involved with close to ten workshops on 
how to delineate the smart city services in European cities 
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

together with services providers, city representatives, 
application developers, and infrastructure developers. 
During the effort we delineated and presented a set of 
entities in the use case ecosystem: Mobile, User, Service, 
Infrastructure, City, and Country. These are high level 
entities to find out and understand the intersections of 
interoperability of smart city services. Each of the entities 
can be mapped with another and analysis can be made in the 
crossroads of this mapping. A set of dimensions have been 
chosen to give structure for analysis and design of smart city 
services. These dimensions are business, legal, usability, 
social and technical aspect. 
In addition to the possible interoperability levels (service to 
service or mobile to user for instance) that need to be 
reached, other aspects (the eventual hierarchical relationship 
between entities for instance) must be taken into account. 
We believe that we need a more general framework that 
could identify these particular levels and deal with them. An 
evaluation system, so that already existing entities 
interactions can be analyzed in an efficient way or the 
conception of future services can be assessed, could be 
useful in this process. 
III. 
INTEROPERABILITY FRAMEWORK 
The goal of this section is to give a good intuition of what 
we intend by interoperability and how it fits in the SUS 
context. We will define the entities that are involved and 
their relationships. These relationships are those for which 
we would like to be able to talk about interoperability. 
A. Criteria 
Before defining the possible levels of interoperability, 
we must choose relevant evaluation criteria. Intuitively, the 
example of two possible actors, namely the service and the 
country, and the study of what the term suitability represents 
in their context is a first approach. The suitability of a 
service for a country means: 
 the legal compatibility which includes the nature of 
the service and the type of data stored by the 
service (Example: the regulations regarding 
privacy differ from one country to the next). 
 the social acceptability which takes into account 
the nature of the application that provides the 
service and the impact on persons (Example: 
using mobile phones in a kindergarten would 
probably not be well accepted in all countries) 
 the localization capability with the language and 
the cultural references. 
This first analysis suggests that the eligible elements, to 
'measure' the interoperability, are the technical, the legal and 
the social details. A second analysis, regarding the services 
proposed in the SUS project and the interoperability issues 
that they raise, confirms that the previously presented 
criteria are to be taken into account. In addition, the nature 
of the SUS project, that connects academic and industrial 
partners, and its goals also lead us to highlight both the 
technological and commercial aspects of the interoperability 
evaluation. Then, because of the relevant elements (in our 
context) that our preliminary studies have identified, we 
choose to focus, as presented Fig. 1, on 4 specific points to 
analyze the relationship between two entities: 
 the technical issues which correspond to the 
evaluation of available technologies (and their 
use) and to the communication standards both at 
hardware and software level 
 the legal issues which are the consideration of laws 
and regulations that may impact on the entities 
 the usability/social acceptability issues which 
target the cultural aspects as well as those related 
to the customization and the seamless use of a 
service regardless the environment 
 the business issues which include, among other 
things, the business model that can be built and 
that could be convenient for the stakeholders  
 
 
 
 
Figure 1: Dimensions of interoperability analysis 
B. Entities and Interoperability Matrix 
The concept of interoperability encompasses the 
relations that can exist between two or more entities. Then, 
the understanding of this concept requires prior knowledge 
of the behavior of entities in each specific case. 
Consequently, the study of interoperability within a well-
defined ecosystem starts by the identification and the 
description of the involved entities. In the framework of the 
city services proposed in the context of the Smart Urban 
Spaces project, we have identified six main entities: 
 the mobile phone which is the personal electronic 
device by means of which a person interacts 
with the (real or virtual) external environment. 
Note that this interaction can also be at the 
initiative of some external entity or the mobile 
phone itself and not necessarily its owner, who, 
in some cases, is perhaps not even aware an 
interaction took/is taking place. 
 the user who corresponds to the person that will 
use a mobile phone to access the different 
proposed services 
 the infrastructure which consists of either NFC 
readers, either contactless smart cards or tag 
systems that correspond to the 3 operating mode 
of NFC. In particular, a tag system is a system 
which manages the interface between a NFC-
enabled device and a set of operations it is 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

willing to launch by means of reading a tag 
while a tag is a small piece of hardware (usually 
a plastic component with electrical circuits) that 
stores data accessible through the reader/writer 
NFC mode. 
 the service which includes, in a particular field, a 
set of elementary operations to improve the daily 
lives of citizens (for instance a mobile ticketing 
service). The service takes generally the shape of 
an application running on a mobile phone 
 the city represents the geographical area for which 
a range of services is offered to the citizens 
 the country is the country where the city is located 
 
Depending on the environment, several players of the same 
type can coexist and interact. Obviously, in a defined 
ecosystem, many mobile phones (belonging to many users) 
are activated as many services are offered to the citizens. 
Precisely, the possible interactions between these different 
actors allow defining the different levels of interoperability 
that can be achieved. For example, if we consider the case 
of two mobile phones that need to exchange some data, we 
will deal with potential hardware compatibility issues and 
communication standard problems.  
 
 
User 
Mobile 
Infras. 
Service 
City 
Country 
User 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mobile 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Infras. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Service 
 
 
 
 
 
 
City 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Country 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: Interoperability matrix 
 
Consequently, the study of relationships between each 
presented entity allows us to introduce the concept of 
'Interoperability Matrix' (Fig. 2) to model the different 
possible levels of interoperability. Each cell represents the 
links that exist or can/should be tied. For example, the cell 
entity #1-entity #2 should be read as follows: what are the 
requirements for entity #1 to be 'interoperable' with entity 
#2? It should be noted that not all the cells play the same 
role regarding the notion of interoperability. This is 
explained in the following section. 
IV. 
RESULTING EVALUATION PROCESS 
A. Description 
The evaluation process can be used to describe/define 
requirements/interoperability for an entity over the other 
components of the ecosystem, for example a given service 
that must interact with the other actors (Mobile, User, etc.). 
The process, regarding two entities, is derived from a 
questionnaire that makes it possible to analyze the possible 
interactions in a cell of the interoperability matrix. The 
structure of the form can be decomposed into different 
blocks: a first part with general questions, a second part 
related to technical issues, a third block concerning legal 
aspects, a fourth part for the business related questions and 
finally a fifth part dealing with the usability/social 
acceptability elements. Thus, the stakeholders involved in 
the evaluation process correspond to the relations to analyze 
(cf. the general questions part of the forms). 
The general part presents information (question to 
answer - who should fill this form - prerequisites) that help 
to explain and understand the context in which the analysis 
is performed. As for the other four parts, which correspond 
to the four dimensions of analysis, they each contain a set of 
questions to answer. These questions enable a detailed study 
of the elements that we find essential. It should be noted that 
these issues have only three possible answers, i.e., yes, no or 
maybe, to keep the process as simple as possible. ‘Maybe’ 
corresponds to a situation where the stakeholders are not 
sure about the answer to provide (for example because 
details are missing regarding a given entity or because the 
answer lies between yes and no). 
From a practical point of view, the assessment is 
done by assigning a value to each answer. An answer 
‘maybe’ is equivalent to 1 point, while the answers ‘yes’ or 
‘no’ can both correspond to 0 or 2 points depending on their 
negative or positive nature concerning interoperability. For 
example, an answer ‘yes’ to the question ‘Can the Service 
be localized if required’ gives 2 points while a ‘yes’ to the 
question ‘Does the service make any country specific 
cultural reference’ gives 0 point. Then, for each category 
(technical, legal, business, usability/social acceptability), we 
define a percentage that is calculated as the ratio of the sum 
of the responses on the maximum (2 times the number of 
questions). This percentage represents in some way the 
degree of ‘interoperability’ achieved in the chosen 
dimension. In the previous example, assume that the 
answers to three questions in the Usability/Social category 
are respectively ‘yes’, ‘yes’ and maybe.  The resulting 
percentage is therefore (0+2+1) / 6 or 50%. 
Then, to graphically illustrate the set of results for an 
analysis of interactions between two entities, we use a 
Kiviat diagram. The diagram has four axes for each analysis 
dimension scaled from 0 to 100 (to represent the 
percentages). Depending on the references values which are 
used for the diagram (50 for each axis in our case, cf. Fig. 
3), the results lead to a conclusion regarding the level of 
interoperability reached by the relation between two entities. 
This graphical representation also enables comparisons 
between different levels of interoperability (different types 
of relations in the interoperability matrix) or between 
different entities of the same nature. 
68
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

 
B. Application on a case 
We apply the Service to Country form to a real case to 
show its practical use. It represents the complete form for 
the Service to Country relation among the set of forms that 
must be built for each cell of the interoperability matrix. We 
first answer to the questions according to the four 
dimensions, then we calculate the percentages and finally, 
we draw the Kiviat diagram. In this example, the Service is 
the Daycare system and the Country is Finland. The form is 
presented Table I. 
 
TABLE I. Service to Country form for Daycare and Finland 
 
 
Daycare  Finland 
 
 
Question to answer: What are the necessary conditions so that a given 
service can be used in my Country? 
Who should fill this form: This form must be filled by a representative 
of a Country who is considering using a pre-existing   Service, with the 
help of the Service provider. 
Prerequisite(s): the country has rules and legislations for open data, 
privacy and security, and open interfaces of public information systems  
 
 
Questions 
 
 
Answers 
 
Technical issues 
Can the Service be localized if required? 
Can the Service fit with the available 
hardware/software infrastructure available in my 
Country? 
Is the Service technology standard based? 
 
 
 
Yes (2) 
 
Yes (2) 
 
Yes (2) 
 
Legal issues 
Does the Service obey the specific regulations of my 
Country? 
Does the Service use and provide open public data as 
required by the regulations and contracts? 
 
 
 
 
Yes (2) 
 
Maybe 
(1) 
 
Business issues 
Will the benefit(s) gained by deploying the service be 
concrete? 
Is the cost/benefit ratio positive? 
Is it possible to use the same solution in many cities to 
save costs of public investment? 
 
 
 
 
Yes (2) 
Yes (2) 
 
Yes (2) 
 
Usability/Social questions 
Might the Service be subject to acceptation arguments 
in my Country? 
Can the Service be localized if required (note that this 
is also a technical issue)? 
 
Does the Service make any country specific cultural 
reference? 
 
 
 
 
Yes (2) 
 
Maybe 
(1) 
 
Yes (0) 
 
The results are presented in the Kiviat diagram Fig. 3. 
Globally, we can conclude that the Daycare reach a good 
level of interoperability at the Service to Country level in 
Finland. 
 
Figure 3: Daycare to Finland interoperability level analysis results 
C. First Contributions 
The first analysis and the initial feedback enable us to 
raise 
positive 
elements 
concerning 
the 
proposed 
interoperability evaluation process: 
- Some partners of the SUS project started to use the first 
forms we have built as an evaluation tool for the services 
they have deployed, thus demonstrating it is a practical tool. 
The 
forms 
include 
quite 
simple 
questions 
(with 
yes/no/maybe answers) and the process (computation of the 
percentages for each category) that leads to the evaluation 
results is easy to achieve. By clearly identifying the forms to 
be filled on the basis of the interoperability aspects that are 
targeted, it is relatively easy to obtain a concrete result. 
- The awareness of the possible problems is another positive 
element of the evaluation process. Indeed, the Kiviat 
diagram resulting from a form filling presents a clear view 
of the level of interoperability with respect to the reference 
values (namely the average values). In other words, the 
diagram allows pointing out the eventual strengths and 
weaknesses (of the evaluated interoperability relationship) 
according to the different criteria presented in the subsection 
3.A. These eventual strengths and weaknesses are the 
points, with reference to the corresponding parts of the 
considered form, to take into account in the improvement of 
a given service.  
V. 
FUTURE WORK 
Obviously, to achieve the definition of the evaluation 
process, it is necessary to build a complete set of form 
mapping the cells of the matrix. Then, each cell of the 
matrix will be associated to a form whose structure will be 
the same as previously defined. This set of forms will not 
only provide guidance on services to be developed (before a 
concrete implementation), but also on improvements to 
existing services (to be deployed in other contexts). 
69
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Depending on the situation, it can be used by each player, 
by selecting the relevant elements to evaluate, to assess its 
level of interaction with external partners. These forms will 
provide a simple tool (questions with yes or no answers), 
flexible and including means for measuring (assessment 
model, Kiviat diagram) to focus on the dimensions of 
interoperability to enhance. The objective is to make it 
possible for the SUS project partners to use the complete 
tool and also to test it on more mobile contactless city 
services to obtain other valuable feedbacks. This set of 
forms has a dynamic aspect as it is built from exchanges 
between SUS partners and the experience gained during this 
project. It has an evolutionary shape and it also intended to 
be enriched by the experience feedbacks associated with its 
use.   
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
It is extremely difficult to take into consideration the 
entire elements which are essential to provide seamless 
services. Nevertheless, the experience of the SUS project 
has allowed us to understand and properly define the 
environment in which mobile contactless city services are 
expected to evolve. It helped us to identify the actors (User, 
Mobile, Infrastructure, Service, City and Country) which 
play a major role in this ecosystem. Based on this 
experience, our study on interoperability allowed us to 
specify 
the 
dimensions 
(technical, 
legal, 
business, 
usability/social) to consider while showing the possible 
interactions between entities in the interoperability matrix. 
We were able to present achievable levels of interoperability 
(represented by the cells of the matrix).  
The 
consideration 
of 
these 
criteria 
and 
the 
interoperability framework that we have defined led us to 
initiate the implementation of an evaluation process based 
on a set of forms. This set, with elements structured 
according to the criteria defined above, contains forms that 
refer to the cells (levels) of the interoperability matrix. To 
deploy a seamless service, we must ensure to analyze its 
environment and the levels of compatibility (depending of 
the objectives) to reach. The set of forms provides tools to 
give a clearer view of the operating environment with a 
simple assessment model and to help achieve this goal. We 
were able to use the framework and a part of the forms on 
specific cases (the Daycare for instance) to show its 
relevance. Of course, we still need to complete this set of 
form and test it on another bunch of mobile contactless 
services.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was carried out within the framework of 
Smart Urban Spaces, an Information Technology for 
European Advancement (ITEA) project, the goal of which 
was to define new mobile e-services for cities. The proposed 
services mainly take advantage of specific technologies, in 
particular NFC, in order to ease the everyday life of 
European citizens. We would like to thank the partners of 
the Smart Urban Spaces project with whom we have been 
working. Open Europeans Sailing competition pilot was 
conducted by Forum Virium Helsinki, Bonwal, Helsinki 
race management, Helsinki Region Transport and Nokia. 
Authors wish to thank these parties for letting us use this 
pilot as an interoperability example. 
We would also like to thank the University of Bordeaux 
which made possible, through its concrete support, the 
collaboration between VTT and LaBRI on this paper. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] B. Benyo, A. Vilmos, K. Kovacs, and L. Kutor. “NFC 
applications and business model of the ecosystem,” Presented at 
Mobile and Wireless Communications Summit, 2007. 16th IST. 
2007.  
[2] F. Borrego-Jaraba, I. Luque Ruiz, and M. A. Gómez-Nieto. “A 
NFC-based pervasive solution for city touristic surfing,” Personal 
and Ubiquitous Computing 15(7), 2011, pp. 731-742.  
[3] Cityzi, Available: http://www.cityzi.fr [retrieved: January, 
2014].  
[4] V. Coskun, K. Ok, and B. Ozdenizci. “Near Field 
Communication: From Theory to Practice,” 2011.  
[5] J. Fang, S. Hu, and Y. Han. “A service interoperability 
assessment model for service composition,” Proc. IEEE 
International Conference on Service Computing. 2004.  
[6] Forum des services mobiles sans contact, “NFC mobile phones 
to 
benefit 
regions,” 
2009. 
Available: 
http://www.nfc-
forum.org/resources/white_papers/SMSC_liberty_equality_mobilit
y.pdf 
[7] 
Innovision 
Research 
and 
Technology, 
“Near 
field 
communication in the real world - turning the NFC promise into 
profitable, 
everyday 
applications,” 
2007. 
Available: 
http://members.nfc-
forum.org/resources/white_papers/Innovision_whitePaper2.pdf 
[retrieved: January, 2014]. 
[8] M. Isomursu, “Tags and the city,” PsychNology Journal 6(2), 
pp. 131-156. 2008.  
[9] G. Madlmayr, “A mobile trusted computing architecture for a 
near field communication ecosystem,” Proc. of the 10th 
International Conference on Information Integration and Web-
Based Applications & Services. 2008.  
[10] G. Madlmayr, J. Langer, and J. Scharinger, “Managing an 
NFC ecosystem,” Proc. of the 7th International Conference of 
Mobile Business, 2008.  
[11] O. Rouru-Kuivala, “NFC in urban settings,” in Touch the 
Future with Smart Touch, Espoo: VTT, 2009, pp. 171-173.  
[12] J. Siden et al., “Home care with NFC sensors and a smart 
phone,” Proc. of the 4th International Symposium on Applied 
Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies. 2011.  
[13] T. Tuikka and M. Isomursu, “Touch the Future with a Smart 
Touch”, 2009.  
[14] P. Välkkynen et al., “A user interaction paradigm for physical 
browsing and near-object control based on tags,” Proc. Mobile 
HCI, Physical Interaction Workshop on Real World User 
Interfaces. Udine, Italy, 2003, pp. 31-34. 
[15] P. Wegner, “Interoperability,” ACM Computing Surveys 
(CSUR) 28(1), 1996, pp. 285-287. 
70
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

