Challenges and Opportunities in e-Government 
Education 
e-Government Programs Curriculum 
Demetrios Sarantis 
Operating Unit on Policy-Driven Electronic Governance 
United Nations University 
Guimaraes, Portugal 
sarantis@unu.edu 
 
Charalampos Alexopoulos 
Department of Information and Communication Systems 
Engineering, University of the Aegean 
Samos, Greece 
alexop@aegean.gr  
Soumaya Ben Dhaou 
Operating Unit on Policy-Driven Electronic Governance 
United Nations University 
Guimaraes, Portugal 
bendhaou@unu.edu 
 
Euripidis Loukis 
Department of Information and Communication Systems 
Engineering, University of the Aegean 
Samos, Greece 
eloukis@aegean.gr 
 
 
Abstract— Public administration and information technology 
university departments worldwide have responded to the 
explosion in e-Government by offering related programs or 
courses. In this study, the authors investigated education 
programs in e-Government by reviewing the curriculum and 
course descriptions of 70 programs that had web listings of 
their programs. Findings suggest that 64 institutions, from 32 
countries worldwide, offer e-Government related programs. 
The programs are classified into four types based on their 
education level. Offered courses have been classified in 15 
clusters.  The majority of the proposed courses belong to the 
areas of Information Systems (20,7%), e-Governance (17,8%), 
Management (12,9%) and Public Administration (8,4%) 
clusters. 
Keywords-component; e-Government; Education; Training; 
Program; Course; Digital Transformation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Although e-Government is a relatively young subfield of 
the public administration discipline, it has gained significant 
academic and practical popularity during the last decade. 
This popularity is mainly due to the increasing and 
ubiquitous use of various information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) by citizens, businesses and by all types 
of public institutions.  
The relevance of information and communication 
technology (ICT) in public sector research and education has 
markedly increased. Thanks to the practical and academic 
interest in e-Government, its teaching as an academic subject 
has also attracted some scholarly attention [1]. That is also 
reflected in public administration and information systems 
scientific conferences and journals, which pick up the issue 
more often within distinct tracks and special issues (e.g. 
ICDS [2], ICEGOV [3], HICSS [4], GIQ [5] etc.). Even 
though there are master programs with e-Government at their 
core, it is not clear how universities take up the topic, what is 
taught, and how the programs can be classified. This 
question 
seems 
highly 
relevant, 
considering 
how 
multidisciplinary the e-Government research community is 
[6]. Nevertheless, there are still relatively fewer studies on e-
Government teaching compared to other kinds of e-
Government research. 
The contribution of this article is twofold: First, despite 
many publications on e-Government theory and practice, few 
exclusively examine e-Government education. Second, while 
the state of information systems and public administration 
education is soundly documented, the relevant literature in e-
Government field is limited. Therefore, this article aims to 
explore the supply-side in e-Government education from an 
international point of view. At the core is the question, in 
which type of programs e-Government is addressed in which 
manner and what are the course types that are provided. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the background of our study concerning the needs 
for e-Government education, as well as existing educational 
activities for fulfilling these needs. Section III describes the 
research method. Section IV presents the findings. Section V 
discusses the results and conclusions close the article. 
II. 
DEMAND AND RESPONSE 
During the last two decades, there has been a continuous 
growth of the e-Government initiatives, as government 
agencies are increasingly using (and relying on) various 
types of ICTs for supporting innovations in essential internal 
functions as well as in their transaction and consultation with 
citizens [7]. This trend is exponentially increasing, as 
governments are investing significant financial resources in 
various kinds of innovation promoting digitization projects. 
According to Ganapati and Reddick [8] in the U.S.A. the 
annual federal government ICT budget is over $86 billion, 
while the state and local government ICT market is valued at 
over $70 billion. A recent study by Grand View Research 
93
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

(2017) estimated the global government ICT investment in 
2015 at 431.15 billion USD, expected to reach USD 654.73 
billion by 2025. At the same time, not only the ‘quantity’ of 
ICT investment increases in government, but also its 
‘quality’ as well: from digitization of existing internal 
processes we proceed to overall ‘digital transformation’ of 
government agencies, concerning both their internal 
administrative and policy making processes, and their 
interaction 
with 
citizens; 
furthermore, 
e-Government 
becomes 
more 
‘context-specific’, 
i.e., 
more 
closely 
associated with the specific local, country and sectoral 
contexts it aims to support [7]. These increase the 
technological and organizational sophistication of e-
Government, making its development more difficult, 
demanding and risky. This critical size and high complexity 
of government ICT investment, and also the need for an 
efficient exploitation, operation and support of the existing 
government ICT infrastructures, necessitate extensive 
relevant human capital, which generates wide range of needs 
for e-Government education. Previous management and 
economic sciences research has revealed the importance of 
the human capital of organizations for knowledge intensive 
innovation related activities, as it improves their capacity to 
absorb relevant external knowledge, combine it with pre-
existing internal knowledge, adapt it to specific needs and 
objectives, and exploit it for innovation purposes [9].   
Therefore, e-Government education is of critical 
importance for the development of modern highly complex 
and sophisticated e-Government. For this reason public 
agencies, ICT implementers, students, and faculty are 
demanding e-Government education offerings with an 
urgency rarely seen before in academia. It is necessary, for a 
variety of e-Government-related roles occupations that have 
emerged, ranging from those requiring heavy technical skills 
in ICT and limited organizational knowledge, to those 
demanding extensive organizational skills and only modest 
technical knowledge (with many ‘hybrid’ ones that need 
considerable 
both 
technological 
and 
organizational 
capabilities). Previous literature has emphasized that the e-
Government domain is a highly interdisciplinary. It 
combines knowledge from four main domains: the 
technological, management, economic and political sciences 
[7][10][11]. For this reason, the e-Government practitioners 
(in government agencies as well as in involved private firms, 
such as ICT or consulting ones) have their background in 
one of these four fields. In this regard, they need to acquire 
knowledge and experience from the other three domains, and 
then obtain the main knowledge of the e-Government 
domain. However, despite the abovementioned inherent 
difficulty and complexity of e-Government education, as 
well as its high importance, limited research has been 
conducted about it. Most of these researches describe 
relevant educational programs and initiatives.   
According to Augustinaitis and Petrauskas [12], the 
interdisciplinary nature of e-Governance allows integrating a 
broad range of specialized knowledge, for instance 
knowledge from public administration, law, information 
technologies, communication, management and political 
sciences. In addition, significant percentage of students of 
such educational programs are primarily originated from 
these disciplines.  
Janowski et al. [13] analysed seven e-Government 
graduate university programs. The results indicate that 29% 
of the programs train political leaders, 57% of them train 
government leaders, project managers and management staff, 
and 43% of the programs train technical staff. The focus on 
only one of the above roles in these programs is very limited 
(29%). The majority of the programs (71%) target more than 
one role, while none of them target all roles.  
Concerning specific learning topics, the literature is 
mostly concentrated in country-specific studies, which 
provide different, but complementary results. Anohina 
Naumeca et al. [14] highlight the lack of learning courses 
concerning interoperability in the European countries. 
Interoperability related courses are essential, as they drive 
delivery of cross-border and cross-sectoral public sector 
services.  
Biasiotti and Nannucci [15] argue that regarding Italy, 
master degrees on Public Administration (PA) and 
information technology organized by public administration 
schools, concentrate on technological issues (information 
systems, communication networks, tools and methodologies 
for public communication) and on legal instances of 
technological innovation in the PA (security, information 
technology law, internet law, etc.). Ganapati and Reddick [8] 
conducted a survey of Master in Public Administration 
(MPA) programs in the U.S.A. concerning the provision of 
e-Government related courses, as well as the importance 
assigned to such courses. More than a quarter of the 
respondents (29%) viewed such a course as “extremely 
unimportant” or “very unimportant”, which indicates that a 
considerable share of MPA programs is not aware of some 
realities in public administration, associated with the high 
penetration and impact of ICT. Therefore, it has been 
concluded that the e-Government related education provided 
in the main U.S. MPA programs is not sufficient, and e-
Government is under-represent in them, so they finally train 
a workforce unprepared for the digital world.  
The needs for e-Government education increase, as 
government proceeds to the gradual exploitation of recent 
disruptive ICTs, and shift from solely looking to the support 
of administrative processes to a more ambitious purposes of 
supporting 
higher-level 
policy-making 
processes 
and 
functions.  
These new objectives and directions of e-Government, 
and the above new technological advances, as well as the full 
range of involved disciplines, necessitates the development 
of corresponding new e-Government courses, and in general 
a holistic educational public sector digital transformation. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD  
The methodology undertaken includes the following 
steps: 1) the definition of the research keywords regarding 
the data collection of existing training programs related to e-
Government, 2) the mapping of the geographical search 
areas, 3) the specification of a training programs metadata 
scheme and 4) the filtering and analysis of training programs 
focused on e-Government area.  
94
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Between February and May 2018, exhaustive Web search 
was conducted, using various search engines to analyse Web 
page descriptions of e-Government programs and course 
offerings by different types of educational institutions. Also 
particular web pages of universities reputed in the related 
literature or other publications to have an e-Government 
program were accessed. Also, all programs suggested from 
e-Government researchers and practitioners have been 
considered. Some established e-Government programs did 
not have a clear web presence or other did not provide the 
program courses. Identified e-Government programs include 
academic ones, executive training ones and various types of 
certifications. Most programs were at the master’s level, but 
a few were available for undergraduates. They varied 
considerably in their focus, types of courses offered, and 
degree requirements. We chose only those programs that 
were described in detail on the web and came up with a total 
of 73 programs in May 2018. The total number of 
institutions offering e-Government education stood at 64.  
 We examined programs considering the following 
aspects: (a) Institution’s country, (b) program’s educational 
level, (c) provided courses. The considered courses were 
further classified in clusters. We used course titles and 
descriptions to place courses in categories.  The 
classification scheme intended to provide a general picture of 
the types of courses offered in this area and an idea about the 
extent to which such programs give emphasis in each course 
cluster.  
IV. 
FINDINGS 
Seventy e-Government programs have been identified 
and considered. The most common strategy among these 
programs is to offer a concentration (or track or 
specialization) in a specific area of e-Government.  
Institutions 
that 
offer 
e-Government 
educational 
programs are located in 32 countries (alphabetical order): 
Argentina 2, Armenia 2, Austria 1, Barbados 1, Belarus 1, 
Belgium 3, Estonia 1, Bosnia & Herzegovina 1, Canada 2, 
China 1, Colombia 3, Estonia 4, Germany 5, India 2, Italy 4, 
Mexico 5, Netherlands 2, New Zealand 1, Norway 1, Poland 
3, Portugal 1, Romania 6, Russia 1, Serbia 1, Singapore 1, 
Slovenia 1, South Africa 2, Sweden 1, Switzerland 2, U.S.A. 
10, Uganda 1, UK 3. 
 
Figure 1. e-Government training programs categorized based on 
the certificate they award 
Regarding the education level, there are eight executive 
training programs, eight undergraduate university programs, 
thirty postgraduate university programs and the rest of them 
are short course ones (Figure 1). The courses of e-
Government related programs have been classified in the 
following clusters (each cluster is described, number of 
identified courses in parenthesis, course examples are 
provided in each group) (Figure 2): 
 
 
Figure 2. Course clusters and number of courses identified in each 
of them in e-Government related training programs 
e-Governance (87). Courses in e-Governance category 
consider aspects such as the application of information and 
communication technology (ICT) for delivering government 
services, 
exchange 
of 
information, 
communication 
transactions, integration of various stand-alone systems and 
services between government and users, back office 
processes and interactions within the entire government 
framework, etc. 
Indicative courses: Phases of e-Government and stages of e-
Government development, Impact and measurement of e-
Governance, Development of government websites. 
Public Policy   (30). The public policy category focuses on 
the systematic analysis of issues related to public policy and 
the decision processes associated with them. This includes 
training in the role of economic and political factors in 
public 
decision-making 
and 
policy 
formulation; 
microeconomic analysis of policy options and issues; 
resource allocation and decision modelling; cost/benefit 
analysis; and various applications to specific public policy 
topics. Public policy courses teach students policy analysis, 
policy studies, public policy, political economy, urban 
planning, public administration, public affairs, public 
management, etc. 
Indicative courses: Sustainability and innovation in society,  
Public Innovation and Resistance to Change, Importance 
and Impact of Social Channels on Public Policy, 
Information Security Policy and Ethics, Information Policy. 
Governance (22). Governance is composed of all processes 
of governing, whether undertaken by a government, a 
market or a network, over a social system and whether 
through the laws, norms, power or language of an organized 
society. It relates to the processes of interaction and 
decision-making among the actors involved in a collective 
problem that leads to the creation, reinforcement, or 
reproduction of social norms and institutions. Governance 
courses cover public sector, public organizations, and the 
concepts of leadership and governance. They study the 
features of the political structure of countries. They contain 
information on the institutional, procedural and value 
components of the political system and public policy in 
countries, as well as a description of the problems, 
contradictions, and prospects for the political development 
95
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

of the country. They consider aspects such as the political 
system and regime, state institutions, political parties, civil 
society, directions and problems of economic and social 
policy. 
Indicative courses: Government Enterprise Architecture, 
Democracy and Governance, Evidence, Institutions and 
Power, Risk Assessment and Governance. 
Project Management (17). The project management 
category covers all aspects that are related to managing 
technology and innovation projects in the public sector. 
They include a variety of areas such as effort management, 
project portfolio management, program management, 
project risk management, project workforce management, 
etc. 
Indicative courses: Project Management, Management of IT 
Projects in Administration. 
Software Engineering (30). Software engineering courses 
consider issues regarding the systematic application of 
scientific and technological knowledge, methods, and 
experience to the design, implementation, testing, and 
documentation of software. Courses that are specifically 
incorporating programming, program design in their titles 
and that are technical in nature, such as web programming 
and security systems, are classified as software engineering.  
Indicative courses: Introduction to Development in Cloud, 
Building interoperability and digital data exchange, 
Principles of Database Management, Data Warehouse and 
Business 
Intelligence, 
Mobile 
Apps: 
Application 
Development, User-Based Design, Spatial Data Capture. 
Information Systems (101). Information Systems courses 
consider aspects such as management of information 
systems, design, implementation and development of 
information 
systems, 
systems 
analysis, 
data 
communications, database design, collection, organization, 
storage, and communication of information, etc. It also 
integrate topics related to business process design and 
automation, reengineering and transformation. 
Indicative courses: Business Information Systems, Virtual 
Environments Usability, Information Management in the 
Public 
Sector, 
Information 
Systems 
Architecture, 
Information security in state and municipal government, 
Collaborative Systems in Administration. 
Business Administration (25). Business administration 
courses provide a broad knowledge of the functional aspects 
of an organisation and their interconnection. They include 
all aspects of overseeing and supervising business 
operations and related fields which contain accounting, 
finance, and marketing. They also consider the performance 
or management of business operations and decision making, 
as well as the efficient organization of people and other 
resources, to direct activities toward common goals and 
objectives. 
Indicative courses: Advanced Business Process Modelling 
and Automation, Transformation and change management, 
Start-up world & Prototyping ideas, Develop an innovative 
ecosystem, Digitally-driven Entrepreneurship. 
Management (63). Management courses consider the 
administration of an organization, whether it is a business, a 
not-for-profit 
organization, 
or 
government 
body. 
Management includes the activities of setting the strategy of 
an organization and coordinating the efforts of its 
employees to accomplish its objectives through the 
application of available resources, such as financial, natural, 
technological, and human resources. Management courses 
provide a solid foundation in organizational behaviour, 
human resource management, labour-management relations, 
negotiation, conflict resolution, compensation systems, and 
organizational development.  
Indicative 
courses: 
Human 
Resources 
Management, 
Leadership and Teamwork, Strategic Planning, Conflict 
Management, Impact Assessment. 
Public Administration (41). Public Administration courses 
study the implementation of government policy and prepare 
civil servants for working in the public service. They 
introduce concepts whose fundamental goal is to advance 
management and policies so that government can function 
efficiently and effectively. They include aspects of 
economics, public finance, research methods/statistics, 
policy analysis, ethics, public management, leadership, 
program evaluation/performance measurement and human 
resources management. 
Indicative courses: Public Sector Service Design and 
Implementation, State and Municipal Administration, 
Theory of the state and rights, Theory of Administration, 
Organisation of the Public Sector, Public Procurement. 
Legal Issues (15). Courses in the legal issues category 
educate individuals in the principles, practices, and theory 
of law. This cluster of courses provides to the trainee, the 
knowledge and skills necessary for admission to legal 
practice in public administration. It also provides to current 
lawyers with advanced training or greater specialisation, or 
it updates lawyers on recent developments in the law. They 
include aspects such as understanding of the potential of e-
Governance, the policies, the required legal and institutional 
frameworks, and insights into an engaging e-Governance 
involving different stakeholders. 
Indicative courses: Legal aspects of e-Governance, cyber 
security & secure governance, Administrative Law, Legal 
Organisation of Public Administration, E-Regulation. 
Scientific Research (21). Scientific research courses 
concentrate on the fundamentals of doing research, aimed 
primarily, but not exclusively, at the postgraduate level. 
These courses provide an understanding of research 
approaches and skills, and importantly an ability to deploy 
them in students΄ studies or their professional lives. They 
aid those who have research as part of their postgraduate 
studies. Research methods courses prepare the student to 
design 
effective, 
ethical 
investigations. 
They 
teach 
appropriate frameworks and tools for qualitative and 
quantitative studies in e-Governance. 
Indicative courses: Strategy and methods of scientific 
research, 
Research 
Methods 
for 
Process 
Analysis, 
96
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Investigative methods for e-Governance, Research on Public 
Management and Organizations, Quantitative Methods. 
Economy (22). Economy courses include microeconomics, 
macroeconomics, econometrics, economic statistics, history 
of economic thought and political economy. They cover 
aspects such as microeconomic theory, macroeconomic 
theory, and econometrics. 
Indicative courses: Public Finance, Public Budgets, 
Financing Programs for Digital Development, Health Care 
Finance. 
Statistics (4). The statistics category is concerned with 
statistical methods, evidence-based reasoning, particularly 
with the analysis of data. Statistics courses study the 
collection, analysis, interpretation, and presentation of data. 
Indicative courses: Statistics in Administration, Probability 
and statistics. 
European Institutions (5). European institutions courses 
provide structured knowledge of EU fundamentals and 
focus on selected priority issues for an in-depth 
understanding 
and 
future-oriented 
approach 
to 
EU 
integration. The institutions of the European Union are the 
seven major decision-making bodies of the European Union 
(EU). 
Indicative 
courses: 
European 
Integration 
and 
EU 
Institutions, European Administrative Law, EU Funds 
Management. 
Other (5). The category “other” includes the rest of the 
provided courses. 
Indicative courses: Physical Education, Ethics, Publicity, 
Mathematics for decision sciences, English for Science and 
Research. 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
 Not that long ago, e-Government related programs and 
course offerings were virtually non-existent, but today they 
are rapidly increasing. In this research, we identified 64 
institutions offering either concentrations or majors in e-
Government at different types of educational level 
worldwide. But even as more universities rush to market 
with such offerings, major controversies remain unresolved 
surrounding the need for, and the nature of, e-Government 
education.  
e-Government courses have arrived as a significant 
element of public administration and technology schools. 
Educational institutions are scrambling to turn the study of e-
Government into majors and degrees. However, the approach 
to offering such course content varies across institutions. 
Controversy highlights whether e-Government represents an 
incremental modification of the capabilities and strategies 
available to information technology or public administration 
areas or whether we are witnessing the birth of a new 
education area. Institutions of higher education are debating 
if they should “patch” e-Government perspectives into 
existing courses and programs or offer new courses and 
majors.  
Though some researchers have contended that e-
Government should be an integral part of the curriculum and 
that separate programs and degrees are unnecessary, others 
have argued for specialized programs in the area [16][17].  
Schools with separate majors in e-Government aim to 
offer intensive study of e-Government and address what 
might be a new approach to reorganize and manage public 
sector. Other institutions are designing courses and programs 
that treat e-Government as an integral part of the broader 
public administration or information technology curriculum. 
This approach assumes that a basic grounding in 
fundamental public administration concepts and information 
technology aspects is still needed in the new type of 
government. e-Government facts and content may be 
obsolete sooner than students can finish a program. 
Integration of e-Government into established curriculums 
also may force students to examine the social, global, 
psychological, and ethical aspects of this approach to 
government.  
Technical versus nontechnical focus aside from the 
debate on whether to integrate e-Government into a public 
administration program or offer it separately, there is also a 
lack of clarity concerning the extent to which such courses 
should emphasize technology aspects as opposed to 
functional public administration areas. Should courses 
emphasize the technology that enables e-Government or 
focus on the effect of technology on government strategy and 
decisions? 
Do 
e-Government 
capabilities 
require 
a 
technological foundation, or can students function effectively 
in e-Government environment without knowledge of the 
enabling technology? Who should initiate and “own” e-
Government education- the computer information systems 
faculty or the public administration faculty?  
In the current study, e-Government programs are being 
offered by both public administration schools such as Hertie 
School of Governance and, primarily, technological schools 
such as the College of Information Science & Technology in 
the University of Nebraska Omaha or the Institute of 
Business and Management Informatics of the University of 
Koblenz Landau. Findings suggest that technology could no 
longer be an afterthought to government strategy but an 
integral part of every phase of the strategy development. But 
what this means regarding the related education is not clear. 
Education opportunities in e-Government field remain 
elusive for some regions and countries, in the developing 
countries. Only 6 academic programs are provided from 
institutions that are located in Africa or Asia. Therefore, it is 
also important to develop tailored e-Government training 
programs to support new public policy and technology 
professions 
to 
strengthen 
institutional 
capacities 
of 
developing countries in deploying digital government and 
digital services. 
To design a complete educational e-Government 
program, the present study suggests fifteen main course 
clusters that lay a solid foundation for the creation of a 
comprehensive and coherent e-Government program.  These 
clusters cover different aspects of e-Government needs. The 
majority of the provided courses belong to Information 
Systems (20,7%), e-Governance (17,8%), Management 
(12,9%) and Public Administration (8,4%) clusters. 
97
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

These e-Government programs should be offered in a 
holistic way providing the opportunity to students to 
develop a high level of knowledge and capabilities in:  
 
an appropriate range of organizational tasks, 
management 
procedures, 
multi-stakeholder 
projects, legal and 
methodological concepts 
towards the efficient and effective execution of 
public projects;  
 
a wide range of technological skills (established 
and 
emerging 
ones), 
towards 
beneficial 
innovations, transformations and transitions in the 
public sector; 
 
a variety of different aspects of information 
systems (IS), that can be developed: IS that support 
internal processes, electronic procurement, digital 
information provision to citizens and businesses, 
electronic transactions between the government 
and citizens/businesses, interoperability, electronic 
participation, 
governance 
and 
democracy, 
utilization of social media, open government data, 
smart cities, etc. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION  
The growing interest of e-Government programs during 
the last years is significant. The debate on whether e-
Government should be viewed as a new curricular area has 
not slowed down curricular innovation. The ability of 
universities to acquire faculty and technology resources and 
to continuously offer more innovative courses will affect the 
success and viability of these programs. This paper examines 
the nature of 70 e-Government programs and explores their 
content. It also sets the foundation for curriculum 
development in e-Government education. 
Educational postgraduate programs need a structure that 
allows the inclusion of country-specific needs based on the 
maturity stage of the country and the developed 
governmental action plan. To improve the efficiency and 
effectiveness of e-Government projects the country's leaders 
must pay closer attention to the problems of increasing the 
"right" e-Government skills of civil servants. 
Further steps to this study will be to identify, structure 
and describe the specific modules of undergraduate and 
graduate level educational programs. A possible research 
approach is also the identification of the needed micro-
certificates interrelated with the appropriate skills from the 
ESCO ontology, which is a classification that identifies and 
categorises 
skills, 
competences, 
qualifications 
and 
occupations relevant for the European Union labour market 
and education. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This paper is a result of the project "SmartEGOV: 
Harnessing EGOV for Smart Governance (Foundations, 
methods, 
Tools) 
/ 
NORTE-01-0145-FEDER-000037", 
supported 
by 
Norte 
Portugal 
Regional 
Operational 
Programme (NORTE 2020), under the PORTUGAL 2020 
Partnership Agreement, through the European Regional 
Development Fund (EFDR). 
REFERENCES 
[1] E. Estevez, and T. Janowski, “Landscaping government chief 
information officer education,” in 2013 46th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 1684-1693, 
IEEE, January 2013. 
[2] https://www.iaria.org/conferences2019/filesICDS19/NGDG.p
df, ICDS 2019. 
[3] http://www.icegov.org/track/workshop-3, ICEGOV 2019. 
[4] http://hicss.hawaii.edu/#!future-conferences/ctld HICSS 2019. 
[5] https://www.journals.elsevier.com/government-information-
quarterly, GIQ 2019. 
[6] M. Yildiz, C. Babaoğlu, and M.A. Demircioğlu, “E-
government education in Turkish public administration 
graduate programs: Past, present, and future,” Journal of 
Public Affairs Education, 22(2), pp. 287-302, 2016. 
[7] T. 
Janowski, 
“Digital 
government 
evolution: 
From 
transformation 
to 
contextualization,” 
Government 
Information Quarterly, 32(3), pp. 221-236, 2015. 
[8] S. Ganapati, and C. G. Reddick, “An Ostrich burying its head 
in the sand? The 2009 NASPAA standards and scope of 
information technology and E-Government curricula,” Journal 
of Public Affairs Education, 22(2), pp. 267-286, 2016. 
[9] S. Arvanitis, E. Loukis, and V. Diamantopoulou, “Are ICT, 
Workplace Organization and Human Capital Relevant for 
Innovation? A Comparative Study Based on Swiss and Greek 
Micro Data,” International Journal of the Economics of 
Business, 23(3), pp. 319-349, 2016. 
[10] A. Grönlund, and T.A. Horan, “Introducing e-Gov: History, 
Definitions, and Issues,” Communications of the Association 
for Information Systems, 15, pp. 713-729, 2005. 
[11] H. J. Scholl, “Central Research Questions in e-Government, 
or Which Trajectory Should the Study Domain Take,” 
Transforming Government: People, Process and Policy, 1(1), 
pp. 67-88, 2007. 
[12] Α. Augustinaitis, and R. Petrauskas, “Master studies on e-
governance administration: the first experience in Lithuania,” 
In International Conference on Electronic Government, pp. 
453-456, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August, 2004. 
[13] T. Janowski, E. Estevez, and A. Ojo, “Conceptualizing 
electronic governance education,” In System Science 
(HICSS), 2012 45th Hawaii International Conference on (pp. 
2269-2278). IEEE, January, 2012. 
[14] A. Anohina-Naumeca, V. Sitikovs, P. Goetzen, and M. 
Chmielecki, “Design of the electronic course on e-
government 
interoperability 
essentials,” 
in 
European 
Conference 
on 
e-Government 
(p. 
649). 
Academic 
Conferences International Limited, June, 2013. 
[15] M. A. Biasiotti, and R. Nannucci, “Teaching e-government in 
Italy,” in International Conference on Electronic Government 
(pp. 460-463). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, August, 2004. 
[16] P. T. Jaeger, “Building e-government into the library and 
information science curriculum: The future of government 
information and services,” Journal of Education for Library 
and Information Science, 49(3), pp. 167-179, 2008. 
[17] S. Kim, and K. Layne, “Making the connection: E-
government and public administration education,” Journal of 
Public Affairs Education, pp. 229-240, 2001. 
 
98
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

