 
A New Security Approach for the Spectrum Access in Vehicular Networks 
 
Ayoub Alsarhan 
Dept. of  Computer Information System 
Hashemite University 
Zarqa, Jordan  
e-mail: ayoubm@hu.edu.jo
Ahmed Al-Dubai    
School of Computing  
Edinburgh Napier University 
Edinburgh, UK 
e-mail: a.al-dubai@napier.ac.uk 
 
Muhsen Alkhalidy 
Dept. of  Computer Science and 
Applications  
Hashemite University 
Zarqa, Jordan  
e-mail: muhsen@hu.edu.jo 
Yousef Kilani 
Dept. of  Computer Information System 
Hashemite University 
Zarqa, Jordan  
e-mail: ymkilani@hu.edu.jo 
 
 
 
Abstract— Vehicular ad hoc networks (VANETs) have been 
instrumental in intelligent transportation systems that enhances 
road safety and road management significantly. This technology 
enables communication among vehicles where drivers can share 
road information conditions. However, users can threaten 
spectrum access caused by launching passive and active attacks 
that prevent nodes to access spectrum efficiently. Securing 
spectrum access has become critical issue in VANET to ensure 
reliability and trustworthiness. In this paper, a novel 
collaborative approach during the spectrum access process is 
proposed. In our approach, vehicles are divided into clusters 
and Road Side Unit (RSU) is used to manage spectrum access 
for each cluster. RSU monitors the traffic for each node and 
identifies the malicious and misbehaving nodes. The proposed 
approach measures the node’s data reliability using a decision 
function. The scheme is applicable to a wide range of VANET 
applications, such as traffic safety, commercial applications, and 
Internet access. 
Keywords— 
Resource 
management; 
VANETs; 
trust 
management; security; misbehavior detection. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
 
Recently, VANETs are adopted to enhance road safety 
and to improve efficiency of traffic management. In VANET, 
vehicles cooperate to relay warning messages and road 
condition which improve safety significantly [1]-[3]. Each 
node in VANET (i.e., vehicles and RSUs) are equipped with 
different environmental sensors, processing, and wireless 
communication 
devices. 
VANETs 
support 
various 
applications that have been developed to innovate solutions 
to real life problems [1]-[3]. These applications include life 
safety, commercial applications, and Internet access. 
VANETs' applications can be classified based on 
communication model into the following categories: Vehicle 
to Infrastructure (V2I), Vehicle to Vehicle (V2V) and the 
hybrid communication.  
In order to enhance road safety, vehicles should monitor 
the nearby vehicles to avoid accidents. Traffic status might 
be stored at RSU where collected data from vehicles can be 
processed and then RSU disseminates road status to other 
vehicles. Because vehicles move at high speeds, the 
likelihood of VANET disconnection increases. Thus, 
sufficient number of road side units should be installed to 
maintain connectivity in VANET. Some of VANETs' 
applications, i.e., safety applications, require timely and 
accurate data. However, VANETs are vulnerable to 
numerous security threats and attacks that may make 
VANETs unavailable to the users. These attacks have several 
impacts on the VANET performance and users. For instance, 
the following are attacks that VANET may face [4]: 
 Attacker may send false messages about the road status. 
The attacker may send wrong information in VANETs 
to vehicles for exchanging this information. 
 The misbehaved vehicle may change the context of 
messages over VANET. 
 The malicious vehicle sends a high volume of messages 
to overwhelm nodes, reserve VANETs' bandwidth, and 
consume nodes' resources. 
 The eavesdropper vehicle injects some malicious codes 
to crash the control system in vehicle.  
In safety application, any vehicle in VANET detects an 
accident, emergency or sudden changes in speed or direction 
should report new road status to RSU [1]-[3]. RSU 
disseminates traffic alerts to all vehicles in the cluster. 
Warning messages should be delivered very fast in a high 
reliable manner to prevent accidents. However, if the reported 
data to RSU is faulty or malicious, then a traffic jam can take 
place, thus, result in life-threatening [4]. Hence, it is 
necessary to secure data communication in VANETs.  The 
rest of this article is organized as follows. First, related work 
and our contributions to the paper are introduced in Section 
II. Next, VANET is presented in Section III. We describe the 
proposed security scheme in Section IV. Then, we present 
some of the performed tests and show the performance of the 
VAET under different conditions with our scheme in Section 
V. Finally, the article is concluded in Section VI. 
 
II. 
BACKROUND 
 
Recently, there has been growing research interest and a 
great deal of emphasis placed in VANET security. In [5], 
authors proposed a new security scheme where public key 
infrastructure is used for message authentication and 
integrity. Large number of anonymous public/private key 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

pairs and the corresponding public key certificates are stored 
in each vehicle. A public/private key pair are used by each 
vehicle to avoid movement tracking. However, each node 
would require very high storage capacity to save many key 
pairs and corresponding certificates. Furthermore, each node 
should store all anonymous certificates of vehicles. Hence, 
message verification incurs high cost using this scheme.  
 In [6], authors proposed CARAVAN scheme where 
vehicles are divided into groups and the leader for each group 
acts as a proxy on behalf of all group members. Authors in 
[7] 
proposed 
new 
Cooperative 
Neighbor 
Position 
Verification (CNPV) security scheme. CNPV uses several 
heuristics for messages verification. These heuristics include 
direct verification, crosschecking, and multipoint location 
verification. CNPV detects any node announcing false 
positions and this node is prevented from relaying any 
message in the network. CNPV considers only nodes that 
advertise correct information about their positions to forward 
critical information. It adopts support vector machine (SVM) 
classifier to determine the authenticity of the messages. SVM 
uses vehicle attributes and message content for detecting 
untrustworthy nodes.  
In [8], the proposed scheme determines the false messages 
by monitoring the behavior of nodes after receiving the road 
status reports. It computes the "degree of belief" for each 
primary information by correlating secondary information 
observed by more than one node. Authors proposed new filter 
in [9] to specify spurious messages. Messages should pass 
through two-layer filter for classification purposes. In the first 
layer, some features for the message are used for rapid 
filtration. 
These 
features 
include 
digital 
signature 
verification, time validation, geographic location validation, 
and support from RSU. In the second phase, alert message is 
evaluated accurately. The filter uses incremental back 
propagation neural network (BPNN) and the support from 
neighbors to recognize the behavior the node. Authors in [10] 
proposed a new scheme for intrusion detection that combines 
BPNN and support victor machine for spurious messages. 
Some security schemes adopt node reputation for 
detecting untrustworthy nodes. Reputation is approximation 
of node behavior based on collective opinion about a node 
[11]. It represents node’s behavioral history which is used to 
predict node behavior in future. In [11], authors proposed 
new 
reputation 
management 
approaches. 
To 
detect 
hackers/liars, they suggested new service reputation and 
feedback reputations. The proposed scheme integrates trust 
management model with a pseudonym technique to preserve 
privacy. Reputation model is used to resist the tactical 
attacks. In order to recognize false messages, information 
entropy and majority rule are integrated to reputation 
algorithm. In [12], distributed trust model (DTM) is proposed 
for motivating selfish nodes to cooperate more. For each 
node, the cost for sending data is computed based on the 
node's behavior, so that malicious nodes pay more for 
communication. Most of the existing security schemes for 
VANET focus only on assessing the trustworthiness of nodes 
by analyzing the history of the nodes. However, these 
schemes have omitted the evaluation of the trustworthiness of 
the data shared among these nodes in VANET. In contrast, 
our scheme detects malicious nodes based on reported data. 
These nodes are evicted form VANET by RSU. Thus, 
multiple attacks can be avoided by focusing on nodes' data 
instead of focusing on the attacks. In order to improve the 
accuracy of trust function, the trust level for each node is 
calculated considering the trustworthiness of data. Moreover, 
the trust model makes a decision more scientifically, 
dynamically, and adaptively where trust level for each node 
is calculated and changed with the number of communication 
interactions.  
 
III. 
NETWORK OVERVIEW 
 
Each road is divided into K segments. We assume that 
the existence of RSU manages the traffic at each segment 
(cluster). Each node is equipped with a single IEEE 802.11b 
based transceiver. The spectrum is partitioned into non-
overlapping channels (16 channels for each RSU with 5 MHZ 
spacing with transmission and power mask restrictions 
similar to the ISM band), which is the basic unit of allocation. 
Our system model for VANET is depicted in Figure 1 
where both communications model are allowed (i.e., V2I, and 
V2V). Each vehicle is outfitted with radio communication 
gear that acts as a relay point for other nodes as well as an 
RSU. In our work, all vehicles are equipped with assistance 
of on-board sensors. These sensors include an GPS receiver, 
speedometer, accelerometer, and digital map to help a vehicle 
to gather road data. Each node in the cluster senses the road 
status and reports the data to RSU. Each vehicle is considered 
within the range of ith RSU if: 
 
                      
T
S
j i
, 
   
 
 
 (1)                     
 
where  
j i
S ,  is the signal power received at th
i
 RSU from 
jth
node, and T  is the threshold for signal power.  Signal 
power is computed as follows: 
 
n
j i
d
d
S
S


)
(
0
0
,
                           (2) 
 
where  
0
d  is the close-in reference distance, n  is the path 
loss exponent, and 
0
S   is the signal power at distance 
0
d . 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Architecture of VANET  
64
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

IV.  PROPOSED APROACH 
 
Each vehicle in VANET gets a value called a trust level (
lT ), which describes the level of reliability of the node. Trust 
level for a node is computed as follows: 
 
m
m
l
T
T  F
                  
 
   (3) 
 
where  
m
F  is the number of false messages that a node sent, 
and 
m
T  is the total number of messages that were sent by a 
node.  Trust level (
lT ) is the key parameter in our scheme to 
secure VANET by monitoring the nodes’ activities and detect 
the misbehaving nodes. Our scheme handles four different 
behavior categories (ways) that may threaten VANET and 
degrades its security and performance. The following threat 
model is considered in this paper: 
 
(i) Selfish behavior where a node does not follow 
VANET's protocol. An attacker does not cooperate 
with nodes in VANET and rejects to forward data 
packets.  
(ii) A node behaves in a malicious, misbehaving, and 
cheating way where it emulates RSU and sends false 
status of road to other nodes in VANET. 
(iii) A node behaves in a malicious, a node launches 
denial of service (DoS) attack one or more VANT's 
resources (i.e., medium, and RSU) to prevent other 
nodes from accessing VANET for their data 
transmission. 
(iv) One or multiple adversary nodes may launch 
objective function attack to change communication 
parameters such as signal power, center frequency, 
encryption type, and public-key cryptography and 
the symmetric key cryptography.  
 
The main objectives of our scheme are threefold, namely 
high data rate, secure communication and maximizing 
VANET utilization. To make the communication in VANET 
secure, the public-key cryptography and the symmetric key 
cryptography are generated and used for communication 
between nodes. Firstly, public-key cryptography is used in 
VANET to ensure data security until a symmetric key is 
shared between RSU, and the node. The symmetric key is 
generated and assigned to new node in the class during the 
node’s authentication process. It is worth indicating that the 
key is used for encrypting and decrypting all messages in 
VANET.  
A symmetric key is used to encode the messages. The 
receiver decodes the data using the same key. Nodes 
exchange certificates, IDs, and symmetric key. RSU keeps 
track of all nodes in its cluster. After gathering road data, all 
nodes send their data to RSU. The data gathered by node j  
are represented by vector Xj . For node j , RSU compares the 
node's j  data with other nodes and if they match, RSU 
decides that node j  is a trustworthy node; otherwise it is 
untrustworthy node. The dissimilarity between node's j  data  
and node i  is computed as follows: 
 
             


 
 
f
X
f
X
i j
d
j
i
f
s

 max
,
                            (4) 
 
where 
 
Xi f
 is the 
f th
dimension for 
jth
 node. Each 
dimension of the vector 
X i
 corresponds to an attribute of a 
vehicle. Each node constructs more than one vectors which 
contain information about vehicles in the road. The vector 
includes the speed of each vehicle on the cluster, and the 
position for the vehicle. Each node gathers information and 
sends the data periodically to RSU through beacon messages. 
Upon the reception of the different data reports from the 
cluster nodes, RSU analyzes these reports to extract the road 
status and decides the reliability of the reported nodes. A 
decision functions a bout 
jth
node can be described using the 
following function: 
 
              








 


G
j
i j
d
G
j
i j
d
Q
s
s
j
,
( , )
,0
,
( , )
,1



                            (5) 
 
where G is the set of nodes in VANET, and   is the 
dissimilarity threshold. 
j
Q  is a decision function that is 
executed by a RSU to decide whether
jth
 node is trustworthy 
or not. RSU decides whether the 
jth
 node is untrustworthy 
if the dissimilarity between node's j  data  and node i is 
greater than threshold  . RSU selects node based on the trust 
level.   RSU does not receive data from untrustworthy nodes. 
It informs other nodes in VANET to discard any message 
from these nodes. Therefore, spectrum utilization is increased 
significantly.   
 
V. 
PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
 
We simulate the proposed scheme to specify the 
adversary nodes in VANET which degrade the performance 
of the network. Table I shows the network simulated with 
values used for the parameters required. Results are analyzed 
to clarify the importance and the effectiveness of our scheme 
to secure data over VANET by monitoring nodes behavior 
and analyzing nodes' data. The key performance measures of 
interest in the simulations are:  
 
(1) Throughput, which is the average rate of successful 
message delivery over a communication channel. 
(2) Utilization, the average amount of time the spectrum 
is kept busy. The utilization is calculated as follows: 
 
                             
t
t
S
U  B
                                                 (6) 
 
where 
tB  is the amount of time in which the spectrum is kept 
busy, and 
tS  is the  simulation time. The results are averaged 
65
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

over enough independent runs so that the confidence level is 
95% and the relative errors do not exceed 5%. We examine 
the performance under different parameter settings. 
 
TABLE I. SIMULATION PARAMETERS 
 
Parameter 
Value 
Number of nodes 
200 
Number of channels per RSU 
40 
Number of messages per node 
Random 
Type of interface per node 
802.11 b 
MAC layer 
IEEE 802.11 b 
Transmission power 
0.1 watt 
Packet size 
512 
Max Vehicle Speed 
80 km/h 
Number of malicious nodes  
10,20,30,40, 50 
Simulation            
Device 
Intel i5 Core 
2.50GHz 
Process cores 
2 x 2.50GHz 
RAM 
6 GB 
OS 
Windows 7 64 bit 
 
 
Figure 2 illustrates the simulation results in terms of 
throughput for VANET using our security scheme (secure 
VANETs, (SV)) and VANET without security mechanism 
(NSV). It is apparent that from the figure that the throughput 
shifts into higher level when the number of malicious nodes 
decreases to the lowest possible number. Sometimes, 
malicious nodes reject forwarding packets. Furthermore, the 
attacker might keep sending RSU false reports to gain 
exclusive access to the spectrum and to prevent other nodes 
from utilizing unused spectrum. Hence, the number of 
dropped packets increases significantly, which lowers 
throughput. Packet drop ratio is plotted under various number 
of malicious nodes as shown in Figure 3. It can be observed 
that the drop ratio increases as the number of malicious nodes 
is increased. Our scheme excludes malicious nodes in 
VANET. Thus, drop ratio is decreased when attack is 
detected and attackers are prevented from forwarding 
packets.  
 
 
                     Figure 2. Throughput comparison for the two schemes 
 
            Figure 3. Packet drop ration comparison for the two schemes 
 
For fixed arrival rate, the utilization for VANET's 
resources is plotted under various number of malicious nodes 
in Fig. 4. It can be observed that system utilization decreases 
as the number of malicious nodes is increased. Dummy 
messages are sent by attackers to jam channels and reserve 
VANETs' resources. Hence, VANET will not be available to 
licensed users. The results in Fig. 4 show the ability of our 
scheme to enhance the utilization of the network's resources. 
In our scheme, RSU does not receive reports from untrusted 
nodes. Furthermore, it informs trustworthy to neglect 
untrusted nodes' messages. Thus, untrusted nodes are 
prevented from forwarding messages and they won't be able 
to generate false messages to RSU. 
 
 
                        Figure 4. Utilization comparison for the two schemes 
 
 
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Number of malicious nodes 
Throughput (Mbps)
 
 
SV scheme
NSV Scheme
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
Number of malicious nodes 
Utilization
 
 
SV scheme
NSV Scheme
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
55
60
Number of malicious nodes 
Drop Ratio
 
 
SV scheme
NSV Scheme
66
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
 
Securing VANET communication is very important to 
save lives by guiding drivers to spotting hazards and 
improving road safety and traffic conditions. Different 
attacks might be launched by adversary nodes. These attacks 
degrade the performance and reliability of VANET 
significantly. Thus, this paper has presented a security 
scheme that monitors nodes behavior in VANET to identify 
and to exclude adversary nodes. In this paper, the 
trustworthiness of data is evaluated for each node to extract 
the set of untrustworthy nodes. To validate the proposed 
scheme, we conducted simulation experiments. The 
experimental results stress the ability of our scheme to 
improve the performance of VANET by eliminating 
malicious nodes. As future directions, several criteria will be 
used to assist the node trust, including, functional trust and 
recommendation trust from other nodes. In addition, different 
operating scenarios and conductions will be considered.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. K. Bhoi and P. M. Khilar, "Vehicular Communication - A 
Survey," IET Networks, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 204-217, 2014. 
[2] S. Bitam, A. Mellouk and S. Zeadally, "VANET-Cloud: A 
Generic Cloud Computing Model for Vehicular Ad Hoc 
Networks," IEEE Wireless Communications, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 
96-102, February, 2015. 
[3]  T. W. Chim, S. M. Yiu, L. C. K. Hui and V. O. K. Li, "VSPN 
VANETBased Secure and Privacy-Preserving Navigation," 
IEEE Trans. On Computers, vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 510-524, 
February, 2014. 
[4] Hasrouny, H., Samhat, A.E., Bassil, C. and Laouiti, A., VANet 
security challenges and solutions: A survey, Vehicular 
Communications, 7, pp.7-20., 2017 
[5] M. Raya and J. P. Hubaux, “Securing vehicular ad hoc 
networks,” Journal of Computer Security – Special Issue 
Security Ad Hoc Sensor Networks, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 39-68, 
2007.  
[6] K. Sampigethaya, L. Huang, M. Li, R. Poovendran, K. Matsuura 
and K. Sezaki, CARAVAN: providing location privacy for 
VANET, in: Proceedings of the Workshop on Embedded 
Security in Cars (escar)’05, 2005. 
[7] M. Fogue et al., "Securing Warning Message Dissemination in 
VANETs Using Cooperative Neighbor Position Verification," 
in IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 64, no. 6, 
pp. 2538-2550, June 2015.  
[8] A. Vulimiri, A, Gupta, Pramit Roy, S Muthaiah and A. Kherani 
“Application of secondary information for misbehavior 
detection in VANETs,” in Proc. NETWORKING 2010, 
Chennai, India, pp. 385-396, 2010. 
[9] J. Zhang, L. Huang, H. Xu, M. Xiao and W. Guo, "An 
Incremental BP Neural Network Based Spurious Message Filter 
for VANET," 2012 International Conference on Cyber-Enabled 
Distributed Computing and Knowledge Discovery, Sanya, pp. 
360-367, 2012.  
[10]  Y. Liu, Y. Shi, H Feng, and L. Wang, “Intrusion detection     
scheme based on neural network in vehicle network,” J. 
Communs., vol. 35, no. Z2, pp. 32-239, Nov. 2014. 
[11]   J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, and X. Gu, “RPRep: A robust 
and privacy-preserving reputation management scheme for 
pseudonym-enabled VANETs,” Int. Journal Distributed. 
Sensor Network, vol. 2016 , Art. no. 6138251, 2016 
[12]   N. Haddadou, A. Rachedi, and Y. Ghamri-Doudane, “A job 
market signaling scheme for incentive and trust management in 
vehicular ad hoc networks,” IEEE Trans. Vehicular Technology, 
vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3657-3674, Aug. 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
67
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

