 
 
The Use of an IT-based Cognitive Assessment and Training as a part of a Smart 
City Program  
Implications in Educational, Social, and Healthcare Public Services 
 
Martina Ratto, Keiron T Sparrowhawk, Paul B Cliveden (Author) 
MyCognition Ltd. 
London, United Kingdom 
e-mail: martina@mycognition.com 
 
 
Abstract—Smart Cities are defined as communities able to 
improve citizens’ quality of life by integrating innovative, 
technology-based solutions with human potential. This paper 
aims to evaluate the impact of adopting on a citizenry level a 
self-administered, online cognitive assessment and training 
program targeting cognitive health and wellbeing in the 
process of building a smart community. An implementation of 
this program across the Peterborough citizenry will be 
presented, showing the potential outcomes it is intended to 
produce across the education, social services, workplace, and 
elderly healthcare sectors. Starting from this pilot study, which 
is successfully involving Peterborough local communities, 
possible implementations of the program in other cities’ public 
services will be considered.  
Keywords-Smart cities; social services; cognitive health; 
cognitive assessment & training. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Smart Cities, according to the main common definitions, 
are communities which unite different types of resources to 
create innovative, technology-based solutions directed 
towards the community’s development and improvement of 
people’s quality of life [1]. 
As winner of the World Smart City of the Year 2015 
award, the city of Peterborough in the United Kingdom is an 
example of an implementation of a citizen growth, 
innovation, skill, and sustainability program. 
To achieve this, Peterborough City Council and 
Opportunity Peterborough created the DNA Peterborough 
program, focused on the creation of smart business 
environments, on providing a “Living Data Portal” (offering 
easily accessible census data, crime statistics and health 
information), on the improvement of employability chances, 
and on long-term physical and mental health resilience. 
As a part of this project, Peterborough City Council has 
promoted a partnership program with a science-based 
company specializing in IT-based solutions for cognitive 
health. Their intent is to promote and enhance cognitive 
wellbeing across multiple segments of the population, 
resulting in related outcomes in academic achievement, 
employability, business soft skills, quality of life, health, and 
sustainability. 
In Section 2 the MyCognitionED assessment and training 
program adopted by Peterborough citizenry will be 
presented. Details about the implementation of the program 
across different sectors of city and the related objectives will 
be illustrated in Section 3. The expected outcomes of the 
program in contributing to the creation of a smart community 
according to the previously provided definition will be 
evaluated in Section 4, considering citizens’ skills 
enhancement, social outcomes, and public costs saving. In 
Section 5 further possible implementation in other local 
communities will be considered, following the Peterborough 
example. Finally, in Section 6 a preliminary conclusion on 
the evaluation of the potential of the presented program will 
be drawn. 
II. 
THE MYCOGNITIONED PROGRAM 
MyCognitionED [3] is a program designed to assess and 
train individuals’ cognitive wellbeing in various educational 
communities, including schools, universities, social and 
cultural groups, and life-long learning programs.  
It comprises a 15-minute, self-administered, online 
assessment including a digital version of five of the most 
validated, traditional, paper-and-pencil, neuropsychological 
tests, designed to assess five key cognitive domains – 
attention, processing speed, working memory, episodic 
memory, and executive function. The assessment provides 
reports for each user, showing the scores obtained in each of 
the five domains, the trends of improvement over time for 
everyone, their position relating to the two dimensions of 
speed and accuracy, and detailed explanations about what the 
different scores mean and actions they can take to obtain 
improvements. 
The MyCognitionED program then uses the assessment’s 
scores to create a “recipe” that automatically configures a 
linked training program. The training application is designed 
to enhance overall cognition, particularly training those 
domains that showed the greatest weaknesses more 
intensely. The training program is totally embedded in an 
engaging video game, which adapts itself to the user’s 
progress.  
The game has an aquatic theme in which players must 
venture into the ocean to undertake various activities. The 
activities include exploring underwater worlds populated 
with a range of fish and sea creatures, seeking out and 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
photographing different types of fish, each with specific 
characteristics. The training works by encouraging the player 
to undertake repetitive, and increasingly more challenging, 
tasks that are designed to train a specific cognitive domain.  
Each cognitive domain is mainly trained by a specific 
“loop,” with some domains trained using several tasks. The 
game develops on multiple structural levels. At the basic 
structural level, there are the loops corresponding to different 
cognitive tasks, which are organized in dives, so that in each 
dive the user can experience a set of loops. 
The ocean map represents a meta-level of cognition. At 
the map level, users must organize their dive to both achieve 
the proposed mission and to discover new areas. 
The progress of the players on the map, and so the 
growth of difficulty in the training game, depends on the 
coins the players collect during their dives. In this way, the 
game adapts its difficulty to the level of improvement 
reached by the player. 
The intensity of the training depends on the individual 
assessment’s scores, too, as mentioned above, as the number 
of loops for each type of task that the user experiences 
depends on the score obtained in each cognitive domain. In 
this way, more impaired domains will receive more intensive 
training. It is generally recommended that users follow the 
training program for at least eight weeks, playing a minimum 
of ninety minutes per week, three times a week, to obtain 
significant improvements. 
The program is used in psychiatric populations and in 
patients having neurodegenerative and various medical 
conditions [4][5][11][14], as well as in elderly populations 
and in students of different ages, including those having 
special educational  or learning disabilities/differences 
(SEND) [7][8][9][13]. 
The programs are available online and run on the most 
commonly used web browsers on PC and Mac computers. 
MyCognitionED is also available as an app for iPad users, 
and versions for iOS smartphones. Versions of the programs 
are in development for Android tablets and smartphones. 
III. 
THE PETERBOROUGH PROJECTS 
The adoption of the MyCognitionED program as a part 
of the Peterborough City Council “smart” plan is divided 
into several projects across various segments of the 
population. The goal is to grant the entire population access 
to this time- and cost-saving, digital tool for self-
administered assessment and training of their cognitive 
health.  
The pilot stage of the broad project began in 2016 with 
targeted workshops and with the adoption of the program by 
large educational and social institutions. The next phase in 
2017 will gather early results from the pilot studies and 
enroll a wider range of schools, families, and institutions for 
a post pilot study. The shared ambition for the third phase 
during 2018-2019 is to offer the program to all about 
200,000 Peterborough residents, by hosting the program on 
the Council website, as well as being available in all libraries 
and on personal devices. 
Beginning with the youngest segment of population, the 
first project involves 13 primary schools and one secondary, 
with the aim of improving academic outcomes of those 
children who are struggling in learning mathematics. The 
solution 
proposed 
is 
to 
provide 
pupils 
with 
the 
MyCognitionED assessment and training programs for an 
initial period of eight weeks, at the end of which the putative 
improvements shown in cognition will be compared with 
official mathematics assessments. 
This program will be employed in further projects 
involving 
teenagers 
from 
the 
Greater 
Peterborough 
University Technical College as an assessment and 
mentoring tool, and the Peterborough City College, a school 
specialized in providing educational opportunities for 
students of all ages, backgrounds, and abilities, particularly 
focusing on study programs and apprenticeships designed to 
create 
employment 
opportunities 
for 
16-19-year-old 
students.  
Early results from a class of year 5 students have shown 
an average improvement of their overall cognitive score 
above 5 points, with a higher improvement in episodic 
memory, executive function, and attention. Full analyses will 
be performed at the end of the study; however these early 
results are encouraging and consistent with the valuable 
improvements in academic outcomes and behavior, which 
have already been shown with cohorts of students using 
MyCognitionED [7][8][13].  
A broader educational and social project sees the 
involvement of the MyCognitionED program in the Early 
Help Services of Peterborough Council, with particular 
regard to the Connecting Families program for troubled 
families. As a first step, the project involves six families with 
children displaying challenging behaviors, who requested an 
autism spectrum disorder (ASD) assessment or an attention-
deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) assessment.  
This first step is planned to be extended to year 6 
students planning to take the Scholastic Assessment Test 
(SAT) and to unemployed adults at the YMCA, with the aim 
of improving individuals future professional careers and 
employability opportunities. 
With the purpose of developing a venture able to achieve 
enhancements in cognitive wellbeing and the consequent 
improvements in quality of personal and professional life 
across the entire city’s population, the training program will 
be adopted by the business owners and entrepreneurs at the 
Allia Future Business Center. The Future Business Center 
will become a referring point to incubate, facilitate, and 
develop innovative ideas for entrepreneurs who are still at an 
early stage of their own business. Therefore, they will be 
provided with a specific version of the training program 
designed to enhance those cognitive functions that are 
mainly responsible for management and leadership skills. 
Finally, the project also aims to reach the homes of the 
elderly with targeted, user-friendly IT solutions to improve 
their independence, by recovering those cognitive functions 
that are essential for managing everyday life tasks. 
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
IV. 
EXPECTED OUTCOMES 
A. Skills enhancement 
Since it has been adopted in a number of studies 
involving hundreds of students from primary and secondary 
schools, the MyCognitionED program is expected to produce 
in Peterborough analogous outcomes both in cognitive and 
learning skills. These outcomes include the ability to focus or 
to recall information, enhancing academic achievement 
especially in mathematics, English, and science, as well as in 
behavioral skills, such as self-regulation and inhibition. 
An example of the effectiveness of the cognitive training 
program in students from 11 primary schools is reported in 
Figure 1, showing the improvement gained by students 
engaging in the training program for different periods of time 
[8]. 
Strong evidence of the relationship between cognitive 
functions and academic achievement is reported in the 
literature, and research is starting to investigate the 
effectiveness of cognitive training on learning, with some 
positive results [2].  
The program is also designed to enhance the basic soft 
skills necessary for good job performance, including speed 
and accuracy in accomplishing tasks, stress management, 
and leadership skills, the basis of which is executive 
function.  
 
B. Social outcomes 
The main social outcomes expected are related to the 
employability of the population across different generations 
and the reduction of the interclass divide. 
Recent 
studies 
[15][16] 
have 
shown 
that 
the 
socioeconomic background of families influences the 
neuropsychological and cognitive development of children 
in their early years of life, especially in the domains of 
executive function and working memory, which are the 
main ones responsible for both school and work 
achievement. 
Good evidence has been found for the effectiveness of 
training programs involving troubled families in promoting 
healthy childhood development, good cognitive functioning, 
and long-term outcomes into adulthood [17][18]. Recent 
studies have shown that 46% of troubled families in the 
United Kingdom have mental health issues, resulting in 
anti-social behavior and employability issues [19]. The 
MyCognitionED program is envisioned to reduce the rate of 
mental health issues and so produce social improvements 
for specific segments of the population. 
C. Cost savings 
A cost-benefit analysis has been conducted of the impact 
of the MyCognitionED program on the annual costs of 
interventions described above in the different social sectors 
of health, education, and workplace. The results show that 
the annual pro rata cost of cognitive deficit in the education 
sector amounts to roughly £26M ($33M), comprising £17M 
($21M) for special educational needs, £4M ($5M) for youth 
crime, and £5M ($6M) for psychiatric disorders. The cost of 
poor cognitive health in the working population sector is 
£154M ($193M) and in the elderly/non-working sector 
£75M ($94M). It has been assumed that the MyCognitionED 
program will reduce the cost by 10% for each sector; 
therefore, the city could realize combined cost savings of 
about £26M ($33M) per annum [12]. 
 
V. 
EXTENSIONS OF THE PROGRAM IN OTHER 
COMMUNITIES 
Following 
the 
example 
of 
Peterborough, 
the 
MyCognition 
program 
will 
be 
extended 
to 
other 
communities, in particular those represented by the London 
Councils, aiming to deliver significant benefits for London 
residents and to pursue innovation, efficiency, and 
performance improvement across the capital’s public 
services. 
The main goals of these interventions will be to increase 
educational attainment, to enhance employment possibilities, 
and to support health and wellbeing across the population. 
By identifying the underlying causes of moderate learning 
difficulties, primary school pupils will get the support that 
they need to improve their educational attainment and life 
chances. Understanding a child’s cognitive strengths and 
weaknesses would allow effective use of teaching assistants 
(TAs), which accounts for 13% of education budgets. By 
reducing the number of TAs needed by 0.5 full-time 
equivalent in each school, this would save the typical school 
£9,000 ($11,250) each year.  
The program is also aimed to offer support to youth 
offenders, jobless parents, refugees, asylum seekers, and the 
elderly segment of the population, since it can be 
personalized to reflect an individual’s needs – job search, 
skills for life, support for mental health problems, training, 
mentoring, work placements, or support for creating new 
businesses or social enterprises. 
 
Figure 1. Comparison of improvement in overall cognitive scores between 
a training and a non-training group of ~50 students.  
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Analyzing the promising expected outcomes of the 
Peterborough program, it is possible that his type of 
cognitive assessment and training intervention will be 
extended to specific cohorts of other Smart Cities and local 
communities looking for cost saving solutions for the whole 
community’s cognitive healthcare. This would open a new 
chapter in the Smart Cities’ government, by focusing on the 
prevention of cognitive issues and their long-term 
consequences in terms of health, learning, employability, 
competitiveness, quality of life, and sustainability, which 
ultimately are the key features of a successful “smart” 
community. Furthermore, the assessment and training 
program is implemented in a simple, self-administered 
software tool, which will be available for every type of 
device, for people of every age and every background. 
Therefore, it is expected that this program will play a key 
role in reducing the inter-generational and inter-class digital 
divide.  
Although the adoption of such cognitive assessment and 
training programs has been increasing recently in the 
education and health sectors – especially to target learning 
difficulties in children and cognitive impairment in the 
elderly – to date, it is not known to the authors that any 
similar programs are being implemented elsewhere at the 
city level. The science-based approach which guides the 
program presented, together with its universality, easy-
availability, 
user-friendliness, 
and 
cost- 
and 
time-
effectiveness, would seem to make it eligible to be a leading 
innovation tool for future cities aiming to focus their “smart” 
agenda on their people’s potential and wellbeing.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
We thank the management and staff of Peterborough City 
Council and the various schools, agencies, and social 
services organizations in Peterborough. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. Albino, U. Berardi, and R. M. Dangelico, “Smart cities: 
Definitions, dimensions, performance, and initiatives,”, 
Journal of Urban Technology, vol. 22(1), pp. 3-21, 2015. 
[2] Peterborough wins Smart City of the Year 2015. (2015, Nov. 
20). 
Peterborough 
DNA. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.peterboroughdna.com/peterborough-wins-smart-
city-of-the-year-2015/ 
[3] MyCognitionED. 
MyCognition. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
http://www.mycognition.com/education/. Accessed Feb. 03, 
2017. 
[4] A. C. Domen et al., “The validation of a new, online cognitive 
assessment tool,” European Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 
25, p. S344, 2015.  
[5] A. Domen et al., “The validation of a new online cognitive 
assessment tool,” European Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 
26, pp. S342-S343, 2016. 
[6] J. E. Harrison,  J. H. Van Rijswijk, K. T. Sparrowhawk, and 
D. A. Knight, U.S. Patent No. 20,150,279,226. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, 2015.  
[7] P. Shah, R. Kumar, A. McCone, K. Sparrowhawk, and J. 
Thomas, “The impact of cognitive function assessment and 
adaptive training on academic performance in students with 
learning 
difficulties,” 
Poster 
session 
presented 
at: 
Copenhagen, DK: 10th Federation of European Neuroscience 
Societies (FENS) Forum of Neuroscience, Jul. 2016. 
[8] K. Sparrowhawk, R. Kumar, and A. McCone, “Evaluation of 
cognitive function and training in school children,” Poster 
session presented at: Copenhagen, DK: 10th Federation of 
European 
Neuroscience 
Societies 
(FENS) 
Forum 
of 
Neuroscience, Jul. 2016. 
[9] A. McCone, R. Kumar, K. Sparrowhawk, and L. Franchi, 
“Evaluating the impact of cognitive training for SEN children 
when used at home,” Poster session presented at: 
Copenhagen, DK: 10th Federation of European Neuroscience 
Societies (FENS) Forum of Neuroscience, Jul. 2015. 
[10] K. Sparrowhawk, R. Kumar, and J. Harrison, “Adaptive 
Video Games can Assess and Enhance Cognitive Health,”  
Value in Health, vol. 17(7), p. A454, 2014. 
[11] D. Nieman et al., “Cognitive remediation in psychiatric 
patients with an online cognitive game and assessment tool,”  
European Neuropsychopharmacology, vol. 25, pp. S344-
S345, 2015. 
[12] K. Sparrowhawk, P. Cliveden, M. Ratto, W. Ogle-Welbourne, 
A. Sunley, “Evaluating the cost-benefit of a cognitive 
assessment and training program across a smart city 
population in the UK,” Value in Health, vol. 19(7), pp. A693-
A694, 2016. 
[13] K. Sparrowhawk, J. Harrison, R. Kumar, D. Knight, 
“Working memory and executive functioning are improved in 
school students using an applied action video game,” Poster 
session presented at: Milan, IT: 9th Federation of European 
Neuroscience Societies (FENS) Forum of Neuroscience, Jul. 
2014. 
[14] S. C. van de Weijer et al., “The Parkin’Play study: protocol of 
a phase II randomized controlled trial to assess the effects of a 
health game on cognition in Parkinson’s disease,” BMC 
Neurology, vol. 16(1), 209, doi:10.1186/s12883-016-0731-z, 
2016. 
[15] D. A. Hackman, R. Gallop, G. W. Evans, and M. J. Farah, 
“Socioeconomic status and executive function: developmental 
trajectories and mediation,” Developmental Science, vol. 
18(5), pp. 686-702, 2015. 
[16] K. G. Noble et al., “Socioeconomic disparities in 
neurocognitive development in the first two years of life,”  
Developmental psychobiology, vol. 57(5), pp. 535-551, 2015. 
[17] H. J. Neville et al., “Family-based training program improves 
brain 
function, 
cognition, 
and 
behavior 
in 
lower 
socioeconomic status preschoolers,” Proc. of the National 
Academy of Sciences, vol. 110(29), pp. 12138-12143, 2013. 
[18] H. Neville, E. Pakulak, and C. Stevens, “Family-based 
training to improve cognitive outcomes for children from 
lower socioeconomic status backgrounds: emerging themes 
and challenges,” Current Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, vol. 
4, pp. 166-170, 2015. 
[19] A. E. Nunn and D. Tepe-Belfrage, “Disciplinary Social Policy 
and the Failing Promise of the New Middle Classes: The 
Troubled Families Programme,” Social Policy and Society, 
vol. 16(1), pp. 119-129, 2017. 
[20] C. Titz and J. Karbach, “Working memory and executive 
functions: Effects of training on academic achievement,”  
Psychological research, vol. 78(6), pp. 852-86, 2014. 
 
 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

