An Actor Network Theory Lens for Mobile Commerce:  
A Mobile Payment Case Study 
 
Hsiao-Chi Wu  
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
hciwu69@gmail.com 
Cheng-Chieh Huang 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
d95725007@ntu.edu.tw 
Ching-Cha Hsieh 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—Mobile device technology and mobile commerce are 
deeply embedded in many people’s everyday lives. In this 
paper, we adopt Actor Network Theory to understand how 
consumers, merchants, service providers, mobile devices, 
applications, and services interact in aligned networks. Using a 
mobile payment system adoption case, we identify social-
technical problems encountered by users. We examine how 
they redefine “convenience” while performing different 
activities under space-time limitations. The results imply that 
m-commerce technology and service designers should consider 
strategies that emphasize activity-oriented design, activity-
based response, social-technical fit, and that lock users in a 
virtual closed network. 
Keywords-mobile payment system; actor network theory; 
system perspective. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Devices and applications based on mobile technology are 
now commonplace in everyday life. In recent years these 
devices have moved beyond wireless phones, wireless-
enabled handheld computers, and personal digital assistants 
(PDAs) to include global positioning systems (GPS), 
location-based services, and electronic payment systems. 
People expect these devices and applications to make their 
lives more convenient, while merchants aspire to earn money 
through mobile commerce transactions. 
Traditionally, mobile devices and applications emphasize 
an “anywhere, anytime” development scheme, but m-
commerce services are now at a crossroads [1]. Experts are 
increasingly 
discussing 
the 
reasons 
behind 
mobile 
technology adaptation and user intentions [2-6]. Despite 
these efforts, relatively little is known about how users, 
merchants, mobile technologies, applications and services 
interact in everyday activities or social life. 
In this paper, we examine social actors and technologies 
in m-commerce environments from a system perspective. 
Actor Network Theory (ANT) is used to understand how 
technical (i.e. mobility applications, technologies) and 
different social actors (i.e. consumers, merchants) align and 
interact in a social-technical system, called an actor network. 
In testing this theory, we selected a complex social and 
technical mobile payment case study, a public Taiwanese 
university.   
We address three questions. First, how do focal actors, 
such as merchants or issuers, enroll users to join the actor 
network? Secondly, how do these technical and social 
elements interact, and what are the consequences? Thirdly, 
under what conditions do users accept or reject the m-
commerce actor networks these focal actors construct into 
their social life? Using the ANT lens to interpret our case 
study, we argue that m-commerce technology and service 
strategies should focus on activities-oriented designs rather 
than location-based or context-aware concepts. 
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
Section II illustrates Actor Network Theory. Section III 
outlines our research approach, while section IV describes 
our Taiwanese university mobile payment application case. 
Here we identify main actors, social environments, and 
relevant technical elements. We then analyze and discuss 
how the focal actors enroll users, and how the mobile 
payment system enables or constrains users (section V). 
Finally, we examine why the technical system is accepted or 
rejected by users (section VI). The concluding section 
(section VII) lists our contributions and the limitations of our 
research. 
 
II. 
ACTOR NETWORK THEORY 
Actor Network Theory (ANT) was developed within the 
sociology of science and technology [7]. A key feature of 
ANT is that it treats networks as involving both human and 
nonhuman actors (such as a technology) [7][8]. The theory 
examines the motivations and actions of human actors who 
align their interests around the requirements of non-human 
actors. 
Within ANT, inscription and translation are pivotal 
concepts. Engineers who design, develop and diffuse a 
technical artifact inscribe into this artifact their instructions 
for use, their intentions, and their vision of the society and 
world in which the artifact best fits. In this sense, they 
become sociologists, or in Callon’s word, engineer-
sociologists. The technical aspects of the engineer’s work are 
profoundly social. Therefore, it is difficult to distinguish 
between the technical and the social during the process of 
innovation. When we accept that the technical is social, the 
artifacts on which engineers inscribe their own social 
preferences become entities; in ANT terminology, an actor 
45
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

with the same nature and characteristics is regarded as a 
human actor. The distinctiveness of ANT is that it does not 
distinguish between human and nonhuman actors. 
ANT helps describe how actors form alliances, enroll 
other actors, and use nonhuman actors (artifacts) to 
strengthen such alliances and to secure their interests. This 
process, called translation, is defined as “the methods by 
which an actor enrolls others” [8]. When an actor–network is 
created, translation consists of four stages [8]. 
• 
Problematization: The focal actors define interests 
that others may share, and establish themselves as 
indispensable resources in the solution of the 
problems they have defined. They define the 
problems and solutions and also establish roles and 
identities for other actors in the network. As a 
consequence, focal actors establish an “obligatory 
passage point” for problem solutions that all the 
actors in an actor-network must pass. 
• 
Interessement: The focal actors convince other actors 
that the interests defined by the focal actors are in 
fact well in-line with their own interests. Through 
interessement the developing network creates 
sufficient incitement to both lock actors into 
networks. 
• 
Enrollment: Enrollment involves a definition of the 
roles of each of the actors in the newly created actor-
network. It also involves a set of strategies through 
which focal actors seek to convince other actors to 
embrace the underlying ideas of the growing actor-
network and to be an active part of the whole project.  
• 
Mobilization: The focal actors use a set of methods 
to ensure that the other actors act according to their 
agreement and remain loyal. With allies mobilized, 
an actor network achieves stability. 
 
That is, the ANT lens is suitable for analyzing how social 
actors and technical elements negotiate and interact during 
the design and adoption phases of mobile technology. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
A. Data Collection Strategies 
Informed by this interaction process as a guiding 
framework, our subsequent research strategy sought in-depth 
case study data that would give further insight into the 
complex interaction processes in m-commerce environments. 
For this we contacted T University, a university in Taiwan 
that has struggled to introduce their mobile payment system 
on campus. This system involves many participating groups, 
including university mobile payment project teams, the 
mobile payment cards service provider, merchants and users, 
students, staff, and the teachers of T University. 
We adopted multiple data collection strategies (see Table 
1). First, we conducted in-depth interviews with the mobile 
payment project teams at T University and the mobile 
payment cards service provider, so as to understand their 
design intentions and issues. We also interviewed merchants 
about their experiences using mobile payment systems. 
Secondly, we distributed questionnaires to students, staff, 
and teachers to understand their use and interaction 
experiences. Third, we held two student focus groups to 
understand why they used or rejected the mobile payment 
system. Moreover, we gathered secondary data such as the 
mobile payment system’s proposal, function specifications, 
and meeting minutes. This secondary data helps supplement 
our survey and interview sources [9]. 
TABLE I.  
DATA COLLECTION STRATEGIES 
Strategies 
Targets 
Frequencies 
Mobile payment project team 
5 persons 
In-depth interviews 
Merchants 
6 persons 
Questionnaires 
Users 
(students, staffs, and teachers) 
1,852 
questionnaires
Focus groups 
Students 
2 * 5 persons 
Secondary data 
Proposals, meeting minutes, 
functional specifications 
14 copies 
 
B. Analysis Framework 
Our analytical approach was to understand the different 
participating groups’ perspectives, use and interaction 
experiences relating to the T University mobile payment 
environment. Following our approach and ANT, we 
constructed our analytical framework (Figure 1). 
Using this framework, we can understand how the 
mobile project team inscribed their interests on the mobile 
payment system during the design phase and how the users, 
merchants and mobile payment system interacted during the 
technology’s adoption. 
 
IV. 
MOBILE PAYMENT SYSTEMS AND ACTORS IN T 
UNIVERSITY 
A. Mobile Payment Systems 
Mobile payments are defined as the use of a mobile 
device to conduct a payment transaction in which money or 
funds are transferred from a payer to a receiver via an 
intermediary, or directly without an intermediary. Mobile 
devices include mobile phones or any wireless enabled 
device (e.g. PDA, laptop, card, watch). 
Payment technology can be classified as card-based and 
phone-based systems [10]. Several successful mobile 
payment systems have already been launched in order to 
enhance the convenience of micro-payments for daily local 
expenditures. These solutions have been principally adopted 
by various fast service-oriented industries such as public 
transport (e.g. Octopus), toll booths (e.g. EZPay, FasTrak), 
gas stations (e.g. ExxonMobils Speedpass), fast food 
restaurants (e.g. McDonalds), retail vending machines (e.g. 
Sonera Mobilepay) and ski resort ticketing (e.g. Skidata) [11]. 
A payment market can be examined in terms of payment 
service providers, technology, and users. Payment service 
providers are typically financial institutions, network 
operators or independent issuers [12]. Users are divided into 
46
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

two different and demanding groups of adopters: consumers 
and merchants. In general, the mobile payment adoption 
environment is complex, and involves many social and 
technical elements. 
B. Social Actors and Technical Elements in the Case of T 
University  
Mobile payments systems in T University were 
introduced in August, 2008. T University administrators 
considered that “mobile payments systems, combined with 
EasyCard and students’ or staffs’ identity cards will be 
convenient for payment needs on campus,” according to their 
meeting minutes on December, 2007. The intention of 
combining the university card with the public transportation 
EasyCard (issued by E Company) would increase its overall 
utility and provide simpler access to the largest public 
transportation system in northern Taiwan. That is, the new 
student/staff identity cards would conveniently pay for 
public transportation, parking, and other purchases on 
campus. 
 
Merchants
M‐payment
Service provider
(E Company)
Users
refund
clearing
Issuers
(T University)
issue
payment
refund
machines
payment
machines
 
Figure 2.  The mobile payment system business model in T University 
 
The business model for this system is illustrated in Figure 
2. Users, such as students, staff, and teachers of T University 
refill the payment cards (their identity cards) using refill 
machines, and pay merchants through payment machines, 
called EDC (electronic data collector). Merchants will send 
this transactions information to E company for every 
transaction. Merchants pay a 0.5 % transaction fee to E 
company, which is cheaper than credit card transaction fees. 
In summary, the mobile payment system in T University 
is a card-based system. The service provider is E company, 
and the issuer is T University. The technical elements 
include mobile payment cards, payment machines, and refill 
machines. The social actors are T University authorities, E 
Company, and participating merchants, students, staff, and 
teachers. 
 
V. 
A MOBILE PAYMENT CASE IN T UNIVERSITY 
Based on our analytical framework, the following are the 
interactions of social actors and technical elements in the 
design and adoption phases in the T University case. 
A. Design Phase 
The design phase began in January, 2008 after the T 
University combined EasyCard with student/staff identity 
cards in September, 2007 (see Figure 3). The T University 
project manager then invited the E company to design the 
mobile payment system on campus. 
This was not the first time E company had introduced 
their EasyCard as a mobile payment system for institutions. 
The most successful case was D Hospital, which introduced 
EasyCard for patients to pay for their registration fees and 
medicine. Other education institutions have also incorporated 
these cards. Prior to implementation, T University surveyed 
more than forty merchants on campus, who initially 
welcomed the mobile payment system. 
However, it was not easy to persuade these merchants to 
join the payment system. One E company representative said, 
“When talking about transactions fees, only ten merchants 
wanted to join!” The representative continued, “This case is 
very different from D Hospital or other education institutions. 
T University administrators did not sufficiently help 
persuade merchants.”  
The T University project manager responded, “We are 
different from D Hospital or other private Universities!” He 
said, “It is state-run university, and our culture is free and 
respectful to everyone. We will not and cannot force every 
merchant and student or teacher to use the mobile payment 
system.” 
A complication included differences between merchant 
points of sales (POS) systems. The card system required 
considerable integration costs. One of mechants said “Why 
we promote more while costs/benefits are not equal?” 
Nineteen merchants finally joined card payment services 
after T University agreed to pay the machine rental for two 
years. 
B. Adoption and Consequences 
To encourage user adoption, the T University project 
team conducted a promotional activity, where using a mobile 
payment card during the first month of the adoption phase 
earned the user a prize. They also made posters for 
participating merchants to attract user adoption. The project 
team and T University administrators viewed the cards as a 
valuable convenience.  
TABLE II.  
PRIORITY OF MOBILE PAYMENT USAGE SERVICES 
Services 
Percentage of 
agreement 
Introduced in the 
adoption phase 
copy services 
83% 
No 
vending machine 
61% 
No 
book fines 
59% 
No 
space rental 
55% 
Yes 
other consumption 
6% 
Yes  
(partial merchants)
 
Despite this perception however, adoption has been 
surprisingly weak. According to our survey questionnaires, 
weekly average payment amounts per user are roughly 100 
NT dollars, which is less than one-day average spending on 
47
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

campus. Although about 70% users agreed that the mobile 
payment card is more convenient than paying by cash, the 
cards are primarily used to pay for school administration 
activities, such as copy services, space rental, book fines, and 
vending machines (see Table II). 
When asked, the first reason respondents did not use the 
payment card frequently was the risk of card loss. An 
interviewee said, “I think that the payment card is small and 
easier to lose than cash. If I lose my payment card I lose my 
student ID card!” Another interviewee described, “I added 
only a small amount of money into the payment card to 
reduce risk.” A user explained his experiences, “One day, I 
used my mobile payment card to pay for dinner at a coffee 
shop. I found the amount is not enough. But I really do not 
want to leave because my seat will probably be taken while I 
go to refill my payment card. It left me embarrassed!” As a 
result, users will not make large purchases with their mobile 
payment cards. Students also complained that only a few 
merchants accept mobile payment cards; they still need to 
bring cash in their pocket to campus. Moreover, payment 
speed is not faster than paying by cash. “Most of time, I still 
use my mobile payment card to pay for public transportation. 
I paid by mobile payment cards only because I was running 
out my coins!” an interviewee explained. 
Merchants also encounter problems with the mobile 
payment system. A merchant said, “Sometimes users want to 
reorder, but the mobile payment system cannot withdraw.” A 
restaurant salesclerk also said, “We have three salesclerks so 
that, for cash payers, they could choose any line for 
transaction during peak hours. However, for card users, they 
have no choice, but need to stand in the only line for the card 
payment machine, which sometimes takes longer time.” 
In summary, it seems convenient for users and merchants 
to use the mobile payment system, but in different social-
technical interaction situations, they encounter different 
problems, and the system is not as convenient as focal actors 
expected. The payment cards are mostly used with the public 
transportation system beyond the T University campus. 
 
VI. 
ANALYSIS AND DISCUSSIONS 
Based on our analytical framework, the following are the 
interactions of social actors and technical elements during 
the design and adoption phases in the T University case. 
A. Inscription and Translations 
As described within the design phase, the T University 
holds a “respect towards every merchant” policy, and did not 
push any merchants to join the mobile payment system (see 
Table III). Even after T University decided to pay for a two-
year payment machines rental, only nineteen merchants 
joined. For E company, integration costs were too high, with 
little expected benefit. T University also did not want to 
invest much in installing refill machines. Finally, inscription 
of the mobile payment system on T University campus is 
like a “proof of concept” in a laboratory. 
During the adoption phase, users encountered different 
social or technical problems in different situations, but the 
focal actors could not solve these problems. Merchants did 
not actively promote the mobile payment system. E company 
did not want to invest additional effort in resolving technical 
problems. Finally, users did not frequently use the card on 
campus. While the mobile payment card seemed convenient 
for students, these social-technical problems hampered 
overall convenience. Designers or merchants should thus 
consider such issues when solving these scenario problems, 
and not only technical functions or consumers’ intentions. 
TABLE III.  
TRANSLATION STRATEGIES IN THE T UNIVERSITY CASE 
Phase 
Focal Actors 
Translation 
Design 
phase 
T University, 
E company 
1. problematization: T University 
defines “convenience for 
students” 
2. interessement & enrollment: T 
University did promote system 
among merchants. E company 
also considered costs too high 
to form the network. 
3. mobilization: merchants will 
remain loyal if T University 
pays for two years of payment 
machine rental. 
Adoptio
n phase
T University, 
E company, 
merchants 
1. problematization: “convenient 
for students,” but users 
encountered different problems 
in different situations. 
2. interessement & enrollment: 
except for first month prize 
activity, little promotion. 
Merchants did not actively 
promote mobile payment 
system to users. 
3. mobilization: did not have any 
agreement between users and 
merchants. 
 
B. From Physical Location to Actor Network 
Merchants
 
Figure 4.  Location context of T University 
Like other universities in Taiwan, T University is 
surrounded by many merchants beyond campus (see Figure 
4). Moreover, the campus is near a famous trade circle, with 
48
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

many restaurants, coffee shops, and clothing stores. After 
school, most students will thus not stay on campus and 
instead explore the nearby shopping area. 
Such an environment, where actors can easily enter or 
leave to conduct transactions, is called an open network. 
Compared with the closed MRT network environment, it is 
not easy to lock users into consuming on campus. Physical 
location still limits users’ mobile commerce behaviors. Thus, 
when introducing mobile payment or mobile commerce 
services, it is worthy to consider the relationship between 
location context and users.  
But from the ANT theory viewpoint, the focal actors can 
take strategies to form a ‘virtual’ closed actor network space 
to escape the physical location limitation. For example, 
actors may provide more discounts or other marketing 
activities for participating merchants on campus. Other 
strategies include persuading more merchants to join the 
actor network, installing more payment machines on campus 
or enrolling other non-school members to consume on 
campus by mobile payment cards. 
Some students compared the mobile payment system on 
T University with a famous convenience store chain, with 
three stores located on campus. “I do not know why, but 
when I enter the convenience store, I will always find myself 
paying by mobile payment card!” “The payment speed of the 
mobile payment card is also slow, but I would like to pay by 
the card when purchasing at the convenience store.” The 
convenience store installed refill machines, and introduced 
different promotion activities every two months. That is, the 
convenience store chain arranged suitable social and 
technological elements, and then constructed a virtual closed 
actor network while customers entered their many-location 
stores. 
C. Activity-Oriented Mobility 
Sometimes the location is not the only factor to consider; 
activities in specific space-time also matter. For example, 
students consider that they will use their cards most 
frequently for copy services, book fines, space rental, and 
vending machines (see Table II). Often they will remain a 
long time in a specific space, such as the library, while doing 
these activities. Users defined “convenience” as doing 
different activities within their space-time limitations. That is, 
the focal actors should consider different strategies according 
to different space and time-limited activities (see Figure 5). 
Recently, more and more mobile commerce literature 
focuses on location-based or context-aware services and their 
applications [3]. Balasubramanian et al. [13] suggest that 
mobile technologies change the flexibility of activities along 
the spatial and temporal dimensions, and also impact 
people’s activity pattern. Therefore, a designer needs to take 
additional consideration in activity-oriented thinking when 
designing mobile devices, applications or services. 
Although we expect mobile technology to achieve 
ubiquitous world dreams, most of time, mobile commerce is 
embedded within our living world, and activities within a 
specific space and time. Designers of mobile commerce 
applications or services should consider how to arrange the 
social-technical elements of different specific activities. 
Space Limitation
high
low
Time
Limitation
low
high
reading
copying
exercising
online 
shopping
lunch
dinner
shopping
museum
urban
transportation
Different Social‐technical Arrangements
and  Design Strategies
 
Figure 5.  Activity-oriented mobility design 
D. Implications for Technology and Service Strategies 
As discussed above, both location and space-time matter 
for mobile commerce design. Based on the above analysis 
and discussion, we can indicate future directions for mobile 
commerce system technology and service design strategies 
(see Table IV).  
Table IV indicates possible directions for design 
solutions, such as an activity-sensitive interface, activity-
based responses, etc. Mobile systems can record activity, 
usage information and responses for different activities. 
Using T University as an example, mobile payment cards or 
service providers can record user-purchasing information, 
and merchants can respond with different promotion 
activities according to this purchasing data. Although some 
devices, such as the payment cards in our case, cannot store 
as much information as a smart phone, designers can still 
consider ways to use these cards for information storage, as 
social activities and other technical devices support these 
features. This is referred to as a social-technical fit for 
different activities (see Table IV). 
Moreover, although ubiquitous computing is a dream for 
technology, focal actors should consider strategies for 
locking their users in a specific space-time environment: an 
actor network. This involves mobilizing more users to stay in 
an actor network and strengthening the stability of such a 
network. 
TABLE IV.  
IMPLICATIONS FROM TECHNOLOGY AND SERVICE 
STRATEGIES 
Strategies 
Features 
Technology 
z activity-sensitive interface 
z activity-based responses 
z activity/event time configuration 
z behavior information presentation 
z usage summary information. 
z location-sensitive responses 
Service 
z understanding target users’ activities 
z different strategies for various activities 
z social-technical fit for activities 
z event-based marketing 
z lock users in a virtual closed network 
49
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

VII. CONCLUSIONS 
[3] 
I. A. Junglas, and R. T. Watson, “Location-Based Services,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol 51, 2008, pp. 65-69. 
In this paper, we take ANT theory as an analytic lens to 
understand the social-technical interactions of a mobile 
payment application case. We argue that mobile commerce is 
not only location-sensitive but also represents a social-
technical arrangement of specific time-space activities. For 
designers, it is not sufficient to simply create a ubiquitous 
payment system, but an arrangement of applications, services, 
devices and activities that are embedded within the user’s 
living world. These findings imply the following principles 
for designers:  
[4] 
P. A. Pavlou, and M. Fygenson, “Understanding and Predicting 
Electronic Commerce Adoption: An Extension of the Theory of 
Planned Behavior,” MIS Quarterly, vol 30, 2006, pp. 115-143. 
[5] 
Y. Aoyama, “Sociospatial Dimensions of Technology Adoption: 
Recent M-commerce and E-commerce Developments,” Environment 
and Planning, vol  35, 2003, pp. 1201-1221. 
[6] 
E. W. T. Negi, ,and A. Gunasekaran, “A Review for Mobile 
Commerce Research and Applications,” Decision Support Systems, 
vol 43, 2007, pp. 3-15. 
[7] 
M. Callon, and B. Latour, “Unscrewing the big Leviathan,” in 
Advances in Social Theory and Methodology, K. Knorr-Cetina and 
A.V. Cicourel, Eds,  London: Routledge & Kegan, 1981,  pp. 277-303. 
• follow and understand user’s everyday activity 
• activity-based sensitivity and responses 
[8] 
M. Callon, ”Some Elements of a Sociology of Translation: 
Domestication of the Scallops and the Fishermen of St. Brieuc Bay,” 
in Power, Action and Belief, J. Law, Ed, London: Routledge and 
Kegan, 1986,  pp. 197-233. 
• social-technical fits for different activities 
• location-sensitive responses 
• design a virtual closed actor network and strategies to 
lock users 
[9] 
R. K. Yin, Case Study Research, Design and Methods, CA: Sage 
Publications, 1994. 
In this study, we adopt multiple data collection strategies, 
and analyze both quantitative and qualitative data. Our 
primary limitation however is our single mobile payment 
case study. In future work, we will compare other institutions 
and different mobile commerce applications cases to 
understand the complex social-technical interactions within 
mobile commerce environments. 
[10] J. Ondrus, and Y. Pigneur, “A multi-stakeholder multi-criteria 
assessment framework of mobile payments: An illustration with the 
swiss public transportation industry,” in Proceedings of the 39th 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Science, Hauai, 
HI, USA, 2006, pp. 42a. 
[11] J. Ondrus, and Y. Pigneur, “A Disruption Analysis in the Mobile 
Payment Market,” in Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, Hawaii, 
2005, pp. 84c 
REFERENCES 
[12] Y. Au, and R. Kauffman, “The economics of mobile payments: 
Understanding stakeholder issues for an emerging financial 
technology application,” Electronic Commerce Research and 
Applications, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 141-164, 2008. 
[1] 
S. L. Jarvenpaa, K. R. Lang,, Y. Takeda, and V. K. Tununainen,: 
“Mobile Commerce At Crossroads,” Communications of the ACM, 
vol 46, 2003, pp. 41-44.  
[13] S. Balasubramanian, R. Peterson, and S. Jarvenpaa, “Exploring the 
implications of m-commerce for markets and marketing,” Journal of 
the academy of Marketing Science, vol. 30, no. 4, pp. 348-361, 2002. 
[2] 
S. Sarker, and J. D. Wells, “Understanding Mobile Handheld Device 
Use and Adoption,” Communications of the ACM, vol 46, 2003, pp. 
36-40. 
 
 
Design Phase
Adoption Phase
Mobile Payment
Technology
Mobile Payment 
Social‐Technology
System 
for T‐University
Adoption Results
Social Actors,
Technical Elements 
Social Actors,
Technical Elements 
 
Figure 1.  Analysis framework based on ANT Theory 
 
 
Combined
EasyCard and
ID Card Issued
2007.9 
2008.1
Design Phase
of Mobile
Payment Systems  Began
2008.9
Adoption Phase 
of Mobile 
Payment Systems  Began
2009.3
2009.6~12
In‐depth Interviews with
project team and merchants
Questionnaires
Surveyed and
In‐depth interviews
with users 
 
Figure 3.  The mobile payment system implementation schedule of T University 
50
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

