Exploring an IT Service Change Management Process: A Case Study
Marko Jäntti
University of Eastern Finland
School of Computing, Software Engineering Research Group
P.O.B 1627, 70211 Kuopio, Finland
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@uef.ﬁ
Merja Kainulainen
Istekki Oy
P.O.B 1777, Kuopio, Finland
Email: ﬁrstname.lastname@istekki.ﬁ
Abstract—IT service providers need effective methods for
managing change requests and changes regarding provided
IT services and the IT infrastructure. However, many IT
service providers consider the implementation of a service-
oriented change management process as a difﬁcult task. This
challenge has led us to examine the research problem: How
to improve a change management process based on IT service
management practices? The main contribution of this study
is 1) to explore how an IT service provider organization
in Finland has implemented a change management process,
and 2) to identify what types of challenges are related to
the transition process from traditional change management to
service-oriented change management. Data for this study were
collected by using a case study research method.
Keywords-change management; request for change; IT ser-
vice
I. INTRODUCTION
Many IT service provider organizations are living under
continuous change. Changes have effects on organizational
structures, provided IT services, software products and
systems, technologies, data networks, documentation and
processes. A documented change management process plays
an important role because changes need to be recorded, eval-
uated, authorized, prioritized, planned, tested, implemented,
documented and reviewed in a controlled manner [1].
Improvement of change management is usually started
from three main reasons. First, an organization may identify
quality problems in change management activities, such as
information on changes is never logged into the customer
support tool, unauthorized changes are performed, or there
is no deﬁned process for handling changes that cause several
different types of interpretations how changes can be han-
dled. Second, a key customer may require that an IT provider
should improve change management practices. Informing
IT people on customer’s requirements regarding change
management is very effective way to motivate workers to
follow change management procedures. Third, an organiza-
tion may be interested in adopting a standard or a process
framework that requires establishment or improvement of
the documented change management process.
In this paper, we present results from a case study where
the improvement of change management was triggered by
the adoption of the ISO/IEC 20 000 service management
standard. The ISO/IEC 20 000 standard is aligned with IT
Infrastructure Library best practices and consists of two
parts: Part 1: Speciﬁcation for service management (Shall
requirements) [2], and Part 2: Code of practice for service
management (Should requirements) [3].
IT organizations that aim to achieve ISO/IEC 20 00
shall very likely exploit the most widely used IT service
management framework IT Infrastructure Library (ITIL)
as guidelines in the process improvement work. ITIL is
a collection of best practices for deﬁning, designing, im-
plementing, managing and monitoring IT services and IT
service management processes [4]. ITIL deﬁnes service
management as “the implementation and management of
quality IT services that meet the needs of the business”. The
service management section of the ITIL version 2 consists of
two parts: Service Delivery and Service Support (including
change management). In the ITIL version 3, change man-
agement is part of the Service Transition publication [1].
The main objective of the change management process is to
ensure that standardised methods and procedures are used
for efﬁcient and prompt handling of all changes [5].
A. Related work
Much has been written about software maintenance and
managing changes and defects. In the software engineering
literature, change management is mainly focused on tracking
changes to the technical artifacts (software components)
[6]. Information on a change is captured by a software
change order. Service-oriented change management covers
both changes to technical conﬁguration items (servers, desk-
tops, software components) and changes to services and the
service infrastructure. Lientz and Swanson [7] categorize
software maintenance into four categories: adaptive, perfec-
tive, corrective and preventive.
Change management seems to be related to all of those
four perspectives covering changes in the software environ-
ment, changes due to new user requirements, changes due to
ﬁxing errors, and changes that are made to prevent problems
in the future. Implementation of changes as corrective ac-
tions can be seen as one way to prevent defects [8]. Requests
for change are typical outputs from problem management
and defect management process [9]. Bennett [10] states that
1
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

when software enters the servicing (software maturity) stage,
only small tactical changes (patches, code changes) are
possible. Wallmueller [11] considers change management
activities as a subgroup of conﬁguration management. He
states that conﬁguration control phase includes inputting
change requests into the development process, controlling
the processing of changes and tracing the changes to their
closure.
Within service science and services computing, IT change
management is part of the services operation phase in the
services lifecycle [12]. There is a wide number of IT service
management studies. Hochstein, Zarnekow and Brenner [13]
have studied ITIL as a common-practice reference model
in three case studies. Tan, Cater-Steel and Toleman [14]
have identiﬁed six success factors in ITIL implementations:
senior management support, project champion, relationships
with tool vendors, change in corporate culture, project gover-
nance and execution and realisation of beneﬁts. Additionally,
Lahtela, Jäntti and Kaukola [15] have explored implement-
ing an ITIL-based IT service management measurement
system.
Pollard and Cater-Steel [16] report four interesting chal-
lenges in ITIL implementation: People do not understand
that one person can hold many ITIL roles (hats), engaging
the right people to make changes, gaining support from
technical staff and measuring the ROI of ITIL implemen-
tation. Kapella [17] has presented a framework for incident
management and problem management where known errors
from problem management process should be implemented
via change management process. Niessink and van Vliet
have explored software maintenance from a service per-
spective [18] and reported that IT support organizations
seem to have problems in the interface between incident
management and problem management. Duffy and Denison
[19] have presented a conceptual model of ITIL impacts on
IT services.
Surprisingly few studies have dealt with IT service change
management. Wickboldt et al. have studied IT change
management from the risk analysis viewpoint [20]. They
report that all requests for change must be submitted to the
Change Advisory Board (CAB) to be analyzed, approved,
and scheduled. We propose that a change manager should
be able to preview low impact RFCs and authorize them
instead of a formal CAB meeting in order to make handling
the change more effective.
The ITIL change management process consists of the
following activities (see Fig. 1). An organization must de-
ﬁne separate procedures for handling standard changes and
urgent (emergency) changes.
Change management is also clearly visible in the Control
Objectives for IT and Related Technology (COBIT) frame-
work. Manage Changes is one of the Acquire and Implement
(AI) processes [21].
Figure 1.
The change management process (adapted from [5])
B. Our Contribution
Surprisingly few studies have dealt with change man-
agement from IT service management perspective. This
case study belongs to the results of KISMET (Keys to IT
Service Management and Effective Transition of Services)
research project at the University of Eastern Finland. A part
of the research work was conducted during our previous
research project MaISSI (Managing IT Services and Service
Implementation) research project. The main contribution of
this paper is to
• to explore how an IT service provider organization
from healthcare domain in Finland has implemented
a change management process, and
• to identify what types of challenges are related to the
change management.
The results of this study are valuable for IT service provider
organizations that are planning to implement IT service
change management process or improve existing change
management activities. The remainder of the paper is or-
ganized as follows. In Section II the research problem and
research methods of this study are described. In Section
III, we explore the change management process of the
case organization. Section IV is the analysis. Finally, the
discussion and the conclusions are given in Section V.
II. RESEARCH QUESTIONS & METHODOLOGY
A case study research method was used to answer the
research problem: How to improve a change management
process based on IT service management practices? Ben-
basat and Goldstein [22] report that a case study research
is a viable research strategy to answer “how” and “why”
research questions. According to Yin [23] a case study
is “an empirical inquiry that investigates a contemporary
phenomenon within its real-life context”. Additionally, a
case study is deﬁned as “a research strategy which focuses
on understanding the dynamics present with single settings”
[24]. The case study method was used to explore the current
2
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

state of change management process in the case organization
and to identify process-related challenges.
The case study design included the following questions
that were monitored during the study:
• How requests for change (RFCs) are handled?
• How the initial review of RFCs has been organized?
• How changes are approved for implementation?
• How changes are planned?
• How changes are implemented?
• How changes are monitored or handled after the im-
plementation?
• What types of challenges are related to change man-
agement?
A. Case Organization and Data Collection Methods
The case organization is one of the KISMET research
project’s industrial partners. KISMET research team aims
to help IT service providers in the adoption of IT service
management methods and processes. Figure 2 describes the
context of this study.
Figure 2.
The case study context
Our case organization Istekki is an IT service provider
company with 160 employees. Istekki provides IT and med-
ical technology services to the city of Kuopio and Hospital
District of Northern Savo. The case organization started ISO
20000 project around two years ago. The following data
collection methods were used in the study:
• Participative observation
– June 30, 2009: a meeting with a customer support
tool development team
– August 25, 2009: a ’support process’ training ses-
sion in the case organized by a research team
– September 15, 2009: a change management meet-
ing (incident, problem and change manager, busi-
ness area manager)
• July 29 - August 12, 2010: theme interviews with 10
persons
• A case study writeup
• Internal documentation (a project plan of the standard-
ization project, a system speciﬁcation of the customer
support tool)
Theme interviews were the main data collection method in
this study. The following interview questions were selected
with a customer manager and a change manager: what
is the current state of change management, what types
of challenges are related to change management, which
metrics are used within change management process, are
you familiar with ISO 20000 standard and ITIL framework?
Interviewees (two per unit) were selected randomly from the
following units: service desk, application support services,
on site support services and IT technology services.
B. Data Analysis Method
In data analysis, we used a within-case analysis method
that examines a case carefully as a stand-alone entity [24].
Interviews were recorded and the most important ﬁndings
were stored in an Excel ﬁle. After the interview phase,
results were analyzed and reported as a case study writeup
by a computer science student. The case study database
was created to ensure the traceability between data sources,
meetings and ﬁndings. The case study database included
memos from meetings with a case organization.
III. IT SERVICE CHANGE MANAGEMENT PROCESS
The main goal of this study was to explore the change
management process in the case organization and identify
the challenges regarding the current state of the process
and the challenges related to the transition from traditional
change management to service oriented change manage-
ment.
A. Change Request Procedures
There are different types of change requests in different
units. Interviewees had received change requests related
to software, hardware, procedures and instructions. They
had received change requests from service desk, customers,
boss, colleagues, from their own working unit or they had
identiﬁed a change target by themselves. Change requests
usually come by phone, email or ticket systems (operational
management system or help desk system). Many answers
indicated that requests from customers would go through
a service desk that assigns the requests to specialist teams
if necessary. However, it is very common that customers
contact specialists directly. There are different procedures
3
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

for recording change requests because there are no uniﬁed
instructions. Change requests are recorded in ticket systems,
in personal documents and some requests are not recorded
at all.
Additionally, the quality of change recording varies a
lot in the case organization. A part of the change requests
include a very detailed description of a change while other
change requests are written in a very general level. The
quality of recording depends on the size of the change. Large
changes are recorded more detailed than small changes.
B. Initial Assessment of Requests for Change
According to case study observations, RFCs are not
classiﬁed systematically in the initial assessment phase. The
classiﬁcation is often based on the persons’ own inter-
pretations. Several interviewees felt that they do not have
instructions how to classify RFCs and how they should
react to certain types of changes. Although there is no
systematic classiﬁcation, the reaction time to problems in
the customers’ critical information systems is shorter than
other problems. In some cases, a manager had deﬁned which
change requests are urgent.
The service desk tool includes some classiﬁcation rules
for change impact: makes user’s work difﬁcult, user cannot
continue work, major incident. In case of an urgent change
the reaction time is shorter and there will be more resources
to solve this kind of changes. When an urgent change
is needed, the RFC will not receive detailed assessment
but a change is implemented as soon as possible. Small
changes can be implemented quite freely. Thus, the person
who implements the change is also responsible for the
change. The scope of the change deﬁnes how detailed impact
analysis is carried out for the RFC. For major changes one
can estimate costs, service downtime, resources and risks.
Change impact is often estimated with colleagues or with
own team which results in a better overview of the issue.
C. Change Approval
The type of the RFC deﬁnes who is able to approve
the change. Change approval can be made by a customer,
a customer and a specialist together, a system main user,
a service manager, own team, own manager, information
system manager, a specialist or an RFC initiator. Information
on the decision whether the change is accepted is usually
not recorded in the service management system. Decision
is typically informed by email or by phone. In some cases,
all stakeholders had not received information. If the RFC is
rejected, the decision is often not recorded but the initiator
of RFC is informed. If the RFC is recorded in the service
desk tool, the rejected RFC shall be closed and the reason
for rejection can be added to the RFC record. Interviewees
hoped that decision making on change approval should be
ﬂexible enough in order to avoid unnecessary waiting.
D. Planning of Change Implementation
Several interviewees stated that planning of the change
implementation is carried out carefully but there are chal-
lenges in documenting. For large changes, deailed planning
of implementation is carried out including resources, sched-
ule, implementation method, implementation steps and ef-
fects. There are no templates for plans. Thus, their structure
and content varies between teams. Implementation plans are
located in email, shared folders or in own documents. There
is no agreed place for planning documentation archives.
Implemenation plans are not created for small changes.
Some interviewees felt that in some cases it is waste of time
to log changes to the system. However, other interviewees
thought that planning should be detailed and it would be
good to document also the small changes. It was noted that
every person who is responsible for change implementation
should take account in the backup and restoration plan in
planning the implementation. Backup and restoration plans
are typically not recorded anywhere or plans exist in the
private folders.
E. Implementation of Change
Ínterview ´results indicate that there are several different
methods to implement changes. Many interviewees stated
that information on implemented changes is located in
different places: personal documents, email messages, back
ofﬁce systems (for example, a hardware register), operation
management tools, web sites and program code. There is
no uniﬁed procedure how and where information on change
implementations should be recorded. Bigger changes include
a short description what was done and when. If necessary,
information on a change is sent to appropriate stakeholders.
F. Post-Implementation Monitoring
The level of post-implementation monitoring of change
depends on the type of the change and how active is the
person who implemented the change. Quite often, there is
no time for monitoring or monitoring is not possible. In
these cases, post-implementation monitoring means that a
customer contacts when a problen occurs.
After major changes the situation is strictly monitored and
controlled and if necessary one can add resources. In case
of a bigger change, a service can be monitored by technical
monitoring tools. In some cases, IT provider can review
the change with a customer whether a change has been
successfully implemented. If the change had unexpected
effects, the service can be restored to the initial state. In all
cases, the restoration cannot be done. Large, failed changes
should be reported to a manager level.
IV. ANALYSIS
Based on the case study results, the following strenghts
were identiﬁed regarding the case organization’s change
management process:
4
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

• There is a change manager role with documented
responsibilities
• A description of the change management process exists
• Change management and maintenance work is carried
out carefully by specialists
• There are two tools that support recording RFCs and
change details in a basic level
• There are deﬁned workﬂows for different types of
changes: small changes, emergency changes, major
changes and development ideas.
• There is a list of planned metrics for change manage-
ment.
In contrast to strenghts, the following key challenges can
be identiﬁed in the case organization’s change management:
• Lack of uniﬁed change management methods
• Lack of centralized point for change requests
• Poor documentation of how to record changes
• Lack of resources (more time should be allocated to
improvement of the change management procedures)
• The service desk tool does not provide enough support
for change management at the moment
• The issues deﬁned in the theoretical process description
are not applied in practice
• Knowledge sharing problems on planned or imple-
mented changes
• Change requests come as a surprise which causes
challenges for resource planning.
• It is difﬁcult to identify the connection between a new
incident and a recently made change.
• Sometimes IT people have to carry out changes that are
not well planned.
• Unclear responsibilities of change management.
• The organization has two locations and two business
areas which causes challenges in decision making re-
garding changes.
Many answers indicated that maintenance and change
work is carried out carefully and in a professional way in
the case organization. Additionally, the service desk tools
support recording service requests and part of the RFCs
are logged into the tools. The organization has planned and
documented a change management process based on ISO
20 000 and ITIL concepts. The process description includes
a description of the change management goals, roles, re-
sponsibilities, activities, the lifecycle of the change (with
change status options), the content of the change record,
process metrics and process relationships to other ISO 20
000 processes. The organizations has a change manager
that is responsible for improving the process. However, the
introduction of the process in the practice seems to be a big
challenge in the near future. According to our observations,
a change advisory board has been in a pilot use for some
products.
The major challenges are related to guidance how changes
should be recorded, classiﬁed and documented. There are
people who do not understand the difference between service
requests and change requests. This is clearly a challenge that
is related to the transition process from traditional change
management to service-oriented change management. Thus,
these support requests are handled in the same way although
they have different workﬂows. The process description has
been made in one organizational unit and it does not address
well the needs of another unit. Knowledge sharing problems
on planned or implemented changes refers to the point that
all the RFC/change-related information should be stored in
the service desk tool instead of private ﬁles to improve
the data availability. According to some interviewees, the
tool does not support the change management enough, for
example, in producing measurement reports.
Besides identiﬁed challenges, this study resulted in several
useful process improvement suggestions. More resources
should be allocated for improving change management pro-
cedures. More attention should be placed in informing IT
people of change management practices and responsibilities
and the existence of a process description. Informing could
be done, for example, in weekly team meetings. The change
management process description should be updated in the
cooperation between representatives from both organiza-
tional units. Perhaps, in the future, they could have only
one tool for managing changes. If the business domains of
two units are very different, two or more change managers
might be needed.
V. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
This study aimed to answer the following research prob-
lem: How to improve a change management process based
on IT service management practices? The main contribution
of this study was to present 1) to explore how an IT
service provider organization in Finland has implemented a
change management process, and 2) to identify what types
of challenges are related to change management. Data for
this study were collected using a case study method.
First, we described the change management practices of
the case organization. We focused on exploring change
request procedures, initial assessment of requests for change,
change approval, planning of change implementation, im-
plementation of change, and post-implementation. Second,
we presented challenges related to change management.
Key challenges were related to lack of instructions how to
record and classify RFCs, lack of uniﬁed change manage-
ment methods, poor understanding of the difference between
service requests and change requests, and knowledge sharing
of change-related information.
There are several limitations to this study. First, data
were collected from one IT service provider organization
by using qualitative research methods such as interviews.
More IT people, process managers and customers could
5
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

have been interviewed. Second, the case organization was
not randomly selected but selected from the partner pool
of the MaISSI project. Thus, the selection method was the
convenience sampling method. Third, the case study does
not allow us to generalize our research results. However,
we can use our results to expand the theory of IT service
change management. Further research is needed to examine
introduction of change management tools, processes and
methods in IT service companies.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This paper is based on research in KISMET (Keys to IT
Service Management and Effective Transition of Services)
and MaISSI (Managing IT Services and Service Implemen-
tation) projects funded by the National Technology Agency
TEKES, European Regional Development Fund (ERDF),
and industrial partners.
REFERENCES
[1] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce, ITIL Service Transition.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[2] ISOIEC20000, IT Service Management, Part 1: Speciﬁcation
for service management.
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC7 Secretariat,
2005.
[3] ISOIEC20000b, IT Service Management, Part 2: Code of
practice for service management.
ISO/IEC JTC1/SC7 Sec-
retariat, 2005.
[4] Ofﬁce of Government Commerce, ITIL Service Operation.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK, 2007.
[5] OGC, ITIL Service Support.
The Stationary Ofﬁce, UK,
2002.
[6] W. Royce, Software Project Management: A Uniﬁed Frame-
work.
Addison-Wesley, 1998.
[7] B. P. Lientz and E. B. Swanson, Software Maintenance
Management. Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley Longman
Publishing Co., Inc., 1980.
[8] R. G. Mays, C. L. Jones, G. J. Holloway, and D. P. Studinski,
“Experiences with defect prevention,” IBM Syst. J., vol. 29,
no. 1, pp. 4–32, 1990.
[9] Quality Assurance Institute, “A software defect management
process,” Research Report number 8, 1995.
[10] K. H. Bennett and V. T. Rajlich, “Software maintenance
and evolution: a roadmap,” in ICSE ’00: Proceedings of the
Conference on The Future of Software Engineering.
New
York, NY, USA: ACM Press, 2000, pp. 73–87.
[11] E. Wallmueller, Software quality assurance: A practical ap-
proach.
Prentice Hall International, 1994.
[12] L.-J. Zhang, J. Zhang, and H. Cai, Services Computing.
Ts-
inghua University Press, Beijing and Springer-Verlag GmbH
Berlin Heidelberg, 2007.
[13] A. Hochstein, R. Zarnekow, and W. Brenner, “Itil as com-
mon practice reference model for it service management:
Formal assessment and implications for practice,” in EEE
’05: Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE International Conference
on e-Technology, e-Commerce and e-Service (EEE’05) on e-
Technology, e-Commerce and e-Service.
Washington, DC,
USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 704–710.
[14] W.-G. Tan, A. Cater-Steel, and M. Toleman, “Implementing
it service management: A case study focussing on critical
success factors,” Journal of Computer Information Systems,
vol. 50, no. 2, 2009.
[15] A. Lahtela, M. Jäntti, and J. Kaukola, “Implementing an
itil-based it service management measurement system,” in
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Digital
Society.
St. Maarten, Netherlands Antilles: IEEE Computer
Society, February 2010, pp. 249–254.
[16] C. Pollard and A. Cater-Steel, “Justiﬁcations, strategies, and
critical success factors in successful itil implementations in
u.s. and australian companies: An exploratory study,” Infor-
mation Systems Management, vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 164–175,
2009.
[17] V. Kapella, “A framework for incident and problem manage-
ment,” International Network Services whitepaper, 2003.
[18] F. Niessink and H. van Vliet, “Software maintenance from
a service perspective,” Journal of Software Maintenance,
vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 103–120, March/April 2000.
[19] K. Duffy and B. Denison, “Using itil to improve it services,”
in AMCIS08: Proceedings of the FourteenthAmerican Con-
ference on Information Systems 2008.
Toronto, Canada:
Assocation for Information Systems, 2008.
[20] J. A. Wickboldt, G. S. Machado, W. L. da Costa Cordeiro,
R. C. Lunardi, A. D. dos Santos, F. G. Andreis, C. B. Both,
L. Z. Granville, L. P. Gaspary, C. Bartolini, and D. Trastour,
“A solution to support risk analysis on it change manage-
ment,” in IM’09: Proceedings of the 11th IFIP/IEEE inter-
national conference on Symposium on Integrated Network
Management.
Piscataway, NJ, USA: IEEE Press, 2009, pp.
445–452.
[21] COBIT 4.1, Control Objectives for Information and related
Technology: COBIT 4.1.
IT Governance Institute, 2007.
[22] I. Benbasat, D. K. Goldstein, and M. Mead, “The case
research strategy in studies of information systems,” MIS Q.,
vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 369–386, 1987.
[23] R. Yin, Case Study Research: Design and Methods.
Beverly
Hills, CA: Sage Publishing, 1994.
[24] K. Eisenhardt, “Building theories from case study research,”
Academy of Management Review, vol. 14, pp. 532–550, 1989.
6
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

