 
Figure 1. Evolution of a weak signal,  
building upon Coffman [7] and Steinmüller [20]  
No Outstanding Surprises when Using Social Media as Source for Weak Signals? 
First Attempt to Discuss the Impact of Social Media Sources to Detect Surprising Weak Signals 
 
Robert Eckhoff, Mark Markus,  
Markus Lassnig, and Sandra Schön 
Innovation Lab 
Salzburg Research Forschungsgesellschaft 
Salzburg, Austria 
markus.lassnig@salzburgresearch.at
 
 
Abstract—Enterprises as well as research institutions are 
interested to find very early signs for future trends, disruptions 
or other emerging big changes. Such “weak signals” may also 
be detected within user-generated social media content. 
Information technologies support searching, analyzing and 
interpreting social media data. According to our experiences 
with an approach called “innovation signals”, none of our 
detected weak signals was an outstanding surprise for our 
industry partners. Within this paper, we try to validate these 
experiences with a look into weak signals theory, and whether 
similar experiences can be found in the extant literature. While 
we were not able to find conclusive evidence that our 
conclusions are common (or that they are not), we present a set 
of possible explanations of this phenomenon. Our paper has to 
be seen as a first discussion of the topic, which should be a first 
step to validate researchers’ experiences and to initiate a 
potentially controversial discourse about it. 
Keywords-Weak signals; detection; innovation; surprise; 
criteria. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Weblogs, discussion forums or mailing lists are seen as a 
worthy and relatively accessible source for trend research. At 
Salzburg Research, we developed an approach to detect 
“weak signals” [1]. Weak signals are find very early signs 
for future trends, disruptions or other emerging big changes. 
According to theory, weak signals may also be surprising. 
Our approach of weak signals detection is a combination of 
computer-supported 
analysis 
and 
social 
scientific 
interpretation that uses social media content as source of 
primary data. This approach, called “innovation signals”, 
was used to get insights into three branches from industry 
partners [2] [3]. Whereas the feedback and customers’ 
satisfaction was very good, the involved researchers still got 
the impression that their results were no big surprises for 
their customers respectively industry partners. Within this 
paper, we will analyze if other researchers in social media 
make similar experiences and how this phenomenon might 
be explained. If it is common that “weak signals” are not 
surprising, this should be influence theory of as well as 
counseling in weak signals detection. 
Within this paper, we try to validate our experiences with 
a look into weak signals theory, and whether similar 
experiences can be found in the extant literature. Our paper 
has to be seen as a first discussion of the topic, which should 
be a first step to validate researchers’ experiences and to 
initiate a potentially controversial discourse about it. 
II. 
DETECTING WEAK SIGNALS WITH SOCIAL MEDIA 
“Weak signals” are seen as potentially important signs 
for future developments with big impact on companies. 
According to Ansoff, weak signals are “imprecise early 
indications about impending impactful events” [1]. All that is 
known, he proceeds, “is that some threats and opportunities 
will undoubtedly arise, but their shape and nature and source 
are not yet known.” Compared with other levels of 
knowledge about the future, weak signals are the vaguest and 
possibly earliest kind of information, especially compared 
with “drivers” or even “trends” [4]. Being able to recognize 
such weak signals for future trends and developments might 
be a chance: Organizations can use the time for management 
decisions concerning innovative adaptations or new 
developments within the firm, the product or any other 
impacted unit. The collection and detection of weak signals 
could “be a key to anticipating change in advance and avoid 
letting them cause surprise” [5], see Figure 1.  
A very common approach towards weak signals 
detection is the use of social media content as a source. 
Social media are Web tools and services that allow to 
communicate, to collaborate, and to share information. For 
example, social networks, discussion forums, Wikis, 
Weblogs or mailing lists are such applications. Within social 
media customers, colleagues, experts and others discuss 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

brands, products and services, or related topics and issues. 
Therefore, social media is not only a way to share and 
discuss online, but also a good source for research and 
strategic 
planning. 
Information 
technologies 
support 
searching, analyzing and interpreting social media data. 
Typically, but not always, computer analysis supports the 
detection of weak signals [6]. This is especially illustrated in 
a comparison of about 20 social media monitoring tools with 
regard to their applicability for detecting weak signals [7]. 
In theory, relatively vague and new topics should pop up 
when detecting weak signals, but in our experience we did 
neither find surprising new trends nor previously unknown 
weak signals. Customers and experts within our search fields 
were satisfied with our results and were happy with facts, 
figures and illustrative content (e.g., citations), but we could 
not detect genuinely surprising weak signals for them. 
 
III. 
RESEARCH QUESTION AND DESIGN OF (FIRST) 
RESEARCH 
Within this contribution, we are interested in whether the 
limitations we experienced are limited to our approach of 
detecting weak signals using social media or whether this is a 
more common phenomenon that we share with other 
researchers in the field, i.e. whether the problems we 
encountered are general problems of the research field. 
Additionally, we try to find explanations for this 
phenomenon and thus, we try to find answers to the 
following questions: 
• 
Did others have similar experiences with no 
outstanding surprises when using social media as a 
source for the detection of weak signals?  
• 
If this is the case, what are potential explanations 
for this phenomenon?  
This contribution is not a comprehensive study but a first 
step into a topic that could influence the understanding and 
practice of weak signals detection in future, if others support 
our impressions and argumentation. Therefore, we aim to get 
feedback and to initiate further discussion.  
In the following, we will give insights into our first 
desktop-based research and considerations about our 
experiences. To start with, we discuss if according to the 
theory weak signals should be surprising or not. Building on 
this, we will describe our own setting and the experiences we 
made with the detection of weak signals. Then, we will 
present our results of similar experiences we found in the 
literature. This is followed by a first set of explanations of 
this phenomenon. Our paper is meant as a first discussion of 
the topic, which might be of broader interest for researchers 
in the field.  
IV. 
SHOULD WEAK SIGNALS SURPRISE?  
WHAT THE THEORY SAYS 
According to Coffman [8] weak signals may also be 
surprising: They are “new and surprising from the signal 
receiver's vantage point (although others may already 
perceive it)”. Additionally he wrote that weak signals are 
often “scoffed at by people who ‘know’” [8]. Both citations 
can be seen as an explanation, that weak signal may be a 
surprise (or at least have to be for some), but that does not 
mean that experts should be surprised by every single 
detected weak signal. Also, Ilmola and Kuusi see the 
potential of surprise when they see its bounding to “surprise 
value”: “We can define that the information content of a 
signal or new information produced by it depends besides on 
the relevance of the signal also on its surprise value to the 
actor” [9, p. 913]. The potential to surprise, “because they 
are new and even surprising” “can break our prevailing 
mental models and encourage us to think differently” [5, p. 
7]. Kuosa even directly associates weak signals with 
surprises in his current summary of weak signal detection: 
“In contemporary futures studies the term weak signal refers 
to an observed anomaly in the known path of transformation 
that surprises us somehow” [10, p. 22].  
Surprises are also mentioned in weak signals theory as 
argument why weak signals detection is important: 
“Collecting and analyzing weak signals could be a key to 
anticipating changes in advance and avoid letting them cause 
surprise” [7] [similar 11]. 
Nevertheless, this explanation does not give a ratio of 
surprising weak signals or their level of surprise for industry 
experts. But from the theoretical base it is clear that weak 
signals should at least have the potential to surprise. 
V. 
THE CONTEXT OF OUR EXPERIENCES: INNOVATION 
SIGNALS WITHIN SOCIAL MEDIA 
In this part, we introduce the background of our 
experiences, the research project “innovation signals” in 
order be able to compare it similar approaches [2] [3]. The 
approach of innovation signals and the technology was 
developed and used within the project “Innovation Signals – 
Development of a Social Web Innovation Signals Amplifier 
System”, funded by Austrian Research Promotion Agency. 
A. The approach of “innovation signals” 
The concept called “Innovation Signals” exploits user-
generated content for strategic innovation purposes by 
combining quantitative data mining [12] and qualitative 
methods. The Innovation Signals research approach does not 
rely on technology alone, but unfolds in the development of 
social media mining technology in unique combination with 
an interpretative methodology. The process is described as 
follows.  
a) Set-up: The set-up of Innovation Signals research 
mimics the traditional research design of empirical social 
science. The main goal is to formulate research hypotheses 
and define conceptual search terms, which contain between 
20 and 50 English and German keywords. Then, 40 to 50 
publicly 
accessible 
social 
web 
sources 
(forums, 
communities, blogs, newsgroups) are identified and quickly 
assessed, according to a catalogue of criteria (e.g., quality of 
contents, length of contributions, intensity of contribution). 
b) Detection and monitoring: The social media 
mining-based technology provides automatic detection of 
relevant keywords and topics of interest in sources selected 
beforehand. It first extracts a large amount of user posts 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

(e.g., 200,000 posts) and then, automatically detects 
emerging keywords, topics and sentiments from compiled 
discussions and users’ publicly available opinions.  
The Innovation Signals technology provides answers to the 
questions in the context of product development and trend 
detection such as: How do users talk about existing 
products? What are critical issues? What issues are 
discussed very intensively? What are emerging topics? How 
do topics change over time? The technology enables experts 
to analyze and interpret detected innovation signals in an 
easy and intuitive way and also, to save the most important 
posts for additional manual analysis and coding. 
c) Identification and contextualisation of innovation 
signals: The automated analysis of textual content enables 
an efficient information processing, but the machine-
processed information still remains ambiguous. In order to 
enable effective research, the interactions in the social web 
must be structured additionally and analyzed with social 
science methodology. This means to associate user 
generated content with relevant statistics, trends and 
theories to amplify the meaning of the information and to 
understand the consumers’ conversations better and in a 
broader context. 
d) Translation into business opportunities: This phase 
of the research process utilizes user generated content (in 
close co-operation with customers/companies) as an 
additional information source for strategic decision making 
with regard to the kind of innovation (product, process, 
business models, strategic innovation fields) to be pursued 
in order to determine the focus of the product innovation 
and market strategies and/or to detect new markets and new 
ideas. 
B. No outstanding surprises with“innovation signals” 
Three bigger and some smaller practical use cases were 
delivered within the project “innovation signals” – for 
different branches and industry partners. Fields of 
application were the skiing industry, car mobility, and the 
energy sector.  
The general feedback in all three use cases was that our 
customers said that the results do not surprise them, but 
rather support their hypotheses. For instance, the social 
media mining project for a large automobile service provider 
showed that drivers are increasingly dissatisfied with the 
costs of mobility. However, this observation did not qualify 
as groundbreaking news to our client. The analysis in the 
energy sector could after major contextualization deliver at 
least some food for thought as we could show that the 
customer journey towards a solar panel on the roof was 
paved with negative experiences that an energy provide 
could relatively easily provide its customers with. Finally, 
the analysis conducted in the realm of the skiing industry 
was able to identify some features that users would look for 
when reviewing new skiing products. However, even though 
this last analysis was by far the most specific, the results 
failed to surprise our customer.  
Readers might wonder, when and why we came to the 
conclusion that our research did not result in outstanding 
surprises for our customers and partners. When we tried to 
develop guidelines for others that are interested in social 
media mining for innovation purposes, we quickly realized 
that in nearly all cases the expected surprise was not reached. 
One of our most important guidelines, delivered through an 
expert discussion, is: “Do not expect outstanding surprises” 
[13]. After writing the respective paper, we wanted to know 
more about this experience, resulting in this contribution.  
VI. 
ARE OUR EXPERIENCES INDIVIDUAL OR COMMON? 
Are we alone with our experiences? Might our 
impression be a fault, misinterpretation or artifact?  
Within our analysis of approaches for the detection of 
weak signals we read all publications available to us on the 
topic. When reading them, we did not recognize any hints 
that detected weak signals produced surprising results. 
Moreover, we failed to find that detected weak signals were 
surprising at all. To validate this impression, we took a set of 
current papers with a concrete description of weak signals 
detection by social media mining [7] [14] and other methods 
[9] [15] [16]: None of them reported surprising results or 
surprises when presenting results to the final customer.  
We searched within literature databases like Google 
Scholar and Sciencedirect for “weak signals” and “surprise” 
and found a long list of hits; most of them refer directly to 
the idea that the detection of weak signals is seen as a 
strategy to prevent surprises for enterprises. We scanned all 
abstracts and where possible (via open access), the papers as 
such for clues of finding surprising results from weak signals 
detection. 
To sum up, our literature review did not find any 
statement or even study result that the detection of weak 
signals produced surprising results or respective surprising 
weak signals. Of course, this might not be sufficient 
evidence to argue our point, as “surprise” is not a typical 
criterion to measure research’s quality. It would not be very 
common in a research paper to address customers’ surprise 
about the research results. 
Nevertheless, given that “finding surprising insights” is 
one of the hallmarks of weak signals detection, the lack 
thereof in the empirical literature is indeed surprising to us. 
After reflecting and discussing the issue and other 
contributions within the field, we decided to try and spark off 
the debate, even if at this point in time we cannot supply 
conclusive evidence that our impressions holds true for all 
other efforts to detect weak signals as well. 
  
VII. POTENTIAL EXPLANATIONS FOR THIS PHENOMENON 
We are not able to present a good empirical base or data 
about our impression of a very small (if any) rate for 
outstanding surprises when detecting weak signals within 
social media. Nevertheless, we try to collect some 
explanations for this phenomenon.  
 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

A. Characteristic of noisy social media and limits of 
current mining approaches 
Per definition, weak signals are normally hidden in the 
“noise of the daily produced data” [7]. Typically, weak 
signals in social media are tricky to detect. Approaches from 
social media mining typically use combinations of clustering 
approaches as well as counting algorithms, eventually using 
semantic analysis, in addition. Following this, singular 
postings with differing content cannot be detected. Every 
new topic or issue must be mentioned and discussed from 
more people within a certain time span, before the 
approaches might be able to detect such signals. Therefore, 
even “weak signals” must surpass a threshold, measured as a 
certain amount of people or postings, to get recognized as 
“weak signals”. Within other approaches and sources, where 
“weak signals” for example are collected manually as very 
astonishing or annoying stories of individuals, the potential 
to detect a single story is potentially given [17]. With data 
mining approaches and social media as source the 
probability to find a completely seldom or new incidence 
seems not possible due to the sheer amount of signals so 
detected.  
 
B. Filters may avoid the detection of surprising weak 
signals 
So far we did not succeed in automatically filtering those 
signals that are new and relevant to our context. It is not only 
complicated to detect such weak signals in the noise, but also 
to keep and amplify them (i.e. the “real weak signals”) for 
use in a final conclusion to the client. Which of the hundreds 
of signals is the weak signal that anticipates a future trend? 
Presenting the client with all possible weak signals isn’t a 
good option (we actually tried this), nor is picking a few that 
“look promising” good scientific practice. Already Coffman 
described the issue of “people who ‘know’” that scoffed at 
weak signals [12].   
Additionally, “cognitive filters” influence the final 
detection of what is coined as “weak signals” and which 
weak signals might be overseen. Ansoff named mental filters 
that influence the realization of weak signals within 
enterprises:  The “surveillance filter” focuses on special parts 
of the environment which might deliver data and the 
“mentality filter” is responsible for the selection that comes 
to perception in a firm. The third filter, the “power filter” 
might be the influence of managers that purposely neglect 
information. As described and empirically shown in [1], such 
mental filters can be influenced by the setting. Filters can be 
opened by “virtual process, open question and anonymity” 
(p. 919). The filters can be deepened through “focused scope, 
close to the current strategy, strong requirement for 
plausibility and probability in the social interaction process” 
and others [1, p. 919]. 
C. Our customers are experts, not newbies 
Typically, customers of weak signals detection are 
experts. Hence, they of course hear a lot around their key 
topics, they are aware of all the things going on in their main 
field of interest. Their wish to detect “weak signals” seems to 
be driven by their interest in getting more factual knowledge, 
deeper insights and first figures about the development of 
topics etc. They want to be the first to know. Of course, their 
expertise limits the potential of surprise. 
Another point that might influence the impression, that 
customers are not surprised by the found weak signals, might 
also be explained by a cognitive bias: If I am an expert, I 
should already know everything (see hindsight bias [18]). 
Further work might be aware of such psychological 
influences. 
D. Epistemological limits of surprising weak signals 
detection  
On a more philosophical base, we can also argue the 
epistemological background of the detection of weak signals, 
especially if it concerns media and technology. “The current 
mediosphere strongly influences the thinking on media, and 
therefore the thinking of all, including experts in current 
study design without possibility to reflect this phenomenon” 
[19]. Of course, we are limited to what we are able to detect 
because we see it. Other developments might be blind spots, 
as we are not aware of them: “Blind spot means, we do not 
realise it”, “it is a spot we cannot see” [19]. Such blind spots 
of thinking and knowing can be age specific, and related to 
our cultural techniques and the predominant medium of our 
society [20]. If someone would be able to imagine our blind 
spots, deep surprises might be possible. Building on such an 
argumentation, future hindsight projects might be able to see 
such early signs of development, which would be pretty 
surprising for us from today's perspective. But this will only 
be possible through future knowledge and awareness of a 
new human age and mediosphere. 
VIII. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
As described, our discussion paper is meant as a first step 
of deeper consideration of our experiences that are not 
necessarily common experiences for those using social 
media mining for the detection of weak innovation signals. 
This first discussion might be a starting point for 
researchers’ and practitioners’ who made similar experiences 
– or even more interesting: other experiences. So we would 
be happy to hear your stories, if and when your detection of 
weak signals left surprised recipients behind. To manage 
expectations at our side as well as our customers’ side, today, 
we do not emphasize the “originality” or “surprise-factor” 
our detection of weak signals might deliver, until we believe 
this to be the case after reviewing the first results.  
Additionally, our starting point was the failure to find 
surprising weak signals, which might be related to the usage 
of social media as our data-mining source. Of course, social 
media might be additionally limiting for detecting surprises 
(see section VIII A), but after writing this discussion paper 
we are hesitating if the source is really of importance for 
missing surprises or if other factors show to be more 
important. 
As research at weak signals seems to be a very vivid part 
of current innovation research and futurology, deeper 
investigations on the theoretically described characteristic of 
“surprise” should be taken into account.  
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Thanks to Kathrin Parson and Laurenz Giger for their 
support. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] I. H. Ansoff, Implanting Strategic Management, Prentice/Hall 
International Inc, 1984. 
[2] M. Markus, R. Eckhoff, and M. Lassnig, “Innovation Signals 
in Online-Communitys – ein komplementärer analytischer 
Ansatz”, in: M. Blattner, and A. Meier, Eds., Web 
Monitoring. HMD - Praxis der Wirtschaftsinformatik, 293, 
10/2013, pp. 13–21. 
[3] M. Lassnig, M. Markus, R. Eckhoff, and K. Wrussnig, 
“Prospects of technology-enhanced Social Media Analysis for 
Open Innovation in the Leisure Industries”, in: R. Egger, I. 
Gula, and D. Walcher, Eds., Open Tourism – Open 
Innovation, Crowdsourcing and Collaborative Consumption 
challenging the Tourism Industry. Salzburg, 2013. 
[4] T. Kuosa, “Futures signals sense-making framework (FSSF): 
A start-up tool to analyse and categorise weak signals, wild 
cards, drivers, trends and other types of information”. In: 
Futures, Volume 42, Issue 1, February 2010, pp. 42–48. 
[5] E. Hiltunen, Weak Signals in Organisational Futures, Aalto 
University School of Economics, Aalto 2010. 
[6] R. Eckhoff, M. Markus, M. Lassnig, and S. Schön, „Detecting 
Weak Signals with Technologies. Overview of current 
technology-enhanced approaches  for the detection of weak 
signals“,International Journal of Trends in Economics 
Management & Technology (IJTEMT), volume III issue V, 
October 2014. 
[7] K. Welz, L. Brecht, J. Kauffeldt, and D. Schallmo, “Weak 
signals detection: Criteria for social media monitoring tools”, 
in: Proceedings of the 5th ISPIM Innovation Symposium: 
"Stimulating 
Innovation: 
Challenges 
for 
Management, 
Science & Technology", 09-12 December, 2012; Seoul, 
Korea. 
[8] B. 
Coffman, 
“Weak 
Signal 
Research”, 
MG 
Taylor 
Cooperation, 
online 
available 
http://www.mgtaylor.com/mgtaylor/jotm/winter97/wsrintro.ht
m.htm, 1997, downloaded at 31.08.2014. 
[9] L. Ilmola and O. Kuusi, “Filters of weak signals hinder 
foresight: Monitoring weak signals efficiently in corporate 
decision-making”, Futures, Volume 38, Issue 8, 2006, pp. 
908–924. 
[10] T. 
Kuosa, 
Toward 
Strategic 
Intelligence. 
Foresight, 
Intelligence and Policy Making, Helsinki, Dynamic Futures 
2014. 
[11] I. H. Ansoff, “Managing strategic surprise by response to 
weak signals”, California Management Review XVIII 2, 
1975. 
[12] R. Zafarani, M. Abbasi, and H. Liu, Social Media Mining. An 
Introduction, 2014, Cambridge University Press. 
[13] R. Eckhoff, M. Markus, M. Lassnig, and S. Schön, 
“Guidelines for social media mining for innovation purposes. 
Experiences and recommendations from literature and 
practice”, Proceedings of eKNOW 2015, The Seventh 
International Conference on Information, Process, and 
Knowledge Management, February 22 - 27, 2015 - Lisbon, 
Portugal.  
[14] R. Rohrbeck, N. Thom, and H. Arnold, IT tools for foresight: 
“The integrated insight and response system of Deutsche 
Telekom 
Innovation 
Laboratories”, 
Technological 
Forecasting and Social Change, September 28, 2013. 
[15] S. Kim et al., „NEST: A quantitative model for detecting 
emerging trends using a global monitoring expert network and 
Bayesian network“, Futures, Volume 52, August 2013, pp. 
59–73. 
[16] J. Keller and H. A. von der Gracht, “The influence of 
information and communication technology (ICT) on future 
foresight processes — Results from a Delphi survey”, 
Technological Forecasting and Social Change, Volume 85, 
June 2014, pp. 81–92. 
[17] L. Ilmola, and O. Kuusi, “Filters of weak signals hinder 
foresight: Monitoring weak signals efficiently in corporate 
decision-making”, Futures 38 (8) (2006), pp. 908–924. 
[18] B. Fischhoff and R. Beyth “'I knew it would happen': 
Remembered 
probabilities 
of 
once-future 
things.” 
Organizational Behaviour and Human Performance, 13 
(1975), 1-16. 
[19] S. Schaffert and C. Schwalbe, “Future Media Adoption in 
Learning and Teaching: Current Study Design from the 
Perspective of Cultural Studies”, in: M. Ebner & M. Schiefner 
(eds.). Looking Toward the Future of Technology Enhanced 
Education: Ubiquitous Learning and the Digital Native. 
Hershey: IGI Global, 2009, pp. 1-11. 
[20] T. 
Meyer, 
“Zwischen 
Kanal 
und 
Lebens-Mittel: 
pädagogisches Medium und mediologisches Milieu”, in: J. 
Fromme and W. Sesink (eds.), Pädagogische Medientheorie. 
Wiesbaden: VS Verlag für Sozialwissenschaften, 2008, pp. 
71-94. 
[21] K. Steinmüller, “Wild Cards, Schwache Signale und Web-
Seismografen. Vom Umgang der Zukunftsforschung mit dem 
Unvorhersagbaren”, in: Wolfgang J. Koschnick (eds.), 
FOCUS-Jahrbuch 
2012. 
Prognosen, 
Trend- 
und 
Zukunftsforschung, Focus Verlag München, 2012, pp. 215-
240. 
 
63
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

