Informal Virtual Organizations: A Perfect Home for SUBJECTs as Building Blocks
Wajeeha Khalil
University of Vienna
Department of Knowledge and Business Engineering
Vienna, Austria
Email: wk rehman1@yahoo.com
Erich Schikuta
University of Vienna
Department of Knowledge and Business Engineering
Vienna, Austria
Email: erich.schikuta@univie.ac.at
Abstract—The present era has witnessed a rapid technologi-
cal advancement, which has shaped our social connection into a
new dimension. Online social networks are gaining acceptance
and popularity among masses. PCs and mobile devices are used
to connect with each other. Availability of online social networks
on remote devices, such as cell phones, has made it even
more pervasively. A large population of internet users today is
actively participating in online social networks (e.g., Facebook,
Myspace, Twitter, Blogger). The percentage of members is
growing higher each year. Online social networks are a speciﬁc
type of Virtual Organizations, called informal VOs. This paper
focuses on users and resources gathered and provided by online
social networks. It presents online social networks as informal
VOs and develops a generic pattern of user and its special type,
which we call SUBJECT. It identiﬁes the roles served by users
as Subjects in online social networks and it reveals how users
can be ”consumed” as a resource in an informal VO.
Keywords-Social Networks; Virtual Organization; Subject;
Logical Resources.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Virtual Organization (VO) is an orchestration of glob-
ally dispersed resources in a speciﬁc domain. VOs represent
a combination of entities which are logically associated to
achieve a goal. The building blocks of a VO are Goal,
User community, Tools and Resources. These concepts are
detailed in [1]. VOs provide resources which are utilized by
users to solve their problems. In the early collaborations,
these resources were restricted to storage, computational
cycles, print facilities, high performance devices, parallel
servers, simulation software, application programs and li-
censed software. The computing paradigm of Grid comput-
ing played an important role in providing such facilities,
thereby, establishing a platform for VOs. Some examples of
Grid based VOs are [2], [3].
VOs are of different types ranging from dynamic to ﬁxed,
temporary to long lived and formal to informal [3]. No
matter what the type is, VOs offer resources to the users
in the said domain to help them in problem solving activity.
Speciﬁcally the Users in VOs play an important role. VOs
creation, existence, evolution and deletion depends on user
requirements. Users range from laymen to experts, beginners
to professionals, learners to scholars from every ﬁeld of life.
Informal VOs are part of our lives in the form of social
networks (e.g., Facebook, Myspace, MyExperiment) [3].
These user driven networks are typical examples of informal
VOs where every user has its own goal for consumption
and contribution to the resources pool. Today, online social
networks are becoming essential part of life of humans who
have access to Internet. People ﬁnd it easier to connect to
each other using social networks. These social networks can
be visualized as a collection of small scale informal virtual
organizations. Each user is given the right to access a number
of resources offered by an online social network by creating
a proﬁle. These platforms give a sense of authority to the
members by allowing them to initiate different activities.
On the other hand, members can participate in the activities
initiated by other members. Online social networks are an
interesting area to study roles played by members. This pa-
per identiﬁes the resources available in a virtual organization
in general. It reveals the role of users as a resource in an
online social network. In the context of this paper, online
social networks are presented as a special case of VOs.
In all types of VOs, users are classiﬁed into following four
categories: consumer, contributor, developer, and administra-
tor. Resources offered by VOs are utilized by users in these
four capacities. VOs offer globally distributed resources to
its users. With the technological shift, resources offered by a
VO are also changed. The relation between user and resource
is partially overlapping. This situation motivated us to review
the users roles and resources offered in a VO. Thus we
introduced a new term for a special type of resource in VO
in [1], [4], [5], which we called Subject.
VOs exist around us in many shapes, as ﬁrst choice
of research community for collaborative computing. Still,
standard pattern/methods for building VOs are missing.
This situation is the motivation of our research to design
a Reference Architecture for VOs. We believe that this
endeavor will not only help the research community to ﬁnd
a starting point for building a VO, but also will provide
them with a blueprint to extend existing pilots towards a
fully-ﬂedged environment for their needs (i.e., identiﬁcation
of existing/missing components). In our vision users and
resources are main building blocks of a VO. Therefore we
introduce the newly deﬁned notion of Subject as a generic
building block of a VO, as our ﬁrst step towards building a
134
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Reference Architecture for Virtual Organization, which we
call RAVO. A Reference Architecture for Virtual Organiza-
tion can be deﬁned as ”an open source template that does not
only depict the architectural patterns and terminology, but
also deﬁnes the boundaries where heterogeneous resources
from different domains merge collaboratively into a common
framework”.
A Subject is deﬁned as a component of a VO, which
can consume the resources, offered by a VO and also can
act like a resource to be consumed in the VO environment.
Therefore a Subject resembled the generic block of a VO,
which results into a new deﬁnition for VOs. In the view of
above discussion we propose a VO as a set of cooperating
building blocks, called Subjects.
The rest of the paper is as follows: Section 2 deﬁnes the
resource hierarchy in VOs. Section 3 explains the user acting
as a resource and details a generalized pattern for users in
VOs. Section 4 contains examples of users focusing their
role as Subject in informal VOs. Section 4 concludes the
paper with future aims.
II. THE RESOURCE HIERARCHY
A virtual organization is a nonphysical communication
model which aims to achieve a common goal. It consists
typically of a heterogeneous collection of people and or-
ganizations with respect to geographical limits and nature.
The existence of a VO is typically identiﬁable by many
individuals, ad-hoc groups, research teams, and national
and international organizations deploying a wide range of
resources [5]. Initially, resources were meant to be hardware
such as storage, high performance devices (measuring earth
quake, weather forecast, printers, etc), and software (ap-
plications, utilities, simulation facilities) [3]. The extensive
use of computer technology for problem solving changed
the nature of resources [6]. Now resources are distributed
as logical and physical resources. Deﬁning a resource in a
VO environment is dependent on the participating entities
and domains in which the VO operates. A categorization of
resources is presented in Figure 1.
In our research endeavor, a complex but interesting rela-
tionship was discovered between user roles and resources
[1]. During resource consumption and contribution, at a
certain point, user roles and resources are interchangeable.
Some may ﬁnd these concepts overlapping. Previously,
resources are purely considered to be something, which is
being consumed by the user, as shown in Equation 1.
USER
Consumes
←
RESOURCE
(1)
However, resources are also contributed by users in a
problem solving activity. This situation is deﬁned by Equa-
tion 2.
USER
Contributes
→
RESOURCE
(2)
Figure 1.
Resource Hierarchy in VO
The situation becomes even more complex, when a re-
source itself is a user. For example, in an exploration
scenario, a meteorologist wants to know the reason that
causes an unexpected storm. By chance she is the member
of LEAD VO [7], [8]. So she searches for available data
sources, and utilizes the tools offered by this VO for the
analysis. In case of non-satisfactory results, she consults an
expert for guidance and performs an analytical activity with
changed data sets. In this scenario, the expert opinion is
used as a resource, while experts also utilize VO resources
for gaining knowledge [8]. In online social networks, the
same situation can be easily identiﬁed in group discussions.
A member asks a question and other members share their
experiences, which can provide potential solutions to the
problem, and vice versa. So the equation takes the shape as
shown below
RESOURCE/USER⇀
↽RESOURCE/USER
(3)
Even more according to our deﬁnition of Subject, the
equations above can be generalized to Equation 4.
SUBJECT⇐⇒SUBJECT
(4)
Here, the user is consuming the knowledge of an expert,
who acts both as user and resource. Subject is the notion
given to a user who itself can be used as resource. There are
two reasons for choosing this term. First, a Subject (user)
initiates an activity in the VO environment and secondly,
a Subject (resource) is under consideration to be useful
in a problem solving activity. Figure 2 shows the Subject,
resource and user relationship in different types of VOs.
III. SUBJECT AS A RESOURCE
The previous section established the human expertise as a
resource in a VO. Now we will present a template for a Sub-
ject class with its functions and relations to other user types
in a VO. User types are a must for a system, because it helps
135
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Figure 2.
Subject, Resource and User in different VOs
Figure 3.
User Roles and their dependencies
in many ways, e.g., by deﬁning trust, building a business
model / negotiation model, setting security, authorization at
different levels, managing the incoming and outgoing trafﬁc
(in dynamic environments), consumption and contribution
of resources, and many more. In VOs a user is given a
role according to a business model or negotiation pattern
for collaboration. Roles may vary as the target domain
changes. There are few characteristics and activities that can
be generalized. Figure 3 presents the classiﬁcation model of
a user in a VO environment. This model covers both formal
and informal types of VOs. A class diagram is created using
UML 2.0 to present the pattern.
A User is the superclass with attributes deﬁned in the
context such as
• Id: string (any combination used for authentication)
• Role: string (assigned role in the said VO)
• Status: string (active, passive)
A User class is further specialized into two broad cate-
gories of Contributor and Consumer.
• The Contributor class presents the instances of a user,
who contributes to the VO. The main method is con-
tribute(). This class is further divided into Developer
and Administrator, performing pure contribution and
no utilization. Here, the Subject is also a subclass of
Contributor. It realizes the role of a contributor while
it can also act as a consumer in a VO environment.
It inherits the attributes of the main User class and
provides contributing methods (functions). The type of
contribution can be added according to the role of the
user and the domain in which it is active.
– Administrator: Another potential subclass is Ad-
ministrator, who monitors the VO platform for
smooth use and in case detects and manages hard-
ware and/or software crashes. Again the Admin-
istrator class can be represented by a group of
paid experts, who are specialized in their respective
jobs assigned. Participating organizations can hire
such professionals to monitor the services they are
offering to the VO.
– The Developer class includes the professionals and
application developers from participating organiza-
tions. There can be professionals who contribute
open source software to the improvement of IT
support in speciﬁc domains. However, any person
can contribute knowledge in form of applications
in a speciﬁc domain, even if they are not member
of a participant organization.
• The Consumer class represents the class of users, who
just utilize the resources by performing pure consump-
tion only. This class has two subclasses called End
User and Subject. It contains a method consume(),
which shows that an instance of this class will be able
to consume the resources offered by the VO.
– The End User class represents a set of users who
only consume the resources provided by the VO.
– The Subject class represents the category of users
who utilize the resources and also contribute to
the VO environment. Currently two generalized
methods are associated with the Subject class
namely, contribute() and consume(). An instance
of the Subject class is capable both to utilize the
resources of the VO and to contribute to the VO at
the same time. Instances of the Subject class can
act as a Consumer or Contributor (as a resource),
who share partial characteristics of their superclass.
A business model can also be developed on the basis of
this categorization. Users belonging to the Subject class,
can be given a high priority. This priority can entitle them
to beneﬁts such as money, free memberships to different
participating organizations, utilizations of resources (test
beds access, and access to reference material, etc).
The Contributors can have the 2nd highest priority, be-
cause they are the paid members of the VO. They develop
tools for the maintenance of VO and monitor it. Such users
are employed by the system. A possible subcategory could
be developers contributing open source applications for the
improvement of IT environment. They can be given priorities
according to their contribution to the system, e.g., free
resource consumption.
136
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

IV. INFORMAL VO AND SUBJECT
The above described user classiﬁcation can be observed in
different domains. We presented the elaborated roles in VOs
for E-learning [4] and Computational Intelligence (CI) [5].
Both are examples of formal virtual organization. Ambient
intelligence is taking social networking to a new level of
awareness [9]. This awareness is propagated from relatively
constant contact with one’s friends and colleagues via social
networking platforms on the Internet. Informal VOs realize
the concept of ambient awareness. Social network fall in the
category of informal Virtual Organization. Informal VO are
characterized by absence of a speciﬁc goal,rather they are
user driven [3].
Online social networks are user driven, with no speciﬁc
goals. However, they can be joined to meet several goals
(e.g., making friends, playing games, joining research, reli-
gious, social, health, sports groups, to communicate with
distant relatives or friends, promote different causes, ad-
vertise, participate in discussion forums etc). Goals can be
anything supported by the platform. Here, it can be clearly
observed that every user is a resource of this informal
virtual organization. It exists only due to the relationship
between the users and improves with the feedback they
provide. Popular social networking websites are Facebook
[10], Myspace [11], Twitter [12], and Blogger [13], etc.
To justify the patterns developed in the previous section,
we choose Facebook as an example of an informal VO.
Facebook [10] is a popular online social network launched
in February 2004. It is selected as an example to identify
the roles and resource dependencies in informal VOs. The
activities performed by Users are
• Create a proﬁle, update and set privacy settings, delete
and add applications
• Add people as friends (send, reject and accept requests)
• Send and receive private and public message
• Notify of updating to friends
• Deﬁne status settings
• Chat with online friends
• Make lists depending upon privacy settings
• Add photos
• Add videos
• Create notes
• Join networks organized by workplace, school, or col-
lege
• Like fan pages
• Join and start groups, networks
• Send a virtual ”poke” to each other (a notiﬁcation in
turn tells a user that they have been poked)
• Send gifts
• Visit marketplace
• Play games
In social networks every need or goal is dependent on
another user. If a user wants friends, so this user is looking
for a resource (friend). She plays games, which are provided
by other users (in most cases). She joins a cause, which
is initiated by another user. In any of the above listed
actions a user needs other users and their expertise or shared
information to fulﬁll her needs.
On the other hand, information, expertise, material, pic-
tures, videos provided by her can act as a resource for other
users. She can initiate fan clubs, discussion groups and any
cause, to invite people and grow her community. A use case
was developed to understand the activities performed in this
informal VO, shown in Figure 4. The user roles and their
interaction with existing resources is detailed below.
• Subject : The role of a user as a resource is more
profound in an informal VO than in formal ones. This is
illustrated clearly in our current example of Facebook.
A user creates an id and is given right to perform
several activates, as listed above. Here the user is a
contributor and a consumer herself. For example, a
member uploads a video or photo or creates a note,
which is being watched by other users and vice versa.
Sending and receiving friend requests, messages (open
and private), initiating groups, causes and campaigns,
joining groups, reading and writing notes, sending and
receiving gifts, communicating with friends through
wall, and chat and status updates are the activities
performed as Subject.
A Subject also gains information from news feeds. An
interesting facet are business promotions, which play
the role of End user. Many products are introduced to
E-communities using social networks by their manufac-
turers. Facebook is also used by different manufacturers
to reach their customers. News channels, media, health,
education, research communities, etc., all use social
networks according to their requirements and goals.
• Developer : Members also play games, utilize appli-
cations developed and contributed by developers to the
platform.
• Administrator : Group of specialized person(s) main-
tains the platform for performance, backup and routine
maintenance.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented the concept of resources and users
in both formal VOs and informal VOs. A resource hierarchy
is deﬁned and the role of a user as a resource was observed
and discussed in different environments. The understanding
of user roles is necessary for building a trust model for VOs.
This approach was extended by a generic pattern for users
in VOs and was justiﬁed using online social networks (e.g.,
Facebook). The concepts are elaborated with examples to
understand when a user changes her role from a consumer to
a resource and starts contributing to the environment. Hence
the term Subject was justiﬁed.
137
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Online social networks provide resources to its members.
Every member contributes to the community silently. The
impression of a member as a consumer is fading by growing
needs of ”give and take” collaborations. This new concept of
Subject ﬁts well into the nature of online social communities.
It will help in the future research on VOs to understand the
concept of a Subject as a ﬁxpoint where users and resources
become the same. It will also set the bases of user roles in
designing a Reference Architecture for VO (RAVO) as our
future direction.
REFERENCES
[1] W. Khalil and E. Schikuta, “Towards a virtual organisation
for computational intelligence,” in Proceedings of the 2010
Fourth International Conference on Digital Society, ser. ICDS
’10.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2010,
pp. 144–149.
[2] L. Hluchy, O. Habala, V. Tran, B. Simo, J. Astalos, and
M. Dobrucky, “Infrastructure for grid-based virtual organi-
zations,” in Computational Science - ICCS 2004, ser. Lecture
Notes in Computer Science, M. Bubak, G. D. v. Albada,
P. M. A. Sloot, and J. J. Dongarra, Eds.
Springer Berlin
/ Heidelberg, 2004, vol. 3036, pp. 124–131.
[3] C. Kesselman, I. Foster, J. Cummings, K. A. Lawrence, and
T. Finholt, “Beyond being there: A blueprint for advancing the
design, development, and evaluation of virtual organizations,”
NSF Workshop, Tech. Rep., May 2008.
[4] K. Wajeeha, M. Juergen, and S. Erich, “Veloci: A virtual
e-learning organization for computational intelligence,” in
World Conference on Educational Multimedia, Hypermedia;
Telecommunications ED-MEDIA 2010, Toronto, Canada, 6
2010.
[5] K. Wajeeha, , juergen Mangler, and S. Erich, “Virtual or-
ganization for computational intelligence (voci):architecture
and realization,” in International Joint Conference on Neural
Networks 2010 (WCCI2010), Barcelona, Spain, 2 2010.
[6] U. Farooq and W. Khalil, “Grid as human’s assistant: A
logical solution provider for physical problems,” in CTS ’06:
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Collaborative
Technologies and Systems.
Washington, DC, USA: IEEE
Computer Society, 2006, pp. 312–317.
[7] [Retrieved: December 6, 2010]. [Online]. Available: http:
//portal.leadproject.org/gridsphere/gridsphere
[8] D. Gannon. (2008, January) Building virtual organizations
around super computing grids and clouds. Indiana University
and Tera Grid Infrastructure Group.
[9] E.
Aarts
and
R.
Wichert,
“Ambient
intelligence,”
in
Technology Guide, H.-J. Bullinger, Ed.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2009, pp. 244–249. [Online]. Available: http:
//dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-540-88546-7 47
[10] [Retrieved: December 6, 2010]. [Online]. Available: www.
facebook.com
[11] [Retrieved: December 6, 2010]. [Online]. Available: http:
//www.myspace.com/
[12] [Retrieved: December 6, 2010]. [Online]. Available: www.
twitter.com
[13] [Retrieved: December 6, 2010]. [Online]. Available: https:
//www.blogger.com/start
138
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

Figure 4.
Facebook: User Roles
139
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

