AI Philosophy: Sources of Legitimacy to Analyze Artificial Intelligence
Olga Gil
Instituto Complutense de Ciencias de la Administración
Departamento de Historia, Teorías y Geografía Políticas
Facultad de Ciencias Políticas y Sociología
Universidad Complutense de Madrid
Madrid
olgagil@ucm.es
.com
Abstract—The following pages aim to reflect upon how to
analyze
the
governance
of
artificial
intelligence
in
a
comparative perspective. In doing so, a dashboard is developed
for
the
analysis
and
for eventual comparisons between
democratic and non democratic regimes. The Gil dashboard of
legitimacy would allow us to assess key features that determine
the governance model for artificial intelligence at the national
level, for local governments and other participant actors. The
framework also allows us to appraise aims of the governance
strategy, and what aims are left aside. The work opens
windows to discuss 1) the complex reality of AI command and
control
2) uncertainties about future society and the polity
against AI development and 3) cultural values enshrined in
countries' AI development. The theoretical framework could
be of use to advance case studies globally, and comparative
endeavors.
Keywords-
Artificial
intelligence;
governance;
philosophy;
ethics; political theory
I.INTRODUCTION
This work aims to present a general framework to analyze
artificial intelligence (AI), and to discuss legitimacy and
governance from political theory as a stream of philosophy.
As such, the work addresses questions related to command
and control, that are at the base of political and social power
and of technical engineering in global societies. In section
two, the methodology is introduced. In the third section, the
theoretical framework follows. This theoretical framework
is based on the sources of legitimacy to analyze artificial
intelligence. Here we are bringing to the fore political
theory to address a contemporary problem. This part of the
work presents an eight dimensional view of sources of
legitimacy, based on the works by Max Weber and Craig
Mathesson [6][7]. In the fourth section, method as source of
change and legitimacy the Gil dashboard on legitimacy are
presented. The Dashboard has been developed in a wider
context that is not addressed in this short article. The wider
context aims to compare the AI regulatory framework of
China, the European Union and the United States [1]-[5],
which is the endeavor the author is currently devoted to in
the draft of a book. The selection of cases, the European
Union, the United States and China has been made by their
relevance for the development of AI globally today. The
case of China has been included because as a political
scientist
doing comparative politics, the fine line of
including most different cases is very important to know
better the most equal cases, such as the United States and
the European Union, both with democratic components.
Today we focus on the theoretical dashboard that has been
developed to make the comparisons. In the fifth and last
section
conclusions
are
presented,
followed
by
acknowledgments
II. METHODOLOGY
The methodology of the general work –the book that the
author is writing about artificial intelligence- includes a
discussion about the objective of the work, definitions from
different perspectives, and questions related to the social
basis of knowledge. Additionally, it includes the research
approach to the selection of articles reviewed for the work
tackled. Finally, the work includes a theoretical framework
allowing for a comparison of the three cases, and eventually,
a bigger number of cases. For the purpose of comparison of
the three main cases in the book of reference, the selection
of works started by a search in scopus with the terms
artificial intelligence AND China in 2020, 2021, 2022. This
brought about 776 works. The selection was further refined
under the social sciences category, with 170 documents
published matching the query. These works were reviewed
looking for governance and legitimacy as topics for retrieval
and further work, identifying 37 source articles. Once first
relevant works were identified, the reference list of these
works became a main source of materials, whether those
were included in the scopus database or not, as detailed
knowledge became crucial to build up the study. Google
scholar was also utilized, searching for the first 10 works on
artificial intelligence and social sciences, the 10 most cited
works, and the ten most recent ones. These works were
reviewed
searching
for
interesting
insights.
Proquest
database has also been consulted, with the query artificial
intelligence in the Financial Times newspaper. Specific
articles on the query were of value to identify authors with
new ideas on artificial intelligence nowadays and how AI
affects governance. As a result, these searches brought about
information
from
comparative
reports
with
general
information on the United States [1], the work on Europe
[2][3], and on China and China local AI ecosystems [4][5]
–which I focus on for the purpose of this brief paper.
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

This research and discussion have been pursued without the
aid of artificial intelligences or data bases in the process of
ideas. Research and discussion are the result of a human
mind. There is no use of any big data software, organic life
engineering, or cyborg aid. Thus, at this stage, the results of
the work are solely the responsibility of a human author´s
mind. At a future stage, it could be explored whether there
are interesting possibilities from non natural intelligences to
broaden the scope and findings of this research.
III. THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK OF AI PHILOSOPHY: THE
SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY TO ANALYZE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
The following work tries to unveil a complex reality, 1)
where there are new rules attached to command and control
and 2) to bring to light new ways of thinking. A framework
for analysis, the Gil dashboard for legitimacy is developed.
The dashboard allows for comparisons of most similar and
most different cases. The theoretical framework is in the
intersection between values and AI development, and allows
to
unveil
how AI is mediating problems related to
coordination and control, what uncertainties about the future
society and the polity different countries face against AI
development, and what could we say about different cultural
values.
We depart from the work on legitimacy from Max Weber
-for
whom
there
exist
three
types
of
domination,
charismatic, traditional and rational or legal [6]. This
framework was revised by Matheson [7] in 1987, nearly a
century after Weber started writing. Matheson qualifies and
opposes Max Weber theory on legitimacy. Later on, and
departing from Matheson, this work develops a theoretical
framework to allow for the comparison of AI legitimacy
bases in the European Union, the United States and China -
and could be valuable for the analysis of developing
countries, and countries in the global south.
Weber distinction among the three types of domination
differentiating
three types of domination, charismatic,
traditional and rational or legal is based on the legitimacy of
the power-holder. The work by Matheson nearly a century
later includes eight types of domination, including the
perspective of both
the power holders and the power
subjects. The main critique that Matheson introduces to
Weber's work is that democracy and its effects along the XX
century are not reflected in Max Weber typology. Matheson
reaches new layers of granularity for the study of the polity
and society with his revised proposal. From Matheson´s
critique of Weber I develop the following table: The table
explains visually the eighth types of domination. This would
be an eight dimensional view of sources of legitimacy.
TABLE I. THE EIGHT DIMENSIONAL VIEW OF SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY, BY OLGA
GIL
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Convention
Norms, rules: legal or customary rules that prescribe
forms of behavior
Contract
as
basis
of
legitimacy
Mutual rights and obligations. The theory of consent as
the basis of obligations
Basis
of
legitimacy in
a conformity
with
universal
principles:
natural law
Theories of natural law, aka, the existence of a natural
order superior to man-made law
Sacredness of
authority
Power-holder or his/her norms considered to be sacred
divine right of reigns. For Max Weber it could also be
an attribute of an office rather than a person
Legitimacion
by expertise
Technical
expertise,
in
the
vein
defended
by
Saint-Simon, Taylorian theories, or historic laws
A
popular
mandate in a
constitutional
democracy
Popular mandate: a claim to democratic election in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Based on
constitutionalism, power holders elected in accordance
with
constitutional
procedures.
Here
we
find
a
distinction between polulist democracies, where the
will
of
a
majority
rules,
and
constitutional
democracies, were there will of the majority is limited
by a constitution
Personal
relation
Domination in which there are close ties between
power-holders and power-subjects such as personal
authority or paternal authority relationships
Personal
quality of the
power holder
Domination based on the personal quality of the power
holder, by virtue of which he/she can claim a right of
command
Having AI in mind and looking at this framework for the
analysis of the cases selected, observations about new
sources of legitimacy out of the scope of the table above can
be drawn. A first one would be coercion as an instrument
for legitimacy. A second source of legitimacy would be AI
development outside the umbrella of the state, based in
ethics codes. For instance, an applied comparison of
national AI strategies in nine countries, including China and
the United States finds that national AI strategies have an
approach towards AI governance that entails cooperation
among the public sector, industry and academia and is based
on ethics [8]. For this purpose cooperation is achieved with
voluntary mechanisms including best practices, codes of
conduct, and guidelines.
IV. METHOD AS A SOURCE OF CHANGE AND LEGITIMACY
A third source of legitimacy would be linked to method.
Matheson's approach to sources of legitimacy reviews Max
Weber work making important contributions. However, the
search of improved democracies through method as a source
of legitimacy -a type of legitimacy based in experimenting
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

with method and in an active process, not only based in a
popular mandate, to reach better results- is not included in
Matheson analysis. Method is the base to reach new
knowledge following the scientific revolution in Europe.
Method, in contrast, has not been explored as a feature to
improve democratic governments. The result is that there
has not been an appraisal of method as a way to reach better
results in democratic regimes. An example of the dangers
and limitations of not including method as a source of
improved legitimacy is the work comparing national AI
strategies in nine countries, including China and the United
States [8], stressing the lack of concrete mechanisms for
inclusion of civic society and public engagement in AI
control. Moreover, at the core of a general approach to use
ethic guidelines as an efficient measure to prevent or reduce
harm caused by AI the general argument is for its higher
flexibility, as opposed to hard regulations that could
represent an obstacle to economic and technical innovation
[8] [9], or other means of legitimacy.
These new sources of legitimacy will be incorporated in the
previous table in order to develop a new table, the Gil
Dashboard, allowing us to analyze artificial intelligence
from a comparative perspective. The sources of legitimacy
are incorporated close to the category that is more akin to
the concept, if any. Additions are included in bold text.
TABLE II. THE GIL DASHBOARD: THIRTEEN SOURCES OF LEGITIMACY TO
ANALYZE AI
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Convention
Norms, rules: legal or customary rules that
prescribe forms of behavior
Contract as basis
of legitimacy
Mutual rights and obligations. The theory of
consent as the basis of obligations
Basis of
legitimacy in a
conformity with
universal
principles:
natural law
Theories of natural law, aka, the existence of a
natural order superior to man-made law
Sacredness of
authority
Power-holder or his/her norms considered to be
sacred divine right of reigns. For Max Weber it
could also be an attribute of an office rather than a
person
Legitimation by
human expertise
Technical expertise, in the vein defended by
Saint-Simon, Taylorian theories, or historic laws
Legitimation
based on an
algorithm
Legitimation based on macrodata –hindering
the idea of individual liberty
A popular
mandate in a
constitutional
democracy
Popular mandate: a claim to democratic election in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Based
on constitutionalism, power holders elected in
accordance with constitutional procedures. Here
we find a distinction between populist
democracies, where the will of a majority rules,
and constitutional democracies, were there will of
the majority is limited by a constitution
Improved
democracies
through method
A type of legitimacy based not only in a popular
mandate but experimenting with method and in
a continuous process in order to reach better
results, including accountability
Dimension
Definition of the dimension
Regimes -non
democracies-
developed
through method
A type of legitimacy based on experimenting
with method and a continuous process to justify
objectives and reached results
Personal relation
Domination in which there are close ties between
power-holders and power-subjects such as personal
authority or paternal authority relationships
Personal
quality
of
the
power
holder
Domination based on the personal quality of the
power holder, by virtue of which he/she can claim
a right of command
Coercion
The use of power to influence someone to do
something they do not want to do, from exerting
fear to nudging as positive reinforcement
Societal
cooperation,
excluding the
polity
Development of mechanisms of cooperation
among the public sector, industry and
academia: cooperation is achieved with
voluntary mechanisms including best practices,
ethical codes of conduct, and guidelines
V. CONCLUSIONS
This work allows us to unveil a complex reality from the
perspective of philosophy, political theory and sociology,
where AI brings new rules attached to command and control
to governance in general. The Gil dashboard proposed
shows how AI is mediating problems related to coordination
and control in governance. This theoretical dashboard could
be also useful to apply in a comparative perspective, in
countries in Asia, western countries and countries in the
global south. The dashboard brings to light new ways of
thinking in methodological terms [10]. It also allows to
address and reflect upon the following changes of present
societies:
a)
What uncertainties about the future society and the
polity countries face against AI development?
b)
What can it be said about cultural values?
c)
What may we find in the intersection between
values and AI development?
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The author wants to acknowledge the comments of five
anonymous reviewers, which helped to improve the final
manuscript when the paper was accepted for presentation at
IARIA
Annual
Congress
on
Frontiers
in
Science,
Technology, Services, and Applications, Venice, Italy April
24 - 28. The author also wants to acknowledge the
inspiration of Prof. Joaquín Abellán, teaching together at the
Master on Political Theory and Democratic Culture at UCM
in the 2000-2022 editions, and to Prof. Carmelo Moreno´s
comments at the 2022 AECPA Congress in Girona (Spain).
REFERENCES
[1] World Bank Group. Harnessing artificial intelligence for
development in the post-covid-19 era. A Review of National AI
Strategies and Policies. May 2021.
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

[2 ] Eichler, William. “‘Shockingly small’ number of councils
embrace
automation”.
LocalGov.
10
May
2019.
https://www.localgov.co.uk/Shockingly-small-number-of-councils-
embrace-automation-study-reveals/47387, retrieved october 20th,
2022.
[3] Justo-Hanani, Ronit. The politics of Artificial Intelligence
regulation and governance reform in the European Union. Policy
Sciences, 2022, vol. 55, no 1, p. 137-159.
[4] Ding, Jeffrey. Promoting nationally, acting locally: China´s
next generation AI approach. In NESTA. The AI Powered State.
China´s Approach to public innovation. 2020. P. 11-17.
[5] Ding, Jeffrey. Deciphering China’s AI Dream: The Context,
Components, Capabilities, and Consequences of China’s Strategy
to Lead the World in AI. Future of Humanity Institute, Oxford
University. 2018.
[6] Abellán, Joaquín. El político y el científico: Weber. Madrid,
Alianza Editorial. 2021.
[7] Matheson, Craig. Weber and the Classification of Forms of
Legitimacy. British Journal of Sociology, 1987, p. 199-215.
[8] Gianni, Robert; Lehtinen, Santtu; Nieminen, Mika. Governance
of responsible ai: from ethical guidelines to cooperative policies.
Frontiers in Computer Science, 2022, vol. 4.
[9] Gianni, Letizia. Democratic Accountability in Stressful Times:
When Decisions Must Be Made Quickly. Penn State Journal of
Law & International Affairs, 2023, vol. 11, no 1, p. 1.
[10] Moreno, Carmelo. “Los fundamentos de la política. La noción
de política, las teorías sobre el concepto de poder y el dilema de
legalidad
vs.
legitimidad
política.”
Análisis
de
la política.
Enfoques y herramientas de la Ciencia Política, Mikel Barreda.
2016.
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

