Strategic Management, Public Value and Co-Creation in the Renewal of Public 
Agencies across Europe  
Keith Shaw 
Department of Social Science 
Northumbria University 
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom 
e-mail: keith.shaw@northumbria.ac.uk 
Andreja Pegan 
Department of Social Sciences  
Northumbria University 
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom 
e-mail: andreja.pegan@northumbria.ac.uk
 
 
Abstract—This is document present the work programme and 
results from the Horizon 2020 COGOV project.  Here we 
introduce the key research questions of the project on the role 
of strategic management in co-creation. We then provide an 
overview the main findings arising from the project and 
provide a set of recommendations.  
Keywords: Co-creation, Strategic Management, Public Value 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
COGOV 
project 
aims 
to 
understand 
the 
transformation of European public administrations following 
post-managerial trends. These trends advocate for a move 
from bureaucratic organisations and de-emphasise efficiency 
and effectives to include a broader set of public value such as 
public legitimacy. The project’s focus is on co-creation and 
the role of strategic management in implementing co-
creation. This extended abstract present and defines the main 
concepts and results.  
II. 
CO-CREATION 
We define co-creation as the process through which two 
or more public and private actors attempt to solve a shared 
problem, challenge, or task through a constructive exchange 
of different kinds of knowledge, resources, competences, and 
ideas that enhance the production of public value in terms of 
visions, plans, policies, strategies, regulatory frameworks, or 
services [1]. This can either be through a continuous 
improvement of outputs or outcomes or through innovative 
step-changes that transform the understanding of the problem 
and leads to new ways of solving it. Co-creation is on the 
public sector agenda for three reasons [2]:  
• 
The public sector is caught in a cross-pressure 
between growing expectations and scarce public 
resources;  
• 
The public sector has a limited reach and needs to 
involve societal actors to solved wicked problems;  
• 
The public sector produce its own distinct public 
value that many different actors can help produce. 
While increasingly popular in contemporary public 
policy discourses, research shows that  co-creation has not 
yet fully achieved its transformative impact. In this sense, 
co-creation is still in its infancy and needs to  mature to 
achieve real impact.  
III. 
RESEARCH PROBLEM  
The COGOV project responds to the problem of how 
strategic management can best enable managers and 
professionals in the public sector to exploit the drivers - and 
overcome the barriers - to the co-creation of innovative 
public value outcomes at both organizational and project 
levels, and which lessons can be shared on undertaking 
strategically managed co-creation. A strategic management 
approach means that  planning is linked with implementation 
on an ongoing basis [5]. Because of its long-term and 
organisation-wide approaches, strategic management support 
major organizational transitions towards co-creation.  
IV. 
METHODS 
COGOV’s intent is to produce evidence to answer this 
policy problem by:  
• 
Administering a survey across 6 national sites;  
• 
Establishing an archive of innovative practices, 
based on 205 interviews in 15 case studies [6];  
• 
Examining the co-creation of territorial cultural 
strategies in the UK and France; 
• 
Implementing a design-experimental approach 
to co-creation in 5 countries to produce a 'CO-
CREATOR' board game to aid policy learning;  
• 
Identifying relevant skills for professionals 
engaged co-creation through focus groups;  
• 
Developing an e-toolkit for managers to aid the 
development of co-creation.  
V. 
FINDINGS 
Our findings indicate that co-creation has several benefits 
as well as pitfalls, which nonetheless strategic management 
can help overcome.  
A. Co-creation Balance Sheet  
Co-creation has many advantages as it:  
• 
Mobilizes experiences and resources of relevant and 
affected actors that enhance service quality;  
• 
Strengthens social cohesion by bringing together 
diverse groups of citizens;  
• 
Stimulates 
innovation 
and 
builds 
common 
ownership for new solutions;  
• 
Enhances citizens’ democratic influence at the 
output side of the political system. 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

When public authorities decide to implement co-creation, 
they should consider the following pitfalls: 
• 
The co-destruction of value due to negligence, 
incompetence or the abuse of power;  
• 
Arena capture, allowing access to powerful 
groups at the expense of marginalized groups;  
• 
The stigmatization of citizens;  
• 
Suppression of disagreement in the public 
pursuit of consensus and quick wins; 
• 
Increasing public costs of facilitation and add-
on services. 
B. Emerging Lessons on Co-creation  
Several lessons on co-creation have emerged:  
• 
Irrespective of administrative traditions, co-
creation is widely implemented across countries. 
• 
The use of co-creation to explore new issues and 
unmet needs is increasingly more likely than to 
improve already existing services ('co-production'). 
• 
Public Value (with an emphasis on stakeholder 
engagement and improved service performance and 
satisfaction) 
as 
opposed 
to 
resources 
and 
capacity, is increasingly important in shaping the 
response of managers. 
• 
Culture shift - managers/professionals need to learn 
to invite and accept (experiential) knowledge of 
clients and others - a challenging task, whereas 
clients and citizens are by definition seen as 
‘objects of care’ rather than equal partners. 
C. Emerging Lessons on Strategic Management  
Our analysis of strategic management efforts indicates that 
successful co-creation is based upon the following elements:  
• 
Values: A central part of the organizational vision  
• 
Leadership: Embraced by leading managers, but 
infrequently by elected politicians  
• 
Platforms: Underpinned by digital platforms but 
physical platforms are vital for building trust, 
spurring mutual learning and crafting new solutions 
• 
Roles and Perceptions: Supported by a tentative 
and yet incomplete movement from traditional 
command and control leadership and management 
to a more facilitative forms of leadership and 
management that aims to empower employees and 
citizens to co-creation innovative public value 
outcomes.  
VI. 
RECOMMENDATIONS FOR MANAGERS  
Based on the findings, COGOV’s  recommendation are: 
• 
Managers, politicians, and professionals should be 
aware that a hybrid/mixed approach to strategy 
may be beneficial when attempting co-creative or 
co-productive projects or services  
• 
Greater attention needs to be paid to understanding 
the processes involved with co-creation and co-
production outside of simple impact evaluations; 
• 
Managers should set aside time and resources for 
training professionals in how to co-create;  
• 
Politicians, professionals, and managers should be 
aware of the necessity of funding when beginning a 
co-creative project or service  
• 
Ensure consistency and long-term planning. 
Despite experimentation, co-creation has suffered 
from the fragmentation caused by one-off and 
temporary initiatives.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the past, public and private organizations have focused 
on using their own money and employees to create results. 
In the future, platforms and arenas could be created that: 
enable relevant and affected actors to co-create public value; 
support these co-creation processes with new digital tools, 
institutional designs and forms of leadership; while 
government funding could be made conditional on adopting 
co-creation in key service areas.  
In general, future research on co-creation should 
emphasize extensive and sustained empirical work 
including: longitudinally orientated case study work to track 
how traditional public agencies move to different co-
creation approaches and large-scale quantitative research 
allowing for international benchmarking. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This project has received funding from the European 
Union’s Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme 
under grant agreement No 770591.  
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Torfing, J., Sørensen, E., & Røiseland, A. (2019). 
Transforming the public sector into an arena for co-creation. 
Administration & Society, 51(5).  
[2] Sørensen, E. & Torfing, J. (2015) Enhancing Public 
Innovation through Collaboration, Leadership and New 
Public Governance. In A. Nicholas, J. Simon & M. Gabriel 
(Eds.) New Frontiers in Social Innovation Research. 
Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, pp. 145-169.  
[3] Ferlie, E. & Ongaro, E. (2015). Strategic Management in 
Public Services Organizations. Abingdon: Routledge 
[4] Joyce, P. (2015). Strategic Management in the Public Sector. 
Abindgon: Routledge.  
[5] Bryson, J. M. (2011). Strategic Planning for Public and 
Nonprofit Organizations. Hoboken: John Wiley & Sons. 
[6] Regal, B. & Ferlie, E. (2020). Patterns of strategic renewals. 
Available at: http://cogov.eu/wp-content/uploads/2020/10/D2-
3.pdf (14/7/2020) 
 
 
 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

