Using Stylometric Features to Predict Author Personality Type 
in Modern Greek Essays 
 
Gagiatsou Sofia 
Department of Linguistics, School of Philosophy 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens  
Athens, Greece  
e-mail: sgagiats@phil.uoa.gr 
Markopoulos Georgios 
Department of Linguistics, School of Philosophy 
National and Kapodistrian University of Athens  
Athens, Greece  
e-mail: gmarkop@phil.uoa.gr 
Mikros George 
College of Humanities and Social Sciences 
Hamad Bin Khalifa University 
Doha, Qatar 
e-mail: gmikros@hbku.edu.qa
 
Abstract—We present a research focused on the prediction of 
the author's personality based on natural language processing 
techniques applied to essays written in Modern Greek by high-
school students. Each writer has been profiled by filling in the 
Jung Typology Test. In addition, personality prediction is 
being discussed under the general research framework of 
author profiling by examining the effectiveness of several 
stylometric features to predict students’ personality types. The 
feature set we employed was a combination of the word and 
sentence length, the most frequent part-of-speech tags, most 
frequent character/word bigrams and trigrams, most frequent 
words, as well as hapax/dis legomena. Since personality 
prediction represents a complex multidimensional research 
problem, we applied various machine learning algorithms to 
optimize our model’s performance after extracting the 
stylometric features. We compared nine machine learning 
algorithms and ranked them according to their cross-validated 
accuracy. The best results were obtained by the Naive Bayes 
algorithm. According to the personality classification based on 
the Jung Typology Test, the author’s personality prediction 
accuracy reached 80.7% on Extraversion, 79.9% on Intuition, 
68.8% on Feeling, 75.7% on Judging, according to the 
personality classification. The reported results show a 
competitive approach to the personality prediction problem. 
Furthermore, our research revealed new combinations of 
stylometric 
features 
and 
corresponding 
computational 
techniques, giving interesting and satisfying solutions to the 
problem of the author’s personality prediction for Modern 
Greek.  
Keywords-Author 
profiling; 
stylometry; 
Personality 
prediction; 
Jung 
Typology 
Test; 
corpus 
processing; 
computational stylistics; machine learning.  
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Authorship identification represents one of the emerging 
text mining fields that stands at the intersection of Machine 
Learning, Information Retrieval, and Natural Language 
Processing. Under the stylometric framework, the author's 
identity is a multidimensional construct based mainly on 
writing patterns scattered across multiple linguistic levels 
and expressed quantitatively. The specific research domain 
splits into three subdomains: attributing a text to a particular 
author among a finite set of authors (Authorship Attribution), 
attributing a text to an author that does not belong to a closed 
set (Authorship Verification), and specifying the author’s 
metadata such as demographic and psychological traits of the 
author (Authorship Profiling), including gender, age, 
personality, etc. 
Language as a communication mechanism denotes the 
diversity of every individual. Therefore, the quantitative 
study of linguistic features can lead to predictions regarding 
the individual's character. The subject of Computational 
Personality Prediction (CPP) through natural language 
processing techniques constitutes a relatively new research 
field with many applications.  
One critical application domain of this field is Forensic 
Linguistics. Criminals can be identified by the way they 
write. Moreover, conclusions can be drawn regarding their 
personalities and the way they are thinking. The example of 
identifying students' personality that carry guns and 
participate in school shootings is typical [1]. CPP can 
highlight their psychological traits, which afterward can be 
exploited in the successful identification of potential 
perpetrators.  
Apart from the obvious contribution that provides in 
Behavioural Psychology by connecting personality traits to 
human behaviour, CPP can function in many other fields as 
well. For instance, in the marketing domain, personality 
analysis of users/consumers is utilized by companies to 
adopt effective recruitment techniques and customer service 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

techniques. Even in the field of human resources 
management, predicting the personality can affect or 
facilitate the selection and determine the eligibility of 
candidates for a particular job. Moreover, based on the user’s 
personality, dialogic systems can be customized and brought 
closer to users’ temperament making interaction more 
effective and satisfying. 
Another 
vital 
analysis 
domain 
where 
automatic 
personality prediction is used is education. For example, by 
analyzing students’ writings, talented students or students 
with difficulties could be recognized and thus receive 
adaptive teaching, addressing the appropriate cognitive level 
for each one or each group.  
One of the most crucial issues in CPP research is 
developing appropriate linguistic resources enriched with the 
author’s personality metadata. Unfortunately, these resources 
are challenging to create due to the increased level of manual 
interaction with the authors and the various privacy and 
ethical 
considerations 
linked 
with 
administering 
psychometric questionnaires to many individuals. 
 Another issue is that most Natural Language Processing 
(NLP) tools specialized in psychometric text profiling 
support only English. Therefore, research in other languages 
should be done by developing specialized dictionaries and 
other supporting linguistics resources from scratch (see, for 
example, the case of Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count-
LIWC [2]).  
To cover the above-mentioned research gaps, we 
performed the first CPP study in Modern Greek focused on 
high-school students. For this reason, we developed a model 
for predicting the personality of students based on Jung’s 
taxonomy by analyzing their term-essays and applying 
various machine learning methods to rich document 
representation based on several stylometric features.  
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section 
II we provide an overview of previous work on personality 
prediction. Section III describes our researching methods. In 
Section IV we present the research results. We summarize 
our findings and discuss future work in Section V. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW  
In this section we present the personality questionnaire 
used to profile the writers. Then, we review the findings of 
studies in the field of CPP from text.  
A. Carl Jung’s and Isabel Briggs Myers’ Personality Type 
Questionnaire 
Research in the field of personality prediction uses the 
Five-factor Model of Personality [3] or the Carl Jung’s and 
Isabel Briggs Myers’ personality type theory [4][5] to 
profile the participating authors. Therefore, the literature 
review presented in this section is referred to associated 
research, which involves the Jung Typology Test since our 
students have been profiled with the above-mentioned 
personality questionnaire.  
According to Jung's theory of psychological types [4] 
people can be characterized by 
• 
their preference of general attitude as Extraverted 
(E) or Introverted (I) 
• 
their preference of one of the two functions of 
perception as Sensing (S) or Intuitive (N) 
• 
their preference of one of the two functions of 
judging as Thinking (T) or Feeling (F)  
• 
their orientation to the outer world as Judging (J) or 
Perceiving (P).  
The Jung Typology Test classifies psychological 
differences of personality in four dichotomies which yield 
16 different combinations or personality types. Each 
personality type can be assigned a 4-letter acronym of the 
corresponding combination of preferences: ESTJ, ISTJ, 
ENTJ, INTJ, ESTP, ISTP, ENTP, INTP, ESFJ, ISFJ, ENFJ, 
INFJ, ESFP, ISFP, ENFP, INFP.   
B. Personality Research from Text 
One of the first studies related to the author's personality 
prediction problem [6] defined the research problem as a 
text categorization task. They developed a corpus consisted 
of essays written in Dutch by 145 students (BA level). By 
selecting syntactic features and by training machine learning 
algorithms, the experiments in personality prediction 
suggested that the personality dimensions Introverted-
Extraverted and iNtuitive-Sensing) can be predicted fairly 
accurately.   
CPP studies have also expanded to social media texts 
with an emphasis on Twitter. A study for predicting Twitter 
users’ personality type [7] showed that the classifier's 
performance on training data was quite good. Still, the 
classifier failed to achieve satisfying results for the test data. 
Another study [8] describes a logistic regression classifier's 
training process to predict each of the four dimensions of 
Jung Typology. Their results showed that linguistic features 
are the most predictive features. Although they succeeded in 
distinguishing 
between 
the 
personality 
dimensions 
Introverted-Extraverted and Feeling-Thinking, the other two 
dimensions were hard to predict.  
In a study of a multilingual corpus of tweets [9], based on 
six languages (Dutch, German, French, Italian, Portuguese, 
and Spanish), the researchers extracted the most frequent 
word and character n-grams. Their results confirmed the 
findings of the previous work in that particular personality 
distinctions could be predicted from social media data with 
success. In another study focused on tweets [10], the 
researchers used a Naive Bayes classifier achieving 80% 
accuracy for Introverted-Extraverted and 60% for the other 
dimensions.  
CPP has also being applied to languages with a different 
graphemic organization compared to Western languages. 
For example, in [11], researchers investigate the personality 
prediction of Twitter users in Japanese and conclude that the 
textual information of user behaviors is more useful than the 
users’ cooccurrence behavior information such as the likes. 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

In this study, the problem of author personality prediction 
was treated as a set of binary classification tasks using 
Support Vector Machines.  
III. 
CORPUS 
To test our research hypothesis, that is, whether it is 
possible to detect personality traits of the authors of written 
Modern Greek texts, it is necessary to have a corpus of 
Modern Greek texts and at the same time to connect each 
author of these texts to a psychological profile. Due to the 
lack of such material, the first step was to collect primary 
textual data from native speakers of Modern Greek. In 
particular, the corpus that we developed consists of essays 
of 198 high school students and comprises 250.000 words in 
total. It is balanced both in size (number of words per 
student) and in students’ demographics (gender and age).   
The participating students of three different high schools 
were asked to write three essays to achieve our goal, which 
was to collect at least 1,000 words from each student. The 
task was voluntary, lasted three school years, and the 
writing was held in the classroom. The experiment was 
repeated three times at different periods. The authors had to 
write spontaneously and continuously for 60 minutes an 
essay. The topics, which were not given in advance, were 
related to the benefit of art, the role of school in raising 
environmental awareness, and fighting against child labor. 
Finally, since the provided texts were handwritten, we had 
to digitize them by manually typing all of them.  
IV. 
METHODOLOGY  
The following section describes the approach used to 
predict personality types of students.  
A. Approach 
In the literature, two approaches stand out for an 
automatic author's personality prediction. In a bottom-up 
approach, personality labels are predicted from linguistic 
features that are being extracted from the corpora used using 
standard NLP document representations (e.g., Bag-of-Words 
- BoW models, etc.) [12]-[14]. In a top-down approach, 
instead, specialized dictionaries with custom entries are used 
to check the potential correlation with personality traits [15]-
[17]. Both approaches have advantages, as well as 
restrictions. Therefore, modern techniques are oriented 
towards hybrid methods that combine the use of a dictionary 
with extended document representations trained on machine 
learning algorithms to exploit the best from both approaches, 
i.e., speed and precision, respectively. In this study, we 
followed the bottom-up approach, which among other 
benefits explained above, is also language-independent. 
B. Feature extraction 
The features used in our research can be considered as 
part of a broader feature set that has been characterized as 
stylometric, i.e., models quantitatively the text’s style. The 
linguistic features that have been used previously as 
stylometric 
indices 
are 
numerous. 
They 
increase 
continuously and belong to the whole range of linguistic 
levels. Stylometric features are compact, information-rich 
signaling linguistic devices. They are correlated with many 
different textual functions and carry multilevel information 
related to both the author’s identity and his/her metadata.  In 
CPP, stylometric features can unchain the hidden link 
between linguistic production and its correlation with 
specific personality types. This is because our personality 
traits are defining and be defined by our socio-cognitive and 
psychological conditions. In that sense, aspects of our 
linguistic behavior reflect these personality traits indirectly 
and amplify them using identity perceptions. 
We processed the corpus with natural language 
processing tools during the pre-processing phase, i.e., 
tokenizer, lemmatizer, and POS tagger. The output of the 
preprocessing phase (matrix of stylometric features) was 
submitted to the data mining platform Rapidminer [18]. The 
text preprocessing pipeline was initially applied to the 
original texts of the students. However, we observed that 
various language errors scattered across all linguistic levels 
inserted significant bias in the modeling process and 
negatively affected the prediction results. Therefore, the 
essays were corrected manually without loss of information 
on the morphosyntactic level.  
We designed and ran multiple experiments in order to 
extract and quantify many different subsets of stylometric 
features from the corpus. We extracted the most frequent 
character bigrams and trigrams, words bigrams, and 
trigrams,  mean word and sentence length, the occurrence 
frequency of content and functional words, the most and less 
frequent words, the occurrence frequency of parts of speech, 
as well as hapax and dis legomena. These features have been 
proven effective in the field of authorship attribution [19] 
and gender identification [20], and we tested them for author 
personality prediction as well.   
C. Classification Algorithms  
In this project, the problem of predicting the personality 
type was treated as a binary classification task among the 
four dimensions of personality, Extraversion-Introversion, 
Sensing-iNtuition, 
Thinking-Feeling 
and 
Judging-
Perceiving. To have a valid prediction, the extracted 
stylometric features matched the texts whose authors clearly 
belonged to a positive or negative category. 
Since 
personality 
detection 
presents 
a 
complex 
classification task, we decided to use several different 
machine learning algorithms to find the best approach in 
terms of model performance. We compared nine machine 
learning methods, i.e., Naive Bayes, Generalized Linear 
Model, Logistic Regression, Fast Large Margin, Deep 
Learning, Decision Trees, Random Forest, Gradient Boosted 
Trees, Support Vector Machines and we ranked them 
according to their cross-validated accuracy (10-fold). We 
evaluated the machine learning algorithms in terms of their 
predictive ability using as training data the students' essays. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Their personality type had been defined before using the 
appropriate psychometric questionnaire.  
V. 
RESULTS  
In this section, we present the results of the procedure 
that we followed to automatically classify the students’ 
essays based on the personality type defined by the 
personality questionnaire they filled in. From the nine 
algorithms that were trained in the textual data, we present 
the evaluation metrics of the most effective algorithm 
(Table I) along with the corresponding weights that 
positively affected the prediction of the personality type.  
Regarding the prediction of all personality types of 
Jung’s typology, the algorithm with the best results was 
Naive Bayes. The accuracy rate revealed a range from 
68.8% to 80.7%, with an average of 76.5%. Extraversion 
type was predicted with 80.7%, the Intuition type with 
79.9%, the Feeling with 68.8%, and the Judging type with 
75.7% [21]. A more detailed list of evaluation metrics 
(accuracy, precision, and recall) is reported in Table I. 
TABLE I.  
NAIVE BAYES MODEL PERFORMANCE 
 
The remaining algorithms that were trained in the corpus 
produced the following results in terms of classification 
accuracy: Regarding the Extraversion type, the Generalized 
Linear Model, Logistic Regression, Fast Large Margin, 
Deep Learning, Decision Trees, Random Forest and 
Gradient Boosted Trees algorithms have the same 
percentage of accuracy being 80.0% and the Support Vector 
Machine algorithm has 79.0%. The Intuition type was 
predicted with 75.0% by Gradient Boosted Trees algorithm, 
with 71.9% by Deep Learning and with 71.7% by  
Generalized Linear Model and Logistic Regression. For the 
Feeling type, the Decision Tree algorithm exhibits the 
second best performance with 63.2%, Random Forest being 
in third position with 63.1% and the next best result was 
63% using Gradient Boosted Trees. The algorithms with the 
best performance for the Judging type were Support Vector 
Machine, Fast Large Margin and Deep Learning with 
calculated accuracies of 71.1%, 71.0% and 70.3%  
respectively.  
The study aimed to classify the essays of the students in 
personality types by using stylometric indices. Therefore, 
we had to check whether and which of these features are the 
most useful and contribute to the prediction accuracy of the 
algorithm. For this reason, we extracted the weights from 
the Naive Bayes model that measure the importance of each 
stylometric feature to the classification decisions of the 
algorithm for each personality type separately.  
For Extraversion (Figure 1), the use of verb types in 
active voice had a significant impact. In addition, the mean 
length of the sentence in words of all sentences, the words 
that occur only twice in one text, the most frequent content 
words, and finally the personal pronouns complete the list 
with the five most important stylometric features. 
 Figure 2 depicts the prediction ability of the stylometric 
features for Intuition used by the algorithm. The word's mean 
length in characters had the most significant impact. The 
features that follow are the most frequent trigrams of 
characters, the hapax legomena, the personal pronouns, the 
content words, the most frequent word bigrams, the rarest 
words, the most frequent word trigrams, and all content 
words.  
The stylometric features that affected the result of the 
classification of the essays in terms of Feeling are the verbs, 
the adjectives, the most frequent content words, the personal 
and the possessive pronouns, the nouns, and the adverbs 
(Figure 3).  
 Finally, in Figure 4, the eight stylometric features that 
contributed to the prediction of the Judging type were in 
descending order: The most common word trigrams, the 
most common word bigrams, the mean length of the 
sentence in words, the most common character bigrams and 
the most common character trigrams with the same 
percentage, the personal and possessive pronouns, the 
articles, and the mean length of the word in characters. 
Personality 
Type 
Naive Bayes Classifier 
Accuracy 
Precision 
Recall 
Extraversion 
80.7% 
80.5% 
100% 
Intuition 
79.9% 
81.3% 
92.6% 
Feeling 
68.8% 
67.7% 
96.7% 
Judging 
75.7% 
76.2% 
95.2% 
Figure 2.    Weights for Intuition. 
Figure 1.    Weights for Extraversion. 
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
The most important features extracted from the model 
vary considerably for each personality type. Therefore, we 
can infer that each type is based on different combination of 
linguistic features and these subsets are different between the 
different personality types.  
It also becomes clear that the predictive accuracy of the 
proposed classification model is high compared to the 
existing literature on the field of personality prediction. 
Regarding Jung’s Typology Test, we got an average 
accuracy of 76.5%, compared to the 68.62% reported for 
Dutch 
[6]. 
The 
other 
studies 
mentioned 
[7]-[11] 
implemented machine learning techniques in textual data that 
were retrieved from social media. Therefore, their results 
involve research with textual data from adults written under 
different circumstances and in a different language. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
To summarize, in this paper, we presented the results of 
our research in the field of personality prediction. We 
applied CPP for the first time in texts written by high-school 
students, making our dataset unique. Our results confirmed 
our initial research hypothesis that stylometric features 
could be used as reliable prediction indices for the author’s 
psychological profile. Our findings further support the latent 
link of personality traits with a wide array of linguistic 
behaviour aspects. Different personality types correlate with 
different stylometric features that belong to different 
linguistic levels. Therefore, the personality prediction 
through text demands a highly dynamic feature set to 
capture the widest possible spectrum of linguistic structures.  
To 
this 
direction, 
future 
research 
will 
employ 
experimentation with more linguistic features. Furthermore, 
we plan to localize in Modern Greek well-known 
psychometric lexicons (e.g., LIWC) and use them 
complementing our feature sets.  
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Y. Neuman, D. Assaf, Y. Cohen, and L. J. Knoll, “Profiling 
school shooters: Automatic text-based analysis,” Front. 
Psychiatry, vol.6, p.86, 2015.                 
[2]  J.W. Pennebaker, R.L. Boyd, K. Jordan, and K. Blackburn, 
“The 
Development 
and 
Psychometric 
Properties 
of 
LIWC2015”. Austin, TX: University of Texas at Austin. 
(www.LIWC.net), 2015. [retrieved: June, 2021] 
[3] Jr. P. T. Costa and R. R. McCrae, “NEO-PI-R: Professional 
Manual,” Odessa, Fla.: Psychological Assessment Resources, 
1993.  
[4] C. G. Jung, “Psychological Types,” Princeton, New Jersey: 
Princeton University Press, 1971. 
[5] I. Briggs Myers and P. B. Myers, “Gifts Differing: 
Understanding Personality Type,” Mountain View, CA: 
Davies-Black Publishing, 1980.  
[6] K. Luyckx and W. Daelemans, “Personae: A corpus for 
Author and Personality Prediction from Text” The Sixth 
International Language Resources and Evaluation Conference 
(LREC 2008), 28-30 May 2008, pp. 2981-2987. 
[7] D. Brinks and H. White, “Detection of Myers - Briggs Type 
Indicator 
via 
Text 
based 
Computer-mediated 
Communication,” CS 229 Machine Learning Projects, 
Stanford, 2012. 
[8] B. Plank and D. Hovy, “Personality Traits on Twitter-or-how 
to get 1,500 Personality Tests in a Week” The Sixth 
Workshop on Computational Approaches to Subjectivity, 
Sentiment and Social Media Analysis, Association for 
Computational Linguistics, 2015, pp. 92-98.  
[9] B.Verhoeven, W. Daelemans, and B. Plank, “Creating 
TwiSty: Corpus Development and Statistics,” Computational 
Linguistics and Psycholinguistics Research Center CLiPS 
Technical Report Series, University of Antwerp, Belgium, 
CTRS-006, 2016.  
[10] L. C. Lukito, A. Erwin, J. Purnama, and W. Danoekoesoemo, 
“Social 
Media 
User 
Personality 
Classification 
using 
Computational 
Linguistic” 
The 
Eighth 
International 
Conference on Information Technology and Electrical 
Engineering, Oct. 2016, pp. 1-6. 
[11] K. Yamada, R. Sasano, and K. Takeda, “Incorporating 
Textual Information on User Behavior for Personality 
Prediction” The 57th Annual Meeting of the Association for 
Computational Linguistics: Student Research Workshop, Jul.-
Aug. 2019, pp. 177-182. 
[12] J. Oberlander and S. Nowson, “Whose Thumb is it anyway? 
Classifying Author Personality from Weblog Text” The 44th 
Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational 
Linguistics ACL, Jul. 2006, pp. 627-634. 
[13] F. Iacobelli, A. J. Gill, S. Nowson, and J. Oberlander, “Large 
Scale Personality Classification of Bloggers” The Fourth 
International Conference on Affective Computing and 
Intelligent Interaction, 2011, Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag, pp. 
568-577. 
[14] Y. Bachrach, M. Kosinski, T. Graepel, P. Kohli, and D. 
Stillwell, “Personality and Patterns of Facebook Usage” The 
Fourth Annual ACM Web Science Conference, 2012, pp. 36-
45. 
Figure 3.    Weights  for Feeling.  
Figure 4.    Weights for Judging.  
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[15] S. Argamon, S. Dhawle, M. Koppel, and J. W. Pennebaker, 
“Lexical Predictors of Personality Type” The Joint Annual 
Meeting of the Interface and the Classification Society of 
North America, 2005, pp. 1-16.  
[16] F. Mairesse, M. A. Walker, M. R. Mehl, and R. K. Moore, 
“Using Linguistic Cues for the Automatic Recognition of 
Personality in Conversation and Text,” Journal of Artificial 
Intelligence Research, vol. 30, pp. 457-500, 2007. 
[17] J. Golbeck, C. Robles, and K. Turner, “Predicting Personality 
with Social Media” The 2011 Annual Conference Extended 
Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 253-
262.  
[18] I. Mierswa and R. Klinkenberg. Rapidminer Studio (9.1) 
[Data science, machine learning, predictive analytics]. 
(https://rapidminer.com). [retrieved: June, 2021].  
[19] G. K. Mikros and G. Markopoulos, “Using Multiword 
Sequences as Features in Authorship Attribution: Experiments 
based on Greek Blog Texts,” In A. Christofidou (Ed.), 
Aspects of Corpus Linguistics: Principles, applications and 
challenges Vol. 14, pp. 56-67, 2017. Athens: Academy of 
Athens: 
Research 
Center 
for 
Scientific 
Terms 
and 
Neologisms. 
[20] G. K.  Mikros, “Authorship Attribution and Gender 
Identification in Greek Blogs,” In I. Obradović, E. Kelih & R. 
Köhler (Eds.), Selected papers of the VIIIth International 
Conference on Quantitative Linguistics (QUALICO), Apr. 
2013, Belgrade: Academic Mind, pp. 21-32.  
[21] S. Gagiatsou, “Automatic author profiling based on natural 
language processing techniques”, Ph.D. Thesis, National and 
Kapodistrian University of Athens: Greece, 2021.  
 
 
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

