Regional Information Platform and One-Segment Local Broadcast Service for 
Tourism Promotion and Disaster Prevention  
An initial experiment and assessment
Tadashi Miyosawa, Hiroo Hirose, Takeshi Tsuchiya 
Department of Business Administration and Information 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Nagano, Japan 
e-mail: miyosawa@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp, hirose@rs.tus.ac.jp, tsuchiya.takeshi @rs.tus.ac.jp 
 
Abstract—Repeat tourists tend to gather information on their 
destination through mobile devices. For this reason, it is 
necessary to have a regional information platform that allows 
users to see all the information on an area in a unified format. 
One-segment local services in Japan are broadcasts targeted at 
mobile devices; however, these broadcasts are limited to a 
narrow area. We set out to use this service, which is currently 
in an experimental phase in Japan, for a large-scale event (the 
Lake Suwa fireworks show). Results of our experiment showed 
that the visitors found that this service is very useful, but also 
showed that it is necessary to provide the information that 
visitors really want. As the next step in this research, we intend 
implementing a regional information platform to find out the 
information that visitors want. And also disaster prevention 
information system will be implemented. 
Keywords-One-segment local broadcast service; mobile 
device; regional information platform; tourism; disaster 
prevention; data mining 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
According to the Japan Tourism Agency, the ripple effect 
of production resulting from travel expenditure was 51.4 
trillion yen (5.3% of the total in the “2005 Input-Output 
Table”[1]), equating to a value-added effect of 26.5 trillion 
yen. This is seen as having a large effect on employment and 
production. Furthermore, despite the problems caused by the 
earthquake and nuclear reactors, the agency has unveiled the 
“Visit Japan” project, which aims to attract 30 million 
foreign visitors to Japan. It is also seeking to expand tourism 
production. It is apparent that the needs of tourists are 
shifting away from travel with associated large-scale 
expenditure, which emphasizes groups, luxury, and well 
known tourist spots. Instead, this has given way to tourism 
that is “suited to individuals,” which considers aspects such 
as individuals/small groups, day trips, and secluded 
destinations. Trips tend to be taken alone, with family, or 
with close friends. According to the Japanese Association of 
Travel Agents, the cost of tourism is advancing in two 
directions: one that emphasizes luxury, and the other that 
features low prices and includes such activities as day trips. 
It is thus necessary to devise a strategy that satisfies the 
changing needs of tourists. 
However, with regard to tourism in Nagano Prefecture 
and the Suwa Region, while there has been a steady annual 
increase in visitors owing to large-scale events such as the 
Suwa Taisha Onbashira festival and the Lake Suwa 
fireworks show, the trend in the medium term has been 
decreasing.  
As a new form of tourism, the Japanese Tourism Agency 
and other bodies have introduced “landing-type tourism” [2], 
which is a travel commodity produced by local areas. 
Volunteer guides from the areas’ non-profit and other 
organizations lead tourists around the area, focusing on 
experiences, exchange, and education. In this way, it is 
possible to convey each area’s unique charm, something that 
cannot be organized by large travel agencies. 
The ability to send information directly to the visitor, 
which has been made possible by the spread of the Internet, 
is a key element in landing-type tourism. Alternative means 
of transportation have also played a significant part. 
Currently, travelers using their own cars comprise over 70% 
of tourists (Tourist Mobility Survey, 2008, Nagano 
Prefecture[3]). This means that tourists are now free to be 
selective about their trips, which are typically low cost. 
Furthermore, regarding the usage of information technology 
during landing-type tourist activities, the percentage of 
tourists who collect information while at their destination has 
risen to 46.5%. This figure has a high correlation with male 
IT users in their 40s and female IT users in their 30s (Survey 
Research Regarding the State of Landing-Type IT Tourism 
and Services for Attracting Visitors, 2007, Ministry of 
Economy, Trade, and Industry[4]). In particular, repeat 
visitors have a higher tendency to gather information at their 
destination. In terms of the IT medium for doing so, mobile 
devices have become the strong favorite. For this reason, it is 
necessary to have a regional information platform that allows 
users to see all the information on an area in a unified format, 
as well as an information distribution system that transmits 
information via the Internet and broadcasts aimed at mobile 
devices. 
There is a also a wide range of disaster prevention 
information that can be covered, including weather 
information and river (flooding) information, which are 
transmitted 
by 
each 
area, 
and 
national 
earthquake 
information. As each type of information is transmitted 
through a different media and in different formats, it is 
necessary to consolidate everything. In addition, manual 
conversion of media and formats would prevent the 
information from being transmitted in real time. A system 
structure capable of immediate transmission is preferable. 
Moreover, with Japan’s terrestrial digital broadcasting 
format, one channel is split into 13 parts, called “segments.” 
87
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

A few of these segments are bundled together to send video, 
data, and audio, while one segment is dedicated to mobile 
devices; “1seg” uses this for broadcasts. One-segment local 
services in Japan are broadcasts destined for mobile devices; 
however, the broadcast is limited to a narrow area. 
With regard to the discussion above, in the context of 
trial services for one-segment local services, many areas 
have been conducting experiments using the unused portion 
(white space) of television broadcast signals as a platform for 
research and development, as well as for demonstration 
experiments. These activities aim to utilize this white space 
to facilitate the initiation of new services and systems, as 
well as the development of business. The expectation of 
utilizing this for local tourism promotion and disaster 
prevention is particularly high. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
There are no previous studies that address local area 
information 
and 
information 
distribution 
systems 
comprehensively, as this research aims to accomplish. 
However, the following are mentioned as examples of 
research on individual technological levels. 
A. Transmission of Information using One-Segment Local 
Services 
There are several reports in the literature on experiments 
that have been conducted to transmit information using one-
segment local services, for example, those by Saito et al. [5] 
and Nishikawa [6].  
B. Research on Data Mining Technology 
Basic research on data mining technology is being 
addressed, and its effectiveness is expected to improve. 
Deguchi [7] suggested the possibility of content navigation 
through recommendation and data mining. Additionally, 
Haseyama and Hisamitsu [8] considered the use of video 
search technology to allow users to access videos they wish 
to view from amongst a great number of videos. 
C. Regional Information Platform 
An effort has been made to further standardize area 
information platforms from the viewpoint of municipalities 
[9]. Additionally, in [10] it is reported that through the 
optimal use of telecommunication and broadcasts, the 
satisfaction level of users can be maximized. 
Thus, although there has been some research on 
individual technologies, to the best of our knowledge, no 
research has focused on a comprehensive area information 
platform and information distribution system.  
III. 
AREA INFORMATION PLATFORM AND INFORMATION 
DISTRIBUTION SYSTEM 
The Suwa Region has been designated as a white space 
specific district. In this study, for the purpose of tourism 
promotion and disaster prevention in the area, we conducted 
an experiment to determine the efficacy of a one-segment 
local service transmission service. In particular for this 
region, the timely transmission of weather, tourism, and 
disaster prevention information for the fireworks show 
(which attracts approximately 500,000 visitors) was a 
priority. But until now this kind of experiment was not yet 
conducted. To distribute tourist and disaster prevention 
information in a timely fashion to those who need it, the 
development of a regional information platform was required. 
Data mining and content understanding technology are also 
necessary on such a platform, to gather and analyze 
information, and then automatically generate and organize 
the information requested by the user.  
In the current state, tourism information for large areas is 
scattered, and therefore, the desired information cannot be 
obtained instantly. In addition, accessing to individual 
hidden information is challenging. For these reasons, a 
regional information platform including social media 
information and the ability to find information on small areas 
through data mining is crucial. 
In addition, a tourism and disaster prevention information 
(one-segment local service) distribution system will be 
developed on top of the regional information platform, as 
illustrated in Figure 1.   
 
 
Figure 1. Regional information and distribution system. 
 
In terms of the content transmission, the distribution 
system must be able to connect to broadcast and 
telecommunication units in a coordinated fashion. The aim 
of this system is to optimize the content in order to deliver 
programs better suited to the users’ needs. Another aim of 
this system is to optimize the content distribution method 
suited to the users’ environment. Finally, an autonomous 
disaster prevention information system, which has the ability 
of using broadcast and telecommunication units in the event 
of a disaster, is will be developed in next step. 
IV. 
SYSTEM DESIGN 
A. Regional Information Platform (corresponding to (1) in 
Figure 2) 
First, by holding a workshop on the effective usage of 
social media, the utilization of social media transmissions by 
tourism officials was increased. In addition, as shown by the 
Regional Information Platform
SNS
HP
Portal Site
HP
Profiling
Content Analysis
(Annotation)
Information Distribution System for Tourism and 
Disaster Prevention
Internet
One Segment 
local service
Multimedia  
Broadcasting
Digital Signage
Data Mining
88
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

area demarcated as (1) in Figure 2, the regional information 
platform can centrally manage not only official local area 
websites, but also personal sites, blogs, and social 
networking services. Through the realization of a one-stop 
portal site such as this, users (tourists) will be able to find the 
information they seek without having to search several sites. 
Moreover, by crawling websites for regional information, 
gathered knowledge about an area can be sampled, the 
information requested by users can be analyzed, and this can 
leveraged through broadcasts. 
 
 
Figure 2. System configuration. 
 
1) Workshop on the Effective Usage of Social Media  
As depicted in Figure 3, workshops regarding portal sites 
and the effective use of social media will be held. Aimed at 
key individuals (from volunteer guide organizations and 
different tourism associations, tourism officials, and 
executive committees for special events) who are (or wish to 
be) involved in social media such as blogs, these workshops 
are intended to advance the utilization of such media. 
 
Figure 3. Social media workshop. 
 
2) Construction of a Landing-Type Tourism Portal Site 
that Utilizes Social Media 
a) Construction of a Functional Navigation Site  
Using crawler programs employed by search engines, 
data regarding tourism websites including currently existing 
tourism organizations, hot spring associations, tourism 
project officials, and executive committees for special 
events will be collected. As shown in Figure 4, data from 
websites related to the Suwa Region will be imported, and 
using a clustering function, sorted by place, time (season), 
keyword, target consumers, and so on. Displayed as a 
navigation site, these data will provide comprehensive 
information as a one-stop service for those planning trips. 
 
Figure 4. One-stop regional portal site. 
b) Information Exchange for Volunteers and Tourists 
and Participation through Social Media, and System 
Structure  
In addition, the website will include social media 
information from volunteer guides and others, created at the 
workshops discussed in 1) above.  
Seasonal or rare events will be displayed on the main 
screen, and using mining functions such as the clustering 
described above. Analysis will be performed on customers 
(like what kinds of events certain customers are likely to 
participate in), and top-selling tourism commodities and so 
on. And also the cultivation of customers and information 
providers 
(the 
satisfaction 
level 
of 
customers 
and 
information providers, determining what is unsatisfactory for 
each, and raising their awareness of one another) will be 
performed. However, so as not to depend too much on 
mining technology, mined information will be used as a 
starting point to deepen the understanding and awareness 
between volunteer guides/tourism officials and tourists. 
B. Construction of an Information Distribution System 
using Broadcast and Telecommunication Units 
(corresponding to (2) in Figure 2) 
1) Incorporating Market Needs into Broadcasts  
Through the use of data feature extraction (mining), for 
each time and place, the degree of interest and popularity 
can be extracted, and the program organization can be 
dynamically changed to match the users’ interests. Also, 
through content selection (automatic annotation) technology, 
the necessary content can be searched for in an extensive 
archive and displayed. In this way, the program to be 
broadcast can be created with less manual intervention.  
2) One-Segment Local Services Usability Trial   
By experimenting with transmission of one-segment 
local services to 500,000 users, the usability of this type of 
product can be confirmed.  
At the trailhead of the Yatsugatake Mountains, 
information about aspects such as weather conditions, 
changing leaves, snowfall, lodgings, transportation (buses, 
etc.) will be transmitted. This will confirm the quality of the 
radio reception and the effectiveness of the one-segment 
local service. 
Regional Information
(1)Regional Information Platform
(2)Information Distribution System 
(in Telecommunication and Broadcasting Convergence)
Important Keywords
Data Mining
Program/Portal 
automatic editing 
Automatic content 
selection
Metadata Generation
(Annotation)
Weather 
information
Data 
Space
SNS
Digital 
Photo
Video
Earthquake 
information
Blog
Format Conversion 
for Disaster warning
(3)Autonomous Disaster 
warning system
Regional 
News 
Paper
CATV
Twitter
J-ALERT
Regional one stop 
portal site
Crawling
Broadcasting  in Large Scale 
Event 
Broadcasting in 
mountain region
Broadcasting in 
Disaster prevention 
What’s your favorite place? 
What food do you like?
-> Bring out the charm of the area.
How can I use a blog?
What is Twitter？
-> Training regarding social media.
What do travelers look for?
What will they be dissatisfied about?
-> Communicate through social media.
SUWA Wide-area Tourism Portal Site
This week 
Event Calendar
Hot Topics
Keywords
Seasonal 
Information
On Video 
Everyone Blog
Extract event 
information from 
existing tourist sites, 
and display  it as a 
Calendar.
Local information 
Blog created by  
members of 
workshop. Travelers 
can participate also.  
Extract trendy  keywords 
from existing tourist site 
and Blog, and provide it 
as hot topics.
Gourmet
Tour Gide
Healing
The current appearance of 
tourist destinations to see 
the video and photos. 
Events, such as flowering .
89
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

C. Development of an Autonomous Disaster Prevention 
System (corresponding to (3) in Figure 2) 
1) Sharing 
of 
Local 
Area 
Disaster 
Prevention 
Information and Conversion Technology for Sharing 
Information  
A disaster prevention information system will be 
developed as part of the regional information platform. 
Through the use of data mining and automatic annotation 
functions, this can be used to detect early disaster 
information in a timely manner and assist in evacuation 
guidance. Functionality to convert information regarding 
aspects 
such 
as 
weather, 
disaster 
prevention, 
and 
emergencies into a consolidated format will also be 
developed. 
2) Emergency Information Transmission System 
It is vital that residents in local areas become familiar 
with emergency information such as J-ALERT(The civil 
protection warning system in Japan) without delay. It is 
necessary to develop the automated technology that can 
transmit such information in real time.  With linked together 
with various forms of media (networks, cable television, one-
segment local services, and so on), the information 
transmission can be carried out in the most suitable manner.  
For example, it is possible to make prompt reports using text 
superimposed over a television program that is being 
telecasted, and at the same time setting up a data broadcast 
using Broadcast Markup Language (BML) to report 
information on evacuation areas, and so on. Under these 
circumstances, any delay in sending such information is 
unacceptable, so it is necessary to generate and send such 
information from the regional information platform in as 
automated a way as possible. 
V. 
TRANSMISSION EXPERIMENT AT LAKE SUWA 
FIREWORKS SHOW 
Transmission using one-segment local services at large-
scale events is one of the focus areas of this research. As 
such, a transmission experiment was carried out on August 
15, 2012, at the Lake Suwa fireworks show. 
On the day, the weather was mostly pleasant. Including 
the surrounding areas, 500,000 people participated in the 
event, with 40,000 fireworks being set off. As visitors who 
have come to see the fireworks tend to arrive in the early 
afternoon to secure good seats and have time to spare before 
the fireworks show begins, a survey was conducted between 
noon and 5 pm (before the fireworks show began).  
A. One-Segment Local Broadcasting System 
The upper portion of the diagram in Figure 5 shows the 
broadcasting system, which is in the media center in the 
main office. At this media center, archived videos of tourist 
information that had previously been collected and recorded, 
as well as live video captured on the spot, are encoded in real 
time using H.264, which is the video coding standard for 
one-segment local services. BML editing for the data 
broadcasting portion is also performed. Video information 
and data broadcasts, as well as schedule information, are 
then sent to a remote broadcasting location over the Internet 
following IP (Internet Protocol) conversion. 
 
Figure 5. One-segment local broadcasting system. 
 
Shown in the lower portion of Figure 5 is the system 
structure, which is in a broadcast location set up on the 
rooftop of a hotel. Here, after a TS (Transmission Stream) 
conversion of the video-type and broadcast-type data that 
have been received, the data are multiplexed and converted 
into a signal for program broadcast. They are then sent to an 
antenna and broadcast by orthogonal frequency division 
multiplexing. 
Figure 6 shows the reception range of the signal, which 
was sent at 30mw for a full-segment and 2.3mw for a one-
segment. The reception range covered an area with a 
maximum linear distance of approximately 500m from the 
antenna, although obstructions such as buildings within the 
range caused a deterioration in the reception conditions. 
 
Figure 6. Broadcast service area. 
B. Broadcast Program 
The program that was broadcast is described below.  
Followings are the program which was broadcasted at the 
Lake Suwa fireworks show. 
 
Archived Video Content (basic content) compiled into a 15-
minute broadcast: 
- Welcome to the Suwa fireworks show 
- Welcome message from the Mayor 
- Fireworks photo digest 
SW
Video 
archives
Live 
Camera
Live 
Camera
PC
Micro-
phone
PC
Composite-
Signal(R,G,B)
Display
Real Time Encoder
(2730A)
Data Broadcast
(BML)
IP output
SI  information
HUB
HUB
Media Center
Transmitting Station
IP-PS converter
(2732A)
Multiplexing
TV Signal Generator
(3548A)
IP 
TS 
Booster Amp
(4055A)
RF
Antenna 
Wireless Network
90
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

- How to enjoy the fireworks show 
- Oguchi Enka (fireworks company) 
- 1seg and lost child information 
- Twitter 
- Suwa area navigation information  
Special Content compiled into a one-hour broadcast: 
- Introduction to Suwa city by the Mayor 
- Suwa city tourism 
Live Content introduced by a master of ceremonies (MC): 
- Fireworks show  
- Information on congestion 
- Toilet information 
- Parking information 
- Tourism information  
- Explanation of Twitter and Facebook 
- Address by the Mayor to open the show 
- Fireworks stream 
Live Content (output automatically by a PC): 
- Clock detailing congestion times 
(during of  the actual fireworks) 
- Fireworks program and participating companies 
- Messages for the fireworks 
- Twitter content 
Only lost child information was transmitted as Data 
broadcast content with using BML. This was because BML, 
the content language used for data broadcasting, was found 
to be too complicated to author content in timely fashion.  
For example, in order to transmit Parking information, 
comparing to BML authoring, it was easier to create a 
PowerPoint presentation and transmit Power point Screen 
image. Therefore all the information except lost child 
information were transmitted as a screen image. 
 
Figure 7. Display of the program on a Smartphone. 
 
Figure 7 shows how the program is displayed on an 
actual Smartphone. In this example, the image in the upper 
portion of the display is the program promoting a tourism 
location in the local area. The text in the bottom portion of 
the display pertains to lost child information. When a lost 
child is reported, his/her name, age, and description are 
displayed. 
C. Questionnaire Results and Observations 
Prior to the start of the fireworks show, five university 
students carried out an interview-style survey. 
 As the survey also included an explanation of one-
segment local services, the survey took about 20 minutes 
per person. Although fewer surveys were performed than 
anticipated, 71 completed questionnaires were collected 
from visitors. Figure 8 shows what kind of information 
visitors want. And it is evaluated on a scale from 1 to 5 (1 
denotes the lowest score, while 5 denotes the highest). 
 
 
Figure 8.  Evaluation of each item in the survey. 
 
The top-ranked items were as follows: maps showing 
toilet locations (4.57), comprehensive map of the event area 
(4.53), event crowding information (4.49), and evacuation 
area information (4.37). It seems that visitors want a 
comprehensive view of the event area and would like 
information about their current location. It is also clear that 
they desire information on when toilets are expected to be 
overcrowded and on congestion.  
The 
lowest-scoring 
items 
were 
nearby 
lodging 
information (2.93), nearby tourist spot information (2.96), 
and descriptions of souvenirs from nearby shops (3.04). A 
likely reason for this is that, as the majority of people 
attending the fireworks show were on day-trips. They were 
more interested in receiving real-time information about the 
fireworks show itself than about the surrounding area. 
Figure 9 displays the average scores for each information 
category. According to this data, those attending the 
fireworks show were not particularly interested in tourism 
information about the surrounding area. However, location 
information related to the user’s actual position within the 
area, as well as disaster and crime prevention information, 
attracted a high level of interest. 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
4.5
5
1. Location Information
1.1 Comprehensive Map of the Event Area
1.2 Map of parking area
1.3 Map showing toilet locations
1.4 Location of Administrative Facility(such as …
2. Transportation information
2.1 JR service status
2.2 Traffic conditions of Surrounding Area 
2.3 Weathr forecast
3. Area Tourism information
3.1 Speciality Store and souvenir shop
3.2 Neraby Tourist spot information
3.3 Nearby Restourant information
3.4 Nearby Lodging information
4. Information Related to the Event
4.1 Event Schedule(such as Fireworks  time)
4.2 Event Crowding information (walkig path, …
4.3 Yukata beauty information
4.4 Street stall Map
5. Disaster/crime prevention information
5.1 Lost Child information
5.2 Evacuation Area information
91
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Figure 9. Average scores per category. 
 
Finally, the question “Is the one-segment local service 
useful?” returned a score of 4.03. This confirms that visitors 
feel that this service is useful, but that it needs to be 
improved to be able to present the information that visitors 
want. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this study, we set up an experimental one-segment 
local transmission system (one of the themes of this 
research) and used it as a demonstration experiment at a 
large-scale event.  
Based on the survey responses by visitors at the 
fireworks show, there is little interest in tourism information 
about the surrounding area. However, it seems that location 
information related to the user’s position within the area, as 
well as disaster and crime prevention information are of high 
interest. This means that an optimal system should have 
broadcasts containing event area maps and real-time 
congestion information, in addition to a feature whereby the 
user can locate places relative to his/her location using a GPS. 
In particular, it would be desirable to be able to locate the 
nearest toilet or food/drink vendor. Also, as a form of 
disaster/crime prevention, there is a high demand for 
knowledge of the nearest exit in the event of an emergency, 
or the location of evacuation areas if a disaster were to strike.  
Important lessons obtained in this experiment is that 
visitors felt that the one-segment local broadcast service was 
useful but that it should be improved to be able to present the 
information visitors want. These lessons gave us the several 
ideas regarding what kind of features to be developed in a 
regional information platform to fill the user's requirement. 
Especially, in terms of the promotion of tourism, it was 
found that it is necessary to push the local tourist information 
and event information to be involved with it. 
During this one-segment local service transmission 
experiment, we found that creating programs for data 
broadcasts was complicated. The process involved taking 
BML files created with BML authoring tools, which are 
specialized and have professional specifications, and then 
performing a TS conversion on each before transmission. If 
there was a way to take content that has been entered and 
display it through broadcasts without carrying out the long-
winded process, anyone would be able to use such 
technology.   
It is also necessary to consider an optimal linking method 
for broadcast and telecommunication units. 
At the time of the experiment, the regional information 
platform was not yet implemented, and so keyword detection 
technology through data mining was not available. However, 
the undeveloped parts of the system will be developed before 
the next transmission experiment is carried out. 
By developing regional information platforms and one-
segment local service broadcasting systems, we hope to 
facilitate the initiation of one-segment local broadcast 
services in many areas.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Strategic 
Information 
and 
Communication 
R&D 
Promotion 
Programme (SCOPE) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications, Japan, under Grant No. 122304003. 
REFERENCES 
[1] “2005 Input-Output Table”  Japan Ministry of Internal Affairs 
and Communications, Statistics Bureau, Director-general for 
Policy 
Planning 
Japan, http://www.stat.go.jp/data/io/2005/io05.htm 
[2] “Tourist Area Creation Platform”, Japan Tourist Agency, 
Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transport and Tourism 
homepage, http://www.mlit.go.jp/kankocho/shisaku/kankochi/
platform.html 
[3] “Tourist Mobility Survey 2008”, Nagano Prefecture, 
Japan ,http://www.pref.nagano.lg.jp/kanko/kankoki/ryudo/ryu
dou-index.htm 
[4] “Survey Research Regarding the State of Landing-Type IT 
Tourism and Services for Attracting Visitors, 2007”, Ministry 
of 
Economy 
Trade 
and 
Industry, 
Japan, 
http://warp.ndl.go.jp/info:ndljp/pid/286890/www.meti.go.jp/r
eport/data/g70629aj.html 
[5] Keiji Saito, Hidenori Kiyama, Takanobu Takase, “One 
Segment 
Local 
Services 
Experiment: 
Demonstration 
Experiments Concerning One Segment Local Services at the 
Sapporo Snow Festival,” Information Processing Society of 
Japan Journal, November, 2009 
[6] Atsushi 
Nishikawa, 
“Network-Integrated 
Broadcast 
Equipment for One Segment Local Services,” Information 
Processing Society of Japan Journal, November, 2009 
[7] Shuichi Deguchi, “3-1. The Current State and Future of Image 
Transmission Services through Multicast Transmission,” The 
Institute of Image Information and Television Engineers 
Journal, 2009 
[8] Haseyama, Hisamitsu, “Common Technologies of the 
Information Grand Voyage Project: An Introduction to Image 
and Video Processing Technologies” The Institute of Image 
Information and Television Engineers Journal, 2009 
[9] “Area 
Information 
Platform 
Standard 
Specifications”, 
Association for the Promotion of Public Local Information 
and Communication, Japan 
[10] Tadashi Miyosawa, Wataru Kameyama, “Modeling Users’ 
Benefits for Hybrid Broadcast and Communication System 
Optimization” The Institute of Electronics, Information and 
Communication 
Engineers 
B 
Vol.J93-B 
No.4, 
2010
 
0
1
2
3
4
5
1. Location information
2. Transportation 
3. Local Tourist Spots
4. Event-related 
5. Disaster/crime prevention 
92
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

