Requirements Analysis Towards Future Design of an Innovative Distance Learning 
Device Intended for French Orthodontic Practitioners  
Contribution of a Community of Practice Analysis 
 
Aurélie Mailloux  
Orthodontics 
Reims Hospital 
Reims, France 
e-mail: aurelie.mailloux@univ-reims.fr 
 
 
 
Jérôme Dinet 
CNRS, INRIA, Loria 
University of Lorraine 
Nancy, France 
e-mail: jerome.dinet@univ-lorraine.fr
Abstract-The COVID-19 crisis has changed behaviors and 
needs of orthodontic practitioners related to (i) cancellation of 
all the continuing education events, which led to the 
disappearance of formal and informal exchanges on the 
practice (ii) emergence of numerous videoconferences, but 
without prior identification of practitioners’ needs. The 
problem of interaction within a continuing education online 
environment is paramount: promoting interaction between 
peers within the system is essential to (i) reduce the feeling of 
loneliness (ii) promote users’ commitment. Most French 
orthodontic practitioners were already involved in a virtual 
active Community of Practice (CoP) with their own way of 
fostering identification, cohesion, and collaboration. The 
purpose of this user-centered research is to identify 
requirements for creating an innovative comprehensive 
distance continuing education environment that would meet 
expectations and needs in terms of interactions of most CoP 
members, according to their experience (novices to experts). 
After an extensive state-of-the-art, used to better understand 
the changes in training and education related to orthodontic 
domain, we conducted (a) a detailed examination of the 
discursive activities within a CoP (e.g., content, interactions, 
rhythm, objectives, etc.) (b) four focus group and (c) an online 
survey. The collected data confirmed that an innovative 
complete distance continuing education environment could 
meet many CoP members needs, such as: anonymous, 
scientifically validated content, extensive or limited discussion 
forums, clinical case sharing, videoconferences 
instant 
translation, ease of access and cost and time saving. From a 
theoretical point of view, this study highlighted the crucial role 
of the community of practice in producing requirements for 
creating a useful, usable, and acceptable digital education 
environment for orthodontic practitioners. 
 
Keywords-elearning; 
community 
of 
practice; 
psycho-
ergonomic study; innovative device; orthodontics; continuing 
education. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The COVID-19 crisis has changed behaviors and needs 
of orthodontic practitioners towards continuing education. 
Among others, the replacement of face-to-face congresses by 
videoconferences had led to the disappearance of direct 
formal and informal exchanges between novices and/or 
experts of the Community of Practice (CoP): the 
videoconferences current format only allows one-to-one 
vertical interactions between participants and speakers. 
However, in the field of distance continuing education, it is 
necessary to support a form of “e-presence” between 
members because one of the major dropout factors is the 
loneliness felt within the education device. Indeed, attrition 
rate is lower when the user is supported by his/her peers and 
interacts with them regularly [7][8]. According to the state-
of-the-art [9]–[12], several solutions are mentioned to 
promote interactions and commitments within an education 
distance device, such as distance tutoring, and e-portfolio. 
However, their results are heterogeneous, and their 
implementation complex. 
This innovative continuing education environment is 
addressed to French orthodontic practitioners who are mostly 
already involved in an informal active virtual CoP, built on 
Facebook© in 2014. In 2022 February, this CoP were 
gathering almost half of the French orthodontic practitioners. 
The purpose of this user-centered research is to analyze 
requirements to promote interactions within an innovative 
learning system based on a dual approach (i) the analysis of 
the virtual CoP discursive activity (ii) the identification of 
the CoP members’ needs by conducting focus group and an 
online survey.  
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. 
After a state-of-the-art (Section II), Section III describes the 
data gathered and methodology applied in three different 
studies to identify the CoP members interactions needs and 
attitudes according to their experience (novices to experts). 
This is followed by an overview of findings in Section IV, 
categorized by the discursive analysis, the CoP members 
interaction needs and the requirements. Section V 
summarizes the value of these findings and outlines elements 
of future research to be conducted on the subject.  
II. STATE-OF-THE-ART 
We conducted an extensive state-of-the-art to identify (i) 
the possible benefits of designing an innovative distance 
learning device in the orthodontic domain (ii) the current 
solutions to promote interactions within distance education. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

A. Contribution of an innovative device  
The COVID-19 crisis has changed behaviors and needs 
of orthodontic practitioners. The need to evolve the 
traditional format to remote access is now widely shared. 
The COVID epidemic has greatly accelerated this trend 
related to cancellation of all the continuing education events 
[15]–[17]. 
The state-of-the-art [11]-[18][30][31] demonstrated that 
many devices dedicated to the continuing education of 
dentists or orthodontists have been created over the past 20 
years, particularly in Anglo-Saxon countries. These devices 
were a source of satisfaction for the participants and 
effective in terms of learning and acquisition of skills but 
they were mainly centered on one unique theme (e.g., 
recognition of oral pathologies) and were not focused on the 
orthodontic discipline [13][14]. However, an innovative 
complete distance continuing education environment could 
have many advantages, such as flexibility, lower costs, no 
office closing and accreditation by the French body of 
Continuing Professional Development (CPD) [21]–[25]. 
B. Existing distance learning device 
According to the state-of-the-art [11]-[18], there was no 
complete distance learning environment adapted to the 
French orthodontic practitioners’ needs. Only two complete 
websites dedicated to distance continuing education were 
intended for orthodontic practitioners: the World Federation 
of Orthodontists (WFO) and the e-orthodontie.com websites. 
First, the WFO website, with online videoconferences 
access and its smartphone application (with notifications), is 
the most complete digital continuing education environment 
available to date, particularly concerning the diversified 
content, supports, and the scientific validity. Despite this, 
none of the interviewed practitioners were registered with 
WFO probably because this device was neither adapted (i) to 
their expectations and attitudes (ii) nor to their way of 
interacting with each other. Correlation between cultural 
and/or social dimensions with the use of a distance education 
device has already been highlighted in a previous study [18]. 
Secondly, the French e-orthodontie.com website has been 
created in 2007 without no prior user-centered research to 
evaluate practitioners’ needs and expectations [19][20]. That 
could explain why this website was very little used by 
French orthodontic practitioners, as evidenced by the closed 
to zero activity of the forums section. 
C. The interactions within the devices 
According the state-of-the-art [29], the loss of peer-to-
peer interactions was the major drawback of the current 
distance education experiences for participants. That is why 
interaction represents one of the main issue to be considered 
for the design process. Nevertheless, several solutions are 
mentioned in the literature to create a kind of “e-presence” 
within the distance device, such as (i) virtual small groups of 
practitioners sharing same centers of interest or geographical 
proximity [27] (ii) creation of a collaborative e-portfolio 
[11][12] or (iii) tutoring [9][10]. But interactions between 
novices and their teachers via an e-portfolio were often 
limited, because, among other factors, teachers considered 
the digital feedback as a waste of time [11]. Concerning the 
remote tutoring, it remained generally underused because 
users struggled to meet their “ideal” tutoring model [9][10]. 
There are difficulties to maintain mutual commitment 
and trust in an online environment, hence the importance of 
examining the interactions within a current active CoP for 
creating a useful, usable, and acceptable digital education 
environment for orthodontic practitioners. We considered 
that 
an 
innovative 
distance 
continuing 
education 
environment, supported by the CoP members (and vice 
versa), could promote users’ commitment. We based our 
approach on the horizontal social learning theories [3]-[6]. 
D. Contribution of a community of practice analysis for 
education device design 
Several research-actions involving the design of training 
devices, in particular digital ones, are based on the notions of 
professional community in the education fields [33][34]. 
Although CoPs (i.e., traditional and virtual) have been 
developed and studied extensively in the education fields, 
they were fewer and less structured in the health sector [35]. 
However, horizontal exchanges between peers represent 
an important source of cohesion and group identification 
within the CoP [1]–[6][21]. Besides, learning results from 
the interaction with other individuals and particularly with 
the peers [3][4].  
III.  DATA & METHODOLOGY 
To produce design recommendations for creating a 
useful, usable, and acceptable digital education environment 
for orthodontic practitioners, three techniques have been 
used (Figure 1). We conducted (i) observation of interactions 
and discursive activities within a virtual CoP “discutons 
entre spécialistes (let’s discuss between specialists)”. (ii) 
Four different focus groups of 4 to 6 CoP novices to identify 
their actual behaviors related to training and education, their 
needs, and expectations (iii) an online survey of 59 
participants to collect data about attitudes and expectations 
towards education addressed to the CoP members. Figure 1 
presents an overview of the methodology adopted and its 
objectives: 
Figure 1. The triangulation of our methodology. 
A. Focus group  
Four focus groups bringing together 4 to 6 novices of the 
CoP novices were conducted: three focus groups were 
conducted before the health crisis and one after. The process 
was carried out in three stages: 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

(1) Identification of the difficulties, obstacles, and 
prospects of continuing education. 
(2) Presentation of an existing French training system: 
the website e-orthodontie.com, to evaluate the participants’ 
perception of digital training tools. 
(3) Co-construction of “an ideal” website architecture 
dedicated to continuing education. 
B. Questionnaire Survey 
The online survey was conducted among practitioners, 
members of a virtual CoP. The electronic survey 
was prepared and distributed by the software Limesurvey© 
to all CoP members, first on January 11, then on January 25, 
2022 (n=59 CoP members, including 41 CoP experts and 18 
novices).  
This online survey was conducted to identify: 
(1) Reasons for which practitioners became members. 
(2) what the CoP actually provided for its members. 
(3) The members status: novices or experts. 
In this study, CoP novices were defined as either 
orthodontic resident (i.e., already qualified in dental 
medicine) or practitioner with less than three years of clinical 
experience. CoP experts were defined as orthodontic 
practitioners with more than three years of clinical 
experience. 
C. Examination of a virtual CoP  
The dual purpose of this examination was (i) an 
identification of the current interactions and (ii) description 
of the discursive activity (in term of content, nature of 
exchanges, objectives, rhythms, comments and likes 
generated…) according to their experience (expert vs novice) 
within the CoP. This enables to study the discursive activity 
(e.g., rhythm, type of interactions, content within this CoP) 
and to identify the needs, attitudes, and expectations of the 
CoP members according to their experience (expert vs 
novice).  
D. Data analysis 
The focus group and the online survey data were 
analyzed as follows: 
The textual analysis was carried out using free software 
IRAMUTEQ based on the R software and the Python 
language. After a manual thematic analysis, several       
automated analyzes were applied and in particular (i) the 
Reinert Descending Hierarchical Classification (DHC) 
model (ii) the Factorial Correspondences Analysis (FCA) 
and (iii) the similarity analysis. The DHC made it possible to 
divide the statements into classes marked by the contrast of 
their vocabulary. We completed DHC with a FCA which 
enabled us to observe the classes “geographical” proximity 
or distance. We also applied the similarity analysis when the 
number of segments was insufficient to obtain a saturation of 
the statements. We analyzed together the first three focus 
groups data (conducted before the health crisis), to compare 
them with the last focus group data (conducted after the 
health crisis). We also compared the online survey collected 
data between experts and novices (41 experts and 18 
novices) to identify their common or divergent expectations 
and benefits of becoming member of a CoP. 
The CoP interactions collected data were analyzed as 
follows: 
All posts and interactions (in the form of comments or 
likes) of the month of September 2021 were subjected to a 
thematic content analysis to group them within categories 
/themes. The nature of the exchanges (e.g., copresence, 
cooperation, collaboration, identification), correlated with 
different contents and levels of interaction, have been studied 
in accordance with Proulx's taxonomy [36]. Interactions 
level was measured as the sum of comments and/or likes of 
each publication (low: < or= to 10; medium: > to 10 and < or 
= to 20; and high: >20). 
We analyzed the comments (i.e., categories, feedback 
type and specific application) generated by clinical case 
posts basis on an evaluation grid of the "quality" of peer 
comments, produced in a previous study [32]. 
IV. MAIN RESULTS 
Our findings indicates that (i) COVID-19 crisis modified 
the CoP members learning needs (ii) the interactions needs, 
attitudes, and expectations of CoP novices and experts were 
different. 
A. Contribution of the virtual CoP discursive analysis 
This innovative continuing education environment is 
addressed to French orthodontic practitioners who are mostly 
already involved in an informal virtual CoP, built on 
Facebook© in 2014. This virtual active CoP “let’s discuss 
between specialists” (in French: discutons entre spécialistes) 
has significantly grown these last years. The growth of the 
informal virtual CoP these last three years (see Figure 2) 
seemed to be an underlying trend (i.e., +170% members 
since 2019). Indeed, the first COVID lockdown (i.e., start 
date 03/17/2020) did not seem to have modified this growth. 
In 2022 February, this CoP were gathering 1082 
practitioners, representing almost half of the population (i.e., 
2420 orthodontic specialists). 
 
 
 
Figure 2. CoP growth since 2019. 
The analysis of the publication’s rhythm in September 
2021 (n=59) revealed its cyclical aspect (see Figure3). 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

  
 
Figure 3. Distribution of the posts in September 2021. 
The analysis of the authors’ status showed that the start 
of a new cycle of publications coincided with a publication 
by a central CoP member (i.e., moderator, administrator, or 
recognized expert): their role was crucial in maintaining and 
developing the interaction. 
 
Thematic / sub theme
number   
interaction level 
(low, medium, 
high or 
inconstant)
Interactions type 
(none/comments 
and/or likes)
Co-presence (n=24)
job ads
3
low
likes
training information
8
low
likes
sale of practice
5
low
likes
patient communication
1
low
comments/likes
patient transfer
6
low
comments
link to other CoP
1
none
none
Cooperation (n=18)
product/equipment advice
7
medium
comments
HR/legal advice 
11
medium
comments
Collaboration (n=14)
sharing of clinical cases
11
low or high
comments/likes
clinical tips
3
medium or high
comments/likes
Identification (n=3) 
ethical problem
1
medium
comments
criticism of private training
2
high
likes
Number of publications, interactions level and type  after thematic 
classification  (n=59 on september 2021) 
 
Figure 4. Publications thematic analysis and the level of interactions 
generated. 
Figure 4 shows the publications thematic analysis and the 
level of interactions generated. Most publications were of the 
order of co-presence among members, creating few reactions 
(mostly likes). Their content was mainly informational. 
Publications on the mode of cooperation were less frequent 
but generated a higher level of interaction (mostly 
comments). The collaborative publications, generating a 
sustained interaction (i.e., clinical cases and clinical tips) 
were also rarer. During the month of September, three 
publications with strong identity value were published (i.e., 
one ethical problem and two criticisms of private training). 
These elicited many reactions (likes or comments).  
However, all CoP members did not publish in all 
categories. The publications allowing either reflection on the 
orthodontics practice or collaboration among members, came 
exclusively from the CoP core experts, administrators, and 
moderators. The novices never participated in the form of 
posts or comments and very rarely in the form of likes. This 
observation agreed with the focus group collected data: all 
CoP novices (pre and post COVID-19 focus group) 
expressed their fear of being judged by the CoP experts. That 
was indeed the main barrier to their participation [5][37]. It 
is for this reason that anonymity was such a strong novices’ 
expectation.  
 
 
Figure 5. Shared clinical cases detailed thematic analysis. 
Figure 5 shows that practitioners never shared failures or 
treatments incidents, although this was an explicit strong 
request from novices, according to post COVID-19 focus 
group collected data. 
Concerning the comments “quality” evaluation of the two 
“complex diagnoses” posts, they were rich in terms of 
content, supports (video, training, clinical case articles, etc.), 
feedback 
type 
(questions, 
suggestions, 
sharing 
of 
“imaginary” clinical cases, etc.) and reflections level (e.g., 
recommendations for good practices). But practitioners never 
shared personal clinical case to illustrate their comments, 
although it could enrich the discussion [32]. In this “clinical 
posts” category (unlike in the others), experts could 
sometimes contradict and criticize each other, revealing 
some disagreements. Nevertheless, the exchanges were much 
more subdued between novices and/or experts (and rarer). 
All publications related to illustrated clinical treatment 
(successful and complex diagnoses) generated feedback and 
initiated discussions, debates, and links to other problems. 
According to the online survey collected data, the clinical 
publications were at the heart of the CoP (novices and 
experts) members’ commitment (see Figure 5). In addition, 
discussions between peers about clinical cases could help 
novices to connect theoretical and practical knowledges [32]. 
B. Impact of the COVID-19 crisis on the CoP members 
learning needs 
The comparison between the focus groups data collected 
before versus after the health crisis enabled us to describe 
finely the changes of continuing education perception, 
raised 
by 
the 
literature 
[15]–[17]. 
Regarding 
the 
interactions, in the pre COVID-19 focus group, the lack of 
informal exchanges between peers was a significant barrier 
to distance learning. The "ideal" learning experience was a 
Thematic/sub-theme
 
number
interaction 
level
interactions 
type
Requested concerning a rare pathology
5
low
comments
  =>including referring practitioners
2
low
comments
Sharing of successful clinical cases 
4
high
comments/likes
Requested concerning complex diagnoses
2
high
comments/likes
Themathic analysis of clinical posts  (n=11 on september 2021)
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

face-to-face conference, with limited costs and duration. In 
contrast, in the post COVID-19 focus group, the” ideal” 
learning experience consisted in clinical cases sharing (i.e., 
especially failed treatment) illustrated step by step, 
anonymous, internet-based literature search, scientifically 
validated content, and videoconference instant translation 
into French. The need to translate was strong for CoP 
novices, 
probably 
because 
they 
were 
afraid 
of 
misunderstandings without being able to detect them. The 
health crisis changed deeply the practitioners’ perception 
toward distance learning. According to the literature, an 
innovative 
complete 
distance 
continuing 
education 
environment could henceforth meet many CoP members’ 
needs [21][22][23]. 
C. Experts/novices : interactions attitudes, needs, and 
expectations 
The distinct similarity analysis produced from novices 
and experts’ responses to the online survey, allowed us to 
distinguish their expectations and needs towards the CoP 
(Figure 6). Figure 6 shows two different profiles in terms of 
content, interaction needs and attitudes within the virtual 
CoP “let’s discuss between specialists”. The experts 
expected to (i) be informed about the novelties, (ii) discover 
the practice and clinical tips of their peers. Their main goals 
were to evaluate their own practice and eventually modify 
them: that was a reflective learning process based on 
reciprocity. Concerning novices’ needs, they expected to 
obtain expert opinions and were in an observant attitude. 
 
 
Figure 6. Experts and novices’ needs in terms of content, learning and 
interaction. 
D. Several requirements to promote peers interactions 
The current virtual CoP supported via Facebook© did not 
allow to make small groups, nor to publish anonymously. 
An innovative continuing education environment should 
offer these possibilities to encourage novices’ participation 
and ultimately stimulate interactions between peers. To 
promote practitioners’ participation, according to the state-
of-the-art and our collected data, some criteria should be 
respected: 
First, participation in discussions forums could be done 
under a pseudonym. However, each practitioner’s status 
should be known (novices/experts), so that novices could 
trust in the posted information. 
Secondly, the content scientific validity could be 
ensured by various means: 
-Review by known International/European clinical experts. 
-Review by teachers from universities. 
-Review by a mixed college (universities teachers and 
clinical experts).  
Some of these experts should also ensure the discussion 
forums animation and take on the role of moderator to 
promote the interactions, as in the virtual CoP “let’s discuss 
between specialists”. 
Thirdly, the device should allow the possibility of 
exchanging on his/her clinical cases via a forum, seeking the 
opinions of other practitioners or even having access to very 
detailed clinical cases (step by step). 
Fourthly, the device should allow the creation of limited 
or extended discussions groups based on professional status 
(expert/novices). The geographical discussion group could 
also be relevant according to the CoP discursive analysis: 2 
of the 11 clinical posts were indeed requests for referring 
practitioners in the same region (see Figure 5). 
Finally, to improve the efficiency of the practitioners' 
comments in terms of learning and collaboration, a “quality” 
charter could be draw up, according to the peers’ comments 
quality evaluation grid, to encourage them to: share 
illustrated 
personal 
clinical 
cases 
(successful 
and 
unsuccessful), ask for questions, make suggestions, share 
scientific articles, use a friendly tone, etc. [32].  
V.  DISCUSSION 
The collected data (focus group, online survey, virtual 
CoP examination) agreed and complemented each other. 
This confirmed the interest of adopting a data triangulation 
method to formulate relevant recommendations [38]. 
Although learning within a CoP is a trajectory from 
novice to expert passing through intermediate stages. Despite 
this, the data analysis by dividing them into two groups 
(novices vs experts) allowed us to reveal different attitudes, 
needs and expectations in terms of continuing education. 
It is commonly accepted that novices participated less 
than experts, because of their peripheral position within the 
CoP [3]-[6]. However, an education device should encourage 
all CoP members to participate on a voluntary basis, to 
reduce the feeling of loneliness and foster their commitment 
[4]. But, if virtual CoPs share the same principles than 
traditional ones (e.g., commitment and mutual trust), this is 
more difficult to maintain in an online environment [2]. 
Our collected data explained more precisely why the 
WFO and the e-orthodontie.com websites did not match 
users’ expectations. Concerning the WFO website, there was 
a strong language barrier: in all focus group, the need to 
translate everything into French was commonly shared. 
Concerning the French e-orthodontie.com website, the 
content was perceived as not scientifically valid by 
interviewed practitioners. Moreover, this website was 
accessible 
to 
patients, 
specialist, 
and 
non-specialist 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

orthodontic practitioners. This “open access” was the subject 
of numerous criticisms by all the interviewed practitioners. 
All surveys revealed indeed the significant tension within 
this CoP related to the various academic backgrounds 
(specialists versus non-specialists). The open or limited 
access of non-specialists to the innovative distance learning 
environment should be carefully considered: the specialists 
considered the non-specialists as an outgroup of the CoP, 
whereas 
the 
non-specialist 
probably 
considered 
the 
specialists as experts of the CoP. 
This paper showed that orthodontic practitioners 
commonly needed (i) scientifically validated content, (ii) 
discussion extensive or limited groups, (iii) anonymous, (iv) 
publications 
on 
clinical 
cases 
(successful 
AND 
unsuccessful). These results were consistent with the state-
of-the-art. But contrary to the literature, in our study, the 
discussion forums group should be centered on the 
professional status (CoP novices and/or experts) and not on 
the center of interest [27]. 
It would have been interesting to carry out focus group of 
CoP experts but professional constraints (solitary practice, 
geographically scattered, lack of time) prevented us from 
doing so. Nevertheless, the online survey by questionnaire 
enabled us to include mostly CoP experts. The experts were 
numerous either because they participated more actively into 
the CoP, and/or because they were more represented there. 
VI.  CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK  
A complete, careful analysis of the orthodontic 
practitioners’ needs, expectations, and interactions behavior 
within the virtual active CoP “let’s discuss between 
specialists” was done for this innovative distance 
environment to comply with the criteria of usability and 
acceptability. 
According to our data collection, a comprehensive 
distance learning environment could meet many novices and 
experts’ expectations. Indeed, the CoP novices reported 
their need to (i) interact with experts anonymously (to avoid 
being judged) (ii) create restricted or extended online 
discussion (iii) ask for questions about all available content 
(e.g., videoconferences, articles) (iv) be informed of news 
by notification. The needs and attitudes of novices and 
experts we described in this study are supported by the data 
on the CoPs [1]-[6], particularly concerning cohesion, 
sharing of experiences and identity needs. However, the 
way to proceed is specific to each profession and, to our 
knowledge, no previous study has analyzed the orthodontic 
practitioners’ community.  
This study allowed us to identify the CoP members needs 
and expectations in terms of (i) content (and the categories 
structuring it), (ii) expected interactions between novices or 
experts (e.g., rhythm, themes, anonymity, etc), (iii) scientific 
validity, (iv) sharing or observing the peers’ positives or 
negatives clinical experiences. On this basis, several 
requirements in term of interactions and contents have been 
proposed. 
This users’ center research showed that an innovative 
education environment would greatly enrich the CoP, 
particularly in terms of content, support, and variety of 
possible exchanges. All focus groups participants co-created 
a website architecture and discussed their expectations in 
terms of supports and contents to design an “ideal” distance 
learning device. The contents and supports will be the focus 
of a future article. 
Our user-centered approach must be extended during the 
design/redesign phases by empirical methodology at 
different stages without and /or with “real” users, to ensure 
compliance with the device ergonomic criteria [39]. 
The security and legality of shared medical data such as 
X-rays and/or photographs of patients must be questioned. 
Further studies on the security aspects of the device are also 
important to be conducted to minimize the risks of malicious 
attacks and gain more confidence from the practitioners. 
More extensive experimentation should be carried out, 
especially to deepen practitioners’ expectations in post 
COVID-19 period to justify usefulness of the proposed 
requirements. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Editorial board, "Informal learning communities, communities of 
practice - Learning with, by and for others" ¿Interrogations ? review, 
vol.32, 2019. [retrieved: May 2022] 
[2] 
B. Mercieca, "What Is a Community of Practice?", in Communities of 
Practice: Facilitating Social Learning in Higher Education, J. 
McDonald and A. Cater-Steel, Singapore: Springer, pp. 3‑25, 2017.  
[3] 
E. Wenger, "Communities of Practice and Social Learning Systems: 
the Career of a Concept ", in Social Learning Systems and 
Communities of Practice, C. Blackmore, London: Springer, pp. 
179‑198, 1998.  
[4] 
J. Lave and E. Wenger, Situated learning:  Legitimate peripheral 
participation. New York, NY, US: Cambridge University Press, pp. 
26-49, 1991. 
[5] 
E. Wenger, R. A. McDermott, and W. Snyder, "Cultivating 
Communities of Practice". Boston, Mass: Harvard Business Review 
Press, 2002. 
[6] 
P. Lièvre, E. Bonnet, and N. Laroche, XXI. Etienne Wenger. 
Community of practice and social theory of learning. EMS Editions, 
pp.427-447, 2016.  
[7] 
A. Jezegou. "Distance in formation. First milestone for an 
operationalization of the theory of transactional distance". Distances 
et savoirs, Vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 341-366, 2007.  
[8] 
J. H. Park and H. J. Choi, "Factors Influencing Adult Learners’ 
Decision to Drop Out or Persist in Online Learning" Learning & 
Technology Library (LearnTechLib), 2009. [retrieved: May 2022] 
[9] 
V. Glikman, "Learners and tutors: a European approach to human 
mediations",Education permanente, vol 152, pp.55-69, 2002. 
[retrieved: May 2022] 
[10] V. Glikman, "Remote Tutor", in Distance education tutoring, B. D. 
Lievre, C. Depover, A. Jaillet, D. Peraya, and J.-J. Quintin, De Boeck, 
pp.137‑158, 2011. [retrieved: May 2022] 
[11] C. Vernazza, "Introduction of an e-portfolio in clinical dentistry: staff 
and student views ", vol. 15, no.1, pp.36-41, Eur J Dent Educ, 2011. 
[12] R. L. Kardos, J. M. Cook, R. J. Butson, and T. B. Kardos, "The 
development of an ePortfolio for life-long reflective learning and 
auditable professional certification ", Eur. J. Dent. Educ. Off. J. 
Assoc. Dent. Educ. Eur., vol. 13, no.3, pp.135‑141, August 2009. 
[13] L. Browne, S. Mehra, R. Rattan, and G. Thomas, "Comparing lecture 
and e-learning as pedagogies for new and experienced professionals 
in dentistry", Br. Dent. J., vol. 197, no. 2, pp.95‑97, July 2004. 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[14] L. Stow and D. Higgins, "Development and evaluation of online 
education to increase the forensic relevance of oral health records. ", 
Aust. Dent. J., vol. 63, no. 1, pp.81‑93, March 2018. 
[15] X. Liu, J. Zhou, L. Chen, Y. Yang, and J. Tan, "Impact of COVID‐19 
epidemic on live online dental continuing education.", Eur. J. Dent. 
Educ., vol. 24, no. 4, pp.786‑789, Nov. 2020. 
[16] H. C. Cheng, S.-L. Lu, Y. C. Yen, P. Siewchaisakul, A. M. F. Yen, 
and S. L. S. Chen, "Dental education changed by COVID-19: 
Student’s perceptions and attitudes", BMC Med. Educ., vol. 21, no. 1, 
pp.364, July 2021. 
[17] R. Elledge, R. Williams, C. Fowell, and J. Green, « Maxillofacial 
education in the time of COVID-19: the West Midlands experience », 
Br. J. Oral Maxillofac. Surg., vol. 60 no. 1, pp.52-57, July 2020.  
[18] K. T. Miller, W. M. Hannum, T. Morley, and W. R. Proffit, « Use of 
recorded interactive seminars in orthodontic distance education », 
Am. J. Orthod. Dentofac. Orthop. Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Orthod. Its 
Const. Soc. Am. Board Orthod., vol. 132, no. 3, pp.408‑414, 
September 2007. 
[19] J. M. C. Bastien and D. L. Scapin, "A validation of ergonomic criteria 
for the evaluation of human‐computer interfaces ", Int. J. Human–
Computer Interact., vol. 4, no. 2, pp.183‑196, Apr. 1992. 
[20] É. Brangier and J. M. C. Bastien. "The evolution of the ergonomics of 
computer products: accessibility, usability, emotionality and 
influenceability", Presses Universitaires de France, pp.307‑328, 2010. 
[Retrieved: Apr. 2022].  
[21] K. M. Bernie, E. T. Couch, and M. Walsh, "Perceptions of California 
Dental Hygienists Regarding Mandatory Continued Competence 
Requirements as a Condition of License Renewal", J. Dent. Hyg. 
JDH, vol. 90, no. 5, pp.275‑282, Oct. 2016. 
[22] M. Bonabi, S. Z. Mohebbi, E. A. Martinez-Mier, T. P. Thyvalikakath, 
and M. R. Khami, "Effectiveness of smart phone application use as 
continuing medical education method in pediatric oral health care: a 
randomized trial", BMC Med. Educ., vol. 19, no. 1, pp.431, Nov. 
2019. 
[23] K. P. Klein, K. T. Miller, M. W. Brown, and W. R. Proffit, "In-office 
distance learning for practitioners", Am. J. Orthod. Dentofac. Orthop. 
Off. Publ. Am. Assoc. Orthod. Its Const. Soc. Am. Board Orthod., 
vol. 140, no. 1, pp.126‑132, Jul. 2011. 
[24] E. W. Odell, C. A. Francis, K. A. Eaton, P. A. Reynolds, and R. D. 
Mason, "A study of videoconferencing for postgraduate continuing 
education in dentistry in the UK--the teachers’ view", Eur. J. Dent. 
Educ. Off. J. Assoc. Dent. Educ. Eur., vol. 5, no. 3, pp.113‑119, Aug. 
2001. 
[25] N. Mattheos and al., "Potential of information technology in dental 
education.", Eur. J. Dent. Educ., vol. 12, pp.85‑92, Feb. 2008. 
[26] J. Brown, « Online learning. CDS to present debut webinar on Direct 
Resin Pearls », CDS Rev., vol. 103, no. 5, pp.14‑15, Oct. 2010. 
[27] P. Rekawek, P. Rice, and N. Panchal, "The impact of COVID-19: 
Considerations for future dental conferences", J. Dent. Educ., vol. 84, 
no. 11, pp.1188‑1191, Nov. 2020. 
[28] M. Grangeat, "L. S. Vygotski : group learning ", Éditions Sciences 
Humaines, pp.134-141, 2016. 
[29] H. Spallek and al., "Supporting emerging disciplines with e-
communities: needs and benefits ", J. Med. Internet Res., vol. 10, no. 
2, Apr-Jun. 2008. 
[30] P. Ratka-Krüger, J. P. Wölber, J. Blank, K. Holst, I. Hörmeyer, and E. 
Vögele, "MasterOnline Periodontology and Implant Therapy-revisited 
after seven years: A case study of the structures and outcomes in a 
blended learning CPD ", Eur. J. Dent. Educ. Off. J. Assoc. Dent. 
Educ. Eur., vol. 22, no. 1, pp.7‑13, Feb. 2018. 
[31] R. Kuba and A. Kohli, "Continuing professional development of 
dentists through distant learning: An Indira Gandhi National Open 
University-Dental Council of India experiment a report", Indian J. 
Dent. Res., vol. 25, no. 6, pp.821‑827, Dec. 2014. 
[32] G. Ortoleva and M. Bétrancourt, "Supporting productive 
collaboration in a computer-supported instructional activity: peer-
feedback on critical incidents in health care education", J. Vocat. 
Educ. Train., vol. 68, no. 2, pp.178‑197, Apr. 2016. 
[33] L. Cifuentes, G. Maxwell, and Ş. Bulu, "Technology Integration 
Through Professional Learning Community", J. Educ. Comput. 
Res., vol. 44, pp.59‑82, Jan. 2011. 
[34] S. Ouellet, I. Caya, and M. P. Tremblay,"The contribution of a 
learning community to developing collaborative and inclusive 
practices: action research", Éducation Francoph., vol. 39, no. 2, 
pp.207‑226, 2011. 
[35] L. C. Li, J. M. Grimshaw, C. Nielsen, M. Judd, P. C. Coyte, and I. 
D. Graham, "Use of communities of practice in business and health 
care sectors: A systematic review ", Implement. Sci., vol. 4, no. 1, 
pp.27, Dec. 2009. 
[36] S. Proulx, "Virtual communities: what makes a connection" in S. 
Proulx, L. Poissant and M. Sénécal, "Virtual communities: thinking 
and acting in a network", Presses de l’Université Laval, pp.13-26, 
2006. 
[37] L. Arcand, "The community of practice a relevant tool: summary of 
knowledge adapted to the context of public health", Nov. 2017. 
[38] T. 
Apostolidis, 
"Social 
representations 
and 
triangulation: 
theoretical-methodological issues", In: J. C. Abric, "Methods of 
studying social representations", Ed Érès, pp.13-35, 2003.  
[39]  J. D. Gould and C. Lewis, "Designing for usability—key principles 
and what designers think", Communications of the ACM, pp.50–
53, Dec. 1983. [retrieved: May 2022] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

