Design Thinking Applied to the Internet of Things 
A Project on Technological Innovation in Agriculture and Food Processing 
 
Lasse Berntzen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Kongsberg, Norway 
e-mail: lasse.berntzen@usn.no 
Adrian Florea 
School of Engineering 
Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu 
Sibiu, Romania 
e-mail: adrian.florea@ulbsibiu.ro
 
 
Abstract— Agriculture experiences rapid changes due to 
advances in technology. The introduction of mechanical 
equipment caused the first agricultural revolution. Agriculture 
is moving into the information age, where data are collected and 
analyzed to improve production and quality. Internet of Things 
(IoT) plays an essential role in innovative developments. This 
paper introduces the use of Design Thinking (DT) to create 
innovative solutions for agriculture and food processing. DT is 
well suited for multidisciplinary teams. An ongoing project is 
presented where agriculture and technology students meet 
farmers and other stakeholders in a summer school setting to 
learn from each other and innovate together. DT is used as the 
framework for innovation and co-creation. 
Keywords-design thinking; agriculture; Internet of Things; 
IoT; innovation. 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
In 2021, Lucian Blaga University of Sibiu, Romania, and 
the University of South-Eastern Norway won a grant for a 
project to exploit the Internet of Things (IoT) within 
agriculture and food processing. This paper discusses the 
ideas behind the project and its practical implementation. The 
main assumptions are:  
• 
IoT has a great potential to improve agriculture and food 
processing.  
• 
The design process itself is essential for innovation to 
take place.  
• 
The involvement of different stakeholders in the design 
process is necessary to unleash the potential of IoT 
technology.  
• 
Innovation is achieved by bringing teachers and students 
from agriculture, food processing, engineering, and 
computer science together in a workshop with farmers 
and IoT specialists. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
discusses the importance of technological innovations in 
agriculture. Section III takes a closer look at the IoT. Section 
IV describes potential areas of IoT applications in agriculture. 
Section V discusses the design process and methodology. 
Section VI describes the practical implementation of the 
project as two summer schools focusing on IoT in agriculture. 
Section VII discusses the practical implications of the project, 
while Section VIII provides a conclusion.  
II. AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENTS 
Agriculture is essential for society because it represents a 
source of livelihood and raw materials for industry, ensures 
food and fodder supply for people and animals, and 
contributes to national revenue, economic development, and 
international trade. Agriculture provides many employment 
opportunities, such as farm work, building irrigation and 
drainage systems, transporting goods, and retailing products. 
Through the European Horizon 2020 research program, 
the European Union acknowledges the importance of focused 
research and testing of the IoT to support the development and 
take-up of the technology in different economic sectors 
(industry, agriculture, logistics, transport) [1]. On April 9th, 
2019, EU Member States signed the declaration of 
cooperation on "A smart and sustainable digital future for 
European agriculture and rural areas" [2]. The declaration 
acknowledges the potential of digital technologies and 
proposes actions for the digitalization of agriculture in 
Europe. The use of technology substantially impacts 
agricultural production, and the introduction of automation, 
robotics, IoT, knowledge-based systems, and artificial 
intelligence facilitates further improvements in farming 
practice [3]. New technology impacts the whole agrarian 
ecosystem and provides new opportunities for monitoring and 
control, ensuring the safety of agricultural food products. 
Agriculture is moving into the information age, where data 
are collected and analyzed to improve production and quality. 
IoT plays an essential role in innovative developments. As the 
global population increases, smart farming and precision 
agriculture [4] are crucial for a sustainable future. Smart 
farming and precision agriculture reduce human intervention 
and increase production quantities. 
Specifically, IoT systems and drones are used in 
applications like precision agriculture, crop irrigation 
planning, plant disease detection, and soil texture mapping. It 
is also used for crop maturity monitoring to correctly assess 
optimal harvest time and monitoring growth to plan the 
necessary equipment for harvesting, transporting, and storing 
the production.  
Images collected with drones can lead to a correct 
estimation of biomass or identify fruit diseases. Automated 
harvesting using mobile robots and robotic arms can reduce 
human labor and increase productivity. The development of 
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

computer engineering and information technology created the 
premises of a data-driven society. Data has become a key 
element in modern agriculture (Agriculture 4.0 [5]), helping 
producers make critical decisions [6].  
IoT devices equipped with sensors can collect data and 
forward the data to cloud-based solutions using artificial 
intelligence techniques to maximize productivity and improve 
sustainability. 
Sustainable agriculture is not restricted to the EU; it is 
global. In this sense, the United Nations (UN) [7] targets the 
following sustainable development goals (see Table 1). 
TABLE I.  
UN SUSTAINABILITY GOALS RELATED TO AGRICULTURE 
Goal 
Description 
Zero hunger 
Implementing sustainable food production 
systems and resilient practices in agriculture, 
especially for developing countries, such that 
by 2030, hunger and malnutrition will end 
worldwide. 
Clean water and 
sanitation 
International cooperation for protecting 
wetlands and rivers and sharing water 
treatment technologies to ensure clean water 
and sanitation of the planet's population in the 
conditions of population growth and climate 
changes. 
Industry, 
innovation, and 
infrastructure 
Increasing investment in scientific research, 
innovation, and infrastructure to reduce the 
digital gap (digital technologies and Internet 
connectivity) between countries and promote 
sustainable development in industry and 
agriculture. 
Responsible 
consumption 
and production 
More efficient management of natural 
resources and removal of toxic waste, halving 
global food waste per capita, waste recycling, 
and education toward more responsible 
consumption. 
Life on land 
Preserving and restoring the use of terrestrial 
ecosystems such as forests, wetlands, deserts, 
and mountains, stopping the biodiversity loss 
by 2030, affected by population growth, 
industrialization, and transition to cities and 
climate changes. 
 
III. INTERNET-OF-THINGS 
IoT refers to devices exchanging data with other devices 
and systems through the Internet. IoT is expected to offer 
advanced connectivity of devices, systems, and services 
beyond Machine-to-Machine (M2M) communications and 
covers various protocols, domains, and applications. In 2014, 
the number of IoT devices was estimated to be approximately 
19.7 billion and is expected to grow to 95.5 billion in 2025 [8].  
Figure 1 shows a model of a typical IoT device with a 
microcontroller, sensors, actuators, and communication 
technology.  
IoT systems are multilayer architectures [9]. Figure 2 
shows a simple architectural model with an application layer 
and two sublayers: the perception sublayer and the network 
sublayer.  
The sensors (perception sublayer) collect data from the 
outside world. A sensor transforms the detection or 
measurement of a physical property into an electric signal. 
Physical properties include temperature, humidity, moisture, 
barometric pressure, gases, movement, distance, light, 
voltage, and current. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Typical IoT device. 
More advanced sensors may read RFID tags or positions 
from satellites through the Global Positioning System (GPS). 
 
 
Figure 2.  IoT basic architecture. 
Actuators may be simple output devices such as light-
emitting diodes (LEDs), displays, motors, and servos. All 
kinds of electric units can be controlled through relays. The 
microcontroller processes the inputs from sensors and controls 
the actuators. An IoT device also needs communication 
capabilities 
to 
communicate 
through 
the 
Internet. 
Communication (the network sublayer) can be wired or 
wireless. 
Several 
technologies 
exist 
for 
wireless 
communication, such as WiFi, Bluetooth, LoRa, NFC, and 
GSM [10]. 
Data collected by an IoT device can be used to control its 
surroundings and sent for further processing through the 
Internet. A typical application is shown in Figure 3, where a 
temperature sensor is used to control a heating element. The 
program code in the application layer reads the temperature 
and decides whether the heating element should be turned on 
or off. At the same time, the temperature data is sent to a 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

decision support system that may influence when to turn the 
heating element on and off to optimize energy use. 
 
 
Figure 3.  An example of an IoT application. 
IV. IOT IN AGRICULTURE 
Agriculture is a promising field for the use of IoT. The 
agricultural processes rely on collecting data, analyzing the 
data, and using the results to create optimal conditions for 
growth. A typical example is a greenhouse where optimizing 
temperature, humidity, lighting, CO2, and fertilizers can 
significantly increase the yield. Table II and Table III show 
examples of how IoT solutions can be used for crops and 
livestock management. 
TABLE II.  
IOT SOLUTIONS FOR CROPS MANAGEMENT 
Solution 
Description 
Environmental 
monitoring 
Collect data about environmental variables 
(temperature, humidity, moisture, barometric 
pressure). Data is used for automated decision-
making 
and 
forecasting. 
Environmental 
monitoring may be done by a network of 
interconnected sensor stations or using land and 
aerial drones. 
Crop 
measurement 
Measuring when the crop reaches a certain 
height or size. Used to optimize harvesting 
according to requirements set by customers; rot 
detection. 
Irrigation 
Use of sensor data and machine learning 
algorithms to decide on irrigation. Reduce 
unnecessary spills of water. 
Fertilizing 
Use of data to optimize the use of fertilizer. 
Reduce the amount of fertilizer used. 
Pest control 
Detecting pests, e.g., through discoloration, and 
minimizing the use of pesticides by targeting 
only crops with specific needs. 
Decision-
making 
Deciding when to sow and harvest based on 
updated measurements and forecasting. 
Automation 
Automating 
machinery 
for 
sowing 
and 
harvesting. 
Possibilities 
for 
detecting 
malfunctions 
and 
suggesting 
preventive 
maintenance 
 
IoT in agriculture contributes to improved quality and 
efficiency and is essential for value creation for farmers. 
The examples presented show how IoT can be utilized on 
farms. However, IoT also has a role in the whole value chain, 
from raw materials to the end customer. Table IV lists some 
opportunities for using IoT in the agricultural value chain. 
 
TABLE III.  
IOT SOLUTIONS FOR  LIVESTOCK MANAGEMENT 
Solution 
Description 
Monitoring 
Monitor livestock for health problems, find the 
right moment for insemination using birthing 
sensors or check for mastitis signs. It can also 
monitor and increase the quality of milk and 
wool. 
Feeding 
Optimize 
livestock 
feeding 
by 
mixing 
combinations of food and feeding at optimal 
cycles. 
Control/ 
logistics 
Keep track of livestock locations using RFID 
and GPS tracking devices. Control animals by 
virtual fences (Geofences). It saves physical 
fences and reduces the need for maintenance. 
Virtual fences also improve human access to 
nature. 
Automation 
Robots can take care of milking and harvesting 
wool. 
 
Recent approaches combine IoT and blockchain 
technology with smart agriculture. Blockchains and smart 
contracts can improve the logistics and traceability of 
agricultural products [11]. With increased focus on product 
origins and food safety, small IoT devices may follow the 
products from the farm to the consumer. Such devices will 
keep track of the supply chain and detect anomalies in storage 
temperatures, etc. [12].  
TABLE IV.  
IOT IN THE AGRICULTURAL VALUE CHAIN 
Solution 
Description 
Origin 
tracking 
Use intelligent tags (RFID, NFC) to track 
deliveries through the value chain. 
Quality 
tracking 
Smart IoT devices can keep track of 
environmental conditions during transport and 
storage. 
 
Precision agriculture-specific approaches combine IoT 
with big data and decision support systems, combined with 
artificial intelligence prediction techniques for efficient 
control of farm irrigation valves and soil moisture prediction 
[13]. 
A practical example of the innovative use of IoT in 
agriculture is the early detection of soft rot in potato storage 
bins [14]. Soft rot spreads on contact, and if detected early, 
rotten potatoes can be removed from the container and save 
the rest of the batch. The farmer can be alerted by an app 
connected to the Internet.  
V. DESIGN THINKING 
This section describes Design Thinking (DT). DT was first 
introduced worldwide in 2005 at Stanford University in Palo 
Alto, USA. In Europe, DT was adopted in 2007 by the Hasso 
Plattner Institute in Potsdam, Germany [15]. DT contemplates 
human needs while considering both a technical perspective 
(technological feasibility) and an economic perspective 
(economic viability). 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

DT is based on the creative power of teamwork, 
collaboration, innovation, and interdisciplinary teams. 
Implementing this concept involves an iterative process based 
on the following states: understanding, observation, defining 
a point of view, design, developing a prototype, and 
testing/validation (see Figure 4). 
 
Figure 4.  Design Thinking: An Iterative but not Linear Process. 
The authors have experience using DT in workshops and 
hackathons and see it as a feasible methodology to enhance 
innovation in agriculture. A bibliometric analysis was 
performed to investigate the influence of DT on agriculture. 
The period examined was from 2004 to 2021. Only 36 articles 
containing the phrases "design thinking" + "agriculture" + 
"innovation" in the "Title," "Abstract," or "Keywords" or 
appeared at least ten times in the article's content were 
selected. 
VOSviewer is a software tool for constructing and 
visualizing bibliometric networks using advanced clustering 
and visualization techniques to show the relationships 
between keywords characterizing articles from the Scopus 
database. 
VOSviewer enabled us to determine how often each item 
occurred within the network and how often the elements were 
cited together. The use of the software also facilitated 
combining the analyzed data set into clusters which were then 
marked out on the map in different colors. 
The bibliometric study shows that very few researchers 
have considered DT for innovation in agriculture. Four 
clusters, drawn in different colors, are visible in the chart (see 
Figure 8 at the end of the paper). The first cluster (red) focuses 
on the system and design thinking related to company, 
business models, value, collaboration, diversity, application, 
and sustainability. The keywords belonging to the second 
cluster (yellow) gravitate around innovation and link 
innovation with keywords like approach, knowledge, idea, 
research, use, policy, process, and decision. The third cluster 
(blue) reflects the entrepreneurship approach learned in 
university and focuses on real farmers’ challenges and needs, 
(case) studies, and their role for economic profit and animal 
welfare. Finally, the fourth cluster (green) focuses on 
sustainable agricultural developments based on science and 
engineering. Table V shows the clustering of keywords in the 
36 articles found. 
For example, DT in building agricultural equipment aims 
to understand the needs of the customers, farmers, workers, 
and machine operators, to convert the ideas through a useable 
approach to develop a problem-solving activity or machine. A 
challenge for integrating DT in agriculture consists of 
bringing the farmers into the process of designing solutions. 
Technology innovation has become an important trend in the 
development 
of 
various 
sectors. 
Compared 
with 
manufacturing and high-tech industries, agriculture typically 
pays more attention to the conditions of farm sites than 
technology. The successful growth and transformation of the 
agriculture industry require a deep understanding of local 
social contexts and farmers' habits. 
TABLE V.  
CLUSTERS GENERATED BY THE BIBLIOMETRIC STUDY 
Cluster # 
Number of 
keywords 
Important (relevant) Keywords 
1.  
13 
design thinking with relations to 
problem, model, system, 
company, business, industry, 
technology, collaboration, value, 
diversity, application and 
sustainability 
2.  
10 
innovation, approach, research, 
policy, process, decision, 
knowledge, idea, use, evidence 
3.  
10 
entrepreneurship, university, 
challenge, (case) study, paper, 
role, farmer, need, animal 
welfare 
4.  
10 
agriculture, (sustainable) 
development, (agricultural) 
engineering, project, science, 
integration, implementation, 
world 
 
The intention of young farmers to employ innovative 
technologies depends on the perceived usefulness and the 
perceived ease of use of IoT devices. The reputation of system 
suppliers and users' trust in software and hardware suppliers 
affect users' intention to adopt innovative technologies. 
Young farmers' intention to adopt smart sensor technology 
increases with the reputation of IoT suppliers, field-level 
information analysis quality, and individual privacy security 
[16]. 
DT may innovate agriculture by combining expertise from 
multiple perspectives and disciplines, primarily computer 
science 
and 
agriculture/food 
processing, 
stimulating 
collaborative work to facilitate the deployment of digital 
technologies in agriculture. More precisely, the innovation is 
based on transferring knowledge and skills from the computer 
science domain to the agriculture/food processing domain and 
vice versa. 
The farmers (who may have basic knowledge of digital 
technologies but almost no knowledge of IoT systems, 
artificial intelligence, robotics, or drones) should see possible 
opportunities in agriculture provided by digitalization. The 
engineers need to understand agriculture's practical problems 
and challenges to design and implement proper solutions [17]. 
VI. ENTREPRENEURIAL AGRICULTURE AND EDUCATION 
As shown in Figure 5, DT connects technology with the 
needs of the market or the society. In this context, the 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

technology is IoT, while the market is the agricultural sector. 
Research is done from the initial idea, and a product or process 
is designed and developed. A prototype is made and tested 
before continuing with manufacturing, followed by marketing 
and sales. 
The idea generation requires knowledge of both 
technology and agriculture. IoT experts need to share their 
knowledge with farmers and vice versa. Most farmers are 
unaware of the opportunities provided by IoT. At the same 
time, engineers often lack the domain knowledge to create 
products and processes that create high value for the 
agricultural sector. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.  Design Thinking process for IoT in agriculture. 
Usually, in universities, engineering and agriculture are 
separate study programs within their respective faculties. 
Agriculture students do not learn about IoT, and engineering 
students do not study agriculture. Therefore, a viable approach 
would be to create multidisciplinary activities where students 
from both programs meet, learn from each other, and co-create 
new products and processes. Such activities could be: 
• 
Cross-disciplinary course modules where students work 
together to identify and solve real problems in agriculture 
by using IoT. 
• 
Shorter "Hackathon" style events where students do the 
same, but within a strict timeframe, e.g., 24 or 48 hours. 
• 
Summer schools where students do the same, but within 
a longer timeframe, e.g., two weeks. 
The students will bring their respective backgrounds, but 
they also need training in DT. The DT process is the catalyzer 
for innovation and will be the common ground for the 
students. The DT process is a good framework for co-creation 
activities.  
 
Figure 6.  Skillset. 
Figure 6 shows the different skills required to contribute 
to IoT in agriculture. 
Creating value for the customer (farmer) should be the 
primary goal of IoT products and services. The agriculture 
sector includes the whole value chain from the farmer to the 
end consumer. Figure 7 presents the different elements of the 
agricultural value chain. The input is seeds, fertilizer, water, 
fodder, etc. The production results are grain, vegetables, 
fruits, dairy products, meat, etc. The products must be cleaned, 
graded, and packed before they are either distributed to the 
retail market or refined into more complex products.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Agricultural value chain (crops and livestock). 
Education, stakeholder cooperation, and the regulatory 
environment supports this value chain. IoT can be integrated 
at any stage of this agricultural value chain to digitalize the 
process, optimization, tracking, and quality assurance. As 
documented earlier, developments in agriculture are high on 
the political agenda and closely connected to the United 
Nations sustainability goals. Developments within agriculture 
can potentially revolutionize how the global population can be 
fed. 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Agriculture is essential in achieving the sustainability 
goals set by the United Nations, in particular. The imbalance 
regarding the agriculture performance of world countries must 
be reduced only by changing the agricultural landscape 
through new technologies or new methodologies and cross-
fertilizing different scientific and educational sectors.  
This paper has discussed the use of IoT in agriculture. DT 
has been suggested as a viable methodology to achieve 
innovation. 
As already mentioned, this paper reports on an ongoing 
project to examine and promote IoT use in agriculture. An 
essential part of the project is two editions of a summer school, 
one in Norway and one in Romania, where technology 
students will work with agriculture and food processing 
students to innovate together. The summer schools will be on 
farms where students explore real problems in an authentic 
setting.   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was partially funded by the project MAPIoT 
(Modernizing Agricultural Practice using Internet of Things), 
grant 20-COP-0019 no. F-SEE-026/17.06.2021, Education, 
Scholarships, Apprenticeships, and Youth Entrepreneurship 
Programme (ESAYEP) in Romania financed by the EEA 
Financial Mechanism 2014-2021, Cooperation Projects in 
Higher Education Area. 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

REFERENCES 
[1] Europe's Internet of Things Policy, https://ec.europa.eu/digital-
single-market/en/research-innovation-iot, [retrieved: 06, 2022] 
[2] EU Member States join forces on digitalisation for European 
agriculture and rural areas, https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-
market/en/news/eu-member-states-join-forces-digitalisation-
european-agriculture-and-rural-areas, [retrieved: 06, 2022] 
[3] A. Feher, V. Goșa, M. Raicov, D. Haranguș, B. Condea, 
“Convergence of Romanian and Europe Union agriculture–
evolution and prospective assessment,” Land Use Policy, 67, 
pp. 670-678, 2017. 
[4] A. Triantafyllou, P.  Sarigiannidis, S. Bibi, “Precision 
agriculture: A remote sensing monitoring system architecture,” 
Information, 10(11), 348, pp. 1-25, 2019. 
[5] I. Zambon, M.  Cecchini, G.  Egidi, M. G. Saporito, A. 
Colantoni, “Revolution 4.0: Industry vs. agriculture in a future 
development for SMEs,” Processes, 7(1), 36, pp. 1-16, 2019. 
[6] V. Saiz-Rubio and F. Rovira-Más, “From smart farming 
towards agriculture 5.0: A review on crop data management,” 
Agronomy, 10(2), 207, pp. 1-21, 2020. 
[7] United Nations, Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for 
Sustainable Development, Resolution adopted by the General 
Assembly on September 25th, 2015, A/RES/70/1. 
[8] A. Florea, “Digital Design Skills for Factories of the Future,” 
In MATEC Web of Conferences, vol. 290, 14002. EDP 
Sciences, pp. 1-14, 2019. 
[9] A. Faid, M.  Sadik, E. Sabir, “IoT-based Low Cost Architecture 
for Smart Farming,” In 2020 International Wireless 
Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC), pp. 1296-
1302, IEEE, 2020. 
[10] A. Khanna, and S.  Kaur, “Evolution of Internet of Things (IoT) 
and its significant impact in the field of Precision Agriculture,” 
Computers and Electronics in Agriculture, 157(C), pp. 218-
231, 2019. 
[11] Y. Voutos, G.  Drakopoulos, P.  Mylonas, “Smart agriculture: 
An open field for smart contracts,” In 2019 4th South-East 
Europe Design Automation, Computer Engineering, Computer 
Networks and Social Media Conference (SEEDA-CECNSM), 
IEEE,  pp. 1-6, 2019. 
[12] W. Lin et al, “Blockchain technology in current agricultural 
systems: from techniques to applications,” IEEE Access, 8, pp. 
143920-143937, 2020. 
[13] B. Keswani et al.,  “Improving weather dependent zone specific 
irrigation control scheme in IoT and big data enabled self-
driven 
precision 
agriculture 
mechanism,” 
Enterprise 
Information Systems, 14(9-10), pp. 1494-1515, 2020. 
[14] M. F. Rutolo, J. P. Clarkson, G. Harper, J. A. Covington, “The 
use of gas phase detection and monitoring of soft rot infection 
in store,” Postharvest Biology and Technology, 145, pp. 15-19, 
2018. 
[15] C. Meinel U. Weinberg, T. Krohn (Eds.), Design Thinking 
Live: 30 Perspectives on Making Innovation Happen, 
Murmann Publishers, 2017. 
[16] J. H. Chuang, J. H. Wang, C. Liang. “Implementation of 
Internet of Things depends on intention: Young farmers' 
willingness to accept innovative technology,” International 
Food and Agribusiness Management Review, 23(2), pp. 253-
265, 2020.
 
 
Figure 8.  Keyword clusters from VOSviewer. 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

