Understanding Mobile Payment Service in University Campus:  
A Context-awareness View 
 
Hsiao-Chi Wu  
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
hciwu69@gmail.com 
Jen Wel Chen 
Dept. of Information Management  
National Taiwan University 
Dept. of Business Administration 
Chinese Culture University  
Taipei, Taiwan 
d95725009@ntu.edu.tw 
Ching-Cha Hsieh 
Dept. of Information Management 
National Taiwan University 
Taipei, Taiwan 
cchsieh@im.ntu.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—Mobile payment services have gradually become 
popular and so drawn researchers’ attention. Currently, most 
research has focused on issues of the technology itself and 
consumer’s acceptance of this technology, but paid little 
attention to possible social and cultural ramifications. Mobile 
payment services can be used at various locations by different 
types of users, resulting in complex contexts and difficult 
design challenges. This study first examines the context of 
mobile payment services, and then comprehends how this 
context affects its implementation. A context-awareness 
framework is adopted to compare two cases in different 
Taiwanese university campuses. This framework investigates 
the significance of contextual factors during the adoption of 
mobile payment services, such as location, people, objects and 
their interaction. Our findings suggest that, for mobile 
payment services, (1) the socio-spatial dimensions of 
geographical regions affect consumer adoption; (2) the 
developer’s social interpretation of technological artifacts 
facilitates their innovation; (3) and a deep understanding of 
contextual interactions enables the creation of a “must-have” 
mobile payment service, and helps identifies its niche. 
Keywords-mobile payment; context-awareness; location-
based services; university campus 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The growing popularity of mobile payment services has 
increasingly drawn the attention of academic researchers. 
Some scholars argue that because mobile payments (MP) 
allow real-time, cashless, and wireless transactions for 
buying goods and services at any location or time, these 
payments will become a successful mobile service [1, 2]. 
This predicted success of mobile payment services is 
based upon not one single dimension, but rather 
considerations of many different aspects. Dahlberg et al. [3] 
point out that most MP research focuses on issues 
concerning the technology and consumers. Some researchers 
have explored the issue at the national level, such as MP 
environments 
[4-6], 
while 
others 
investigate 
MP 
standardization [7, 8] or provide simple overviews [9]. 
However, 
few 
researchers 
have 
adopted 
multiple 
perspectives of study [2, 10], and none have addressed the 
social and cultural influences of MP [3]. 
The purpose of this paper is to understand the context 
surrounding MP services. MP designers pay close attention 
to mobile environments when designed their applications 
and improving the functionality of MP services [23]. When 
using mobile technology, rapidly changing environmental 
factors are an important issue. Thus, development of MP 
services should not only consider consumers’ technological 
acceptance but also the surrounding context, such as location, 
time, activity, physical objects, etc. Environmental changes 
will trigger various needs and activities, and affect the 
choices of payment services. Some consumers may be 
interested in MP for reasons beyond payments [11], and if a 
certain payment scheme is available for multiple purposes 
and at various locations, consumers will find it more useful 
[10]. Current research has paid little attention to the impact 
of situational changes on the implementation of MP services. 
Due to this research gap, this paper asks two research 
questions. First, how does context affect MP services 
implementation? Secondly, what contextual factors should 
MP developers and service providers focus on when facing 
different 
contexts/environments? 
In 
examining 
these 
questions and mobile payment services, this paper 
investigates two case studies with different context 
environments: 
two 
Taiwanese 
university 
campuses 
undergoing MP services adoption. 
The paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the 
literature related to mobile payments. Section III describes 
data collection strategies and introduces a context-awareness 
framework. Section IV explains case background. Section V 
analyzes these cases. Conclusions and discussion are 
provided in Section VI. 
 
II. 
MOBILE PAYMENTS  
Customer’s acceptance of MP mainly depends on issues 
of cost, security, and convenience [7]. The technology-based 
schemes of MP are divided into card-based and phone-based.  
The card-based scheme remains the preferred scheme for 
payments [12], and adopts the pre-paid solution [10]. Some 
successful MP systems match specific customer needs that 
enhance the convenience of micropayments for daily local 
expenditures, such as public transportation (e.g., Hong 
Kong’s Octopus is one of the most successful smart cards in 
39
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

the world), toll booths (e.g., E-ZPass), and fast-food 
restaurants (e.g., McDonalds) [13]. MP systems are suitable 
for proximity and micropayments, and should not be limited 
to mobile commerce [7, 13]. 
Dahlberg et al. [3] constructed a framework for the 
literature reviews of two applied theories – the five forces 
model [14] and the generic contingency theory (73 papers, 
1999 - 2006) on MP. The rate of technological study is 
about 40% of the related researches; these studies mainly 
focus on conceptual technical constructions, and the 
proposal of tools or mechanisms for MP transactions and 
security. The rate of consumer research is about 27%, and 
these researches explore consumer adoption/acceptance, and 
focus on ease of use, compatibility, cost, trust, and 
usefulness for adopted MP services. It is regrettable that 
there is no research that investigates the effects of social and 
cultural changes on the development of MP. 
Specific social and cultural issues may influence MP 
adoption, such as demographics, lifestyle characteristics, and 
cultural differences [13]. Payment services refer to an 
individual’s location. The location factor is one of the 
essential factors that separates mobile commerce from e-
commerce [15]. As individuals remain in different contexts, 
the various needs of consumption affect their choices of 
payment services [3]. Under the mobile computing, the 
application and development of MP services should pay 
more attention to the context of social influence; however, 
the current researches neglect this issue.  
University campuses promote card-based MP services, 
which are used as a payment tool as well as for student ID 
cards and access to buildings [16, 17], these functions that 
enhance 
administrative 
efficiency 
[16], 
reduce 
administration costs, and increase incomes [18]. Mirza and 
Alghathbar 
investigated 
smart 
card 
applications 
in 
universities around the world, including North America, 
West Europe, and Asia. They surveyed 20 universities with 
34 applications, and generalized the most popular four 
applications, which are student ID cards, book borrowing, 
and access to libraries and photocopies [17]. Related 
applications can be generalized into three categories, namely, 
(1) student ID card as identification; (2) entrance cards for 
libraries, buildings, parking lots, etc.; and (3) e-purses for 
consumption (e-purses is a prepaid card which can be used 
for payment instead of coins [26]). This paper explores the 
impact of contexts on MP services and elaborates on the 
multiple-purpose applications of MP.   
 
III. 
RESEARCH METHOD 
A. Data Collection Strategies 
This paper adopts a case study approach, allowing the 
researcher to connect the research phenomenon with actual 
situations [19], in order to recognize the dynamics of these 
phenomenon. Primary data collection methods include 
participant observation, in-depth interviews, secondary data, 
and questionnaires (see Table I). Adopting these multiple 
sources of data collection helps ensure data authenticity and 
repeatedly validity. 
TABLE I.  
DATA COLLECTION STRAGEGIES 
Two Cases 
Data type 
TU 
CU 
Participation 
observations 
Observation 
period: 
2008.07-2010.05 
Observation 
period: 
2006.03-2010.05 
One author works in CU 
11 person-interviews.  
10 person-interviews.  
In-depth 
interviews 
Each interview lasted 90 to 120 
minutes. 
Participants included mobile payment team leaders, 
developers, merchants, etc. 
14 copies 
32 copies 
Secondary data
Proposals, project reports, meeting minutes, etc. 
Questionnaires
1,852 users, such as 
students, staffs, and 
teachers 
-- 
 
B. A Context-Awareness Framework  
Mobile services focus on the “anywhere, anytime” 
method of development, as mobile computing does not 
occur at a single location in a single context, but rather spans 
a multitude of situations and locations [20]. The greatest 
challenge is to design successful mobile services that deal 
with multiple contexts. Individuals engaged in related 
activities may trigger individual payment situations and 
other MP services, such as photocopying, overdue fines on 
library books, etc. As MP services face dynamic 
environments, MP developers must be aware of the context 
of MP services, and be able to design an MP system that 
satisfies consumers’ needs.  
Schilit and Want [20] defined context as “a constantly 
changing execution environment.” Context can include 
computing, users, physical location [20], and even social 
situations [27]. Dey, Abowd and Salber [21] defined context 
as “any information that can be used to characterize the 
situation of entities (i.e., whether a person, place, or object), 
that are considered relevant to the interaction between a 
user and an application, including user and application 
themselves. Context is typically the location, identity, and 
state of people, groups, and computational and physical 
objects.” In this paper, three entities were identified—places, 
people, and things [21, 22]. 
• 
People include individuals or groups.  
• 
Places apply to geographical spaces, such as rooms, 
offices, buildings, or streets. 
• 
Things 
refer 
to 
physical 
objects, 
software 
components, or artifacts, etc. 
In order to describe these entities, four characteristics of 
context are listed, as follows. 
• 
Identity refers to assigning a unique identifier to an 
entity. 
• 
Location includes position information and spatial 
relationships between entities. 
• 
State 
(or 
activity) 
identifies 
the 
observable 
properties of an entity. 
40
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

• 
Time characterizes a situation, either as a timestamp 
or as a time span. 
 
 
Figure 1.  A context-awareness framework  
sourced from Dey, Abowd, and Salber [23]  
 
In order to develop MP applications that satisfy 
consumers’ needs, this study constructs a context-awareness 
framework based on the definition of context described by 
Dey, Abowd and Salber [21] (see Figure 1). The primary 
advantage of their approach is its inclusion of a complete but 
generalized scope of context, that can then be applied to 
different applications [22]. Application designers choose 
what context best fits an application upon an in-depth 
understanding of their contextual options. Similarly, 
application designers also determine what context-awareness 
behaviors are required to support their applications, through 
an in-depth understanding of how a given context is used 
[23]. 
 
IV. 
CASE BACKGROUND 
This study examines two universities in Taiwan 
(anonymous: TU and CU) as case subjects. TU is a public 
university, while CU is private. After some time, both 
schools adopted the same card service as their campus MP 
system. This paper compares the consequences of MP 
implementation in distinct settings in order to understand the 
significance of contextual factors for the adoption of MP.  
A. Case Study: TU TCard  
TU is one of the top national universities in Taiwan. In 
2007, TU replaced their student ID cards (TCard) with 
contact-less and store-value smart cards, namely, the 
EasyCard, in order to provide more convenient services for 
faculty and students. The new smart TCard is used not only 
for identification and entrance access to locations, but also 
as a payment card. Since September 2008, there have been 
16 campus shops that provide MP services. In June 2009, 
TU disseminated an on-line questionnaire to investigate 
usage of the TCard among faculty and students, in response 
to decreasing MP consumption. 
B. Case Study: CU UPass  
In 1998, CU was the first university to issue MP cards 
(UPass) in Taiwan, and three well-regarded versions of MP 
cards have been used in the development of MP applications. 
Since 1998, CU has attempted to develop more services for 
the UPass. In 2005, CU again served as a pioneer and 
cooperated with the largest transportation card system 
(EasyCard) in northern Taiwan. CU changed the UPass from 
a debit card into an RFID smart card, which then provided 
various store-value services with contact-less Mifare 
standards. Since the School of Continuing Education (SCE) 
at CU operates independently of the university, the MP card 
application was first implemented by the academic centers 
of SCE, initiated under the planning of the IT Department of 
SCE.  
In 2006, SCE introduced 12 campus services for UPass, 
including student identification, entrance access to specific 
locations, libraries, parking lots, venue reservations, 
photocopying, vending machine use, services for school 
administration, and intelligent management of classrooms in 
integrated academic buildings. As a result, numerous 
universities asked the SCE of CU to help promote MP 
systems in their own universities.  
 
TU and CU eventually both selected the EasyCard as 
their campus MP system. EasyCard is utilized by northern 
Taiwan’s largest transportation systems, and its development 
is similar to Hong Kong’s Octopus card. Since April 2010, 
EasyCard has extended its service to transactions at over 
10,000 locations, including four major convenience store 
chains, coffee shop chains, drug store chains, restaurants, 
fast food stores, and parking lots. Thus, the MP services of 
TU and CU expanded beyond their campuses to incorporate 
public transportation and other MP services. 
On the whole, CU UPass adoption was more successful 
than the TU TCard. This is surprising, because UPass has 
fewer users and a more complex e-purse mechanism. Using 
a context-awareness framework (Figure 1), this study 
examines the differences between MP implementation in 
these two university campuses, and determines the 
significance of contextual factors during the adoption of MP 
services. 
 
V. 
ANALYSIS  
This section analyzes the development and adoption of 
MP services in TU and CU, and employs a context-
awareness analysis framework (Figure 1) as the analytic lens.  
A. The Context of Places 
TU is a comprehensive university with an open campus 
environment designed for leisure and public use. This 
campus includes academic and administrative buildings, 
libraries, dormitories, a post office, bank, museums, lakes, 
stadiums, arenas, etc.  For consumption, there are over 50 
retail stores on campus including cafeterias, coffee shops, 
restaurants, convenience stores, bookshops, a souvenir store, 
etc., but only 19 of these are equipped with MP services 
where patrons can use their EasyCard. TU is located near a 
famous shopping area and an MRT (subway) station. When 
interviewed, students offered several responses to this 
situation: “It would be better if all stores on campus 
accepted the TCard, otherwise it is inconvenient;” “after 
school, I used to have dinner off-campus and not shop on 
Place 
 
Context awareness 
Thing 
People 
41
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

campus.” Furthermore, some complained, “there is no 
obvious signage at stores to identify shopping with the 
TCard.”  
In contrast, the SCE of CU is a closed environment, with 
eight academic centers located at the center of the city. 
However, the space for student activities is limited, as most 
space is utilized for classes, studying, discussions, and 
administration.  Students can shop in campus stores with 
UPass, such as coffee shops, convenience stores, and 
photocopy centers.   
B. The Context of People 
After students at TU and CU register, they are issued a 
smart student card, which is embedded with an MP 
mechanism. 
According 
to 
our 
investigations 
and 
observations, the age and origin of TU and CU students are 
very similar. These students can quickly accept and easily 
use the card. Investigation of Lee, Cheng and Depickere [18] 
points out university’s students generally accept using their 
university smart card.  
The students of TU’s main campus exceed 33,000. On-
campus activities at TU are broad, and include studying, 
research, 
dining, 
living, 
sports, 
and 
entertainment.  
Additionally, many tourists enter campus for fun and 
shopping. According to our survey questionnaire, 70% of 
respondents agreed that the TCard is more convenient than 
paying by cash, and 62% of respondents were willing to use 
the TCard for payments. In fact, for 80% of respondents, 
average expenses per week are lower than 100NT dollars 
(approximately 3US dollars).  Most students must pay 
administration service fees, such as photocopying (83%), 
vending machines (61%), overdue book fines (59%), and 
stadium rentals (55%). Respondents suggested that ”I want 
to use the TCard for all of photocopy machines and vending 
machine on campus.” They want “more discounts or reward 
mechanisms,” and noted that the “TCard just pays for bus 
and MRT.”  
The SCE of CU is actively devoted to the adult 
education 
market, 
and 
types 
of 
students 
include 
undergraduate students, part-time students with jobs, and 
senior learners. Thus, the campus activities of SCE’s 
students focus on studying and discussions at the academic 
center.  
C.  The Context of Things 
TU and CU adopted the same MP card system (Easy 
Card). This MP card is a RFID smart card, which then could 
provide store-value services with contact-less Mifare 
standards. Its usage is easy and convenient. 
The TU TCard has only one e-purse: basic store value. 
The TU campus has only three convenience stores for 
adding value to their MP cards, and the minimum total 
amount for each value transaction is at least 500NT dollars. 
Students can also add value to their cards at MRT stations. 
Students responded that “setting up more cash-to-card 
machines is good, but you cannot limit the amount of money 
I can add”; and “it would be helpful if the Internet could 
provide services for tracking purchases.” Some complained 
that “it is not that much faster if students shop with their 
TCard, and this decreases overall shopping;”  “there is a 
receipt when paying with the TCard, which is a waste of 
paper and increases check-out time.” 
In contrast, the CU UPass has three e-purses: off-line 
dollars, on-line dollars, and store value. Off-line dollars and 
on-line dollars are only used on campus.  Off-line dollars 
pay for photocopying, overdue book fines, and vending 
machines, while on-line dollars pay for net-printing and 
school services applications. Unlike TU, SCE’s academic 
center has kiosks for adding value and checking balances, 
and students can also ask service center personnel to add 
value to their cards.  
 
Here, the different contexts of MP services result in 
different implementation consequences. Table II shows the 
summary of the context-awareness dimensions for TU’s and 
CU’s MP cards. 
TABLE II.  
CONTEXT-AWARENESS DIMENSIONS ON TU AND CU FOR 
MP CARDS 
Context
TU 
CU 
Places 
z Identity: open environment 
z Location: research centers, 
academic buildings, shops, 
lakes, museums, arenas, 
etc. 
z Identity: closed 
environment 
z Location: SCE’s academic 
buildings, convenient 
stores, coffee shops, 
photocopy centers, etc. 
People 
z Identity: students, faculty, 
staff, and tourists 
z Activity: studying, reading, 
teaching, research, sports, 
shopping, living, traveling, 
etc. 
z Time: all day 
z Identity: students, faculty, 
staff, and tourists 
z Activity: studying, reading, 
teaching, discussions, 
shopping, etc. 
z Time: business hours 
Things 
z Identity: MP card  
z State: MP card has just one 
e-purse 
z Activity: payment, 
entrance access to 
buildings 
z Identity: MP card and 
kiosks 
z State: MP card has three e-
purses; kiosk has value-
added and balance 
functions  
z Activity: MP card and 
kiosks are multi-purpose/ 
multi-function 
 
VI. 
DISCUSSION 
Students of TU and CU generally accept MP cards, and 
recognize their convenience. However, while the two cases 
have similar organizational contexts, the development and 
implementation of MP services in both are very different 
from each other. From our research findings, the additional 
dimensions of contextual factors influence the development 
direction of MP services and their implementation. 
A. Socio-spatial dimensions of MP card adoption 
The use of technological artifacts by individuals depends 
not only on their convenience, cost, and the user’s 
technology acceptance, but also the context of their use [7]. 
Aoyama [24] suggested that socio-spatial dimensions, such 
as urban form, consumer preference, and cultural attributes 
all shape the patterns of technology adoption. Our 
observational results support Aoyama’s findings.   
42
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

The TU campus is an open environment surrounded by a 
famous shopping area, which means that there are many 
places for dining, shopping, and entertainment. Most sales of 
TCards are from the EasyCard issuer, and off-campus stores 
can also have this type of sale. Thus, it is difficult to attract 
students shopping with the TCard. Moreover, not all stores 
on campus accommodate TCards, which influences both the 
ability and willingness of students to use the card. 
Unsurprisingly, TCard purchases are decreasing.  
In contrast, SCE’s academic center of CU is a closed 
environment. All stores at CU provide shopping services 
with UPass. When shopping for vending machines, 
photocopying, and paying overdue book fines, UPass is an 
all-in-one card, and is convenient throughout the entire 
campus. 
In other words, the interactions between places (e.g. 
socio-spatial dimensions) and consumer preferences affect 
the usage of MP. TU students have more opportunity for 
shopping in the famous shopping areas, not on their campus, 
and even though the TCard provides some payment 
convenience, students have alternative choices for purchases 
in this open environment, which results in uncertainty for 
MP usage. In a closed environment, the CU UPass serves as 
a payment tool in addition to other campus functions, which 
facilitates its continued use. 
B. The service-oriented developments of MPcard 
The MP card has physical limitations such as sending, 
receiving, or 
presenting 
information. 
However, the 
application developments of MP card are different between 
TU’s and CU’s. The information service for payment is 
taken as an example. The TU TCard provides an immediate 
paper receipt for each transaction, but students regard it as a 
waste of paper and prefer online inquiries. The SCE of CU 
applies multi-platforms to provide information services for 
students to check their balance, namely kiosks and the 
Internet. Jacob [12] points out that customers might be 
interested in MP for reasons beyond the payments 
themselves. In sum, UPass services broaden and have 
greater usefulness than the TCard.  
The IT Department of SCE suggested that, other than the 
access control of buildings and parking lots, the entrance 
access of the UPass should also include venue reservations 
and spatial management. The IT manager of SCE stated: 
“the purpose of UPass entrance access is not to control the 
people coming in and going out; it is about spatial 
management.” Teachers and students may directly reserve 
classrooms or discussion rooms online and access locations 
through the UPass. Security personnel monitor the states of 
classrooms and also manage campus safety by the PDA. The 
CU UPass is more than just a payment tool; it is also an all-
in-one card, with multiple purposes and functions. These 
outcomes are the result of contextual interaction among 
people, places and things, and thus not simply due to any 
single contextual variable. Moreover, it is based on service-
oriented approaches to apply multi-platforms, e.g., kiosks, 
internet, and PDA, to extend the scopes of UPass services. 
The schemes of MP card can not actively capture the 
information of its involved environment in comparison with 
the phone-based MP schemes. MP card designers must pay 
more attention to the possible contextual interactions before 
they create new services. Furthermore, this study finds that a 
designer has more understanding on the contextual 
interactions, and then he/she would give more social 
interpretation of technological artifacts to develop specific 
innovations 
of 
MP 
services. 
The 
service-oriented 
development of MP card would more closely fit into the 
customer’s specific needs; accordingly, it enhances the 
usability and functionality of the MP card.. 
C. The niche of MP services  
In a mobile environment, the key successful point of MP 
services is that it is a “must-have” rather than “nice-to-have” 
service [25]. There are some failed cases [28], of which most 
fell into the “nice-to-have” strategy. 
The TU TCard adoption has a “nice-to-have” strategy, as 
its MP services are just an alternative choice, but not 
necessary. For example, TU students expect to use the 
TCard for payment specific to the school’s activities, such as 
photocopying and overdue fines for library books, and 
stadium space rental. .They also suggest adding more cash-
to-card machines on campus. However, these expected 
shopping services have not been introduced, which also 
causes low usage of the TCard. 
In contrast, the adopted strategy of the CU UPass is 
“must-have”, such as photocopying, net-printing, venue 
reservation, payment listings, and access control to buildings, 
etc. These functions must use the MP card and fit with 
user’s specific needs. CU provides two kiosks with cash-to-
card machines in each building, which generates positive 
reactions from students, makes the CU UPass necessary on 
campus, and enables students to continually use the card. In 
summary, the innovative services of CU UPass consider all 
possible contexts of campus activities and integrate campus 
information, cash flows, and resources together. This all-in-
one card is a result of strong linkage among contextual 
factors, i.e., people, place and things, which represents a 
niche for MP services.  
 
VII. CONCLUSION 
Consumers can use MP technology anywhere at anytime, 
which opens the technology up to a host of potentially 
complex contexts and renders the MP design process 
increasingly difficult. Complex contexts affect not only the 
implementation of MP services, but also determine the 
development of MP services. Here, two case studies adopt 
the same MP card in similar organizational settings, but with 
very different consequences of implementation, illustrating 
the interaction effects of contextual factors. 
• The contexts of place include not only identity, location, 
state and time but also socio-spatial dimensions, which 
affect the adoption of consumer’s MP services. In an 
open 
environment, 
the 
lack 
of 
boundaries 
of 
geographical regions raises more uncertainties for MP 
services, even though consumers may accept these 
services and agree to their convenience. 
43
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

• The developers must have more awareness of involved 
contextual interactions for MP card during development. 
Designing MP applications must go beyond MP card’s 
physical limitations, which is to base upon service-
oriented contexts and apply multi-platforms to extend 
service scope. The developers’ social interpretation of 
technological artifacts facilitates the creation of new MP 
services, and enables MP services beyond simple 
payment options. 
• A strong linkage of contextual interactions among 
people, places and things, shapes a “must-have” strategy 
for MP development, and then identifies niches for MP 
services. MP services provide a positive impact on 
consumer’s lives, which in turn helps ensure consumers 
continue using MP services. 
 
This study selected university campuses as its research 
settings, which provided successful and failed experiences 
on MP service implementations. These findings can serve as 
reference for future studies, which may apply multiple in-
depth cases to explore closer cooperation with users and 
merchants in a different natural setting to create more 
possibilities for MP services. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Herzberg, “Payments and banking with mobile personal devices,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 46, no. 5, pp. 53-58, 2003. 
[2] 
J. Ondrus, and Y. Pigneur, “Towards a holistic analysis of mobile 
payments: A multiple perspectives approach,” Electronic Commerce 
Research and Applications, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 246-257, 2006. 
[3] 
T. Dahlberg, N. Mallat, J. Ondrus, and A. Zmijewska, “Past, present 
and future of mobile payments research: A literature review,” 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 
165-181, 2008. 
[4] 
K. Stroborn, A. Heitmann, K. Leibold, and G. Frank, “Internet 
payments in Germany: a classificatory framework and empirical 
evidence,” Journal of Business Research, vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 1431-
1437, 2004. 
[5] 
J. Ondrus, and Y. Pigneur, “A Systematic Approach to Explain the 
Delayed Deployment of Mobile Payments in Switzerland,” in 
Proceedings of the Fifth International Conference on Mobile 
Business(ICMB) Copenhagen, Denmark, 2006. 
[6] 
P. Jaring, T. Matinmikko, and P. Abrahamsson, “Micropayment 
business in Finland-forming the basis for development of 
micropayment methods and business,” in Proceedings of Helsinki 
Mobility Roundtable, Helsinki, Finland, 2006. 
[7] 
N. Kreyer, K. Turowski, and K. Pousttchi, “Mobile payment 
procedures: scope and characteristics,” e-Service Journal, vol. 2, no. 
3, pp. 7-22, 2004. 
[8] 
A. 
S. 
Lim, 
“Inter-consortia 
battles 
in 
mobile 
payments 
standardisation,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 
vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 202-213, 2008. 
[9] 
A. Zmijewska, “Evaluating Wireless Technologies in Mobile 
Payments  -- A Customer Centric Approach,” in Proceedings of the 
Fourth International Conference on Mobile Business (ICMB), 
Sydney, Australia, 2005. 
[10] Y. Chou, C. Lee, and J. Chung, “Understanding m-commerce 
payment systems through the analytic hierarchy process,” Journal of 
Business Research, vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 1423-1430, 2004. 
[11] K. Jacob, “Are mobile payments the smart cards of the aughts?,” 
Chicago Fed Letter , Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, No. 240, July, 
2007. 
[12] J. Ondrus, and Y. Pigneur, “A multi-stakeholder multi-criteria 
assessment framework of mobile payments: An illustration with the 
swiss public transportation industry,” in Proceedings of the 39th 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Science, Hauai, 
HI, USA, 2006, pp. 42a. 
[13] J. Ondrus, and Y. Pigneur, “A Disruption Analysis in the Mobile 
Payment Market,” in Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, Big Island, Hawaii, 
2005, pp. 84c. 
[14] M. Porter, Competitive strategy: techniques for analyzing industries 
and competitors: with a new introduction, New York: Free Pr, 1998. 
[15] I. 
Junglas, 
and 
R. 
Watson, 
“Location-based 
services,” 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 65-69, 2008. 
[16] C. H. M. Lee, Y. W. Cheng, and A. Depickere, “Comparing smart 
card adoption in Singapore and Australian universities,” International 
Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 307-325, 
2003. 
[17] Abdulrahman A. Mirza, and K. Alghathbar, “Acceptance and 
Applications of Smart Cards Technology in University Settings,” 
Eighth IEEE International Conference on Dependable, Autonomic 
and Secure Computing, pp. 746-748, 2009. 
[18] C. Clark, “Shopping Without Cash: The Emergence of the E-purse,” 
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, issue Q 
IV, pp. 34-51, 2005. 
[19] R. Yin, Case study research: Sage publications Newbury Park, Calif, 
1994. 
[20] B. Schilit, N. Adams, and R. Want, "Context-aware computing 
applications." pp. 85-90. 
[21] A. Dey, G. Abowd, and D. Salber, “A conceptual framework and a 
toolkit for supporting the rapid prototyping of context-aware 
applications,” Human–Computer Interaction, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 97-
166, 2001. 
[22] M. Debes, A. Lewandowska, and J. Seitz, “Definition and 
Implementation of Context Information,” in Proceedings of the 2nd 
workshop on positioning, Navigation and Communication (WPMC 
'05) & 1st Ultra-Widenband Expert Talk (UET '05), 2005, pp. 63–68. 
[23] A. Dey, “Understanding and using context,” Personal and ubiquitous 
computing, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 4-7, 2001. 
[24] Y. Aoyama, “Sociospatial dimensions of technology adoption: recent 
M-commerce and E-commerce developments,” Environment and 
Planning A, vol. 35, no. 7, pp. 1201-1222, 2003. 
[25] S. L. Jarvenpaa, K. Lang, Y. Takeda, and V. K. Tuunainen, “Mobile 
commerce at crossroads,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 46, no. 
12, pp. 41-44, 2003. 
[26] L. Van Hove, "Electronic purses in Euroland: why do penetration 
and usage rates differ?," SUERF Studies, M. Balling, ed.: Vienna, 
Austria: Société Universitaire Européenne de Recherches Financières, 
2004. 
[27] O. Kwon, K. Yoo, and E. Suh, “ubiES: Applying ubiquitous 
computing technologies to an expert system for context-aware 
proactive services,” Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, 
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 209-219, 2006. 
[28] C. Clark, “Shopping Without Cash: The Emergence of the E-purse,” 
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, issue Q 
IV, pp. 34-51, 2005 
 
 
44
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

