Web Personalization 
Implications and Challenges 
 
Ahmad Kardan, Amirhossein Roshanzamir 
Department of Computer Engineering and IT 
 Amirkabir University of Technology  
Tehran, Iran  
aakardan@aut.ac.ir, amrhssn@aut.ac.ir 
 
Abstract — Companies are under the pressure to provide 
tailor-made products or services that match customers’ 
preferences better. Personalization from web mining is a 
significant tool to accommodate this trend by extracting 
patterns of customer’s preferences and connecting them 
directly to production line and supply chain. However, with 
exception of companies like Amazon, Dell, Toyota and most 
of Airlines which have solid strategy and large appeal, it is 
challenging to develop a concrete and cost-effective 
approach in personalization for many companies. This 
paper studies dimensions of personalization and addresses 
business implications and challenges of web personalization. 
It will further suggest a novel approach for developing web 
personalization in small and medium sized enterprises by 
utilizing Frequent Flyer Program of Airlines Industry in 
order to justify and guide investment.  
Keywords-web personalization; build-to-order; customer 
relationship management; recommender system; frequent flyer 
program. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Web Personalization is simply defined as the process 
of gathering and storing data about visitor's interactions 
and navigation in a website in order to assemble and 
deliver the tailor-made web experience to a particular 
user. The delivery can range from making the web site 
more appealing to anticipating the needs of a user and 
providing customized and relevant information. The 
experience can be as simple as browsing a web site up to 
trading stocks or purchasing a computer. Effective 
personalization can be achieved by three steps including 
identifying, retrieving and assembling. The first step starts 
by collecting all available data. In fact, the user's data is 
divided into two categories i.e. personal data such as age, 
gender and demographics as well as behavioral data such 
as usage, click stream and time [1]. In the next step, the 
web site forms the visitor's profile and utilizes intelligent 
algorithms to analyze and mine data in order to extract 
statistics, and discover correlations between web pages 
and user's preferences. In the final step, the web site will 
deliver the right information and/or produce customized 
products and services to meet each user's requirement or 
assemble the most preferred page to be displayed to his or 
her preferences. This paper reviews dimensions of 
personalization and then addresses business implications 
and challenges of web personalization. It will further 
suggest 
a 
novel 
approach 
for 
developing 
web 
personalization in small and medium sized enterprises by 
explaining a mobile portal as a case study. A Frequent 
Flyer Program of Airlines Industry is used to justify and guide 
investment in this approach.  
II. 
 DIMESIONS OF PERSONALIZATION  
In practical applications, we can suggest a model to 
divide personalization technologies into two dimensions 
namely horizontal and vertical. Horizontal dimension 
enables a company to adapt attributes and appearance of 
products or services according to customer's flavor and 
taste, whereas vertical dimension enables a company to 
interact with customers in order to customize the 
configuration, performance and quality of products or 
services according to customer's request . 
A. Solid  
This is a kind of personalization which a user has no 
control to change or modify the product, nor is there any 
interaction between website and user. The user or 
customer simply selects the product and then use it. 
Digital music and video store and most of retail online 
sites which sell specific and predetermined products are 
examples of this type . 
B. Superficial  
This is a kind of personalization in which user has 
only limited control on appearance and presentation of the 
products. Many portal sites, such as Yahoo, Google and 
MSN allow users to personalize the page with selected 
news, local weather forecast, and other features. For 
instance, web news portal may provide news and articles 
about education and business school ranking to customers 
who are avid MBA fun and sport news for sportsmen. 
Digital Greeting Cards stores are another example where 
the user can select the type and structure of greeting card 
and can further customize it by individual messages.   
C. Evident  
This is a kind of personalization which user has no 
control to modify the product however, he or she can 
communicate with supplier and inform his or her specific 
interests while receiving recommendations and reviewing 
buying patterns of other customers of similar preferences. 
The customer can further place order for his or her 
preferred type or version or predetermined price. Amazon 
is an example of this kind in which users can receive 
79
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

recommendations and review comments of other 
customers. They can also request for digital version of a 
book and once the total requests reach a certain number, 
Amazon will fulfill this request. It is actually, 
manifestation of one of Amazon’s strategies titled obsess 
over customers, to start with the customer and then go 
backwards to develop product and service solutions [2]. 
eBay can be considered as another example of evident 
personalization in which consumers and businesses 
engage in buying and selling a variety of goods and 
services worldwide. eBay online portal facilitate these 
ventures by providing Auction-style listing in which 
buyers and sellers can set and adjust their specific 
requirements and predetermined price.  
D. Collaborative  
This is the ultimate level of personalization in which 
user has control in designing and building the product 
according to his or her preferences. User usually selects 
the modules that are literally building blocks in order to 
customize a product and then assembles various 
combinations of modules. In electronics examples of 
modules would include processor, mother boards, 
memory, disk drives and software. Dell Computers has 
created a unique process within Industry and pioneered 
the build-to-order computer business. The process was 
long and required a great change in the thinking of many 
firms and many people within Dell and it has taken 20 
years to get where it is [3]. Toyota, for example, 
introduced Buyatoyota.com as the major step in order to 
integrate its unique Just In Time (JIT) system with 
personalization and customer's specific requirements. This 
site guides the customer through the steps of selecting a 
model, viewing and searching options, assembling the 
features and specifications, choosing the color and 
accessories, and finally, locating a local dealer that can 
provide that choice of car in order to get a quotation and 
arrange finance. Other car manufacturers may start to use 
the same approach in building their cars in near future.  
 
 
 
Vertical 
Personalization 
 
Evident 
e.g. Amazon, eBay 
 
Collaborative 
e.g. Dell, Toyota 
 
Solid 
e.g. Online Music 
 
Superficial 
e.g. E-card, E-News 
                            Horizontal Personalization 
 
    Fig 1. Dimensions of Personalization 
 
III. 
PERSONALIZATION-BROADER STRATEGY  
In fact, personalization must be an integral part of a 
broader strategy and connect to Customer relationship 
Management (CRM) and Recommender Systems. CRM is 
viewed as a strategy to attract, grow and retain customers. 
Personalization is an approach that can aid in bringing, 
staying and returning visitors / customers to a website. 
Since the very nature of the web tools encourage 
interactivity between people and organizations, the topics 
of 
personalization 
and 
CRM 
are, 
therefore, 
complementary to each other. They both have the ability 
of providing the right information or content (e.g. 
products, services and data) to the customer at the right 
time and right place [4].  
The explosive growth of e-commerce and online 
environments has overwhelmed users by countless 
options to consider. They simply neither have time nor 
knowledge to personally consider and evaluate these 
options. Recommender systems represent a prominent 
class of personalization applications that aim to support 
online users in deciding which products or services meet 
their 
requirements. 
The 
advanced 
version 
of 
a 
recommender system, for example the one implemented 
in Amazon Inc. , would add information about other 
complementary products (cross selling), in the form other 
customers that had bought X, also had bought Y and Z. 
Today, recommender systems have become one of the 
most powerful and popular tools in electronic commerce, 
since, they allow to transfer users into customers, increase 
the cross selling and build loyalty [5]. 
IV. 
FREQUENT-FLYER PROGRAM  
A Frequent Flyer Program (FFP),which is a loyalty 
program offered by many airlines, was first created by 
Texas International Airlines in 1979. FFP can be 
considered as an interesting manifestation of evident 
personalization which integrates personalization with 
CRM and recommender system. Passengers can typically 
enroll in FFP of an airline and accumulate miles based on 
the distance flown of that airline or its partner. Miles 
accumulated allow members to redeem tickets, upgrade 
service class, or obtain free or discounted car rentals, 
hotel stays, merchandise, or other products and services 
through partners. The personalization features include but 
not limited to the possibility of selecting seats through 
online portal and requesting for special meal. Members 
can manage their account online by buying tickets and 
checking online while receiving personalized news and 
special offers based on their preferences and destination 
flown. In recent empirical study on FFP, Drèze and Nunes 
argue that successful redemption of miles fosters 
reengagement of passengers and motivates them to flying 
more frequently. Therefore, loyalty programs that offer 
people multiple redemption opportunities must balance 
the attractiveness of a reward with an appropriate level of 
difficulty in attaining success [6]. This research further 
shows that loyalty can be better accomplished when the 
reward is not too difficult to achieve, rather it should be 
inspiring and challenging to cash out and when someone 
does, he or she feels successful. 
80
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

V. 
IMPLICATIONS AND CHALLENGES 
Personalization 
has 
gone 
through 
different 
development phases since early 2000. It initially started as 
a tool to attract and retain visitors by giving them chance 
to explore more of the site. Advertising and promoting 
products and services, nevertheless, were part of this 
phase as well. The next phase attempted to increase 
turnover of customer's spending by offering more 
expensive or similar products. Today, personalization is 
increasingly used as a means to speed up the delivery of 
the right information to a visitor in order to customize 
products and services for meeting and exceeding his or 
her 
requirements. 
Those 
companies 
that 
are 
systematically 
gathering 
information 
about 
their 
customers, product attributes, purchase contexts and 
integrate it with behavioral segmentation such as 
demographics, attitudes and buying patterns can make 
more sophisticated offers that identify customers who are 
most likely to defect [7]. This personalization strategy 
ultimately increases number of regular customers and 
amount of each transaction and has made personalization 
as a required and expected feature of an e-business. For 
example, Timberland Boot Studio by allowing customer 
to select different leathers and colors gets three times hits 
on its customized boots [8].  
Without challenging the enormous potential and 
contribution of personalization technology, the question 
still remains whether personalization really works? The 
smart answer is it depends. On one hand the benefits 
could be significant not only for the website visitor  
(being offered more interesting, useful and relevant web 
experience) but also for the provider (allowing one to one 
relationships and mass customization and improving 
website performance). On the other hand, personalization 
requires extensive and precise data that are neither easily 
obtainable, nor can be mined and analyzed efficiently. As 
such in many cases the output does not seem so successful 
in understanding and satisfying user needs and goals. 
First and foremost, the ethical dimension of 
personalization need to be addressed, since online user's 
navigations are recorded for building and updating user 
profiles and this can put privacy of users in jeopardy. At 
the same time users are becoming more vigilant and have 
higher expectation. They are not so happy with idea of 
being stereotyped without their consent. Users also expect 
to be treated equal and have enough control and choices. 
The cost of technology initiated from intelligent software 
and storing hardware as well as the time spent are also 
critical factors which must be justified in the long run.  
Schneider and Bowen [9] proposed to explain that 
customer satisfaction of the service originates with the 
handling of three basic customer needs: security, justice 
and 
self-esteem. 
Building 
on 
their 
three 
needs 
conceptualization, we suggest six major implications and 
challenges of personalization as follows : 
A. Security and Privacy  
There are implications for user’s privacy and security 
of information, since, much of personalization entails 
intensive collection and use of personal information. The 
terms 
"privacy" 
and 
"security" 
are 
often 
used 
interchangeably, but there is an important distinction 
between these two. Security refers to the ability of user or 
site to protect information against unauthorized third 
parties by preventing them to access, use or modify 
information whereas privacy is the quality of being 
secluded from the presence or view of others [10]. It 
further refers to the ability and the right of the users to 
decide and control what can happen to their data and 
profile. Given the importance of data acquisition to 
personalization approach, it is crucial that sites identify 
privacy preferences of users and the relationship to their 
satisfaction with the site. This includes the users’ level of 
acceptance in how the data is acquired, whether the 
benefits of the approach outweigh the privacy risks, and 
whether the site will disclose the information to third 
parties [11]. As such users, at least, must explicitly feel 
connected to information in order to start benefiting from 
the service/features. Once users see benefits, they might 
be willing to surrender additional information and be 
more transparent, provided they know what is going to be 
done with it. In addition, the site must take all measures 
against the factors that could be outside of the knowledge 
or understanding of the user, such as the sufficiency of 
security mechanisms to protect any data provided. The 
user may often be unaware of what data is being given 
away and how they are stored and secured in the case of 
passive collection of information. Therefore, the site must 
encrypt passwords and sensitive data of users and 
evaluate an external test to ensure about the security and 
protection of data. A commonly recommended practice is 
to declare a privacy statement (or disclosure statement) 
which describes exactly what kind of data are gathered 
from users and then declare the policies about methods of 
using and sharing it . 
B. Fair dealing and Integrity  
These are critical issues in dealing with customers and 
visitors of a web-site. In fact, all visitors expect to be 
treated equally in terms of information, prices and 
services provided. When it comes to personalization, 
there are of course many occasions that a company is 
obliged to act discriminately based on the time, efforts, 
and money invested by customers as well as level of 
loyalty and pervious transactions. In such cases, the 
reason for differentiation or privileged treatment must be 
publicly announced to address user’s expectation for 
equality and avoid misunderstandings.  
A good example of implementing this discriminatory 
practice is in Airline Industry which employs different 
prices based on booking time and publicly announces it. 
Passenger might have paid different fair tickets but upon 
boarding they would receive similar treatment. Today, 
fair dealing, integrity and justice is becoming critical 
issues and few other factors such as keeping commitment 
and flexibility in dealing with unusual requests are also 
emerged accordingly. Personalization has the capacity to 
reinforce all these based on the nature of business and 
81
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

dimensions of personalization. It can also meet reasonable 
yet 
abnormal 
requests 
by 
keeping 
records 
and 
commitments . 
C. Self-esteem and Sense of worth  
Personalization can provide a unique possibility to 
maintain and enhance self-esteem and sense of worth for 
visitors by providing a user-friendly platform in which 
people feel in control, important and comfortable while 
having enough choices. Maslow claimed that the need for 
self-esteem can be met through mastery or achievement in 
a given field or through gaining respect or recognition 
from others [12]. As users become more vigilant, they 
might find personalization more pleasant and appealing, if 
they could exercise more control over it. We can imagine 
a scenario in which a online bookseller asks a visitor, 
"Would like us to add this title to our growing knowledge 
of your interests to lead and direct our future 
recommendations?" The customer can select "yes" and 
enjoy receiving recommendation, if he or she is an avid 
reader fun of the same subject. Alternatively, he or she 
can say "no" and spare time of receiving and reading 
these recommendations [13]. Likewise, a website which 
has personalization capabilities to discover and analyze 
the patterns in customer's navigations can fulfill their need 
by saying "We have noticed you frequently check football 
news, would you like us to update this news on your 
home page?" In both these scenarios, regardless of 
visitors response, we are trying to view them as unique 
people by respecting their interests and self-esteem while 
giving them some control over displayed contents. Even, 
a simple greeting message by indicating the name of 
visitor can enhance customer's feeling of self worth. This 
approach which is simple yet powerful can address 
privacy 
requirements 
of 
vigilant 
users, 
since, 
personalization is done after receiving their consent . 
D. Cost 
Successful companies like Google, Amazon, Dell and 
most of airlines spent millions on their portal web-site in 
order to personalize their products and services for their 
customers. In fact, personalizing online offerings is 
considered less costly than customizing physical products 
because of the “digital” nature of information goods. That 
is, with advanced information technology, online pages 
can be manipulated easily to suit individual customers’ 
needs. But, it all depends on the number of visitors and 
customers as well as the nature of business. Each 
individual need to have a profile with details of their 
preferences and every time he or she goes online and 
visits the site, the profile needs to be updated. Moreover, 
intelligent algorithms must be applied in order to extract 
the most suitable and customized products or services to 
be offered. There will be also interrelated links between 
preferences of users who have similar purchasing 
behavior. Although the price of using new technology is 
being reduced day by day, however, developing new 
algorithms and using thousands of servers to address each 
and every customer's need is time consuming and costly. 
It was found that operating a personalized web site can 
cost more than four times than operating a “comparative 
dynamic 
site” 
and 
most 
sites 
that 
deployed 
personalization have not realized adequate returns on their 
investments [14]. As such, there must always be a balance 
between cost spent and potential income which is likely 
generated by economy of scale and addressing core 
business strategy. Google for example has almost billion 
visitors every day using its search engine [15]; therefore, 
they can easily afford heavy investment on technologies 
such as collaborative filtering, data mining, and click-
stream analysis in order to customize their offerings at the 
individual level. Amazon, nevertheless, has thousand 
customers too and personalization is an important part of 
their sales strategy . 
E. Timing  
Web personalization enables online websites to 
customize their contents by capturing real time 
preferences of individual visitors through web mining 
techniques. The next step is to adapt the website content 
in order to meet individual's specific requirements. Yet, 
there is a trade-off between quality of recommendation 
and probability of accepting a given recommendation i.e. 
although the content of web-site will improve during the 
course of session to meet preference of the visitors, 
however, the probability of using and enjoying the fresh 
contents diminishes over the course of session [16]. These 
effects suggest that online portals have limited time to 
capture and mine visitors data in order to customize the 
most tailor-made contents or products. In fact, consumers 
prefer early presentation that eases their selection process, 
whereas adaptive systems can make better personalized 
content if they are allowed to collect more consumers' 
clicks over time [16]. 
Therefore, personalization needs to be efficient 
enough in order to keep the balance between time spent 
by user and to the extent to which his or her online 
behavior can be symbolized . 
F. Agility 
With advances in tracking and database technologies, 
companies can better understand and evaluate their 
customer's requirements. However, they need to build up 
certain capacity in order to rapidly translate this 
understanding into appealing products and service. 
Agility or nimbleness is the capability to swiftly adapt to 
changes and can be achieved in three distinct ways 
including operational, portfolio and strategic [17]. 
Operational agility is illustrated as the success of Toyota 
and Dell through integrating supply chain and directly 
linking customer to production line. While sharing real-
time market data that is detailed and reliable, Dell and 
buyatoyota.com only assemble the product after receiving 
the order (build-to-order) and this strategy increases 
visibility to the demand and flow of goods. The primary 
advantage is sensitivity to changes in customer demand 
and possibility of mass-customization.  
82
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

Toyota, for example, outsources about 70% of 
components and that is why Toyota Production System 
(TPS) requires a serious investment in building an agile 
network of highly capable suppliers of different 
components that must be truly integrated into supply 
chain [18]. In this scenario, the user goes through the 
process of designing a car by selecting features and 
components online. Once the order is registered and the 
car dealer and type of finance is arranged, the delivery of 
parts and components takes place a few times a day from 
different suppliers to Toyota factory and the car is 
specifically and solely assembled as per online order of 
the user . 
Although a company's growth is dependent on finding 
and retaining customers, however, its success is far 
beyond what is on the web page and depends on internal 
operations (the back end) and its relationship with 
suppliers and other business partners [19]. The true power 
of such operational agility requires solid information 
technology infrastructure and is based on ingenuity and 
electronic supply chain management.  
VI. 
GIVE UP OR BUILD UP  
Today, companies can extract valuable information by 
exploiting information hidden in their web site created as 
a result of visitors interaction and browsing. Facing 
increasingly sophisticated customers, companies are 
under the pressure to provide tailor-made products or 
services that better match customers’ preferences . 
The major challenge is cost pressure and justification 
of investment by economy of scale. Except giant 
companies like Amazon, Facebook, Dell and most of 
Airlines, which have large appeal and thousands and even 
millions of customers, it is challenging to seek cost-
effective approaches in personalization for small and 
medium sized enterprises. The appropriate solution for 
these companies could be to start their portal on Solid 
personalization basis and gradually develop it horizontally 
or 
vertically 
to 
Superficial 
and 
then 
Evident 
personalization based on the nature of business and 
improvement of the business model . 
VII. WEB PERSONALIZATION METHODOLOGY 
Commonly used to enhance customer service and e-
commerce sales, personalization is sometimes referred to 
as one-to-one marketing, because the enterprise's web 
page is tailored to specifically target each individual 
consumer. The main purpose of every business is to make 
money either by selling products or services to new 
customers or selling more to existing ones [21]. Miller 
[20], in his book, argues that the average value of 
customers is 8 to 10 times their initial purchase depending 
on the research he and his colleagues have reviewed. He 
further argues that the cost to attract a new customer is 5 
to 6 times more than your cost to save an existing 
customer.   
As small and medium enterprises have serious 
challenge to create traffic on their site and increase the 
number of visitors, the best strategy would be to focus on 
existing customers by encouraging them to repeat the 
orders on similar or different products and services and/or 
cross selling. Frequent Flyer Program is a gifted tool 
which can be duplicated and applied in any online shop in 
order to grant points to the customer based on the value of 
their purchase. These points can be rewarded later in 
terms of free offering or discount scheme as incentives for 
repeated orders. By exploiting such a policy, a company 
can increase market share and improve profitability. 
Saving time and reducing costs of sales and marketing as 
well as economic use of resources are other indirect 
benefits of what can be called point plus program. All 
these will ultimately 
justify 
investment 
in web 
personalization. Business owner, Rosalind Resnick also 
insists on rewarding program by saying "It's nice to know 
that every dollar we spend to grow our business can also 
be a point or air mile we can use to celebrate our 
independence" [22]. 
In order to increase customer satisfaction and the 
likelihood of repeat visits, there must be a reason like 
membership. When people are members rather than 
shoppers, they feel connected and privileged. Therefore, 
the first step in formulating a solid personalization model 
is to encourage users to become members in order access 
special contents and/or perform special functions on the 
site while enjoying superficial personalization. Once a 
closer relationship with the users are developed, the 
company can gradually address the other challenges of 
personalization as indicated in Fig 2 and move to evident 
level and build interactive relationship to meet and exceed 
user's requirements. The collaborative requires ingenious 
infrastructure and agile supply chain, which certainly goes 
beyond information technology. 
 
Privacy and Security 
Fair Dealing and Integrity 
Self-esteem and sense of worth 
 
Cost 
Agility 
 
Timig 
 
Membership 
 
Collaborative 
 
   Evident 
 
Superficial 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig 2. Web Personalization model 
 
A mobile portal, which aggregates and provides contents 
and services for mobile users, is a good example for 
explaining how the above model works. These portals are 
specifically designed for m-commerce with short menu of 
popular topics like news, sports, email, travel information 
and finance as well as very few graphics. They recently 
83
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

started to provide downloads, health, dating and job 
information as well [23]. In fact, a mobile portal provides 
an intimate one-to-one experience for a user who is 
visiting the portal for specific purpose like checking 
sports scores or looking to buy specific item in nearby 
shops [24]. Users frequently can become a member by 
paying 
a 
monthly 
membership 
to 
access 
basic 
information. This is superficial personalization in the 
above model. As users started to seek specific services 
and information, the portal need to address 5 challenges 
of web personalization in the same order to meet user's 
requirements for evident personalization. First and 
foremost, privacy and security are critical, since mobile 
systems tie highly personal information to location and 
contacts. We normally do not share our mobile device 
with anybody; therefore, anything that we do with our 
mobile is traceable to us. This may be helpful for 
marketing; yet, mobile advertisement is nowadays 
pursued with caution while getting the customer's consent. 
This can be done by offering long-distance in exchange 
for viewing the ads offered by mobile portals. 
Furthermore, mobile portals can customize advertising 
message for specific group of customers based on their 
location while knowing their preferences and buying 
habits. The integrity, fair dealing and self growth should 
be the essential cornerstones of these offers to convince 
for quick decision and it must be support by loyalty 
program to reward customers with points. The cost and 
timing are also hot topics for mobile portals. In addition 
to basic monthly fees, most mobile portals charge per-
service fee for premium and customized contents such as 
download and weather forecast. The nature of m-
commerce, in which users have little time to navigate the 
contents and wait for page to load, also demands that the 
content to be produced in much shorter time. We can 
imagine in the not so far future, Toyota and few other car 
manufacturers allow their customers to assemble and buy 
their favorite car through mobile portals.  
VIII. CONCLUSION  
Personalization from web mining has been received 
lots of interests in business as a gifted tool to improve 
sales and retain customers, since, it can increases 
customer‘s satisfaction by providing them with tailor-
made products and services. Web Personalization can also 
help the company to implement build-to-order policy by 
connecting customer’s requirements and preferences 
directly to production line and supply chain. As a result 
the company can benefit from cost saving and efficient 
utilization 
of 
resources. 
Therefore, 
collaborative 
personalization can be considered as a vision of any small 
and medium sized enterprise to incorporate its online 
portal with built-to-order strategy for sales and marketing. 
This of course a long term plan which must be supported 
by integrating personalization into loyalty program in 
order to reward customers with points for a wide range of 
daily interactions with the company.  
The reward scheme should be smartly designed to 
provide users with both mental and financial benefits in 
order to encourage them for repeated order and/or cross 
selling. The power and benefits of these two can create a 
solid momentum to justify and guide investment in 
personalization.  
REFERENCES  
[1] 
Kardan, A.,  Fani, M.R. and Mohammadian, N. (2011), Purposing 
an Architecture for Learner Modeling base on Web Usage Mining 
in e-Learning Environment, The 5th Data Mining Conference Dec. 
14 - 15, 2011 ; Tehran, Iran  
[2] 
 Treanor, T.  (2010), Amazon : Love Them ? Hate them ? Let's 
Follow the Money, June 2,2010 Springer Science + Business 
Media, LLC 2010, pp. 124-125  
[3] 
Kumar, S. and Craig, S. (2007), Dell, Inc.'s closed loop supply 
chain for computer assembly plants,Information Knowledge 
Systems Management; 2007, Vol. 6 Issue 3, pp. 197-214 
[4] 
Jackson, T.W. (2007), Personalization and CRM,Journal of 
Database Marketing & Customer Strategy Management (2007) 15, 
pp. 24–36 
[5] 
Velaquez, J. D. and Palade, V. (2007), Building a knowledge base 
for implementing a web-based computerized recommendation 
system, 
International 
Journal 
on 
Artificial 
Intelligence 
Tools,Oct2007, Vol. 16 Issue 5, pp. 798 
[6] 
Drèze, X.  and  Nunes, J. (2011), Recurring Goals and Learning: 
The Impact of Successful Reward Attainment on Purchase 
Behavior, Journal of Marketing Research (JMR), Apr2011, Vol. 48 
Issue 2, pp. 268-281 
Thomas H. Davenport, Leandro Dalle Mule, and John Lucker  
[7] 
Davenport, T.H., Mule, L.D., and Lucker, J. (2011), Know What 
Your Customers Want Before They Do, Harvard Business Review, 
Dec2011, Vol. 89 Issue 12, pp. 84-92 
[8] 
Turban, E. and Voloninio, L. (2010), Information Technology for 
Management, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. ;7 th Edition  
[9] 
Schneider, B. and Bowen, D. (1999), Lessons in customer service, 
Understanding 
Customer delight and 
outrage Fall 
1999, 
SloanSelection Winter 2011 pp. 4 
[10] Becker, M. and Arnold, J. (2010), Mobile Marketing for Dummies, 
Wiely Publishing Inc.; 1st Edition   
[11] Getek, 
R.C. 
(2010), 
A 
usability 
model 
for 
web-based 
personalization based on privacy and security, PhD dissertation ; 
University of Maryland, Baltimore County. 
[12] www.normemma.com/articles/armaslow.htm (accessed on Dec. 
18, 2011) 
[13] Nunes, P. and Kambil, A. (2001), Personalization? No Thanks., 
Harvard Business Review; Apr2001, Vol. 79 Issue 4, pp. 32-34 
[14] Jupitermedia Corp. (2003), Beyond the Personalization Myth: 
Cost-effective Alternatives to Influence Intent  
[15] Jarvis, J. (2009), What Would Google Do ?, HarperBusiness; 1st  
Edition 
[16] Ho, S.Y.,  Bodoff, D. and Tam, K.Y.  (2011), Timing of Adaptive 
Web Personalization and Its Effects on Online Consumer 
Behavior, Information Systems Research; Sep2011, Vol. 22 Issue 
3, pp. 660-679 
[17] Sull, D. (2009), How to thrive in turbulent market, Harvard 
Business Review; Feb2009, Vol. 87 Issue 2, pp. 78-88 
[18] Liker K.J. (2004), The Toyota Way, McGraw-Hill; 1st Edition  
[19] Turban, E., Lee, J.A., King, D. , Liang, T.B. and Turban, D.   
(2010), Electronic Commerce a Managerial Perspective, Pearson 
Prentice Hall; 6th Edition  
[20] Miller, R. (2008), That is customer focus, BookSurge Publishing  
[21] Hess, E. (2010), Smart Growth, Columbia Business School 
Publishing; 1st Edition  
84
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

[22] Resinck, R. (2010), Fly Higher, Entrepreneur; Sep2010, Vol. 38  
[23] Becker, M. and Arnold, J. (2010), Mobile Marketing For 
Dummies, Wiley Publishing, Inc. ; 1st Edition  
[24] Dushinski, K. (2009), The Mobile Marketing Handbook, 
Information Today, Inc.; 1st Edition (January 19, 2009)  
 
 
 
85
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

