Design and Evaluation of “Social Networking Radio”
To Provide Voice and Sound of the Location Based Information
Kosuke Miyasaka
Keio University
Graduate School of Media and Governance
Fujisawa, Japan
e-mail: mikko@sfc.keio.ac.jp
Katsuhiko Ogawa
Keio University
Faculty of Environment and Information Studies
Fujisawa, Japan
e-mail: ogw@sfc.keio.ac.jp
Abstract—People in a city are usually seen spending a lot of
time
on
their
smartphones.
By
developing
information
technologies, we have become able to access information on the
Internet and get in touch with friends anytime and anywhere.
However, there is also the possibility that such behaviors make
people a “cocoon” in social spaces. Therefore, we propose a
new service called -social networking radio (SNR), which
provides voice and sound of location-based information. By
setting the voices in the city and listening while walking, we
expect to encourage a user’s interest around the town. This
paper describes the concept of SNR, the system design, and
from the experimental results, considers the playing method
and contents of comments.
Keywords-Radio; Navigation; Speech synthesis; Smartphone.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Owing to the development of information technology,
city walking and driving habits have changed. Before the
inception of the smartphone and car navigation systems, we
relied on a paper map and enquiries for navigation. Strolling
the streets while studying maps and meeting people on
routes, we were able to discover the attractiveness of the
towns and experience the atmosphere of the town.
Today, by the evolving location service, it has become
possible to reach specific destinations quickly and easily.
However, it inhibits the chance to encounter the city and
people. Furthermore, when we use the location information
application of smartphones, we concentrate fully on the
smartphone screen by looking downward, which isolates
one. It is, therefore, necessary to research on city walking
with interesting media that are different from existing
navigation systems. There exists previous research that is
related to interesting city walk; here, we introduce some of
this research.
Kori developed a blog car radio system that presents blog
entries in auditory style using speech synthesis [1]. He
discussed a method of extracting text contents that is suitable
for speech synthesis; he also verified the effectiveness of the
method. This system collects information from a local blog,
and summarizes the information to some “entry,” which
gives it the ranking for users. This ranking method helps to
screen the content that is associated with the users’ location.
However, blog contents used in this system are not suitable
for sightseeing, and its use for sightseeing based on location
is not mentioned.
Nakatani proposed a new tourist navigation system that
does not provide detailed route information [2]. By not
presenting a specific route, attempts to induce a chance
encounter and detour of the city were made. A navigation
system that only provided a path and landmark was
developed and experiments were conducted by actually
walking around with this navigation system. By using this,
subjects had a detour in the city. In his research, he discussed
the route and time subjects walked around; however, there
was no mention of how subjects changed their cognition of
the town.
Suda proposed the system “GBvoice” to take advantage
of leaving a characteristic old locality [3]. GBvoice recorded
the voice of town dwellers who were interviewed and
provided this to walking users. In this research, it was found
that local contents led to user’s motivation to discover new
things about contents. However, this was not related to the
location of users. It was also not possible to provide a voice
that corresponded to the user’s location.
We intend to develop a new navigation system that
provides interesting comments that only locals know and
provides it to the user depending on their location. We
created this system to discuss how a change in user’s route
would change a cognitive map.
Therefore,
we
propose
a
news
service—social
networking radio (SNR), which provides information based
on the route of walking. SNR provides interesting location-
based information. By listening to information that only
locals know, we are able to make users walk around
normally.
This paper describes the concept of SNR, the system
constitution, and by the experimental results, considers a
playing method and comments. In addition, we discussed the
changing of a subject’s perspectives in the town by a
cognitive map written by subjects.
II.
CONCEPT
Collecting and vocalizing local information of the city,
and playing it automatically corresponding to a user’s
location would enable users to walk around with ease. This is
the fundamental concept of SNR, which is shown in Fig. 1.
To achieve this, we propose two elements.
72
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

The first element is to provide local information that only
locals know. By providing local information rather than the
information that is listed on the Internet, SNR promotes user
interest in the city. If users listen to this information, they
look around and try to find the location indicated by the
information. It promotes a detour, thereby, making walking
around fun.
The second element is to set the sound in the city and
images of the city given to users, which also change. When
we try to search location information and route in an existing
web map, it is displayed in a text. Consequently, the user’s
point of view is downward unlike SNR, which provides
users with local information by speech, thereby, allowing
users to face upward. For example, when we hear the voice
of a male while walking, we look up and see around to
search his voice. This is unlike an image from the usual path.
Forming a different image from the usual path could promote
fun in city walking.
Figure 1. Concept of SNR.
III.
SYSTEM DESIGN
The system design of SNR is configured in three sides
(input side, output side, and vocalizing and processing side).
In Figs. 2 and 3, the image of the system design and
flowchart are shown .
A. Input Side
The informant enters the text in the text box, and the
input system stores it in the input database. The comments of
input are id, Name, and Text. These are stored in the MySQL
database. Anyone can enter comments to this system because
it is online (consists of Javascript and PHP).
B. Vocalizing and Processing Side
The vocalizing and processing side load text from the
database, and converts the text to sound data with the speech
synthesis system. This converts sound files that are stored in
a local folder. This local folder associates local latitudes that
are predetermined to play the sound file. If the text in
database id is updated, this side loads the latest text
automatically, and generates a new sound file.
C. Output side
The output side extracts the location of the user’s
information and measures the distance of this position
together with the local latitude where the audio file is placed.
When approaching a certain location, audio files placed in
this position are automatically played. Here, we define “Rad”
as a certain distance, which is the radius of the circle to be
displayed on the map. In other words, if the marker
indicating the current location is entered in a circle on the
map,
a sound
file that is placed
in its position
is
automatically played.
Figure 2. System design.
Figure 3. Flowchart.
To play an audio file automatically, an automatic playing
permission button in SNR was installed. When users start the
SNR and press this button, SNR will load the audio file on
the
server,
which
will
be
played
automatically
and
corresponds to the location of the user.
Based
on
this
system
design,
a
prototype
was
implemented. In Figure 4, two prototypes are shown. The
prototype on the right is the new version that has the
automatic playing permission button installed.
Figure 4. Prototype (right is the new version).
73
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

After the prototype implementation, the arrangement
intervals
of
the
comments
were
examined
owing
to
simultaneous activation of the first and second audio in some
cases. The average walking speed of people is said to be 1.5
m/s. If the length of one of the audio file used in the SNR is
10 to 25 s, the distance between the comments must be at
least 37.5 m. Therefore, when the comments on the SNR are
arranged, it is necessary to consider the distance. In Figure 5,
the sample interval between the first comments and next
comments is 25 seconds, and the speed of walking is 1.5m/s
is shown.
Figure 5. the sample Interval of comments.
IV.
COMMENTS FOR SNR
In this experiment, the type of comments suitable for the
SNR system is discussed.
A. Comment Collection and Grouping
In order to collect local information of the city, we
interviewed people of the city. The location chosen was at
the wayside of Enoshima Railway.
Figure 6. Location of Enoshima Railway.
Many tourist spots and fashion shops are located in this
location, which attracts 12 million tourists per year. Apart
from being a popular tourist location, the locals are warm
and familiar with the many attractive spots.
The interview was carried out by 40 team members from
our laboratory. To facilitate the interviewing process, three
pieces of information were focused upon:
- Recommended Shops
- Recommended Place
- Other recommendations
We were able to collect 159 pieces of comments through
this fieldwork. We studied the text of all comments and
grouped them based on the technique of HCD (Human
Centered Design). After grouping, it was found that the
groups could be classified into four quadrants.
Figure 7. Comments four quadrants.
B. Evaluation
1.
Evaluation Method
SNR of Enoshima Railway was created for all 15
Stations with 10 comments per station. These audio
comments were created by speech synthesis, and the
subjects were students of the laboratory. The comments
placed on the map were heard, and the comments in the free
description were evaluated. Fig. 8 shows an experimental
SNR
in
the
Kamakura
station.
Figure 8. Experimental SNR in the Kamakura station.
2.
Results and Discussion
From the results of the free description evaluation,
opinions were summarized as shown in Table1.
TABLE I. LIST OF DESCRIPTION
-
On the street, reliable information is better because it is
easy to understand.
-
Ambiguous information is bad to hear.
-
Information
of
the
local
gourmet
food
increases
motivation to go shopping or visit a restaurant.
-
Long comments are too long and difficult to listen to.
-
Local information of shops and restaurants that only
locals know is interesting to hear.
From these results, two points for SNR comments were
noted.
74
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

1)
The length of the comments
It becomes difficult to hear the voice of the speech
synthesis if the comments are very long.
2)
The contents of the comment
It is better to include specific comments to present
reliable information.
In light of these points, Q1 in Fig. 7 is deemed to be the
most suitable quadrant for SNR comments. However, by
context of the situation of users and the city, other quadrant
comments such as Rumor or Appearance may generate
interest for users in the town.
V.
EXPERIMENT
SNR based on system design was developed, and a
demonstration was performed. Users of SNR and users
without SNR walked on the same street and the difference
between walking and the user’s perspective were verified.
A. Experimental Method
Three students (one male and two females) of KEIO
University were subjects. Subjects A and B use the SNR
while
subjects C did not use the SNR but rather, used
Google Map. The experimental location was between
Kamakurakokomae Station and Shichirigahama Station in
Fujisawa (Kanagawa). This is same place of the comment
experimental. The shortest distance of this section is about
950 m, which can be covered in 10 min. This section is also
a famous location of SlamDunk - a famous animation in
Japan. In this section, there is a branch point to either
choose to walk by the sea or climb to hills but most people
choose the coastal road. However, there exists many
beautiful places along the hills. For example, the location of
beautiful views of the sea is lined with beautiful houses that
make the walk interesting.
In
this
section,
each
subject
walked
from
Kamakurakokomae Station to Shichirigahama Station after
which they had drawn a cognitive map.
B. Comments
Comments that were used in the experiment, based on
the discussion of the recorded comments were originally
created. Comments on both the coastal side street where
many tourists visit and the hillside street where locals live
were placed. Arrangement intervals of the comments were
based on the comment distance of system design. In this
experiment, 20 comments were placed on this section. Fig.
9 shows the SNR used in the experiment, while Table 2
shows some example of comments.
Figure 9. SNR in the experiment.
TABLE II. COMMENTS EXAMPLE
If you go up the hill there is a place from where you can
see a beautiful view of the sea.
There's a dead end sign but this road leads to the Enoden
railroad.
Restaurant Shichirigahama. Drink a beer and enjoy the
view of the sea at this restaurant.
C. Behavior Observation
Fig. 11 shows the route that subjects walk around the
town. The behavior of each subject is summarized below.
1.
Subject A (SNR)
Subject A visited this location once. In Fig. 11-1 we
showed the route of Subject A. At Point A, SNR provided
the voice “let’s go to the hill” and the way of the hill was
chosen by the male subject A. At Point B, the directions
chosen by
the SNR was also chosen. The interest of the
male subject was in the local information that “this is the
stage of drama” and “beautiful location of scenery”, and at
Point C, when the location introduced by SNR was found,
the subject took a photo. The male subject also reacted to
the word “these is Aloe” but it could not be found by the
subject. At Point D, SNR provided “There are Stop Signs,
but you can come out to Enoden Line”. The male subject
went through the route and arrived at Shichirigahama
Station.
Figure 11-1. Route of Subject A.
Fig.11-2 shows the cognitive map of Subject A. In this
cognitive map at Point 1, Subject A recorded a
nice view
of the sea. At Points 2, 3, and 4, elements that SNR
provided were recorded especially at the side of the hill. The
“edge” that meant Enoden Line was recorded, but was
exceeded in the cognitive map. It was observed that more
points could be located than we expected.
75
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 11-2. Cognitive Map of Subjects A.
2.
Subject B (SNR)
Subject B also visited this location once. In Fig. 12-1,
the route of subject B is shown. At the branch Point A, SNR
provided the voice “let’s got to the hill” similar to that of
subject A, which was selected by Subject B. At Point B, the
street that was further at the top of the hill was selected,
which was reached via a walking trail in the woods. When
she arrived at the walking trail in the woods, the subject’s
path was crooked in the forest but a picture was taken at the
middle point of the trail denoted as Point C, which
overlooked the Sagami Bay. After the walking trail, at
Point D, the subject was behind Shicirigahama Station by
chance.
Figure 12-1. Route of Subject B.
In Fig. 12-2, we showed the cognitive map of Subject B.
At Point 1, the comment “I wanted to see the view of the sea
from the hill” was recorded. Point 2 is where the female
subject could see the sea, which she also recorded on the
map. Though the subject was lost for a while after this point,
the subject recorded “relieved” at Points 3. In this cognitive
map, however, the female subject did not write Enoden Line.
Figure 12-2. Cognitive Map of subject B.
3.
Subject C (Google Map without SNR)
Subject C was at this location once as the other subjects.
In Fig. 13-1, the route of the Subject C is shown. On the
start location, the subject used Google Map to check for the
route to Shichirigahama Station, which was found at Point
A. The subject decided to choose the way of the seaside and
walked a while to Point B before looking over sea and hill.
Though the female subject was lost at the branch point of
Point C, the female subject used Google Map and found the
route to the Station(Point D) instantly. By using Google
Map, the shortest route was selected and the female subject
arrived at the station in 15 min.
Figure 13-1. Subject C.
Fig. 13-2 shows the cognitive map of Subject C is shown.
At Point 1, the female subject commented “There would be
residential areas”. At Points B and C (Fig.13-1), the female
subject also commented forecast too and at Points 2 and 3,
elements that were seen by the subject were also recorded.
At Point 4, the female subject commented “There would be
pizza shop”. This female subject also wrote Enoden Line
clearly.
76
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 13-2. Cognitive map of subject C.
VI.
DISCUSSION
A. the Effect of SNR
Two effects of SNR were deduced from this experiment.
-
A way that was different from usual was chosen.
Subjects of SNR chose a way different from usual.
Subject A walked around based on the speech provided by
the SNR. By walking via the streets while listening to the
local comments in the SNR, the male subject was able to
walk through a route that was not provided in Google Map.
In addition, Subject B selected the street of hills, and walked
via the forest road that was not in the map. In a later
interview about walking, the subject noted that the choice
was selected because SNR provided a comment “The view
of the sea is beautiful from the top of the hill.” This
comment was created by author intentionally, in order to
lead users to choose uncommon routes.
-
Change the cognition of the city
From
the
experimental
cognitive
map,
the
most
uncommon record of the SNR user was “exceed the edge”.
Subject C wrote “that may be residential area” near the
starting point. Subject C suggested this from the road and
line. It is assumed that line of Enoden is “edge” for users
who are walking in city.
However, comparing the two subjects of SNR and the
subject C, SNR users could exceed this edge. In addition,
there is a little difference in height between the hills and the
line, and this could be an edge. However, SNR users could
exceed beyond the line unconsciously. From this fact, it was
found that SNR users could change their cognition and
could change behavior from the usual.
B. Know-how of SNR
From this experiment, we can discuss some knowhow
about creating SNR.
1.
The location and comments
From this experiment, it was discovered that SNR is
useful in the two situations of the user, which could either
be on the Path or on the Node. On the Path if SNR provides
comment about its location, users will look for its comment
position and find new discoveries. For On the Node, SNR
can provide direction on the node for users to find new
routes and be more motivated to walk around than usual. In
Fig. 14, the image of these two instances is shown.
Figure 14. Path and Node.
2.
Story of the comments
From the interview results, it was found that users seek
to listen to the story of comments. For example, the first
comment was about gourmet food, the second comment was
also about gourmet food or provided more detailed for the
first comment. Relevant comments are easier to hear than
independent comments.
VII.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, the concept of SNR was described and its
system design. By experimental results, discussion on the
effect of SNR and the playing method and comments, it was
found that SNR changes both the usual route and the
cognitive map of the city. It was also found that using SNR
could lead to detour. Furthermore, from experiments, a
suitable location to play comments could be found and
contents of comments could then be selected.
On the other hand, some improvements about SNR
were identified, which can only provide comments to
walking users at the moment. However, since there
are
many people on the move, driving cars, riding on bikes or,
in the future, automatic operation vehicles,
SNR would
have to be suitable to many users on the city who would
enjoy the city by detour Therefore an improvement on
system design and comments to various users has to be
sought for.
VIII.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Kori, “Text Extraction and A User Interface for Regional Blog
Sonification” Proc. of the 2nd International Special Workshop on
Databases for Next-Generation Researchers (SWOD2006), 2006.
[2]
Y. Nakatani, “Tourist Navigation System that Induces Accidental
Encounter” Human Interface Symposium, 2008, pp.1033-1038.
[3]
M. Suda, “The Development of Audio Contents for Conveying
Characteristics of Local Regions and
a Proposal of Distributio
nSystem for Them” IPSJ SIG Technical Report, 2013, pp.13-18.
[4]
K. Lynch, The Image of The City, The MIT Press, 1960.
[5]
P. Thorndyke, and H. Barbara, “Differences in spatial knowledge
acquired from maps and navigation” Cognitive psychology 14, 1982,
pp.560-589.
[6]
H.
Mallot,
and
G.
Sabine,
“Route
navigating
without
place
recognition: What is recognised in recognition-triggered responses?”
Perception 29, 2000, pp.43-56.
[7]
F. Redlick, M. Jenkin, and H. Laurence, “Humans can use optic flow
to estimate distance of travel” Vison research 41, 2001, pp.213-219.
[8]
F. Kato, “Experiencing the City through Podwalk: A Medium for
Flâneur” Pervasive Image Capture and Sharing Workshop, 2006.
77
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

