Mobile and User-friendly Two-Factor Authentication for Electronic Government 
Services Using German Electronic Identity Card and a NFC-enabled Smartphone 
 
Michael Massoth  
Department of Computer Science  
Hochschule Darmstadt – University of Applied Sciences  
Darmstadt, Germany  
E-mail: michael.massoth@h-da.de
 
Abstract— A mobile, secure and user-friendly two-factor 
authentication using the German electronic identity (eID) card 
will be presented. The new approach shall be used for the mobile 
online-authentication of citizens in order to get access onto high 
trust level electronic government services. One part of the 
innovation is the use of a Near Field Communication (NFC) 
enabled Android smartphone as ubiquitous NFC card reader. 
The new approach implements a mobile, as well as a stationary 
authentication solution for citizens. The high trust level of the 
mobile online-authentication will be reached by a strong two-
factor authentication with the German eID card and the 
corresponding 6-digit Personal Identification Number (PIN). 
Keywords-mobile authentication; identity management; strong 
two-factor authentication; high trust level. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
Due to the rapid increase of digitalization within our 
industry and society, more and more businesses and 
government agencies are offering online services where a 
citizen can access anywhere, anytime, using the online 
function of the German National electronic Identity (eID) 
Card. Citizens shall be able to communicate with the 
administration simply and securely around the clock online 
in order to perform necessary administrative tasks. This saves 
costs, the way to administration, waiting times, paper and 
postage. Citizens and users can identify themselves not only 
on the Internet, but also at vending machines and the self-
service terminals in public authorities. Therefore a mobile 
and strong two-factor authentication using the German 
electronic identity (eID) card will be presented in this paper. 
The new approach shall be used for a quick mobile online-
authentication of citizens in order to get access onto all high 
trust level electronic government services. 
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, the 
online authentication process with the German eID card and 
the problems of previous solutions are discussed. Section III 
presents some related work. Section IV introduces the new 
mobile AusweissApp2 for Android in Germany. The new 
mobile authentication approach with the citizen service app  
is shown in Section V. In Section VI, the new stationary 
authentication approach with a Quick Response (QR) code is 
presented in detail. Section VII gives a security evaluation of 
the REST-interface. Section VIII presents a security 
evaluation of the HTTS-interface. Section IX ends this paper 
with a conclusion and outlook on future work. 
II. 
ONLINE AUTHENTICATION WITH GERMAN ID CARD 
 
The new German National Identity Card was introduced 
in 2010, Dec 1st, in smart card format and with a contactless 
chip, see Figure 1. With this activated chip, the citizen and 
eID card holder can use the eID function (online function). 
With the eID function, the citizen can prove her or his identity 
in a simple, secure and quick manner on the Internet or at 
vending machines. The eID card chip transmits the personal 
data using secure connections once the user authorizes such 
a transmission by entering the corresponding 6-digit PIN. So 
a strong two-factor authentication (property and knowledge) 
will take place. For realization of the electronic 
authentication, a trusted and secure channel between the chip 
and the service provider will be established, using an 
authenticated Diffie-Hellmann key agreement protocol. Both 
communication parties know with whom they interact 
(reciprocal authentication).  
The German National Identity Card offers maximum 
security for the personal data on the chip. This applies to both 
the physical security features of the document and the 
security technologies protecting the personal data on the chip. 
The eID function significantly improves data security and 
reduces the amount of personal data collected (data 
minimization). The German eID system fulfills certain strong 
requirements described in the technical guidelines and 
security advices, published by the German Federal Office for 
Information Security (BSI), see [1] and [2]. The security and 
privacy details of the German eID system were addressed in 
various papers and articles, see, e.g., [3] and [4]. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. German National eID Card 
 
In order to use the activated eID function, the citizen need 
a NFC [10] card reader (available from various retailers) and 
a client software, such as AusweisApp2, which ensures a 
secure connection between the eID chip and the Internet 
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

service provider so that data can be exchanged in encrypted 
form [13]. The online authentication process with the eID 
card (using the example of a web service) will be explained 
step-by-step below: 
 
(1) The card holder opens the provider's web service 
requiring online authentication. 
 
(2) The service transmits the authentication request to 
the eID server. 
 
(3) A secure channel is established between the eID 
server, the client software (e.g., AusweisApp2), the card 
reader and the ID card's chip, and the authenticity of the 
service provider and the authenticity and integrity of the 
eID card (protection against forgery) are checked. 
 
(4) The client software shows the card holder the 
service provider's authorization certificate and the 
requested personal data categories. The eID card holder 
decides which personal data he/she wishes to transmit. 
 
(5) By entering the 6-digit PIN the eID card holder 
confirms the transmission of his/her data. 
 
(6) The eID card data are sent to the eID server. 
 
(7) The eID server sends an authentication response and 
the eID card data to the service. 
 
(8) The authentication response and the ID card data are 
retrieved. The service checks the authentication results 
and decides whether the authentication was successful. A 
response is then sent to the user and/or the service is 
provided. 
 
The consumer research study of GfK, determined in May 
2015, stated, that only 5% of all Germans used their eID card 
for online authentication services within the past 12 months 
[6]. Also, the "AusweisApp2" (for stationary Windows and 
Mac OS) was only downloaded about 180,000 times from 
Dec 2014 to May 2015.  There are probably two main reasons 
for that disappointing result: First, there are only few services 
(55 commercial and 109 from administrations, in May 2015) 
with eID support available on the market. Thus, the citizen 
and users may not see a significant benefit in using eID. 
Second, for the online authentication there is a special NFC 
card reader needed which can cost between 30 (basic) to 160 
(comfort) Euros. As interim conclusion: The necessity to 
purchase such an expensive NFC card reader was and is a 
high blocking factor for the citizens and users to make use of 
the online authentication function of the German eID card. 
 
III. 
RELATED WORK 
 
Other countries in Europe also provide mobile 
authentication solutions for their citizens and users. In 
Austria for example a new system called “Identity Austria” 
(IDA) will be introduced. With the new IDA system it will be 
possible for an Austrian citizen to recall and display official 
documents and ID cards such as a driving license, passport, 
e-card or approval form, on the mobile phone without having 
to carry the different ID cards. The cards and documents are 
just displayed but not stored on the smartphone. The 
requested data can be accessed via a centralized high-security 
server in the Ministry of the Interior and with the consent of 
the person concerned via an encrypted Internet connection. 
First field tests has taken place in summer 2017.  
The predecessor project was “My Identity App” (MIA) 
[6] and was developed by the Österreichische Staatsdruckerei 
GmbH. MIA combines electronic formats of traditional 
printed ID documents and electronic identities (eID) into a 
platform-independent smartphone app embedded in an ID 
ecosystem. Authentication of MIA against the backend is 
performed by means of a client certificate, which is stored on 
the users’ smartphone. All data transfers are secured using 
Transport Layer Security (TLS). There are no data stored on 
the smartphone. Personal data and digital formats of 
documents and ID cards are always retrieved from a trusted 
high-security server of a cloud backend infrastructure. A 
strong two-factor authentication, e.g., with a generated one-
time transaction number  and a biometric fingerprint, could 
be performed if required for authentication and proof of 
identity within an online service. 
In Switzerland, there is so far no national eID card 
available, but Swisscom provides a Mobile ID solution for 
secure mobile authentication via the smartphone [7]. The 
Swisscom Mobile ID is a public key infrastructure (PKI)-
based secure authentication service that enables users of 
business applications to access secure accounts, platforms, 
applications and cloud services. Mobile ID is an application 
that is not installed on the smartphone, but on the subscriber 
identity module (SIM) card over-the-air. This makes the 
application work on any popular smartphone. First, the 
mobile phone number must be entered for registration. The 
Swisscom's database is then checked to ascertain whether this 
mobile phone number is under contract with Swisscom. Then 
the users home address is displayed. This has to be confirmed 
by the user. A Mobile ID is already preinstalled on all 
Swisscom SIM cards as a SIM toolkit (STK) applet, which 
can only be accessed by the mobile provider “over the air” 
(OTA) via the correct identification key. Additionally an 
RSA key is generated, which binds the SIM card to the 
specific device and thus makes it a safety token. Furthermore, 
a user-specific Mobile ID PIN is defined, which the user must 
enter each time when the RSA key, which is stored on the 
SIM card, is to be accessed. If the user wants to log on to a 
website, a four-digit number is displayed on the website. At 
the same time, a message is sent via the SMS channel, which 
contains the login location and the four-digit number. If both 
are matching, then the user is prompted to enter his personal 
Mobile ID PIN. After the correct Mobile ID PIN has been 
entered, a message is sent back to the sender and the login is 
successful. 
Otterbein et al. [8] presented a new approach with 
“derived” identities on mobile phones. They analyzed and 
evaluated different kinds of hardware-based security 
solutions in order to protect sensitive data at the smartphone. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

IV. 
NEW MOBILE AUSWEISAPP2 FOR ANDROID IN 
GERMANY 
 
 
The new mobile AusweisApp2 for Android was released 
officially on 27th April 2017 at Google Playstore. With that 
client software the online identification can be used with an 
android smartphone or tablet (version 4.3 and higher) without 
an additional NFC card reader. To do so, the smartphone or 
tablet must have an NFC interface in the first place. The 
second requirement for the NFC-enabled smartphone is the 
support of the communication function "Extended Length". 
This function must be supported by both the NFC chip inside 
the smartphone and the firmware of the respective device 
manufacturer. In the third place, the NFC chip must have a 
sufficient field strength, which ensures that the contactless 
eID card is supplied with sufficient power to read the stored 
data. Since 3rd July 2017 the open source code of the 
AusweisApp2 Android release (1.12.2) is available on 
Github under the European Union Public License (EUPL). 
With the new BSI-certificated mobile AusweisApp2 it is now 
possible to implement a mobile two-factor authentication for 
online services using the German eID card and a NFC-
enabled Android smartphone, as demonstrated in the 
following sections. 
 
V. 
MOBILE AUTHENTICATION WITH CITIZEN SERVICE 
ACCOUNT APP 
 
The mobile two-factor authentication using the German 
eID card and a NFC-enabled Android smartphone as 
ubiquitous NFC card reader will be presented as prove of 
concept, demo and practical development experience, shown 
in Figure 2. The new approach shall be realized for a typical 
electronic government service with trust level “high”.  
 
 
Figure 2. High level overview of the mobile authentication of a citizen 
 
Hereby a Linux-based virtual machine from Hochschule 
Darmstadt (- University of Applied Sciences) is used as 
server platform in the backend. A Tomcat web server was 
installed on this site, which serves as a container for all 
developed web applications. A MariaDB SQL [15] database 
is used to store the authentication procedures, as well as the 
additional data of the particular e-government service. The 
PKI-infrastructure 
and 
the 
eID-Server 
of 
the  
Bundesdruckerei GmbH (Berlin), or as alternative the media 
transfer AG (Darmstadt), could be used for live testing. To 
enable platform-independent communication with various 
terminals, a Representational State Transfer (REST) [12] 
server based on the Jersey framework was developed as a 
server application. The task of the REST interface basically 
consists of two parts. On the one hand, it is used to 
authenticate a customer, using the new German eID card. It 
can also be used to process and terminate the particular 
electronic government services with trust level “high”. 
Further applications are possible and could be integrated into 
the backend architecture. The approach of a successful 
authentication is shown in Figure 3 below, see step (1)-(4): 
 
Step (1): The App asks you to hold your identity card 
behind the back of your smartphone and to enter the 6-
digit PIN of your German eID card. [Figure 3a] 
 
Step (2): The Android smartphone uses NFC to read 
your private data contactless from your activated eID 
chip. [Figure 3b] 
 
Step (3): Transmits your encrypted personal data to the 
citizen service account server. [Figure 3c] 
 
Step (4): After successful transmission you have 
completed the proof of your identity. [Figure 3d] 
 
Figure 3. Step-for-step approach for mobile authentication 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

The Citizen Service Account App interacts with the server 
via the following five essential steps: 
 
 
Request of an Authentication and Session Token  
 
Transmission of the Transaction Number (TAN) after 
successful authentication using the ID card 
 
Request of the user's read-out ID card data 
 
Transfer of the input form data  
 
Confirmation of the vehicle decommissioning 
 
For this purpose, a REST client has been implemented as 
prototype and proof of concept, which is able to address the 
specified REST API of our server. The required data between 
the app and the server are exchanged in JSON format [17]. 
 
VI. 
STATIONARY AUTHENTICATION OF A CITIZEN WITH 
QUICK RESPONSE (QR) CODE 
 
The complete process of online authentication of the 
citizen can also be done with a stationary QR code solution. 
The high level overview is shown in Figure 4 below: 
 
 
Figure 4. High level overview of the stationary authentication of a citizen 
 
The corresponding step-by-step process for the 
stationary authentication of a citizen with the quick response 
code (QR) solution is shown in Figure 5 below: 
 
 
 
Figure 5. Step-by-step process for the stationary authentication of a citizen 
 
In the stationary authentication approach the user 
performs the actual login process via the website of the e-
government service account and uses the Citizen Service 
Account App only to scan the generated QR and set the 
displayed TAN into the corresponding field in the website. 
As prerequisite the citizen has to download and install 
the citizen service account app first on a NFC-enabled 
Android smartphone. Then the step-by-step process for the 
stationary authentication of a citizen continues as following: 
 
Step (1): 
The citizen opens the website of the e-
government service account on the desktop 
PC or notebook and wants to register for the 
service account as a citizen for the first time. 
Step (2): 
A QR code is then displayed on the website of 
the e-government service account. The citizen 
opens the service account app on its 
smartphone and scans the QR code of the 
website. It thus establishes a link between the 
smartphone's service account app and the 
browser-based website on the PC. He then 
legitimates himself with the German eID of 
his ID card and the corresponding 6-digit PIN. 
Step (3): 
After successful authentication the process is 
terminated in the browser of the PC or 
Notebook. 
 
Rest–Server: 
To 
enable 
a 
platform-independent 
communication with various terminals, a REST server based 
on the Jersey framework [16] was developed as a server 
application. The task of the REST interface basically consists 
of two parts. On one hand, it is used to authenticate a 
customer, using the new ID card. It can also be used to log 
off a vehicle after successful authentication. Further 
applications are possible and could be integrated into the e-
government architecture. 
 
REST contains the following five core principles: 
 
 
Unique identification (e.g., 
http://example.com/customers/1234) 
 
Links / Hypermedia (for example links and forms) 
 
Standard methods (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE, 
HEAD, OPTIONS) 
 
Resources and Representations (Set data format for 
output, such as XML, JSON) 
 
Stateless communication (no savings of session status) 
 
 
VII. 
SECURITY EVALUATION OF THE REST-INTERFACE 
 
Possible attack vectors and threats against the REST-
interface are: 
 
A. Distributed-Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attack:  
A DDoS attack on a system with a REST interface is 
aimed at exploiting the limit of the API keys. Often 
developers do not set a limit on requests to the API when 
implementing the REST interface. If an attacker finds out 
such a REST interface, he is able to paralyze the system with 
frequent requests. 
 
B. Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF) attack:  
In a CSRF attack, a user is given a command for a web 
application (e.g., in the form of a link in a guest book) by an 
attacker. If the user follows this link, the command is sent to 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

the web application and executed in the context of that user. 
If the user is logged on to the web application, the user's trust 
relationship with the web application is exploited and the 
command is executed with the rights of the user. 
 
C. Countermeasure Cross Site Request Forgery (CSRF): 
As a safeguard against a CSRF attack, a secret token can 
be introduced that is difficult to guess by the attacker. Each 
time the web application views the page, that token is passed 
as a parameter in URLs or as a hidden field on forms (double 
submit cookies). For each client request, the web application 
checks whether the transmitted token matches the value 
stored for the session. If an error occurs, the requested call is 
rejected. Without knowledge of this token an attacker cannot 
adjust a valid HTTP request. For high-security web 
applications, consider creating the token for each request so 
that each time the web application is called, a new token is 
sent to the client, which must then be used in the subsequent 
request [19]. 
 
VIII. 
SECURITY EVALUATION OF THE HTTPS-INTERFACE 
 
All HTTPS connections 
of the prototype 
are 
implemented and realized with TLS 1.2. The current version 
TLS 1.2 is specified in RFC 5246. Unlike its predecessor 
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), TLS uses the cryptographically 
more secure keyed-hash message authentication code 
(HMAC) method to calculate message authentication code 
(MAC) values. TLS also uses a modified key generation 
method, which provides greater robustness against attacks on 
hash values used in key generation as pseudo-random number 
generators. TLS has also extended the amount of alert 
messages, with all extensions classified as fatal alerts. 
Examples of such extensions are the warnings that an 
unknown Certification Authority (CA) has been specified, or 
that a decryption operation has failed.  
 
One possible attack vector and threat against the HTTPS-
interface shall be discussed here in more detail. The Browser 
Reconnaissance and Exfiltration via Adaptive Compression 
of Hypertext (BREACH) attack is a security exploit against 
HTTPS when using HTTP compression. [18] 
The BREACH attack was discovered in 2013. This type 
of data theft exploits the data compression and data 
encryption used by websites to speed up page load times, save 
bandwidth, and secure data during transmission. While the 
BREACH attack does not directly address SSL security, it 
compromises the privacy goals of SSL because HTTPS is 
used only to encrypt page headers and disclose other content. 
Hackers use a combination of brute-force attacks and divide-
and-conquer methods in BREACH attacks to gain access to 
credentials, email addresses, and other sensitive and personal 
information from SSL-enabled sites. BREACH attacks work 
with all versions of the SSL and TLS protocol and with any 
type of ciphers collection, as long as the following conditions 
are met: 
 
The web application is served via HTTP-level 
compression and contains user-provided data and a static 
secret in the HTTP response text. 
 
The attacker knows what he is looking for and is able to 
monitor the traffic between the user and the web 
application to get the length of the HTTP responses. 
 
The attacker can persuade the user to visit a malicious 
scripting site and then inject a man-in-the-browser 
malware that can send requests to the target site. 
 
By injecting plain text into an HTTPS request and observing 
the length of the compressed HTTPS responses, an attacker 
is able to iteratively guess and derive plaintext secrets from 
an SSL stream. [18] 
BREACH attacks only require a few thousand queries and 
can be completed in less than 60 seconds. There is no 
practical way to turn off the attack.  
 
Some countermeasures in order to give a higher 
protection against BREACH attacks are: 
 
 
One possible safeguard is to disable HTTP compression. 
This leads to reduced performance and increased 
bandwidth usage. 
 
Other measures include the separation of secrets and user 
input or a limitation of the rate limit for queries to the 
server. Most protections against BREACH attacks are 
application-specific or require improved information 
security practices to handle sensitive data. 
 
As a further preventive measure, security management 
for web applications can be implemented and a web 
application firewall can be used to detect and block 
malicious clients. [18] 
 
In the following subsections, we discuss some additional 
countermeasures in order to protect the implemented HTTPS 
and TLS1.2 connections. 
A. Countermeasure TLS backward compatibility (TLS): 
Incorrect configuration of the TLS 1.2 interface allows 
entry into the connection. If the connection is broken, there is 
the potential for man-in-the-middle attacks and phishing 
attacks. A correct configuration of the extensive TLS 
connection ensures long-term protection against these 
intrusion attempts. 
By default, TLS 1.2 allows backward compatibility with 
older versions of TLS. Older versions of TLS offer more 
vulnerabilities and poorer cryptographic properties. It is 
advisable to only accept TLS 1.2 and to block all clients with 
older versions in case of a handshake at the beginning of the 
connection. 
B.  Countermeasure Cipher Suites (TLS): 
The range of cipher suites is large at TLS 1.2, but some 
are no longer safe. The BSI recommends either Galois / 
Counter Mode (GCM) or Cipher Block Chaining (CBC). 
Both are currently considered safe and must continue to be 
supported until at least 2023. The TLS connection should be 
set to GCM at least for machine-to-machine connection. With 
GCM, the real key is never transferred and the temporary key 
is destroyed. This means that even if an attacker breaks the 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

connection and obtains the private key, unlike CBC, he 
cannot make the content. Furthermore, the BSI recommends 
the Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) 
which uses elliptic curve cryptography. ECDSA is 
recommended here due to the short keys and good 
performance.  
 
C. Countermeasure DDoS on HTTPS: 
It is strongly recommended, that the IP range allowed for 
HTTPS connections shall be truncated, so that only the IP 
addresses of legitimate connection partners will remain. 
 
IX. 
CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 
 
The new approach and solution has implemented a 
mobile strong two-factor authentication with German eID 
card and the corresponding 6-digit PIN, whereby a NFC-
enabled Android smartphone will be used. The new mobile 
solution overcomes the need to buy an expensive NFC card 
reader.  Instead, the NFC-enabled Android smartphone will 
be used as ubiquitous NFC card reader.  
The new approach shall be used for the quick mobile 
authentication of citizens in order to get access onto 
electronic government services with trust level “high”, like, 
e.g., the citizen service account. 
 
Advantages for the citizens and users are: 
 
 
Mobile and stationary web-based use 
 
Identification within seconds 
 
Easily proof of the citizens identity with legal security 
 
Without biometry, texting, and media breaks. 
 
Replacement of expensive card reader 
 
Save the way to the government agency and the long 
waiting times, 
 
Advantages for the government: 
 
 
Sovereign digital identity data 
 
Strong two-factor authentication suitable for all 
government services with trust level “high” (and below) 
 
No media disruption 
 
High processing speed  
 
Cost savings and reductions 
 
High satisfaction of citizens and users 
 
Future work: The new approach will be implemented and 
used for  the de-registration of a vehicle as off the road. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work was supported by the Hessian Ministry of the 
Interior and Sports (HMdIS, Government of the Federal State 
of Hessen) [14], Project “Mobiles Servicekonto Hessen”. 
 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] 
Bundesamt  für  Sicherheit  in  der  Informationstechnik 
(BSI):  Advanced  Security  Mechanisms  for  Machine  
Readable  Travel Documents  and  eIDAS  Token  (2015). 
https://www.bsi.bund.de/SharedDocs/Downloads/EN/BSI/P
ublications/TechGuidelines/TR03110/BSI_TR-03110_Part-
2-V2_2.pdf. Last accessed 06th Dec 2017. 
[2] 
Bundesamt  für  Sicherheit  in  der  Informationstechnik 
(BSI): Technische Richtlinie 03112 – Das eCard-API-
Framework (2014). 
https://www.bsi.bund.de/DE/Publikationen/TechnischeRicht
linien/tr03112/index_htm.html. Last accessed 06th Dec 
2017. 
[3] 
Bender, J., Dagdelen, Ö., Fischlin, M. and Kügler, D.: 
”Security analysis of the pace key-agreement protocol.” 
International Conference on Information Security. Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg (2009). 
[4] 
Bender, J., Dagdelen, Ö., Fischlin, M., and Kügler, D.: ”The 
PACE— AA protocol for machine readable travel 
documents, and its security.” International Conference on 
Financial Cryptography and Data Security. Springer Berlin 
Heidelberg (2012). 
[5] 
http://www.gfk.com, last access 9th Dec 2017. 
GfK SE (2015) Fünf Prozent nutzen den elektronischen 
Personalausweis. http://www.gfk.com/insights/news/fuenf-
prozent-nutzen-elektronischen-personalausweis. Last 
accessed: 06th Dec 2017. 
[6]  
Österreichische Staatsdruckerei GmbH, MIA – My Identity 
App. https://www.mia.at. Last accessed 06th Dec 2017. 
[7]  
Swisscom Mobile ID,  
https://www.swisscom.ch/de/business/mobile-
id/overview.html. Last accessed 06th Dec 2017. 
[8]  
Florian Otterbein, Tim Ohlendorf, and Marian Margraf: 
“Mobile Authentication with German eID”, IFIP Summer 
School 2016. 
[9] 
http://www.egov4dev.org/success/definitions.shtml,  
last access 4th Dec 2017. 
[10] 
http://nearfieldcommunication.org/,  
last access 6th Dec 2017. 
[11] 
http://www.investopedia.com/terms/q/quick-response-qr-
code.asp, last access 7th Dec 2017. 
[12] 
REST: www.restapitutorial.com/lessons/whatisrest.html, 
last access 9th Dec 2017. 
[13] 
AusweisApp2 can be downloaded for free at: 
www.ausweisapp.bund.de, last access 7th Dec 2017. 
[14] 
https://english.hessen.de, last access 6th Dec 2017 
[15] 
https://mariadb.org, last access 8th Dec 2017 
[16] 
https://jersey.github.io, last access 8th Dec 2017. 
[17] 
http://www.json.org, last access 8th Dec 2017. 
[18] 
„Akamai BREACH-Attack“ [Online]. Available: 
https://www.akamai.com/de/de/resources/breach-attack.jsp 
Last access 11st Dec 2017 
[19] 
BSI,  Prevention of Cross-Site Request Forgery 
https://www.bsi.bund.de/DE/Themen/ITGrundschutz/ITGru
ndschutzKataloge/Inhalt/_content/m/m04/m04403.html 
Last access 11st Dec 2017 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

