Decision-Support Systems and Decision Making: Managing Decisional Deskilling in 
Human-DSS Interactions in Organizations 
A Quantitative Study 
 
Nadine-Christine Wessel 
Department of Business and Management 
Technische Hochschule Brandenburg 
Brandenburg an der Havel, Germany 
e-mail: nadinechristine.wessel@th-brandenburg.de 
 
 
Abstract—The loss of individual decision-making skills and 
knowledge, also known as Decisional Deskilling, constitutes a 
significant threat to knowledge workers in the interactions 
with intelligent Decision-Support Systems (iDSS). The study 
used an online survey to test six hypotheses for examining the 
relationship between the extent use of intelligent decision-
support systems and the impact on financial professionals’ 
knowledge. The findings support the idea that extensive iDSS 
use 
decreases 
declarative 
and 
procedural 
knowledge. 
Therefore, balancing technology use with preserving employee 
skills and knowledge is vital. Proposed mitigation techniques 
include training and support programs, monitoring reliance on 
iDSS, and reevaluating system effectiveness. 
Keywords-decisional 
deskilling; 
artificial 
intelligence; 
decision-support 
systems; 
financial 
services; 
mitigation 
techniques. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The increasing adoption of intelligent Decision-Support 
Systems (iDSS) in various industries, including healthcare 
and finance, has raised concerns regarding their impact on 
knowledge workers and their decision-making skills [1]-[3].  
Decision-Support 
Systems 
(DSS) 
encompass 
any 
computerized system that assists with decision-making in 
organizations [4]. Emerging technologies, such as artificial 
intelligence have influenced the current DSS landscape [5], 
demanding a concept extension of the research field into 
iDSS. Artificial Intelligence (AI), which is also known as 
“machine intelligence”, is a field in computer science that 
aims to develop systems capable of performing tasks that 
typically require human intelligence [6]. By using algorithms 
to learn from data, Machine Learning (ML) enables task 
automation [6]. According to [7] decision-making processes 
in organizations include 1) issue identification and problem 
finding, 2) decision question specification and problem 
formulation, 3) alternative generation and evaluation, 4) 
choice and 5) implementation. An iDSS that uses ML can 
perform any or all these phases. Despite the widespread use 
of DSS, there is limited research on the impact of iDSS on 
decision-making under these novel conditions [7][8]. 
iDSS implementation in organizations alters individual 
information processing and decision making [9] and can 
cause unintended deskilling [10]. This study defines this 
phenomenon as Decisional Deskilling (DD), which involves 
a decline in decision-making abilities and knowledge loss 
[1][11]. Literature suggests that DD is often caused by over-
reliance on technology, also known as automation bias 
[1][12]. One possible explanation is that humans tend to 
delegate the responsibility of information seeking and 
processing to iDSSs, resulting in reduced individual effort 
[13]. This can also affect decision-makers’ declarative 
knowledge and procedural knowledge [14]. Declarative 
Knowledge (DK) is “the storage of fact and events,” whereas 
the memory of Procedural Knowledge (PK) “is more like a 
technique applied when necessary” [15]. For effective 
decision making, both types of knowledge, i.e., knowing the 
“What” and the “How” of the specific task are relevant [15]. 
[16] discovered that DD may only become apparent 
when iDSSs are discontinued, even though it can occur on a 
latent level. Prior research has therefore mainly focused on 
reliance and its short-term effects. [1] explored the impact of 
iDSS on DM and defined reliance based on factors, such as 
user’s experience level, problem complexity, familiarity with 
the iDSS, and cognitive fit. In a case study of a German bank 
group with a fully automated iDSS [2] found that loss of 
critical thinking, knowledge, and expertise, as well as misuse 
of the system, were unintended employee-related short-term 
effects. [14] used a qualitative approach to investigate 
partially automated iDSS and identified three factors that 
reduce auditors' DK and PK, namely, the extent to which the 
tool takes over routine tasks, the auditors' reliance on the 
tool, and the time spent with iDSS. 
Expanding on [14] this study explores the relation 
between the extent use of iDSS and financial professional’s 
knowledge. Objectives were to 1) identify contributing 
factors, 2) assess the impact on professionals’ knowledge, 
and 3) inform mitigation strategies. The paper is organized as 
follows: Section II outlines the empirical method, Section III 
presents survey results, Section IV discusses findings and 
implications, and Section V concludes. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
II. 
METHOD 
The study adopted a quantitative empirical approach and 
employed an online survey for data collection. Figure 1 
shows the research framework based on [14]. 
Figure 1.  .Research Framework 
A. Sampling and Data Collection 
Sampling involved professionals from the financial 
services sector in Germany, encompassing investment 
banking, commercial banking, asset management, insurance, 
and other financial services. The additional criteria included 
experience in decision making, familiarity with DSS, and 
usage of partially or fully automated iDSS in their current 
role. These iDSS could be deployed to aid decision-making 
processes in risk management, fraud detection, portfolio 
management, credit scoring and underwriting, as well as 
financial forecasting and modeling. Data was collected 
through an anonymous online survey between 15th 
November to 15th December 2022, resulting in 39 completed 
questionnaires. The survey consisted of questions from the 
research framework, outlined in Table I, along with open-
ended inquiries regarding access to training and support 
programs, and the participants' experiences with iDSS. 
B. Data Analysis 
To test the indicated relations of the three potential 
contributing factors and their impact on declarative and 
procedural knowledge, six initial hypotheses were built. The 
collected questionnaire data concerning the items for 
hypothesis testing were imported and computed using the 
software SPSS Statistics 28.0.1. In the first step, a null 
hypothesis and an alternative hypothesis were built for each 
of the hypotheses: 
 
H0: ρ = 0 
() 
 
HA: ρ ≠ 0 
() 
The Greek letter ρ indicates the population correlation, 
i.e., corresponding to the sample Pearson correlation 
coefficient r. The expression (1) of the null hypothesis H0 
means that Pearson coefficient equals zero, suggesting no 
association between the two tested variables. Based on the 
assumption that there is an association between the two 
variables, the alternative hypothesis HA requires the 
coefficient to be different from zero as shown in (2). In the 
second step, the correlation coefficient r, two-tailed, was 
calculated and the strength of the correlation between both 
variables were determined according to Table II. In the next  
TABLE I.  
QUESTIONNAIRE (EXCERPT) 
Question 
Item 
Years of experience with IT tools for decision 
making? 
Time spent with 
iDSSa 
Which best describes the use of IT tools in your 
decision making? 
iDSS performs 
routine &time-
intensive tasks  
How much do you feel that you rely upon IT-
enabled support tools in carrying out your work?  
Dependence on 
iDSS 
Do you believe that your ability to recall details 
recorded in the IT tool (for example, customer data 
or financial data) is impacted as a result of your use 
of IT tool? 
Declarative 
Knowledge 
Do you believe that your ability to run your 
working tasks without the IT tools is impacted as a 
result of your use of the IT tools? 
Procedural 
Knowledge 
a. Multiple choice with single answer: 1) < 2 years, 2) 2 - 3 years, 3) 3 - 5 years, and 4) > 5 years 
b. Multi select answers possible. Stages included: 1) Gathering information, 2) Identifying problems, 
3) Developing options 4), Selecting the best course of actions, and 5) Implementing the decision. 
TABLE II.  
THE SCALE OF PEARSON’S CORRELATION COEFFICIENT 
Value of Coefficient r 
Correlation 
0 ≤ r ≤ 0.1 
No Correlation 
0.1 ≤ r ≤ 0.29 
Low Correlation 
0.3 ≤ r ≤ 0.49 
Medium Correlation 
0.5 ≤ r ≤ 0.69 
High correlation 
0.7 ≤ r ≤ 1.0 
Very High Correlation 
 
step, the statistical significance was determined by 
calculating the value of p. A relation is considered 
statistically significant if the calculated value of p is lower 
than alpha, with a predefined value of α < 0.05. A qualitative 
content analysis and additional word frequency computations 
in R were used to examine the answers to the open questions.  
III. 
RESULTS 
This study analyzed survey responses from 39 financial 
services professionals to determine the correlation and 
statistical significance among variables. The correlation 
results are summarized in Table III. Further insights were 
gathered from open questions on training and support 
programs, and participants’ experiences with iDSS. 
A. Hypothesis Testing 
The study found significant correlations between “iDSS 
performs routine and time-intensive tasks” and “Declarative 
Knowledge”, as well as “iDSS performs routine and time-
intensive tasks” and “Procedural Knowledge”, with medium 
effect sizes. These associations were statistically significant 
at the 0.05 level, indicating a probability of less than 5% that 
the null hypothesis, H0, was correct. Thus, H0 was rejected in 
favor of HA, for both cases, providing support for hypotheses 
H1 and H2 as shown in Table IV.  
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

Moreover, “Dependence on iDSS” showed a high 
correlation with both “Declarative Knowledge" and 
“Procedural Knowledge”, with correlation coefficients of 
0.63 and 0.66, respectively. These associations were 
statistically significant at the 0.05 level with a p-value of less 
than .001. As a result, H0 was rejected in favor of HA, 
providing support for hypotheses H3 and H4.  
TABLE III.  
RESULTS OF CORRELATIONS 
a. Correlation is statistically significant at the 0.05 level (2-tailed) 
TABLE IV.  
HYPOTHESES RESULTS 
 
However, the negative correlations that were observed 
between “Time spent with iDSS” and “Declarative 
Knowledge” as well as “Time spent with iDSS” and 
“Procedural Knowledge” were not statistically significant. 
Hence, H0 could not be rejected for both cases, and thus, 
hypotheses H5 and H6 were not supported in the sample.  
B. Training and Support Programs 
The survey question on access to training and support 
programs for skill development in the working field found 
diverse responses. Some financial professionals have access 
to various programs, while others do not require any training 
due to fully automated software. Employers offer different 
types and modes of programs, such as internal academies 
with basic and advanced trainings, mentoring, and online 
courses, and some are setting up new programs due to the 
implementation of new software. Other participants reported 
that their employers offer soft skills, hard skills, and new 
technology training, as well as career development and 
coaching. Some also offer career consultation. Participants 
with access to training programs, stressed the importance of 
these programs in maintaining and improving skills. While 
some have access to technology-outdated programs, others 
do not use any offered by their employer. 
C. Training and Support Programs 
The finance professionals surveyed responded with a 
range of experiences and opinions on iDSS. Some found 
automation helpful in focusing on clients, while others felt 
pressure and risk of deskilling. The systems in place helped 
some organize their work, but others found the information 
superficial and not useful. Many said their organizations still 
had a traditional mindset despite technological changes, and 
they needed more training on the impact of new technology. 
Some found it challenging to understand the information 
provided by the software and explain their decisions. A few 
expressed concerns over the limited control they had over 
the software and its decisions. Some found automated 
systems convenient, but others found them difficult to 
navigate with overwhelming amounts of customer data. 
Difficulty in explaining decisions to other internal 
stakeholders due to the confusing solutions of systems and 
superficial answers to problems were also mentioned. 
IV. 
DISCUSSION 
The results showed significant associations between two 
of the three contributing factors and financial professionals’ 
declarative and procedural knowledge, supporting four of 
the six hypotheses according to Table IV. The survey 
responses show a diverse range of experiences and opinions 
on iDSS, access to training and support programs for skill 
development.  
A. Interpretation of the Findings 
While some employers offer a variety of internal and 
external training and support programs, few participants 
have no access to training programs. Other participants feel 
they do not need them due to the ease of automated systems 
in place. Those with access emphasize their importance in 
maintaining and developing their skills. Some financial 
professionals appreciate technology’s assistance, while 
others feel pressure to make quick decisions, struggling with 
the limitations and difficulty in navigating the systems in 
place effectively, and risking deskilling.  
The results showed a significant association between 
financial professionals' dependence on the iDSS and a 
decrease in their DK and PK. In addition, there is a 
significant association between iDSS taking over routine and 
time-intensive tasks in decision making and a decrease in 
financial professionals' DK and PK. However, no significant 
association was found between time spent with the iDSS and 
DK and PK. Overall, the results suggest that a greater 
reliance on iDSS leads to a decrease in financial 
professionals' knowledge.  
Contributing Factors 
Declarative 
Knowledge 
Procedural 
Knowledge 
N=39 
N=39 
r 
p  
r 
p 
iDSS taking over decision 
making activities 
0.37a 
.019 
0.37a 
.021 
Dependence on iDSS  
0.63a 
< .001 
0.66a 
< .001 
Time spent with iDSS 
-0.09 
.588 
-0.03 
.853 
Hypothesis 
Result 
H1 The greater the extent to which the iDSS performs 
routine and time intensive tasks, the less declarative 
knowledge possessed by the financial professional.  
Supported  
p = .019 
H2 The greater the extent to which the iDSS performs 
routine and time-intensive tasks, the less procedural 
knowledge possessed by the financial professional. 
Supported 
p = .021 
H3 The greater the financial professional’s dependence on 
the intelligent system the less declarative knowledge 
possessed by the financial professional. 
Supported 
p = < .001 
H4 The greater the financial professional’s dependence on 
the intelligent system the less declarative knowledge 
possessed by the financial professional. 
Supported 
p = < .001 
H5 The greater the time the financial professional has 
spent with the intelligent system, the less declarative 
knowledge by the financial professional. 
Not 
supported 
p = .588 
H6 The greater the time the financial professional has 
spent with the intelligent system, the less procedural 
knowledge by the financial professional. 
Not 
supported 
p = .853 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

B. Theoretical and Practical Contributions 
The theoretical contribution of this research lies in its 
examination of the relationship between the extent of use of 
iDSS 
and 
the 
knowledge 
possessed 
by 
financial 
professionals. By exploring this relationship, the study 
provided insights into potential contributing factors. The 
results indicate that the use of iDSS in organizations can 
notably influence the financial professionals` knowledge. 
The findings of the study highlight the importance of 
striving for a balance between technology use and 
maintaining a capable workforce. Mitigation techniques to 
address DD include providing proper training resources and 
programs to support employee growth and development, as 
well as encouraging participation among employees. As AI 
becomes more prevalent in decision-making processes, 
monitoring employees' reliance on intelligent decision aids 
becomes crucial to identify areas where additional training 
and support is needed. By offering knowledge workers 
opportunities to participate in purely human decision 
making, organizations can further counteract the loss of 
specific task knowledge and skills. Finally, to ensure iDSS 
remains a supportive tool for decision making, the 
effectiveness of the system in place should be regularly 
reevaluated 
and 
information 
processes 
be 
adjusted 
accordingly.  
C. Limitations 
This study has several limitations that should be 
acknowledged. Firstly, the sample size of 39 finance 
professionals is relatively small, which may limit the 
generalizability 
of 
the 
results 
to 
other 
industries, 
organizations, or larger populations. Secondly, the findings 
of the study are based on the participants' own opinions and 
ratings, which may introduce some bias into the results. 
Additionally, these opinions and ratings are time-sensitive, 
which may impact the applicability of the results in the 
future. Lastly, this study only examined three contributing 
factors to decisional deskilling and did not consider other 
individual, technical, and organizational factors. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
By studying the relation between the extent use of iDSS 
and the knowledge possessed by financial professionals, the 
study found significant associations of the two contributing 
factors “iDSS takes over routine and time-intensive taks” and 
“Dependance on iDSS” with DK and PK. However, there 
was no significant association with the variable of “Time 
spent with iDSS”. The results also revealed varied 
experiences and opinions on iDSS, as well as on 
participants’ access to training and support programs. Some 
professionals appreciated technology's assistance, while 
others felt pressure to make quick decisions and struggled 
with the limitations of the IT tool in place. 
The study highlights the potential drawbacks of over-
relying on emerging technology for decision-making and 
emphasizes the need to mitigate potential negative impacts 
on workforce knowledge and skills. The results can be used 
to raise awareness of the significance of providing proper 
resources and programs to support employee growth and 
development, and to encourage organizations to invest in 
these resources. Mitigation strategies includes increasing 
participation 
in 
human 
decision-making 
activities, 
monitoring employees' reliance on iDSS, and reevaluating 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the system in place 
present further mitigation strategies to address DD. 
Future research could benefit from a longitudinal study 
tracking the effects of DD over time and combining survey 
data with methods, such as interviews or case studies to gain 
a deeper understanding of the concept of DD.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The author likes to thank Olga Levina and the reviewers for 
their constructive feedback. Any opinions expressed in this 
article are those of the author. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. G. Sutton, V. Arnold, and M. Holt, “How Much 
Automation Is Too Much? Keeping the Human Relevant 
in Knowledge Work,” J. Emerg. Technol. Account., vol. 
15, no. 2, pp. 15–25, September 2018, doi: 10.2308/jeta-
52311. 
[2] A.-S. Mayer, F. Strich, and M. Fiedler, “Unintended 
Consequences of Introducing AI Systems for Decision 
Making,” MIS Q. Exec., pp. 239–257, December 2020, doi: 
10.17705/2msqe.00036. 
[3] M. Schemmer, N. Kühl, and G. Satzger, “Intelligent Decision 
Assistance Versus Automated Decision-Making: Enhancing 
Knowledge 
Work 
Through 
Explainable 
Artificial 
Intelligence.” arXiv, Sep. 28, 2021. [Online]. Available at: 
http://arxiv.org/abs/2109.13827. [retrieved: 6 April, 2023] 
[4] R. Sharda, D. Delen, and E. Turban, Business intelligence and 
analytics: systems for decision support, 10th ed. Boston: 
Pearson, 2015. 
[5] D. Arnott and S. Gao, “From Radical Movement to 
Organizational 
Mainstream: 
ABehavioral 
Economics 
Perspective on DSS History,” in EURO Working Group on 
DSS, J. Papathanasiou, P. Zaraté, and J. Freire de Sousa, Eds., 
in Integrated Series in Information Systems. Cham: Springer 
International 
Publishing, 
2021, 
pp. 
239–257. 
doi: 
10.1007/978-3-030-70377-6_13. 
[6] V. B. Sowmya, B. Majumder, A. Gupta, and H. Surana, 
Practical natural language processing: a comprehensive guide 
to building real-world NLP systems, 1st ed. Sebastopol, CA: 
O’Reilly Media, 2020. 
[7] D. J. Power, C. Heavin, and P. Keenan, “Decision systems 
redux,” J. Decis. Syst., vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 1–18, January 2019, 
doi: 10.1080/12460125.2019.1631683 
[8] D. Paradice, “Two Grand Challenges for DSS Evolution,” in 
EURO Working Group on DSS, J. Papathanasiou, P. Zaraté, 
and J. Freire de Sousa, Eds., in Integrated Series in 
Information 
Systems. 
Cham: 
Springer 
International 
Publishing, 2021, pp. 33–49. doi: 10.1007/978-3-030-70377-
6_3. 
[9] V. U. Vincent, “Integrating intuition and artificial intelligence 
in organizational decision-making,” Bus. Horiz., vol. 64, no. 
4, 
pp. 
425–438, 
July 
2021, 
doi: 
10.1016/j.bushor.2021.02.008. 
[10] T. Hoff, “Deskilling and adaptation among primary care 
physicians using two work innovations,” Health Care 
Management Review, vol. 36 no. 4, pp. 338–348, June 2011 
doi:10.1097/HMR.0b013e31821826a1. 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

[11] R. Parasuraman, T. B. Sheridan, and C. D. Wickens, “A 
model for types and levels of human interaction with 
automation,” IEEE Trans. Syst. Man Cybern. - Part Syst. 
Hum., vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 286–297, May 2000, doi: 
10.1109/3468.844354. 
[12] K. Goddard, A. Roudsari, and J. Wyatt, “Automation bias: A 
systematic review of frequency, effect mediators, and 
mitigators,” J. Am. Med. Inform. Assoc. JAMIA, vol. 19, pp. 
121–7, June 2011, doi: 10.1136/amiajnl-2011-000089. 
[13] L. J. Skitka, K. L. Mosier, and M. Burdick, “Does automation 
bias decision-making?,” Int. J. Hum.-Comput. Stud., vol. 51, 
no. 
5, 
pp. 
991–1006, 
November 
1999, 
doi: 
10.1006/ijhc.1999.0252. 
[14] M. Axelsen, “Continued use of intelligent decision aids and 
auditor knowledge: Qualitative evidence” The 18th Americas 
Conference on Information Systems (ACMICS 2012), 5, 2012 
pp. 
3860-3869 
[Online] 
Available 
at: 
https://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2012/proceedings/AccountingInf
ormationSystems/19. [retrieved: 6 April, 2023]. 
[15] T. ten Berge and R. van Hezewijk, “Procedural and 
Declarative Knowledge: An Evolutionary Perspective,” 
Theory Psychol., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 605–624, October 1999, 
doi: 10.1177/0959354399095002. 
[16] T. Rinta-Kahila, E. Penttinen, A. Salovaara, and W. Soliman. 
(2018) “Consequences of Discontinuing Knowledge Work 
Automation - Surfacing of Deskilling Effects and Methods of 
Recovery,” Proceedings of the 51st Hawaii International 
Conference on System Sciences, (HICSS 2018), March 2018, 
pp. 5244–5253, doi:10.24251/HICSS.2018.654. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

