Towards the Automatic Management of Vaccination Process in Jordan 
 
Edward Jaser 
Princess Sumaya University for Technology 
King Hussein School for Information Technology 
Amman, Jordan 
ejaser@psut.edu.jo 
Islam Ahmad 
Royal Scientific Society 
Information and Communication Technology 
Amman, Jordan 
islam@rss.jo
 
 
Abstract—Rural communities in developing countries are faced 
with many challenges due to its geographical and demographic 
conditions. This has been evident in many studies and surveys. 
Health issues are among the top priority challenges in 
governments’ agendas. One important example is the 
vaccination of new born babies and young children.  
Vaccination is generally considered to be the most effective 
method for preventing infectious diseases. The rate for non-
vaccination is much higher among communities in rural and 
remote regions. Information and Communications Technology 
can play an important role in assisting the government to 
manage the process and help reduce the rate of non-
vaccination. In this paper, we describe a mobile system 
developed to electronically manage the vaccination process. 
Early evaluation demonstrates the benefits of such system in 
supporting government activities. 
Keywords- information and communications technology for 
development; health systems; mobile application; vaccination; 
rural areas. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Governments in developing countries, and even in 
developed ones, face challenges with relation to services 
provided to communities living in rural and remote areas. 
Among these, health services occupy high priorities in 
government planning and funding. Quality health services 
are offered in capital and big cities. This is mainly because 
those cities offer more opportunities to medical staff to 
forward their careers in addition to the ease of life and many 
other advantages. This leaves rural areas and remote 
communities deprived of specialized and experienced 
medical staff. It is not difficult to imagine that many medical 
cases will have to travel to the capital city or other big cities 
to obtain needed treatment; or wait till the next medical day 
in their region (where a consortia of medical doctors visit 
rural areas) to happen. This has been a challenge even in 
advanced societies. A good example is [1], a study by 
Lenthal et al. describing the challenges facing rural Australia 
as a result of decreasing numbers of nurses and midwives.  
Another characteristic challenge in remote areas, due to 
geography and the dynamic demography, is coverage. 
Governments face daunting task to outreach for those 
communities with awareness information, health warnings, 
medical specialists’ visits and other events. In the case of 
Jordan, 
the 
government 
and 
related 
NGOs 
spend 
considerable budget to produce and print leaflets and 
produce TV and radio content. However, the question 
remains about efficiency of coverage among intended 
population.  
Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) 
are now widely considered by developing countries as the 
motor of growth, the driver of efficiency and effectiveness 
and the tool to enhance human development. With the 
advancement of ICTs and the Internet, communication and 
web-based technologies can be exploited to address many 
challenges with relation to improving coverage and obtaining 
a much needed accurate statistics and information.  
In recent years there has been concrete evidence on the 
impact of social networking website in many aspects of life. 
An obvious and recent example is current events in the 
Middle East and North Africa. Many claim major roles for 
social networking tools such as Facebook and Twitter in the 
dynamics of these events [2]. These tools are changing the 
way people communicate, receive and exchange information. 
Such tools easily attract users as they are discrete, connect 
large number of individuals and eliminate the middlemen. 
While most popular networking websites are social in nature, 
professional networking websites can also be used as an 
efficient and cost effective tool to tackle issues and problems 
in society. 
Many ICT interventions have been introduced to address 
social challenges including those of rural communities. In 
[3], the authors addressed the role of mobile technology and 
the viability of this technology in enhancing productivity, 
facing poverty, and improving social conditions in general. 
Jun [4] provided several evidences in China on the impact of 
mobile applications socially such as addressing employment.  
One very important and priority sector is health. As 
mentioned earlier, quality health services are specific to large 
communities and adequate services or support are not 
available for rural areas. Health is an obvious sector that can 
benefit from opportunities that the technology offers as 
shown in many studies. In a comprehensive study [5] carried 
out to assess the application of ICT in health sector in terms 
of accessing information and disseminating awareness 
content in Uganda, Omona and Ikoja-Odongo concluded that 
there is need to support and promote ICT as the most 
effective 
tool 
for 
health 
information 
access 
and 
dissemination. The opportunities and benefits of mobile and 
wireless technologies for healthcare service delivery, 
improving patient safety and reducing cost were also the 
subject of a research by Ping Yu et al. [6]. The study 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

researched m-health solutions and the challenges for 
developing and deploying m-health applications. Maeda et 
al. [7] proposed a framework for mobile application for 
health education and awareness. 
Recognizing the important role ICT can play in 
improving the outreach and the feedback from health 
services, we started a pilot project concerned with enhancing 
health services to women and children in remote and rural 
communities in Jordan. The aim of the project is to evaluate 
the impact of ICT on improving such services and 
compensate for the lack of experts and medical staff. The 
project contains tool for medical practitioners to interact with 
the public regardless of their geographical proximity. The 
system allows contributions from medical doctors, medical 
students, nurses, pharmacists and other medical personnel in 
Jordan to assist stakeholders (whether doctors or patients) 
with questions related to health issues. Also, it allows 
interaction between users (patients) themselves to form 
common interest support groups. The system’s information 
channels, such as mobile phones allow access to health 
information to such groups in a cost effective manner. 
In this paper, we report on one module of the project that 
recorded some encouraging results qualifying it to be 
adopted nationally. The module is concerning the 
management of the vaccination process of new born babies 
and children. The importance of such module comes from its 
impact on health. Most children who are not appropriately 
immunized are at risk of serious conditions. The automatic 
management of vaccination is therefore a necessary 
application. 
II. 
THE CHALLENGE OF VACCINATION  
Ever-changing vaccination schedules can be confusing 
for providers (clinics, doctors, hospitals) and parents. The 
Ministry of Health maintains a vaccination program that is 
updated and checked regularly. As soon as a new baby is 
born, parents are given a card with the vaccination schedule. 
It will be then the responsibility of the parent to follow the 
dates of each vaccine. Possibly, it’s not an issue in urban 
communities with all existing electronic gadgets to remind 
people. Nevertheless, compounding this problem is the fact 
that vaccination records are often scattered. In rural areas in 
particular, the process is manual and records are kept on 
cards given to parents and on papers kept at local clinics. 
When records are scattered, it is difficult to assess whether a 
patient is up-to-date or not. It makes it harder for parents in 
rural and remote communities to maintain the process 
especially that the process is stretched over a long period of 
time. 
On the other hand, it is also the responsibility of the 
clinic or the doctor to make sure that enough vaccines are 
stored in the local clinic to cover the need for the area they 
serve. Clinics usually have no statistical information on 
volume of vaccines needed daily or weekly. This can also 
lead to other challenges like storage. Clinics in rural 
communities are occasionally not equipped to store vaccines 
for long period of time.  
Recent research has demonstrated specific and practical 
procedures medical staff can adopt to improve effectiveness 
in immunizing children, including the following: 1) sending 
parents reminders for next vaccination; 2) using printed 
material during calling at local clinics to remind parents and 
staff about importance of vaccination and vaccination table; 
3) contribute to keep a statistical records on immunization 
rates for improvement effort.  
Vaccination coverage in Jordan nationwide is relatively 
high [8]. Statistics show that the rate is higher in urban areas 
than rural. 
 
 
Figure 1: Vaccination coverage in Jordan (source: Jordan 2007 
Population and Family Health Survey) 
 
Figure 1 shows the vaccination rate among communities 
in rural areas (such as in the governorates of Ma’an, Tafiela 
and Aqaba south of Jordan) are lower than other 
governorates. The reason can be attributed to lack of 
effective awareness, illiteracy rate, lack of reminders and 
lack of medical personnel. Any intervention should address 
these issues. 
 
III. 
SYSTEM REQUIREMENT 
From the challenges mentioned in the previous section, 
an ICT intervention to manage the vaccination process will 
contribute to improving the vaccination rate especially 
among residents of rural and unprivileged areas. The high-
level requirements of the system are to: 
1) Register new born babies with the system and 
calculate the vaccines based on the vacination schedule 
maintained by the Ministry of Health.  
2) Issue reminders to parents reminding them on the 
date and the type of the due vaccine. 
3) Issue reminders and volume information to clinics on 
the number and types of vaccination they will be expecting 
to perform in a specific day to make sure they secure the 
needed quantities. 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

4) Provide awareness information to parents to help 
them establish the importance of the vaccines for their 
children. 
 
To identify the interaction requirements of the system, 
we need to understand the main stakeholders and how they 
will use the system. We have two main stakeholders: parents 
and clinic staff. Following are description of the main 
stakeholders: 
Parents: Usually parents in rural communities are not 
exposed to technology such as internet and all the tools that 
come with it. In a survey conducted prior to the design of the 
ICT intervention to investigate the best way for the system to 
interact with those users, it was noticed that more than 90% 
of the surveyed users own at least one mobile phone. This is 
quite significant penetration rate. Most of these phones are 
basic ones. The usage of mobile phones is for the purpose of 
making and receiving calls as well as communication 
through text messages. Our conclusion was that any project 
should have a mobile component to communicate 
information with the users.  
Clinics: When we mentioned clinics servings rural and 
remote communities, we are assuming basic infrastructure. 
No internet or computer. Some of the clinics are even mobile 
clinics to provide services to the moving population 
(Bedouins) and they tend to have minimum equipments. Any 
solution to be adapted nationwide should take into 
consideration the cost factor i.e. minimum is to be spent on 
infrastructure. Clinic staff should have the option to interact 
with the system using the internet if possible, or using smart 
mobile devices which are cheap to acquire and install. 
 
IV. 
MOBILE APPLICATION 
Given the identified requirements, we designed the 
vaccination management system based on a clear identified 
scenario and simple workflow.  
Workflow: Clinic staff registers new born babies with 
the system. This can be done either using the internet 
(website) or, if the infrastructure is not there, using smart 
phone over 3G networks. The application can be downloaded 
and used with any java enabled phone. The clinic personnel 
need to capture basic information about the child (name, date 
of birth, weight, height and contact details of parents) and 
send the information to the system as an SMS message. Once 
the information of a new child have been received and 
stored, the system uses the vaccination schedule issued by 
the Ministry of health to calculate the dates of the vaccines 
for the registered child and store them on the database. The 
system continuously checks the database to produce a report 
of which children due to be vaccinated in a certain day. The 
system automatically sends the parents a reminder on the 
next vaccine for their child and at which clinic. Also, the 
system sends statistical and volume information to clinics 
about expected children and vaccines at a certain date. When 
the vaccination of a child takes place, the clinic personnel 
send this information to the system to maintain the child 
record. Figure 2 summarizes the workflow of the system. 
 
 
Figure 2: Work flow of the system. 
 
The database maintains up-to-date record of vaccination 
to be used by decision makers at the ministry to obtain 
information for the purpose of reporting and planning. 
 
 
Figure 3: Architectural design for the Automatic vaccination 
system 
 
Figure 3 depicts the architectural design of the system, 
the input/output channels and support information. Figure 4 
provides more details about the process and the modules in 
the system. 
 
Objectives: The main aim behind the design of the pilot 
system has been to measure the advantages and impact of 
ICT interventions in enhancing vaccination process and 
support health clinics and hospitals in rural and remote 
communities. During the life of the project we attempted to 
answer the following key research questions: (1) Could ICTs 
contribute to the enhancement of the general health of rural 
and remote communities? and (2) What is the minimum 
infrastructure needed for the deployment of the automatic 
vaccination management system?  
 
 
Vaccination 
System 
user 
user 
clinic 
Register child 
Statistics 
Reminders SMS 
#of vaccines 
Vaccination 
Table (MoH) 
 
52
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
Figure 4: Main components of vaccination system 
 
Implementation: Our intervention was developed using 
the following technologies: Java Server Pages (JSP) and Java 
Servelet for the Dynamic Interaction with the users in the 
user interface; J2ME to develop mobile application; Hyper 
Text Mark-up Language (HTML) for the Content of the 
static pages in the system; JavaScript for the validation of the 
data entered by the users; AJAX for the smooth interaction in 
items (Data Swap without DB Rendering); The Tag-libs 
technology for the Modularity and Template adaptation in 
Inner and Main Pages;  MySQL for database functionality; 
and XML for the optimized and structured data transfer. 
 
V. 
EVALUATION 
We made the necessary awareness about the availability 
of our system to concerned stakeholders and we started to 
collect the needed information to answer our research 
questions. Five clinics in Jordan were selected serving 
communities in remote and rural areas. The selection was 
made together with the Ministry of Health based on need 
analysis. We provided these clinics with minimum 
infrastructure required (i.e. a netbook and a smart mobile 
phone per clinic). Valuable information were collected 
(either by interviews and/or questionnaires) from various 
stakeholders with this regards. The evaluation at this early 
stage is subjective and is based on user experience with the 
system. We noticed that all feedback from clinics were 
positive. The system allowed them to plan for both number 
of staff needed and number of vaccines required. Several 
comments were made about the use of mobile devices as a 
data entry device compared to using a laptop in terms of 
easiness and correctness. Parents who tried the system 
expressed their satisfaction on receiving reminders about the 
process. Parents are only receiving a couple of line text in the 
form of SMS and don’t need to report or perform any data 
entry. Basic mobile phones were suitable for the task.  
The subjective evaluation showed that user experience 
from using the system was smooth and realized with 
satisfaction. However, and in order to obtain a clearer picture 
in terms of benefits on how this module help tackling and 
important issue which is children missing vaccination 
(higher in rural areas), a wider deployment is needed 
nationwide once a decision is made to adopt the solution. 
Overall, and in spite of the advancement in mobile 
applications developments and innovations, there are certain 
challenges: (i) Concrete evidence: we are in need of a robust 
analysis and evaluation tools and standards of mobile 
intervention in health to help designing better and effective 
services; (ii) Legislations: this is quite important to establish 
a clear policies and laws to govern ICT interventions and 
their deployment; (iii) Sustainability of ICT interventions, 
sustainability is important issue for ICT4D projects. There 
should be clear understanding of how to fund these projects 
from both public and private sectors and to continue to 
provide resources and (iv) Capacity building: there should be 
focus on building the competency of various stakeholders in 
terms of ICT usage. Also mobilize resources to bridge the 
technological gap facing rural communities. 
 
VI. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Deploying the pilot vaccination management system in 
selected clinics serving remote communities demonstrated 
the impact ICT interventions can have on enhancing services 
and its outreach. More research and investigation is needed 
to deal with smooth and effective online communication 
between patient and health workers. Future work will focus 
on widening the evaluation to include more clinics and 
region in rural Jordan to reach a working system that can be 
adopted nationally. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Sue Lenthall, John Wakerman, Tess Opie, Sandra Dunn, 
Martha MacLeod, Maureen Dollard, Greg Rickard, and 
Sabina Knight; “Nursing workforce in very remote Australia, 
characteristics and key issues”. Australian Journal of Rural 
Health, 19:  pp. 32–37. 2011. 
[2] Marko Papic and Sean Noonan; “Social Media as a Tool for 
Protest” 
web 
article 
http://www.cfr.org/democracy-and-
human-rights/stratfor-social-media-tool-protest/p23994, 
visited on the 20th January 2012. 
[3] Lisa Cespedes and Franz Martin; “Mobile Telephony in Rural 
Areas: The Latin American perspective”; The i4d print 
magazine; Vol. VII No. 9 pp. 10-11, January-March 2011. 
[4] Liu Jun; “Mobile Social Network in a Cultural Context”. In E. 
Canessa and M. Zennaro: m-Science: Sensing, Computing 
and Dissemination. ISBN:92-95003-43-8. Pp. 211-240. 2010. 
[5] Walter Omona and Robert Ikoja-Odongo; “Application of 
information and communication technology (ICT) in health” 
Journal of Librarianship and Information Science; 38:pp. 45-
55.  2006. 
[6] Ping Yu, Mingxuan Wu, Hui Yu, and GC Xiao; “The 
Challenges for the Adoption of M-Health” IEEE International 
Conference on Service Operations and Logistics, and 
Informatics, 2006. pp. 181-186, 21-23 June 2006. 
[7] Toshiyuki Maeda, Tadayuki Okamoto, Yae Fukushige, and 
Takayuki Asada; “Mobile Application Framework for Health 
Care Education” 7th IEEE Consumer Communications and 
Networking Conference, pp. 1-2. January 2010. 
[8] Department of Statistics; “Jordan 2007 Population and Family 
Health Survey: Key Findings Department of Stattics”. 
Amman – Jordan; 2007. 
 
 
Database 
- Children & Clinics 
- Vaccine table 
due2vaccine 
module 
SMS and Web 
Interface 
Vaccination Module 
 
- Calculate vaccine    
schedule 
- Get children due 
vaccination 
- send feedback 
 
Register child 
Vaccination info. 
Reminders 
Statistics 
 
53
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

