Implementing Factors of Information Security in Governmental Organizations of 
Jordan  
 
 
Ibrahim Obeidat 
Prince Al-Hussein Bin Abdullah II Faculty of Information 
Technology 
Hashemite University 
Zarqa, Jordan 
imsobeidat@hu.edu.jo 
Ala Mughaid 
Prince Al-Hussein Bin Abdullah II Faculty of Information 
Technology 
Hashemite University 
Zarqa, Jordan 
Ala.mughaid@hu.edu.jo
 
 
Abstract— To maintain the integrity of information technology 
in governmental organizations, efficacious success factors in 
information security must be applied. Upon broad assessment 
and screening on the factors that influence information security, 
no permutation to successful assessment was reached. In 
addition, the influence of such factors has yet to be evaluated 
across the stages of assessment. This research’s objective is the 
discovery of successful implementation of information security 
factors.  
 
Keywords- Information security; Success factors; Governmental 
Organizations. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Today's society is data-driven. Collecting data from 
people, actions, algorithms, and the web has resulted in large 
data stores, and accommodating all this data has become a 
major challenge. ‘Big data' tends to grow exponentially each 
year [14]. How secure is confidential information when 
people are not actually in their offices using a desktop 
computer, or when they are using a laptop computer on a 
network set up by a network administrator, When people take 
advantage of networking to use cloud computing services or 
to access e-mail on their own documents, they may 
accidentally risk the loss and/or disclosure of sensitive data 
and confidential client information. Organizations must pay 
more attention to data security and use protection tools to 
help secure their sensitive data and the confidential client 
information. 
Weak 
security 
systems 
used 
by 
the 
organizations may lead to data breaches and theft, resulting 
in major data losses and loss of customer’s confidence in their 
service provider. The hierarchal structure of current 
organizations has placed more of emphasis on reinforcing 
possible breaches on an individual level due to the fact that 
Organizations depend more and more on computers and that 
computing control has been brought down to the individual 
desktop. Hence, realizing the importance of the type of 
environment people work in. More employees are interacting 
with technology to commence their daily tasks, and 
employees have established a greater threat because they 
have direct access to an organization's assets [5]. Also, 
information that is generated and stored on their individual 
desktop must remain confidential to the concerning party, this 
is because insufficient protection of confidential information 
may result in destruction, delay or disclosure to an illegal 
party [15].  Conventional computer systems may be 
desirable, but conventional security mechanisms are not 
sufficient against unauthorized access in cloud systems [7]. 
Network systems have provided many advantages to 
organizations, essentially providing a means of access to 
facilities and resources from any computer, anytime, 
anywhere, bringing about a technological revolution. 
However, organizations need to give more attention and 
consideration to their system security and need to guarantee 
that 
unauthorized 
individuals 
cannot 
access 
their 
information. A standout amongst the most undesirable 
circumstances to happen in systems is the unapproved access. 
This sort of access might be cultivated by an organization’s 
official, or an unofficial intruder, or both. Such access may 
significantly harm the organization's notoriety by taking its 
imperative information, which favors adversely the 
organization's business dealings and diminishes its client's 
trust. 
A number of risks and threats exist in the operational 
environment of computers and networks, particularly where 
they can become exposed to security breaches. There could 
be various reasons for the vulnerability, including an 
incorrect installation of systems, incorrect usage or malicious 
software. 
In general, information shared among two or more computers 
over a network, may be exposed to the risk of intrusion. There 
are four ways of intrusion that can negatively affect the 
system [24]:  
• 
Interception: An unwanted entity between the 
transmitter and the receiver steals the information. 
• 
Interruption: Any unwanted entity between the 
conversations of two nodes stops the message and 
prevents it from being passed to the destination. 
• 
Modification: An unwanted entity at the middle of a 
conversation of two nodes changes the sender's 
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

messages, modifying their information before 
forwarding them to the receiver. 
• 
Fabrication: A type of lie; here, one party is 
fabricated, and the other participants on the network 
are unaware that the messages are not from a valid 
participant. 
Computer networks make it easier for organizations to 
distribute their business worldwide at a low cost. The Internet 
in particular increases the trading operations where 
organizations are targeting billions of customers. The open 
nature of the Internet makes it easy for people to access 
services from all over the world by using their own devices. 
Companies have developed and implemented easy access 
applications to provide their services over the Internet. 
 
II. 
LITERATUE REVIEW 
Studies on the factors affecting risk assessment practice 
and information security are light and there is a lack of 
experimental research in the area of security risk 
management [1]. Therefore, a need to consult a literature on 
factors affecting information security which helps us to 
identify a set of factors that may potentially affect the 
successful undertaking of information security risk 
assessment practices in organizations. These are listed in 
Table 1[4]. 
 
 
TABLE 1 SECURITY FACTORS 
 
     “Information security relates to an array of actions 
designed to protect information and information systems” 
[4].  However, in statistics protection does not consist of only 
the information itself but also the entire infrastructure that 
enables its use, it covers hardware, software programs, 
threats, physical protection, and human factors, where each 
of these components has its own features. Consequently, 
information security plays a major role in the internet age of 
technology. Given that the number of organization security 
breaches is increasing daily, and the more available the 
information, the greater the dangers, it is expected that 
security will need to be tightened [17].  
Because of the quantity of personnel, packages, and 
structures increases in the organizations, the control of the 
groups information becomes more difficult and therefore 
vulnerability potential propagates. Considering preferable 
practice of hardware and software program, notwithstanding, 
encouraging 
and 
empowering 
worker 
conduct, 
the 
organizations must make utilization of records and protection 
regulations. Data security coverage is a mixture of principles, 
rules, methodologies, strategies, and equipment installed to 
protect the business enterprise from threats. These guidelines 
also help agencies to become aware of its facts property and 
define the company mindset to these statistics belongings 
[16]. 
The authors of [3][10][19][26] agree that established 
standards, together with the worldwide widespread ISO 
27002, are an excellent starting point for shaping the statistics 
safety 
policy 
to 
improve 
statistics 
safety 
in 
a 
company/business. 
ISO 
27002 
provides 
some 
recommendations associated with successful implementation 
of facts protection and is particularly supposed to help 
management to make decisions and then pass the important 
actions to those in management positions. ISO 27002 deals 
with: 
• 
Security policy, objectives, and activities that 
properly reflect business objectives, 
• 
Clear management commitment and support, 
• 
Proper distribution and guidance on security policy 
to all employees and contractors, 
• 
Effective 'marketing' of security to employees 
(including managers), 
• 
Provision of adequate education and training, 
• 
A sound understanding of security risk analysis, risk 
management, and security requirements, 
• 
An approach to security implementation which is 
consistent with the organization's own culture, 
• 
A balanced and comprehensive measurement 
system to evaluate the performance of information 
security, 
• 
Management 
and 
feedback 
suggestions 
for 
improvement. 
The authors of [2][16][20][21] quantify the causes and 
consequences of threats to information tackled by 
organizations. 
The 
following 
threats 
have 
been 
acknowledged by their researches:  
1. Outside threats: computer viruses; herbal catastrophe; junk 
emails and hacking incidents. 
2. Internal threats: set up or use of unauthorized hardware, 
peripherals; abuse of computer to  get admission to controls; 
physical robbery of hardware or software program; human 
mistake; damage with the aid of an aggravated worker; use of 
employer resources for prohibited communications or sports 
Critical Success Factors 
Reference Discipline                                          
Management support 
Risk assessment 
Risk management  
Information security 
User security awareness 
Risk assessment 
Risk management  
Information security 
Technical experts 
Risk assessment 
Risk management  
Information security 
Alignment with 
organization’s 
objectives 
Risk assessment 
Risk management  
Information security 
Funding 
Risk assessment 
Risk management  
Information security 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

(porn browsing, electronic mail harassment) and installation 
or use of unauthorized software programs. 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The aim of this research is to evaluate the effect of the 
different information security factors implementation on 
governmental organizations. This research used the 
exploratory method by using a semi-structured qualitative 
method for collecting data and the grounded theory to get the 
results. The Data was categorized by defining patterns or 
topics and organizing them to derive meaning. This research 
was conducted in Jordan, for several governmental 
organizations. The research will depend on table 1 on 
designing the interview. There are more than 60 
governmental organizations in Jordan , we used the semi-
structured method to interview the selected samples , the 
samples consists of a mixture of Information technology  and 
Information Security experts, in which they representing 
most of the governmental organizations in Jordan, we spent 
from forty minutes to one hour interviewing the population 
of the research, most of the expert samples were highly 
educated in IT, and most of them  have more than three years' 
experience in their work, the semi-structures questioner was 
chosen in such a way  to encourage the Population to explore 
their experience  in their job as an Information Security 
Experts to grasp the success factors and the actions taken to 
secure the information. The selected sample is related to the 
in-depth nature of the qualitative approach used by author 
[30].   Reliability was addressed by a clear visualization of 
the research variables by means of multiple coders and case 
study procedure [22]. The questioners were clearly defined 
and have a summary of all the factors before given to the 
interviewees. The interview was conducted at the 
interviewee's convenient time. 
IV. 
RESEARCH DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS 
The success of the information security factors derived from 
the results are discussed below: 
A. User Security Awarness and Training  
The majority of the interviewees conceded to the 
organizations security. They imagined that the security can 
be accomplished by expanding the awareness and training. 
Some even admitted that awareness was next to nothing in 
their organization, and that the employees thought that the 
sole measure of security to maintain integrity was by using 
the username and password. Thus expanding, the awareness 
can be implemented through training employees in order to 
establish a sense of  information security amongst them. The 
interviewees have requested the need of proceedings with 
preparations and plans to achieve execution of data security 
approaches. Author [8] Claims that organizations need to 
have continuing education and training plans to accomplish 
the essential outcome from the implementation of 
information security policies. 
The 2002 security awareness index report mentioned by 
author [12] concluded that organizations all over the world 
are failing to make their employees aware of the security 
problems and concerns. The interviewees concluded that the 
majority of the security incidents in their organizations came 
out from their own employees identified as insider threat 
damage, this approves what author [23] finds, that employees 
are the biggest threat to information security. Other 
interviewees said that the outsider attacks come only from 
viruses and spam.  Besides which, the interviewees do not 
face any real attack, but the viruses came from their 
employees when the employees themselves  opened spam 
email or attached files. "The human side of computer security 
is easily exploited and constantly overlooked. Companies 
spend millions of dollars on firewalls, encryption, and secure 
access devices, and it is money a waste, because none of these 
measures address the weakest link in the security chain", 
where humans are the weakest link in the security chain [25]. 
So, if the security fails, that will weaken any organization.  
The interviewees also commented on some of the employee 
behavior claiming that some of them leave their computers 
on, other employees write the username and password on a 
small sheet near the computer and this will break the 
confidential to unauthorized people. That’s why the research 
recommend doing a continuous course in training and 
awareness to all levels in the organization. 
B. Management Support  
Management commitment was essential in implementing 
the factors of information security, it was reflecting in 
assigning IT managers in the organizations' department to 
identify the importance of security in their organizations. A 
successful implementation of information security factors 
need very qualified staff. The Management tends not to start 
any procedure to guarantee the security of organizations 
because naturally they feel that the IT department is 
responsible for selecting the correct technologies, installing 
the essential software tools, keeping the technology in the 
organization and protect the organization's information [29]. 
That is what our interviewees confirmed; they said our 
management does not know everything we have to explain 
and convince them about the importance of the security of the 
organization and keep the IT department updated to keep the 
organization information secure. One of the interviewees said 
we cannot do anything without their permission; they have to 
give us support in implementing the security factors. Another 
expert said if the management does not understand our need 
to information security, whatever we do to prevent attacks 
and keep our information safe will fail. Hone et al. [18] 
clarify that the performance and the behavior of employees 
towards information security will be more coherent with 
secure behavior if the top management shows concern about 
the organization security. Thus it is recommended that the 
security procedures is set by the attitudes of those at the 
topmost of the organization [27]. Management will not 
support the information security except if they can see that it 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

supports the organization's important business purpose [28]. 
Hereafter they must be persuaded of the importance of 
information security before they will run enough budget, and 
act to apply the information security policy [9]. 
C. Funding  
All expert interviewees agreed upon that the budget is 
the major concern that affects the successful implementation 
of information security; the budget is needed to buy the 
software tools for identifying the vulnerabilities and 
recommended controls, so funding must be sufficient because 
without enough money organizations cannot be secured. 
Hinde [27] defines budget as the financial facility which 
firstly wisely estimates the costs and secondly measures the 
access required to the resources to reach a successful 
implementation of information security. Budgets generally 
depend on the manner in which individuals' investments 
translate to outcomes, but the impact of security investment 
often depends not only on the investor's own decisions but 
also on the decisions of others [26]. One of the experts said 
that the vendors of security tools do not mention that after a 
while these tools must be updated to meet the new threats and 
attacks so without sufficient money our system organization 
will be vulnerable to the new attacks. It was, therefore, 
suggested that if the Organizations does not have the 
appropriate software tools  or hardware that will lead to 
difficulties in control some security concerns like access 
control tools, assisting the employees to apply some security 
principles such as changing the password regularly or logoff 
after finishing their work. Another interviewee said that if 
they do not have the proper resources that may lead to lack of 
implantation of information security factors.  
D. Alignment With the Organization’s Objectives and 
Polices  
Information security policy is a set of arrangements set 
by organizations' to guarantee that all data innovation clients' 
inside the space of the organization or its subsystem comply 
with rules and plans related to the security of digital 
information at any point inside the organizations' of the 
specialist. Each organization should ensure and control its 
information, moreover, it ought to be conveyed both inside 
and outside the organization's boundaries. This may cruel that 
data may need to be scrambled, authorized through a third 
party or an establishment and may have confinement set on 
its dissemination with reference to a classification framework 
laid out within the data security approach. The information 
security policy may be a plan identifying the organization's 
crucial resources with detail explanation with what is worthy, 
unsatisfactory and sensible behavior for the employee to 
ensure the security of data [13]. There is no question that the 
selection of good information security policy is the 
introductory degree that must be in place to play down the 
threat unsatisfactory utilize any of the organizations' data 
assets. 
The interviewees said if we have a good information 
policy, compelling execution of this policy, acknowledgment 
from the employees, adhere to our rules and not try to control 
them, then that will positively affect the organization's 
performance and security. The participators mentioned that 
the organization's policy ought to be clear, understood by the 
employees, and it should be updated regularly. 
IV. FINDINGS 
Organizations ordinary do nothing in terms of security 
as long as nothing goes off-base but when things do go off-
base they all of a sudden pay consideration and part of action 
is required to recover from the attack or the threat they face, 
indeed in spite of the fact some of the full-time recovery is 
inconceivable [11]. The observational findings developed 
from the interviewees affirm the significance of key basic 
information security factors mentioned in Table 1. Another 
new factor was found to be important which is using a 
suitable software tool. The important part of the management 
plays a recognized role in finding the suitable resources and 
managing the necessary policies and strategies, the 
management should provide essential funds and the right 
resources to guarantee that the controls are implemented, and 
this finding is balanced with author [6] which says that the 
management commitment in all levels is vital to guarantee 
the implementation of information security factors.  
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this research a set of factors were illustrated that 
applies a great influence on different phases of the 
organizations' security. In spite of the fact that these factors 
are used in the existing literature. But their pertinence in the 
association 
of 
organization 
security 
has 
not 
been 
observationally discussed. Also, a new factor which is 
utilizing appropriate software tools was recognized, in order 
to facilitate information security in the governmental 
organizations. The foremost commitment to this paper, is 
fortifying the informative ability factors drawn from the 
existing literature, to satisfactory describe the success factors 
affecting the governmental organization in Jordan. 
The findings were of great importance to the 
governmental organization in Jordan as well as in the 
organizations in the world, to realize compelling information 
security, achieve security in the organizations and to decrease 
the attacks and breaches. The paper recommended to follow-
up studies, utilizing different distinctive strategies or diverse 
instruments. Finally this study is not without shortcoming, 
first, only five organizations were investigated and hence 
future work, must focus on multiple organizations. Second, 
we believe that the findings ought to be compared with non-
governmental organizations, in order to study the influence of 
these factors on the information security of these non-
governmental organizations.     
 
 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

REFERENCES 
[1] A. Kotulic,  and  J. Clark, “Why there aren't more 
information security research studies” Vol.41,No.5,pp 
597-607 ,2004.  
[2] B. Lampson, “ Computer Security in the Real World,  
Principles of Computer Systems” IEEE Computer 
Society,Vol. 1, pp. 37-48,2004. 
[3] C. Pfleeger, and S.  Pfleeger, “ Security in computing”     
Prentice Hall, N.J., 2017. 
[4] C. Richard, “ AusCert Australian computer crime & 
security survey , Sustaining operational resiliency A 
process 
improvement 
approach 
to 
security 
management” 
Software 
Engineering 
Institute, 
Carnegie Mellon University, 2006. 
[5] E. Madigan et al.   “ The cost of Non-Compliance-When 
Policies Fail” Proceedings of the32nd annual ACM 
SIGUCCS conference on User services, pp. 47 – 51, 
USA,2004. 
[6] F. Katz,  “The Effect of a University Information 
Security Survey on Instruction Methods in Information 
Security”ACM, USA , 2005. 
[7] F. Bjorck, “  Implementing Information Security 
Management Systems ” Eigth Annual Working Conference 
on Information Security Management & Small Systems 
Security,  USA ,2001. 
[8] G. Dhillon, “Managing and Controlling Computer 
Misuse”, Vol. 7, No. 4, pp. 171- 175,1999. 
[9] GAO, “Information security risk assessment:Practices 
of leading organizations”,USA, 1999. 
[10] H. Saini and A. Saini , “Security Mechanisms at different 
Levels in Cloud Infrastructure” , International Journal of   
Computer Applications (0975-8887)Volume 108 No. 
2 December 2014. 
[11] H. Smith, et  al.  “ Risk management in information 
systems:problems and potential” Communications of 
AIS (7) 2001. 
[12] International Standards Organisation, ISO/IEC 27002," 
2013. 
[13] Information Systems Audit and Control Association, 
“Critical elements of information security program 
success” 2005. 
[14] J. Manyika,  et al.   “ Big Data: The Next Frontier for 
Innovation, Competition, and Productivity” McKinsey 
Global Institute,2011. 
[15] J. McCumber, “ Assessing and managing security risk in IT 
systems: 
A 
structured 
methodology” 
Auerbach 
Publications, 2004. 
[16] J. McKay, “ Pitching the Policy: implementing IT 
Security Policy through Awareness” SANS Institute, 
Management & Computer Security, Vol. 8, No. 1, pp. 
31-41,2003. 
[17] J. Brown, and S.  Duguid, “The Social Life of 
Information” 
Boston, 
Harvard 
Business 
School 
Press,2002. 
[18] K. Hone and J. Eloff , “What makes an Effective 
Information Security Policy”, Network Security, Vol. 20, 
No. 6, pp. 14-16, 2002. 
[19] L. Gordon and M. Loep, “Budgeting Process for 
Information Security Expenditures” Communications 
of the ACM, Vol. 49, No. 1, pp. 121-125,2006. 
[20] M. Ernst and L. Young, “Global Information Security 
Survey ” UK , 2013 
[21] M. Al-Awadi, K.  Renaud , “ Success Factors In 
Information Security Implantation In Organization” 
IADIS International Conference e- Society,2007. 
[22] M. Miles,  and  A. Huberman, “ Qualitative Data 
Analysis” Sage Publications, Inc., 1994. 
[23] N. Doherty and H. Fulford, “Do Information Security 
Policies Reduce the Incidence of Security Breaches: 
An 
Exploratory 
Analysis”,Information Resources 
Management Journal, Vol. 18, No. 2, pp. 21-39,  2005. 
[24] P. Fung and E. Jordan “Implementation of Information 
Security: A Knowledge-based Approach” The 6th 
Pacific Asia Conference on Information Systems,Japan, 2002. 
[25] R. Anderson, and T. Moore, “The Economics of 
Information Security” Science USA, Vol. 314, No. 5799, 
pp. 610-613,2006. 
[26] S. Canavan, “  An Information Security Policy Development 
Guide for Large Companies”SANS Institute  , Journal of 
Advanced Nursing, Uk ,Vol. 20, pp.716-721,2004. 
[27] S. Hinde,“ Security Surveys Spring Crop. Computers and 
Security”, Vol. 21, No. 4, pp. 310-321,2002. 
[28] S. Mikko “Information Management & Computer Security” 
A 
Conceptual 
Foundation 
for 
Organizational 
Information Security Awareness”. Vol. 8, No. 8, pp. 31-
44,2000. 
[29] T. Tryfonas, et al. “ Embedding Security Practices in 
Contemporary Information systems Development 
Approaches” Information Management & Computer 
Security, Vol. 9, No. 4, pp. 183-197. Siponen, M. T. 
2001. 
[30] T. Carr , “ The Strengths and Weaknesses of Quantitative 
and Qualitative Research :What Method for Nursing” 
Journal of Advanced Nursing, Vol.20,pp.716-721, 1994. 
 
 
 
 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

