Patient Portal Service: An Exploration of Patients’ Experience and Perception 
Chern Li Liew* and Joshua Harjadinata 
School of Information Management 
Victoria University of Wellington 
New Zealand 
 
Corresponding author: * ChernLi.Liew@vuw.ac.nz 
 
 
Abstract— The New Zealand government is currently 
implementing electronic health records and encouraging 
general practices to enroll their patients into a patient portal 
service. Although literature shows the benefits of such a system 
for healthcare providers and patients, there is a lack of 
empirical 
research 
around 
patient’s 
experiences 
and 
requirements.  This study aims to bring to light these through 
a survey research of a major patient portal. The survey data 
reveals issues around lack of consultation around the design, 
inconsistency in service uptake and lack of training on the use 
of the service. Overall, it reveals that the current patient portal 
system is not designed to the patient’s expectations. 
Keywords – e-health, New Zealand, patient portals 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
With technological advances, health care services 
worldwide are moving to deliver e-health services to patients 
in order to improve the quality of care, reduce operational 
costs and to manage the substantial amount of data 
generated. The benefit and value of a patient portal service 
for healthcare workers has been heavily investigated and 
studied in literature. A majority of these studies have 
investigated the use of electronic health records from the 
perspective of health care professionals due to the significant 
impact on their day-to-day activities. It is interesting to note 
that, in an industry where the quality of service is a need, few 
studies have been conducted to investigate the benefit, 
functional and non-functional needs of such a system from a 
patient’s perspective. It has often been argued that the use of 
a patient-centred e-health service allows patients better 
insights and self-management of their health, including the 
ability to access their own medical records, immunisation 
history as well as perform tasks such as requesting repeat 
prescriptions, booking appointments, direct messaging to 
GPs or nurses. 
This study aims to bring to light patients’ perception and 
experiences with a major patient portal in New Zealand. 
Questions 
around 
perceived usefulness, accessibility, 
usability and reasons and intentions to continue or 
discontinue using the service are explored. 
II. 
RELATED WORKS 
Around the world, especially in the developed nations, e-
health has been promoted to be the most promising tool to 
bring growth, cost savings and to improve the overall 
quality, safety and efficiency of delivering health care to 
patients [1-3]. In a broader sense, the e-health concept has 
been promoted not only as a technological development, but 
also a state of mind - a way of thinking, a change in attitude 
and a commitment to improve healthcare by taking 
advantage of information and communication technology. 
A. Patient Portals 
There are many different definitions and terms for a 
‘patient portal’. Most of the existing literature uses the term 
‘personal 
health 
records’ 
and 
‘patient 
portal’ 
interchangeably. In the New Zealand (NZ) context, the term 
‘patient portal’ is defined as a secure online site, provided by 
general practices (GPs), where patients can access, manage 
and share their health information and interact with their GP 
[4-5]  
In the NZ context, most GPs utilise the PC-based practice 
management software called MedTech32. The Patient Portal 
is tethered to ManageMyHealth which is one of the most 
popular portal available that is developed by the same 
company (i.e. MedTech Global). While e-health sites 
generally provide ‘read only’ health information, a patient 
portal provides a secured platform where patients can log-in 
to view their own personal health information and 
communicate with their GPs via secure messaging, request 
repeat prescriptions and book appointments [6]. 
Patient Portals are expected to meet the 10 e’s of e-health 
[7]: Efficiency – the portal decreases costs and enhances 
communication between providers and patients; Enhancing 
quality of care – allows healthcare workers to view up-to-
date information to provide the best service; Evidenced 
based – allows patients to view detailed test results in order 
to make better decisions; Empowerment –empowers patients 
by providing knowledge and access to their own health 
records; Encouragement – a partnership is established 
between patient and provider where patients can contribute 
towards their own health; Education – patients can view 
their medical records and conduct their own investigation on 
diseases 
and 
issues; 
Enabling 
– 
exchanging 
and 
communication via secure messaging; Extending –enables 
patients to view their details such as immunisation history 
while abroad; Ethics – introduces a new form of healthcare 
interaction (where new challenges and threats could emerge); 
Equity – the portals will be equitable by allowing access to 
the same service for all classes of people.  
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

B. Issues with  e-health and Patient Portals Provision 
An important prerequisite for the success of any online 
service is to ensure that the customers experience from the 
system and its interface satisfies both sensory and functional 
needs. The providers of patient portals and the government 
concerned must consider such portals an equal to other 
online services such as e-banking, online education and e-
government services where the customer’s needs requires a 
perspective on the design as well as having a deep 
understanding on the type of users likely to utilise the service 
[8]. 
Existing literature has focused on the potential benefits, 
utility and satisfaction patients can experience from using 
patient portals to access their health information, interact 
with their doctors and nurses, and to manage their own 
health. However, according to [3], patients are the missing 
piece of the introduction of e-health services and there is a 
lack of patient involvement in design and implementation of 
such services to identify what patients’ actual needs and 
requirements are. 
Prior research conducted has been primarily from 
experts’ perspectives [9-10]. There have been very few 
studies conducted to understand how users perceive and 
utilise patient portals [11]. This demonstrates that there is 
still little known from the patient’s perspective in regards to 
usability, perceived value and whether the patients have the 
intention to use/ continue using such portals. 
C. Perceived Value, Usability and Use Intention 
The importance of involving patients has been 
emphasized in the discussion [12] as it is the users who must 
incorporate patient portals into their lives. While there are 
few studies that have examined patient portals in regards to 
enrolment, utilisation, and factors that influence or affect the 
use among patient sub-groups, further research is crucial for 
understanding the experience and perceptions of patients. It 
is crucial that the service is usable and of value to patients, 
regardless of age, gender, ethnicity, education level, and IT 
competence  
Usability assesses how easy the user interface is to use. If 
a website or system is difficult to use, lacks the necessary 
information, if people get lost, and/or if the information is 
hard to digest; people will not use/ discontinue use [13-14]. 
According to Gu et al. [15], poor literacy is a great concern 
for e-health services due to the technicality and sensitivity of 
medical information. As health literacy is defined as “the 
degree to which individuals have the capacity to obtain, 
process, and understand the basic health information and 
services needed to make appropriate health decisions” it is of 
paramount importance that health information on online 
services must be understandable and managed ethically to a 
wide range of patients, or the technology revolution will not 
reach its full potential and provide its benefits to all those 
using an e-health service. 
Usability is defined by the following quality components: 
• Learnability - How easy is it for users to accomplish 
basic tasks the first time they encounter the design?  
• Efficiency - Once users have learned the design, how 
quickly can they perform tasks?  
• Memorability - When users return to the design after a 
period of not using it, how easily can they re-establish 
proficiency?  
• Errors (management)- How many errors can users 
make, how severe are these errors, and how easily can they 
recover from errors? 
• Satisfaction - How pleasant is it to use the design? 
 
A key and related component is utility which refers to the 
design's functionality: Does it do what users need? Together, 
usability and utility determines whether a website or system 
is useful. Nielsen [13] states that it matters very little if 
asystem allows you to easily conduct a task that you don’t 
want do to. A system can similarly fail if it can in 
hypothetical term do what you want but you are unable to, 
due to its poor interface.  
For patients, the value of a patient portal may come from 
three general areas – reduction in medical costs, 
improvement in health care efficiency, and enhanced quality 
of care [16]. With health records, GP notes, lab results, 
immunisation history and medication list accessible online, it 
has become much easier for patients to have control and to 
monitor them [17] In addition, the ability to perform tasks 
and interact with the GP could lead to an enhanced 
relationship with the GP. It has been proposed that patient 
portal services sparks a new age of collaboration between 
patients and doctors where patients can become more 
involved and engaged, thus becoming a partner or co-creator 
of their own health [18]. 
Perceived usefulness and satisfaction are the two 
predictors of acceptance and use continuance intention [19]. 
Patients may have pre-acceptance attitude based on cognitive 
beliefs which stem from advice from their doctor that the 
patient portal is useful and valuable. The main focus for 
patient portals is to encourage new users to enroll and utilise 
the service as well as retaining the current users. This is 
important for the success of the initiative and the future of 
the delivery of health care. The government and providers 
must ensure that they do not ignore a user’s post-acceptance 
use satisfaction. Feedback and suggestions from patients 
themselves must be seriously considered as their actual 
experience and the issues they encounter in use may become 
a reason that they stop using and prevent others from 
adopting the service, if not addressed.                                                             
III. 
RESEARCH DESIGN 
An online survey questionnaire was created in Qualtrics. 
There were two levels of recruitment of participants. The 
first step was to recruit General Practices (GPs) around New 
Zealand who have a large number of patients enrolled into a 
patient portal service. The second step involved securing the 
assistance of the GPs to distribute the online survey to all of 
their patients, including those who are not enrolled into the 
patient portal with the aim of getting insights into why 
certain patients have opted not to enroll for the service.  
The first step was contacting the fifteen Primary Health 
Organisations (PHOs) from across different regions of New 
Zealand and communicated to them the research brief and 
invitation to assist in the research. Two PHOs replied with a 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Research Application to be completed due to a high demand 
of research requests. Both PHOs opted to not take the 
research proposal further due to other commitments at the 
time of the research. One PHO responded with interest in the 
research and agreed to distribute the necessary documents to 
the GPs in their region. Due to unknown reasons, the 
correspondence with the contact ceased and no patients from 
the region ended up participating in the survey.  
Due to the time constraints, a contingency recruitment 
was required. Local GPs in Wellington were contacted 
directly. This reduced the scope of the research significantly 
from across New Zealand to a single city. One GP agreed to 
distribute the necessary documents to only the patients 
enrolled in the patient portal through its secure messaging 
service. This reduced the research scope further. Hence, 
these should be noted as limitations of this research and the 
survey findings need to be read in this context. 
A selection of key findings is presented next. 
IV. 
FINDINGS 
The participating GP had 1,900 patients enrolled into the 
patient portal. A total of 218 patients responded to the 
survey. Out of these, 195 were completed responses. 64% 
were females and 36% were males. The key demographics of 
the participants are older patients (i.e. mean age group of 45-
54 years old), where the majority were at least high school 
graduates with a self-estimated IT competence of moderate 
to extremely competent.  
All respondents were utilising the ManageMyHealth 
portal service. 70% of the respondents have been enrolled 
into the service for more than 12 months or more, and close 
to 50% were accessing the service once every 3 months 
which coincides with the standard period of 3 months for 
prescription medication before repeats can be requested or 
visits to the GP for a check-up.  
To understand patients’ perception of the service it is 
important to see if the respondents are still using traditional 
methods to interact with their doctors. 82% reported that 
their preference was using phone, 62% said they preferred 
talking to doctors in person compared to 37% who used the 
portal secure messaging function. This shows that the patient 
portal would not necessarily replace traditional methods. 
Instead it supplements the existing communication channels. 
Most of the respondents stated that it is much easier to call 
their GP compared to turning on a machine and logging in to 
the portal to make an appointment. Some respondents also 
stated that they prefer the human interaction and getting 
immediate feedback. 
The features most often used according to the 
respondents are: view lab results (92%), view GP notes 
(71%), view reports of medical conditions (65%), request 
repeat prescriptions (61%), booking appointments (52%), 
and to view immunisation history (49%).  
The mean value of each of the four survey items 
measuring the “Intention to continue using” ranged between 
1.33 and 1.41 – i.e. participants “Strongly Agreed” that they 
have the intention to continue using the patient portal.  
Nearly all respondents (98%) reported that they did not 
receive any training prior to using the service. Only 2% 
reported receiving written or verbal instructions from their 
GP. This suggested that training offer was not proactive and 
nearly all respondents resorted to exploring the system 
themselves and there was a possibility that they were not 
using the system as effectively as possible. 
When asked if the portal is easy-to-use and reliable, the 
results were 88% and 89% respectively agreeing and 92% of 
the respondents agreed that the portal was intuitive enough 
for them to learn how to use it quickly. The majority of the 
patients found that the service is using understandable terms 
that were used consistently throughout the portal.  
The feature respondents found the most valuable is 
‘Requesting repeat prescriptions’. Patient portals should 
enable patients to conduct tasks in a more convenient manner 
and thus save them time. 61% of respondents strongly agreed 
that the service saved them time. 25% somewhat agreed.  
Patient portal services allow patients to be more aware of 
their health and have more control. By allowing patients to 
keep a diary that doctors can view as well as providing a 
direct line of communication to the GP and their doctors, 
existing literature explains that patients can develop better 
relationships with their GP as a result.  
In the survey findings, 23% of the respondents strongly 
agreed that they have developed a better relationship with 
their GP. 29% somewhat agreed, whereas 38% neither 
agreed nor disagreed. 6% somewhat disagreed, and 5% 
strongly disagreed. It was possible that patients with chronic 
conditions who required frequent monitoring may find that 
the service allows for a better relationship compared to 
patients who do not require or visit their GP very often.  
If doctors utilise the service properly, the portal provides 
an alternative channel through which they can communicate 
better with their patients which could lead to enhanced 
relationship over time. However, this might not be the case if 
the patients still prefer to visit their doctors in person as 
indicated in the responses to a previous question. This might 
be the case for older patients who relatively lack confidence 
in using ICT. 
One of the objectives of the patient portal service is to 
empower the patient. Among the survey respondents, 35% 
strongly agreed, 35% somewhat agreed, 21% neither agreed 
nor disagreed, 5% somewhat disagreed, and 4% strongly 
disagreed.  Looking at the type of respondents, especially the 
frequency of access, it appeared that “casual” users of the 
service did not perceive any “control” over their health care 
compared with a patient who used the service on a more 
regular basis. 
In terms of satisfaction with the portal, 87% agreed that 
ManageMyHealth was easy to use. 56% of the respondents 
reported to be extremely satisfied with the ManageMyHealth 
Patient Portal service. 28% were somewhat satisfied, 11% 
were neutral, 3% were somewhat dissatisfied and only 1% 
were extremely dissatisfied.  
When asked if the patient portal can be improved, about a 
quarter of the respondents provided suggestions. The 
suggestions were largely related to user interface issues:  
 
 
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

• Use more layman terms rather than medical terminology/ 
jargons 
• Provide links to external Web resources to find out more 
about medications and medical terms 
• Clearer indication of “new” alerts 
• Ability to personalise appearance e.g. colour, theme 
• Simplified interface – reduce number of levels and 
modules to access information 
• Needs to be made more usable using mobile devices 
• Display statistical information using visual presentations 
• Displaying information/results in plain English as 
opposed to tabulated results 
 
A number of respondents commented that the service 
was not as intuitive as it could be. The other comments that 
are worth noting and worthy of further investigation are: 
• The patient portal is a useful tool to view certain 
information but did not have a great impact on their lives 
in regards to their health 
• The portal should allow for shared access to accounts e.g. 
between spouses 
• Should be integrated with other health care systems 
provided by e.g. hospitals (including A&E) and 
specialists/ consultants 
• Features do not appear to be utilised well enough by the 
GP e.g. no response in emails, GP notes are lacking 
• 
The service does not explicitly advise what services 
are available/ unavailable. 
V. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
The respondents of this research had a high level of 
education and self-rated moderate to high IT competence 
where nearly all had experience in utilising other online 
services such as online banking, e-government services and 
using social media applications. It is not surprising that the 
majority felt they were able to learn how to use the patient 
portal quickly without any training or guidance.  
The general census was that they found the service 
intuitive to use, the service was easy for the respondents to 
become skillful, and found it generally easy to get the service 
to do what they wanted it to do even though there are areas 
that could do with improvement such as the need for a more 
user-friendly, mobile-friendly and intuitive user interface as 
well as use of layman terms and links to complimentary 
resources. 
There were no obvious differences in responses between 
the respondents who had a lower level of education and rated 
themselves with lower IT competence. They also generally 
reported being able to learn to use the service quickly and 
perform tasks without training or support.  
An issue arose from the findings relates to both 
functional and aesthetic aspects. The respondents noticed 
that when they received a notification for something “new” 
to check such as test results or updates to read, the patient 
portal did not highlight the “new” updates well enough for 
the users to find once they logged into the service.  
The findings in this research positively reflect the 
convenience that the service provides which has been 
reported in the literature. Many respondents believe that the 
portal has saved them time by allowing them to book 
appointments online, getting notifications and viewing lab 
results. Some respondents contradicted this however when 
asked why they did not use a particular feature, specifically 
booking appointments. The respondents stated that it is much 
easier to call their GP and they prefer human interaction.  
Other issues include the difficulty to book appointments 
because there were no confirmation messages that 
appointment requests are put through, appointments made 
were at times not received by the GP and the inability to 
view what appointment is available.  
In comparison, viewing lab results is the most popular 
feature used by the respondents. Respondents liked that they 
could get notification of a lab result through the system 
instead of getting them through the post. Respondents felt 
that this feature saved them time and anxiety. 
Even though there has been some discussion in the 
literature about use of patient portals enhancing patient-
doctor/ GL relationships, the survey findings did not support 
this. It is worth noting however that in the literature, keeping 
journal diaries tend to be utilised by patients with chronic 
diseases that require daily updates that their doctors can view 
online, thus allowing both parties to be kept up-to-date. 
Because this study did not specifically study or identify such 
patients that required a closer relationship with their doctor, a 
conclusion cannot be drawn with regard to this. 
Perceived usefulness and satisfaction are the two 
predictors of acceptance and use continuance intention 
(Bhattacherjee, 2001). The results from the survey items on 
value and satisfaction were overall positive, reflecting 
respondents’ intention to continuing using the patient portal 
service they are currently utilising. Nevertheless, a number 
of issues were highlighted.  
Respondents believed that the service lacked clear help 
and guidance, specifically instructions on how to use features 
and explanations of medical terms. Addressing these could 
increase the usability and user-friendliness of the service.  
Respondents also comment that the government and 
providers must ensure that the doctors are actively 
participating in the portal service by providing meaningful 
notes on test results that is clear, understandable and concise. 
For example, a simple “no further action required” comment 
is valuable to patients who are looking at test results that 
they are unable to decipher. Respondents recognise that 
doctors may also need to be trained on the use of the portal 
to make good use of the tool to interact with patients and to 
maximise the benefits of the portal service.  
Despite the identified issues, overall, the respondents 
from this research are satisfied with the patient portal they 
use and intend to continue using the service. However, in 
order to retain its current users and to encourage new users to 
utilise the service, the issues identified must be addressed by 
involving patients in its future developments. 
A number of areas for future research on patient portals 
are identified. The integration of patient portals and other e-
health systems should be looked into.  
The patient portals are currently only available for those 
who are 18-years and older. The government and the heath 
sector should look into having children into the system with 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

their own records, perhaps under their parents’ account. This 
will allow a parent to access, view and conduct the same 
administrative tasks for their children’s medication and 
viewing test results. Several respondents also expressed a 
need to have a shared access to their spouse/ partner’s 
account. There are obviously ethical issues that would need 
to be understood and ironed out with regard to these 
suggestions. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Chaudhry, B., Wang, J., Wu, S., Maglione, M., Mojica, W., 
Roth, E., & Shekelle, P. G. (2006). Systematic review: impact 
of health information technology on quality, efficiency, and 
costs of medical care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 144(10), 
742-752. 
[2] Undem, T. (2010). Consumers and health information 
technology: 
a 
national 
survey. 
California 
Healthcare 
Foundation. 
[3] Wilson, E, V., & Lankton, N. K. (2004). Modeling patients' 
acceptance of provider-delivered E-health. Journal of the 
American Medical Informatics Association, 11(4), 241-248. 
[4] Healthitboard (2015b). Patient Portal Implementation Guide. 
National 
Health 
IT 
Board. 
Retrieved 
from: 
http://healthitboard.health.govt.nz/our-programmes/patient-
portals/patient-portal-implementation-guide 
[5] Tang, P. C., Ash, J. S., Bates, D. W., Overhage, M., & Sands, 
D. Z. (2006). Personal health records: Definitions, benefits, 
and strategies for overcoming barriers to adoption. Journal of 
the American Medical Informatics Association, 13, 121–126. 
doi:10.1197/jamia.M2025 
[6] Myreteg, G. (2015). Cost-benefit evaluation of e-health 
services: acceptance and value creation are interactive forces. 
Health Systems, 4(3), 204-211. 
[7] Eysenbach, G. (2001). What is e-health? Journal of Medical 
Internet 
Research,3(2), 
e20. 
http://doi.org/10.2196/jmir.3.2.e20 
[8] Massey, A. P., Khatri, V., & Montoya‐Weiss, M. M. (2007). 
Usability of online services: The role of technology readiness 
and context. Decision Sciences, 38(2), 277-308. 
[9] Hunter, I. (2002). Patient Attitudes to Electronic Medical 
Records. In Proceedings of Privacy Forum, New Zealand. 
[10] Hadwich, K., Georgi, D., Tuzovic, S., Büttner, J., & Bruhn, 
M. (2010). Perceived quality of e-health services: A 
conceptual scale development of e-health service quality 
based on the C-OAR-SE approach. International Journal of 
Pharmaceutical and Healthcare Marketing, 4(2), 112-136. 
[11] Tulu, B., Trapp, A. C., Strong, D. M., Johnson, S. A., Hoque, 
M., Trudel, J., & Garber, L. (2016). An analysis of Patient 
Portal utilization: what can we learn about online patient 
behavior by examining portal click data?. Health Systems, 
5(1), 66-79. 
[12] McLaughlin, J., & Skinner, D. (2000). Developing usability 
and utility: a comparative study of the users of new IT. 
Technology Analysis & Strategic Management, 12(3), 413-
423. 
[13] Nielsen, J. (2003). Usability 101: Introduction to usability. 
[14] Singh, S., Puradkar, S., & Lee, Y. (2006). Ubiquitous 
computing: 
connecting 
Pervasive 
computing 
through 
Semantic Web. Information Systems and E-Business 
Management, 4(4), 421-439. 
[15] Gu, Y., Orr, M., & Warren, J. (2015). Health literacy and 
Patient Portals. One of the problems with multiple medicines 
in older people is that there can be a cumulative effect, 172. 
[16] Johnston, D., Kaelber, D., Pan, E. C., Bu, D., Shah, S., Hook, 
J. M., & Middleton, B. (2007). A framework and approach for 
assessing the value of personal health records (PHRs). In 
AMIA Annual Symposium Proceedings(Vol. 2007, p. 374). 
American Medical Informatics Association. 
[17] Taha, J., Czaja, S. J., Sharit, J., & Morrow, D. G. (2013). 
Factors affecting usage of a personal health record (PHR) to 
manage health. Psychology and Aging, 28(4), 1124-1139. 
doi:http://dx.doi.org.helicon.vuw.ac.nz/10.1037/a0033911 
[18] Baird, A., Raghu, T. S., North, F., & Edwards, F. (2014). 
When traditionally inseparable services are separated by 
technology: The case of Patient Portal features offered by 
primary care providers. Health Systems, 3(2), 143-158. 
[19] Bhattacherjee, A. (2001). Understanding information systems 
continuance: 
an 
expectation-confirmation 
model. 
MIS 
quarterly, 351-370. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2017.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-537-1
ICDS 2017 : The Eleventh International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

