Personalized Item Review Ranking Method Based on Empathy
Taketoshi Ushiama
Faculty of Design
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
email: ushiama@design.kyushu-u.ac.jp
Daichi Minami
Graduate School of Design
Kyushu University
Fukuoka, Japan
email: minami@kyudai.jp
Abstract—In e-commerce, online reviews posted about items
play an essential role in helping users select products. However,
when many reviews are posted for the same product, it is
sometimes difficult for users to find the most valuable reviews
among them. This paper proposes a method for ranking online
reviews of a target item based on the user’s empathy for
reviewers. Using the target user’s feedback on reviews for known
items as input, the proposed method estimates the empathy
toward the reviewer and ranks reviews for unknown items based
on it. Evaluation experiments showed that the proposed method
is effective against comparative methods.
Keywords - online reviews; recommendations; rankings;
natural language processing; machine learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
E-commerce sites often provide reviews about products.
Reviews play an important role in users’ selection of items.
However, when a large number of reviews about the same item
are included, it is impractical to browse through all reviews [1].
It has been reported that 80% of users read only a maximum
of 10 reviews when purchasing an item on online review sites
such as Amazon. Therefore, functions that rank reviews are
essential to assist users in merchandising recommended items.
Some reviews are helpful to the user, while others are not.
Therefore, e-commerce sites provide a mechanism for rating
reviews and ranking highly rated reviews at the top. However,
there exist cases where reviews that are valuable to one user
are not valuable to another user. Since existing review ranking
is not personalized, reviews that are not valuable to a user may
appear at the top of the list. Therefore, the review ranking
mechanism is expected to reflect the values and preferences
of users.
This paper proposes a method for ranking online reviews
of a target item based on user empathy. The proposed method
predicts a target user’s empathy for a reviewer based on the
reviews the user has rated in the past. It then ranks the reviews
based on their empathy for the reviewer.
Section II introduces a method for ranking item reviews
based on empathy. Section III shows the experimental results
for evaluating the effectiveness of the proposed method. Sec-
tion IV describes the summary and future work.
II. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Typicality of reviews to authors
Reviews are considered to reflect the values and personality
of the author (reviewer). The degree to which a review reflects
the values and personality of the reviewer who wrote it is
called the ”typicality” of the review. typi(d, r), which is the
degree of typicality of a review document d to a reviewer r,
is defined by the following equation.
typi(d, r) = p(r|d)
(1)
where p(r|d) is the conditional probability that given a review
document d, its author is d.
The proposed method uses machine learning to predict
p(r|d). Specifically, reviews are vectorized using Doc2Vec [2],
and machine learning are performed with that author as the
correct label. A neural network with two hidden layers is used
for machine learning.
B. Similarity of reviewers
To predict empathy for unknown reviewers, similarities
between reviewers are used. In a two-layer neural network
that takes reviews as input and predicts authors, the all-
connected layer in front of the output layer is considered to
be the manifestation of the features used to classify reviewers.
The vector obtained by inputting a single document that is a
concatenation of all reviews posted by reviewer r as input to
the machine learning model of author estimation is denoted as
v(r).
sim(r1, r2), which is the similarity between two reviewers
r1 and r2, is defined by the following formula.
sim(r1, r2) =
v(r1) · v(r2)
∥v(r1)∥ × ∥v(r2)∥
(2)
where PR(u) represents the review set that was positively
rated by user u, NR(u) represents the review set that was
negatively rated by user u and reviewer(d) represents the
reviewer who submitted a review d.
C. Estimation of the empathy for reviewers based on review
ratings
The proposed method uses the user’s ratings of previous
reviews to extract the level of empathy toward the reviewer. In
this study, we assume that users can vote ”like” and ”dislike”
for some reviews. The user is not required to rate all reviews.
We predict the empathy empathy(u, r) of a user u toward a
reviewer r who has posted a review he has rated, using the
following formula.
empathy(u, r) =
X
d∈Dpos(r)
typi(d, r) −
X
d∈Dneg(r)
typi(d, r)
(3)
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

where Dpos(r) represents the set of review documents posted
by reviewer r that the target user rated as ”like” and Dneg(r)
represents the set of review documents that the target user
rated as ”dislike”. tipi(d, r) denotes the topicality of a review
document d to reviewer r.
D. Ranking of reviews for unknown items
Estimate the value of a review of an unknown item Iu based
on the feedback of the evaluation of a review of a known item
Ik. The recommendation score score(u, d) of a review d for
a target user u is defined by the following equation.
score(u, d) =
P
r∈R(u) empathy(u, r) × sim(r, reviewer(d))
P
r∈R(u) sim(r, reviewer(d))
(4)
The reviewer set R(u) with respect to user u is defined by the
following equation.
R(u) = {x|x = reviewer(d), d ∈ PR(u) ∪ NR(u)}
(5)
where reviewer(d) denotes the reviewer who submitted the
review d.
III. EVALUATION
A. Experimental setup
Experiments were conducted to evaluate the effectiveness
of the proposed method. The dataset used for the experiments
was obtained by crawling from one of the famous Japanese
online book review sites “Dokusho meter”. Six subjects were
asked to select two books from among those they had recently
read and to input their evaluation feedback for the reviews of
the two books. The subjects were asked to rate the reviews
of two books on a three-point scale of “agree,” “don’t know,”
and “don’t agree,” based on the question of “do you agree
with this review?” The evaluation data for one book review
was used as training data to predict the recommendation score
for the other book review.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed method, we
compared the results with those of three different methods.
They are random sampling, vote ranking, and Support Vector
Regression (SVR). In the vote ranking, we compared the
top 10 reviews with the highest number of votes with the
top 10 reviews using the proposed method. In SVR, the
explanatory variables for the regression analysis were the Term
Frequency–Inverse Document Frequency (TF-IDF) vector of
words, the percentage of each part of speech in the reviews,
the total number of words, and the number of word types.
B. experimental results
We calculated the percentage of reviews that subjects rated
as ”sympathetic” and the percentage of reviews that they rated
as ”not sympathetic” out of the top 10 ranked reviews in the
proposed and comparative methods.
The results for the reviews that were evaluated as ”sympa-
thetic” are shown in Fig. 1. When significant differences were
confirmed by T-test, significant differences were observed be-
tween the proposed method and the random sampling method,
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
Proposed Random
Votes
SVR
%
*
*
* p < 0.05
Fig. 1. Percentage of ”sympathetic” reviews in top 10 ranked.
0
5
10
15
20
25
Proposed Random
Votes
SVR
%
*
*
* p < 0.05
Fig. 2. Percentage of ”not sympathetic” reviews in top 10 ranked.
and between the proposed method and the order of the number
of votes, at a significance level of 5 percent.
The results for the reviews that were evaluated as ”not
sympathetic” are shown in Fig. 2. When the T-test was used
to confirm the significant differences, significant differences
were observed between the proposed method and the random
sampling method and between the proposed method and the
support vector regression at a significance level of 5 percent.
The above results show that the proposed method includes
more reviews with content that users can relate to and fewer
reviews that users cannot relate to in the top ranking than the
comparative methods.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a review ranking method based
on user empathy. The proposed method predicts the reviewer’s
empathy based on the user’s review ratings to achieve a
personalized ranking. Results of evaluation experiments using
subjects showed the effectiveness of the proposed method. As
future work, we are considering the use of advanced resource
language models such as BERT [3] to more accurately predict
the degree of empathy of unknown users.
REFERENCES
[1] M. L. Anderson and J. R. Magruder, “Learning from the crowd:
Regression discontinuity estimates of the effects of an online review
database,” Economic Journal, 122(563), pp.957–989, 2012.
[2] Q. L. Le and T. Mikolov, “Distributed Representations of Sentences
and Documents,” Proceedings of The 31st International Conference on
Machine Learning, pp. 1188–1196, 2014.
[3] J. Devlin, M. Chang, K. Lee, and K. Toutanova, “BERT: Pre-training
of Deep Bidirectional Transformers for Language Understanding,” Pro-
ceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, Volume 1, pp. 4171–4186, 2019.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2022.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-981-2
ICDS 2022 : The Sixteenth International Conference on Digital Society

