Polish E-Government at Local Level  
Heavy Road to Citizens’ Empowerment 
 
Leszek Porebski  
Department of Political Science and Contemporary History 
AGH University of Science and Technology  
Krakow, Poland 
 leszekpo@agh.edu.pl  
 
 
Abstract—The paper evaluates the development of e-
government in Polish local governments, within the framework 
of the role played by an individual in political processes. 
Presented here are the results of the empirical research carried 
out in the period of 2005-2009. The study comprised the 
assessment of the official websites of Polish counties, the 
secondary level of local government system. Sites of 314 
counties were analyzed, with the application of the quantitative 
method based on Website Attribute Evaluation System. The 
change of citizens’ position with respect to public institutions 
was assessed against the background of the four basic 
functions performed by local governments websites. They are: 
information, promotion, consultation and service delivery. 
Research results indicate that local level of Polish e-
government is on the preliminary stage of development and the 
impact of new technologies on the model of local democracy is 
limited. 
Keywords-e-government; e-democracy; websites content; 
local democracy; local government. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
use 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies (ICT) by public institutions remains one of the 
most popular issues undertaken by scholars dealing with 
social 
implications 
of 
the 
information 
revolution. 
Nevertheless, the local level still attracts much less attention 
than activity of parliaments, governments or governmental 
agencies. While the vast majority of both individual research 
projects and international benchmarking studies focus mostly 
on consequences of ICT use in the macro-scale of political 
and administrative processes [1], [2], [3], from the 
perspective of a democratic theory it is the study of the local 
democracy that offers an excellent insight into a political 
transformation. The survey of what occurs in local 
communities can be the preliminary stage of pointing the 
overall direction democracy heads for. 
The present paper presents an assessment of the role 
played by local government websites in redefining the model 
of contemporary democracy. The focus of the analysis is on 
the position taken by the individual in his relations with the 
state, represented by public institutions. Without a doubt ICT 
modify patterns of interactions between various political 
actors. Nonetheless, consequences of the emergence of new 
technologies on the status of the citizen in relation to the 
state have been vigorously debated for several years. ICT 
enthusiasts note the definite positive the impact of 
technologies on political life, such as the empowerment of an 
individual in the realm of political communication, political 
participation as well as decision-making [4], [5]. More 
skeptical observers however point out that cyberspace in fact 
mirrors the real life “politics as usual” game, with the same 
actors dominating the scene [6]. Others claim that it is too 
early to prejudge the ultimate effect of ICT use in political 
processes [7],[8]. 
Is the role of the individual, especially in local 
democracy, enhanced by new technologies? To what extent 
websites of local government institutions stimulate civic 
activism and participatory attitudes? What type of 
democracy  is formed by the way local authorities use the 
ICT? These issues are addressed in the paper, on the base of 
the empirical assessment of the content of Polish local 
government websites. 
II. 
BASIC TERMS 
E-government is the notion which is both commonly 
used and at the same time lacking agreed, precise meaning. It 
can be defined as the use of technology in the management 
and delivery of public services [9], or the employment of 
ICT to provide electronic services to citizens, businesses and 
organizations [10]. The same term is however described at 
times in much broader perspective. According to Carbo and 
Williams [11] the role of e-government is also to involve 
citizens in the democratic process and decision making in the 
convenient, customer-oriented and cost-effective way. 
Consequently, e-government cannot be reduced to the 
process of electronic services distribution. It is much more 
than merely the technological phenomenon. The essence of 
e-government is the reconstruction of mutual interactions 
between citizens and service providers [12]. 
In this paper, the broad concept of e-government is 
assumed. It comprises a few basic dimensions. Most 
important of them are: delivery of public services, provision 
of information, strengthening the public debate as well as the 
stimulation of citizens participation and their involvement in 
the decision making process. Such a wide-ranging approach 
to e-government makes it very close to the notion of e-
1
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

democracy. In fact, e-government can be considered to be 
the aspect of e-democracy associated with the pursuit of 
various types of public institutions. It obviously implies that 
performance of e-government considerably determines 
whether the overall goals of the ICT use in politics can be 
accomplished, regardless of how they are articulated. 
III. 
SUBJECT AND SCOPE OF THE RESEARCH 
The research project presented in this paper was 
dedicated to the analysis of official websites of Polish 
counties. In the three-tier system of local government in 
Poland (introduced in January 1999) municipalities are the 
primary units, counties are units on the secondary level and 
provinces make up the third tier of the system. There are 
2478 municipalities, 379 counties and 16 provinces 
altogether.  
There are two different types of counties in Poland: urban 
and territorial ones. Cities with population over one hundred 
thousand residents establish 65 urban counties. The territory 
of the county is in this case limited to the area of the single 
city – the county seat. Nevertheless, legally these cities are 
endowed with rights of counties. The second category of 
counties – territorial counties, are composed of several rural 
and urban municipalities. The largest city in the area is 
usually the seat of the county. It performs the role of 
educational, economic and cultural center of the region as 
well. Regions represented by territorial counties are very 
often linked with strong ties, which are rooted in shared 
history and common traditions. The sense of local identity is 
thus often preserved by both residents of the county and its 
local government authorities. 
The elected organ of the county is the council, while the 
executive branch is represented by the county board. The 
chair of the board is in charge of both temporary works of 
the county administration and the execution of the policy 
assumed by the council.  There are several statutory tasks of 
the county. The most important of them include: health care, 
social 
welfare, 
public 
transport 
and 
public 
roads 
maintenance, culture and tourism, education and building 
supervision. 
In the reviewed research, websites of territorial counties 
were the only ones to be selected for the analysis. Urban 
counties were excluded from the study to ensure the internal 
cohesion of the sample and to allow for generalized 
conclusions. Cities with populations close to or even greater 
than half a million inhabitants are very much different from 
the majority of territorial counties. The latter are typically 
rural and sparsely populated units, often – as mentioned 
above – founded around common history and enduring social 
ties. Therefore, the assumption that both types of counties 
are equal (and including them within the same sample) 
would distort the results of the study.  
Consequently, websites of all the 314 territorial counties 
in Poland were analyzed within the framework of the project. 
There were the official websites only, these maintained 
formally by the county office. The research was carried out 
for five years, from 2005 to 2009, between April and May of 
each year. 
IV. 
METHOD OF THE RESEARCH  
The major goal of the research project presented in this 
paper was the comprehensive assessment of the content of 
the counties’ websites. The questionnaire constructed for the 
study was a quantitative one. It was based on the overall idea 
proposed by the Cyberspace Policy Research Group, known 
as the Website Attribute Evaluation System (WAES). The 
WAES is used both in the analysis of websites [13] and as 
the point of reference for researchers of websites 
performance [14], [15]. The WAES is the binary tool. It  
analyses the content of the website in the context of specific 
detailed criteria (types of information, services, web tools). 
The component in the content either exists or is absent. As a 
result, a score of either “0” or “1” is assigned to the specific 
criterion.  
The questionnaire applied in the analysis of websites of 
Polish counties was founded on the same principle. In the 
2005 edition of the research it included 55 detailed criteria. 
After minor modifications introduced in 2006 (a few criteria 
were substituted with new ones) the number of criteria was 
reduced to 54. This final version of the questionnaire was 
used in the research conducted from 2006 to 2009.  
Prior to the beginning of the actual research, in 
November 2004, the preliminary,  qualitative survey of 
several local government websites was performed. Four 
major aspects of website content were identified on the base 
of its results. They are major functions performed by 
websites in everyday activity of local government 
institutions. The functions are: information, promotion, 
consultation and service delivery. In the questionnaire 
several specific criteria were assigned to each function. 
The information function is associated with the access of 
Internet users to various types of data. Local governments 
publish both basic personal information (composition of the 
county council and the board) and information pertaining to 
their work (office hours, announcements), as well as other 
information 
helpful 
for 
customers 
of 
the 
county 
administration. They include: the division of powers among 
various departments of the county administration and 
information on handling specific matters. A website of local 
government can be also regarded as a hub in the network 
connecting many different kinds of public institutions, local 
civic initiatives, NGOs, etc. The simplest way to facilitate 
this process is to place links to such organizations on the 
website. Accessibility of such links is also a part of 
information function. 
Promotion is the only function performed by the website 
aimed mainly at non-residents of  the county. That aspect of 
online presence includes the presentation of  touristic and 
cultural qualities of the region (directed to individual 
visitors) as well as commercial assets (e.g., offers to potential 
investors). An important dimension of promoting the region 
is also the availability of website content in foreign 
languages.  
Consultation is the most directly “political” dimension of 
local government websites content. It includes services and 
tools that stimulate public debate on local issues and enhance 
communication with citizens as well as civic participation. 
2
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

Detailed criteria include the availability of email addresses to 
local government representatives, online polls, discussion 
forum or chat. 
The last function, electronic delivery of public services, 
can be regarded as synonymous to the narrowly defined 
concept of e-government. It refers to interactions between 
local 
government 
administration 
and 
the 
individual 
(considered as a beneficiary of various services). The 
questionnaire applied in the research has not assessed the 
electronic availability of specific services. Instead, stages of 
online sophistication were measured. They include: 
downloading forms, the ability to apply online, online 
transactions with the office as well as the possibility of 
tracking the individual matter handling.  
Beside the survey of four major functions the 
questionnaire included also a few criteria assessing the 
availability of additional services. They were: accessibility of 
the web site for persons with disabilities and presence of 
various types of multimedia content (pictures, audio and 
video materials). 
All major functions performed by local government 
websites can be regarded as founding elements of the 
broadly defined domain of e-government. Therefore, the 
research of Polish counties websites was in fact an attempt to 
evaluate the standing of local dimension of e-government 
development during the first decade of the 21st century. It 
was also the indirect indicator of the current status of e-
democracy in local communities. 
V. 
THE CONTENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT WEBSITES. 
RESEARCH RESULTS 
A. Overall results and the distribution of scores 
As mentioned above, the maximum score that could be 
obtained in the research was 55 points in 2005 and 54 points 
in 2006-2009 period. Fig. 1 presents the average scores 
achieved by county websites in the consecutive years of the 
analysis. The results indicate that except for 2006, when 
slight decline in the total score was noticed, we can observe 
gradual and steady growth of overall sophistication of the 
websites. The greatest progress appeared between 2006 and 
2007,  followed by the decline of the pace of growth..  
20,06
19,34
18,57
16,79
17,21
2009
2008
2007
2006
2005
 
Figure 1.  Average scores of local government websites. 
 This development can be considered disappointing, 
especially if compared with the rapid growth of overall ICT 
accessibility during the same period all over the world, 
including Poland. Local governments improved their web 
offer although they have hardly kept abreast of the overall 
progress in technology. 
Fig. 2 depicts the distribution of scores in the first (2005) 
and  the last (2009) year of the research project execution. In 
2005 about one third of all the websites (33,7%) scored 
between 16 and 20 points. More than one hundred counties 
can be found in this interval, making it the most numerous 
category of scores. 
Quite similar frequency of scores can be found however 
in the interval between 11 and 15 points, which is a category 
of explicitly minor scores, compared with the mean value. 
Altogether, as much as 85% of all the websites scored 
between 11 and 25 points. The single minimum result was 3 
points, while the maximum score was 31 points (obtained by 
two websites). That proves that the gap between leaders and 
laggards was considerable. 
Five years later, in 2009, the distribution of scores clearly 
leans towards results surpassing the mean value. At this time 
the most common category of scores is the interval between 
21 and 25 points (more than both the mean and the median 
value).  
2005
4
24
93
68
17
2
106
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
26-30
31-35
 
Mean = 17,21,  Median = 17,  Std. Dev. = 5,20,  N=314 
2009
0
7
56
40
6
101
104
1-5
6-10
11-15
16-20
21-25
26-30
31-35
 
Mean = 20,06, Median = 20,  Std. Dev. = 5,08,  N=314 
Figure 2.  Distribution of local government websites scores.  
3
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

  Simultaneously, the frequency of scores between 11 and 
15 points is almost two times lower, than in 2005. In 2009 
both the minimum and the maximum results have increased. 
They were: 7 and 34 points, respectively. Thus the whole 
sample remained very much differentiated, with the variation 
between the best and the worst websites similar to that of 
2005. 
B. Basic functions performance 
The adequate measure of the advancement in the use of 
Internet capabilities is the presentation of websites score as 
the percentage of the total number of points, which could 
have been obtained. These data, concerning both the total 
score and specific functions, are presented in Table I. 
The starting point of the project – 2005 – is the moment 
when less than half of criteria taken into account in the 
research questionnaire were fulfilled. It refers both to the 
overall score and to each particular function. Performance of 
information and promotion is much more advanced than in 
case of consultation and service delivery. Nevertheless, even 
with respect to the provision of information, the leading 
aspect of web use, the score is slightly below fifty percent. In 
2005, electronic service delivery was especially at the 
preliminary stage of development. Its score strongly lagged 
behind all other functions, with result two times lower  than 
the total score. 
Successive years bring about the improvement of scores 
but the sequence of performance of specific functions 
continues to be stable. The most advanced dimension of 
websites content is the access to information, followed by 
promotion and consultation. Service delivery all the time 
remains to be the least developed. In 2009 the total score was 
about one fifth greater as compared to the first year of the 
research. Approximately the same level of increase can be 
observed with respect to information provision. The lowest 
increase occurred in case of the promotion. In fact it was the 
only function that has barely grown during five years of the 
research. Aspects of websites content which registered the 
most significant progress are: consultation and, in particular 
– service delivery. In case of the latter the spectacular growth 
of performance took place during the last two years of the 
analysis. In 2007 the score of this function was lower than in 
2005, while during next two years it recorded the 
improvement by almost seventy percent. 
Data comparison between 2005 and 2009 proves gradual 
transformation of the pattern of websites use by Polish local 
government.  
TABLE I.  
LOCAL GOVERNMENT WEBSITES SCORES (SELECTED 
YEARS) 
 
2005 
2007 
2009 
2005 = 100 
2007 
2009 
Total score 
 
Information 
Promotion 
Consultation 
Service Delivery 
40,00 
 
49,30 
46,86 
26,56 
19,33 
44,21 
 
55,80 
47,14 
32,29 
17,00 
47,76 
 
58,15 
48,00 
34,29 
28,75 
110,5 
 
113,2 
100,6 
121,6 
87,9 
119,4 
 
118,0 
102,4 
129,1 
148,7 
 
 
In the first year of the research passive and one-way 
forms of web communication (information and promotion) 
were dominating in the offer of self-government institutions 
for the Internet users. In the successive years, mostly 
interactive features of websites were improved, making the 
content of websites more balanced and open to more active 
participation of citizens. It represents the typical model of e-
government and e-democracy development [16].  
Nevertheless, functions which are essential from the 
perspective of democratic theory – consultation and service 
delivery – are still  evidently delayed. Unless the pace of 
described changes accelerates, websites of Polish local 
governments will continue to function as the electronic 
bulletin boards as opposed to the tools of real political and 
civic interaction.  
C. Availability of resources encouraging the development 
of e-democracy 
In the framework of the analysis of Polish local 
governments websites three functions play critical role in 
terms of supporting the citizens-oriented model of e-
government. They are: information, consultation and service 
delivery. Accessibility of particular types of information, 
web tools and services is then the adequate measure of  the 
“democratic maturity” of the assessed websites. 
Table II presents data on selected criteria of the 
information function. As mentioned in the previous part of 
this text the provision of information is performed at 
relatively satisfactory level.  
Basic data on the county office are available on virtually 
every one of the analyzed websites (however, in 2009 
precise instructions on handling particular matters could 
have been found only on every second – 49,4% – of assessed 
sites). Moreover, local government site gradually becomes 
an information center  for the local community. In the 
consecutive years of research there was a visible growth in 
the availability of resources useful in everyday life of 
residents. It refers to local newsletter (with information on 
program of movies, cultural events, etc.), links to websites of 
municipalities in the county as well as sites of local NGOs. 
In 2009 these data were available on the vast majority of the 
surveyed websites. 
A 
completely 
different 
picture 
emerges 
when 
consultation resources are analyzed (see Table III). These are 
services dedicated directly to the encouragement of civic 
activity and public debate. Therefore, their presence on local 
government sites is the indicator of local authorities’ 
readiness to face the real e-participation. Research results 
suggest that representatives of Polish local governments are 
not exactly enthusiastic about this prospect.  
TABLE II.  
LOCAL GOVERNMENT WEBSITES SCORES (SELECTED 
YEARS) 
Content 
2005 
2007 
2009 
Organization of the office 
Local newsletter 
Links to government websites 
Links to websites of municipalities 
Links to websites of local NGOs 
89,2 
54,8 
33,1 
74,2 
51,6 
89,2 
58,0 
33,8 
87,6 
57,9 
92,0 
70,4 
29,3 
87,6 
63,7 
 
4
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

TABLE III.  
AVAILABILITY OF SELECTED CONSULTATION RESOURCES 
Content 
2005 
2007 
2009 
Email address to the office 
Online discussion forum 
Online poll on local issues 
Chat with county officials 
Interactive service for the direct contact 
with county officials 
90,8 
27,1 
15,6 
4,5 
 
8,0 
95,5 
16,2 
19,1 
2,2 
 
14,3 
95,5 
13,7 
18,8 
2,6 
 
16,9 
 
The only resource commonly available on the assessed 
websites is the office email address (it is worth stressing 
however that even in 2009 a few counties have not published 
their own email addresses on their websites). Nevertheless, 
making email address accessible is not the same as 
responsiveness. In 2009, only one fifth of websites (21,7%) 
replied to electronic messages sent to local authorities during 
the research. It proves that email is still not perceived as the 
regular means of communication with citizens. 
All the other, much more sophisticated, resources can be 
only found on the relatively small part  of the analyzed sites. 
It refers to discussion forums, online polls, chats as well as 
various types of interactive services facilitating contacts with 
representatives of local authorities. In 2009 none of these 
resources was available on more than one fifth of evaluated 
sites. Specifically, chat can be hardly found in general (only 
2,6% of sites enabled the use of that service). Out of tools 
stimulating the public debate, in 2005 a discussion forum 
was the most popular one. Every fourth of assessed sites 
(27,1%) provided the opportunity to debate on local issues. 
The following years brought about the remarkable decline of 
the accessibility of that service (2009 – 13,7%). This 
tendency goes together with growing popularity of online 
tools, which assist in the direct contact with county officials. 
Both services represent however various forms of online 
communication. Discussion forums are open for multilateral 
communication, protect anonymity and provide the arena for 
real deliberation of public problems. Conversely, services 
facilitating contact with local representatives enable only 
bilateral interaction, during which an individual Internet user 
can ask a question or present his or her views to the 
particular county official. In addition, in 2009 more than 
every second of the latter services (54,7%) required 
revealing personal data of a user. Growing popularity of this 
mode of local debate proves an obvious intention of local 
authorities to manage the course of online dialogue with 
citizens. What can be observed is then the emergence of the 
supervised model of e-democracy. 
Distribution of public services is another aspect of online 
pursuit, which is of fundamental importance in the context of 
e-government development. With regard to Polish local 
governments, electronic delivery of services – as mentioned 
before – performs at a disappointingly low level (see Table 
IV). A relatively well accessible option is the ability to 
download various forms from the county site. Close to two 
thirds of local governments (59,6%) provided this 
opportunity in 2009. On the contrary, online transactions are 
still hardly possible on the analyzed sites. Only seven out of 
314 counties (2,2%) made that service available.  
TABLE IV.  
AVAILABILITY OF SELECTED SERVICE DELIVERY 
RESOURCES 
Content 
2005 
2007 
2009 
Downloading forms 
Ability to apply online 
Online transactionsa  
46,2 
2,9 
- 
55,1 
2,6 
0,3 
59,6 
28,7 
2,2 
a. The criterion was included to the questionnaire in 2006. 
 
Thus, apart from considerable improvement during last 
years, public services delivery remains the major challenge 
for local governments. Their websites will either include 
electronic distribution of services to online offer, or they stay 
behind the main current of information revolution. 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
The use of ICT can support various forms of democracy. 
E-voting obviously strengthens representative, procedural 
model of government, while virtual local communities 
reinforce libertarian aspects of democracy [17]. In the 
theoretical framework of the research presented in this paper 
the ultimate model of democracy formed by ICT was not 
decided in advance. Instead, the general term of “citizens 
empowerment” was introduced, as the possible model of the 
growing role of individuals in political processes.  
It is worth stressing that the same analytical framework 
can be applied in the study of various levels of government. 
Further research is needed however to assess if phenomena 
and processes which characterize local democracy are visible 
in states and democratic political systems as well. 
The data presented above indicate that with regard to 
Polish local government websites we can barely observe the 
reinforcement of the individuals’ status in their interactions 
with public institutions. Thanks to websites citizens have 
certainly much better access to information. Thus, in that 
domain costs they bear to pursue their democratic rights are 
visibly reduced. It is however the only dimension of e-
government that really works. Well informed individuals, 
who are ready to get involved in local public life face the 
challenge of a very poor offer provided by local authorities. 
In case of Polish counties, the increase of e-participation is 
not among top priorities of local elites. Obviously, there are 
numerous locations where online local debate can proceed. 
Websites of local government (which are the natural spot to 
confront residents’ and their representatives’ views and 
opinions) are not in the forefront of civic engagement 
encouragement.  
Electronic delivery of services, which makes operations 
of public institutions more transparent and customer oriented 
is yet another aspect of possible empowerment of citizens. 
This element of e-government has recently undergone 
perhaps the most spectacular transformation to enable the 
improvement of a citizen position in his or her relation with 
the state. Nevertheless, benefits of the ICT use in service 
distribution bypass users of Polish local government sites. 
Inability to perform transactions with the office and very 
limited access to online applications prove that electronic 
service delivery is still in the preliminary stage of 
development. In his or her relations with local administration 
a resident of the county is still considered more as the 
5
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

passive petitioner than the customer, whose satisfaction is 
critical in the evaluation of the performance of the office. 
The overall image of local e-government in Poland, 
based on data concerning counties websites, does not support 
the thesis of the observable reinforcement of the role 
individuals play in political processes. Thus far, ICT seem to 
have very limited impact on the nature of local democracy.  
They rather strengthen the existing rules of the game, with 
dominating position of political institutions, sluggish public 
debate and poor intensity of political participation. Members 
of local communities are still in search for the effective 
means to empower their political position. It seems that at 
the moment local government websites remain less than 
helpful in this endeavor. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was funded by the Polish Ministry of Science 
and  Higher Education (research project   N N116 331338). 
REFERENCES 
[1] D. Janssen, S. Rotthier and K. Snijkers, “If you measure it 
they will score: an assessment of the international 
eGovernment benchmarking,” Information Polity, Vol. 9, 
2004, pp. 121-130. 
[2] F. Salem, “Benchmarking the e-government bulldozer: 
beyond measuring the tread marks,” Measuring Business 
Excellence, Vol. 11, Issue 4,  2007, pp. 9-22. 
[3] F. Bannister, “The curse of the benchmark: an assessment of 
the validity and value of a e-government comparisons,” 
International Review of Administrative Sciences, Vol. 73, 
June 2007, pp. 171-188. 
[4] L. Grossman, The Electronic Republic, New York: Viking, 
1995. 
[5] N. Negroponte, Being Digital, New York: Vintage, 1995. 
[6] M. Margolis and D. Resnick, Politics as Usual: The 
Cyberspace ’Revolution’, London: Sage, 2000. 
[7] P. Norris, A Virtuous Circle: Political Communications in 
Postindustrial Societies, Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2000. 
[8] L. Porebski, “Three faces of electronic democracy,” Proc. Xth 
European Conference on Information systems (ECIS 2002), 
Gdansk, June 2002, pp. 1218-1227. 
[9] K. Edmiston, “State and local e-government: prospects and 
challenges,” American   Review of Public Administration, 
Vol. 33, March 2003, pp. 20-45. 
[10] L. Berntzen and M. Olsen, “Benchmarking E-Government: a 
comparative review of three international benchmarking 
studies,” Proc. Third International Conference on Digital 
society, 2009, pp. 77-82. 
[11] T. Carbo and J. Williams, “Models and metrics for evaluating 
local electronic government systems and services,” Electronic 
Journal of E-Government, Vol. 2, 2004, pp. 95-104. 
[12] A. Evangelidis, J. Akomode, A. Taleb-Bendiab and M. 
Taylor, “Risk assessment & success factors for e-government 
in a UK establishment,” Proc. The First International 
Conference on Electronic Government, 2002, pp. 395-401. 
[13] P. Ferber, F. Foltz and R. Pugliese, “The Politics of state 
legislature 
web 
sites: 
making 
e-government 
more 
participatory,” Bulletin of Science, Technology & Society, 
Vol. 23,  June 2003, pp. 157-167. 
[14] P. Leith, and J. Morison, “Communication and dialogue: what 
government websites might tell us about citizenship and 
governance,” International Review of Law, Computers and 
Technology, Vol. 18, Issue 1,  2004, pp. 25-35. 
[15] J. H. Lim and S. Y. Tang, “Urban e-government initiatives 
and environmental decision performance in Korea,” Journal 
of Public Administration Research and Theory, Vol. 18, 
January 2008, pp. 109-138. 
[16] L. Porebski, “Evaluating the development of eGovernment 
dystems: the case of Polish local government Web Sites,” 
Proc. the 11th European Conference on eGovernment (ECEG 
2011),  June 2011, pp. 475-481. 
[17] J. Van Dijk, The Network Society: Social Aspects of New 
Media, London: Sage, 1999. 
 
 
 
 
6
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

