A Secure and Flexible
Server-Based Mobile eID and e-Signature Solution
Christof Rath, Simon Roth, Manuel Schallar and Thomas Zefferer
Institute for Applied Information Processing and Communications
Graz University of Technology
Graz, Austria
Email: {ﬁrst name}.{last name}@iaik.tugraz.at
Abstract—In our digital society, e-government, e-commerce, and
e-business are increasingly gaining importance. Many services
of these domains rely on reliable user authentication and
electronic signatures. For many years, smart cards have been the
technology of choice to implement eID and e-signature solutions.
Recently, mobile eID and e-signature solutions have emerged
as an attractive alternative, as they provide better usability
compared to smart card based approaches while maintaining
the same level of security. Unfortunately, most current mobile
eID and e-signature solutions are tailored to the needs of speciﬁc
application scenarios and hence cannot easily be applied to and
used for other use cases. This prevents a broad use of mobile
eID and e-signature solutions and leads to a situation, in which
many services still rely on smart card based approaches with
poor usability or even insecure password-based solutions for
user authentication. To overcome this issue, we propose an
improved mobile eID and e-signature solution. In contrast to
existing comparable solutions, the proposed solution has been
designed such that compatibility with arbitrary use cases is
guaranteed. This way, its integration into arbitrary services and
applications is facilitated. The feasibility and applicability of the
proposed solution has been successfully evaluated by means of a
concrete implementation. This implementation demonstrates that
the proposed solution provides a secure and usable alternative
to existing eID and e-signature solutions and has the potential
to improve the security of various e-government services and
applications from private-sector domains.
Keywords—eGovernment; eID; electronic identity; electronic
signature; identity management; mobile security.
I.
INTRODUCTION
With the rise of the digital society, remote identiﬁcation
of users has become an increasing challenge as a growing
number of services have been moved to the Internet. This
applies to public-sector applications (e-government) as well
as to private-sector applications (e-commerce, e-business).
Remote identiﬁcation is usually achieved by means of a unique
electronic ID (eID) assigned to the user. An eID can for
instance be a unique number, user name, or e-mail address.
During authentication, the claimed identity (eID) is proven
by the user. Reliance on secret passwords for authentication
purposes is still the most popular and most frequently used au-
thentication approach for online services. However, password-
based authentication schemes have turned out to be insecure
due to their vulnerability against phishing attacks and their
poor usability, which often leads to the use of weak passwords
that are easy to guess [1] [2].
Transactional online services from the e-government do-
main and related ﬁelds of application typically require reliable
remote identiﬁcation and authentication of users. Given the
obvious drawbacks of password-based eID and authentica-
tion schemes in terms of security, two-factor authentication
schemes have been developed for applications with high secu-
rity requirements such as transactional e-government services.
Current two-factor authentication schemes typically comprise
the authentication factors possession and knowledge.
Popular examples of two-factor authentication schemes are
smart card based solutions. During the authentication process,
the user proves to be in possession of the eID token (i.e.,
the smart card) and proves knowledge of a secret PIN that
is speciﬁc to this eID token and that protects access to the
token and to eID data stored on it. In most cases, smart cards
additionally enable users to create electronic signatures (e-
signatures). For this purpose, the smart card additionally stores
a secret signing key and features hardware-based signature-
creation capabilities. Access to the signing key and to the
smart card’s signature-creation functionality is again protected
by means of two-factor authentication.
Smart cards are an ideal technological choice to combine
the concepts of eID and e-signature, as they are capable to im-
plement both eID and e-signature functionality. Thus, they are
frequently used in security-critical ﬁelds of application such as
e-business, e-banking, or e-government. For instance, various
transactional e-government services that have been launched
in Europe during the past years require users to authenticate
remotely with a personalized smart card and to complete online
transactions by applying an electronic signature with the same
card [3]. Unfortunately, smart card based solutions usually lack
an appropriate level of usability, as they require users to obtain,
install, and use an appropriate card-reading device [4].
Powered by the recent emergence of mobile communica-
tion technologies and motivated by the low user acceptance of
smart card based eID and e-signature solutions, several mobile
eID and e-signature solutions have been developed during the
past years [5]. These solutions render the use of smart cards
unnecessary, as they cover the authentication factor possession
by means of the user’s mobile phone. This way, mobile eID and
e-signature solutions have the potential to signiﬁcantly improve
usability while maintaining the same level of security as smart
card based solutions.
Due to their improved usability compared to smart card
based authentication schemes [4], mobile eID and e-signature
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

solutions are in principle also suitable for use cases with lower
security requirements. Unfortunately, existing mobile eID and
e-signature solutions are usually tailored to the requirements
of speciﬁc use cases and ﬁelds of application. This applies
to most mobile eID and e-signature solutions that have been
introduced and launched worldwide during the past years. Due
to their limitation to speciﬁc use cases, these solutions can
hardly be used in different ﬁelds of application. This leads to
a situation, in which most applications cannot beneﬁt from the
enhanced security and usability of existing mobile eID and
e-signature solutions.
To overcome this problem, we propose a modular and
ﬂexible concept for mobile eID and e-signature solutions. The
main idea behind the design of the proposed concept was to
achieve a ﬂexible solution and to maintain its compatibility
to different use cases and application scenarios. Details of the
proposed concept are presented in this paper. In Section II,
we start with a brief survey of existing mobile eID and e-
signature solutions and discuss their strengths and limitations.
We then derive requirements of a mobile eID and e-signature
solution that is applicable in arbitrary application scenarios in
Section III. In Section IV, we introduce a technology-agnostic
architecture for a mobile eID and e-signature solution that
meets all predeﬁned requirements. Based on the proposed ar-
chitecture, we model three technology-agnostic processes that
cover the functionality of the proposed solution in Section V.
The practical applicability and feasibility of the proposed
solution is assessed in Section VI by means of a concrete
implementation. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section VII.
II.
RELATED WORK
The reliable remote identiﬁcation and authentication of
users by means of two-factor based approaches has been a
topic of scientiﬁc interest for several years. Two-factor based
authentication schemes based on smart cards have been intro-
duced in several security-sensitive ﬁelds of application during
the past decades. Especially in Europe, various countries, such
as Austria [6], Estonia [7], Belgium [8], or Spain [9] have
issued personalized smart cards to their citizens in order to
reliably identify and authenticate them during transactional e-
government procedures [3]. In various ﬁelds of application,
smart cards also enable users to create electronic signatures
during online procedures. For instance, electronic signatures
are of special importance in Europe, where electronic sig-
natures can be legally equivalent to handwritten signatures
according to the EU Directive 1999/93/EC [10].
While smart cards work ﬁne from a functional point of
view, their usability is usually rather poor due to the need
for a card-reading device to physically connect the smart
card to the user’s computer. The need for additional drivers
and software to communicate with the smart card and to
integrate its functionality into security-critical applications also
decreases the usability of smart-card technology in general and
of smart card based eID and e-signature solutions in particular
[4].
To overcome given usability issues of smart card based
solutions, several mobile two-factor based eID and e-signature
solutions have been developed during the past years. Surveys
of mobile eID and e-signature solutions have for instance been
provided by Ruiz-Martinez et al. [5] and Pisko [11]. All these
solutions have in common that the factor possession is not
covered by a smart card but by the user’s mobile phone.
All mobile eID and e-signature solutions that comply with
demanding legal requirements, such as those deﬁned by the
EU Signature Directive include some kind of secure hardware
element, which is able to securely store eID data and to carry
out cryptographic operations. Depending on the realization and
location of this secure hardware element, mobile eID and e-
signature solutions can be basically divided into the following
two categories:
•
SIM-based solutions: Solutions belonging to this cat-
egory make use of the mobile phone’s SIM (subscriber
identity module) to securely store eID data and to
carry out cryptographic operations. In most cases, the
use of a special SIM is required, as off-the-shelf SIMs
do not feature the required cryptographic operations
such as the creation of electronic signatures. Access to
eID data stored on the SIM and to cryptographic func-
tionality provided by the SIM is typically protected by
a secret PIN that is only known to the legitimate user.
This PIN covers the factor knowledge of the two-factor
based authentication scheme.
•
Server-based solutions: Server-based mobile eID and
e-signature solutions implement the secure hardware
element centrally e.g., in a hardware security mod-
ule (HSM). Such a solution has been proposed by
Orthacker et al. [12]. The user’s mobile phone does
neither implement cryptographic functionality, nor
store eID data. However, the mobile phone is an
integral component of the authentication process that
is mandatory in order to gain access to centrally stored
eID data and to carry out electronic signatures. In most
cases, the mobile phone acts as receiver for one-time
passwords (OTP), which have then to be sent by the
user to the central HSM in order to prove possession of
the mobile phone and to complete the authentication
process.
For both above-mentioned categories, concrete mobile eID
and e-signature solutions have been developed and rolled-out
on a large scale. For instance, SIM-based mobile eID and e-
signature solutions have been set into productive operation in
Estonia [13] and Norway [14]. A server-based mobile eID
and e-signature solution has been in productive operation in
Austria since 2009 [15]. Most existing solutions are tailored
to a speciﬁc legal framework (e.g., national laws) or to a certain
identity system (e.g., to a speciﬁc national eID system). For
instance, the Austrian mobile eID and e-signature solution has
been purpose-built for the Austrian ofﬁcial eID infrastructure
and bases on data structures, protocols, and registers that are
speciﬁc to the Austrian use case. Deploying this solution in
other countries would require major adaptations and cause
additional costs. Similar limitations apply to most mobile eID
and e-signature solutions that have been set into productive
operation so far. This renders an application of these solutions
in different ﬁelds of application difﬁcult and expensive, and
prevents that all applications can beneﬁt from the improved
security and usability of mobile eID and e-signature solutions.
III.
REQUIREMENTS
The conducted survey on existing mobile eID and e-
signature solutions has identiﬁed a lack of dynamically adapt-
able solutions that can easily be applied to arbitrary use cases.
To remove this issue, we propose a mobile eID and e-signature
solution that can easily be used in arbitrary application sce-
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

narios. We have designed the proposed solution, which will be
introduced in Sections IV and V in detail, according to a set of
requirements. These requirements have been extracted from an
analysis of existing solutions and from published evaluations
of these solutions such as [4]. The derived requirements (R1-
R5) are discussed in the following in more detail.
R1:
Flexibility regarding external components: Mobile
eID and e-signature solutions typically rely on external
parties and components. Common examples for such
components are certiﬁcation authorities (CA), which
bind a user’s identity to her signing key, or identity
databases (e.g., ofﬁcial person registers or company
databases), which are required to derive eIDs for users.
A generic mobile eID and e-signature solution must
not be limited to certain external components but
provide ﬂexible means to integrate different external
components (e.g., different CAs).
R2:
Avoidance of token roll-outs: Long-term experience
with smart card based solutions has shown that the
roll-out of eID and e-signature tokens (e.g., smart
cards, SIMs) causes additional (ﬁnancial) effort and
hence reduces user acceptance. Avoidance of neces-
sary roll-outs of such tokens is hence a key require-
ment for usable mobile eID and e-signature solutions.
R3:
Usability: The often disappointing user acceptance of
smart card based solutions shows that usability is an
important success factor of eID and e-signature solu-
tions. For mobile eID and e-signature solutions, the
following aspects need to be considered in particular
in order to achieve an appropriate level of usability:
R3a:
Avoidance of installations: Usable solutions
must not require the user to obtain, install, and
maintain additional hardware or software, as
this causes additional effort.
R3b:
Platform and device independence: Usable
solutions must not be restricted to certain com-
puting platforms, operating systems, or end-
user devices, as users want to access services
everywhere and at any time irrespective of
their current execution environment.
R3c:
Location independence: Usable mobile eID
and e-signature solutions must not be bound
to a certain mobile network but must also be
accessible when roaming in foreign networks.
R4:
Security: Security is an important requirement, as mo-
bile eID and e-signature solutions are mainly applied
in security-sensitive ﬁelds of application such as e-
government or e-commerce. Hence, mobile solutions
must assure the same level of security as other two-
factor based eID and e-signature solutions and must
be able to comply with given legal requirements such
as the EU Signature Directive.
R5:
Easy and ﬂexible deployment and operation: From
the service operator’s point of view, mobile signature
solutions should support an easy and ﬂexible deploy-
ment as well as an efﬁcient operation, in order to save
installation, set-up, and operation costs.
Based on these requirements, we propose a generic and
adaptable mobile eID and e-signature solution, which removes
limitations of current solutions. We introduce and discuss the
concept of our solution in the next sections before providing
details on its implementation in Section VI.
IV.
ARCHITECTURE
As discussed in Section II, mobile eID and e-signature
solutions follow either a SIM-based or a server-based approach
to store eID data and to create electronic signatures. Other
approaches would be possible on smartphones but cannot
be applied on standard mobile phones due to their limited
capabilities. Considering the requirements deﬁned in Sec-
tion III, we have decided to follow a server-based approach
for our solution. This means, that a central hardware security
module (HSM) stores all eID data and computes electronic
signatures. Since solutions based on server-side signatures
have very limited hardware requirements on the user side,
they are comparatively cheap, user-friendly, and ﬂexible in
their deployment, as no roll-out of tokens is required (R2).
There are no up-front investments in dedicated SIM cards
and no requirements towards the MNOs, hence, the targeted
user group is not limited to a single, or certain MNOs.
Advantages of server-based signature-creation approaches in
terms of usability and user acceptance have also been discussed
by Zefferer et al. in [4]. Thus, reliance on a server-based
approach assures that requirements regarding usability (R3)
are met.
A theoretic concept of a server-based mobile signature
solution and a solution to store users private keys in a secure
manner on a remote server has been proposed by Orthacker et
al. [12] in 2010. The proposed solution fulﬁlls the requirements
of qualiﬁed electronic signatures as deﬁned by EU Directive
1999/93/EC [10], which emphasizes the suitability of this
concept for security-critical application scenarios. Further-
more, a server-based mobile eID and e-signature solution that
is compliant to the EU Directive 1999/93/EC has been in
productive operation in Austria for several years. This provides
evidence that server-based solutions are capable to meet given
security requirements (R4).
On a high level view, our solution deﬁnes the three
processes: registration, activation and usage. These processes
have different properties regarding computational effort and
security constraints. During registration, which is mainly a
matter of legal and organizational requirements, the identity
of the user is veriﬁed. Usually, it is sufﬁcient to perform the
registration only once per user. During activation, a new eID
and a signing key and certiﬁcate are created for a registered
user. Activation is required once per life span of an eID. In
the usage process, created eIDs and signing keys are used by
the user for authentication purposes and to create electronic
signatures. Details of the three processes will be provided in
the following section.
The architecture of our mobile eID and e-signature so-
lution, which is shown in Fig. 1, basically reﬂects the three
processes deﬁned above. The entire architecture is split into
an inner part and an outer part. Components implementing
functionality of the activation and the usage processes are
divided between these two parts. As shown in Fig. 1, each
part has its own database to store required internal data.
This way, the architecture is mainly composed of two
databases and the four core components Activation Outer,
Activation Inner, Usage Outer, and Usage Inner. The split
between inner and outer components is a security feature as it
reduces the impact of a data loss in case a service connected
to the outer world gets compromised. Communication between
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

outer and inner components happens via a limited, pre-deﬁned
set of commands over an encrypted channel. The separation
of the core components allows for a very ﬂexible deployment
where, e.g., the activation parts can run on different machines,
a different network or, if the business process allows/demands
it, without a remote access at all. Additionally, access rights
can be granted more restrictively, as only the activation process
requires write access to many ﬁelds in the databases. On
the other hand, it is theoretically also possible to deploy the
complete service on a single machine, if this is the preferred
deployment scenario. This way, the chosen architecture meets
the requirements of security (R4) and also the requirements
for easy and ﬂexible deployment, and efﬁcient operation (R5).
Internet
Shadow Database
Private Database
Person Records
Activation
Outer
Activation
Inner
Usage
Outer
Usage
Inner
HSM
OTP
Gateway
SIR
Web Service
Person
Register
Certiﬁcation
Authority
Figure 1: Overview of Core Components
In addition to the four core components, the proposed
architecture additionally deﬁnes two internal and two external
components. The external component OTP Gateway is required
during the activation and the usage processes to send OTPs
to users. The internal component SIR Web Service is used
during the registration phase and is part of our solution.
The Person Register and the Certiﬁcation Authority (CA) are
services that are required during the activation process. While
the CA is an external component, the Person Register is an
internal component, which usually connects to an external
database. By clearly separating potential external components
from the core components of our solution, we can meet
the requirement for ﬂexibility regarding external components
already on architectural level (R1). The three processes, which
build up our solution and cover its functionality as well as all
involved components are described in the following section in
detail.
V.
PROCESSES
The functionality of the proposed technology-agnostic
mobile eID and e-signature solution is basically covered by the
the processes, registration, activation and usage. The purpose
of these processes is discussed in the following subsections in
more detail.
A. Registration Process
During the registration process, the identity of a user is
veriﬁed. Each user has to run the registration process once,
before being able to use the proposed solution. In order to
allow for a ﬂexible setup of the registration process and to
cover a broad range of legal and organizational requirements
regarding the registration process, the registration process
has been designed to support different types of registration.
In particular, the following types of registration have been
deﬁned. These types of registration cover use cases from
the e-government domain as well as use cases from related
domains such as e-commerce or e-business. Also, the proposed
architecture is ﬂexible enough to allow for an easy integration
of further alternative registration types, in case this is required
by the given use case.
•
Registration via registration ofﬁcer: The registration
ofﬁcer (RO) is a trusted user, who veriﬁes the identity
of the user face-to-face using ofﬁcial IDs, e.g., a pass-
port. After manual veriﬁcation of the user’s identity,
the RO manually registers the user in the system.
•
Self registration: Self registration is carried out by
the user herself with the help of an existing eID (e.g.,
a smart card). The systems veriﬁes the user’s ID by
means of the provided eID and afterwards registers
the user.
•
Ofﬂine registration: To support ofﬂine registration,
the proposed solution supports registration of users
via so-called Standard Identiﬁcation Records (SIR).
A SIR contains information to identify a person,
information about the ID used to verify the identity
of the applicant, a binding towards a hardware token,
i.e., a mobile phone for the use case at hand, and the
digital signature of a RO or a trusted partner, e.g., a
bank or a university. During the registration process,
the system veriﬁes the validity of a provided SIR that
has been created ofﬂine, i.e. checks that the signature
is valid and that the signer of the SIR is a legitimate
RO or trusted partner.
Support of different types of registration allows for a very
ﬂexible setup of the registration process and covers a broad
range of legal and organizational requirements regarding the
registration process. This, in turn, contributes to a ﬂexible
operation of the proposed solution, which has been identiﬁed
as key requirement (R5).
B. Activation Process
After successful registration, users can run the activation
process to create a new eID. Our solution supports multiple
eIDs for each user. Hence, the activation process can be run
multiple times by each user. During the activation process, the
unique identiﬁer of the applicant is bound to the mobile phone,
or more precisely, to the signing certiﬁcate that is issued during
the activation process.
To activate a new eID, the applicant has to prove posses-
sion of the speciﬁed mobile phone. This is achieved by means
of OTPs that are sent to the user through an OTP Gateway.
When the user has proven possession of her mobile phone,
a signing key-pair is generated for the user inside the server-
side HSM. The public key and the ﬁltering criteria to ﬁnd the
applicant, e.g., name and date of birth, is sent to the Person
Register. The Person Register is a component that connects to a
database containing potential users of the service. Depending
on the deployment and application scenario, this can be an
existing ofﬁcial database like a central register of residence
maintained by a public authority, an existing domain-speciﬁc
database like the database of employees of a private-sector
company, or a database speciﬁcally for this service that grows
with every new registration.
If the user has been found unambiguously in the database,
the Person Register returns a signed data structure that contains
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

the unique eID of the applicant within the register and the
public key of the created signature key-pair. Thus, it is possible
to link a signature to a person for means of identiﬁcation
without the need to embed the unique eID directly in the
signing certiﬁcate. By clearly separating eID functionality from
e-signature functionality, users’ privacy is assured. A similar
concept is already successfully applied in existing national eID
solutions [16].
Subsequently, a end-user certiﬁcate is requested from
the certiﬁcation authority (CA). The certiﬁcate, the wrapped
private key, and the created eID data are stored encrypted in
the database. The encryption of user data is based on a secret
signature password, which the applicant chooses during the
activation process. Our solution relies on hybrid encryption
schemes, in order to encrypt data on behalf of the user
without knowledge of the signature password. The decryption,
however, requires the consent of the user, which she gives by
providing the signature password. By choosing different signa-
ture passwords, a user can activate different eIDs for the same
mobile phone number. Each eID can be managed separately.
This enables users to have eIDs for different purposes, e.g.,
private and ofﬁcial purposes.
C. Usage Process
After successful completion of the activation process, the
user can use the created eID and signing key to securely and
conveniently authenticate at services and to create electronic
signatures. To issue an electronic signature, the user has to
enter her phone number and signature password. The signature
password is used to decrypt a private key that is part of the
hybrid encryption mentioned above. Thus, neither the activa-
tion of the user’s signature key has to take place before the
two-factor authentication is complete, nor must the signature
password be stored in a session.
Next, the service sends a OTP via the OTP Gateway to
verify possession of the mobile phone. After the user has
been successfully authenticated, the user data is read from
the database and decrypted using the user’s private key of the
hybrid encryption. Then, the still-wrapped private key of the
signing key-pair is loaded into the HSM where it is unwrapped.
Finally, the unwrapped key is used to create an electronic
signature. After successful completion of the signature-creation
process, the unwrapped key is discarded.
VI.
EVALUATION
Based on the proposed architecture, we implemented a
prototype to evaluate and demonstrate the applicability of
our solution. We built our implementation on a set of well-
known and production-ready frameworks and libraries. The
foundation of all modules is the Spring Framework [17],
which greatly supports the development of modular and ﬂex-
ible software solutions. Access to databases happens through
Hibernate [18], an object-relational mapping (ORM) library.
Thus, the access to a database is mostly independent from
its implementation. This gives us the freedom to adapt the
databases to the needs of a certain deployment scenario. For
cryptographic operations we use the IAIK JCE and iSaSiLk
libraries [19]. Messages between the modules are exchanged
using Apache ActiveMQ [20]. As means to deliver OTPs
our implementation uses random transaction numbers (TAN)
delivered by an SMS gateway.
To assure its security, we have assessed our implementa-
tion by means of a security analysis. To follow an approved
approach, the implementation has been evaluated regarding the
most recent critical risks according to OWASP [21] using a
white-box testing approach. This approach allows the auditor
having knowledge of the internal structure of the project, like
the knowledge of libraries and frameworks in use, as well as
having access to the source code.
The developed and assessed implementation covers the
three processes deﬁned in Section V. The realization of these
processes is discussed in the following subsections.
A. Registration Process
In this step, the applicant has to prove her identity. Our
implementation supports the three types of registration deﬁned
in Section V. In a traditional setup this happens at the ofﬁce
of the RO. For this scenario, our implementation provides a
web-based UI, through which the RO can register the applicant
in the system.
However, in some situations it might be beneﬁcial if the
RO travels from applicant to applicant (ofﬂine registration).
We developed different front-ends to simplify this type of
registration. Initially, we developed a simple, yet compre-
hensive, stand-alone application based on Spring MVC. This
application can be used on mobile devices in case of traveling
ROs and supports the RO in creating SIRs. Furthermore, we
developed a proof-of-concept where a traveling RO takes the
picture of the ID of an applicant. The required data is extracted
using optical character recognition (OCR). Additionally, our
implementation provides a web service that accepts these
externally created SIRs.
To cover the third registration type, our implementation
provides a UI for the applicant. This UI allows the applicant
to carry out a self registration in case she has already a trusted
eID (e.g., smart card).
B. Activation Process
In this step, the applicant creates and activates a new
mobile eID. A pre-registered applicant can perform this step
on her own and independent of the registration process.
The activation process offers again a web-based interface.
It has been developed using JSF 2.1 [22] and Primefaces [23].
The decision to use a different technology to create the UI
is based on the rich set of UI components that is part of
Primefaces. Thus, a ﬂexible, easy to use, role/permission-based
interface has been developed in a short amount of time.
Apart from the actual activation process, this module
offers interfaces for several other tasks. Registration ofﬁcers
can perform activations on behalf of someone else. Hence, the
activation process has been extended by the registration tasks.
Furthermore, we developed interfaces to manage eIDs, both for
the owner and a support team. An administration UI allows the
deﬁnition and assignment of roles.
C. Usage Process
The usage process was developed alongside the activation
and therefore is built on the same technologies, i.e., Java Server
Faces [22] and Primefaces [23]. The interfaces are reduced
to the bare minimum required for authenticating users and
authorizing the creation of signatures. This facilitates an easy
integration of our solution into arbitrary third-party applica-
tions. The two main forms for the two-factor authentication
are shown in Fig. 2.
First, the signer provides her phone number and signature
password. If the authentication was successful, two random
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Telephone
Number:
Signature
Password:
English
English
Logon
Logon
Cancel
Cancel
(a) Login
Reference value:: DL5f4puLO7
signature data
TAN: 
resend SMS
resend SMS
Sign
Sign
Cancel
Cancel
(b) TAN Veriﬁcation
Figure 2: Interface of the Usage Process
values are generated: the reference value, which is shown in the
TAN veriﬁcation form (Fig. 2(b)) and in the SMS to provide
a link between TAN and signature, and the TAN itself, which
is only sent by SMS.
After verifying the reference value received by SMS
against the reference value prompted in the TAN veriﬁcation
form, the user enters the received TAN. If the correct TAN
is entered, the signature is created. This form also provides a
link to display the signature data, to verify what data will be
signed.
VII.
CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have proposed an enhanced eID and e-
signature solution. The practical applicability of the proposed
solution has been successfully evaluated and demonstrated by
means of a concrete implementation. A test deployment of
this implementation is publicly available online and can be
accessed for test purposes [24].
By relying on a server-side HSM for storage of users’
eID data and for realization of cryptographic functionality, our
solution is one of few mobile eID and e-signature solutions that
rely on a server-based approach. In contrast to existing server-
based eID and e-signature solutions, our solution has not been
tailored to requirements of a speciﬁc use case or application
scenario but has been based on an abstract architecture. This
assures that the proposed solution is applicable for different
use cases and ﬁelds of operation.
Furthermore, the proposed solution shows that secure two-
factor based user authentication can be achieved in a user-
friendly way and does not necessarily require the cumbersome
handling of additional security tokens such as smart cards.
This way, the proposed solution provides a promising way to
enhance the usability of transactional e-government services
while maintaining a high level of security.
Due to its easy integrability and high degree of usability,
the proposed solution is not limited to e-government-related
use cases. It can also be an attractive alternative for less
security-critical
services
such
as
e-commerce
or
social
networking. If also these services take the opportunity to
provide users a higher degree of security while maintaining
a high degree of usability by integrating the proposed
mobile eID and e-signature solution, insecure password-based
authentication schemes will hopefully be history in the future.
Acknowledgements: The authors have been supported
by the European Commission Seventh Framework Programme
through project FutureID, grant agreement number 318424.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Ives, K. R. Walsh, and H. Schneider, “The domino effect of
password reuse,” Commun. ACM, vol. 47, no. 4, Apr. 2004, pp.
75–78. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/975817.975820
[2]
D. Florencio and C. Herley, “A large-scale study of web password
habits,” in Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on World
Wide Web, ser. WWW ’07.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2007,
pp. 657–666. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/1242572.
1242661
[3]
S. Arora, “National e-id card schemes: A european overview,” Inf.
Secur. Tech. Rep., vol. 13, no. 2, May 2008, pp. 46–53. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.istr.2008.08.002
[4]
T. Zefferer and V. Krnjic, “Usability evaluation of electronic signature
based e-government solutions,” in Proceedings of the IADIS Interna-
tional Conference WWW/INTERNET 2012, 2012, pp. 227 – 234.
[5]
A. Ruiz-Martinez, D. Sanchez-Martinez, M. Martinez-Montesinos,
and
A.
F.
Gomez-Skarmeta,
“A
survey
of
electronic
signature
solutions in mobile devices.” JTAER, vol. 2, no. 3, 2007, pp.
94–109. [Online]. Available: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/journals/jtaer/
jtaer2.html#Ruiz-MartinezSMG07
[6]
“Handy Signatur und Buergerkarte,” 2013, [retrieved: November,
2013]. [Online]. Available: http://www.buergerkarte.at/
[7]
“Estonia eID,” 2013, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.id.ee/?lang=en
[8]
“Belgium eID,” 2013, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://eid.belgium.be/en/
[9]
“Spanish eID,” 2013, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.dnielectronico.es/
[10]
European Parliament and Council, “Directive 1999/93/ec on a commu-
nity framework for electronic signatures,” December 1999.
[11]
E. Pisko, “Mobile electronic signatures: Progression from mobile
service to mobile application unit.” in ICMB.
IEEE Computer
Society, 2007, p. 6. [Online]. Available: http://dblp.uni-trier.de/db/conf/
icmb/icmb2007.html#Pisko07
[12]
C. Orthacker, M. Centner, and C. Kittl, “Qualiﬁed mobile server
signature,” in Security and Privacy – Silver Linings in the Cloud,
ser. IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology,
K. Rannenberg, V. Varadharajan, and C. Weber, Eds., vol. 330.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, p. 103–111. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-15257-3_10
[13]
“Estonia mobile eID,” 2013, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online].
Available: http://mobiil.id.ee/
[14]
“Norway eID,” 2013, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
https://www.bankid.no/
[15]
“Austrian Handy Signatur,” 2013, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online].
Available: https://www.handy-signatur.at/
[16]
H. Leitold, A. Hollosi, and R. Posch, “Security architecture of the
austrian citizen card concept,” in Proceedings of 18th Annual Computer
Security Applications Conference (ACSAC’2002), Las Vegas, 9-13
December 2002. pp. 391-400, IEEE Computer Society, ISBN 0-7695-
1828-1, ISSN 1063-9527., 2002.
[17]
“Spring Framework,” 2014, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online].
Available: http://projects.spring.io/spring-framework/
[18]
“Hibernate,” 2014, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://hibernate.org/
[19]
“IAIK JCE,” 2014, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://jce.iaik.tugraz.at/
[20]
“Apache Active MQ,” 2014, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online].
Available: http://activemq.apache.org/
[21]
The Open Web Application Security Project, “Owasp top 10 - 2013 the
ten most critical web application security risks,” 2013.
[22]
“Java Server Faces,” 2014, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online].
Available: https://javaserverfaces.java.net/
[23]
“Primefaces,” 2014, [accessed November, 2013]. [Online]. Available:
http://www.primefaces.org/
[24]
“Test
deployment
of
our
implementation,”
2014,
[retrieved:
November, 2013]. [Online]. Available: https://pheasant.iaik.tugraz.at:
8443/Registration/
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

