Improving the Ridge Based Fingerprint Recognition Method Using Sweat Pores
Marcus de Assis Angeloni, Aparecido Nilceu Marana
Department of Computing, Faculty of Sciences, UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista
Bauru, S˜ao Paulo, Brazil
{marcus, nilceu}@fc.unesp.br
Abstract—Among several biometric traits possible to be used
for people identiﬁcation, ﬁngerprint is still the most used.
Current automated ﬁngerprint identiﬁcation systems are based
on ridge patterns and minutiae, classiﬁed as ﬁrst and second
level features, respectively. However, the development of new
ﬁngerprint sensors and the growing demand for more secure
systems are leading to the use of additional discriminative
ﬁngerprint characteristics known as third level features, such
as the sweat pores. Recent researches on ﬁngerprint recognition
have focused on ﬁngerprint fragments, in which methods based
only on ﬁrst and second level features tend to obtain low
recognition rates. This paper proposes a robust method de-
veloped for ﬁngerprint recognition from ﬁngerprint fragments
based on ridges and sweat pores. We have extended a ridge-
based ﬁngerprint recognition method previously proposed in
the literature, based on Hough Transform, by incorporating
sweat pores information in the matching step. Experimental
results showed that although the reduction of Equal Error
Rate is modest, a signiﬁcant improvement was observed when
analyzing the FMR100 and FMR1000 metrics, which are more
suitable for high security applications. For these two metrics,
the proposed approach obtained a reduction superior to 10% of
the rates, when compared to the original ridge-based approach.
Keywords-biometrics; ﬁngerprints; ridges; sweat pores
I. INTRODUCTION
In the modern society, several situations from secure
login in information systems to prevention of terrorist at-
tacks, make the personal identiﬁcation in high safety mode
a necessity. Traditionally, the common ways of personal
identiﬁcation are through possession, such as cards, keys, or
documents, and knowledge, such as password or personal
data.
However, these approaches present drawbacks, since a
possession can be lost, stolen or used fraudulently by third
parties, and knowledge can be forgotten or inferred by oth-
ers. These vulnerabilities have been exploited by fraudsters,
causing major leaks in the vaults of banks, consumers and
service providers. As an alternative to these identiﬁcation
methods emerges Biometrics. Biometrics is the science of
recognizing the identity of a person based on its physical
or behavioral attributes such as face, ﬁngerprints, voice, and
iris [1].
Among many biometric traits, ﬁngerprint is the most
widely deployed biometric characteristic, because of its
well-known distinctiveness (individuality) and persistence
properties, as well as the low cost and maturity of products.
A ﬁngerprint is the exterior appearance of the ﬁngertip
epidermis, produced when a ﬁnger is pressed against a plain
surface [2]. The most evident structural characteristic of a
ﬁngerprint is the pattern of interleaved ridges and valleys [3],
which appears in a ﬁngerprint image as dark lines (ridges)
or bright lines (valleys).
Fingerprint features are generally categorized into three
levels [4][5]. First level features are the macro details of
the ﬁngerprint, such as the ridge ﬂow, singular points, and
pattern type. Second level features are the minutiae, such as
ridge endings and bifurcations. Finally, third level features
include some ﬁnnest attributes of the ridges, such as ridge
path deviation, width, shape, pores, edge contour, incipient
ridges, breaks, scars, and other permanent details [4]. Some
examples of these three ﬁngerprint level features are showed
in Figure 1.
Closed pores 
Open pores 
Ridge 
ending 
Ridge 
bifurcation 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
Figure 1.
Some examples of ﬁngerprint level features. (a) First level
features (ridge orientation ﬁeld and singular points), (b) Second level
features (minutiae), and (c) Third level features (pores).
Statistical analysis show that ﬁrst level features do not
contain enough information to identify a person, however,
they can be used for ﬁngerprint classiﬁcation and to reduce
the search space. Second level features have sufﬁcient dis-
criminatory power to establish the individuality of ﬁnger-
prints [6], and are considered permanents, immutables, and
uniques by forensic experts. Likewise the second level, third
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

level ﬁngerprint features are uniques for each individual, that
is, they can provide discriminatory information for human
identiﬁcation [3].
In general, the current Automatic Fingerprint Identiﬁca-
tion Systems (AFIS) are based only on ﬁrst and second ﬁn-
gerprint features [7], and require 500 dpi ﬁngerprint images
in order to extract the ﬁngerprint characteristics. However,
the Scientiﬁc Working Group on Friction Ridge Analysis,
Study and Technology (SWGFAST) recommended, in 2005,
the use of higher resolution images in order to allow the
inclusion of third level features and follow the FBI standards
[4].
Due to the new standards, the advent of high resolution
ﬁngerprint sensors, and the increasing requirements on the
accuracy and robustness of the ﬁngerprint recognition, re-
searches have been developed to investigate and quantify
the discriminatory power of third level ﬁngerprint features
[5][7][8][9].
Third level features are oftenly investigated by forensic
experts when the other two levels are not enough to decide
an identity, mainly when they are analysing ﬁngerprint
fragments. In such cases, the overlapping area of the two ﬁn-
gerprints being compared can be very small and, therefore,
the reduced number of paired minutiae may be insufﬁcient
to permit a reliable ﬁngerprint recognition [3].
With the trend of the reduction size of sensors in sev-
eral applications, especially for mobile devices, the proper
treatment of ﬁngerprint fragments has great relevance.
The aim of this work is to propose and assess a third level
features based ﬁngerprint matching method, which extends
the ridge-based ﬁngerprint recognition method proposed by
[10]. This new method incorporates sweat pores information
in the ﬁngerprint recognition stage, in order to improve the
robustness and the reliability of the identiﬁcation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Sec-
tion II, we present a review of pore extraction methods.
In Section III, the ridge-based ﬁngerprint matching using
Hough Transform, proposed by Marana and Jain [10], is
described. In Section IV, we present the proposed approach
for ﬁngerprint recognition based on sweat pores, the eval-
uation database, and the assessment protocol. In Section
V, we present the obtained results. Finally, in Section VI,
we present the conclusions of this work and point future
research directions.
II. REVIEW OF PORE EXTRACTION METHODS
The earliest pore extraction methods were based on skele-
tonization. Stosz and Alyea [11] used a custom-build sensor,
whose resolution were around 2000 dpi. In their method,
a preprocessing step is ﬁrstly applied, where the image
is smoothed, binarized, and thinned to produce the raw
skeleton image. From the skeleton, the terminations and the
bifurcations can be easily found by examining the neigh-
borhood of a pixel component of the skeleton. Termination
points have only one neighbor and bifurcation points have
three neighbors, assuming that the skeleton pixels are eight-
connected [11]. The pore detection is performed by tracking
the skeleton. Each termination point is used as a starting
location to track the skeleton. The tracking stage requires
analyzing the current element, storing its coordinates, and
determining the location of the next element in the path.
The tracking algorithm proceeds until one of the stop criteria
is satisﬁed: i) another termination point is detected, ii) a
branching point is detected, and iii) the path length exceeds
the maximum allowed value.
Afterwards, Kryszczuk et al. [12] worked with ﬁngerprint
fragments, in order to assess the performance of ﬁngerprint
recognition applied on images captured by small sensors,
which are a tendency. They proposed an authentication sys-
tem that can handle ﬁngerprint image with reduced dimen-
sions, but with high resolution. In order to align the ridges
structures from the template and test images, ﬁrst the ridge
structures are cleaned using Gabor wavelet ﬁltering, and then
they calculate the 2D normalized correlation coefﬁcient for
every possible location of the fragment within the reference
image. The decision on which part of the template image
matches the test fragment is done by ﬁnding the highest
correlation factor [12]. In order to detect the pores, they
binarize the original grayscale image and look for closed
pores, which are entirely surrounded by the ridge pixels and
appear as holes in the ridges. Some heuristics are applied to
remove spurious pores. So, to detect open pores (pores that
intersects with a valley between two ridges), they skeletonize
the valleys of the binarized image and compute the distance
between the end of each spur and the skeleton of valleys.
From the experiments the authors observed that the smaller
are the ﬁngerprint fragments, the better are the beneﬁts of
using sweat pores for ﬁngerprint recognition.
However, as pointed by Jain et al. [4] the ﬁrst methods
proposed for ﬁngerprint recognition based on pores have
some drawbacks: i) skeletonization leads to some limitations
due to its strong dependence on the image quality: ii)
the alignment is computationally expensive; iii) they were
validated by using small databases; and iv) only custom
built optical sensors (2000 dpi), rather than commercially
available live-scan sensors (1000 dpi) were used in these
studies.
The next generation of pores detection methods were
based on isotropic ﬁlters. Ray et al. [13] proposed a method
to be applied on grayscale ﬁngerprint images of 500 dpi, us-
ing an approach based on a modiﬁed 2D Gaussian function.
First, this method calculates an error map for the image.
Then, the map is binarized so that only areas of high pore
probability are retained. Pores are detected in these areas as
a local minimum in a neighborhood.
Posteriorly, Jain et al. [4][8] proposed a new pore detec-
tion method based on the observation that pore positions
often give high negative frequency response as the intensity
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

values change abruptly from white to black. They used
Gabor ﬁlters to enhance the ridges, this way separating
ridges from valleys (since pores are naturally distributed
along the ridges). And, to capture this abrupt changes, they
apply the Mexican hat wavelet transform with an experimen-
tally deﬁned scale parameter. By adding the responses of
both ﬁlters, they obtained an enhancement of pores, as well
as of the borders between ridges and valleys, since pores
are naturally distributed only along the ridges. Lastly, an
empirically determined threshold (= 58) is applied to extract
pores with blob size less than 40 pixels.
More recently, Zhao et al. [5] have investigated the spatial
appearances of pores on ﬁngerprint images, and have showed
that some representative pore structures are not isotropic. In
these cases, isotropic ﬁlter-based approaches do not work
properly. Another limitation of isotropic approaches is that
the pore extractor can not adapt itself, and the pore scales
and ridge/valley widths can vary greatly from one ﬁngerprint
to another, or from one region to another in the same ﬁnger-
print [5]. Regarding this, Zhao et al. [5] proposed a Dynamic
Anisotropic Pore Model (DAPM), which has two parameters
to adjust: scale and orientation. These two parameters are
adaptively determined according to the ridge frequency and
orientation, respectively. The DAPM is deﬁned as:

P0(i, j) = e(−j2/2σ2)cos

template, using the Hough space peaks; ii) Comparison: in
which the ridge matching score (RS) is calculated from the
ridge alignment matrix C as follows:
RS =
2
 
n1
P
i=1
n2
P
j=1
C(i, j)2
!
a + b
(3)
where n1 and n2 mean the numbers of ridges of the query
and template images, respectively, and a and b are deﬁned
by Equation 4 and 5.
a =
n1
X
i=1
(Rq(i)nop)2
(4)
b =
n2
X
i=1
(Rt(i)nop)2
(5)
where Rq(i)nop is the number of pixels of the i-th ridge of
query ﬁngerprint, and Rt(i)nop is the number of pixels of
the i-th ridge of the template ﬁngerprint. Only the ridges of
one ﬁngerprint image that intercepts at least one ridge of the
other ﬁngerprint image are considered in the computation of
a and b.
Figure 4 shows the matrix of ridge alignments obtained
from a genuine and an impostor ﬁngerprint matching. In the
genuine case, high-valued peaks are mostly spread along the
matrix’s main diagonal. On the other hand, in the impostor
case, low-valued peaks are spread over the matrix [10].
(a) 
(b) 
Figure 4.
Matrix of ridge alignments obtained from (a) genuine ﬁngerprint
matching, and (b) impostor ﬁngerprint matching.
IV. PROPOSED METHOD
Analyzing the ridge-based method proposed by Marana
and Jain [10], we can observe that one of its weaknesses is
that some impostor matchings can generate high scores, es-
pecially when only fragments of ﬁngerprints are compared.
The aim of this work is to extend this ridge based ﬁn-
gerprint recognition method using sweat pores information
in the ﬁngerprint matching step, focusing on fragments of
ﬁngerprints. The method used to extract pores is the DAPM,
proposed by Zhao et al. [5]. Figure 5 presents a diagram
illustrating the proposed approach.
Firstly, there is a preprocessing step, based on Hong et al.
work [14], in order to enhance the ﬁngerprint input images,
Ridges	  
extrac-on	  
Ridges	  
alignment	  
Ridges	  
extrac-on	  
Pores	  
extrac-on	  
on	  the	  
overlapped	  
area	  
Pores	  
extrac-on	  
on	  the	  
overlapped	  
area	  
Ridges	  
comparison	  
Final	  Score	  
Pores	  
comparison	  
Figure 5. Proposed approach using two kinds of third level features (ridges
and pores).
and to extract the orientation ﬁeld and the frequency from
the ridges.
The preprocessing output and the parameters extracted
from the ridges are used by both methods, the ridge-
based and the pore-based. So, to the ridge-based ﬁngerprint
recognition method, we down-sample the enhanced images
and then execute the extraction, alignment and matching
steps.
The alignment obtained by the ridge-based method is
used to register the query and the template images. Then,
after the alignment, the sweat pores are extracted only in
the overlapped area. We use the original image instead of
its downsampled version, because pore detection requires
high resolution images. The ridge orientation and frequency
obtained in the preprocessing step are used to compose the
parameters of the DAPM. After the pore extraction and the
post-processing, we label the pores according to the ridge
where they are located.
For the pore matchings, we have adopted a correlation-
based method, and, due to the natural ﬁngerprint distortion,
we use a bounding box around the detected pores in the tem-
plate image in order to establish the pairwise correspondence
with the detected pores in the query image. To increase the
conﬁdence of the pore matchings, we use the matched ridges
information calculated by means of Marana and Jain method
[10], taking the peaks of the ridge alignment matrix C and
analysing the pores labels.
The pore matching score is calculated following the
Equation 6.
PS =
|MP|
min(Tnop, Qnop)
(6)
where MP is the matched pores set, |MP| denotes the
number of elements in the set MP, Tnop and Qnop are the
number of pores found in the ﬁngerprints overlapped area
from the template and query images, respectively.
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

Lastly, the scores calculated for the ridges and the pores
matchings are combined through the weighted sum scheme.
To assess the proposed approach, we have used a public
database containing partial ﬁngerprints with high resolution.
In the next subsections, we describe the database, the pro-
tocol, and the score fusion strategy adopted in this work.
A. Database
To assess the proposed approach we have used The Hong
Kong Polytechnic University (PolyU) High-Resolution-
Fingerprint (HRF) Database [15]. We have used the test set
from the database PolyU HRF DBI, which consists of 1480
partial ﬁngerprint images of 148 ﬁngers. These ﬁngerprints
were collected in two sessions, separated by two weeks
apart. In each session, ﬁve images of each ﬁnger were
captured, using a custom built sensor, with resolution of
1200 dpi, generating ﬁngerprint images of 320x240 pixels.
When the database was captured, the participants were asked
to naturally put their ﬁngers on the prism of the scanner,
without any exaggeration, in order to avoid severe ﬁngerprint
deformation.
The PolyU HRF database is very challenging. Besides
presenting the most common problems, such as non-linear
distortions, rotations, and translations, the overlapping area
of the partial ﬁngerprint is very small, making difﬁcult
to register properly the ﬁngerprints. Figure 6 shows some
samples of the PolyU HRF DBI test set.
Figure 6.
Some samples from the PolyU HRF DBI test set ﬁngerprint
images.
B. Protocol
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed
method for ﬁngerprint recognition based on ridges and pores,
we have performed experiments according to the following:
• Genuine comparisons: each ﬁngerprint image of the
second session was compared with the ﬁve ﬁngerprint
images of the ﬁrst session of the same individual,
totalizing 3,700 genuine comparisons;
• Impostor comparisons: the ﬁrst ﬁngerprint image of the
second session of an individual was compared with the
ﬁrst ﬁngerprint image from the ﬁrst session of all other
individuals, totalizing 21,756 impostor comparisons.
With all genuine and impostor matching scores we have
calculated three metrics: EER (Equal Error Rate), the error
rate at a given threshold where the False Match Rate (FMR)
and False Non-Match Rate (FNMR) have the same value,
FMR100 (value of FNMR for FMR = 1/100), and FMR1000
(value of FNMR for FMR = 1/1000) [16].
C. Score analysis
In the experiments, we have analyzed the recognition
accuracy for three situations: i) using only ridge matching
scores; ii) using only pore matching scores (but, using the
ridges for alignment and labeling); and iii) using the fusion
of ridge and pore matching scores, through the weighted
sum scheme, calculated as follow:
FS = ω.RS + (1 − ω).PS,
(7)
where RS is the ridge matching score, PS is the pore
matching score, ω is the weight for RS (ω ∈ [0, 1]).
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
Figure 7 presents the EER using only ridges (ω = 0), pores
(ω = 1), and varying the associated weight for each score.
In the best case, the EER decrease from 23,50% (original
ridge-based algorithm) to 22,30% using pores information
together.
Figure 8 shows the FMR100 and the FMR1000, varying
the weight of pores with respect to ridges. As shown in this
Figure, combining the scores, the proposed approach reaches
signiﬁcant improvements, with reductions above 10% com-
pared to the original ridge-based method. The original ridge-
based method obtained 87,03% of FMR1000 and 68,70% of
FMR100. After the fusion with pores matching scores, the
FMR1000 reduced to 76,21%, and the FMR100 reduced to
57,81%.
21.6	  
21.8	  
22	  
22.2	  
22.4	  
22.6	  
22.8	  
23	  
23.2	  
23.4	  
23.6	  
0	  
0.1	  
0.2	  
0.3	  
0.4	  
0.5	  
0.6	  
0.7	  
0.8	  
0.9	  
1	  
EER(%)	  
Weight	  of	  pores	  with	  respect	  to	  ridges	  
Figure 7.
The EER of proposed approach when different weights to pore
score are used.
The high error rates obtained in the experiments may be
explained by the adopted database, which, as said, is very
117
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

52	  
56	  
60	  
64	  
68	  
72	  
76	  
80	  
84	  
88	  
0	  
0.1	  
0.2	  
0.3	  
0.4	  
0.5	  
0.6	  
0.7	  
0.8	  
0.9	  
1	  
(%)	  
Weight	  of	  pores	  with	  respect	  to	  ridges	  
FMR100	  
FMR1000	  
Figure 8.
The FRM100 and the FMR1000 of proposed approach when
different weights to pore score are used.
challenging, since it is composed of ﬁngerprint fragments,
which lead to small overlapping areas during the ﬁngerprint
matchings.
Table I reports the experimental results obtained on PolyU
HRF Database following the protocol described in section
IV-B. The best result was obtained when the ridge matching
scores were fused with the pore matching scores.
Table I
COMPARATIVE RESULTS OBTAINED IN THE EXPERIMENTS.
Rate
Ridge-based
Pore-based
Ridge and Pore-based
EER
23,50%
23,22%
22,30%
FMR100
68,70%
63,19%
57,81%
FMR1000
87,03%
80,97%
76,21%
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
This paper presents a ﬁngerprint recognition technique
that uses two kinds of third level ﬁngerprint features:
ridges and sweat pores. The ridge-based ﬁngerprint matching
method, proposed by Marana and Jain [10], used as start
point, is extended to incorporate sweat pores information
in the matching step. The alignment obtained by the ridge-
based method is used to register the query and the template.
Then, the pores obtained from the ﬁngerprints, by using the
DAPM pore extraction method, are used in the matching step
to increase the conﬁdence and performance of the matching.
The proposed approach obtained a reduction of more than
10% in FMR100 and FMR1000, comparing with the original
ridge-based algorithm, when applied on a public database
composed of ﬁngerprint fragments. These results proved
that the use of sweat pores can improve the ﬁngerprint
recognition rates in applications where the ﬁngerprint sensor
has high resolution and a reduced sensing area.
In order to continue the investigation with sweat pores, we
intend to evaluate their use in other steps of the ﬁngerprint
recognition process, such as in the alignment. We also intend
to test and compare the current approach against commercial
minutiae-based methods, and investigate the best approaches
to combine ridges and pores based methods.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The
authors
would
like
to
thank
FAPESP
(proc.
2010/18123-3) and Capes for the ﬁnancial support. The au-
thors thank Professor Anil K. Jain and Dr. Qijun Zhao from
Michigan State University, for their valuable suggestions,
comments, and for sharing the DAPM pore extraction source
code.
REFERENCES
[1] A. K. Jain, P. Flynn and A. A. Ross, Handbook of Biometrics,
Springer-Verlag New York, Inc., 2007.
[2] D. Maltoni, D. Maio, A. K. Jain and S. Prabhakar, Handbook
of Fingerprint Recognition, 2nd ed.
Springer-Verlag New
York, Inc., 2009.
[3] D. R. Ashbaugh, Quantitative-Qualitative Friction Ridge
Analysis: An Introduction to Basic and Advanced Ridgeology,
CRC Press LLC, 1999.
[4] A. K. Jain, Y. Chen and M. Demirkus, Pores and Ridges:
High-Resolution Fingerprint Matching Using Level 3 Fea-
tures,
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 29 (1), pp. 15–27, 2007.
[5] Q. Zhao, D. Zhang, L. Zhang and N. Luo, Adaptive ﬁngerprint
pore modeling and extraction,
Pattern Recognition 43 (8),
pp. 2833–2844, 2010.
[6] M. Chaberski, Level 3 friction ridge research,
Biometric
Technology Today, vol. 16, 9–12, 2008.
[7] Q. Zhao and A. K. Jain, On the Utility of Extended Finger-
print Features: A Study on Pores,
IEEE Computer Society
Workshop on Biometrics, CVPR2010, pp. 9–16, 2010.
[8] A. K. Jain, Y. Chen and M. Demirkus, Pores and Ridges: Fin-
gerprint Matching Using Level 3 Features, 18th International
Conference on Pattern Recognition, ICPR’06, pp. 477–480,
2006.
[9] Q. Zhao, D. Zhang, L. Zhang and N. Luo, High resolution
partial ﬁngerprint alignment using pore-valley descriptors,
Pattern Recognition 43 (3), pp. 1050–1061, 2010.
[10] A. N. Marana and A. K. Jain, Ridge-Based Fingerprint
Matching Using Hough Transform, Proceedings of the XVIII
Brazilian Symposium on Computer Graphics and Image Pro-
cessing (SIBGRAPI), pp. 112–119, 2005.
[11] J. D.Stosz and L. A.Alyea, Automated System for Fingerprint
Authentication Using Pores and Ridge Structure, Proceedings
of SPIE Conf. Automatic Systems for the Identiﬁcation and
Inspection of Humans, pp. 210–223, 1994.
[12] K. Kryszczuk, A. Drygajlo and P. Morier, Extraction of
Level 2 and Level 3 Features for Fragmentary Fingerprints,
Proceedings of the 2nd COST Action 275 Workshop, pp. 83–
88, 2004.
118
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

[13] M. Ray, P. Meenen and R. Adhami, A Novel Approach
to Fingerprint Pore Extraction,
Proceedings of the 37th
Southeastern Symposium on System Theory, pp. 282–286,
2005.
[14] L. Hong, Y. Wan and A. K. Jain, Fingerprint Image En-
hancement: Algorithm and Performance Evaluation,
IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 20
(8), pp. 777–789, 1998.
[15] PolyU
HRF
Database:
The
Hong
Kong
Polytechnic
University
High
Resolution-Fingerprint
Database,
available
at
<http://www4.comp.polyu.edu.hk/
biomet-
rics/HRF/HRF.htm> 26.12.2012.
[16] R. Cappelli, D. Maio, D. Maltoni, J. L.Wayman and A. K.
Jain, Performance Evaluation of Fingerprint Veriﬁcation Sys-
tems,
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence 28 (1), pp. 3–18, 2006.
119
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

