Development of the Model of Dynamic Storage Distribution in Data Processing 
Centers 
 
Rashid Alakbarov 
Institute of Information Technology 
of ANAS, Baku, Azerbaijan 
rashid@iit.ab.az 
 
 
 
Fahrad Pashayev  
Institute of Control Systems after 
Academician A. Huseynov of 
ANAS, Baku, Azerbaijan 
pasha.farhad@gmail.com 
 
 
Mammad Hashimov 
Institute of Information Technology 
of ANAS, Baku, Azerbaijan 
m.hashimov@iit.ab.az 
 
Abstract—The paper reviews an optimal distribution of 
storage resources among the users in data processing 
centers. Stochastic model of the dynamic distribution of 
storage resources is proposed. The model ensures the use of 
storage resources without wasting. 
 
Keywords—data  processing center; cloud computing; storage 
capacity; Markov process; stochastic model. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Nowadays, computing and storage resources of personal 
computers are not sufficient for the solution of complex 
problems requiring big computing and storage resources 
such as real time modeling of physical and chemical 
processes, 
nuclear 
reactions, 
global 
atmospheric 
processes, economic development in various fields of 
science, as well as Cryptography, Geology, development 
of new drugs. Supercomputers with high performance 
computing and big storage are widely used in the above-
mentioned issues [1]. As a strategic product, the high 
price of supercomputers reduces its availability for many 
countries to be used in scientific and technical research. 
However, these countries have demand for big computing 
resources. On the other hand, computing and storage 
resources of the data processing centers connected to the 
computer networks are not used effectively. Researches 
show, that only 60-70% of computing and storage 
resources of computers manufactured by giant companies 
(Intel, IBM, Google, etc.) are used effectively [2]. In this 
case, remaining unused computing and storage resources 
of data processing centers can be used to solve complex 
problems. Applying remote access to the data processing 
centers in daily practice with the help of high speed 
communication channels open up new possibilities for the 
users. Now, the quantitative increase of opportunities of 
users to get information caused qualitative change in the 
organizational 
principles 
of 
distributed 
computing 
systems in the networks. 
At present, research is conducted out for an effective use 
of computing and storage resources of data processing 
centers with the help of Cloud Computing. Such systems 
with big computing and storage resources are based on 
computer 
networks, 
provided 
with 
high-speed 
communication channels. Cloud Computing enables 
organizations to use computing and storage resources of 
data processing centers more efficiently. The concept of 
Cloud 
Computing 
provides the development and 
utilization of infrastructure and software of computer 
technology in the network. With the help of this 
technology, the user data is stored and mined on Cloud 
Computing servers, at the same time, the results are 
viewed through browsers [3]. Cloud Computing allows 
the users to access powerful computing and storage 
resources, and at the same time, the user is not interested 
where these resources are located and installed. The paper 
is dedicated to the optimal distribution of storage 
resources among the users. The proposed model allows 
the data processing center to attract more users providing 
optimal distribution of available storage and system 
resources among the users. 
The content of the article is organized as follows:  
- State of the memory use in data center was set to 
change as Markov process;  
- The characteristics of Markov process of the memory 
usage change were identified;  
- Recommendations were given for the use of obtained 
results. 
II. DEVELOPING THE MODEL OF DYNAMIC STORAGE 
DISTRIBUTION IN DATA PROCESSING CENTERS 
Let us analyze the process of dynamic storage 
distribution among the users of the systems where 
Hypervisors are applied. The process of dynamic storage 
distribution is modeled as Markov process [4]-[7]. Let us 
suppose that M is the number of users specified in 
advance and suggesting storage need. In this case, m-th 
user (m ∈ [1, M]) uses Vm amount of memory. Thus, an 
amount of memory required by users is as follows: 
  ,   ,... ,    .                                                               (1) 
If Vt denotes storage volume that is used instantly at any t 
time 
      = 0,       = ∑
  
 
   
.                                   (2) 
Nevertheless, in practice, 
       ∑
  
 
   
 is almost impossible. In the peak of 
storage use it is practically as follows: 
                 .                                              (3) 
This may lead to attracting additional users. 
Each storage user can apply for storage at random 
moments of time, regardless of its physical identity and 
35
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

functionality. Therefore, the process of memory use is 
determined by a random Vt storage volume used instantly 
at any time t. In this case, state space of the process is 
defined by the storage of different capacity in use. The 
process of transition from one state to another does not 
depend on the transition path. This transition depends on 
the current state, and it is one of the signs of Markov 
process. It is sometimes called the process without 
memory. 
The second key feature of Markov processes the finite 
number of states. In our case, the required number of 
different volumes (states) is finite. Thus, M number of 
users can apply for storage in a short time interval (time 
instant) 0,1,2,... . Storage capacity defining the process 
state depends on these combinations. Obviously, n 
number of M users can be choosen from 
  
  = 
  
           methods. That is, different combinations 
    
  with n number of userscan be set up from M number 
of users. If n ∈[0; M] the number of all possible 
combinations can be as follows: 
K =   
     
   ...  +   
  + ... +    
                        (4) 
According to Newton binominal   [8]-[9]: 
As       =     
  +   
 + ... +  
 ,                          (5) 
K=    
  +    
  + ... +   
  =         =      .         (6) 
In other words, the number of possible different states 
are K =   , which is finite. Thus, Markov process is 
covered in this state.  
So the model of the need for storage in the Data 
Center by M number of users is developed as in Markov 
process. The process parameters are defined as follows: 
1.    ,     , ... ,    - state set. 
As it is mentioned above, this set is finite and can be 
defined as K=  . Each state corresponds to regular order 
of storage volumes which can be required in different 
combinations. 
2. Stochastic transition matrix. The matrix for  
continuous-time processes is an intensity matrix of the 
transition from one state to another. Intensity of transition 
from    state to    can be denoted by    . 
  (
    
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
   
)                                                 (7) 
 
3. Probability vector is the key characteristics of the 
modeled process. Let   = {  
       
          
   }. This 
vector gives complete information about the process at 
any time t: where     
      , ∑
  
   
 
   
=1 states are 
covered. 
In continuous-time Markov processes, the following 
system is used to calculate these probabilities: 
{
  
 
  
 
   
   
   ∑
  
   
 
   
    
 
  
      
   
 
 
∑
  
 
   
  
                                         (8) 
This system can be solved by approximate 
methods. If the process has ergodic features, it is a 
system of algebraic equations, which has only one 
solution. 
{
 
 
 
 ∑
     
 
   
  
∑
     
 
   
  
 
∑
     
 
   
  
∑
  
 
   
  
                                                   (9) 
As the ergodic process shifts to stationary mode, it does 
not depend on time and it shifts to 
P(t) = (  
   ,   
   , ... ,   
   ) = (              =P   (10)  
The equation (10) is the vector of transition 
probabilities of the process from the i-th state into 
another. This vector provides the probable distribution of 
the condition of the process in which it will be in the 
future.  
If  ∈ [     ] the probability of the calls to the 
computing resources of the users of  ∈ [       ] 
number is calculated as follows: 
∑
 ∈[       ]   
. This sets the condition of attracting new 
users as well. 
 III.  CONCLUSION 
  The paper reviews an optimal distribution of storage 
resources among the users in data processing centers. The 
model of the dynamic distribution of storage resources is 
proposed.  The model provides that the storage resources 
allocated for any purpose hold the space in the system as 
much as they are used. Thus, resources are allocated as 
much as they are used without wasting. This is beneficial 
for both cloud provider and the user. Accordingly, the 
user does not pay for reserved resource, but only for the 
actual resource use, and the provider reduces unnecessary 
purchase and installation of additional equipment’s. 
Furthermore, it can be able to offer the same service for 
lower price, which leads to greater user involvement in 
this type of services. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] V. V. Voevodin, Vl. V. Voevodin. Parallel computing. St. 
Petersburg. “BHV – Petersburg”, 2002. 
[2] I. Yu. IBM invests “Cloud Computing”,  
www.pcnews.ru/news/ibm-300. 
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

[3] R. M. Alguliyev,  R. K. Alekperov. Cloud Computing: 
Modern State, Problems and Prospects. Telecommunications 
and Radio Engineering, 2013, vol.72, no.3, pp.255-266. 
[4] A. A. Markov. "Extension of the limit theorems of 
probability theory to a sum of variables connected in a 
chain". Reprinted in Appendix B of: R. Howard. Dynamic 
Probabilistic Systems, volume 1: Markov Chains. John Wiley 
and Sons, 1971. 
[5] S. Meyn. Control Techniques for Complex Networks. 
Cambridge University Press. 2007, p.615. 
[6] S. P. Meyn and R. L. Twedie. Marcov Chains and 
StochosticStability. Springer-Verlag 1993, p 552. 
[7] H. A. Taha. Operations Research: An Introduction. Seventh 
Edition M:, “Williams”, 2007., p 901.  
[8] G. Ronald, K. Donald, P. Oren. “(5) Binomial Coefficients” 
Concrete Mathematics (2nd ed.) Addison Wesley. 1994. PP. 
153-256. ISBN 0-201-55802-5. OCLC 17649857. 
[9] G. E. Shilov, (1977). Linear algebra. Dover Publications. 
ISBN 978-0-486-63518-7. 
 
 
 
 
   
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

