Security and Confidentiality in Interconnected Networks 
 
Aljoša Jerman Blažič 
SETCCE 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
aljosa@setcce.si 
Svetlana Šaljić 
SETCCE 
Ljubljana, Slovenia 
svetlana.saljic@setcce.si 
 
 
Abstract— With the rapid development of interconnected 
environments many technical and organizational aspects are 
being addressed in relation to atomized services operating 
across networked domains. Some of those aspects still need 
further examination and evaluation also from security 
perspective. Data may traverse several organizational, security 
or information domains in order to be processed and results 
delivered. This calls for proper technical and organizational 
design approaches, which include means for secure data 
exchange. Various aspects of secure information exchange are 
already being addressed by different business, administration, 
defense and other professional initiatives. The aim of this 
paper is to present results of the ongoing activities for 
development and deployment of secure interconnected 
networks and to demonstrate a framework that shows the 
relations between relevant security requirements and security 
mechanisms that can be applied to fulfill the requirements of 
interconnected domains. The scope of security requirements 
and mechanisms spans the network, application and 
information layers.  
Keywords-component; 
seruity 
domains, 
confidentiality, 
secure data exchnage, security requirments, security mechanisms 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
The 
importance 
of 
sharing 
information 
across 
organizational or technical domains is commonly recognized 
in many professional areas. Novel business or administration 
concepts supported by technical infrastructures rely on 
disperse data processing, with services deployed location 
independent across open networks. These requirements have 
also been moved to other fields with high security 
requirements and standards such as governmental or defense 
organizations [1], which today rely on infrastructures with 
limited or no connectivity. Data being pushed across network 
boundaries must be addressed form organizational and 
technical aspects [4, 5, 13, 15]. In many cases these data may 
carry sensitive information such as financial statements, 
governmental decisions or military orders. 
In the vision of future networks everyone and everything 
is connected in order to allow for information sharing: the 
right information, at the right place, at the right time. 
Furthermore, dispersed processing power means that 
information can be processed simultaneously or in sequence 
at different locations or within different domains and results 
then combined. Ever increasing throughput, new (web) 
services based frameworks or cloud computing concepts for 
instance present foundations for information exchange, 
shared data processing and distributed storage. However, 
when it comes to sensitive information, e.g. personal, 
financial, governmental or even military, sharing requires 
harmonization and change of the existing capabilities and 
change in terms of doctrine, processes, personnel, culture 
and organization. 
Examples of information sharing are to be found in many 
domains e.g. health services, which may combine several 
organizations exchanging information in order to provide 
proper and professional health support. Telemonitoring for 
example requires health services to reach patients across 
several networks and organizations. Health parameters may 
be collected from patients on the field by sensor and mobile 
services providers and then processed by e.g. public health 
institutions. Corresponding service response may then be 
delivered by specialized health service provider, which may 
be operated on private basis or patient’s relatives and 
professional health personnel in geographical proximity are 
informed on downgraded health status. It is obvious that in 
such 
scenarios 
data 
flows 
may 
traverse 
several 
organizational and security domains and be processed on 
distributed basis, which only imposes the risk of sensitive 
information leakage. 
Another important concept in this context is Network-
Enabled Capabilities (NEC) defined by defense and coalition 
organizations such as NATO [1, 12, 13, 15]. Defense 
operations may require fetching data from different 
organizations such as national weather system, then 
processed by military geographic data provider and final 
results on contaminated areas delivered by defense 
organization to public announcement system in case of e.g. 
chemical warfare. However, more recent military operations 
require cooperation of different organizations not only on 
national basis but on much wider scope between coalition 
partners. Such future networks are known by the term 
Network and Information Infrastructure (NII), which is in 
fact an ever-developing coalition-wide multinational military 
intranet alike network. 
Better integrated networks mean that sharing relevant 
information will be easier and quicker and that more people 
will be reached than before. The technical basis for 
networked operations lies in a secure, robust and extensive 
federation of networks, a large network consisting of a 
number of smaller individual networks. This is the case for 
any area and domain, i.e. business, public administration, 
non-for-profit organizations and defense organizations. 
159
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

While technical concepts and mechanisms that support 
secure data exchange (e.g. access control, encryption, 
confidentiality labeling) are already well understood and a 
plethora of technical solutions are being widely implemented 
and put in practice such as [16], [17], [18], [19], [20], [21], 
etc., requirements of network and information connections 
and their functional security in the context of interconnected 
networks still remains unknown or poorly understood. In this 
paper we present the attempt to design a framework for 
collecting 
requirements, 
which 
focus 
on 
security 
mechanisms needed on both the network connection level 
and the information exchange level. The ultimate aim of the 
on-going work is to develop a methodology for designing 
high level system architectures for network and information 
connections and their associated security mechanisms that 
support a controlled exchange of information in different 
contexts. The work presented has background on coalition 
needs to deploy NII infrastructures, while results presented 
have much broader impact and may be used in any multi-
domain scenarios with sensitive information flows. The 
primary focus of the paper is to describe a framework, which 
is supported by identifying some key security requirements 
and indicating how the framework could be developed and 
used 
to 
address 
the 
issues 
of 
secure 
networks 
interconnection. 
II. 
SHARING INFORMATION ACROSS DOMAIN 
BOUNDARIES 
In this paper we address the problem of secure 
information exchange across domain borders. For this 
purpose we distinguish four different types of domains: 
• 
Security domains; these domains are defined by the 
security requirements that apply, e.g. based on a 
security policy or classification level implemented 
by a single domain.  
• 
Organizational domains; these domains span the 
collection of information, systems and infrastructure 
for which a single organization is responsible, e.g. a 
domain operated by a single organization. 
• 
Technical domains; these are defined by a collection 
of technical means used to enable information 
processing and communication, e.g. local area 
network. 
• 
Information domains; these are defined by a set of 
information that is used in a specific functional 
context by a community of interest (CoI), e.g. 
information 
related 
to 
a 
specific 
business, 
administration or defense process. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  Information flows crossing different domain boundaries. 
160
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

These domain types provide different perspectives on an 
information infrastructure. A reason for distinguishing 
between domain types is that they pose different security 
requirements with respect to information exchange. When 
exchanging information one should be aware of which 
domain boundaries are crossed. Subsequently, relevant 
security requirements should be identified for each domain 
boundary individually. Figure 1 illustrates how domains can 
interrelate in case of coalition organization such as NATO. 
Information flows may cross different security or 
organizational domains. In order to prevent unauthorized 
access or interception in such conditions, data exchange is to 
be performed in a controlled manner using appropriate 
security means and organizational measures. 
Secure data exchange depends on the context, which 
addresses crossing at least one boundary (one domain), while 
many scenarios exist where more than one boundary is being 
crossed. When multiple domains of different types are 
crossed an order for the resulting transition sequence must be 
identified. This can be interpreted by a multidimensional 
system, where each axis presents one domain type and points 
in the coordination system data origin, data final destination 
and data boundaries crossings. Figure 2 presents multi-
domain crossing in a three way coordination system. 
 
information crosses 
multiple domains
 
Figure 2.  Interpretation of information flow domain crossing in three 
dimensional coordination system. 
Sharing information between security domains presumes 
a way of determining whether a specific information object 
may or may not be shared. Each information object has a set 
of security properties that are relevant in this process. 
When sharing information a number of general security 
requirements apply: 
1. 
Making sure that information in a domain can be 
accessed (community of interest) while access 
to confidential information is limited according 
to a set policy (need to know). 
2. 
Allowing information objects to be shared with 
anybody outside the security domain, while 
confidential information that should not be 
shared is protected against unintended release. 
3. 
Managing the flow of information objects over 
different security domains, based on a shared 
security policy, e.g. mission-specific or process-
specific classifications may be used to support 
information sharing within a mission or a 
process while preventing data leakage outside 
the mission or the process. 
Setting up technical and organizational environment that 
supports such crossings is based on a framework of security 
mechanisms. Framework is a structured approach to select 
applicable security mechanisms which operate on different 
(technical) layers. For the purpose of this paper we 
differentiate 
between 
the 
network, 
application 
and 
information layers: 
• 
Network layer addresses physical, (inter)network 
and transport protocols, such as TCP/IP; 
• 
Application layer addresses application-specific 
protocols such as HTTP, MMHS but also proprietary 
system interfaces. 
• 
Information layer addresses the actual information 
payload which may be encoded and/or encrypted. 
Security mechanisms may come in various forms and 
may be applied in different combinations and technical 
implementations. Their role and function is presented by 
diagram showing to what layer each mechanism could be 
applied. It is important to understand that implementing a 
security mechanism on one layer may impact mechanisms 
working on other layers. An example is the application of 
network encryption, which renders application layer packet 
filtering useless. 
 
 
Figure 3.  Security mechanimsms and their application on different layers. 
Figure 4 presents an example of secure information 
exchange between two different security domains. In this 
case, 
the 
following 
mechanisms 
are 
being 
used: 
confidentially 
labeling 
for 
selecting 
information 
classification level [1], XML guard as release control 
mechanism [1, 15] and data encryption [18] as access 
prevention or control mechanism. Both domains have their 
security policies aligned and classification categories are 
adjusted. Data being sent from domain A to domain B means 
that information flow is supported form a higher to a lower 
classification network. XML Guard is deployed as release 
control mechanism, encryption is used to support data 
exchange across unknown networks and classification label 
is used to support exchange of information on data 
confidentiality level. 
 
161
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

 
Figure 4.  Secure data exchange between different security domains.. 
III. 
SECURITY REQUIRMENTS 
Setting up secure environment for inter domain 
information exchange requires framework of organizational 
measures and technical means. The primary scope of this 
paper is to present findings on security requirements and 
security mechanisms related to secure data exchange, and 
their role within the interconnected domains. The work 
relates to national defense and coalition initiatives on 
network enabled capabilities concepts and interconnected 
networks. 
In order to support secure information exchange across 
different domains data security (exchange) context has to be 
first defined. Data security context is associated with many 
scenarios and has to be addressed with for example exchange 
of information during defense or tactical operations. The 
security context includes parameters on degree of data 
sensitivity in terms of unauthorized access (this is usually 
defined with the classification category) and how classified 
data is to be managed. These are the basic considerations 
based on which security requirements are then collected. 
For better understanding the following topics are not in 
scope for the framework. They do however need to be 
addressed when the framework is implemented in practical 
situations. 
A. Policies 
Policies are a set of decisions that are made on the 
organization level. Security requirements and related security 
mechanisms can be used to enforce these decisions. It is 
important to note the fundamental difference between a 
decision made by a responsible entity (i.e. to give a 
document a certain classification) and the enforcement of 
such a decision within the infrastructure (i.e. by either 
blocking or allowing a document to be transferred to another 
domain). 
B. Relation to organization and management of 
information 
With the increasing introduction of enforcement 
mechanisms in the infrastructure the link between 
infrastructure, organization and management of information 
becomes more interrelated. These relations can present 
complex and dynamics characteristics and for the purpose of 
the work presented relations are static and known. The actual 
organization and management of information and related 
processes are therefore outside the scope of this paper. 
C. Non-security requirements 
The requirements presented in this paper are limited to 
examples within the security scope. In order to limit the 
negative impacts e.g. functional and interoperability issues, 
additional requirements are needed. 
 
Results presented in this paper do not have explicit 
intention to give a comprehensive overview of all possible 
security contexts. Rather it describes the basic problems of 
cross boundaries affection when data are exchanged across 
domains. In the table below key requirements for secure data 
exchange 
applicable 
to 
e.g. 
defense 
scenarios 
are 
summarized. 
TABLE I.  
A LIST OF IDENTIFIED REQUIRMENTS FOR SECURE 
INFORMATION EXCHANGE ACROSS DOMAIN BOUNDARIES 
No.
Requirement
Explanation
1
Information 
confidentiality  
General requirement for data 
being exchanged between 
domains 
2
Confidentiality breaches
detection 
Detection of unauthorized 
downgraded data 
classification
3
Change/alteration 
detection
Applicable for complete 
lifecycle of classified data
4
Information integrity
Applicable for complete 
lifecycle of classified data
5
(Authorized) changes 
propagation 
Propagation (of security 
context changes) to relevant 
entities in communication
6
Trust-relation(s)
A trust-relation between 
parties established before 
exchanging information
7
Information non-
repudiation
Applies for originating and 
receiving domain
8
Policies enforcement
Decisions on information 
162
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

exchange must not be in 
violation against policies
9 
Policies availability 
Availability of all relevant 
policies for an information set 
is ensured at all times
10 
Explicit policies decisions 
Information can be exchanged
only when classification level 
is defined and adjusted
11 
Deviations of policies 
Deviations from policy 
should be possible but always 
detectable 
12 
Anonymity 
Ensure anonymity of data 
sources (entities) 
13 
Limited access 
Only specified subjects 
should have access to 
specified objects – need to 
know principle 
14 
Audit trail and integrity 
demonstration 
Information actions trusted 
log and demonstration of 
information integrity
 
The list of collected requirements presented is in scope of 
defense administration, operation and decision making 
processes. The intention of listed requirements is not to 
present a comprehensive list applicable to any scenario or 
professional area. Other areas may need to implement 
additional or different requirements. However, most of the 
requirements are applicable to other areas, such as financial 
or governmental institutions, while presented collection is 
used primarily to demonstrate how to set up a framework for 
secure information exchange in defense scenarios. 
IV. 
SECURITY MECHANISMS 
Next, a set of security mechanisms that support secure 
information exchange in multi domain environment is 
collected. For each mechanism a short description is given in 
the table below. This is not architectural proposal but a basic 
collection of mechanisms needed to support secure data 
exchange. Conceptual and final architecture must address 
and include mechanisms, which are selected according to the 
requirements identified for specific scenario of secure data 
exchange. 
TABLE II.  
A LIST OF SECURITY MECHANIMSM RELEVNT FOR SECURE 
INFORMATION EXCHANGE ACROSS DOMAIN BOUNDARIES 
No. 
Mechanism 
Description 
1 
Authentication 
Authentication of subjects for 
access control purposes
2 
Access control 
Authorized access to the 
information and resources 
(conforming to a policy)
3 
Release control  
Authorized  released of 
information (conforming to a 
policy) 
4 
Security assertions for 
integrity 
Applying additional (meta) 
information to demonstrate 
integrity of information in a 
form of e.g. digital signature or 
label. 
5 
Data encryption  
Prevent access to information 
for anyone except by entities in 
possession of special knowledge 
(decryption key).
6
Hash function
Integrity demonstration.
7
Confidentiality labeling
Providing information on data 
classification level(s), 
classification marking rules and 
classification parameters.
8
Agreement
Establishing formal relation
according to policy 
requirements between two or 
more entities. 
9
Policy enforcement
Ensure that all decisions 
concerning secure information 
exchange are conforming to 
policy requirements.
10
Policy translation 
Interpretation of different 
policies and establishing mutual 
understanding of their 
consequences. 
11
Referencing and 
binding 
Describe implicit or explicit 
relationship between resources 
or portions of resources.
12
Trusted binding
Support trustworthy 
relationships between resources 
or portions of resources
13
Source and destination 
filtering 
Control of information flows 
based on authorized source 
and/or destination entities.
14
Content filtering
Excluding specific information 
elements form information flow 
based on policy requirements.
15
Segmentation
Partitioning of domains and/or 
entities in order contain risks of 
security breaches.
16
Validation
Determining or demonstrating 
integrity according to a 
predetermined set of 
requirements. 
17
Time stamping
Process of securely applying or 
delivering trusted time meta 
data through the lifecycle of 
information. 
18
Validity period marking
Process of securely keeping 
track of validity events and 
defining future validity in the 
lifecycle of information.
19
Sticky policies
Ensuring that policies are 
bounded to information during 
secure exchange.
20
Audit trails and change 
logs 
Chronological sequence based 
on audit records and other 
relevant information.
V. 
FRAMEWORK COMPOSITION 
Once security requirements are collected and security 
mechanisms selected the framework for secure information 
exchange in multi domain environment can be composed. 
This part of the process includes several steps, whose result 
should deliver conceptual model for deployment of proper 
organizational and technical infrastructure. Bellow is an 
example of how to define relations between security 
requirements and security mechanisms. 
Step 1 requires determining what domains will be 
crossed (see chapter II). In this example we foresee a 
163
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

scenario crossing where security and organization domains 
are crossed: A NATO nation needs to send a part of a 
national confidential document to NATO. The document has 
to be filtered for non releasable information, reclassified for 
NATO confidential. 
The next step involves selection of security requirements 
applicable to the foreseen scenario. In the case of NATO 
confidential information exchange, the requirements are R1, 
R2, R4, R6, R7, R8, R9, R10, R11, R13, R14. 
In order to show the relation between listed security 
requirements and the list of security mechanisms we use the 
following approach: first we select a security requirement 
and match this to appropriate security mechanisms. 
Subsequently we add a requirement and matching 
mechanisms. Then we check if there are any conflicts in the 
mapping 
of 
the 
mechanisms 
to 
the 
requirements. 
Implementation layer of security mechanisms is finally 
added. Table 3 presents the output of the process. 
TABLE III.  
AN EXAMPLE OF RELATION BETWEEN SECURITY 
REQUIRMENTS AND SECURITY MECHANISMS IN SCENARIOS OF 
CONFIDENTIAL DATA EXCHENAGE WITHIN COALITON PARTNER AND 
COALITION. 
Mechanism 
Requirement 
Applicable layer 
Information 
Application
Network
M1 
R1, R8, R13 
y 
M2 
R1, R8, R13 
y 
y
M3 
R1, R8, R13 
y 
y
M4 
R4, R6, R7, 
R14 
y 
y 
M5 
R1, R8 
y 
y
M7 
R1 
y 
y 
M8 
R6, R8, R9 
y 
 
M9 
R8 
y 
y 
M10 
R8, R9, R10 
y 
y
M11 
R1, R8, R10 
y 
y 
M12 
R1, R8, R10 
y 
y 
M13 
R1, R7, R8, 
R10, R13 
 
y
M14 
R1, R7, R8, 
R10, R13 
y 
y 
M16 
R4, R14 
y 
y 
M20 
R2, R1 
y 
y 
y
Figure 5.  An example of relation between security requirments and 
security mechanisms in scenarios of confidential data exchenage within 
coaliton partner and coalition. 
The example above presents how security mechanisms 
can be selected and integrated in the infrastructure. The 
result of the exercise does not deliver a final architectural 
model. This is to be done in the final step, which is however 
not relevant for framework development. 
When composing a framework, it is important to perform 
steps of consistency. It might happen that selected security 
mechanisms collide or that a combination of security 
mechanisms is affecting the process in a way it is non-
executable or that security implications have been tampered. 
Systematic approach to address these issues is still to be 
developed. 
It is important to understand that security mechanisms 
are not to be confused with security services or solutions 
implementation. Utilization of security mechanisms may 
happen in various combinations, where some instances can 
cover a significant part of the listed security mechanisms. 
Therefore, the methodology presented, takes into account 
only logical components of the final architecture. Further 
development should therefore among others be focus on 
interpreting the results and their translation to security 
implementations.  
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
The work presented does not only illustrate how to 
address 
secure 
data 
exchange 
in 
interconnected 
infrastructures but how to understand implications of data 
being exchanged across different domains. Connecting 
secure networks has a long history and has been around since 
the introduction of open systems. However, local networked 
environments have long ago become part of global 
infrastructures and the last barriers for unconnected high risk 
networked environments are coming down. This is aligned 
with the key strategy of coalition partners to utilize a single 
network supporting order and decision processes. 
Through the research work performed on security in 
interconnected networks it has been proved that a single 
security architecture is not feasible since an appropriate 
architecture depends on the (security) context (scenario) to 
which it needs to be applied. Rather it is essential to identify 
security context for scenario or a collection of scenarios. 
This can be very demanding process and proposed example, 
which illustrates approach taken, only shows that a 
significant amount of resources are required to identify 
proper architectural concept for a specific scenario. 
Further work lies ahead, mostly focused on development 
of methodologies, which will ease security context 
definition, security requirements and security mechanisms 
mapping. Another research topic should focus on security 
profiles, which address common scenarios, and security 
contexts. Profiles may also deliver predefined architecture 
compositions for secure data exchange based on a specific 
context. Similar work has already been done for the security 
patterns 
through 
European 
Commission 
funded 
6th 
Framework programme integrated project SERENITY [26]. 
The project was focused on developing methodologies and 
languages 
for 
capturing 
security 
and 
dependability 
knowledge in heterogeneous and pervasive environments. 
The result of 3 years research was a platform for collecting 
security requirements and library of patterns [23, 24]. 
Patterns are layered through business and organization 
levels, workflows and processes level, devices and networks 
level. Specific language was developed in order to interpret 
patterns, which provide security properties (e.g. information 
confidentiality), context in which a pattern is to be used (e.g. 
communication over IP protocol) and one or more 
implementations (e.g. data encryption using IPSec). 
Another important research topic is security mechanisms 
utilization 
and 
standardization 
of 
security 
solutions 
orchestration. In scenarios of dynamic services and concepts 
such as cloud computing, security requirements and 
supportive security mechanisms must be selected and 
composed in consistent services solution on the fly. This is 
164
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

why it is of utmost importance for future research in this 
field to address above issues and propose standardized 
methodologies for setting up frameworks for secure 
information exchange in interconnected environments. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
B.J. te Paske, D. Boonstra, D.H. Hut, and H.A. Schotanus, "Cross-
Domain Solutions, A conceptual model", Whitepaper, TNO, 2009. 
[2] 
P. Hoffman, "Enhanced Security Services for S/MIME", RFC 2634, 
IETF, June 1999. 
[3] 
National Institute of Standards and Technology, "Standard Security 
Label for Information Transfer", FIPS 188, NIST, 1994. 
[4] 
ISO/IEC, “Information technology Portable Operating System 
Interface (POSIX)”, ISO/IEC 9945 and IEEE 1003-1, ISO/IEEE, 
2003 
[5] 
ISO, "Information Technology – Open Systems Interconnection – 
Security Frameworks for Open Systems: Overview", ISO 10181-1, 
ISO, 1996. 
[6] 
ISO, "Information Technology – Open Systems Interconnection – 
Security 
Frameworks 
for 
Open 
Systems: 
Access 
Control 
Framework", ISO 10181-3, ISO, 1996. 
[7] 
National Security Agency, "Common Criteria Labeled Security 
Protection Profile", NSA, 1999. 
[8] 
ISO/ITU, "Information Technology – Security Techniques – Security 
Information Objects for Access Control", ISO/IEC 15816, ITU-T 
X.841, ISO/ITU, 2002. 
[9] 
W. Nicolls, "Implementing Company Classification Policy with the 
S/MIME Security Label", RFC 3114, May 2002. 
[10] A. Thümmel and K. Eckstein, "Design and Implementation of a File 
Transfer and Web Services Guard Employing Crypto-graphically 
Secured XML Security Labels", Proceedings of the 7th IEEE 
Workshop on Information Assurance, U.S. Military Academy, West 
Point, NY, pp. 26 – 33, IEEE, 2006. 
[11] OASIS, "eXtensible Access Control Markup Language v2.0", 
XACML, 2005. 
[12] NATO, "Information Exchange Gateways Reference Architecture" 
March 2009 
[13] NATO, "Core Enterprise Services Framework V1.2", January 2009. 
[14] http://www.xmlspif.org/, "Open XML SPIF - XML Schema for 
Security Policy Information File". Last access November 2010. 
[15] http://www.isode.com/whitepapers/isode-security-infrastructure.html, 
"Isode Security Policy, Security Label and Security Clearance 
Infrastructure", August 2008. Last access November 2010. 
[16] D. Eastlake, J. Reagle, and D. Solo, "XML-Signature Syntax and 
Processing", RFC 3275, IETF, 2002. 
[17] T. Imamura, B. Dillaway, and E. Simon, "XML Encryption Syntax 
and Processing", XMLEnc, W3C, 2002. 
[18] T. Dierks and E. Rescorla, "The Transport Layer Security (TLS) 
Protocol", RFC 5246, IETF, 2008 
[19] S. Kent and R. Atkinson, "Security Architecture for the Internet 
Protocol", RFC 2401, IETF, 1998 
[20] M. Wahl, T. Howes, and S. Kille, "Lightweight Directory Access 
Protocol", RFC 2251, 1997 
[21] R. Housley, W. Ford, W. Polk, and D. Solo, "Internet X.509 Public 
Key Infrastructure Certificate and CRL Profile", RFC 2459, IETF, 
1999 
[22] J. Porekar, K. Dolinar, and A. Jerman Blažič, "Design Patterns for a 
Systemic Privacy Protection", Journal On Advances in Security, vol 
2, no 2&3, pp. 267 – 287, IAIRA, September 2009. 
[23] J. Porekar, A. Jerman Blažič, and T. Klobučar, "Towards 
Organizational Privacy Patterns", Proceedings of The Second 
International Conference on the Digital Society, pp. 15 – 19, IEEE, 
February 2008 
[24] European 
Comission 
FP6 
Intergated 
Project 
SERENITY, 
http://www.serenity-project.org/, accessed october 2010. 
 
 
 
165
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

