Towards an Empirical Analysis of Trustworthiness Attributes in the Context
of Digitalization
Sandro Hartenstein
Berlin School Of Economics
And Law
Berlin, Germany
email: sandro.hartenstein@hwr-
berlin.de
Steven Schmidt
DB Station&Service AG / Ber-
lin School Of Economics And Law
Berlin, Germany
email:
s_schmidts19@stud.hwr-berlin.de
Andreas Schmietendorf
Berlin School Of Economics
And Law
Berlin, Germany
email: andre-
as.schmietendorf@hwr-berlin.de
Abstract— This idea paper describes the current per-
ception of the terms trust and trustworthiness in technical
and sociological systems. Related works are examined and
put into relevant context for the proposed research. The
main goal is to show the missing link between those two
extrema. Thus, proposed future works aim to further
identify systems aspects connecting sociological and tech-
nical trustworthiness. The focus lies on socio-technical
systems. Therefore, the proposed empirical research con-
centrates along this spectrum. The thorough examinations
in the proposed study fields benefit a holistic model of
trustworthiness attributes for digital systems through
enrichment of empirically evaluated and compared trust-
worthiness attributes.
Keywords-Trustworthiness; Digitalization; Information
Systems; Society.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The richness of provided services in the digital
world is ever evolving and rapidly growing through the
establishment of digitalized aspects in everyday life,
private or professional. The consumption of digital
services relays on trustworthiness in a significant way
[1]-[3]. Yet, the terms trust and trustworthiness are
perceived differently across multiple academic and
industrial disciplines, as well as the related attributes.
This idea paper aims to present a possible approach
on analyzing significant factors of trustworthiness
through different empirical examinations of different
fields. Those trustworthiness attributes may vary heavi-
ly from field to field, but the general assumption is that
those attributes mainly only differ in weight, relative to
the observed field they are significant to.
In Section 2, different terms and viewpoints on the
topic of trust and trustworthiness are described to ex-
plain the motivation for this approach. In Section 3, past
and current related work is then examined, to demon-
strate the variations of the current understanding and
related contexts that have been evaluated. Section 4
describes
what
could
be
done
to
achieve
a
generic and general model of trustworthiness attributes
and associated weights according to the area under study.
The conceptional procedure to accomplish this idea is
described in detail, as well as what fields are going to
be involved as part of the planned project to enable this
work. The fields and their individual empirical ap-
proach, thus, are presented briefly to demonstrate the
general idea of the approach.
II.
TERMS AND VIEWPOINTS
A definition of trust is:
“Trust by definition entails a willingness by the [trus-
tor] to make herself vulnerable to the possibility that
another will act to her detriment” [4, p. 28]
A definition of trustworthiness for software is:
“Software trustworthiness is a key enabler of IoT
trustworthiness, which is the degree of confidence that a
system will perform as expected. Trustworthiness is
based on five characteristics—safety, security, privacy,
reliability and resilience, which directly and in combina-
tion provide protection against hazards and threats relat-
ed to environmental disturbances, human errors, system
faults and attacks.” [5, p. 6]
The digitization is depending on the well-being of the
users. Entrusting data and work steps to computer sys-
tems is viewed critically by the user. Besides the ad-
vantages, there are also disadvantages. Trust is a key to
the acceptance of digitised services and thus also to the
increase in productivity through digitisation. This idea
paper shows the dimensions of trust. These need to be
addressed by the provider. There are several participants
with different interests and understandings of trust and
trustworthiness. The needs of the stakeholders in the
context of trustworthiness of digital services are consum-
er, provider and third-party trustee. The consumer is
striving to use a service that is as trustworthy as possible,
as the effects of data misuse are becoming increasingly
apparent. Digital service providers need consumer confi-
dence in their products. They also need trustworthy sup-
ply services. The third independent authority can confirm
the trustworthiness of digital services to the user, as long
as it has the confidence of the users and can verify the
services.
From the point of view of the service, two main ele-
ments are decisive for its reputation with consumers.
User trust and the trustworthiness of the service are these
two factors. In the research project that is named OPera-
tional Trustworthiness Enabling Technologies, in short
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

OPTET, the prerequisite for trust in the context of web-
based services was determined. The result is that trust
can be personal, transferred and based on core trust, for
example in institutions. The trustworthiness of the ser-
vice is based on its attributes and on those confirmed by
third parties. These correlations and their influences were
summarized in Figure 1 [6]-[8].
The structure of the known Social-, Technological-,
Economic-, Environmental-, Political-, Legal- and Ethi-
cal-environment analyses, in short STEEPLE, was used
to classify the trust building measures as a view from
outside [9, pp. 80-84]. From the authors' point of view,
the environment analysis for a digital service is essential
for its trustworthiness and the trust of its consumers. For
this reason, the influencing factors can be classified with
STEEPLE.
This idea paper focuses on the social, economic and
technical factors that influence trust in digital services.
Based on the analysis of trust and trustworthiness, the
following influencing factors can be assigned. The social
factors are distinguishable by personal, referral and de-
rived trust. Personal trust is characterised by emotions,
e.g., browser certifications status colour (red – danger,
green – ok) or knowledge, e.g., knowledge about the
two-factor authentication procedure. Referral trust is
based on a third party who is trusted. Derived trust is
often shaped by experience with institutions and their
status. The technological factors are the trustworthiness
attributes of the services. These should be measured
objectively during development and operation or con-
firmed by third parties. The economic factors are charac-
terised by the expectation of profit. The provider aims to
offer trusted digital services. He can achieve this by
optimising all factors, but there must be a minimum level
of each factor. For example, a service may be technically
perfect, i.e., fully trusted, but the provider has a bad
reputation, so the derived trust is low and the service is
not fully trusted. One factor influencing the consumer is
the absence of risk or low risk. If the stakes are low, the
service will be trusted more because the potential loss is
manageable. However, many users are not aware of the
value of the user data. A risk assessment is therefore
useful for all stakeholders.
III.
RELATED WORK
The research on trust goes back a long way; basics
were already interesting in the 50s. More recent research
has commercial reasons [10]. For trust in software and its
use, this section introduces the most important concepts
briefly.
The social drivers for trust are honesty, integrity and
reliability of the interaction partners. It is the nature of
trust to address these interpersonal relationships. That’s
also the basis for stability in social institutions and mar-
kets. It is undisputed that trust is the fundament of the
interactions of the daily life.
Simmel sees the generation of trust on the expected
result [11]. If it is good, trust is created. If it is bad, trust
is destroyed. Trček highlights the emotional aspects and 
the behaviour of the participants as important influencing
factors [12]. The change in perceived competence ap-
peared to occur largely for citizens with high trust and
little knowledge and a shift in perceived benevolence
could
mainly be
noted
among
citizens
with
low
knowledge and low trust. [13]
Figure 1.
Trust and trustworthiness for digital services [own representation based on [6]-[8][14]]
trusted digital
services
trust
personal trust
by knowledge
by emotion
referral Trust
by trusted
Truster
by emotion
trust in
institution
by competence
by law
trustworthiness
attributes
measured
estimated
third party
confirmed
certificates
113
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

In the commercial context, Patrick and his team have
determined that cognitive and emotional dimensions of
trust are strong, independent and interconnected in
building trusting relationships with firms [10]. Grimme-
likhuijsen and Meijer examined the relations with public
institutions and found that they are considered more
trustworthy than private companies [15]. In 2001,
McKnight brought together the various aspects and their
dependencies on trust in one design. This is illustrated in
Figure 2. Basically, he distinguishes in trust in the institu-
tion through psychology and sociology, which influences
the personal trust.
Figure 2.
Interdisciplinary model of trust constructs [recreated from
16, p. 33].
Robbins shows a modern trust-risk-act-model, called
relational trust in the year 2016 [17, p. 985]. It is illus-
trated in Figure 3 and visualizes the connections between
trust, risk assessment and the relation to activities. The
factors influencing trust are the characteristics of the
actors and the relationships between the actors and exter-
nal parties.
Figure 3.
Structural-cognitive model of trust [recreated from 17, p.
982].
The technical drivers for trust are characterized by
the trustworthy properties of the service. By evaluating
72 scientific articles on trustworthiness and correspond-
ing quality categories, the attributes were determined
within the OPTET project (EU FP7-project from 2012
till 2015). These are shown in Figure 4. [18, p. 24][19, p.
236]
Figure 4.
Trustworthiness attributes [19, p. 236].
The attributes have context-specific influence on the
trustworthiness. The domain and the type of the Social-
Technical- System, in short STS, are relevant. The attrib-
utes are measurable and can map the influence with a
weighting. The top three attributes of the study of 72
relevant papers by Mohammadi et. al are Security, De-
pendability and Usability. In almost 2/3 of the literature,
security is mentioned as the most important attribute.
Reliability is mentioned in almost half of them. 1/4 of the
papers mention usability as an important attribute for
trustworthiness. All attributes and their relevance are
shown in Figure 5. [18, p. 25]
Figure 5.
Classified trustworthiness attributes [18, p. 24].
114
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

IV.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The description of related works shows that the fo-
cused dimensions range from very technological to very
sociological but fail to respect both extremes equally.
Trust is related to many more fields than solely sociology
or technology. Different legal or political institutions
might perceive trustworthiness different than individuals
and therefore evaluate the same systems attributes dis-
similar with varying implications on the systems evalua-
tion and consumption of its services.
Considering classical environmental approaches such
as the STEEPLE analysis would enable a system that
models trustworthiness and related attributes to take
different aspects of the systems whole environment into
account. The systems attributes in relation to different
environments is important especially for the socio tech-
nical view, as the connection of these two fields is the
main motivation for the intended research project in the
context of digitalization and its impacts. The width of all
fields enables a greater richness for the model itself in
terms of representativeness and – if examined – empiri-
cal argumentation.
This thought leads to the proposed idea regarding the
planned feature works related to trustworthiness and
trustworthiness enabling attributes to achieve a general-
ized set of empirical evaluated and weighed attributes
examined in different fields of the project to model
trustworthiness. The architecture shall be designed to be
extended through further research in different fields
across the socio technical spectrum through the views of
the STEEPLE dimensions. The first fields and respective
systems which will be observed, are as follows:
S1 - Simulation of a trustworthy scrum process
The observation concentrates on the impacts of dif-
ferent trustworthiness enabling attributes along a simu-
lated software engineering process. The aim is to exam-
ine weights of different attributes to achieve a high
trustworthiness score.
S2 – Trustworthy public WiFi
The empirical assessment in this field emphases
trustworthiness attributes in public WiFis through ques-
tionnaires and compared interviews between user groups
of different services with different suspected trustworthi-
ness levels.
S3 – Trustworthy AI-Webservices
This research area is concerned with determining and
evaluating the trustworthiness of web services that use
artificial intelligence.
S4 – Trustworthy web presence of mediators
Similar to the previous field, a variety of web
presences of self-established mediators is examined to
gain a collection of empirical validated trustworthiness
attributes in this field, to enrich the overall proposed
model with weights unique to this field.
Figure 6 shows the planned research goal in a sche-
matic diagram. Each empirically determined trustworthi-
ness attribute (Ai) per examined system (Sj) should be
weighted. In addition, these attributes are categorized
according to the STEEPLE dimensions and thus enable
the formation of clusters. This is helpful to create the
general model. Each further investigation of similar or
different systems will contribute to the overall set, but
also add information on different weights, unique per
examined field.
Figure 6.
Visualization of the proposed approach
The empirical research and contribution of insights to
the proposed system shall be established at the Berlin
School of Economics and Law as a research project
abbreviated as EUMoVe – Empirische Untersuchung der
Modelierung von Vertrauenswürdigkeit (Empirical Ex-
amination Of Modeling Trustworthiness). The main
objective of the planned research project is to achieve the
said model, enriched with a static set of attributes empir-
ically weighted per domain and thus applicable to most
of the socio-technical spectrum of systems.
Without sufficient confidence in appropriate solu-
tions, problems of acceptance or even difficult to resolve
conflicts arise. Accordingly, the question arises as to
what a systemic approach to improving customer-related
trust in the discourse of digital solutions can look like.
We see here a combination of organizational, socio-
logical and technological approaches to solving prob-
lems, whereby potential conflicts of involved parties are
monitored immanently (if necessary, also algorithmical-
ly) by a mediatory approach and solved if necessary. The
aim is to establish intelligent conflict resolution strategies
as an integral part of digital products and services. On
this basis, customer-centered trust can be ensured
through transparency, control options, conflict resolution
strategies and considered liability issues.
REFERENCES
[1]
S. Utz, P. Kerkhof, and J. van den Bos, “Consumers rule:
How
consumer
reviews
influence
perceived
trustworthiness of online stores,” Electronic Commerce
115
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Research and Applications, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 49–58,
2012, doi: 10.1016/j.elerap.2011.07.010.
[2]
European
Commission,
Trustworthy
AI.
[Online].
Available:
https://ec.europa.eu/digital-single-market/en/
news/trustworthy-ai-brochure [retrieved: 10, 2020].
[3]
World Economic Forum, Our Shared Digital Future
Building an Inclusive, Trustworthy and Sustainable
Digital Society: Insight Report. [Online]. Available:
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_Our_Shared_
Digital_Future_Report_2018.pdf [retrieved: 10, 2020].
[4]
C. A. Hill and E. A. O'Hara O'Connor, “A Cognitive
Theory
of
Trust,”
SSRN
Journal,
2005,
doi:
10.2139/ssrn.869423.
[5]
M. Buchheit, F. Hirsch, S. Rix, M. Hermeling, and B.
Martin,
Software
Trustworthiness
Best
Practices.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.iiconsortium.org/pdf/
Software_Trustworthiness_Best_Practices_Whitepaper_
2020_03_23.pdf [retrieved: 10, 2020].
[6]
S. van der Graaf, W. Vanobberghen, M. Kanakakis, and
C. Kalogiros, “Usable Trust: Grasping Trust Dynamics
for Online Security as a Service,” vol. 9190, pp. 271–
283, 2015, doi: 10.1007/978-3-319-20376-8_25.
[7]
A. Chakravarthy et al., “OPTET D2.4 Socio-economic
evaluation
of
trust
and
trustworthiness,”
OPTET.
Accessed: Oct. 16 2020. [Online]. Available: https://
www.researchgate.net/publication/317488309_OPTET_
D24_Socio-economic_evaluation_of_trust_and_
trustworthiness.
[8]
S. Wiegand et al., “D2.5 – Consolidated report on the
socio-economic basis for trust and trustworthiness,”
OPTET, 2015. Accessed: Oct. 16 2020. [Online].
Available:
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/
317488377_OPTET_D25_-_Consolidated_report_on_
the_socio-economic_basis_for_trust_and_
trustworthiness.
[9]
G. Johnson, K. Scholes, and R. Whittington, Strategic
Management [orig.: Strategisches Management]: An
Introduction; Analysis, Decision and Implementation
[orig.: Eine Einführung; Analyse, Entscheidung und
Umsetzung], 9th ed. München: Pearson Studium, 2011,
ISBN: 9783868940565.
[10]
A. Patrick, S. Marsh, and P. Briggs, “Designing Systems
That People Will Trust,” Security and Usability, NRC
47438, pp. 75–99, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://
www.researchgate.net/profile/Pamela_Briggs/
publication/44081283_Designing_Systems_That_
People_Will_Trust/links/
00b7d5344d8b27f675000000.pdf.
[11]
G. Simmel, The sociology of Georg Simmel: Selected
writings.
New
York:
Free
Pr,
1964,
ISBN:
9780029289204.
[12] D. Trček, “A Brief Overview of Trust and Reputation 
over Various Domains,” in SpringerBriefs in Information
Systems, Trust and Reputation Management Systems: An
e-Business Perspective, D. Trček, Ed., Cham: Springer 
International Publishing, 2018, pp. 5–19.
[13]
T. Nguyen, “Trust and Sincerity in Art,” Ergo, 2020.
[Online].
Available:
https://www.researchgate.net/
publication/343239976_Trust_and_Sincerity_in_Art.
[14]
N. Gol Mohammadi et al., “An Analysis of Software
Quality
Attributes
and
Their
Contribution
to
Trustworthiness,” Proceedings of the 3rd International
Conference on Cloud Computing and Services, Science,
pp. 542–552, 2013.
[15]
S. G. Grimmelikhuijsen and A. J. Meijer, “Effects of
Transparency on the Perceived Trustworthiness of a
Government Organization: Evidence from an Online
Experiment,” JOPART, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 137–157, 2014,
doi: 10.1093/jopart/mus048.
[16]
D. H. McKnight and N. L. Chervany, “Trust and Distrust
Definitions: One Bite at a Time,” in Lecture Notes in
Computer Science, vol. 2246, Trust in Cyber-societies:
Integrating the Human and Artificial Perspectives, R.
Falcone,
M.
Singh,
and Y.-H.
Tan,
Eds.,
Berlin,
Heidelberg: Springer, 2001, pp. 27–54.
[17]
B. G. Robbins, “What is Trust? A Multidisciplinary
Review, Critique, and Synthesis,” Sociology Compass,
vol.
10,
no.
10,
pp.
972–986,
2016,
doi:
10.1111/soc4.12391.
[18]
N. G. Mohammadi et al., “Trustworthiness Attributes and
Metrics for Engineering Trusted Internet-Based Software
Systems,”
in
Communications
in
Computer
and
Information Science, Cloud Computing and Services
Science, M. Helfert, F. Desprez, D. Ferguson, and F.
Leymann, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing,
2014, pp. 19–35.
[19]
S.
Paulus,
N.
G.
Mohammadi,
and
T.
Weyer,
“Trustworthy Software Development,” in Lecture Notes
in Computer Science, Communications and Multimedia
Security, D. Hutchison et al., Eds., Berlin, Heidelberg:
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 233–247.
116
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

