Pharmaceutical Care: A Challenge for EAI in Pharmacies 
Juha Puustjärvi 
University of Helsinki 
Department of Computer Science 
Helsinki, Finland 
juha.puustjarvi@cs.helsinki.fi 
Leena Puustjärvi  
The Pharmacy of Kaivopuisto 
Helsinki, Finland 
leena.puustjarvi@kolumbus.fi
 
 
Abstract—A new trend in pharmacy practice is to move away 
from its original focus on medicine supply towards a more 
inclusive focus on patient centered care. This new trend is 
named pharmaceutical care. It emphasizes the responsible 
provision of drug therapy for various purpose of achieving 
definite outcomes that improve or maintain patient’s quality of 
life. In order to achieve these goals pharmacists are expected to 
assume 
many 
different 
functions 
including 
caregiver, 
communicator, teacher, life-long learner and manager. These 
functions set new challenges for pharmacy’s information 
systems usability as well as pharmacist’s skills to use them. A 
problem here is that existing pharmacies’ information systems 
are isolated in the sense that they have their own data stores 
that cannot be accessed by other information systems used in 
pharmacies. As a result a pharmacist is burdened by accessing 
many systems inside a user task, e.g., in giving drug therapy 
for a patient. In order to alleviate this problem we have 
designed a knowledge-oriented EAI (Enterprise Application 
Integration) strategy for pharmacy’s information systems. Our 
key idea is to revolve all pharmacy systems and applications 
around the shared knowledge base, and in this way avoid the 
problems 
of 
isolated 
non-interoperable 
systems 
and 
heterogeneous replicated data. In this paper, we present how 
knowledge-oriented EAI strategy can be exploited in 
contributing pharmaceutical care.   In particular, we present 
how Semantic Web technologies such as RDF and OWL are 
intertwined in our developed solutions.    
Keywords - internet; semantic web; OWL; RDF; web-based 
applications; 
EAI; 
knowledge 
managememnt; 
e-health; 
ontologies 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
During the last years there has been a trend for pharmacy 
practice to move away from its original role on drug supply 
towards a more inclusive focus on patient care [1, 2, 3]. This 
new trend in pharmacy practice is named pharmaceutical 
care [4, 5, 6]. It emphasizes the responsible provision of 
drug therapy for the purpose of achieving definite outcomes 
that improve patient’s quality of life [7, 8].  
The provision of pharmaceutical care sets significant 
challenges on pharmacy’s ICT and pharmacists’ skills  as 
healthcare is a field where the fast development of drug 
treatment and the introduction of new drugs  require 
specialized skills and knowledge that need to be renewed 
frequently [9, 10].  
In particular, the amount of new information concerning 
medication increases rapidly. Pharmacies receive this 
information from a variety of sources [11], e.g., from 
medical authority, medicinal wholesalers, educational 
organizations 
and 
pharmaceutical 
companies. 
These 
information entities arrive in variety formats, e.g., by paper 
mail, e-mail, and fax. The nature of the information entities 
may vary, e.g., an information entity may be a learning 
object, a regulation, a guide or a bulletin [12]. Further, some 
of the information gives rise for a new business rule or 
changing prevailing rules and practices.  
Two interesting questions arising from this reality are:  
 
• 
How pharmacy systems should interoperate in order 
to support pharmaceutical care?  
 
• 
How medicinal information should be organized in 
order to ensure ready access for pharmacists?  
 
In ICT (Information and Communication Technology) 
this kind of issues are analyzed in the disciplines of 
Enterprise 
Application 
Integration 
(EAI) 
[13] 
and 
Knowledge Management (KM) [14]. The former is a 
strategic approach to binding many information systems 
together and supporting their ability to exchange information 
and leverage processes in real time while the latter concerns 
with acquiring, organizing and retrieving information within 
an organization.  
Although current pharmacy systems have proven to be 
valuable and powerful systems in traditional pharmacy’s role 
[15], they fail in contributing pharmaceutical care. This is 
due to the fact that existing pharmacy systems are monolithic 
isolated systems that cannot be easily modified to be able to 
interoperate with relevant external sources.  
Providing pharmaceutical care implies that pharmacy 
applications should be able to cross organizational 
boundaries, and in this sense they should be open. In open 
systems the configuration of the whole system can change 
dynamically. For example in supporting drug therapy, by the 
permission of a patient, the pharmacist should be able to 
access patient’s PHR (Personal Health Record) [16, 17] 
stored in a server in internet.   
Nowadays, 
a 
common 
practice 
in 
pharmacies 
information management is that the incoming information 
entities are not stored at all, or are stored in a variety of 
systems such as in Document Management Systems, 
Learning 
Content 
Management 
Systems, 
Content 
Management Systems, Database Systems and Customer 
Relationship Management Systems [14].   
100
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

The problem here is that the same information may be 
stored in separate systems, and each system is hardcoded to 
only work with its own data. Using such systems is overly 
complicated 
and 
thereby 
does 
not 
contribute 
to 
pharmaceutical care.  
We have analyzed various EAI and KM strategies’ 
suitability for supporting pharmaceutical care. Our key idea 
has been the integration of information oriented EAI strategy 
[18] and knowledge management strategies, which exploits 
semantic web technologies. We call such a strategy semantic 
EAI.  
Through semantic EAI we can avoid the common 
problems of the legacy systems, i.e., the problems of the 
systems that are built based on proprietary solutions, 
developed in piecemeal way, and tightly coupled through ad 
hoc means, and which thereby have many duplicated 
functions, and which are non-interoperable.  
In this paper, we first in Section II give an overview of 
the notion of pharmaceutical care. Then, in Section III, we 
motivate our proposed solutions by considering the 
interoperability problems of existing pharmacy systems. In 
Section IV, we consider EAI strategies focusing on semantic 
EAI. We first describe our used way for integrating 
heterogeneous data into the format that is compatible with 
the pharmacy’s knowledge base. Then we consider portal-
oriented application integration, where a pharmacist can 
view a multitude of systems through a single user interface.  
Finally, Section V concludes the paper by discussing from 
pharmacy’s point of view the advantages and disadvantages 
of semantic EAI.  
 
II. 
PHARMACEUTICAL CARE AND THE ROLES OF 
PHARMACISTS 
The International Pharmaceutical Federation (FIP) 
defines pharmaceutical care to be the responsible provision 
of drug therapy for various purpose of achieving definite 
outcomes that improve or maintain a patient’s quality of life 
[1]. 
The introduction of pharmaceutical care sets many new 
requirements on pharmacy’s information systems as well as 
for pharmacists’ skills and knowledge [4]. In this context the 
notion of “seven-star pharmacist”   is taken up by FIP in its 
policy statement on Good Pharmacy Education Practice. It 
covers the following seven roles of a pharmacist [1]: 
 
• 
Caregiver: Pharmacists have to view their 
practice as integrated and continuous with those 
of the health care system and other health 
professionals.  
 
• 
Decision maker: The appropriate use of 
resources 
such 
as 
medicines, 
chemicals, 
equipments and practices should be the 
foundation of the pharmacist’s work.  
 
• 
Communicator: The pharmacist provides a link 
between prescriber and patient, and so he or she 
must be knowledgeable and confident while 
interacting with other health professionals. 
 
• 
Manager: Pharmacists must be able to manage 
effectively various resources such as human, 
financial 
and 
information 
resources. 
In 
particular ICT will provide challenges as 
pharmacists assume greater responsibility for 
sharing information about medicines and related 
products.    
 
• 
Life-long learner: The role of continuing 
education and lifelong learning is becoming still 
more important as the fast development of 
technologies requires specialized skills that need 
to be renewed frequently.   
 
• 
Teacher: The pharmacist has a responsible to 
assist with the education and training of future 
generation of pharmacists and the public.   
Teaching as well as pharmacist life-long 
learning assumes the exploitation of modern e-
learning technologies.            
 
• 
Leader: In areas where other care providers are 
in short supply or non-existent the pharmacist is 
obligated to assume a leadership position in the 
overall welfare of the patient.       
 
For each of these roles there are many specific ICT-based 
systems and disciplines including ERP (Enterprise Resource 
Planning), CRM (Customer Relationship management), 
SCM (Supply Chain Management), LMS Learning Content 
Management) and CM (Content Management System) that 
are developed for improving the management of these roles.  
We next consider such systems and their interoperability 
requirements in supporting pharmaceutical care.                                
III. 
SEGMENTATION IN PHARMACY SYSTEMS  
Integrating 
information 
in 
an 
ever 
growing 
internetworking world is likely to be the most urgent need 
for any kind of business, trade or science. Daily work in 
supporting pharmaceutical care is not an exception: a huge 
and increasing amount of heterogeneous medicinal data is 
distributed over network of computing system, and the usage 
of this heterogeneous data requires the introduction of 
interoperability and integration technologies.  
Basically the term integration refers to the idea of putting 
diverse concepts together to create an integrated whole. 
Instead interoperation refers to making applications work 
together by sharing the appropriate messages but without any 
single conceptual integration. Further, semantic integration 
means that a new ontology is derived from existing 
ontologies such that the new ontology facilitates the 
interoperability of the systems [19].   
Initially the problem of software and data segmentation 
was increased with the introduction of commercial off-the-
shelf applications such as ERP, SCM and CRM systems 
101
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

[18]. In particular the early versions of these systems were 
designed as self-contained boxes with no means for 
accessing internal data or processes. Though the new 
versions of the pharmacy systems provide better access to 
their data, integrating them with other systems in pharmacies 
is still problematic. 
As a result, many pharmacies, as well as other 
organizations, have an environment of disparate legacy 
systems and applications, which typically interact by a 
number of connections that are poorly documented and 
difficult to maintain. Such systems also have their own 
isolated data stores and user interfaces. Such architecture of a 
pharmacy system is illustrated in Fig. 1.  
 
User 
Interface
Document 
Management
System
ERP-system
CRM-system
Content 
Management
System
Learning
Management
System
Prescription 
Management
System
Medicine
Information
System
Data
store
Data
store
Data
store
Data
store
Data
store
Data
store
Data
store
User 
Interface
User 
Interface
User 
Interface
User 
Interface
User 
Interface
User 
Interface
   
 
Figure 1.  A segmented architecture of pharmacy system.  
If the data needed in a user task is not included in one 
system, then the user has to log and access data from various 
systems. Further, if the systems do not support SSO (Single 
Sign-On) this may require many user activities. 
To illustrate this difficulty let us assume that a 
pharmacist is dispensing a medicinal product, say Diovan, 
for a patient. First, in order to store the dispensation of the 
prescription, the pharmacist opens the prescription system. 
Then from customers social insurance card the pharmacist 
recognizes that the patient is a veteran.  The pharmacist 
remembers that the discount of ten per cent is granted for 
veterans of some drugs, but she does not remember whether 
it concerns Diovan.  
By accessing the business rule management system by 
the keywords “discounts” and “veterans” the system return 
the statement “discount of 10 per cent of the prescription 
based partially repayable drugs is granted for veterans”. Next 
the pharmacist opens and finds from the medicinal system 
that Diovan is not a partially repayable drug. Then she 
retrieves from the pricing system the medicinal products that 
are cheaper and are substitutable with Diovan and are 
partially repayable. After this, by the permission of the client 
the pharmacist change Diovan to a substitutable medicinal 
product Valsartan and grants the discount of 15 per cent for 
the customer. Finally, from the drug therapy system the 
pharmacist prints the instructions concerning Valsartan and 
gives them to the patient.  
The reason for the complexity of the pharmacist user task 
is that the data needed by a pharmacist is stored in separate 
systems, and their data cannot be accessed by other systems.     
IV. 
SEMANTIC EAI  
The need of interoperation within organization’s systems 
led to the evolution of EII (Enterprise Information 
Integration) and EAI. The early work on addressing the 
challenges of heterogeneity involved integrating different 
data sources. Such a work was called EII. Later on there has 
been work on EAI where information flows between 
applications is addressed. The EAI infrastructure allows 
systems and applications throughout an enterprise to 
seamlessly communicate with one another in realtime.  
EAI solutions can exist at many levels such as database 
level, process level, portal level and method (function call) 
level. Hence, the principal distinction between Information-
oriented, Process-oriented and Service-oriented and Portal-
oriented application integration is been done [18]:  
   
• 
In Information-oriented approaches applications 
interoperate through a data store.  
 
• 
In Process-oriented (also called workflow–
oriented) 
approach 
the 
interoperation 
is 
controlled through a process model that binds 
processes and information within many systems.  
 
• 
In Service-oriented interoperation applications 
share methods (e.g., through Web service 
interface) by providing the infrastructure for 
such method sharing.    
 
• 
In Portal-oriented application integration a 
multitude of systems can be viewed through a 
single user interface, i.e., the interfaces of a 
multitude of systems are captured in a portal 
that user access by their browsers. 
 
Further, in the emergence of many new technologies based 
on Web services and Semantic Web, there are still more 
changes for EAI each change having its limitations and 
opportunities.  
In our developed architecture we use the Information-
oriented approach in achieving the interoperability between 
the pharmacy’s systems and applications. That is, the 
systems and applications interoperate through sharing a 
knowledge base, and the ontology is developed by 
integrating the ontologies of the interoperable systems and 
applications.   
From user’s point of view our used application 
integration strategy follows the Portal oriented approach as 
the multitude of pharmacy’s systems and applications can be 
viewed through a single user interface.  
In the following two subsections we give a more detailed 
description of these strategies.  
102
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

A. Information-Oriented  Integration Using Knowledge 
Management System 
Knowledge management system refers to a computer 
based system for managing knowledge in organizations [14].  
A knowledge base is a special kind of database for 
knowledge management. It provides the means for the 
computerized collection, organization, and retrieval of 
knowledge for various applications.  
Today an ever expanding set of knowledge management 
systems are using the technologies of the Semantic Web 
[20]. That is, knowledge is organized according to 
ontologies, and automated tools are used in accessing and 
maintaining knowledge [21].  
The idea of sharing pharmacy’s knowledge base is 
illustrated in Fig. 2. 
 
Document 
Management
System
ERP-system
CRM-system
Content 
Management
System
Learning
Management
System
Prescription 
Management
System
Medicine
Information
System
Web Service Interface 
Knowledge Management System 
Human resource
ontology
CRM ontology 
Learning management 
ontology
Knowledge base
Pharmacy ontology
 
Figure 2.  The architecture of semantic EAI in a pharmacy. 
We follow the idea of knowledge centric organizations 
[14], where, the key idea is to revolve all applications around 
the shared ontology. In our case, as illustrated in Fig. 2, it 
means the integration of the data repositories of the 
pharmacy’s systems such as business rule management 
system, content management system and learning object 
management system.  To the integrated ontology we refer by 
the term pharmacy ontology. So the pharmacy’s systems can 
seamlessly interoperate through accessing the shared 
pharmacy ontology. 
The data of the pharmacy ontology is received and 
gathered up from a variety of health care organizations. 
However before the data can be inserted into the knowledge 
base (pharmacy ontology) it must be transformed into 
RDF/XML-format [22] that is compatible with the pharmacy 
ontology. Such transformations require that a specific 
stylesheet [14] is developed for each input data that is not 
compatible with the pharmacy ontology. A language 
associated with stylesheets is XSLT (Extensible Stylesheet 
Language) [23]. It is a markup language that uses template 
rules to specify how a style sheet processor transforms an 
XML document.   
In order to illustrate this transformation assume that the 
graphical ontology of Fig. 3 is a subset of the pharmacy 
ontology. In this graphical ontology, ellipses represent 
classes and boxes represent properties.  
 
e -p re s c rip tio n
p h y s ic ia n
is P re s c rib e d B y
p a tie n t
is T a rg e te d A t
is S u b C la s s
p e rs o n
is S u b C la s s
p a tie n t re c o rd
is _ a s s o c ia te d
m e d ic in a l_ p ro d u c t
d is e a s e
q u a n tity
d o s e
id
n a m e
id
is W ritte n B y
in c lu d e s
n a m e
c a re s _ fo r
 
 
Figure 3.  A subset of the pharmacy ontology in a graphical form.  
Assume now that the pharmacy system receives the XML 
coded document presented Fig. 4. As the document is in 
XML it does not contain any semantics, and so it is 
transformed by a stylesheet engine into RDF/XML-format 
that is compatible with the ontology of Fig. 3. Such an RDF 
document is graphically presented in Fig. 5, and in 
RDF/XML format in Fig. 6.  
 
<prescription>
<prescription_id>abc123</prescription_id>
<patient>
<name>John Smith </name>
<id> 1465766677</id>
</patient>
<medicinal_product>Panadol</medicinal_product>
<disease>fever</disease>
<quantity>30</quantity>
<dose>One tablet three times a day</dose>
<physician>
<name>Lisa Taylor </name>
<id> 98765432</id>
</physician>
</prescription>
 
Figure 4.  A precription in XML format. 
 
abc123
Lisa Taylor 
isPrescribedBy
John Smith
isTargetedAt
Panadol
isAssociated
medicinal_product
quantity
dose
Patient
Physician
e-prescription
type
type
type
30
One tablet three times a day
type
disease
feaver
 
 
Figure 5.  A precrition presented by RDF-graph. 
103
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

<rdf:RDF
xmlns : rdf=”http://www.w3.org/1999/02/22-rdf-syntax-ns#”
xmlns : xsd=”http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema#”
xmlns : mo=“http://www.lut.fi/ontologies/montology#”
<rdf:Description rdf:about=”abc123”>
<rdf:type rdf:resource=“&mo;e-prescription”/>
<mo : dose>One tablet three ti mes a day</mo : dose>
<mo : quantity rdf:datatype=”&xsd;integer”>30</mo : quantity> 
<mo: includes>Panadol</mo: includes>
</rdf : Description>
<rdf:Description rdf:about=”1465766677”>
<rdf:type rdf:resource=“&mo;patient”/>
<mo : name>John Smith</mo : name>
</rdf : Description>
<rdf:Description rdf:about=”98765432”>
<rdf:type rdf:resource=“&mo;physician”/>
<mo : name>Lisa  Taylor</mo : name>
</rdf : Description>
</rdf:RDF>
 
Figure 6.  A prescription in RDF/XML format. 
B. Portal-Oriented Integration Using ASP 
 
In Portal-oriented application integration a multitude of 
systems can be viewed through a single user interface, i.e., 
the interfaces of a multitude of systems are captured in a 
portal that user access by their browsers (Fig. 7).  
 
Knowledge Base
(Pharmacy Ontology)
Portal
Document 
Management
System
ERP-system
CRM-system
Content 
Management
System
Learning
Management
System
Prescription 
Management
System
Medicine
Information
System
Browser
Web Service Interface 
Knowledge Management System 
Knowledge base
 
 
Figure 7.  The architecture of portal-oriented EAI . 
User (pharmacist) interacts with the pharmacy’s systems 
and applications by a browser, and so all the data for a 
pharmacist are presented in HTML. However, all the content 
in the knowledge base are stored OWL (Web Ontology 
Language) format [24], i.e., represented by RDF/XML 
syntax.  
A significant gain of accessing the portal through a 
browser is that instead of the proprietary pharmacy systems 
the whole pharmacy system can be implemented by 
exploiting the notions of ASP (Application Service 
Provider). 
An ASP is a business that provides computer-based 
services to customers over a network. The application 
software resides on the vendor's system and is accessed by 
users through a web browser using HTML or by special 
purpose client software provided by the vendor.  
The need for ASPs has evolved from the increasing costs 
of specialized software that have far exceeded the price 
range of small to medium sized businesses such as 
pharmacies. Also the growing complexities of software have 
led to huge costs in distributing the software to end-users. 
Through ASPs, the complexities and costs of pharmacy’s 
software can be decreased.  
On the other hand ASP strategy is criticized since users 
cannot modify the software they use. However, in 
pharmacies this is not a problem as they do not have 
personnel for software development. In some cases 
organizations have rejected ASP strategy since organizations 
data is being stored, and controlled, by third parties, thus 
increasing its attack surface. Within pharmacies the critical 
data are patients’ prescriptions that are received from third 
parties such as prescription holding stores and physicians, 
and so the control of third parties cannot be avoided.  
 
V. 
CONCLUSIONS  
Pharmaceutical care sets significant challenges on 
pharmacy’s ICT and pharmacists’ skills as healthcare is a 
field where the fast development of drug treatment and the 
introduction of new drugs require specialized skills and 
knowledge that need to be renewed frequently.  
On the other hand, pharmaceutical care does not exist in 
isolation from other health care services: it should be 
provided in collaboration with patients, physician, nurses and 
other health care providers. As each of these occupational 
groups has their own information systems also the medicinal 
information systems and applications developed for 
pharmaceutical care should be able to co-operate with these 
systems.  
In ICT these kinds of issues are analyzed in the 
disciplines of Enterprise Application Integration and 
Knowledge Management. In the emergence of many new 
technologies based on Web services and Semantic Web, 
there are new chances for EAI and KM that are appropriate 
for providing pharmaceutical care. The key point in our 
presented semantic (ontology based) EAI is that all parties 
have a common understanding of the pharmacy ontology on 
which the exchanged messages (documents) are based on.  
In order to exchange documents the parties need a 
common language through which to exchange documents 
between their computer systems. Though XML is rapidly 
becoming the key standard for data representation and 
transportation, XML-documents themselves do not capture 
any semantics. Thereby the introduction XML-messaging 
requires that communicating applications must be hard-
coded meaning that the semantics of the message are coded 
in the communicating applications.  
A more flexible way for achieving consensus on 
exchanged messages is to develop appropriate domain 
ontology, and use it as a vocabulary in exchanging 
RDF/XML coded documents. Essentially the developed 
ontology must be shared and consensual terminology among 
the communicating parties as it is used for information 
104
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

sharing and exchange. Hence, the corner stone of our 
presented solutions is that all the communicating parties 
must commit to the same ontology, e.g., to our developed 
pharmacy ontology.  
REFERENCES 
 
[1] K. Wiedenmayer, R. S. Summers, C. A. Mackie, A. g. Gous, M. 
Everard, and D. Tromp, “Developing pharmacy practice”, World 
Health Organization and International Pharmaceutical Federation 
2006 
[2] van Mil JW, Schulz M, Tromp TF. Pharmaceutical care, European 
developments in concepts, implementation, teaching, and research: a 
review. Pharm World Sci. 2004 Dec; 26(6):303–11. 
[3] C.  Hepler and Strand L., Opportunities and responsibilities in 
pharmaceutical care. Am J Hosp Pharm 1990;47:533–43. 
[4] The role of the pharmacist in the health care system. Preparing the 
future pharmacist: Curricular develop -ment. Report of a third WHO 
Consultative Group on the role of the pharmacist, Vancouver, 
Canada, 27–29 August 1997. Geneva: World Health Organization; 
1997. 
WHO/PHARM/97/599. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.who.int/medicinedocs/ 
[5] Hepler C., Clinical pharmacy, pharmaceutical care, and the quality of 
drug therapy. Pharmacotherapy. 2004 Nov; 24(11):1491–98. 
[6] Berenguer B, La Casa C, de la Matta MJ, Martin- Calero MJ. 
Pharmaceutical care: past, present andfuture. Curr Pharm Des 
2004;10(31):3931–46. 
[7] Shumock GT, Butler MG, Meek PD, Vermeulen LC, Arondekar BV, 
Bauman JL. Evidence of the economicbenefit of clinical pharmacy 
services: 1996–2000. Pharmacotherapy 2003; 23(1): 113–32. 
[8] Strand L, Cipolle R., Morley PC, Frakes MJ. The impact of 
pharmaceutical care practice on the practitioner and the patient in the 
ambulatory practice setting: twenty-five years of experience. Curr 
Pharm Des 2004;10(31):3987–4001. 
[9] Tietze K. Clinical skills for pharmacists. A patient-focused approach, 
Mosby Inc. USA, 1997. Medicines Partnership UK, www.medicines-
partnership.org 
[10] Walker R. Pharmaceutical public health: the end of pharmaceutical 
care? Pharm J 2000; 264:340–341. 
[11] Puustjärvi J. and Puustjärvi L., Managing Medicinal Instructions. In 
the proc.  of the International Conference on Health Informatics 
(HEALTHINF 2009). pp. 105-110. 2009. 
[12] Puustjärvi J.,and Puustjärvi L., The role of medicinal ontologies in 
querying and exchanging pharmaceutical information. International 
Journal of Electronic Healthcare, Vol. 5, No.1  pp. 1 – 13. 2009. 
[13] Singh, M. and Huhns M., Service Oriented Computing: Semantics, 
Processes, Agents. John Wiley &Sons, Ltd. 2005. 
[14] M. Daconta, L. Obrst, and K. Smith. The semantic web: a guide to the 
future of XML, web services and knowledge management. 
Indianapolis: John Wiley & Sons. 2003. 
[15] Puustjärvi, J. and  Puustjärv L.,. Towards Semantic Exchange of 
Clinical Documents, International Journal on Advances in Life 
Sciences (IJALS). Vol. 1, No.2&3 pp. 69 – 76. 2009. 
[16] Raisinghani M.S. and Young, E., Personal health records: key 
adoption issues and implications for management, International 
Journal of Electronic Healthcare. Vol. 4, No.1 pp.67-77. 2008. 
[17] Lewis, D., Eysenbach. G., Kukafka, R., Stavri P.Z., and  Jimison, H., 
Consumer health informatics: informing consumers and improving 
health care. New York: Springer. 2005. 
[18] D. Davenport. B2B Application Integration. Addison-Wesley.2001. 
[19] J. Puustjärvi, and L. Puustjärvi. Application Integration and Semantic 
Integration in Electronic Prescription Systems. International Journal 
of Computer Science Issues (IJCSI). Vol. 7, Issue 3, No 2, pp. 1-8.  
2010. 
[20] J. Davies, D.  Fensel, and F.  Harmelen,  Towards the semantic web: 
ontology driven knowledge management. West Sussex: John Wiley & 
Sons.2002. 
[21] G. Antoniou, & F. Harmelen. A semantic web primer. The MIT 
Press. 2004. 
[22] RDF 
– 
Resource 
Description 
Language. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/RDF/ 
[23] E. Harold and W. Scott Means W., XML in a Nutshell. O’Reilly & 
Associates, 2002.      
[24] OWL 
– 
WEB 
OntologyLanguage. 
Available 
at: 
http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/. 
 
 
 
 
105
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

