A Syntethic Measurement for Political Engagement of Spending:
Pilot study to measure performance of local government using Open Government Data
Lorenzo Gabrielli∗§, Davide Guido†, Fosca Giannotti∗ and Luca Bastiani‡
∗National Council of Research - ISTI
Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining Laboratory, Pisa, Italy
Email: {name.surname}@isti.cnr.it
† University of Pavia
Department of Public Health, Pavia, Italy
Email: davide.guido@unipv.it
‡National Council of Research - IFC
Epidemiology Section, Pisa, Italy
Email: luca.bastiani@ifc.cnr.it
§University of Pisa
Department of Information Engineering, Pisa, Italy
Email: lorenzo.gabrielli@for.unipi.it
Abstract—Can we predict the outcome of future elections? Many
politicians wonder if they will be re-elected and often they rely
on polls conducted on a small sample of the population. In
this work, we propose a data-driven approach that, given the
past expenditure of city mayors, considers what are the most
important aspects that determine the re-election. Our empirical
results show the emergence of a particular expenditure threshold:
mayors who invest in current and capital expenditure over such
threshold during the mandate are more likely to be re-elected,
while those who invest differently are more likely not to be re-
elected. The impact of this research is to provide a new analytical
tool that objectively shows to a public administrator if his actions
will lead to the re-election.
Keywords–Open Data; eDemocracy; eGovernment; Citizen-
Government eModels, Data Mining, Administrative elections.
I.
INTRODUCTION
The evaluation of the performance of public administration
is a complex problem, for which the presence of Big Data
and Open Data opens new scenarios. There are several works
that, thanks to the digital traces left by all of us, studied the
preferences of citizens in different economic and social areas
[1] [2]. But, in the context of Public Administration, a new
element to take into consideration is Open Data, in particular
the data curated and made accessible by public administration.
New data sources, in the ﬁeld of political science, open up
new scenarios for those who want to study the effectiveness
of public administration in a data-driven approach.
As an alternative to the traditional surveys, several re-
searchers have recently begun the use of social media such
as Twitter to study the sentiment of voters before the election
[3] [4]. On this aspect, other experiences led conﬂicting
results, since users who use Twitter were not considered a
representative sample [5]. The main limitation of this approach
is that it is not applicable to small and medium realities. It is
relatively easy to collect information on the voters’ opinions
about a national politician by means of social networks, but
it is more difﬁcult to do the same for all the mayors of each
municipality.
In recent years, many governments began issuing the data
as Open Data in order to ensure greater transparency of
public administration. With this new data source, is possible
to have the detailed expenditure of any public institution, in
particular of Italian municipalities. In this paper, we propose
a methodology that, using Open Data, produces a score and
shows the trend of the expenditure managed by the re-elected
and the not re-elected majors. To the best of our knowledge,
there are no works that discuss this type of problem in a
data-driven perspective, for administrative realities of small
or medium size. This article is organized as follows: Section
II describes the data used for the experiment, Section III
introduces the analytical framework, Section IV is about the
results obtained, Section V shows the main limitations of the
approach and, Section VI details the impact of the research
and the future works.
II.
MATERIALS
The experimental dataset results from the processing of
three different sources. (1) The dataset regarding the number
of residents and size of Italian municipalities, that is provided
by Italian Statistics Bureau (ISTAT) and is updated to the
2011 census. (2) The dataset on the expenditure of Italian
local authorities that is provided by the Italian government
1. Available expenditure of Italian municipalities for the years
2013, 2014 and 2015 (only ﬁrst semester). (3) The dataset
containing the election results of about 600 municipalities
that voted in June 2015 plus the results of the previous
consultations held in March 2010. The dataset is provided by
the Ministry of Interior 2.
About the second dataset, the expenditure items are orga-
nized in a hierarchical manner, with the lower level having
248 items of expenditure. There are levels of intermediate
aggregation respectively of 77, 34 and 4 families. In this phase
of the study, the maximum aggregation level was used; the
four families of expenditure (our endogenous variable) are (i)
current expenses, (ii) cost of services for third parties, (iii)
1soldipubblici.gov.it
2storico.elezioni.interno.it
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

capital expenditures, (iv) expenses for loans repayment. (i)
Current expenditure covers all public expenditure necessary to
the ordinary activities of the state structure (eg. staff, purchase
of consumer goods). (ii) Expenses for services concerning
transactions carried out on behalf of third parties as the insti-
tution acts as withholding agent. (iii) The capital expenditures
are the ones in which the State aims to play an active policy
in the economy (eg. buying movable and immovable assets,
shareholdings). (iv) The costs of repayment loans consists of
repayments of loans and cash advances. In our model, all the
values of the costs are expressed on a monthly average basis,
and are scaled to the number of residents of each municipality.
For space reasons we only show the distribution of value for
the period before election (Figure 1). The distribution in the
other years shows a similar trend.
The third dataset allows to understand if a mayor or a coali-
tion government was reconﬁrmed. For about 350 municipalities
only, it is possible to understand if the mayor (or party) is re-
elected and only 70 of these have more than 15,000 inhabitants.
There are two criteria for determining whether a mayor or a
party won the election, namely: (i) checking the name of the
former mayor and the new one or (ii) analyzing the political
area of the previous and new mayor, inferred from the name
of the political party that won the elections. As mentioned
above, only for 350 municipalities out of 600 it is possible to
infer if a mayor was re-elected as if (i) it was not valid, (ii)
had indicated a general civil list. In the municipal elections,
especially in small ones, it is common that all candidates use
civic lists without party symbols. For this reason, the mayor
of the municipality always belongs to a civil list, preventing
to understand whether this list belongs to a party of the left,
right or center wing. For these 350 municipalities, in 45% of
cases, the mayor or the coalition is reconﬁrmed, while in the
remaining 55%, it is substituted.
III.
METHODS
The idea underlying our approach is that a single-factor
model, synthetizing a set of families of expenditure, could
facilitate the understanding of the expenses role to explain the
political success.
Firstly, we used exploratory factor analysis (EFA) to in-
vestigate the expenditure factor structure [8]. Then, we used
conﬁrmatory factor analysis (CFA) to validate the factor struc-
ture provided by EFA. For each statistical unit (municipalities),
we computed a synthetic score of”political engagement of
spending” for each year using CFA [6].
Finally, were performed analysis of variance for repeated
measures (ANOVA-Rm) for a single factor (time) stratiﬁed for
the binary political success indicator, and t-tests to compare
the ”political engagement of spending” and the detached
families of expenditure with a binary political success indicator
(mayor re-elected or not) over time. At the end, for the year
preceding the elections, we validated the ”political engagement
of spending” using Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC)
curve analysis. All statistical analyses were performed using
R software (version 3.0.2 for Windows) [7].
A. Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis
A Conﬁrmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) via Structural Equa-
tion Modeling (SEM) was performed to conﬁrm the presence
of a latent variable (factor) underlying the spending policies.
The items (endogenous variables) are (v1) current expenses,
(v2) cost of services for third parties, (v3) capital expenditures,
(v4) expenses for loans repayment. The factor has been inter-
preted as ”political engagement of spending”. The coefﬁcients
linking the factor with items by linear equations are called
”factor loadings”.
The goodness of ﬁt was evaluated with two indexes: (i)
Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR); (ii) Root
Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA). In general,
a model is considered to show good ﬁt when the SRMR
and RMSEA are not higher than 0.10. In addition, further
CFA indexes as gamma for unidimensionality (acceptable if
> 0.2) and the general validity coefﬁcient (acceptable if
> 0.8) verify the adequacy of single-factor measurement
model. Finally, the standardized factor loadings (item-factor
correlations) (acceptable if > 0.4) proved high-quality speciﬁc
factor validity for each item.
Hence, the score validation (only for score of 2015) was
performed by ROC analysis to evaluate the effectiveness of
the (factor) score in distinguishing if the mayor was re-elected
or not. Overall, the predictive performance was measured by
the area under the curve (AUC): ROC curves with AUC of 0.5
indicating no predictive diagnosis versus AUC of 1.0 indicating
perfect ones. Only the score of 2015 was validated because
2015 is the year before the elections, and expenses are directly
related to the election campaign.
B.
Analysis of variance and independent t-tests
The analysis of variance for repeated measures (ANOVA-
Rm) is a useful multivariate method to evaluate changes of a
continuous variable in relation to a categorical one, over the
time. In this case, it was performed to assess the change of the
score (obtained via CFA-SEM) over time, i.e., from 2013 to
2015, in relation to binary political success indicator (mayor
conﬁrmed or not).
Independent t-test is a useful statistical test to verify if
the means of continuous variable across 2 independent groups
are signiﬁcantly different. It was performed to verify the
differences of the mean of the score for each year, i.e., the
differences of the families expenditure means between the 2
groups over the year.
IV.
CASE STUDY: ITALIAN ADMINISTRATIVE ELECTIONS
The starting assumption is that it is possible to synthesize
all expenditure in a single factor. The factor analysis (EFA)
conﬁrming the one-dimensionality of the concept underlying
the costs taken into account, i.e. eigenvalue > 1 and Horn´’s
parallel analysis identiﬁed one factor.
We apply the CFA-SEM model on the dataset regarding the
administrative election held in Italy in June 2015. Our aim is
to shows that families of expenditure contribute with different
weights in the construction of the factor ”political engagement
of spending”. Although standardized factor loadings of all
the variables of the model are acceptable, the most impor-
tant variable is the current expenditure, followed by capital
expenditure, expenses for services for third parties and refund
loans. This rank is the same for the three years.
Figure 2 shows the triples of the standardized factor load-
ings for the three years of analysis. The high-quality speciﬁc
factors are those higher than 0.4. For example, regarding
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 1. : Distribution of families expenditure per month per capita (2015)
Figure 2. : Standardized factor loadings and goodness of ﬁt indexes for 2013,
2014, 2015 models. The goodness of ﬁt indexes (SMSR, RMSEA) of the
”political engagement of spending” are acceptable for each year because they
are less than 0.10
current expenditure (the most important variable), values are
respectively 0.97, 0.85, 0.64 for the years 2013, 2014, 2015.
The goodness of ﬁt (SMSR, RMSEA) of the ”political en-
gagement of spending” for each year is acceptable because
it is lower of 0.10. Finally, we compute CFA indexes to
measure internal validity of the model; gamma is higher than
0.2 (0.33) and general validity coefﬁcient is higher than 0.8
(0.8). Thereby, we obtained a validated synthetic continuous
score of ”political engagement of spending” (centered factor
score) (cPE) that we analyzed.
Figure 3 shows the trend of the means of score stratiﬁed
for the binary political success indicator, divided into mayor
conﬁrmed or not conﬁrmed. With the aim of assessing the
trend of spending for mayors conﬁrmed and unconﬁrmed,
the analysis of variance (ANOVA) for repeated measures
was performed. ANOVA did not show signiﬁcant differences
(p > 0.05) of cPE within the trend of the same group (2013
vs. 2014, 2014 vs. 2015). Comparing instead the cPE (in
each year) between the two groups with independent t-tests
(adjusted by Bonferroni method for multiple comparisons), the
differences are signiﬁcant for each couple of years (2013 vs.
2013, 2014 vs. 2014, 2015 vs. 2015).
Finally, Figure 4 shows the evaluation of individual families
of expenditure during the three years with independent t-tests.
In the trend of three years, conﬁrmed mayors spent more in
current expenditure (p < 0.05) and, in 2015, they also invest
more in capital expenditures (p < 0.05).
Thanks to parameter estimates extracted from the CFA-
Figure 3. Plot of means of cPE score over 3 years. The relevance of this
plot is conﬁrmed by the ANOVA test that observes that within each group
trends of the measure cPE are very similar. Instead comparing the cPE in
each year between the two groups (green vs. red) with independent t-student,
the differences are signiﬁcantly different for each year (2013 p = 0.019; 2014
p = 0.012; 2015 p = 0.007).
SEM model 2015 (factor loadings and residual variance) an
equation was deﬁned (1) to compute the (rescaled) ”political
engagement of spending” score (rPE) of each municipality:
rPE = 0.0276∗v1+0.0139∗v2+0.0078∗v3+0.0155∗v4 (1)
Then, to validate rPE and determine its cutoff to predict
the election result, ROC curve analysis was performed. The
optimal cutoff for rPE is 2.19, the AUC was 0.62 indicating an
acceptable predictive accuracy. The sensibility was 0.649 and
the speciﬁcity was 0.591. It is worth to remark this is just a
preliminary result and further validation steps are needed, such
as cross validation with one-leave-out methodologies and/or
stratifying the datasets over a different dimension/wealth of
Local Governments.
The remarkable result of our work is that city administra-
tion can use per capita expenditures sustained in the period
before the elections, in order to understand, using (1), if the
investment is similar of the mayors who were re-elected in the
past.
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

Figure 4. : Evaluation of individual families of expenditure during the three
years with independent t-student. In the trend of three years, conﬁrmed mayors
spent more in current expenditure (2013 p = 0.02; 2014 p = 0.010; 2015
p = 0.013) and in 2015 also invest more in capital expenditures (p = 0.025).
V.
LIMITATIONS
The main limitation of this approach is the difﬁculty of
collecting the election results of the previous years. This
limitation is overcome by the fact that, starting from 2014
the Ministry of Interior has provided an open data service, so,
hopefully, in the future there will be more data available. In
addition, the model can be specialized considering the political
party afﬁliation of the mayor. At the moment, the Open Data
website 3 does not provide the income of the municipalities,
i.e., the taxes paid by citizens; with this information, the model
could be further enriched.
VI.
LEARNED LESSON AND NEXT STEPS
Our work shows how Open Data of the public adminis-
tration can be used to anticipate the judgment that citizens
will express in the next election. The contributions of this
study are: (i) provided different weights for the families of
expenditure through the CFA-SEM model, (ii) build a synthetic
measurement of expenditure called ”political engagement of
spending” score, validated using the election results, (iii)
estimate a score cutoff to predict if an administration will be,
more probably, conﬁrmed or not.
The CFA-SEM model shows different weights (standard-
ized factor loadings) among items of expenditure for the
administrations conﬁrmed or not conﬁrmed. In the six months
before the election the weight of current expenditure and
capital expenditure is higher in municipalities that will be
conﬁrmed. This trend was detected in relation to binary
political success indicator both overall, considering the score
of ”political engagement of spending” (Figure 3), and by
comparing the detach averages of the municipal expenses in
the various years. In addition, our framework provides an
indication of the critical thresholds of individual cost items,
3soldipubblici.gov.it
on which one needs to take action in order to improve the
overall score (Figure 4).
This result is of great impact, because a single administra-
tor, by entering into a formula (1) expenditure per capita in
four families can measure the ”likelihood” of his reelection.
Thinking in monetary terms, the threshold values that indicate
a higher likelihood of re-election could be about 100Euro per
month per capita. This suggests that does not pay to invest only
in the last six months. The rank of expenditure, per capita per
month, is: current expense, i.e., the provision of main services
to citizens (45Euro), the second is cost of services for third
parties (27Euro), 12Euro for expenditures capital and 6Euro
for repayment loans. Details will be further investigated with
more complete data.
In the future, we plan to repeat the analysis by considering
a greater level of detail of spending that compose each of the
four families utilized. In addition, the experimental dataset will
be enriched with the morphological and productive datasets
(wealth, well-being, etc.) of the area, the seasonal trends of
expenditure and income, the political party and subjective
variables, such as the self-perception of the citizen on the
effectiveness and efﬁciency of their own mayor.
VII.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Thanks to the technicians of the Ministry of Interior for
providing data of the past elections. Thanks to Pierpaolo
Galleni, Fabio Coppede’ and Francesca Pratesi for their hints
in the preparation of work. This work is partially supported
by the European Community’s H2020 Program under the
scheme ’INFRAIA-1-2014-2015: Research Infrastructures’,
grant agreement #654024 ’SoBigData: Social Mining & Big
Data Ecosystem’. (http://www.sobigdata.eu).
REFERENCES
[1]
Pennacchioli D, Coscia M, Rinzivillo S, Giannotti F, Pedreschi D. The
retail market as a complex system. EPJ Data Science. 2014
[2]
Rinzivillo S., Gabrielli L., Nanni M., Pappalardo L., Pedreschi D. and
Giannotti F. The Purpose of Motion: Learning Activities from Individual
Mobility Networks. In: DSAA 2014
[3]
Bermingham, Adam and Smeaton, Alan F. (2011) On using Twitter to
monitor political sentiment and predict election results. In: Sentiment
Analysis where AI meets Psychology (SAAIP) Workshop at the Inter-
national Joint Conference for Natural Language Processing (IJCNLP),
13th November 2011, Chiang Mai, Thailand..
[4]
Murphy Choy, Michelle L. F. Cheong, Ma Nang Laik, Koo Ping Shung:
US Presidential Election 2012 Prediction using Census Corrected Twitter
Model. CoRR abs/1211.0938
[5]
Alexander Furnas . You Can’t Use Twitter to Predict Election Results.
The Atlantic. 2012
[6]
Kline RB. Principles and practice of structural equation modeling, vol.
156; 2011.
[7]
Development Core Team (2012) A language and environment for statis-
tical computing. R Foundation for Statistical Computing,Vienna.
[8]
Horn JL. A rationale and a test for the number of factors in factor
analysis. Psychometrika 1965;30:179185.
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

