Analytics-Driven Digital Platform for Regional Growth and Development: A Case 
Study from Norway 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, we present the growth barometer 
(Vekstbarometer in Norwegian), which is a digital platform 
that provides the development trends in the regional context in 
a visual and user-friendly way. The platform is developed to 
use open data from different sources that is presented mainly 
in five main groups: goals, premises or prerequisites for 
growth, industries, growth, and expectations. Furthermore, it 
also helps to improve decision-making and transparency, as 
well as provide new knowledge for research and society. The 
platform uses sensitive and non-sensitive open data. In contrast 
to other similar digital platforms from Norway, where the data 
is presented as raw data or with basic level of presentations, 
our platform is advantageous since it provides a range of 
options for visualization that makes the statistics more 
comprehensive. 
Keywords- digital platform; growth barometer; regional 
growth; analytics; visualization. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Nowadays, open data plays an indispensable role for 
governments’ strategy to deal with many innovation 
challenges of the future. Furthermore, open innovation 
philosophies and approaches are being launched and 
adopted by public sectors in many different countries [1][2]. 
In Norway, many governmental agencies have embraced the 
open data initiative and are making data available for public 
use. Hence, businesses and citizens can now access and 
utilize these open data resources to create innovative value-
added products and services [3]. When it comes to defining 
the meaning of open data, we use the definition provided by 
Open Data Institute, which defines open data as “data that is 
made available by government, business and individuals for 
anyone to access, use and share” [4].  The global economic 
potential value of open data has been estimated to $3 trillion 
[5]. On the other hand, the potential and advantage of Open 
Government Data (OGD) for enhancing services in different 
economic sectors has not been realized to a large extent [6]. 
In this paper, by using open data provided by Statistics 
Norway [7], Real Estate Norway [8] and the Brønnøysund 
Register Centre [9], we present the Vekstbarometer digital 
platform, an analytics-driven web application, which 
contains regional indicators presented along with research-
based knowledge relevant to regions’ growth. According to 
the conceptual model presented in Figure 1, regional growth 
is associated with growth in Value Creation, Employment, 
Workplace and Population. A region’s growth is often 
measured by growth in GDP (Gross Domestic Product_. 
However, the aim of the policy is to contribute to higher 
welfare and transform the region into better place to live and 
run business. In order for the Growth Barometer to be able 
to explain developments and provide relevant information 
related to political and business decisions, a broader 
definition of growth is therefore needed. The indicators are 
based on open data while statistical visualizations can be 
generated also for purposes other than regional growth. We 
have focused our study in the region of Ringerike from the 
southeastern part of Norway, which has recently seen a 
decline in the number of jobs and weak economic growth. 
To the best of our knowledge, there is no similar open-data 
based system previously developed or introduced, which 
encompasses research-based knowledge on a regional level 
in Norway. Nationally, there exist different digital 
platforms, but they are all different because not only they 
are using different data categories, but they also have 
different 
purposes. 
Several 
regions 
have 
business 
barometers based on survey data, collected on annual basis 
and register data. They forecast the national and regional 
business trends. One example is Konjukturbarometer 
Østlandet [10], a digital platform that contains, among 
others, a knowledge-based database on developments in the 
counties of Hedmark, Oppland, Oslo, and Akershus. The 
Confederation of Norwegian Enterprise (NHO), which is 
Norway’s largest organization for employers and the leading 
business lobbyist, is another example of digital platform. 
Their platform, Økonomibarometeret [11] covers the market 
situation, operating profit, investments, and employment on 
a county and national level. 
The main intention behind developing our innovative 
system, which can be accessed at vekstbarometer.usn.no, is 
to provide public sector authorities and local industries a 
management tool with key indicators related to the region’s 
growth. Apart from having the potential to enhance public’s 
sector transparency and engagement of civil society, our 
system can also contribute towards improving economic 
growth through processing and illustrating regional open 
data in a comprehensive way.  
Salah Uddin Ahmed, Steinar Aasnass, Fisnik Dalipi, and Knut Hesten 
University of South-Eastern Norway 
Hønefoss, Norway 
e-mail: {salah.ahmed, steinar.aasnass, fisnik.dalipi}@usn.no, 
knut.hesten@gmail.com  
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

The rest of paper is structured as following: Section 2 
presents related work, Section 3 highlights the need of 
digital platform for regional development in Ringerike, 
while Section 4 introduces the Vekstbarometer system and 
the technology used for its development, along with its 
strength and impact for regional growth. Lastly, Section 5 
concludes the paper and provides some insights about 
potential future work. 
II. 
RELATED WORK 
Due to the emergence and pervasiveness of ICT 
(Information and communication Technologies), many 
governments across the globe have been undertaking 
initiatives to transform themselves into e-governments [12], 
and subsequently are encouraging citizen participation in 
governments. OGD is one of the main extensions of such e-
government initiatives [13]. OGD is making data freely 
available and accessible to all with the goal to ensure public 
accountability 
and 
transparency 
[14], 
to 
empower 
innovation in different economic sectors and to enhance 
efficiency in administration.  
Nevertheless, in order for stakeholders to derive the 
public value out of the open data, it is of paramount 
importance for the data sets to be re-usable, comprehensive, 
interpretable, complete, and permit user-friendly interface. 
Moreover, government authorities should be proactive 
towards ensuring that the data sets are published according 
to stipulated norms, such as protecting personal and private 
information of the users, or prohibiting the release of 
sensitive data related to national security. In this 
perspective, the Norwegian government has created a 
license for open government data and have recommended 
all data owners in the public sector to apply the license, 
which contains, inter alia, information on preserving 
confidential and personal data [15]. When it comes to global 
status and trends of open data in the context of readiness, 
implementation and impact, Norway ranks among the top 
ten best countries in the world [16]. 
In the literature, there are two categories of OGD 
research. The first category is mainly based on conceptual 
frameworks and theoretical proposals [17][18], also 
including studies discussing the main stages of the OGD 
life-cycle [19]. The second category, where our work 
belongs, includes studies that are conducted in different 
countries by using OGD at the national or local level. 
Furthermore, this category is characterized by open data 
exploration and exploitation, where data from multiple 
sources of government agencies are processed and 
visualized for further use, such as to conduct various 
analysis, create mashups, to enhance the interpretability of 
open data, or even innovate upon the open data.   
Over the past years, multiple applications have been 
developed based upon the open data sets across the world, 
focusing primarily on larger cities, such as Chicago 
[20][21], New York [22], Dublin [23], St. Petersburg [24], 
Singapore [25]. 
In spite of the interest and the rapid proliferation of open 
data 
platforms, 
many 
challenges 
remain 
with 
the 
accessibility and usability of platforms using open data, data 
quality and completeness, and interpretability of open data. 
When it comes to enhancing the interpretability of open 
data, the authors of the research work [20][21] conduct a 
case study to analyze the open socioeconomic data released 
by the city of Chicago, where they apply different 
visualizations 
tailored 
for 
univariate, 
bivariate 
and 
multivariate analysis. This approach helped them to 
understand that exploring open urban data can lead to more 
effective data interpretation. Considering the usability for 
user interface design of open data platforms, a case study 
scenario involving a transportation challenge in Dublin City 
identified important patterns for highly usable open data 
platforms for open data policy, recommending these 
platforms should adopt user-friendly technology and social 
media platforms [23]. From architectural point of view, 
there is a work presented by [25]. Here, the authors 
developed an open data platform prototype and illustrate the 
requirements and the architecture of open real time digital 
platform to serve as a base for programming the city of 
Singapore, and provide visual data analytics in an urban 
context. 
III. 
THE NEED FOR A DIGITAL PLATFORM 
Several key factors related to growth and welfare points 
to the wrong direction of development for the region 
Ringerike. The region has around 43,000 inhabitants while 
the number of total new employment for the region was 
only 145 people over the past 10 years [26]. The number of 
jobs decreased was 321 for the same period. At the same 
time, value creation for the region's business sector has 
shown a weaker development compared to other regions 
that can be naturally compared with Ringerike, i.e., 
neighboring regions with similar background and assets. If 
this negative trend is not reversed, the Ringerike community 
will face the consequences of declining private and public 
welfare. This will make the region a less good place to live. 
However, politicians and businesses in the region are 
optimistic in terms of the future. New high-speed railway 
from Oslo to Ringerike region, and the new four-lane 
highway from Oslo to Hønefoss is planned to be completed 
around 2028. This gives enormous opportunities for the 
region to reverse the negative trend and create new growth 
that will ensure future welfare and good living conditions in 
the region. Nevertheless, in order to achieve this growth, it 
requires good decisions from the region's public authorities 
and industry. A growth barometer that monitors the growth 
in the region and significant conditions for growth could 
provide a useful management tool for strategic decisions.  
The target user group for the barometer will be 
politicians, municipal administration, business and the 
community. There are large amounts of statistics and 
information related to growth and development for 
municipality regions from different sources. However, there 
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

is a need to provide these statistics and information in a 
customized way targeted for the use in Ringerike region, 
develop new and better statistics, and break down the 
statistics at regional and local level. In the preparatory work, 
we have conducted a simple survey to find similar tools or 
platforms as growth barometer for other regions in Norway. 
We have found a large number of solutions, but none 
with the approach and objectives that we mentioned here. In 
this context, we believe that a digital platform like growth 
barometer could give Ringerike region a significant 
competitive advantage over other regions that are also 
working towards regional growth and development. 
A. The logical model of Barometer 
The conceptual model behind the growth barometer is given 
in the Figure 1 below.  
The objective of regional development is given through 
the points in (A), i.e., higher value creation, employment, 
jobs and higher populations. Nationally, there will always 
be a certain amount of people and businesses considering to 
"relocate". There will be national competition to get these 
businesses and individuals to establish themselves in our 
region. Here, conditions for regional growth (B) and local 
industry's contribution to local growth (C) can serve as 
lucrative points for capturing a good share of the influx of 
national movements of persons and businesses. If the 
conditions (B) and the local business sector's efforts (C) are 
large, this portion will be large. The result will be a major 
influx of businesses and individuals. We assume that growth 
targets mentioned in (A) could be achieved together with 
regional 
economic 
dynamics 
linked 
to 
business 
development, housing construction, etc. 
IV. 
VEKSTBAROMETER - THE DIGITAL PLATFORM 
TECHNOLOGY 
The growth barometer (Vekstbarometer in Norwegian) is 
a digital platform that provides the development trends in 
the regional context in a visual and user-friendly way. The 
platform uses data from different sources that is presented 
mainly in five main groups: goals, premises or prerequisites 
for growth, industries, growth, and expectations.  
 
Each group contains several categories and each 
category contains several variables, which actually contain 
the statistical data. The groups and the categories form the 
information architecture of the digital platform, which is 
shown in the Figure 2.  
The group goal contains categories: Population, Value 
Creation, Employment, Jobs, and Welfare. Each of these 
categories contain a number of variables that are not shown 
in the figure. These variables represent the data analyses and 
the visual representations in the form of charts, graphs, and 
diagrams. For example, the population category contains ten 
variables, some of which are:  total inhabitants, age-wise 
population, population change trends, net population change 
etc. Each variable is represented by a number, for example 
total inhabitants (1), age-wise population (25). The numbers 
are not assigned in any order; rather they were assigned 
when the statistics of the variable were being added in the 
system.  
The variable number can be seen from the URL; when 
browsing a certain statistics from the navigation menu the 
URL gets changed with the variable number.  
 
Figure 1. The logical model behind the vekstbarometer 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
Figure 2. Information architecture of the application 
 
Thus, the statistic variable 25 can be accessed from the 
navigation menu, as well as from the url by appending the 
variable number after the URL given at [27]. 
Apart from presenting the open data, Vekstbarometer 
also presents survey data from the local industries that 
reflects the expectations and assumptions of the local 
entrepreneurs and business owners. The application consists 
of 
mainly 
three 
parts: 
backend, 
presentation 
and 
database.  The schematic architecture of the growth 
barometer application is given in Figure 3.  
 
 
Figure 3. Vekstbarometer system architecture 
 
Back-end’s main feature is to process requests from the 
presentation layer. Based on the requests, it retrieves raw 
data from the database, sort the data and send them to the 
presentation. Backend retrieves data from external data 
storage such as open data that are provided by others 
through APIs (Application Programming Interface). It also 
processes other input data to the system and survey data. 
Data from external sources are retrieved in the desired 
formats and are saved in the database for storage. External 
data sources are fetched periodically to keep the main 
database updated. Presentation takes care of conversion of 
data transmitted from backend, transformation of these and 
display on-screen to end-user. This is the main part of the 
application that the user sees and interacts.  
The database holds the persistent and transient data that 
are critical for running the application. We have used 
MySQL databases for the persistent storage and Angular 2 
for presentation and frontend, and PHP for Backend. 
 
A. Data 
Vekstbarometer is a data visualization platform. It 
includes several kinds of data. Some data are sensitive and 
some are not sensitive. Data that are already presented as 
open data by other outlets, such as Statistics Norway are 
non-sensitive. Since these data are already available and 
open for public, we do not have any restrictions on showing 
them in raw format or in modified format. Apart from non-
sensitive data, there are data or part of data that contains 
some sensitive information about people or businesses that 
should not be made publicly available, e.g. a person’s 
personal number (social security number) or a business’s 
sales and marketing plans, confidential customer or supplier 
information, etc. These data contain privileged or 
proprietary information that only certain people are allowed 
to see. In our system, we present data collected through 
surveys from the companies in the region, which contain 
sensitive information. However, these data are not 
represented in a way that are trackable to individual 
response level. Rather, the data in the system are presented 
only as aggregated data. We make sure that data does not 
contain any attributes that can directly identify a person’s 
response. Identifiers, business names, or organization 
numbers are removed from the data set and the results are 
published only as aggregates. 
Besides, we follow the GDPR (General Data Protection 
Rules) rules when collecting data from local businesses. 
Most of the data are collected from other sources by some 
operations such as filtering or making queries in order to fit 
our local needs that are represented by the statistics 
variables in our system. However, the barometer also shows 
some newly created data that are not available in any other 
data sources. 
B. Visualizations 
 
Data is presented using different kinds of charts and 
diagrams. The diagrams include line charts, bar charts, 
stacked columns, stacked percentage column, column with 
drill down, pie charts etc. For visualizations, we have used a 
javascript library called Highcharts. With Highcharts is it is 
possible to create charts in many shapes, like heat maps, 
waterfall series and more. Additionally, the charts are highly 
configurable, customizable, and interactive.  
By configurable and customizable, we mean that values can 
be added and removed on the charts on the fly. As an 
example, the Figure 4 below presenting variable 25, which 
59
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

shows age-wise population comparisons in different 
regions, we can choose the age groups that will be presented 
in the graph. The graph shows not only the percentage of an 
age group, but also the absolute value of that group in a 
tooltip text when mouse is hovered over that group. Besides 
the customization features, the regions in the x-axis are 
linked to a detailed view of the age wise population chart for 
only that region (Figure 5), thus making the visualization 
configurable and interactive at the same time.  
 
 
Figure 4. Age wise population chart for all regions, variable 25 
 
The visualization of a statistic variable is further 
complemented by i) textual description of the variable, ii) 
links to related documents iii) links to related variables and 
iv) alternative graph options.  The textual description gives 
a brief introduction about the variable for better 
understanding and use. Users can read the links to related 
documents for further concepts. By using the links to related 
variables, user can navigate to related statistic variable 
directly from this page.  
Alternative graph option lists a number of options, and 
by selection one from those options, the user can view the 
same statistical variable in a different form of presentation, 
for example linear chart, bar chart, pie chart etc.   
 
C. The Strength and Impact of the platform 
The 
digital 
platform 
shows 
data 
in 
an 
easy, 
comprehensible and meaningful way. Although some data 
already exist in other data outlets, our platform adds value 
by making a better presentation of the data.  
 
Figure 5. Age wise population chart for a specific region, variable 25 
 
Furthermore, in contrast to other platforms, such as [28]-
[32], where the data is presented as raw data or with basic 
level of presentations, our platform is advantageous since it 
provides a range of options for visualization that makes the 
statistics more comprehensive. Even in case where the 
platform is showing existing data from other sources, still 
we add value on it. 
In addition to showing already existing data, the 
platform shows some new data. The new data can be of two 
types: i) newly formed data, ii) newly created data. Newly 
formed data is created by combining and filtering data from 
multiple sources where the data were partly available but the 
in the form that is presented here. 
On the other hand, newly created data is the case where we 
create, collect or gather very new data that were not 
available or presented in any other platform.  As an example 
of newly formed data we can mention “future population 
growth” which is represented in our platform as statistical 
variable 56 (see Figure 6). Here, the future expected 
population growth is taken from three different sources: 
Statistics Norway assumptions, political assumption and 
housing building assumption. This new variable shows the 
lack or surplus of housing capacities with political 
assumptions or the Statistics Norway assumption and gives 
a good indication if they are feasible or not compared to the 
housing capacities that are planned for the region. When it 
comes to the possibility of downloading data and images,  
besides showing the statistics in visual form, the platform 
also provides the option to download data in multiple 
formats, such as csv, pdf, xls, png and jpeg image, svg 
60
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

vector image, etc. It also provides the option of printing the 
chart and view the data of the chart in tabular forms. These 
options increase the usability of the tool and facilitates 
multiple use cases for the users of the system. Other users 
can use customized graphs and charts from our platform and 
include them in presentations or documents. 
  
 
Figure 6. Future population growth, variable 56 
 
The vekstbarometer platform is a constituent part of the 
five years long Growth Barometer project, which is 
managed by the Regional Development Group at the 
University of South-Eastern Norway (usn.no). Since the 
initiation of the project, a status report is issued 
continuously presenting the current regional growth. The 
Ringerike region also has a business policy strategy that sets 
the premises for how business policy is to be pursued to 
create growth in the region's business community. The 
strategy is created based on Vekstbarometer platform and 
presents the annual results of the regional growth according 
to the growth objectives given at Figure 1. Moreover, the 
municipality authorities can rely on vekstbarometer data in 
order to define their priorities and make better decisions. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In this paper, inspired by the recent developments in the 
field of open data initiatives, we have presented the 
Vekstbarometer digital platform. We developed the platform 
to combine multiple open data sources to generate various 
visualizations. This gives insights into the regional growth 
and development, and demonstrates the usefulness of open 
data in regional context. Furthermore, it also helps to 
improve decision-making and transparency, as well as 
provide new knowledge for research and society. The 
platform uses sensitive and non-sensitive open data. 
As a future work, we intend to expand the functionality 
of the platform by expanding the dataset and focus on 
converting the digital platform into a fully-fledged and 
mobile-friendly application. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
The authors greatly acknowledge the grant from 
Sparebank1 Ringerike Hadeland, which kindly supported 
this project, and the important contribution given by Emil 
Kalstø, who performed some programming tasks.  
REFERENCES 
[1] T. Nam, “Suggesting frameworks of citizen-sourcing via 
Government 2.0”, Government Information Quarterly, vol. 
29, pp. 12-20, 2012. 
[2] S.M. Lee, T. Hwang, D. Choi, “Open innovation in the public 
sector of leading countries”, Management Decision, vol. 50, 
pp. 147-162, 2012. 
[3] https://www.difi.no/fagomrader-og-tjenester/digitalisering-og-
samordning/apne-data [Accessed, 8 Jan 2019] 
[4] The Open Data Institute [Online]. Open Data Roadmap for the UK. 
Available from: https://theodi.org/article/open-data-roadmap-
for-the-uk-2015/ 
[5] J. Manyika, M. Chui, P. Groves, D. Farrell, S. V. Kuiken, and 
E. A. Doshi, 2013. “Open data: Unlocking innovation and 
performance with liquid information.” Technical report, 
McKinsey & Company (2013). 
[6] M. Janssen, Y. Charalabidis, and A. Zuiderwijk, “Benefits, 
adoption barriers and myths of open data and open 
government”. Inf. Syst. Manag vol. 29, no. 4 , 258–268, 2012. 
[7] https://www.ssb.no/en/ [Accessed 4.1.2019] 
[8] http://eiendomnorge.no/en/boligprisstatistikken/ 
[Accessed 
7.1.2019] 
[9] https://www.brreg.no/home/ [Accessed 4.1.2019] 
[10] https://konjunkturbarometer1.no/ [Accessed 4.1.2019] 
[11] http://okonomibarometer.nho.no/ [Accessed 4.1.2019] 
[12] M. Mpinganjira, “Use of e-government services: the role of 
trust”, International Journal of Emerging Markets, Vol. 10 
No. 4, pp. 622-633. 
[13] T. Jetzek, M. Avital, and N. Bjørn-Andersen, “Generating 
sustainable value from open data in a sharing society”, in 
Bergvall-Ka° reborn, B. and Nielsen, P. (Eds), Creating Value 
for All Through IT, IFIP Advances in Information and 
Communication Technology, Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, 
2014. 
[14] R.E. Sieber, and P.A. Johnson, “Civic open data at a 
crossroads: dominant models and current challenges”, 
Government Information Quarterly, Vol. 32 No. 3, pp. 308-
315. 
[15] https://data.norge.no/nlod/en/1.0 [Accessed 3.1.2019] 
[16] F. Esmeralda Ramos, “Open Data Development of Countries: 
Global Status and Trends”, 2017 ITU Kaleidoscope: 
Challenges for a Data-Driven Society (ITU K), 27-29 Nov 
2017, Nanjing, China. DOI: 10.23919/ITU-WT.2017.8246984 
[17] B.W. Wirtz and S. Birkmeyer, “Open government: origin, 
development, and conceptual perspectives”, International 
Journal of Public Administration, Vol. 38 No. 5, pp. 381-396.  
[18] P. McDermott, “Building open government”, Government 
Information Quarterly, Vol. 27 No. 4, pp. 401-413. 
[19] J. Attard, F. Orlandi, S. Scerri, and S. Auer, “A systematic 
review of open government data initiatives”, Government 
Information Quarterly, Vol. 32 No. 4, pp. 399-418. 
61
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

[20] R. Barcellos, J. Viterbo, L. Miranda, F. Bernardini, C. Maciel 
and 
D. 
Trevisan. 
”Transparency 
in 
practice: 
using 
visualization to enhance the interpretability of open data”. In 
Proceedings of The 18th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research, Staten Island, NY, USA, June 
07-09,2017. 
[21] M. Kassen, “A promising phenomenon of open data: a case 
study of the Chicago open data project”, Government 
Information Quarterly, Vol. 30 No. 4, pp. 508-513. 
[22] M. Sutherland, M. Cook, “Data-Driven Smart cities: A closer 
look at organizational, technical and data complexities”. In 
Proceedings of The 18th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research, Staten Island, NY, USA, June 
07-09,2017. 
[23] E. Osagie, M. Waqar, S. Adebayo, A. Stasiewicz, L. Porwol, 
A. Ojo, “Usability Evaluation of an Open Data Platform”. In 
Proceedings of 18th Annual International Conference on 
Digital Government Research, Staten Island, NY, USA, June 
2017. 
[24] S.S. D Dawes, L. Vidiasova, and O. Parkhimovich, “Planning 
and designing open government data programs: an ecosystem 
approach”, Government Information Quarterly, Vol. 33 No. 1, 
pp. 15-2 
[25] K. Kloeckl, O. Senn & C. Ratti, “Enabling the Real-Time 
City: LIVE Singapore”, Journal of Urban Technology, 19:2, 
89-112, DOI: 10.1080/10630732.2012.698068 
[26] https://vekstbarometer.usn.no/assets/documents/2018.pdf  
[Accessed 4.1.2019] 
[27] https://vekstbarometer.usn.no/statistic/25 [Accessed 9.1.2019] 
[28] http://www.telemarksbarometeret.no/ [Accessed 4.1.2019] 
[29] http://www.naringsbarometeret.no/ [Accessed 4.1.2019] 
[30] https://legacyweb.nho.no/oppsiden/ny/html/files/VA-
rapport_2016-31_NHOs_KommuneNM_2016.pdf [Accessed 
4.1.2019] 
[31] http://www.innovasjonnorge.no/no/regionalomstilling/verktoy
/naringsvennlig-kommune/ [Accessed 9.1.2019] 
[32] https://www.nho.no/Politikk-og-analyse/Offentlig-sektor-og-
naringslivet/kommunenm/ [Accessed 5.1.2019] 
 
 
 
62
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

