Regional Information Platform and Information Distribution System in 
Telecommunication and Broadcasting Convergence 
~For Tourism Promotion and Disaster Prevention~ 
Tadashi Miyosawa,  Hiroo Hirose,     
Takeshi Tsuchiya 
Department of Business Administration and Information 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
Chino, Japan 
{miyosawa, tsuchiya.takeshi, hirose}@rs.suwa.tus.ac.jp  
Hideyasu Karasawa, Hidenaga Karasawa 
 Data Cake Baker Corporation 
Tama, Japan 
{hideyasu.karasawa,hidenaga.karasawa}@dcb.co.jp 
Wataru Kameyama  
Global Information and Telecommunication Institute 
Waseda University 
Honjo, Japan 
wataru@waseda.jp 
Keiichi Koyanagi  
Graduate School of Information, Production and Systems 
Waseda University 
Kitakyusyu, Japan 
keiichi.koyanagi@waseda.jp 
Hisashi Yamamoto 
Chino Machidukuri Laboratory  
Chino, Japan 
yamamoto@chino.machiken.jp 
Kenichi Masuzawa  
Media Mix Group 
LCV Corporation 
Suwa, Japan 
masuzawa.kenichi@lcv.co.jp
 
Abstract—As the main focus of this research, we 
constructed an experimental website for the communication 
broadcasting cooperative transmission system and developed a 
regional information platform. In addition, we carried out a 
small-scale demonstration experiment at the Chino station. 
The results of the questionnaire show that there is high 
demand for the provision of regional information, as was 
initially expected. However, the level of satisfaction regarding 
the kind of information people wanted was higher with one-
segment (1Seg) transmission. It appears that 1Seg is better at 
sorting and presenting information believed to be necessary, 
and that there are comparatively few people who want in-
depth information unique to particular regions such as that 
provided by social network services. This means that the 
system should dynamically change the ratio of general and in-
depth information based on the time, location, and user profile. 
Keywords-regional information; disaster prevention; tourism 
promotion; crawling; 1Seg 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
In March 2012, the Japanese Tourism Agency adopted 
the new “Tourism Destination Promotion General Plan” as a 
basic plan to transform Japan into a tourism-oriented country. 
The authorities considered expanding tourist locations and 
improving the quality of tourism as the main directions for 
the plan. Specific goals were set, with the aim of increasing 
domestic travel spending to 30 trillion yen by 2016 and the 
number of foreign travelers to 18,000,000, while also 
improving traveler satisfaction. Tourism is one pillar of the 
growth strategy for Japan, and is also contributing to the 
recovery effort relating to the Great East Japan Earthquake 
[1].  
Furthermore, the Japanese Tourism Agency is evaluating 
the need for a “Tourism Regional Development Platform” 
and has made these documents publicly available [2]. 
Regional tourism development is shifting from an organized 
group travel model to an individual or small group model, 
while participatory experience-type travel needs are growing, 
and travelers’ needs are diversifying. To address these 
changes in travel needs and to establish networking projects 
to attract visitors, various concerned parties at the 
destinations need to meet and cooperate in a cross-sectional 
and substantive manner that will develop local tourism, by 
utilizing resources and offering products and services 
(optional tourism type products) unique to each region. 
Simply having concerned parties provide local travel 
products in their respective specialty fields, however, is not 
enough to carry out marketing that will determine what 
products are in demand, and tends to be insufficient as a 
system for dealing with complaints. Thus, in order to not 
only utilize local resources and sell local travel products, but 
also promote regional economic development that can sell 
these products and services, a regional tourism development 
platform providing a one-stop information center for selling 
local travel products across the sectors is a necessity. 
The area around Chino is blessed with a rich variety of 
natural tourism resources such as Tateshina Plateau and the 
Yatsugatake Mountains, and is host to many tourists. 
Recently, however, a decline in travelers has led to a decline 
in spending, creating a serious problem. The lack of 
coordination between tourism operators has been raised as an 
issue in tourism recovery. Since Chino is a popular location 
for tourism, many tourism companies operate there; however, 
because most of these operators promote their activities 
143
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

individually, the effect is not a consolidated one. This is why 
there is a demand for a centralized “receptacle” organization 
to be established, which could manage operations and 
advertising for all customers under a united banner [3]. Thus, 
the “Tourism Regional Development Platform” is indeed a 
necessity.  
Considering disaster prevention information, a wide 
range of information needs to be covered, including weather 
and river information, which is transmitted by each region, 
as well as earthquake information. As each type of 
information is transmitted through different media and in 
different formats, it is not possible to consolidate everything. 
In addition, manually converting media and formats means 
that information cannot be transmitted in real-time, and thus 
a system structure capable of immediate transmission is 
needed. 
It is also apparent from experiences with the Great East 
Japan Earthquake that society depends on mobile phone 
networks, the Internet, and other digital information 
transmission infrastructure. Besides the use of social media 
and e-mail in times of emergency to confirm a person’s 
safety, frequent access to websites via mobile phones and 
1Seg public information broadcasts were also recorded. 
In other words, the Great East Japan Earthquake proved 
that the various means of broadcasting and Internet 
communication complimented each other, and in so doing, 
confirmed the need to secure an information transmission 
system that can distribute information in a variety of formats. 
One channel in Japan’s terrestrial digital broadcasting 
format (ISDB-T) is split into thirteen sections, called 
“segments.” A few of these segments are bundled together to 
send video, data, and audio. One of these segments, called 
one-segment (1Seg), is used exclusively for broadcasting to 
mobile devices. 1Seg local services in Japan are broadcasts 
aimed at mobile devices, although the service is limited to a 
few small regions. 
Until now, the 1Seg local service broadcast was an 
experimental service, utilizing unused bands of the television 
broadcasting spectrum (white space). Various experiments 
were carried out in each community and service as a place 
(“special white space zone”) to conduct research and 
development in addition to verification tests for the 
institutionalization of new services and systems as well as 
for business development and promotion. Expectations are 
high for the application thereof, especially in the fields of 
regional tourism recovery and disaster prevention. 
This paper consists of an introduction in Section 1, and a 
discussion of past research in Section 2. Section 3 explains 
the aims of this research at a conceptual level. Section 4 
discusses 
the 
implementation 
of 
the 
research 
and 
experiments, while Section 5 gives the details and results of 
the experiments. Finally, Section 6 presents a summary and 
discusses options for future research.  
 
II. 
PAST RESEARCH 
To the best of our knowledge, there are no examples of 
previous hands-on studies that have comprehensively 
addressed local area information systems and information 
transmission systems, as this research aims to do. The 
following examples are provided as related research. 
There have been several reports on 1Seg local service 
experiments including those by Saito et al. [5] on tests 
conducted at  the Sapporo Snow Festival, and Nishikawa [6]. 
In addition, numerous reports exist on experiments carried 
out on the transmission of information using 1Seg local 
services. There are also examples in which 1Seg has been 
used to tackle actual tasks in local areas. 
Research on basic technology for data mining has 
resulted in advancements, and the effectiveness thereof is 
expected to improve. Deguchi [7] suggested the possibility 
of content navigation through recommendation and data 
mining. 
Additionally, 
Haseyama 
and 
Hisamitsu 
[8] 
investigated the use of video searching technology to allow 
users to access a particular video from among a great number 
of videos. 
Prompted by the Association for the Promotion of Public 
Local Information and Communication, the work in [9] 
attempted to further standardize area information platforms 
from the viewpoint of municipalities.  
In 2008, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications established the Research Society for 
Regional Safety and Security Information Foundations, and 
proposed the construction of “safety and security public 
commons” [10], a mechanism to provide the foundation for 
sharing disaster information. From this, the “commons 
format XML” was established as a format for sharing 
information, which led to the creation of the “public 
information commons”. Since June 2011, this service has 
been operating as an entity managed by the Foundation for 
MultiMedia Communications (FMMC). This paper uses the 
public information commons, and proposes a disaster 
prevention information transmission system. 
In 2012, research was carried out on a regional 
information platform and 1Seg local broadcast service for 
tourism promotion and disaster prevention [11]. During the 
research, which contributed to the design of the fundamental 
concepts of the current research project, a 1Seg local service 
broadcasting experiment for a large-scale event (the Lake 
Suwa fireworks display) was carried out. And in the past 
research showed that through optimal use of communication 
and broadcasting, user's benefit was maximized [12].  
III. 
AREA INFORMATION PLATFORM AND INFORMATION 
TRANSMISSION SYSTEM 
This research is based on the conceptual design of one of 
the results from last year’s research on the area information 
platform and information transmission system, and presents 
results based on tangible development and experimentation. 
In Section 3, the basic conceptual design is explained. 
To transmit tourist and disaster prevention information in 
a timely fashion to those needing it, a regional information 
platform has been constructed. Development for data mining, 
content comprehension technology, and sampling technology 
amongst others, has also been carried out to gather and 
analyze the information, and then automatically generate and 
organize the information desired by the user. Transmission 
144
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

experiments were conducted to confirm the platform’s 
effectiveness. 
The current state is that tourism information for large 
areas is scattered, so the desired information cannot be 
obtained instantly. In addition, accessing individual or deep, 
hidden information is challenging. For these reasons, the 
regional information platform is designed to be included 
social media as illustrated in the lower portion of Fig. 1, and 
information on narrow region will be sourced through data 
mining. In addition, conceptually, as shown in the upper 
portion of the Fig. 1, a tourism and disaster prevention 
information transmission system that can link up with media 
from broadcasts or transmissions will be built. In terms of 
the transmitted content, the platform can connect with 
broadcasts and transmissions in a coordinated fashion, and 
can be optimized to organize programs according to the 
analysis of user data. An autonomous disaster prevention 
information system will also be created, to consider the 
possible use of broadcasts and transmissions in the event of a 
disaster. 
 
 
Figure  1. Regional information and distribution system 
 
Whereas our previous research focused on a 1Seg local 
service broadcast transmission experiment at a large-scale 
event (the fireworks show), the transmission experiment in 
this research sets out to investigate an area information 
platform system and transmission system with the ability to 
link with broadcasts and transmissions. 
IV. 
SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION  
A. Overall Construction 
Fig. 2 shows the overall system configuration. The upper 
part of Fig. 2 corresponds to the area information platform 
shown in Fig. 1, while the lower part corresponds to the 
information transmission system. 
The Regional Tourism Information Database crawls web 
sites, blogs, and other online resources of local individuals 
transmitting information, allocates weights to the detected 
keywords according to frequency, and stores them in a 
database. In addition, the Area Disaster Prevention 
Information Database regularly polls public information 
commons [10], not only gathering the latest information 
from the commons, but also detecting other information, 
such as the region’s torrential rain information.  
To report disaster prevention information in a timely 
manner on a tourism and disaster prevention portal site, work 
is underway to transfer such information from the Disaster 
Prevention Information Database to the Tourism Information 
Database, thereby allowing disaster prevention warning 
information to be presented without delay on the portal site. 
 
 
Figure 2.    System configuration 
B. Area Information Platform and Portal Site Construction  
This corresponds to the part of Fig. 2 demarcated as ①. 
A platform has been created that can centrally manage not 
only official local area websites, but also personal sites, 
blogs, and social networking services (SNS), amongst others. 
By creating a one-stop portal site such as this, users (tourists) 
will be able to find the information they seek without having 
to search several sites. Additionally, local knowledge of the 
region can be extracted by crawling regional information, 
which is then analyzed according to what users want, and is 
uploaded to the portal site illustrated in Fig. 3. Moreover, we 
believe that this can be reflected in 1Seg broadcast programs.  
Several of the existing tourist websites, such as those for 
the various tourist associations, hot springs associations, 
tourist operators, and special event committees were 
analyzed by the web crawler system which is installed in 
Tokyo University of Science, Suwa. A crawler program is 
used to search for keywords related to the Suwa region; the 
resulting website data is imported and analyzed with the 
results shown in Fig. 3. This effectively creates the one-stop 
portal for regional information. Dealing with information 
that is transmitted only by SNS, for example, information on 
the local Tateshina Plateau vegetable market, which was 
scheduled to be held every Sunday, but was suspended once 
owing to a typhoon, is not that simple; if you do not know 
the SNS address, you cannot view the information. However, 
Regional Information Platform
SNS
HP
Portal Site
HP
Profiling
Content Analysis
(Annotation)
Information Distribution System for Tourism and 
Disaster Prevention
Internet
One Segment 
local service
Multimedia  
Broadcasting
Digital Signage
Data Mining
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Railway Station 
(Ex. Chino-Station) 
Regional Tourism 
Information Database 
Keyword Analysis 
Portal site 
 
Crawling 
Public 
Information 
Commons 
Regional Disaster Prevention 
Information Database 
RSS data Update 
 
 
Home Page, Blog and 
SNS of Regional 
Tourism Information 
 
Gathering Information 
Disaster Prevention 
Warning 
 
Wifi 
Log In  
System 
Regional 1seg Broadcasting 
System 
Broadcasts 
① 
② 
③ 
④ 
145
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

if “Tateshina” is picked up as a keyword, a relationship is 
created from this keyword and it is possible to see the 
information. 
 
 
 
Figure 3.  One-stop regional portal site 
 
C. Development of an Autonomous Disaster Prevention 
Information System  
 
This section relates to the part of Fig. 2 demarcated by 
②. When developing the autonomous disaster prevention 
information system, it was decided that the public 
information commons [10] would be used. The goals of this 
public information commons are: (1) to send quickly and 
accurately safety and security information that was 
transmitted to residents in regions with public institutions, 
such as local public bodies, to all residents using various 
types of media, (2) to transmit various media to residents by 
sending information only once to the commons, (3) to use a 
data format that has been standardized and unified, and (4) 
to provide the foundation for the distribution of shared 
information.  
 
Figure 4.  Public information commons conceptual design 
 
Information originators positioned on the left of Fig. 4 
are assumed to be central government agencies, local 
government, lifeline operators, and transportation related 
operators, for example. However, currently, almost all 
members are prefectural or municipal local governments. 
The 
majority 
of 
members 
that 
are 
information 
communicators, positioned on the right of Fig. 4, are local 
broadcasting offices, Cable television (CATV), Amplitude 
modulation (AM) / Frequency modulation (FM) radio, and 
community FM. 
Extensible Markup Language (XML) format, which is 
used as a standardized data format, is versatile enough to 
express diverse and varied information under various 
conditions, from warnings and disaster information to 
peacetime activities. The public information commons is 
already 
being 
used 
to 
distribute 
evacuation 
advice/instructions, 
evacuation 
point 
information, 
emergency operation center establishment points, disaster 
information, events, notices, river water levels, rainfall 
information, early warning mail, weather and storm 
warnings, designated river water flood forecasts, and 
landslide alerts as actual information individually to several 
prefectures and cities.  
 
 
Figure 5.  Screenshot during a Suwa region disaster alert 
 
Fig. 5 shows an example of an actual heavy rainfall and 
flood warning released for the Suwa region. This type of 
warning is transmitted to the public information commons 
by the Nagano local meteorological observatory. The figure 
shows how it is presented on this regional information 
platform. Furthermore, from autumn 2013, Civil protection 
warning system in Japan (J-ALERT) is scheduled to be 
transmitted via the public information commons, and it is 
expected that almost all the safety and security information 
will be collated in the public information commons.  
 
D. Login System  
The Wireless Fidelity (WiFi) login system, which does 
not require prior registration, is illustrated in part ③ of Fig. 
2. Tourism and disaster information is transmitted from this 
network interface. After logging in, the user enters the portal 
Hot keywords 
extracted by 
crawling 
regional 
information
Recent 
topics 
extracted 
by crawling 
regional 
information   
One-stop portal  for regional Tourism Promotion and Disaster Prevention 
Links to Disaster 
Prevention site
Information issuer: 
Central and Local 
Government , etc
Public Information 
commons
Transmitter:
Broadcasting, Cell 
phone, CATV , etc
Regional Residents
Warning: 
Heavy rain, Thunder and 
Flood
Names of : 
Cities, 
Towns and 
Villages
Nagano Prefecture Weather Warning Information 
146
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

site as shown in Fig. 2, with disaster information also 
presented on this page. The login system consists of a WiFi 
transmission router and homepage, and a server for 
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) control. 
E. Construction of a Communication Broadcasting 
Cooperative Transmission System  
This corresponds to the part demarcated as ④ in Fig. 2. 
By extracting data characteristics (mining), aspects such as 
the attention level and topics for a certain point in time and a 
certain location can be obtained, and dynamically formatted 
as a webpage matching the interests of the user. For 
broadcasting content, since program content is not directly 
and dynamically converted, it is possible to switch the 
display order for recommended locations based on the level 
of importance of the keyword about once a day. In the future, 
we intend accessing the Suwa tourism information database 
and converting the displayed content dynamically.  
 
 
Figure 6. Communication broadcasting cooperative disaster prevention 
operational screenshot 
 
Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 6, when a disaster or a 
warning occurs, a permanently installed smartphone 
application detects events that occur thanks to the updates to 
the Disaster Prevention Information Database, which 
launches the disaster prevention application. When a disaster 
occurs, because the Internet and radio waves may not 
necessarily be available, it is possible to select whether to 
collect information from the Internet or 1Seg broadcast for 
the disaster prevention application. If the 1Seg broadcast is 
selected, the 1Seg function automatically starts, selects a 
disaster prevention broadcasting channel, and enables the 
user to watch certain programs such as immediate disaster 
prevention broadcasts, This function has been successfully 
implemented.  
It is assumed that tourist programs will be shown by 
default, but that the system will switch to disaster prevention 
broadcasts if a disaster occurs.  
V. 
 TRANSMISSION AND BROADCAST-BASED 
EXPERIMENT AT CHINO STATION 
Using the regional information platform that was 
developed, a communication broadcasting cooperative type 
transmission experiment was performed on August 21, 2013 
at Chino station, as shown in Fig. 7. 
During the experiment, information was transmitted to 
travelers who were waiting for trains to return home after 
visiting Chino for the summer vacation via 1Seg broadcasts 
using the Internet and weak radio waves. Every year at this 
time, 100 to 200 people are typically waiting for the limited 
number of express trains in the direction of Tokyo in waiting 
areas inside the station. We distributed a questionnaire to 
these people at 1 pm, just before the fireworks display was 
about to start, and collected their replies before 5 pm.  
 
 
Figure 7.  Experiment location: map of Chino station 
 
A. Information Transmission System and Data 
Transmission using WiFi 
For transmission using the Internet, a DHCP server and 
WiFi router were set up on the ceiling of a corridor on the 
second floor of the station. The tourism information database 
and disaster prevention information database servers were set 
up at the university. A public network connected these 
servers with the Chino station. Although several WiFi 
hotspots were already in operation within the station, the 
experiment required that the WiFi service be used without 
any prior registration, which meant that it should be possible 
to connect using only the Service Set Identifier (SSID) input. 
After connecting, as shown in Fig. 8, an image introducing 
tourism in Chino was displayed, which when clicked, was 
designed to connect directly to the tourist portal because the 
main goal of the WiFi service was for people to use the 
tourist portal and owing to the realization that a push type 
service was necessary. 
 
Figure 8.  Login screen and portal screen transition 
 
Area 1seg broadcasting 
program 
Detailed Information 
from internet
Select 
internet
Select
1seg
Automatic Activation  triggered by 
disaster or warning
Wifi Network Area
“one-seg” Broadcasting Area
(微弱電波)
( By Weak radio Waves)
1seg Broadcasting Area
Chino Station Building
Chino Tourism 
Federation
Bureau
Chino Citizens Hall
Rail Line
Rail Line
Taxi Rank
East Entrance
West Entrance
Station Square
Wifi
Log in
Introduction of local 
tourism
Regional  tourism one 
stop portal site
147
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

B. Broadcast System using Weak Radio Waves 
During the experiment content was transmitted using 
weak radio waves. A transmitting device for the experiment 
was placed around the tourist information area inside the 
station, and the experiment was performed within a range of 
several meters in which the transmissions could be received. 
The video content, which was pre-prepared Chino tourist 
and disaster prevention videos, was encoded by H.264, a 
video codec for 1Seg, saved on the device’s hard disk drive, 
and repeatedly transmitted. In addition, a compilation of 
Broadcast Markup Language (BML) for the data broadcast 
section was created beforehand using authoring tools on a 
separate computer, stored on the device’s hard disk drive, 
and repeatedly sent using a carousel method. 
 
C. Broadcast Programs 
The content for 1Seg was divided and displayed as 
videos at the top of the screen with the data broadcasting 
section at the bottom of the screen. The video section 
showed Chino tourist videos for standard tourism, and it was 
assumed that this would switch to disaster prevention videos 
during emergencies. During the experiment, to ensure the 
questionnaire was easy to complete, a tourist video was 
shown for approximately 3 min, while a disaster prevention 
video was shown for approximately 2 min. Both videos were 
shown repeatedly. 
 
Figure 9.  Screenshot of 1Seg program on smartphone 
 
Fig. 9 shows the smartphone program in use during the 
actual experiment. The top of the screen in this example 
displays a video introducing tourism in the Chino region, 
while the bottom of the screen displays text in the form of 
BML for tourists.  
As shown in Fig. 10, information on a disaster and the 
prevention thereof can be acquired from the appropriate 
section on the display when a disaster occurs. 
The regional information platform was accessed the day 
before the experiment to acquire tourist information. 
Keyword content relating the 1st to 4th ranking keywords is 
displayed in order with photos attached, while information 
relating to the 5th to 8th ranking keywords is displayed as 
large text entries. Additional items are displayed below this 
on the screen.  
 
Figure 10.   Layout of smartphone screen 
 
When selecting information on a disaster and the 
prevention thereof as shown in Fig. 11, the system is 
designed to confirm aspects like the state of the disaster, 
evacuation points, aftershock information, safety information, 
and the state of recovery.  
 
Figure 11.   Disaster prevention BML screen 
 
D. Results and Considerations of the Questionnaire 
Students from Tokyo University of Science, Suwa 
interviewed people  in the vicinity of the tourist information 
kiosk in the Chino station as part of administering the 
questionnaire. 
Information collected via the questionnaire includes: 
 
• 
The kind of information users require 
• 
Usefulness and evaluation of information obtained 
via the Internet 
• 
Usefulness and evaluation of information obtained 
via 1Seg 
• 
Comprehensive 
evaluation 
of 
information 
transmitted during the experiment 
• 
Profile of the questionnaire respondents 
 
While handing out the questionnaires, the students also 
explained the tourist portal and broadcast system in detail. 
As this took a great deal of time, about 40 min per 
Tourism Promotion Video
(Switched to Disaster Prevention 
Video when Warning happened)
BML for Tourism and 
disaster prevention 
Keyword content  1st ranking to 4th is 
introduced with photo , when photo is 
clicked , move to detailed information 
Event, Lodging, gift,・・・ move to detailed 
information 
Move to disaster prevention 
information
Keyword content  5th ranking to 8th
is displayed as large text , when text is 
clicked , move to detailed information 
Back to Tourism Information
Warning or disaster information 
(Scroll Display)
Aftershock
Evacuation site
Disaster info.
Safety Info.
Recovery Info.
148
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

respondent, questionnaires were only completed by 30 
people, which was fewer than expected. 
We used an evaluation scale from 0 to 4, with 4 being 
the best. Below we discuss the obtained results, where each 
figure is given as the average of the marks for all test 
subjects.  
 
1)  Questions about information required by users 
The demand for information on tourist spots (3.60), 
access to transportation (3.57), weather forecasts (3.53), 
drinking and eating (3.47), accommodation (3.34), and 
recommended tourist routes (3.28) was high. In terms of 
disaster prevention information, there was high demand for 
information on the disaster itself (3.73) and evacuation 
points (3.60).  
 
2) Usefulness and evaluation of information obtained 
via the Internet 
Results of the questions evaluating information obtained 
via the Internet are shown in Fig. 12 and summarized below: 
usefulness (3.25), whether the correct information was 
found (2.89), whether the latest information was available 
(3.57), and whether the regional information was useful 
(3.57). It appears that information focusing on the region in 
particular was highly desirable. 
 
Figure 12.  Usefulness and evaluation of information obtained via the 
Internet 
 
Furthermore, when asking people to view and evaluate 
whether the content related to the top four keywords of the 
tourist portal via the Internet was useful, all items received 
an evaluation of 3 or above. This means that most of the test 
subjects agreed on the level of importance for the top 
keywords extracted by the system. Lake Suwa was ranked 
first, but we believe this is due to the many SNS articles 
about Lake Suwa, and the fact that during this time, many 
advertised events were due to take place at Lake Suwa. 
In addition, for disaster prevention information, an 
average evaluation of 3.69 for the usefulness thereof was 
obtained, while the ability to view tourist and disaster 
prevention information on the same page received a high 
score of 3.72 on average.  
 
 
 
3) Usefulness and evaluation of information obtained 
via 1Seg 
Results of the usefulness of transmissions by 1Seg are 
shown in Fig. 13. High scores were received for access 
information (3.56), recommended routes (3.53), gourmet 
information (3.50), and hot springs guidance (3.47). Since 
test subjects were already at the Chino station, it appears 
that they were interested in return train access information 
and recommended routes for their next visit based on the 
individual 
tourist 
site 
information. 
The 
Togariishi 
archeological site (3.28) and tourist videos (3.21) were 
given low scores.  
 
Figure 13.  Usefulness of tourist information obtained via 1Seg 
 
As shown in Fig. 14, regarding disaster prevention 
information, information allowing the user to decide what 
action to take following a direct disaster such as recovery 
information (3.72) and evacuation point information (3.63) 
was regarded highly. However, the reason that video 
footage for both tourism and disaster prevention received 
relatively low scores could be related to the fact that the 
users did not have enough time to watch the videos 
thoroughly.  
 
Figure 14. Usefulness of disaster prevention information obtained via 1Seg 
 
4) Comprehensive evaluation of information transmitted  
As shown in Fig. 15, on the whole, transmission via 
1Seg received a higher evaluation than that via the Internet. 
In particular, for the question “Did you find the information 
you wanted?” the level of satisfaction was higher for 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Usefullness
Did you find information 
you wanted?
Didi you find latest 
information?
Do you think regional 
information is usefull?
3.00
3.10
3.20
3.30
3.40
3.50
3.60
Access Info.
Recomennted route
Gourmet Info.
Hot Spring guide
Tateshina guide
Suwa Taisha guide
Onbashira guide
Venus line guide
Event Info.
Collection of Links
Accomodation
Shirakabako guide
Yatasugatake guide
Souvenir Info.
Togariishi apex Info
Tourism Video 
3.40 3.45 3.50 3.55 3.60 3.65 3.70 3.75
Disaster prevention Video
Aftershock Info.
Safety Info.
Disaster Info.
Shelter Info.
Recovery Inf.
149
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

information obtained via 1Seg. It appears that 1Seg is better 
at sorting and presenting information considered to be 
important, and that there are comparatively few people who 
want in-depth information unique to certain regions such as 
that provided by SNSs. 
 
 
 
Figure 15. Comprehensive evaluation of information transmissions 
 
5) Profile of subjects 
Profiles of the participants showed a ratio of around 60% 
men and 40% women, of which almost half were in the age 
group 60 to 70 years old. Moreover, visitors from Nagano 
prefecture comprised 30% of the participants, those from 
Tokyo 23%, and those from Aichi prefecture 17%, with the 
remainder from other regions. The percentage of first time 
visitors was 23%, with the rest having visited the area two 
or more times.  
Listed below are comments by the test subjects entered 
in the open section of the questionnaire. 
 
• 
I see that this type of service is available, but if you 
made it so that advertisements, announcements and 
general information could be quickly understood by 
visitors, the service would be better. (male, 40 years 
old) 
• 
I think it is a big help that climbers and such can 
view weather information in real time. (female, 20 
years old) 
• 
When viewing on a smartphone and such with a 
small screen, if there is a lot of information, isn’t it 
difficult to read? (male, 40 years old) 
• 
The elderly find it difficult to operate devices, and 
even though such new information is available, it’s 
often the case we cannot obtain it easily. (female, 60 
years old) 
• 
I am very interested in this. I think it’s great. (male, 
20 years old  and male, 40 years old) 
• 
The 1Seg content is much easier to understand and I 
think it’s good. (female, 30 years old) 
 
VI. 
SUMMARY AND WHAT LIES AHEAD 
The Japanese Tourism Agency is promoting the Regional 
Tourism Development Platform for tourism, while the 
Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications is 
improving awareness of the necessity for a regional 
information platform by promoting the public information 
commons for disaster prevention. 
As the main objective of this research, we constructed an 
experimental website for a communication broadcasting 
cooperative transmission system and developed a regional 
information platform. We also performed a small-scale 
demonstration experiment at Chino station.  
Results of the questionnaire show that there was high 
demand for information focusing on the region, as was 
initially 
expected. 
Also, for 
questions on 
whether 
information was available that users wanted, the level of 
satisfaction was higher for information obtained via 1Seg. 
This implies that 1Seg is better at sorting and presenting 
information believed to be necessary, and that there are 
comparatively few people who want in-depth information 
unique to certain regions such as that presented by SNSs.  
Furthermore, there was a high demand for disaster and 
crime prevention information, and users did not find it 
unusual that disaster prevention information was provided on 
the tourist portal. 
What can be concluded at this point is that a tourist portal 
website that uses the regional information platform is useful 
for users who want to obtain in-depth information unique to 
a particular region (such as that available on SNSs). 
However, for users who want to view general information, it 
appears that 1Seg (data broadcasting) and similar methods, 
which are able to sort and present information in a format 
that is easy to find, are better. This raises the question of 
what ratio of sorted general information to regional in-depth 
information should be presented on the tourist portal. For 
example, it seems that the system should dynamically change 
the ratio of general and in-depth information based on the 
time, location, and user profile.  
Furthermore, we were surprised by the fact that the 
usefulness of the video information did not score highly. It 
appears that participants did not want to take the time to 
watch the video since they were busy and had little time to 
spare. 
For 1Seg, BML data were dynamically changed based on 
the frequency of the keywords in the regional information 
database, and a simulation experiment was performed that 
changed the data broadcast screen. The future plan is to 
include this type of mechanism into the system, and perform 
additional experiments using it. 
In addition, because the local area government showed 
interest in the experiment performed during this study, we 
intend to construct a system with the cooperation of the local 
government and putting it to practical use. 
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was partially supported by the Strategic 
Information 
and 
Communication 
R&D 
Promotion 
Programme (SCOPE) of the Ministry of Internal Affairs and 
Communications, Japan under Grant No. 122304003. 
 
 
 
 
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4
Usefullness
Did you find 
information you 
wanted?
Didi you find latest 
information?
Internet
1Seg
150
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

REFERENCES 
 
[1] Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, Transportation and Tourism, 
Japan Tourism Agency, “The Tourism Nation Promotion 
Basic 
Plan”, 
http://www.mlit.go.jp/kankocho/en/kankorikkoku/kihonkeika
ku.html (retrieved: November, 2013) 
[2] Ministry of Land, Infrastructure ,Transportation and Tourism, 
Japan Tourism Agency, “Regional tourism development 
platform”, 
http://www.mlit.go.jp/kankocho/shisaku/kankochi/platform.ht
ml (retrieved: November, 2013) 
[3] Chino city, “Chino-City Vision of Tourism promotion,” 
www.city.chino.lg.jp/www/contents/1365379527687/files/kan
kouv.pdf (retrieved: November, 2013) 
[4] J. 
Murai, 
“ICT 
Architecture 
for 
Future 
Disaster 
Communication” 
Journal 
of 
Institute 
of 
Electronics, 
Information and Communication Engineers, 95(3), Mar. 2012, 
pp. 259-264 
[5] K. Saitoh, H. Kitayama, and T. Takase, “About the Area 
Limitation 1Seg Local Service Proof Experiment by Sapporo 
Snow Festival”、Information Processing Society of Japan, 
50(11), Nov. 2009,  pp. 1130-1134 
[6] A. Nishikawa, “Network-integrated Broadcast Equipment for 
Local 
One-segment 
Services,” 
Information Processing 
Society of Japan, 50(11), Nov. 2009, pp. 1135-1139 
[7] S. Deguchi, “3-1. Multicast Contents Distribution Service -
Present and Future-“ ,The Journal of The Institute of Image 
Information and Television Engineers Vol. 63 No. 5 , 2009, 
pp. 590-594  
[8] M. Haseyama and T. Hisamitsu, "Common Technologies" of 
Information Grand Voyage Project Introduction to Image and 
Video Processing Technologies” The Journal of The Institute 
of Image Information and Television Engineers Vol. 63 No. 1, 
2009,  pp. 42-47 
[9] The Association for Promotion of Public Local Information 
and Communication, Japan, “Standard Specification for Local 
Information Platform” , http://www.applic.or.jp/ (retrieved: 
November, 2013) 
[10] Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications,“Public 
Information 
commons”, 
http://www.soumu.go.jp/soutsu/shinetsu/sbt/bousai/bousai-
kanren-4.htm  (retrieved: November, 2013) 
[11] T. Miyosawa, H. Hirose, and T.Tsuchiya, ” Regional 
Information Platform and One-Segment Local Broadcast 
Service for Tourism Promotion and Disaster Prevention: An 
initial experiment and assessment,” ICDS 2013, The Seventh 
International Conference on Digital Society, Feb. 2013, pp. 
87-92 
[12] T.Miyosawa and W. Kameyama, “Modeling User's Benefit 
for 
Hybrid 
Broadcast 
and 
Communication 
System 
Optimization” The transactions of the Institute of Electronics, 
Information and Communication Engineers. B J93-B(4), Apr. 
2010, pp. 639-648 
 
 
 
 
 
 
151
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

