Vehicle to Grid and Crisis Management 
Potential of V2G for smart city power grids in Norway 
 
Marius Rohde Johannessen  
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern 
Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: marius.johannessen@usn.no 
Lasse Berntzen 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern 
Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: lasse.berntzen@usn.no 
Boban Vesin  
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern 
Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: boban.vesin@usn.no 
Qian Meng 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern 
Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: qian.meng@usn.no  
Thomas Brekke  
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern 
Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: thomas.brekke@usn.no 
Inessa Laur 
School of Business 
University of South-Eastern 
Norway 
Horten, Norway 
email: inessa.laur@usn.no 
 
 
Abstract— Researchers and practitioners alike have discussed 
Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) technology for quite some time, and we 
have extensive coverage of the technology needed, as well as 
opportunities, challenges, algorithms, and business models. 
However, few studies have examined V2G from a crisis 
management perspective. This paper presents a review of the 
current V2G literature. It gives an overview of the possibilities 
for using electric cars as a backup power supply in case of 
emergencies, such as citywide power outages.  We calculate the 
potential power available in a typical Norwegian mid-sized city 
and examine to what extent this can be part of crisis 
management in case of a massive power outage. We then review 
existing business model literature to analyze possible incentives 
for people to make their cars available for V2G. Finally, we 
conclude by pointing out several technical and social issues that 
need to be addressed for V2G to become a viable option and 
suggest vehicle-to-home (V2H) as the most likely scenario in the 
short to mid-term. 
Keywords-vehicle-to-grid; V2G; smart city; smart grid; 
electric vehicles. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Vehicle-to-Grid (V2G) technology is the ability to 
reverse the flow of energy between Electric Vehicles (EVs) 
and the home/power grid so that EV batteries function as a 
backup power source for peak hours or power outages. V2G 
can also help balance renewable energy sources by feeding 
electricity to the grid when winds are calm or the sun is not 
shining. The charging interface initiative (Charin) estimates 
that V2G technologies are widely available around 2025 [1]. 
Many technical papers are describing V2G algorithms 
for optimizing grid and charging efficiency [2], optimal 
placement and planning of charging and charging locations 
taking supply challenges and demand into consideration [3], 
or cost-optimization for end-users [4]. There are even 
examples of modeling V2G capacity [5]. However, few 
papers combine this with a crisis management perspective. 
Thus, this paper focuses on the potential of vehicle-to-grid 
technology in the context of crisis management. As Norway 
has been the leading country in adopting electric vehicles, we 
use Norway as our example. We examine the potential of 
V2G to act as a backup power source for households in case 
of emergencies and present a scenario for potentially 
available energy in 2025 and 2030, based on the current EV 
fleet and predictions of future uptake. We have calculated the 
potential for the country as a whole and for a typical mid-
sized Norwegian city of 80.000 inhabitants. However, few 
papers combine this with a crisis management perspective. 
Crisis management refers to handling a crisis, which in our 
case is a potential failure in the power grid and the use of 
energy stored in EV batteries as part of the solution. 
The reason for only examining households is that critical 
functions such as hospitals already have backup systems such 
as generators in place. For these functions, the varying energy 
available from EV batteries would probably not meet the strict 
criteria for reliable backup (but could perhaps be of interest as 
a last resort if everything else fails).   
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section II 
presents a literature review of V2G, including technical 
requirements, available algorithms, and the challenges, 
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

opportunities, and willingness of users to adopt the 
technology. Section III presents our research approach. 
Section IV presents our findings; Available energy on the 
national and mid-sized city level as a best-case scenario for 
summer and winter, and a more realistic scenario where 
assume less available energy. Finally, in Section V, we present 
our conclusions and possibilities for future research. 
II. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
This section presents related research on the vehicle to 
grid definition and background, business case, challenges, 
opportunities, and crisis management.  
A. Vehicle to grid definition and background 
The power grid has little storage capability and needs to 
be carefully managed to handle fluctuating customer demand. 
Storage capacity is costly, except perhaps for hydropower, 
where energy is stored in dams. According to Kempton and 
Tomic, electric vehicles are already there, and the number is 
increasing. On average, cars are stationary 96 % of the time, 
making their stored energy potentially available for the power 
grid. The basic definition of V2G is simply the ability of 
vehicles to provide power to the grid when stationary [6].  
 
There are different ways of connecting vehicles and the 
power grid. This paper is concerned with bi-directional V2G, 
where power can flow both ways, and EV batteries can aid in 
grid balancing and backup. This requires aggregator services, 
communication between DSO/TSO and homes, as well as 
smart meters and equipment for two-way transfer of energy 
between home and grid [7]. Other definitions include 
unidirectional V2G, where charging is determined based on 
variables such as available energy and the current prices of 
electricity. Unidirectional V2G requires less infrastructure 
and has considerable potential for overall energy-saving and 
load-balancing of the grid but does not allow for using 
batteries as a backup energy source [2]. Literature has also 
examined hybrid solutions, such as Vehicle-to-Home (V2H), 
where the EV battery is used as a backup power source for 
individual homes, and Vehicle-to-Vehicle (V2V), where cars 
can charge each others' batteries [8].  
B. Business case, challenges, opportunities 
The overall business case for all variants of  V2G is the 
potential for significant cost savings due to energy saving and 
load balancing, which in turn requires less investment in peak 
capacity [8]. In Norway, for example, the challenge is not 
(yet) the availability of electricity but the fact that peak 
demand sometimes exceeds the grid's capacity to deliver.  
As electricity moves to renewable sources such as wind 
and solar, the need for backup and balancing increases. Winds 
fluctuate, and the sun doesn't always shine when the need for 
electricity is greatest. So one scenario for V2G is to act as a 
backup to ensure the grid is balanced and operational, 
replacing polluting alternatives such as coal- or gas-driven 
power plants. Calculations indicate that  V2G could stabilize 
half the US electricity grid with a low base capacity in the 
form of fixed batteries and 8-38% of the EV fleet providing 
reserves [6]. Høj, Juul, and Lindegard [9] claim that V2G 
technology offers the potential for new and profitable business 
models if they manage to balance and integrate intermittent 
renewable energy into the grid, reduction of peak load, 
charging optimization, and regulation of participating 
capacity. They, therefore, call for more research into the 
creation of such business models. 
Almenning, Bjarghol, and Farahmand [10] have 
responded and examined the impact of grid tariffs on peak 
power demand. They found an 11% decrease in peak power 
use in a test neighborhood where peer-to-peer energy trading 
in local markets allowed for local energy exchange from solar 
and batteries. Economic incentives are also important for the 
large-scale acceptance of peer-to-peer "prosumerism", 
including willingness to participate in a V2G scheme [11]. 
 In recent years, several studies have modeled the potential 
economic costs and benefits of V2G. Gough et al. applied a 
monte Carlo-based data-driven analysis of V2G in UK 
commercial buildings, where the car park was equipped with 
V2G capabilities. They found that the most significant 
potential was wholesale market trading involving peak and 
off-peak tariffs, with a potential income of around £8400 per 
vehicle over a 10-year investment period. Vehicle-to-home 
peak reduction generated less value. Short-term operating 
reserve (providing extra power at times of high demand) was 
not viable because battery degradation cost exceeds the 
savings. This factor is likely to change as battery prices drop 
[12]. Similarly, Ahmadian et al. [13] found battery 
degradation costs to exceed the potential income unless set up 
in a system for balancing wind power. Unidirectional V2G 
(smart charging) was found to be economical and with no 
impact on battery degradation. 
 Li and colleagues [14] found that battery costs might 
already have dropped enough for a short-term operating 
reserve to be profitable. They conducted a case study in 
Shanghai and found the total net profit of V2G to be positive, 
but with higher profit for power plants than EV users and 
negative profit for grid companies. Finally, Berglund et al. 
[15] found that effective use of battery storage could shave 
peak energy costs by as much as 13,9%, enough to cover the 
costs of battery storage facilities. This makes it even more 
likely that V2G could become profitable even when 
considering increased battery degradation.  
There are also some challenges to V2G: A survey 
conducted in the Nordic countries regarding EV adoption and 
willingness to be included in V2G capacities showed that only 
two of the four countries (Norway and Finland) were 
interested in V2G. The study concludes that the public knows 
little of the potential of V2G and calls for greater education 
and awareness-building regarding V2G to increase EV 
drivers' willingness to participate. However, monetary 
incentives seem to be popular if people are aware of the 
potential. Sæle [16] conducted a survey to examine the 
willingness of Norwegians to change their electricity user 
habits and found that up to 64% was willing to either allow 
remote control of appliances, water heating, etc. or to 
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

contribute with a manual response if they save 200 Euros or 
more in a year.  
Another challenge, or rather a criticism, is that many 
studies of V2G and electricity efficiency take the idea of the 
rational human for granted and that cost-benefit analyses fail 
to include human factors (human beings are not necessarily 
rational) or social inequality. Smart equipment can be costly 
and is not necessarily something everyone can afford. There 
is also the question of what is the underlying philosophy of 
this constant "surveillance" of users [17]. While the ethics of 
technology is beyond the scope of this paper, the topic should 
definitely be on the agenda of researchers.  
C. Crisis management 
Crisis management is a sub-field of organizational studies, 
which draws on various fields such as psychology, 
management, technology, and politics. Coombs defines crisis 
management as "a set of factors designed to combat crises and 
to lessen the actual damage inflicted by a crisis" [18]  Pearson 
and Clair [19] define crisis management as a process, where 
some kind of event (blackout, natural disaster, terrorism, etc.) 
triggers a crisis, which is met by individual and collective 
reactions and handled in both planned and ad hoc ways. 
Successful handling of a crisis depends on a range of 
contextual and environmental factors, of which preparedness 
and adoption of a crisis management mindset are among the 
most important ones [19].  
Crises come in many shapes and sizes, ranging from the 
local pub running out of beer via industrial-scale crises (metal 
quality reports being falsified, the VW diesel scandal, BPs oil 
spill in the Gulf, or unexpected side effects of drugs) [20] to 
natural disasters such as earthquakes, floods and extreme 
weather [21]  
The power industry is not exempt from crises. Literature 
shows issues ranging from natural disasters via short-term 
power failure to more deep-seated issues such as lacking 
infrastructure or too low capacity for energy generation. 
Examples include Pakistan, which struggles with massive 
energy shortages and power outages ranging between 8 hours 
a day in cities and 18 hours a day in rural areas [22]. In Brazil, 
seasonal changes in weather patterns have proven to be a 
challenge for their hydropower dams, with the latest major 
supply challenge in 2015 [23], and Nepal has struggled with 
both earthquakes and blockades [24]. 
Western countries also face electricity-related crises. In 
the UK, strikes in the 1980s threatened the entire power grid 
[25]. The US state of California had supply issues in the early 
'00s, forcing energy companies to introduce incentives for 
reducing consumption [26]. More recently, we have seen 
electricity prices soar in Texas due to extreme weather 
conditions. The current transition towards renewable energy 
sources also brings challenges and potential crises that need to 
be handled [27]. Zyadin and colleagues [28] point out lack of 
storage and variations in production as major challenges. The 
wind is not always blowing, and the sun doesn't always shine, 
so we need backup sources or energy storage. Traditionally, 
coal-fired or nuclear power plants have provided this, but 
environmental concerns and social pressure mean this is no 
longer an option. This is where V2G comes in as a possible 
(partial) solution to the problem, as discussed by Zdrallek et 
al. [29]. 
III. 
RESEARCH APPROACH 
We used data from statistics Norway for household 
energy use, which has been fairly constant over the past 
years. Thus, we assume that household energy needs will 
remain at the same level for the next decade. To calculate the 
number of EVs in 2025 and 2030, we examined data from the 
Norwegian Information Council for the Road Traffic [32] and 
from the Norwegian Public Roads Administration's open data 
platform [33]. In addition, we conducted a document analysis 
of 
white 
papers 
on 
V2G 
and 
smart 
grid 
from 
Distribution/Transmission System Operators (DSO/TSO) 
and the EU. Finally, we have conducted interviews with 
regional DSO and TSO to discuss their views on V2G as a 
viable source for backup electricity.  
Using the available statistical data and input from white 
papers and interviews, we have made a calculation of the 
potentially available energy from EVs, using the following 
approach (calculations and details are presented in detail in 
section IV): 
1. Calculate daily energy needs nationally and for a 
mid-sized city 
2. Calculate potential number of EV's in 2025 and 2030 
3. Estimate available battery capacity in 2025 and 2030 
4. Estimate available power available, taking use into 
account 
IV. 
FINDINGS – SCENARIOS FOR BACKUP POWER 
In this section, we present the potential of EVs as a power 
source in a crisis, using Norway as our case and looking at 
both the national level and a mid-sized city of 80.000 
inhabitants.  
 
Household energy demand 
We started by examining data from statistics Norway on 
energy use for households (Table I). We have kept this 
number constant, as increased demand from EV charging so 
far has been offset by more efficient appliances and heating. 
Demand is higher in winter (about double) due to the cold 
climate. Nationally, households consume 70,5 GWh/day in 
summer and 140 GWh/day in winter. For our mid-sized city, 
demand is 1 GWh/day in summer and 2 GWh/day in winter. 
TABLE I.  
DAILY ENERGY DEMAND, HOUSEHOLDS 
 
National demand 
City demand 
Summer 
70,5 GWh 
1 GWh 
Winter 
140 GWh 
2 GWh 
 
Estimation of EV numbers 
The Norwegian government has said all new cars should 
be electric from 2025, and annual EV sales growth has been 
10% in the last four years. Based on total annual sales of 
150.000 cars (average new car sales 2017-19) and 10% 
annual sales growth, this means about 900.000 EVs 
48
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

nationwide, and 11.000 in a mid-sized city by 2025, and 1,7 
million/18.000 in 2030 (Table II). This number is close to the 
calculations by Saele [30], who estimates around 1,5 million 
EVs in Norway by 2030  
TABLE II.  
ESTIMATED NUMBER OF EV'S 
 
Nationally 
Mid-sized city 
2025 
900.000 
11.000 
2030 
1.700.000 
18.000 
 
Estimation of battery capacity in EV's 
This is, of course, nothing more than an informed guess, 
based on current battery sizes and predicted battery size for 
coming models. Currently, city cars and small cars have 
battery packs of 30-50 kWh, compact cars average 50 kWh, 
and medium-large cars have battery packs ranging from 75-
100 kWh [34]. As costs of batteries go down, battery pack 
size is likely to increase. However, the current information on 
coming models shows the increase might not be as big as 
expected, with most models announced for the coming years 
have battery packs between 50 and 80 kWh.  
Thus, a conservative estimate is that the average EV in 
2025 has a 40 kWh battery pack, increasing to 60 kWh in 
2030, as the oldest models with 18-24 kWh battery packs are 
gradually decommissioned.  
 
Estimation of available energy in EV batteries 
Battery capacity is one thing, state of charge something 
else. In order to estimate how much energy is available, we 
need to consider the average state of charge on parked cars at 
different times of the day. We have calculated this for 
morning and evening. As smart meters allow dynamic pricing 
of electricity, we assume most people charge their cars at 
night when prices are low. Thus, there should be more 
electricity available in the morning than in the evening when 
cars have been driven back and forth to work and activities. 
As with gasoline-powered vehicles, there is no reason to 
assume that everyone keeps a "full tank" of electricity every 
morning, but also that few people let their "tank" remain 
empty for long since both a high and a low state of charge can 
damage the battery. Thus, we estimate 30 kWh/car in the 
morning in 2025 and 40 in 2030 (Table III). 
The average private car drives 11.883 km in a year, or 33 
km a day. Based on the current US Environmental Protection 
Agency numbers from fueleconomy.com [35], if the average 
car mileage is 200 Wh/km, this means 6,6 kWh spent for 
driving each day. As we drive more some days than others, 
we round this up to 10 kWh, which leaves a conservative 
estimate of 20 kWh (2025) and 30 kWh (2030) available 
energy from each EV in the evening (Table III). This is, of 
course, again an informed guess, based on what we know of 
EV users' current charging habits – According to the 
Norwegian EV survey, most people charge at home, during 
the night, every 2-3 days [31] 
TABLE III.  
AVAILABLE ENERGY IN THE MORNING AND EVENING, 
AVG/CAR 
 
Morning 
Evening 
2025 
30 kWh 
20 kWh 
2030 
40 kWh 
30 kWh 
 
EV's potential as a backup power source 
Given the above assumptions and estimates, we can calculate 
the backup power potential of EVs is as follows: Multiply the 
number of EVs (nation and city) with available energy 
(morning and evening) as a percentage of daily energy 
demand. Tables IV and V below show how much of daily 
energy demand can potentially be covered by EV batteries:  
TABLE IV.  
POTENTIALLY AVAILABLE ENERGY IN EVS, 2025. SUMMER 
AND WINTER, AS A PERCENTAGE OF AVERAGE HOUSEHOLD DEMAND 
2025 
Nation, 
morning 
Nation, 
evening 
City, 
morning 
City, 
evening 
Available 
energy 
28 GWh 
18.7 GWh 
0.3 GWh 
0.21 GWh 
Summer, 
percentage 
of demand 
40%  
27% 
30% 
21% 
Winter, 
percentage 
of demand 
20%  
13% 
15% 
10% 
 
TABLE V.  
POTENTIALLY AVAILABLE ENERGY IN EVS, 2030. 
SUMMER AND WINTER, AS A PERCENTAGE OF AVERAGE 
HOUSEHOLD DEMAND 
2030 
Nation, 
morning 
Nation, 
evening 
City, 
morning 
City, 
evening 
Available 
energy 
67 GWh 
42 GWh 
0,72 GWh 
0,45 GWh 
Summer, 
percentage 
of demand 
95%  
60% 
72% 
45% 
Winter, 
percentage 
of demand 
48%  
30% 
36% 
23% 
 
These numbers are not meant as absolutes, and much can 
change between now and 2030 in terms of household 
demand, EV battery sizes, and charging habits. However, 
they do provide us with an indication of the potential of EV 
batteries as part of a crisis management plan to address power 
outages. This is probably an optimistic estimate, as it assumes 
every EV sold has V2G capabilities and that households have 
equipment in place for feeding electricity back to the grid – 
both assumptions that are not true as of today. Our intention 
with this paper is, however, simply to point out the potential, 
which is not insignificant, at least for shorter-term power 
outages. In winter, heating is critical in the northern 
countries, and even a few hours can lead to people freezing 
in their homes. At least in 2030, the potential is there to use 
49
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

the energy stored in EV batteries in case of power outages. 
The challenge then is to be ready both on a technological 
level and with proper crisis management plans for 
distribution and priorities.  
 In the next section, we outline some of the future research 
challenges that need to be addressed for this to be feasible in 
the near future. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
This paper has examined the potential of using energy 
stored in EV batteries, so-called V2G technology, as part of a 
crisis management strategy in case of power outages. Using 
numbers from Norway, we have shown that in 2030, the 
energy stored in EV batteries can potentially cover almost the 
entire household energy demand in the summertime. Our 
estimates are based on current energy demand, a careful 
increase in battery capacity, and Norway reaching its 
objective of all new cars being sold from 2025 are electric.  
Of course, many factors can push this estimate both higher 
and lower. The percentage of new cars might decline, new 
battery technologies might significantly increase the 
potentially available energy, to name but a few.  
To realize the potential, there are several challenges and 
factors in need of further research, both on the technical and 
social level:  
Technical issues: As EVs cannot necessarily cover all of 
the demand in an emergency, grid balancing and demand 
needs to be carefully managed, most likely using automated 
algorithms and requiring smart hubs installed in homes with 
the ability to control household energy use. One possible 
research approach could be to examine "neighborhood grids", 
attempting to balance supply and demand within, for example, 
the grid served by one transformer. 
  Currently, few homes have the technology to reverse the 
current and draw power from EV batteries. Mostly we find 
this in households with solar panels or other forms of battery 
storage, such as Tesla's powerwall. Thus, equipment 
supporting energy transfer between home, EV, and grid needs 
to be installed in homes. These challenges are technically 
possible to overcome, but so far, households have few 
incentives to install expensive equipment. The most likely 
scenario is perhaps not V2G, but V2H – using the car's battery 
as a backup for individual homes. This brings us over to the 
social and organizational issues: 
As the literature review showed, monetary incentives are 
important for households to invest in smart energy products, 
so research on business models that facilitate this is important. 
Other areas that need examination include transaction 
handling, where studies have appeared on, for example, the 
use of blockchain to handle micro-transactions between 
households. From a crisis management perspective, plans 
need to be made and implemented on both technical and social 
aspects. One important issue is the creation of guidelines for 
prioritizing demand. Even if the equipment is there to switch 
households appliances on and off, there is still a need for a 
plan on how to prioritize. Should families with small children 
be allowed to use more than other households? What about 
essential medical equipment for the elderly living at home, 
with various home care appliances? Heating in winter and 
cooling in summer demands a lot of energy, and here too, 
there is a need to plan and prioritize.   
In summary, EVs have the potential to become a 
significant part of energy crisis management, but in order to 
make this feasible, numerous challenges need to be overcome 
in the coming years. As we are still in the early days of smart 
grids/meters/hubs/homes, we have the opportunity to plan for 
these things now in order to make the energy system more 
robust in the future.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported under the ERA-Net Smart Grids 
Plus scheme Grant number 89029 and funded through the 
Research Council of Norway Grant number 295750 with the 
project title "Multi-layer aggregator solutions to facilitate 
optimum demand response and grid flexibility." 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
Charging Interface Initiative, "Grid Integration Levels 2020-06-26 
V5.2" 
[Online] 
http://combined-charging-
system.org/fileadmin/Downloads/Papers_and_Regulations/CharIN_L
evels__Grid_Integration_v5.2.pdf 2021-06-01. 
[2] 
E. Sortomme and M.A. El-Sharkawi, "Optimal charging strategies for 
unidirectional vehicle-to-grid" IEEE Transactions on Smart Grid, 2(1), 
pp. 131–138, 2011. 
[3] 
M.A. Quddus, M.  Kabli, and M. Marufuzzaman, "Modeling electric 
vehicle charging station expansion with an integration of renewable 
energy and Vehicle-to-Grid sources" Transportation Research Part E: 
Logistics and Transportation Review. vol. 128, pp.251-279, 2019. 
[4] 
H. Turker and S. Bacha, "Optimal Minimization of Plug-In Electric 
Vehicle Charging Cost with Vehicle-to-Home and Vehicle-to-Grid 
Concepts" IEEE Transaction on Vehicular Technology. vol. 67(11), 
pp.10281-10292, 2018. 
[5] 
H. Zhang, Z. Hu, Z. Xu, and Y. Song, "Evaluation of Achievable 
Vehicle-to-Grid Capacity Using Aggregate PEV Model" IEEE 
Transactions on Power Systems. 32(1), pp. 784–794, 2017. 
[6] 
W. Kempton and J. Tomić, "Vehicle-to-grid power fundamentals: 
Calculating capacity and net revenue" Journal of Power Sources, 
144(1), pp. 268–279, 2005. 
[7] 
F. Mwasilu, J.J. Justo, E.K. Kim, T.D. Do, and J.W. Jung, "Electric 
vehicles and smart grid interaction: A review on vehicle to grid and 
renewable energy sources integration "Renewable and Sustainable 
Energy Reviews 34 pp. 501-516, 2014. 
[8] 
C. Liu, K.T. Chau, D. Wu, and S. Gao, "Opportunities and challenges 
of 
vehicle-to-home, 
vehicle-to-vehicle, 
and 
vehicle-to-grid 
technologies" Proceedings of the IEEE, 101(11), pp. 2409–2427, 2013. 
[9] 
J. Høj, L. Juhl, and S. Lindegaard, "V2G—An Economic Gamechanger 
in E-Mobility?" World Electric. Vehicle Journal, 9(3) pp. 1-7, 2018. 
[10] O.M. Almenning, S. Bjarghov, and H. Farahmand, "Reducing 
Neighborhood Peak Loads with implicit Peer-to-Peer energy trading 
under Subscribed Capacity tariffs" In Proc. 2nd International 
Conference on Smart Energy Systems and Technologies (SEST), 2019. 
[11] T.H. Jackson Inderberg, H. Sæle, H. Westskog, and T. Winther, "The 
dynamics of solar prosuming: Exploring interconnections between 
actor groups in Norway" Energy Research and Social Science 70, 2020. 
[12] R. Gough, C. Dickerson, P. Rowley, and C.  Walsh, "Vehicle-to-grid 
feasibility: A techno-economic analysis of EV-based energy storage" 
Applied Energy, 192, pp. 12–23, 2017. 
[13] A. Ahmadian et al., "Cost-Benefit Analysis of V2G Implementation in 
Distribution Networks Considering PEVs Battery Degradation" IEEE 
Transactions on Sustainable Energy, 9(2), pp. 961–970, 2018. 
50
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[14] X. Li et al., "A cost-benefit analysis of V2G electric vehicles 
supporting peak shaving in Shanghai" Electric Power Systems 
Research, 179, 2020. 
[15] F. Berglund, S. Zaferanlouei, M. Korpås, and K. Uhlen, "Optimal 
Operation of Battery Storage for a Subscribed Capacity-Based Power 
Tariff Prosumer—A Norwegian Case Study" Energies. 12(23), pp. 1-
24, 2019. 
[16] H. Sale, "Flexibility potential at Norwegian households - Customer 
evaluations and system benefits" In Proc. International Conference on 
the European Energy Market, EEM. IEEE Computer Society, 2020. 
[17] T.M. Skjølsvold, I.F. Fjellså, and M. Ryghaug, “Det fleksible 
mennesket 2.0: Om sosiale relasjoner i fremtidens digitale 
elektrisitetsystem” Norsk Sosiolgisk Tidsskrift. 3(3), pp. 191–208, 
2019. 
[18] W. Coombs, "Ongoing crisis communication: Planning, managing, and 
responding 5th edition," Sage Publishing, 2019. 
[19] C.M. Pearson and J.A. Clair, "Reframing Crisis Management," 
Academic Management Review, 23, pp.59-76, 1998. 
[20] W.T.Coombs and D. Laufer, "Global Crisis Management – Current 
Research 
and 
Future 
Directions," 
Journal 
of 
International 
Management, 24  pp. 199–203, 2018. 
[21] BK. Sovacool, M. Tan-Mullins, W.  Abrahamse, "Bloated bodies and 
broken bricks: Power, ecology, and inequality in the political economy 
of natural disaster recovery," World Dev. 110, 243–255 (2018 
[22] G. Valasai et al." Overcoming electricity crisis in Pakistan: A review 
of sustainable electricity options," Renewable Sustainable Energy 
Review, 72 pp. 734–745, 2017. 
[23] J.D. Hunt, D. Stilpen, M.A.V. de Freitas, "A review of the causes, 
impacts and solutions for electricity supply crises in Brazil," 
Renewable Sustainable Energy Review 88, pp. 208–222, 2018. 
[24] G. Underwood, D. Hill, and S. Lamichhane, "Earthquakes, blockades 
and energy crises: A conceptual framework for energy systems 
resilience applied to Nepal," Energy Research and Social Science. 69, 
2020. 
[25] F. Ledger and H. Sallis, "Power struggles: crisis management in the 
UK electricity industry," IEE Review, 41(1), pp. 21–25,1995. 
[26] C.A. Goldman, G.L. Barbose, and J.H. Eto, "California customer load 
reductions during the electricity crisis: Did they help to keep the lights 
on?", Journal of Industry, Competition and Trade, 2, pp. 113-142, 
2002. 
[27] F.W. Geels et al., "The enactment of socio-technical transition 
pathways: A reformulated typology and a comparative multi-level 
analysis of the German and UK low-carbon electricity transitions 
(1990–2014)," Research Policy, 45(4), pp. 896–913, 2016. 
[28] A. Zyadin, P.  Halder, T.  Kähkönen, and A. Puhakka, "Challenges to 
renewable energy: A bulletin of perceptions from international 
academic arena," Renewable Energy, 69, pp. 82–88, 2014. 
[29] M. Zdrallek, I.  Hübl, and C.  Böse, "Special Report - Session 3: 
Operation, Control and Protection," 23rd International Conference on 
Electricity Distribution, 2015. 
[30] H. Saele and I. Petersen, "Electric vehicles in Norway and the potential 
for demand response," In Proc. 53rd International Universities Power 
Engineering Conference, UPEC 2018. IEEE, 2018. 
[31] Elbilforeningen: Elbilisten 2020 - a survey of Norwegian EV users. 
[32] Information Council for Road Traffic [Online] https://ofv.no, 
2021.06.01 
[33] Norwegian Public Roads Administration Open Data Portal [Online] 
https://dataut.vegvesen.no, 2021.06.01 
[34] EV Norway [Online] https://elbil.no/om-elbil/elbiler-idag/ 2021.06.01 
[35] US Department of Energy [Online] http://fueleconomy.org 2021.06.01 
 
51
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2021.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-869-3
ICDS 2021 : The Fifteenth International Conference on Digital Society

