Value for Users in Social Media Services - a Framework Walkthrough 
 
Sampo Teräs 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering 
Aalto University  
Espoo, Finland 
e-mail: sampo.teras@tkk.fi 
 
 
Abstract— This paper presents several key values for users in 
social media services. Based on Kujala and Väänänen-Vainio-
Mattila's value framework, a walkthrough was conducted on 
ten social media services of different types. We also analyzed 
which elements are needed in the service to produce these 
values. The main findings are that social media services mainly 
produce social life, creativity, and emotional values. Key 
elements that the services required were contacts, media 
sharing, an opportunity to provide feedback, and profile or 
character creation. By enabling these features, value can be 
created for users. The perceived value still depends on how the 
user utilizes the particular service, and how the other users 
interact with him/her. 
Keywords - Value; value-in-use; social media services; 
walkthrough. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The popularity of the social media services is startling. 
Currently, there are over 400 million Facebook users around 
the world [1]. There are over three million articles in 
English in Wikipedia, and millions more in other languages 
[2]. The social media services have raised the Internet up to 
a new level. Rather than merely gathering and using 
information, users are now also producing and sharing 
information. The audience is also now much broader. 
Instead of being limited to technology driven youth, the 
Internet is used almost by everybody. The average Internet 
gamer is no longer an Internet-savvy youngster, but a 
middle-aged parent instead [3]. 
Why are the social media services so successful and 
popular? What is the value that these leisure time services 
provide to millions of users who access their services 
several times per day? For example, Google is the main 
advertising service on the Internet, but Facebook is gaining 
on Google due its vast number of members [4]. Why do 
people spend several hours per day playing online games 
and adding information to Wikipedia without getting paid? 
Based on these phenomena, two research questions were 
formulated. 1) What forms the value in the social media 
services? 2) How is that value provided to users in social 
media services? 
Since the service creation and use are interlinked, the 
value-in-use is linked to the value’s formation [5]. In this 
research, the elements that create value in social media 
services will be examined. These elements can be functions 
or properties of the system, but they can also be demands 
from the community, users, or the use itself. 
The popularity of social media services, and the fact that 
they are mainly used voluntary during leisure time, suggests 
that the services provide a significant amount of value to the 
users. However, it is not entirely clear what these values are. 
Because some value is provided to the user, there must 
also be some elements within the services that enable this 
value creation. These elements can be functions in the 
system, but they also can be demands from either the user or 
the community.  
The related research is presented in section II. The 
research methods are described in detail in section III. 
Section IV contains the results of the research, and section 
V presents the discussion and conclusion.  
II. 
RELATED RESEARCH 
Cockton wrote that, “we should judge systems by what 
endures beyond the interaction” [6]. This means that it is 
important to find the reasons for the use, rather than only 
focusing on the use itself. Instead of measuring the quality 
of the system, the system’s worth should be considered. In 
this paper, the system is a software centered service system, 
a system that focuses on supporting customer’s activities 
and processes [5]. Here, the value does not only mean the 
economical return from the use, but other aspects as well 
(for example, social benefits and knowledge increase, or 
simply having a pleasant time).  
Grönroos noted that service creation is partly customer-
driven, partly competition-driven, and partly technology-
driven [5]. Clearly, the technology is built on Internet 
service and computers. Web 2.0 and social media are not 
strictly described, but involve several central elements [7]. 
The service improves when there are more users [7]. For 
example, in Facebook, the information increases when users 
have more contacts – other users that are connected to the 
user. The web pages are no longer static sources of 
information. Instead, they are dynamic [7]. Information 
changes constantly, so there is a practical reason for visiting 
the pages more than once. The users should be treated as co-
writers of the information [7]. They produce most of the 
content in the Web 2.0 services, while the service provider 
mainly supplies the tools to share the information. Most of 
the social media services are quite simple [7]. The service 
needs to be simple to use so that it will reach a wide 
audience and can be accessed on a daily basis. Usually, the 
106
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

social media services give something valuable for free, 
something that used to be chargeable [7]. 
Value is created during the use of these services. For 
example, there is value for the customer when a shop 
assistant helps him or her. There is no value from the 
assistant's existence to the customer while he or she is not 
helping the customer. In addition, the value comes from a 
long time customer-provider relationship [5]. Rather than a 
single purchase, it is much more profitable to both parties if 
the customer pays the provider for a longer period of 
service, while knowing that he or she will get quality service 
anytime or anywhere it is needed.  
There are several definitions for the word value. The 
Webster dictionary has included the following definitions 
for value: “1) a fair return or equivalent in goods, services, 
or money for something exchanged, 2) the monetary worth 
of something: market price, 3) relative worth, utility, or 
importance <a good value at the price> <the value of base 
stealing in baseball> <had nothing of value to say>, 7) 
something (as a principle or quality) intrinsically valuable or 
desirable <sought material values instead of human values 
— W. H. Jones>” [8].  Pietarinen defined value as a formula 
V(X,S,P), where X has a value V to S because of P [9]. 
Thus, the value is dependent upon the receiver. Others 
might find different, or even no value from functions that 
are extremely valuable to others. He also stated that values 
can be divided into two general categories, final values, and 
vicarious values that lead to these final values [9].  
Maslow defined the hierarchy of human needs [10]. The 
physiological needs, such as air and nourishment, are at the 
base of this hierarchy. Above these are safety needs and 
social needs, such as security and friends. After that comes 
the esteem needs, such as reputation. Finally, self-
actualization is needed. Later, Alderfer proposed the ERG 
theory (Existence, Relatedness, and Growth) to create a 
hierarchy of behavior influences [10]. The three categories 
in ERG theory are existence needs, relatedness needs, and 
growth needs. However, value can be considered more than 
just fulfilling the needs of users.  
Boztepe divided user value into utility, social 
significance, emotional, and spiritual categories [12]. Utility 
is divided into convenience, quality and performance, and 
economy. It defines the effectiveness and efficiency 
similarly to the definitions in the ISO 9421-11 standard 
[13]. It takes the ergonomic sides, such as accessibility and 
physical comfort, into consideration. There is also the 
economic viewpoint for value, defined as use economy.  
Social significance is divided into social prestige and 
identity [12]. These define the social relationships in the 
use, such as impression management, role fulfillment, and 
group belongingness. Humans tend to ascribe importance to 
the community to which they belong. They want to be a part 
of it, and hopefully an important part. Nevertheless, they 
still want to have their identity and uniqueness. A good 
example of meaning of the identity is that the customer’s 
commitment to a certain brand is dependent on the identity 
values it provides [14]. 
The emotional category is divided into emotion and 
sentimentality [12]. These values define the fun, enjoyment, 
and memories of the service or system. Along with this, 
there is also a spiritual value that is important for those who 
have strong faith. For example, some religious groups do 
not use certain machines for religious reasons.  
There are several other definitions and categorizations of 
user value. Kujala and Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila developed 
a combined framework based on the ones mentioned above 
and several other publications [5]. This framework is based 
on seven value divisions that are shown in Table I, with 
keywords selected from the values description. The 
framework was chosen because it is rather novel, and it 
contains the information collected from several different 
authors over several decades. The framework was also light 
and straightforward, permitting a walkthrough of ten 
services. 
TABLE I.  
SIMPLIFIED VERSION OF THE KUJALA AND VÄÄNÄNEN-
VAINIO-MATTILA’S VALUE FRAMEWORK. SEE [15] FOR THE FULL VERSION. 
Value 
Keywords 
Social values 
Relatedness, social and external esteems status, 
power, control and dominance, achievement, 
conformity, equality, helpfulness, honesty, loyalty. 
Respect, influence, power, social achievement, 
conformity. 
Emotional, 
hedonic values 
Aroused feeling or affective states, pleasure, fun, 
sensory, enjoyment. Positive feelings, pleasure and 
enjoyment, increase in emotional experiences, support 
in handling experiences and emotions and saving 
emotional occasions. 
Stimulation and 
epistemic values 
Excitement, experienced curiosity, novelty and gained 
knowledge. Increase in excitement. 
Growth and self-
actualization 
values 
Self-actualization, creating, independent thought, and 
action. Creating new things, achieving internal 
esteem. 
Traditional 
values 
Respect, commitment, and acceptance of customs and 
ideas (projected to culture or religion). Task support, 
maintaining customs and ideas. 
Safety values 
Security, social order, healthy, comfort, freedom from 
fear. Protection and alarms, ease of use, familiarity. 
Universal values 
Understanding, appreciation, tolerance, and protection 
for all, welfare, nature. Ecological soundness, 
improving equality. 
The seven value categories are: social values, 
emotional/hedonic values, stimulation and epistemic values, 
growth and self-actualization values, traditional values, 
safety values, and universal values. Social values describe 
the social side of the user’s life. These include having 
friends and other contacts, being appreciated and respected 
by the community, having some influence and power over 
others, and having some honesty and loyalty around. For 
example, when a person comes to a new work environment 
he or she needs to get related to the working community. 
Emotional and hedonic values are the user’s feelings. 
These feelings include fun, enjoyment, and other 
pleasurable emotions. The positive feelings, and effectively 
handling their related experiences, are also major part of the 
emotional needs. For example, watching comedy is fun, 
although it might not be so productive. 
Stimulation and epistemic values make the user aroused 
and excited. Finding something new and increasing 
knowledge are the key points in stimulation values. For 
107
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

example, many people are interested in traveling to other 
countries and seeing unfamiliar cultures. 
Growth and self-actualization values describe the output 
of the user’s inner self. Mainly, this refers to creativity, but 
it also means having individual thoughts and actions. For 
example, a child wants to put the clothes on by 
himself/herself, because he/she wants to show that he/she 
can do it without help. 
Traditional values are related to the cultural habits of a 
group. People in a community might keep something quite 
valuable for historical reasons, although people outside of 
the community might not see it in the same way. For 
example, people might still support the home team, although 
they continue to lose. 
Safety values describe the needs for security and 
comfort. These include mental security (for example, 
freedom from fear), and physical security (for example, 
being healthy). For example, people pay a significant 
amount of money to feel safe from burglars, fires, car 
accidents, and diseases. 
Universal values describe the common good, and 
include: public tolerance, welfare, protecting nature, 
understanding others, and having equality. For example, 
people donate food to the poor because they believe it is the 
right thing to do.  
The value created for users can be from one or several of 
these categories. Furthermore, the impact might vary. 
Others find some categories to be more important than 
others. 
III. 
RESEARCH METHODS 
The research method involved employing a value 
framework and analyzing several social media services 
reflected by this framework. Below are the descriptions of 
the chosen services and the framework used in the 
walkthrough. 
A. Services 
According to Cavazza’s Social Media Landscape, the 
chosen services are in the following groups: social 
platforms, 
content 
sharing, 
discussion 
expressing, 
publication expressing, business to business networking, 
casual gaming and multiplayer online gaming [16]. The 
chosen services were: YouTube, Wikipedia, Facebook, 
LinkedIn, Combat Arms EU, Kongregate, Picasa, Habbo, 
Last-fm, and several different phpBB-forums. The services 
are introduced in Table II. There were five different phpBB-
forums used in the research, varying from 400 to 96000 
members under the topics of sports, games, and politics. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE II.  
LIST OF SERVICES AND THEIR DESCRIPTIONS. THE 
DESCRIPTION IS RETRIEVED FROM THE SERVICE PROVIDER'S WEB PAGES 
(8.4.2010) AND THE CATEGORY IS BASED ON THE CAVAZZA'S SOCIAL 
MEDIA LANDSCAPE [16] 
Service 
Description 
Category 
URL 
Combat 
Arms EU 
"Free to play intense 
multiplayer action." 
MOG gaming 
http://com
batarms.ne
xoneu.com
/Intro.aspx
Facebook 
"Facebook helps you 
connect and share with 
the people in your life" 
Social platform
http://ww
w.faceboo
k.com/ 
Habbo 
"Make friends, join the 
fun, get noticed." (Note, 
the Finnish version of 
service was reviewed) 
3D discussion 
expressing 
http://ww
w.habbo.c
om/ 
Kongregate 
 “Thousands of the best 
free games, and our 
community features mean 
that playing them here is 
more satisfying than 
anywhere else. If you do 
well in our games you'll 
earn badges, level up, and 
gain the respect of your 
friends." 
Casual games 
gaming 
http://ww
w.kongreg
ate.com/ 
Last-Fm 
"Last.fm recommends 
music, videos and 
concerts based on what 
you listen to." 
Music content 
sharing 
http://ww
w.last.fm/ 
LinkedIn 
"Over 60 million 
professionals use 
LinkedIn to exchange 
information, ideas and 
opportunities." 
BtoB 
networking 
http://ww
w.linkedin
.com/ 
phpBB-
forums 
"The most widely used 
Open Source forum 
solution." 
Forum 
discussion 
expressing 
http://ww
w.phpbb.c
om/ 
Picasa 
"Picasa is free photo 
editing software from 
Google that makes your 
pictures look great. 
Sharing your best photos 
with friends and family is 
as easy as pressing a 
button! " 
Photo content 
sharing 
http://pica
sa.google.
com/ 
Wikipedia 
"The free encyclopedia 
that anyone can edit." 
Wiki 
publication 
expressing 
http://en.w
ikipedia.or
g/wiki/Ma
in_Page 
Youtube 
"YouTube is the world's 
most popular online video 
community, allowing 
millions of people to 
discover, watch and share 
originally-created videos." 
Video content 
sharing 
http://ww
w.youtube
.com/t/abo
ut 
B. Walkthrough 
The research process contained two steps. In the first 
step, the researcher created an account and added some 
content to the service. The purpose was to actually see the 
value that the service provides. It takes some time to get 
used to a new service and find all of the elements that it 
provides. Moreover, the value does not actually exist until a 
certain amount of time has passed, or until enough contacts 
108
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

are added. For example, it is not possible to receive 
information about what is occurring before something 
actually happens. Further, chatting with another user is 
impossible before the other user logs on to the service. 
During this step, several observations about the value were 
made, but the findings were uncategorized. At this point, 
findings from other services were noted, but they were not 
emphasized as significantly as the ones from the reviewed 
services. 
Once a basic understanding of the system was achieved, 
it was time to proceed to the next step. At that time, the 
services were formally reviewed with Kujala and Väänänen-
Vainio-Mattila's value framework, which was described in 
the previous chapter. For each service, the value was 
reflected through each division of the value framework. The 
main focus was to find properties from the service to 
support the division's value creation. There were additional 
findings that reflected the researcher's use of the service. For 
example, in some services, the emotional values were not 
directly linked to clear properties, but assumptions had to be 
made. It was also hard to describe what type of content each 
user was looking for; thus, the researcher’s subjective 
perspectives are included. There was an attempt to keep 
these at a minimum, but in this kind of walkthrough, it is 
rather impossible to remain completely objective. For 
example, it is rather personal to find something funny. 
Findings are partly based on the users’ observed 
behavior and comments. For example, a comment like, 
"That was funny,” leads to an assumption that at least one 
user found the content to be humorous or emotionally 
stimulating. Several services were targeted to some user 
groups (for example, children) that the researcher could not 
really relate to. This led to some assumptions about what is 
valuable for the users, although not necessarily valuable for 
the reviewer. 
IV. 
RESULTS 
After analyzing the services within the framework, the 
following results were achieved.  
A. Values 
Here are the phenomena listed by each value-category. 
1) Social values 
The main issues for social values involve having friends 
or contacts in the service, and getting respect or showing off 
one’s own status. In several services, having an extensive 
number of friends or contacts has a functional effect. For 
example, in LinkedIn, the service is based on having 
connections. Further, in Facebook, the content shown on 
one’s own homepage (or wall) is increased when there are 
more friends. In several games, having more allies makes it 
much easier to win. Nevertheless, in some contexts, having 
more friends can be seen as a status symbol of popularity. 
In order to gain contacts or friends, the service must 
provide the networking property. Searching or browsing 
must be enabled. In many services, there are also 
suggestions based on the connections. There must be a 
function that adds users to one’s own contacts, but there also 
has to be a function that blocks the invitations from 
strangers. Users usually acquire their friends from the real 
world, (for example, childhood friends, classmates and co-
workers), but they can also be gained through the service. 
For example, joining a team in a game, or a group in 
Facebook, connects the group members together. This 
means that the service should provide some sort of grouping 
property. 
Gaining respect and status can be provided by the users, 
the system, or with money. To gain status from other users, 
the service should provide some sort of appreciation 
function. With this function, the other users can inform that 
they like the actions of a certain user to the entire 
community. For example, one can like the posts in 
Facebook, one can rank the videos with stars in YouTube 
(this changed into thumbs during the research project), or 
add them to favorites, and the users can increase respect for 
other users in Habbo. It is extremely important that the user 
can gain recognition from their fellow users, not just from 
the system. 
Status can also be elevated by the system. Many services 
provide achievements or levels; games in particular have 
these properties. Gaining enough experience points, kills, 
money, or other parameters can permit a character to move 
up a level or allow access to some special features. In other 
services, these types of status symbols also exist. For 
example, in many discussion forums, the amount of posts 
changes the user’s status.  
Finally, status can be improved with money. Many of 
the services are free, but special features are gained with 
purchases. Money can be changed into service currency, 
like Habbo-coins in Habbo, or NX-credits in Combat Arms 
EU, but special properties can also be achieved with money. 
For example, the user can bring his/her profile to the front 
page of the service. The service currency can then be 
changed into virtual property, such as clothes, furniture, and 
weapons. The usual methods for payment are PayPal, Credit 
card, money transfers, and SMS.  This raises certain security 
issues, since real money is involved.  
2) Emotional values 
In social media services, sharing emotions and having 
fun are the two top emotional value creators. Sharing 
emotions, feelings, and experiences is quite common in 
micro blogging. Users tend to tell their friends if they are 
happy, sad, or irritated, and they like to report what 
happened during the day, or what will happen in the near 
future. Pictures, and sometimes, even videos, are used for 
sharing 
emotions 
and 
experiences. 
After 
sharing 
information, friends usually give the user feedback. They 
relate to the feeling and share their own thoughts about their 
experiences. To provide this, the service must have some 
channel to exchange information, whether it is text or 
another form of media. The possibility to comment or 
provide other feedback is essential to the creation process.     
Most social services are related to leisure time, and aside 
from sharing information, they are used for having fun. 
One’s own experiences and comments on such services are 
usually humorous, as are some shared links and images. 
Games can be also considered fun to play, and many of the 
services have games included. For example, Picasa has a 
109
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

“Where in the World” guessing game, Facebook has several 
games, and in HABBO, there is the option of role-playing, 
such as a doctor or a parent. To provide these activities, the 
services require a level of real-time interaction or turn based 
sequences. There must also be enough graphics for the users 
to boost their imagination. 
3) Stimulation 
There are three major elements in social media services 
to increase stimulation for the user. The greatest one is 
information gaining, followed by excitement and meeting 
new people. There are several areas of interesting 
information. Users are usually interested in their friends, 
hobbies, work, and other information related to their lives.  
The essential question is who is providing all of the 
necessary information? In many social media services, users 
themselves create the information. For example, in 
Wikipedia, the articles are written and edited by the users. 
In YouTube, users upload the videos, but they do not 
necessarily create the content for the videos. This might lead 
to copyright violations. Some users are quite active in terms 
of providing information, while others are not. For example, 
in one of the phpBB-forums, there were over 1300 
registered users, but only 27 thousand messages; thus, it is 
likely that the majority simply read the forum. 
One important aspect is the amount of information. If 
there is too much information, it is hard to find the essential 
information [17]. Fortunately, in the Web 2.0 world, the 
information is tagged rather than structured in tree form [7]. 
Thus, the provider of information can set a series of 
keywords to help others locate the correct information. This 
also leads to false advertising, where users add popular 
keywords when they are not related to the information.  
Since the social media services are usually quite 
personal, the privacy factor is notable. When a user provides 
information about himself/herself, family, and friends, it is 
necessary to filter the information to certain groups. In 
Facebook, only registered members can see profiles and 
those who are not friends can see only the public part of a 
user’s profile. In several services, it is also possible to send 
private messages to certain user(s).   
Excitement is usually gained through achievements, or 
more specifically, by trying to reach them. As noted before, 
the status can be measured by these factors, and reaching a 
new level in a game or discussion forum is usually 
challenging. There are several other achievements involved, 
such as finalizing one’s profile in LinkedIn or gaining 
subscribers in YouTube.  
Other stimulation effects include: meeting new people 
and finding some other interesting things, such as new 
bands of one’s favorite music genre. Usually, these are 
achieved with suggestions, browsing, or mere chance. For 
example, users can gain new friends while entering a 
random room. 
4) Growth and self-actualization 
Creativity is well supported in social media services. 
The user’s self image is also elevated by profiles and 
characters. There are several different ways to share media 
in the services. Some even allow users to edit media. The 
biggest creativity factor is creating, mixing, and sharing 
media. The use in itself might be considered creative 
behavior. For example, in YouTube, the users can create 
playlists from their favorite videos. Last but not least, the 
users are able to give opinions and other comments related 
to the media. For example, in YouTube, viewers can suggest 
that amateur musicians make certain cover songs, or in 
discussion forums, users can open a new thread for 
discussion without knowing a great deal about the topic.  
Self-actualization can be achieved through the profile. 
Usually, users try to learn about their strengths, which are 
then presented in text and images. The question is how 
honest the information actually is. Particularly, in games 
and virtual worlds, the users are not trying to copy 
themselves. 
Rather, 
they 
create 
some 
imaginary 
combination or use a common alias. Although there may be 
profiles or character information, the users are evaluated by 
their actions and behavior. For example, in Combat Arms 
EU, the player with the best stats might not be so popular if 
he/she cheats. 
5) Traditional values 
The only traditional values creator in social media 
services is acceptance. Users tend to use services in their 
own way. For example, they post things that they find 
interesting. Without feedback, the user cannot receive 
acceptance from the community; thus, the service should 
produce a channel for other users to inform their level of 
acceptance to the user. 
6) Safety values 
There are only a few safety values creators in social 
media services. Since most of the actions are electronic and 
virtual, physical safety is not really supported. Safety is 
primarily gained through awareness and information about 
the family and friends. For example, knowing that user’s 
child is doing okay on a trip creates a calm feeling. 
There are several safety issues related to social media 
services, such as privacy, family filters, and moderation. 
Since there are often various users on the service and some 
of them are minors, it is essential to have some protection 
from other users. Although the users create the content, 
there should be a moderator in the service. This is 
particularly true on open discussion forums, where the 
conversation might end up quite personal and hostile. Since 
the users are usually more or less anonymous, they can 
easily use foul language and make threats or insults.  
7) Universal values 
For universal value creation, social media services offer 
electronic material and equality. It is often considered an 
environmental deed to use digital material, and digital 
material can be easily shared. As a consequence, 
information can be easily accessed around the world and it 
will be stored to several locations. 
In social media services, all of the users are practically 
equal. Anyone can create an account despite age, gender, or 
race. Every user has essentially the same possibilities at the 
beginning, and the users are usually graded by their deeds, 
not their backgrounds. Unfortunately, in many services the 
money can give additional value to the service, so the 
underprivileged to affluent do not benefit from the services 
as much as the others do. 
110
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

B. Types of services 
For media sharing services (for example, YouTube and 
Picasa), the social network was clearly weaker, but the 
feedback had much more value than in social networking 
services (for example, LinkedIn or Facebook). In more 
graphical services such as Habbo or Combat Arms EU, the 
character’s appearance was somewhat important. In Habbo, 
it was a clear status symbol to invest in clothing and 
equipment, whereas in Combat Arms EU, the weapons and 
gear have more functional properties. 
C. User groups 
The value is also dependent on the user group, as the 
formula V(X,S,P) suggests. For example, LinkedIn is 
geared toward professional use and there are not a 
significant number of emotional values. Nevertheless, it 
seems that LinkedIn has taken several steps toward 
Facebook-type service properties, such as micro blogging, 
and hence, toward broadening the user group. 
Habbo targets young children, and for these users, value 
creation is somewhat different. The main finding was that 
children are less capable of protecting themselves. This 
creates a need to have a higher level of safety than in other 
services. Foul language and teasing of other users seemed to 
be a problem in services targeting younger individuals. 
Moreover, the amount of information that children share 
might cause problems, since they often do not realize what 
the meaning of giving personal information to strangers is. 
Although the users range in terms of age and computer 
skills, the experienced users most likely gain more from the 
services. They are more likely able to adjust settings to suit 
their preferences, and find relevant supporting services for 
their needs. Further, they are more likely to recognize trolls, 
spammers, and other misusers on the service. 
D. The framework 
The framework was easy to use, and sufficiently 
versatile to observe phenomena within the services. 
Nevertheless, some divisions did not produce extensive 
findings. It might be that the services were too socially 
oriented, and thus, the weight was more on the social values. 
For this research study, it might have been wise to break the 
social values into subcategories, such as status and 
relatedness. 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION 
In this paper, the value for user in social media services 
was analyzed. The research was based on Kujala and 
Väänänen-Vainio-Mattila’s value framework. Ten services 
of different categories were analyzed.   
To create value for user in a social media service, the 
service must have a significant number of users. The users 
are necessary, as they create content for the service. Media 
sharing should also be supported. With text, images, and 
video, the users can share their experiences and emotions. 
Subsequently, there must be the option for other users to 
provide feedback, so they can relate to these experiences 
and provide social connection for others. Finally, the service 
should have a profile or character creation. This allows the 
user to share his or her basic information as much as he/she 
wishes. Each profile or character should be unique enough 
to boost the sense of individuality and personalization. 
These profiles also help to initiate contact with other users.  
In the future, the same research study could be 
conducted with the help of actual users. In this study, 
several assumptions had to be made, and it would have been 
beneficial to have end users to verify those assumptions. It 
is quite likely that the results can be generalized to all social 
media services, but value creation is likely different with 
other types of web based services. Yet, it might be 
interesting to explore whether the non-social values are the 
same. Finally, it would be interesting to determine the level 
of value required for successful and prosperous social media 
services. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
http://www.facebook.com/press/info.php?statistics, 
retrieved  
14.4.2010 
[2] 
http://wikipedia.org/, retrieved  14.4.2010 
[3] 
Lehdonvirta, 
V.; 
“Virtual 
Consumption” 
[Doctoral 
thesis]. 
Publications of the Turku School of Economics (A-11:2009), Turku, 
2009 
[4] 
http://www.ft.com/cms/s/2/fd9b57ac-a879-11df-86dd-
00144feabdc0.html, retrieved 14.10.2010 
[5] 
Grönroos, C.; “Service Management and Marketing, Customer 
Management in Service Competition”, 3rd edition, John Wiley & 
Sons, ISBN: 978-0-470-02862-9, 2007 
[6] 
Cockton, G.; “Designing worth is worth designing”. In Proceedings 
of the 4th Nordic conference on Human-computer interaction: 
changing roles,  NordiCHI ‘06,  pp. 165-174, 2006 
[7] 
O'Reilly, 
T.; 
“What 
is 
web 
2.0?”, 
2005 
http://oreilly.com/web2/archive/what-is-web-20.html, 
retrieved 
14.9.2009 
[8] 
http://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/value, 
retrieved 
12.3.2010 
[9] 
Pietarinen, J.; ”Ihmislähtöiset luonnonarvot ja luonnon omat arvot”. 
In: Arvot ja luonnon arvottaminen, edited by Haapala & Oksanen, 
Gaudeamus, Helsinki, ISBN: 9789516627949, 2000 
[10] Maslow, A.; “Motivation and Personality”. New York: Harper, 1954 
[11] Aldefer, C.P.; “Existence, Relatedness, and Growth; Human Needs in 
Organizational Settings”, Organizational Behavior and Human 
Performance, Volume 4, Issue 2, pp. 142-175, 1969 
[12] Boztepe, S.; “User Value: Competing Theories and Models”, 
International Journal of Design 1(2), pp. 55-63, 2007 
[13] ISO 9421 - 11 part 11: “Guidance on the usability specification of 
measures”, part of ISO 9241, Ergonomic requirements for office 
work with visual display units (VDT’s), 1997 
[14] Saariluoma, P.; ”Käyttäjäpsykologia”. Porvoo, Finland: WSOY, 
ISBN: 9789510291849, 2004 
[15] Kujala,  S.  &  Väänänen‐Vainio‐Mattila,  K.;  “Value  of  Information 
Systems and Products: Understanding the Users' Perspective and 
Values”,  Journal  of  Information  Technology  Theory  and 
Application (JITTA), 9, 4, 2009. 
[16] Cavazza, F.; “Social Media Landscape Redux”, 10 april 2009 
http://www.fredcavazza.net/2009/04/10/social-media-landscape-
redux/ , retrieved 14.4.2010 
[17] Endsley, M.R.; “Designing for Situation Awareness in Complex 
System. In: Proceedings of the Second international workshop on 
symbiosis of humans, artifacts and environment, Kyoto, Japan, 2001 
 
111
ICDS 2011 : The Fifth International Conference on Digital Society
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2011.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-116-8

