Online Intermediary Liability and Privatised Enforcement:
the Content ID Case
Thomas Margoni
Faculty of Law
University of Stirling
Stirling, United Kingdom
Email: thomas.margoni@stir.ac.uk
Mark Perry
School of Law
University of New England
Armidale, NSW, Australia
Email: mark.perry@une.edu.au
Abstract—Over the last two decades, the use of technologies to
promulgate information at the click of a mouse has given rise
to unprecedented access to information but has also facilitated
the infringement of rights. There have been a number of
responses by legislative bodies attempting to recover ground
lost by rightsholders in this new environment. Some are
reviewed in this paper. The problem facing legislators is that
they wish to protect rightsholders without stifling the benefits
of easy access to knowledge, information and data, hopefully
maximising the advantages and societal benefits of improved
accessibility. Content hosts, such as YouTube, suffer under a
similar dichotomy but also face the prospect of litigation. Tools
such as “Content ID” provide rightsholders with a means of
combating potential infringements without litigation. However,
as with legislation, it is not a panacea for reaching the balance
between facilitating access and protecting rights. This paper
illustrates these issues and underlines the importance of an
approach that safeguards fundamental rights and freedoms
and strikes a fair balance among the different rights involved.
Technology can play a crucial role in this attempt.
Keywords-web hosting services; rightsholders; safe harbour;
comparative legislation; online intermediary liability.
I.
INTRODUCTION
In the Internet ecosystem, hosting providers play a
pivotal role: they supply the services and servers that users
need to upload and hold the content that they have generated
(User Generated Content, or UGC). There are many other
kinds of hosting services, for example data warehousing, but
herein we consider information sharing sites. UGC can take
disparate forms, such as video, image, text, audio, and
animation. Platforms that offer to store and make UGC
available to the public have become the backbone of what is
nowadays known as Web 2.0. Web 2.0 describes websites
which employ technologies that “allow users to interact and
collaborate with each other in a social media dialogue as
creators of user-generated content in a virtual community, in
contrast to Web sites where people are limited to the passive
viewing of content. Examples of Web 2.0 include social
networking sites, blogs, wikis, folksonomies, video sharing
sites, hosted services, Web applications, and mashups [1].
Usually, hosting providers offer a comprehensive package of
services to users. In addition to the possibility of uploading
content to their servers, they may offer assistance in making
content more accessible, appealing, and easier to consult and
search. They may also help users develop better interfaces, in
terms of look and feel, and content that complies with the
web-site’s
technical
requirements,
for
instance
those
regarding usability, file formats and meta-tags. In particular,
hosting providers often offer services that allow the host and
users to generate revenue from advertising. This is a very
important aspect, as advertising is one of the main sources of
income for hosting providers.
An issue arises with services that exceed the mere offer
of hosting capacity. In particular, advertising services can be
seen by Courts as non-neutral activities that have the
potential to disqualify hosting providers from the “safe
harbour” provisions created to exempt them from secondary
liability. In this paper, the term secondary liability is used to
refer to the possible liability of intermediaries, such as online
service providers, for infringements committed by users of
the service. This kind of liability is not harmonised at the
international or European Union level. The result is a
complex
and
often
confusing
landscape
of
different
terminologies and rules [2].
This paper begins by exploring legislation that provides a
limited “safe harbour” for service providers. It then examines
the problems facing hosting services such as YouTube, and
the Content ID system YouTube implemented in response to
problems of potential liability.
II.
LEGISLATIVE BACKGROUND
Hosting providers create the technical systems for users
to upload content on the Internet. When a user uploads
content that does not infringe another person’s copyright, nor
defames anyone, nor violates privacy or any other third party
right, they perform a perfectly legitimate activity and should
not, generally speaking, fear an injunction or claim for
restitution. The same holds true for the intermediary, the
hosting provider, which created the conditions for the upload
of content. However, when a user uploads content that does
infringe the copyright of a third party, or defames someone,
or violates their privacy or another legal right, liability
claims may not necessarily be limited to the person or entity
that directly performed the uploading action. In many cases,
under doctrines that vary significantly from jurisdiction to
jurisdiction [3], the person or entity that has helped make the
illegitimate act possible may be jointly liable for the
wrongdoing.
Many countries have introduced specific safe harbour
laws to exempt hosting providers from this secondary
liability. The declared policy objective of this type of
36
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

legislative provision is to favour the technological, economic
and social function of digital intermediaries as long as they
fulfil certain conditions. Early examples of these types of
provision are in the EU E-Commerce Directive [8], US
Digital
Millennium
Copyright
Act
[9],
and
Canadian
Copyright Act [10].
A. The European approach
In Europe, Article 14 of Directive 2000/31/EC provides
[emphasis added] [8]:
1. Where an information society service is provided that
consists of the storage of information provided by a recipient
of the service, Member States shall ensure that the service
provider is not liable for the information stored at the request
of a recipient of the service, on condition that:
(a) the provider does not have actual knowledge of illegal
activity or information and, as regards claims for damages, is
not aware of facts or circumstances from which the illegal
activity or information is apparent; or
(b)
the
provider,
upon
obtaining
such
knowledge
or
awareness, acts expeditiously to remove or to disable access
to the information.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not apply when the recipient of the
service is acting under the authority or the control of the
provider.
3. This Article shall not affect the possibility for a court or
administrative authority, in accordance with Member States'
legal systems, of requiring the service provider to terminate or
prevent an infringement, nor does it affect the possibility for
Member States of establishing procedures governing the
removal or disabling of access to information.
Similar provisions are present in 17 USC 512 (created by
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act Pub. L. 105-304 in
1998) and Sec. 31.1 of the Canadian Copyright Act 1985, as
amended. It is important to note that while the E-Commerce
Directive applies to all illegal content, the North American
provisions are limited to copyright cases.
Unlike the aforementioned jurisdictions, Australia’s legal
framework has trended towards more control of Internet
Service Providers (ISPs) (the legislation in Australia refers to
“Carriage
Service
Providers”)
on
many
fronts
[21].
However, rather than a direct set of provisions comparable to
the “safe harbour” approach, there has been a blended
legislative approach that allows ISPs to intervene when they
wish.
B. The Australian approach
The Australian Copyright Act [20], which has been much
amended to comply with the Word Trade Organization
Agreement
on
Trade
Related
Aspects
of
Intellectual
Property, United States–Australia Free Trade Agreement and
subsequent international agreements, follows most copyright
legislation worldwide. Nevertheless, much of the current
legal and policy debate is a result of the findings of the High
Court of Australia in Roadshow Films PTY Ltd & others v
iiNet Ltd (2012) [22]. The action was brought with the
assistance of the Australian Federation Against Copyright
Theft (AFACT), along with a number of major studios and
rights holders, including Roadshow Films. AFACT alleged
that a large amount of copyright material had been
downloaded by users of iiNet, and that iiNet authorised these
infringements. AFACT employed an anti-piracy company,
DtecNet Software (DtecNet software company was bought
by MarkMonitor in 2010, and MarkMonitor itself was
bought by Thompson Reuters in 2012). iiNet is a major
player in the Australian internet provision market, with
annual revenue exceeding one billion Australian dollars [25].
Upon appeal to the High Court of Australia, the question
addressed was whether the term “authorise” could be applied
to the activities of iiNet. That is, did iiNet’s inaction with
regard to putting users on notice of possible infringement
amount to authorisation of infringement [23], that would
then make the company liable. The court held that it did not,
saying: “[An] ISP is not to be taken to have authorised
primary infringement of a cinematograph film "merely
because" it has provided facilities for making it available
online to a user who is the primary infringer”, and that an
ISP is under no duty to continually monitor the activities of
users. However, this case has been diluted by the current
trends in Australian courts and legislation.
Recent amendments to the Copyright Act in Australia
bring into light again the competing interests of users, hosts,
rightsholders and policy makers. The new Section 115A is
interesting in that it allows rightsholders, “on application by
the owner of a copyright”, [25] to seek an injunction to have
a foreign website blocked from access, but allows the service
provider, the intermediary, to not take part in the proceedings
if they do not wish to (and in that case avoid costs). The
injunction, if granted, requires the ISP (carriage service
provider) to take reasonable steps to disable access to the
online location [25]. This kind of legislation, and perhaps the
whittling away of safe harbour protection, makes it more
attractive for content hosts and service providers to make use
of voluntary technologies to protect themselves. Whether
this approach is respectful of users’ fundamental rights, i.e.
of their right to freely express themselves, is yet to be
confirmed.
C. Evaluation of the current legislative trends
It is vital for hosting providers to meet the conditions
required within their jurisdiction in order to enjoy the
liability exemptions provided under so-called “safe harbour”
provisions (or similar). In all cases, liability exemptions do
not apply when the host provider partakes in activities that
give them actual knowledge and control of the infringement
[11]. Other conditions vary. For example, national courts in
the EU have shown a tendency to exclude the applicability of
Art.
14
E-Commerce
Directive
and
apply
their
own
traditional liability categories
[3]. Therefore, it is of
paramount importance for hosting providers to take the
necessary steps to clearly remain within the boundaries
established by the safe harbour or equivalent legislation to
enjoy the relative immunity. At the same time, however, they
have to maintain the services which, by making the hosting
site more appealing, will attract more users and consequently
more advertisement related revenue. All this needs to be
done without displeasing rightsholders, which may, and
usually do, threaten hosting providers and users with legal
actions based on the infringement of their rights, most
notably copyright [14].
37
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

For intermediaries, an option to ensure that their activity
will not conduce to liability claims is to voluntarily enter in
private agreements with rightsholders and users. Such
agreements are a form of private enforcement that do not
suffer the common problems of traditional, State-dominated
regulatory interventions: slow, rigid, and lacking insights or
participation
by
key
stakeholders
[11].
Accordingly,
privatised enforcement measures can become particularly
appealing to those operators that seek quick, flexible and
reliable forms of enforcement. When these privatised
measures prove of particular success and become employed
by an entire sector they are usually referred to as forms of
self-regulation [11]. However, privatised enforcement is not
always quick, flexible, reliable or especially balanced
towards all the subjects involved. From the below discussion
it emerges that of the three categories of players involved in
the typical scenario – rightsholders, intermediaries and
consumers – the latter is the weakest party and often left in
an even weaker position after negotiations.
III.
CASE SCENARIO: YOUTUBE
YouTube, the video sharing website created in 2005 by
three PayPal employees and owned by Google since 2006,
provides a good illustration of the issues involved. Almost all
the videos uploaded on YouTube are provided by users, even
though some content is provided directly by rightsholders,
such as CBS and the BBC. Any Internet user can watch the
videos without authentication but only registered users can
upload them. The maximum length of videos is 15 minutes.
However, users with a good track record of compliance with
the web-site rules and with an account verified by a mobile
phone number may be allowed to upload longer videos. This
limitation is not related to technical issues and at the
beginning of YouTube's operations there was no time limit.
It was noted, though, that most videos exceeding 15 minutes
were infringements of copyright specific to TV shows and
movies [13].
Videos can be watched on the YouTube website or
embedded in different websites in such a way that users of an
embedding website can watch the video without having to be
redirected to the YouTube website. The video, nonetheless,
is physically stored on YouTube servers and not on those of
the embedding website. Downloads of videos are not usually
offered as an option by YouTube but there are exceptions.
There are also a number of third party applications that allow
users to download videos from YouTube. It has been
reported that in the past YouTube sent “cease and desist”
letters to websites offering the possibility to download and
separate the audio or video components, as this was in
violation of YouTube's Terms of Service [13]. YouTube also
implements a number of localised websites, that is to say
websites that are exactly the same as the main one but
translated into the local language and, frequently, adapted to
meet
the requirements of the local legal framework.
YouTube usually redirects users to the localised version of
the website on the basis of the IP address: this explains why,
for instance, users from a given country trying to watch a
video sometimes see the message “Video not available in
your country” while users from a different country can still
watch that same video.
IV.
VOLUNTARY MEASURES: THE CONTENT ID TOOL
In spite of all the described efforts to limit the upload of
videos infringing third parties' copyright, YouTube, together
with its parent company Google, has increasingly been the
object
of
rightsholders'
claims.
Rightsholders
tend
to
perceive YouTube's business model as not completely fair,
since most of the content, they claim, is uploaded by users
without the authorisation of copyright owners. On different
occasions, rightsholders have reported that the number of
infringing videos available is in the order of hundreds of
thousands, which have led to claims for billions of dollars in
damages [14]. In addition to the delicate liability issue,
Google’s 'deep pockets' constitute a strong incentive for this
type of litigation, an aspect that increases both the number of
cases filed and the amount of damages sought [15].
Individual prosecutions take a lot of time and resources and,
particularly in copyright infringement cases, the amount of
damages that courts award does not always justify the
investment. This is also true in countries where courts can
award statutory damages, such as the United States, which in
cases of wilful acts can reach the sum of US$150000 per
infringement [16]. In Australia, the annual economic cost of
piracy is around AUD$551 million [17]. While the punitive
nature intrinsic in the award of particularly high damages is
certainly perceived by convicted infringers, it does not
represent a real restoration for rightsholders when compared
to industry claims that attribute 'piracy' losses at billions of
US dollars [14]. Additionally, many content and media
corporations have gained awareness of the counterproductive
consequences that a strategy of suing your own customers
(actual or potential) triggers in public opinion. Whereas, on
the other hand, to prosecute a big corporation allows
copyright holders to try to recover damages in the claimed
amounts of billions and to have a realistic expectation that
the defendant, if convicted, is solvent for the entire amount.
Furthermore, the public perception of lawsuits against and
between corporations is much more neutral, compared to the
case of a corporation suing an individual user.
In 2007, in order to further limit the amount of uploaded
infringing content and consequently reduce its exposure to
copyright infringement lawsuits, YouTube implemented the
Content ID tool, a voluntary system that in the intention of
the promoters could seriously limit – or even eliminate – the
possibility
to
upload
content
previously
identified
as
infringing.
At this point, a brief description of the tool is necessary.
Rightsholders that meet certain criteria are eligible to take
advantage of the tool and can file a request to YouTube to be
admitted to the program. Once accepted into the program,
rightsholders can submit their copyrighted material (any sort
of audio visual material) to YouTube, which in turn will
“scan” it and store the resulting ID into a database. YouTube
quantifies over 25 million IDs stored in its database [19].
When a user uploads a new video on YouTube, the video is
automatically checked against the ID content in the database
and if a match is found, YouTube contacts the rightsholder.
38
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

At this point, YouTube (more properly Google) shows its
deep understanding of Web 2.0 social and economic
dynamics by offering rightsholders the possibility to take any
of the following actions:
•
Mute the audio that matches their music;
•
Block a whole video from being viewed;
•
Monetise the video by running ads against it;
•
Track the video viewership statistics.
Interestingly, any of these actions can be country-
specific, in light of the IP address identification mentioned
before. Accordingly, rightsholders are able to determine in
which countries they want the content to be blocked, or
monetised, and in which the statistics of the video need to be
analysed. The actions can also be device-specific, meaning
that rightsholders can determine which action should apply
depending on the type of device used (desktop, mobile, e-
reader, embedding system) [11].
Nevertheless, not every rightsholder can participate in
this scheme. To be approved, users “must own exclusive
rights to a substantial body of original material that is
frequently uploaded by the YouTube user community”, a
status currently recognised for about five thousand 'partners'.
Under this condition, it seems clear that the Content ID
scheme's main function is to accommodate the needs of big
audio visual and media groups, and not those of small or
individual rightsholders. The latter can – except in very
special cases – rarely demonstrate ownership of rights “to a
substantial body of original material that is frequently
uploaded”. After all, the Content ID tool has been in action
since 2007, which is the year Viacom filed its multibillion
dollar lawsuit [14].
V.
ENFORCEMENT
Another critical element that emerged in the aftermath
of the new tool is connected with the accuracy of the ID
matching system. As Fred von Lohmann – at the time an
attorney with the Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF) –
noted, the tool has been used by some of the groups
admitted to the program to remove extremely large amounts
of audio-visual content. Many of these removals were clear
fair use cases, which led von Lohmann to describe the
practice as “wholesale censorship” [27]. Other observers
called this a “fair use massacre” and substantiated the
accusation with a number of real cases [28]. The problem is
recognized by a large cross-section of civil and academic
society, and projects aimed to monitor the evolution of
removal claims have blossomed. Indeed, fair use claims,
together with other uses related to freedom of expression,
cannot be properly evaluated by an automated process that
merely identifies similarities in the object uploaded on the
basis of a fingerprinting mechanism.
As a matter of fact, the hardship of determining when a
use is legitimate is recognised by the law, which has created
systems intended to balance conflicting claims and to give
the party whose content was removed for alleged copyright
infringement the possibility to reply. One such legal
mechanism
is
the
United
States
Digital
Millennium
Copyright Act notice and take-down procedure (‘DMCA
procedure’). Other jurisdictions offer similar solutions in
their provisions regarding the removal and replacement of
content, although often they do not reach the level of detail
present in the US case [4]. The DMCA procedure is based
on a highly regulated enumeration of the steps that a take-
down procedure should follow offering alleged infringers
the possibility to respond and establishing specific sanctions
for rightsholders who file ilicit claims [5]. On the contrary,
YouTube’s Content ID system automatically scans in real
time all content that is uploaded by usersr against the
database of works owned by quaflifying rightsholders. No
evaluation of possible fair use cases is at this point present
or possible. If a match is found, the rightsholder is informed
and can decide what to do with the content: block it in a
variety of ways, monetize it or analyse viewership. Only at
this point, the rightsholder has the possibility of determining
whether the identified material could constitute a case of
fair
use.
However,
it
seems
quite
apparent
that
a
rightsholder is not the most neutral judge when he has to
determine whether the unauthorised use of his own material
by a third party (use that often criticise or mock the original
work, such as in the case of parodies) constitutes fair use.
The user who uploaded the blocked content is left with
two choices. The first is to take no action, in which case the
content
remains
under
the
condition
chosen
by
the
rightsholder. Alternatively, the uploader of the blocked
content can decide to take action and dispute the claim,
alleging the reasons why he or she believes that the content
was uploaded lawfully. If this happens, the rightsholder can
release the claim or confirm it. In the latter case, the
uploader can “appeal” a Content ID claim but only if they
possess a pristine and verified account. At this point, the
rightsholder may release the claim or take down the audio or
video. The latter option, also known as a “copyright strike”,
leads to an immediate halt to the audio-visual content and
causes the account of the uploading user to enter a state of
“bad standing”, with limited features. If three copyright
strikes are received, the user’s account is terminated. On the
basis of the information available on the YouTube website,
and of the data required to submit (or counter-notify) a
copyright strike, it seems that the latter integrates a DMCA
notification to all legal effects.
A
last
critical
element
is
related
to
“contractual
agreements” concluded by YouTube and rightsholders.
These agreements eliminate the possibility for users to
oppose a claim of copyright infringement filed through the
Content ID scheme, or even through a formal notification
scheme such as the DMCA notice and take-down procedure.
YouTube informs users about “Videos removed or blocked
due to YouTube's contractual obligations” and explains that:
“YouTube
enters
into
agreements
with
certain music copyright owners to allow use
of
their
sound
recordings
and
musical
compositions.
39
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

In exchange for this, some of these music
copyright owners require us to handle videos
containing
their
sound
recordings
and/or
musical works in ways that differ from the
usual processes on YouTube. Under these
contracts, we may be required to remove
specific videos from the site, block specific
videos
in
certain
territories,
or
prevent
specific videos from being reinstated after
a counter notification. In some instances,
this may mean the Content ID appeals
and/or counter notification processes will
not be available. Your account will not be
penalized at this time” [29].
In other words, users will be denied the possibility to have
their content reinstated on YouTube if they file a Content ID
claim or a DMCA counter-notification under the conditions
established by 17 USC Sec. 512(g) [16].
The consequence of failing to comply with Sec. 512(g)
is that the intermediary is not eligible for the liability
exemption granted under the first part of the same provision.
Therefore, YouTube, at least under US law, by refusing to
reinstate the content under the aforementioned conditions,
exposes itself to potential liability claims from all those
users that have properly filed a counter-notification which
did not cause the rightsholder to start a court action. This is
the type of balance that the DMCA puts, at least apparently,
in place. Intermediaries can be exempted from liability for
the actions of their subscribers, however they need to follow
certain procedures. One of these, meant to counter-balance
the power attributed to rightsholders to take-down content,
is the obligation to replace such content when certain
conditions are met under the penalty of becoming liable
towards users.
Nevertheless, YouTube limits the ability of its users to
file such claims by establishing that the reinstatement of
content is at the sole discretion of YouTube. In fact, the US
version of YouTube's Terms of Service states:
“If
a
counter-notice
is
received
by the
Copyright Agent, YouTube may send a copy
of
the
counter-notice
to
the
original
complaining party informing that person that
it may replace the removed Content or cease
disabling it in 10 business days. Unless the
copyright owner files an action seeking a
court order against the Content provider,
member or user, the removed Content may
be replaced, or access to it restored, in 10 to
14 business days or more after receipt of the
counter-notice,
at
YouTube's
sole
discretion” [29].
From this brief analysis it is possible to conclude that if
the DMCA notice and take-down procedure is intended to
balance the position of rightsholders and users in the quest
for either fast removal or fast reinstatement, then YouTube's
agreements with rightsholders clearly removes only one arm
of this important balance, namely the one leading to the
protection of users. This voluntary and contractual based
approach allows YouTube and rightsholders to circumvent
the legislative safeguards created to rebalance the positions
of the parties involved in UGC activities and to help users –
the traditionally weaker party – to express themselves freely
through the content they upload.
Concluding, the voluntarily implemented Content ID
scheme is clearly a way to meet the needs of the content
industry which is interested in faster and automated
procedures for the removal of copyright infringing content
on YouTube. However, YouTube also hosts extremely large
amounts of perfectly legitimate content, including items that
copy or reproduce parts of protected works but which are
nonetheless lawful (e.g. fair use). In all these caes, the
Content ID scheme not only fails to improve an already
critical situation but worsens the position of users who
upload legitimate content.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS
In the various dimensions of the intellectual property
spectrum there has been a ‘normalisation’ of intellectual
property
rights
through
the
adoption
of
international
agreements that establish ever growing protections for
rightsholders. There are also a growing number of instances
that point away from this harmonisation of intellectual
property rights. Indeed, there is a great number of changes
facing technology mediated information sharing [26].
The hosts of information sharing servers around the
world are coming under pressure to take greater control of
their content, or at least responsibility for it. This trend is
driven by rightsholders. Despite some international and
jurisdictional efforts to mitigate liability through safe
harbour provisions, it seems likely that the coming years
will see the greater adoption of ‘voluntary’ controls, such as
those seen in Content ID.
Future legislative interventions in this field should aim to
strike a fair balance between fundamental rights, such as
freedom
of
expression,
the
proprietary
rights
of
rightsholders and the economic and technology interests of
intermediaries. In order to reach this delicate balance, basic
consumer protections cannot be contractually overridden.
Additionally, the application of better technologies for
rights management, such as notices regarding where and
how information can be used, would allow users to be better
informed as to the provenance and uses to which they can
put such materials.
40
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

VII.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank their respective institutions for making
available the facilities to contribute this paper. Thomas
Margoni thanks the European Commission FP7 programme
for providing the resources funding this research. Mark Perry
thanks IBM for funding and K Lingard for research
assistance.
This
article
is
licensed
under
a
Creative
Commons Attribution 4.0 license (CCPL4.0 BY)
REFERENCES
[1]
Web 2.0 site http://www.wikipedia.org/ Accessed 4th March
2016.
[2]
L’Oréal SA, Lancôme parfums et beauté & Cie, Laboratoire
Garnier & Cie, L’Oréal (UK) Limited v eBay International
AG, eBay Europe SARL and eBay (UK) Limited (C-324/09)
http://curia.europa.eu/juris/document/document.jsf?text=&do
cid=107261&pageIndex=0&doclang=EN&mode=lst&dir=&o
cc=first&part=1&cid=150764 Accessed 11th April 2016.
[3]
C. Angelopulos, “Beyond the Safe Harbours: Harmonising
Substantive Intermediary Liability for Copyright Infringement
in Europe”, Intellectual Property Quarterly, 2013-3, p. 253-
274.
[4]
J. Urban & L. Quilter, “Efficient Process or ‘Chilling
Effects’? Takedown Notices Under Section 512 of the Digital
Millennium Copyright Act”, Santa Clara Computer and High
Technology Law Journal, Vol. 22, p. 621, 2006.
[5]
W. Seltzer, “Free Speech Unmoored in Copyright’s Safe
Harbor:
Chilling
Effects
of
the
DMCA
on
the
First
Amendment”, Harvard Journal of Law & Technology, Vol.
24, p. 171, 2010.
[6]
P. Savola, Blocking injunctions and website operators'
liability for copyright infringement for user-generated links,
(36)5 (2014) EIPR 279.
[7]
B. van der Sloot, “Welcome to the Jungle: the Liability of
Internet Intermediaries for Privacy Violations in Europe”, 6
(2015) JIPITEC 211.
[8]
Directive 2000/31/EC of the European Parliament and of the
Council of 8 June 2000 on certain legal aspects of information
society services, in particular electronic commerce, in the
Internal Market [E-Commerce Directive].
[9]
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, Public Law 105–304 Oct.
28, 1998 https://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/PLAW-
105publ304/pdf/PLAW-105publ304.pdf Accessed 11th April
2016.
[10] [Canadian]
Copyright
Act,
RSC
1985,
c
C-42
https://www.canlii.org/en/ca/laws/stat/rsc-1985-c-c-
42/latest/rsc-1985-c-c-42.html
[11] C
Angelopoulos
et
al,
“Study
of
fundamental
rights
limitations for online enforcement through self-regulation”,
University of Amsterdam, 2016, forthcoming.
[12] YouTube Help “Uploading videos longer than 15 minutes” at
https://support.google.com/youtube/answer/71673?hl=en and
“Your
15
minutes
of
fame”
at
http://www.youtube.com/blog?entry=oorjVv_HDVs
Accessed 4th March 2016.
[13] YouTube
“Terms
of
Service”
https://www.youtube.com/static?gl=AU&template=terms
Accessed 5th March 2016.
[14] Viacom International, Inc. v. YouTube, Inc., No. 07 Civ.
2103 (S.D.N.Y.).
[15] T Margoni and M Perry “Deep Pockets, Packets, and
Harbors” Ohio State Law Journal, v. 74 (6), p. 1195-1216
(2013) http://ssrn.com/abstract=2296216 Accessed 11th April
2016.
[16] 17 U.S. Code § 504 – 513
http://www.copyright.gov/title17/92chap5.html Accessed 11th
April 2016.
[17] Ipsos MediaCT and Oxford Economics “Impact of motion
picture
piracy:
Australia
Report”
at
http://www.screenassociation.com.au/uploads/reports/IPSOS_
Economic_Consequences_of_Movie_Piracy_-_Australia.pdf
Accessed 4th March 2016.
[18] 2015 Special 301 Report United States Trade Representative
https://ustr.gov/sites/default/files/2015-Special-301-Report-
FINAL.pdf Accesdeepsed 11th April 2016.
[19] T Bartholomew “The Death of Fair Use in Cyberspace:
YouTube and the Problem with Content ID” Duke Law &
Technology Review Vol 13, No1, 66 (2015).
[20] Copyright
Act
1965
(Commonwealth
of
Australia)
https://www.legislation.gov.au/Details/C2016C00253
Accessed 10th April 2016.
[21] N Suzor, R Choi, and K Pappalard “Moments of flux in
intermediary liability for copyright infringement” Chapter 6
in M Perry Intellectual Property Governance for the 21st
Century: a Global Perspective, (in press Springer 2016).
[22] Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet Ltd [2012] HCA 16 (20
April 2012). Note, the High Court (HCA) is the highest court
in the Australian legal system.
[23] Federal Court report, Roadshow Films Pty Ltd v iiNet
Limited (No. 3) [2010] FCA 24 (4 February 2010).
[24] M Bingemann “NBN usage fee will burn consumers: iiNet”,
The Australian, 22 August 2014
[25] Section 115A, Copyright Act 1968 (Commonwealth of
Australia).
[26] M Perry (ed) Changing Directions: Global Governance of
Intellectual Property in the 21st Century (in press, Springer
2016)
http://www.springer.com/de/book/9783319311760#aboutBook
Accessed 4th March 2016.
[27] F von Lohmann, Testing YouTube's Audio Content ID
System,
April
29
2009,
available
at
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2009/04/testing-youtubes-aud.
[28] C Mcsherby, The Fair Use Massacre Continues: Now
Warner’s Going After the Babies, March 12, 2009, available
at
https://www.eff.org/deeplinks/2009/03/fair-use-massacre-
continues-now-warner-s-going-aft.
[29] YouTube Terms of Service,
http://www.youtube.com/t/terms?gl=US Accessed 11th April
2016.
41
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2016.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-521-0
ICDS 2016 : The Tenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

