Framework for a User-friendly Statistical Disclosure Control Tool
Anshika Rawat1, Mortaza S. Bargh2, Afshin Amighi3 and Marijn Janssen4
1,4 Delft University of Technology, Delft, The Netherlands
2 Research and Documentation Centre, Ministry of Justice and Security, The Hague, The Netherlands
3 Rotterdam University of Applied Sciences, Rotterdam, The Netherlands
Email: 1 a.rawat-1@student.tudelft.nl 2 m.shoae.bargh@wodc.nl 3 a.amighi@hr.nl 4 m.f.w.h.a.janssen@tudelft.nl
Abstract—Public organisations are opening more and more data
to increase their transparency. But more often than not, data
cannot be opened without modiﬁcation due to data protection
issues. There are Statistical Disclosure Control (SDC) tools that
can help to accomplish this. However, these tools are not intuitive
for end-users, especially for those who are not deeply familiar
with data science. The end-users are mostly public servants who
want to open data. Therefore, the main objective of this paper
is to develop a framework for a user-friendly tool based on
data disclosure methods and usability guidelines for protecting
microdata. The developed framework can be used to design
and evaluate a tool that can be used by data controllers within
the Dutch governmental institutions for anonymising data. This
contributes to the sharing of more data with the public or between
organisations with a minimised risk of disclosing the identity of
the individuals the data is about.
Keywords–Statistical Disclosure Control; Data Protection.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Each year, colossal amounts of data is collected and gener-
ated through court proceedings and administrative procedures
of the Dutch justice department. This data is generally gathered
by many independent organisations that are involved in the
Dutch justice system, like the Public Prosecution Service,
courts, the Central Fine Collection Agency and the Dutch
Police. However, this data is not shared amongst intuitions
or made accessible to the public. This is because sharing of
such data sets carries an inherent privacy risk. Disclosure of
personal data is considered as one of the main threats for data
opening. Therefore, only a small proportion of this data is
made available to the public to protect the identity of the
people the data is about. This impacts the transparency of
these organisations because the full potential of these data sets
cannot be achieved, as it is paramount to protect the privacy
of the respondents of the data because of laws like General
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) [1].
For this reason, the Dutch Ministry of Justice and Security
has taken upon itself to enhance its transparency, accountability
and efﬁciency by setting up an open data programme that aims
at stimulating the sharing of its data sets with the public or with
other organisations [1]. The data sets pertain to information
that is gathered by the justice branch of the Dutch government.
It is for this reason that the Research and Documentation
Centre (abbreviated as WODC in Dutch) of the Dutch Ministry
of Justice and Security is conducting a research on a tool
that can be used to anonymize data so that personal data can
be protected while maintaining the usefulness of the data.
This tool is based on SDC methodologies. SDC refers to
methods that try to prevent statistical data from disclosing
conﬁdential information about speciﬁc respondents, who may
be individuals or enterprises [2].
A. Problem Deﬁnition
Sizable research has been conducted on appropriate SDC
techniques and has been implemented in the form of software
tools. Despite the elegance and extensiveness of these solu-
tions, these tools are not widely used by data controllers in
public organisations in the Netherlands. The simple reason
is that they are complicated, time-consuming to learn and
use, and their usage requires a deep understanding of data
science. Another reason is that people who implement these
techniques, especially statistical agencies, do not widely share,
in substantial detail, their knowledge and experience using
SDC and about the process of creating safe data with other
agencies [3]. This makes it difﬁcult for those organisations
who are motivated to implement this solution but are new to
the process to get all the relevant information they need to
apply these techniques in practice.
B. Research Objective
This project is concerned with the analysis, design and
evaluation of a framework for a set of SDC usage guidelines
that can be translated into a standardised tool which is user-
friendly, time-efﬁcient and intuitive for its intended target user
groups. The target user groups of this tool are data controllers
within the Dutch public organisations like the Dutch Ministry
of Justice and Security.
C. Research Questions
To achieve this, the main objective of this project can be
realised by the following ﬁve research questions:
1)
What is the present state of the SDC tools in use?
2)
What are the conceptual SDC methods in practice?
3)
How can these conceptual guidelines be transformed
into an intuitive tool for the target group?
4)
What is the preferred design option, given the needs and
skills of the target group and given the organizational
setting?
5)
How is the preferred design perceived by the target
group?
The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In Section
2, we provide a literature overview to introduce key concepts.
7
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

Section 3 explains the research methodology to be undertaken.
Finally, we conclude the work in Section 4.
II.
LITERATURE OVERVIEW
In this section, the concept of SDC on data sets relevant for
this paper is introduced. In addition to this, the current state
of SDC tools is also outlined to show that there is a need for
a more user-friendly SDC tool.
A. Conceptual guidelines of SDC
According to the literature, the key guideline of SDC is
to protect structured data so that it can be released without
giving away the identity of speciﬁc individuals or entities [4].
Structured data refers to data that is stored in a structured
way, such as a database or spreadsheets. Thus, this technique
of anonymising data can be applied to a wide range of
data sets, most commonly to microdata and tabular data sets.
Microdata refers to data at the individual respondent level. On
the other hand, tabular data is aggregate data structured as
rows and columns containing information or contributions of
a group of respondents. The common output that is offered by
national statistical agencies is tabular data [5]. Hutchison &
Mitchell distinguish the different data protection methods that
can be applied to microdata and tabular data respectively [6].
However, this paper is only concerned with microdata sets and
its protections methods. Microdata records include personal
data such as direct identiﬁers which reveal the identity of the
person right away. Examples include the name of the person or
their address. This is a direct risk to privacy and such identiﬁers
are usually removed or redacted. However, the inherent risk
that the data faces is assumed in terms of ’linkage’ of sensitive
data with identiﬁed data [4]. The attributes in the data set
that are used in this linkage are termed quasi-identiﬁers or
indirect identiﬁers. These identiﬁers do not explicitly reveal
the identity of the individual, but are used in combination
with other indirect identiﬁers to re-identify an individual. It
is assumed that direct identiﬁers in the data sets that reveal
the identity of the individual such as name, citizenship number,
etc, are removed from the data set. However, the literature also
indicates that quasi-identiﬁers cannot simply be removed from
the data set. Hundepool provides two reasons for this, ﬁrst,
the data may be required for analysis and, second, the data
may already be available to an attacker [4]. Therefore, when
designing an SDC tool, the common risks to privacy that can
be realised through ’linkage’ can be classiﬁed into three types
[7]. They are:
1)
Identity disclosure: It is the foremost risk of re-
identiﬁcation in which the individual can be pinpointed
by a speciﬁc data entry.
2)
Attribute disclosure: This is a primary risk that arises
when additional information can be inferred about an
individual from the data shared through different data
sets or other users.
3)
Membership disclosure: A risk in which the attacker is
able to determine whether some particular data about
an individual may or may not be contained in the data
set through data linkage.
Hence, an SDC tool should address the above mentioned
risks. On further investigating the literature, it was found that
SDC techniques also differ in the way the anonymised data is
released. The data release methods can be classiﬁed into three
types, namely, Public Use Files (PUFs), Scientiﬁc Use Files
(SUFs) and data made available in a controlled research centre
[3]. PUFs are relevant for this topic as this is the data which
is made openly accessible to anyone. Because of the public
nature of these ﬁles, they require protection much larger in
the extent to other release types. Therefore, it can be inferred
that the design of the tool must have the proper data disclosure
capabilities to minimise the risk to user privacy.
However, SDC techniques cannot guarantee the elimination
of risk, but they help in reducing the risk to an acceptable level.
This is illustrated as a risk-utility trade-off in the SDC process
[3]. This trade-off is characterised by the risk of disclosure and
the utility of the data for the end-user. The trade-off between
the two signiﬁes that, to maximise utility from the data, the risk
has to be maximised as well. Figure 1 shows the plot between
risk and utility. Zero risk of disclosure is accompanied by the
release of no data, whereas data released without disclosure is
accompanied by maximum risk. Therefore, SDC techniques
have to achieve an optimal point on the risk-utility plot
where the maximum utility can be achieved at an acceptable
disclosure risk. This is an important concept to remember when
comparing and selecting appropriate SDC techniques/methods
and choosing the right parameters to mask the data. This
understanding should also be reﬂected in the implementation
of the proposed tool. Additionally, the protection methods
for microdata should try to reduce the three common risks
to privacy by ﬁnding the optimal trade-off between risk and
quality of data in terms of information loss.
Figure 1. Plot of Risk-Utility Trade-off
The issue of data anonymization is still a complex subject
which requires expertise to translate the necessary guidelines
for achieving a simpliﬁed tool to the point that it can be used
by a target group with minimal knowledge of statistics and data
science. In the Netherlands, there is no current infrastructure
to sanitise conﬁdential data to make it available for external
use. Often, data is not released at all and stored away only
for authorised personnel to see. This implies that the full
potential of this data is never realised, as it cannot be shared
for use for conducting research or for other scientiﬁc purposes
due to GDPR violation. Thus, there is a need to develop a
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

simple-to-use tool or at least a software environment that can
harness some basic data anonymisation technique so that data
controllers can adopt some minimal practices of sanitizing data
and release them to the public.
This brings us to the question of how can the complexity of
SDC techniques be reduced or hidden by an agreeable user-
interface? One way to reduce the complexity of the issues is
to explore already existing tools that can be simpliﬁed so as to
present the data controllers with a less than perfect solution,
but still something that can tentatively be adopted by them. A
simple-to-use interface can guide users through complex data
protection methods. Prasser & Kohlmayer suggest that data
controllers follow the onion layer principle in which data is
protected in a series of multiple layers as there is no single
method to protect data sets [7]. These steps including legal
agreements, as well as collecting and storing that data, which
is absolutely necessary. These measures are already being
followed because of regulations like GDPR and by executing
a Data Protection Impact Assessment (DPIA).
B. SDC Tools
There are quite a few SDC tools that are available, notably
µ-Argus [4], sdcMicro [8] and ARX [9]. Multiple comparative
studies have highlighted the capabilities of these tools when
compared to each other. The literature shows that tools like
µ-Argus implement a broad range of SDC methodologies.
On the downside, this tool is a closed-source application
which is no longer in active development. SdcMicro is an
additional package for existing statistical software. It provides
elementary anonymization techniques and has limited support
to other speciﬁc data transformations. Prasser et al. analyse that
the limitation of these tools relate to scalability issues when
handling large data sets, incomplete support of privacy criteria
and methods of data transformation and, most signiﬁcantly,
these tools require complex conﬁguration by Information Tech-
nology (IT) experts [9].
In contrast, ARX is an open-source software which ad-
dresses the issues that other tools lack. It provides a broad
range of efﬁcient data anonymization methods along with a
cross-platform user-interface. This graphical front-end pro-
vides multiple perspectives for conﬁguring, exploring and
analysing the data. But the main reason ARX stands out
is that the framework is designed to prevent tight coupling
of subsystems and ensure extensibility. This has helped the
developers of ARX provide a stand-alone software library with
a public Application Programming Interface (API), which can
be used for integrating with other systems.
Even though ARX is the preferred tool of choice, it is not
widely used for the simple reason that its many functionalities
make this tool quite complex. The extensive features provided
by ARX can be quite overwhelming to a user with basic
knowledge of this ﬁeld. The many terminologies used in the
graphical front-end of ARX might be unknown to a common
user, making this tool not intuitive. ARX also provides a user
manual guide and an in-built setup assistant (wizard), but it
does not help in reducing its complexity. Gould & Lewis
suggest that the different components of a software – operating
environment, user platform and reference manuals or materials
usually fail to interact cohesively to create a conception that the
user eventually deals with, as these components are designed
separately [10].
As a result, there is a need to design and implement a tool
which would be easier to learn and adopt. The ﬁndings suggest
that sdcMicro and µ-Argus do not provide the ﬂexibility or
the scalability that can be used as a potential development
environment for a new user-friendly implementation of an
SDC tool. Instead, the availability of the extensive APIs of
ARX coupled with its continuous development, testing and
documentation due to active development makes this tool ideal
for developing a tool that harvests the potential of the ARX
tool itself, but in an environment that may be more suited to
data controllers and their levels of SDC related knowledge.
C. User Interface Design
Designing a user interface for a software often involves
a considerable investment of time and effort which can be
reduced by adhering to previously established design guide-
lines [11]. These guidelines can serve as a starting point for
establishing software requirements and development of the
framework. Most of these guidelines explore aspects of the
user interface design on data entry, data display and Human-
Computer Interaction (HCI). However, not all guidelines can
be applied to the design and have to be ﬁltered for tailoring
the framework design to ﬁt the needs of the target group.
Another technique that can be used for capturing and
describing the functional requirements of a software tool is
use-case modelling [12]. Use-cases describe all those scenarios
in which a user can interact with a system [13]. Writing
effective use-cases can help in realising the goals of the
different stakeholders. It can also lead to stakeholder driven
requirement analysis taking into account the possibility of
conﬂicting requirements [14].
Moreover, Morris & Dillon argue in their paper that devel-
opers can gather inputs on user perception of the usefulness
or ease of use of the system based on preliminary designs
of software tools [15]. The paper suggests that these early
formulations of user perception of a system have an inﬂuence
on whether users will actually use that system [15]. The
literature also suggests that capturing predictive measures of
user acceptance, even before the user has an opportunity to
interact with the software, can lead to correlations between
perceived usefulness and eventual user adoption of the software
[16].
In conclusion, guidelines and requirement analysis can help
in formulating a preliminary design of the framework. This can
result in detecting user perceptions early in the design cycle,
leading to reduced cost and effective time management.
III.
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
The nature of this project requires an understanding of
SDC methodologies and their architecture so that they can
be translated into design guidelines for the proposed frame-
work. Additionally, the ARX tool has to be evaluated for the
comprehension of its capabilities and how those capabilities
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

can be exploited so that the framework can be built upon
features that can eventually result in the implementation of
a new tool. Design guidelines for a user interface software
have to be formalised in conjunction with the goals of the
stakeholders to realise the requirements of the framework.
Furthermore, use-case modelling and qualitative data analyses
can lead to a ﬁnal design. Lastly, the design has to be evaluated
to map it against the goals of all the stakeholders. The ﬁve
research questions mentioned previously can help in achieving
a generalised framework for an SDC tool.
Research questions 1 and 2 can be answered by conducting a
literature study that can help in understanding the present state
of the current SDC technologies, methods and their required
guidelines. By doing this, shortcomings of the current state of
the art can be understood and the most relevant ones can be
handled in the framework. The literature study can also help
in making an informed decision on the models and methods
of data anonymization that should be part of the proposed
framework. Thus, the ﬁrst two research questions can help
in formulating generalised SDC guidelines. The research also
calls upon investigating into HCI, which happens through the
user interface design. This can help in further shaping the
design guidelines and features of a primary tool and translating
it into an intuitive software design. Literature study can further
help in answering research question 3. The literature can also
reveal insights into user perception and behaviour for the
early adoption of the tool. Thus, the ﬁrst three questions can
help in deﬁning a set of guidelines and characteristics of the
framework.
Next, to further understand the target group, a qualitative
analysis research method approach will be undertaken to
understand the requirements of the tool in an organisational
setting. This involves conducting semi-structured interviews
consisting of open-ended questions with the target group. Such
type of interviews can be successful in delving deeper into
the content matter which would have otherwise been difﬁcult
in structured or focus interviews [17]. The interviews will be
conducted with individuals from target organisations within the
Dutch public institutions like WODC, Dutch Police, etc.
The guidelines can then be ﬁnalised using the literature
study and insights gained during the qualitative analysis. Once
the guidelines have been agreed upon, requirement engineering
can be done via use-case modelling. Next, a framework can
be designed for the SDC tool, thereby answering research
question 4.
Lastly, the design of the framework has to be validated
by the target user-group. A mock-up of the new tool can
be made using the framework to see how it is perceived by
the target users. The research can explore the design and
evaluation of the tool by applying different techniques such as
heuristic evaluation, usability testing, use of guidelines and the
cognitive walk-through method [18]. Heuristic evaluation and
usability testing require the involvement of User Interface (UI)
specialists. This is not feasible for this project. Therefore, the
use of guidelines and cognitive walk-through techniques can
help in ﬁnding serious as well as general problems with the
usability of the tool without the need for a UI specialist. Thus,
the ﬁnal research question can be answered by conducting
a survey and by applying the previously mentioned usability
techniques. The result of the survey should be analysed to
accommodate the recommendations to make improvements in
the framework.
IV.
CONCLUSION
In this position paper, we have identiﬁed a problem in
practice regarding data disclosure tools and how they are
not used by data controllers in public organisations in the
Netherlands. We proposed a solution direction to address this
problem by designing a framework for a simpler and more
user-friendly implementation of an SDC tool.
REFERENCES
[1]
M. S. Bargh, R. Meijer, and M. Vink, “On statistical disclosure
control technologies: For enabling personal data protection in open dara
settings,” Research and Documentation Center WODC, The Hague, The
Netherlands, Tech. Rep., Cahier 2018-20.
[2]
J. Domingo-Ferrer and V. Torra, “Disclosure risk assessment in statisti-
cal data protection,” Journal of Computational and Applied Mathemat-
ics, vol. 164, 2004, pp. 285–293.
[3]
T. Benschop, C. Machingauta, and M. Welch, “Statistical Disclosure
Control: A Practice Guide,” 2019.
[4]
A. Hundepool, J. Domingo-Ferrer, L. Franconi, S. Giessing, R. Lenz,
J. Naylor, and P. De Wolf, “Handbook on Statistical Disclosure Con-
trol,” ESSnet on Statistical Disclosure Control, 2010.
[5]
J. Domingo-Feffer, A. Oganian, and V. Torra, “Information-theoretic
disclosure risk measures in statistical disclosure control of tabular
data,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Scientiﬁc and
Statistical Database Management (SSDBM), Jan. 2002, pp. 227–231.
[6]
D. Hutchison and J. C. Mitchell, “Privacy in Statistical Databases,”
in Proceedings of the CENEX-SDC Project International Conference,
2006.
[7]
F. Prasser and F. Kohlmayer, Putting Statistical Disclosure Control into
Practice: The ARX Data Anonymization Tool, 2015, chapter 6, pp. 111–
148, in book, Gkoulalas-Divanis, A. and Loukides, G. (Eds.), Medical
Data Privacy Handbook, ISBN: 978-3-319-23633-9.
[8]
M. Templ, “Statistical disclosure control for microdata using the r-
package sdcmicro,” Transactions on Data Privacy, vol. 1, no. 2, Aug.
2008, pp. 67–85.
[9]
F. Prasser, F. Kohlmayer, R. Lautenschl ˜Ager, and K. A. Kuhn, “ARX–A
Comprehensive Tool for Anonymizing Biomedical Data,” in Proceed-
ings of the Annual Symposium / AMIA Symposium, 2014, pp. 984–
993.
[10]
J. D. Gould and C. Lewis, “Designing for usability-key principles and
what designers think,” in Proceedings of the Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, vol. 28, 1983, pp. 50–53.
[11]
S. L. Smith and J. N. Mosier, “Guidelines for designing user interface
software,” 1986.
[12]
B. Anda, H. Dreiem, D. I. K. Sjøberg, and M. Jørgensen, “Estimating
Software Development Effort Based on Use Cases — Experiences from
Industry,” in The Uniﬁed Modeling Language. Modeling Languages,
Concepts, and Tools, M. Gogolla and C. Kobryn, Eds.
Springer Berlin
Heidelberg, 2001, pp. 487–502.
[13]
D. Rosenberg and K. Scott, Use case driven object modeling with UML.
Springer, 1999.
[14]
B. G. Cameron, E. F. Crawley, G. Loureiro, and E. S. Rebentisch, “Value
ﬂow mapping: Using networks to inform stakeholder analysis,” Acta
Astronautica, vol. 62, 2008, pp. 324–333.
[15]
M. G. Morris and A. Dillon, “How user perceptions inﬂuence software
use,” IEEE Software, vol. 14, no. 4, July 1997, pp. 58–65.
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

[16]
F. D. Davis and V. Venkatesh, “Toward preprototype user acceptance
testing of new information systems: implications for software project
management,” IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management, vol. 51,
no. 1, Feb 2004, pp. 31–46.
[17]
B. DiCicco-Bloom and B. F. Crabtree, “The qualitative research inter-
view,” Medical Education, vol. 40, no. 4, 2006, pp. 314–321.
[18]
R. Jeffries, J. R. Miller, C. Wharton, and K. Uyeda, “User interface
evaluation in the real world: a comparison of four techniques,” in
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing
systems, 1991, pp. 119–124.
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2020.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-760-3
ICDS 2020 : The Fourteenth International Conference on Digital Society

