The Usefulness of Audit to Guarantee the Security on the Electronic Systems 
 
Rie Shigetomi Yamaguchi 
Research Institute for Secure Systems (RISEC),  
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) 
1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8568 
JAPAN 
 e-mail: rie-shigetomi@aist.go.jp 
Hajime Watanabe 
Research Institute for Secure Systems (RISEC),  
National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and 
Technology (AIST) 
1-1-1 Umezono, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 305-8568 
JAPAN 
 e-mail: h-watanabe@aist.go.jp 
 
 
Abstract—In a conventional system, people have created a 
mechanism to take advantage of collateral security by using 
audits without being checked by users. However, in recent 
electronic systems, the users need to do many things to 
guarantee the security. In this paper, we discuss how to use 
audit systems to archive security in digital communications. 
Keywords-Audit; Security; Usability. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Recently, in terms of ensuring convenience and cost 
effectiveness, a lot of paper-based services have been 
replaced by network services, for example, postal mail by 
email. The more people use digital information and network 
communications, the more people surface information 
security issues. For example, the number of the exploitation 
of information and money has been increasing in the Internet. 
Although there are several things that a user must do in 
order to improve security, a user cannot be told to do 
something.  It is difficult for a user not only to show the state 
of security, but also whether a user can select the state of the 
security on the setup mode of the computer. One example to 
show security to the users is a trial that show warning to the 
users in the Internet browsers, such as Internet Explorer [6] 
and Firefox [7].  
If a user cannot verify a web server in SSL/TLS [1], the 
user can see warning sign on the screen such as the Figure 1 
and Figure 2 [3]. The site certificate for SSL/TLS is installed 
in Browsers. 
If a user tries to connect to a server via SSL/TLS and the 
server’s site certificate is valid, then an SSL/TLS connection 
is established between the user and the server. On the other 
hand, if a server's site certificate is invalid, that is, the 
server's certificate is not in the certificate chain, the user 
must see warning that she should not connect the server. 
A service shows instructions that the user should push the 
button to ignore. Even browsers show the warning, the 
service encourage users ignore warning, select to push "red" 
button, and connect the server which is not confirmed. That 
is because servers do not buy right server certificate for 
SSL/TLS and install the certificate correctly. That means that 
the user cannot understand the read sign meaning, that it is 
unable to verify the certificate and the user might connect 
fake serer.  After the user sees that the server recommends 
pushing "red" button, the user misunderstand it is right way 
to push "red" button. The user cannot recognize the server 
has got the risk and avoid the dangerous server. 
In recent years, this problem is solved because most web 
sites have got right certifications.  We need to discuss that 
the user has misunderstood such that the server recommends 
ignoring the warning. The way to ignore the warning is 
wrong way to lad to the user misunderstanding for security. 
 
 
 
Figure 1.  IE8 Security warning. 
 
Users do not have to do anything to archive security in 
the non-digitized system. One example is the voting system. 
People do not have to see all processes, but know all 
processes proceed correctly. This is because users know 
there is a strict law and the system uses audit system. 
In digital communications, a lot of kinds of process are 
designed simplify and straightforward.  In the conventional 
systems, people have created a mechanism to take advantage 
of collateral security by using audits without having checked 
by users. In the current social system, taking advantage of 
even such as audit and evaluation and certification, and has 
incorporated confirmation by third-party organization. This 
is because you cannot verify that their users to understand 
how everything on the market, if they are realized as how it 
works. 
In this paper, we discuss how to use audit system to 
archive security in digital communication. 
We take two examples for the conventional system: 
voting system and board of audit in the government. In 
addition, as they are digitized system, we discuss how to 
show security in two situations key issue by using card or 
SSL/TLS in browsers. 
 
109
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

 
Figure 2.  IE8 Security warning (in Japanese), they say "There is a 
problem that security certificate for this Web site."IE8 Security warning. 
 
A. Outline 
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces 
the relationship of the current audit and security. Section 3 
shows and discusses two example of audit for electronic 
communication. Section 4 discuses another topic for audit. 
Section 5 concludes the paper. 
 
II. 
RELATIONSHIP OF THE CURRENT AUDIT AND 
SECURITY 
A. Conventional Voting 
We explain how to archive security in the current voting 
system. We describe how to prohibit unauthorized acts such 
as double voting and how to protect privacy [4]. 
 
1) Prohibition double voting fraud 
In order to prevent double voting fraud, it has to check to 
pass the ballot correctly and to vote properly. The Board of 
Elections manages this process by using the poll book. 
According to the poll book, the Board sends the 
information by mail to a person, who has the election 
franchise, before the Election Day. This information is a kind 
of a certificate or a ticket for voting, include where and when 
the person can vote, and organize number. A person brings 
the mail to the polls and shows the mail to vote officers who 
checks whether he or she has the right to vote in this election.  
To prevent double voting fraud is made sure that vote 
officers are able to check whether the voter has the right mail. 
 
2) The correctness of elections 
In conventional voting, it is difficult for most people to 
check whether their ballot is counted correctly because users 
do not see all process of voting after the elections. 
To solve this problem, in conventional voting scrutinizer, 
there is a person called a scrutinizer who has selected from 
the electoral roll and checks voting correctly. In other words, 
there is audit system to verify all procedure correctly by 
neutral observers.  
The scrutinizer selected by the Board of Elections see 
every process of vote counting such that this procedure is 
third party verification. The poll watcher checks whether the 
people vote correctly, and sends ballot box to ballot-counting 
station. After checking all process, ballot-counting officers 
count the votes under checking by scrutinizer. 
 
3) Privacy 
In election, nobody is able to link between ballots which 
is written by voter and the poll book, so nobody knows 
anyone who vote for.  
To achieve this privacy requirement, the current system 
selects the following system: 
 
Voting paper does not include voter's name 
 
People use the same ballot paper; so, it is very 
difficult to select which paper is whose. 
 
The voter knows, by third party such as scrutinizer, that 
this procedure is correct and the privacy is protected.  
In the current systems, people do not have to check that 
an election is correct by them, because of checking  by third 
party audit. 
 
B. Board of Audit 
In this section, we explain who check the government 
uses our taxes legally by Board of Audit. 
 
1) Tax Obligation 
People living are obligated to pay taxes. It is necessary to 
gain taxpayer acceptance for the use of taxes. That means 
that people need to check the way tax money is used because 
tax is by people. 
 
2) Board of Audit 
Because taxpayers want to check the use of tax, for this 
checking, there is Board of Audit. The Board of Audit is a 
constitutional organization that is independent of the Cabinet 
and belongs neither to the Diet nor to the Courts. The Board 
of Audit audits the national accounts as well as those of 
public organizations and other bodies as provided by laws, 
and also supervises of public accounting to ensure its 
adequacy.  
Because there is this kind of system, taxpayers do not 
have to check national account by themselves.  
 
III. 
CONVINCING USERS ON SECURITY 
It is important to convince users that the system is secure. 
In this section, we explain how to show to archive security 
and discuss how to reduce user's burden in two recent 
systems: the process of key issue to card and warning of 
SSL/TLS at the browser. 
A. Key Issue to IC Card 
In a PKI system, the issuer of root certificate issues user's 
key, who asks to be provided the service. We explain how to 
get secret key to user by the issuer to service. 
 
1) Security Requirements 
In this process, the most important thing is a user's secret 
key issued by a rigorous process. The user signs a document 
110
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

with the key. A verifier verifies the signature of the 
document by the public key of the user. 
The secret keys are known only by the user. The 
difficulties of this situation are difficulties how to explain to 
create key by the user. After creating the key correctly, to 
manage the key, which not reveal the key to anyone, is 
important but difficult for the user. If the computer might be 
contaminated such as a virus, the key might leak to 
adversaries. 
The solution is to keep the key in the card of tamper-
proof. 
 
2) How to protect secret keys 
If the system adopts the card process, still there are some 
difficulties for the user.  
When the user creates the key by herself to be provided 
the service, she must use her personal computer or electronic 
computing equipment. However, when the card system 
adopts is the user's equipment, the process of key issue might 
be under adversaries' attacks.  
To solve these problems, Japanese government adopts 
the dedicated system to create the user's key. To use this 
system, when the user needs the keys for the service, the user 
do not have to get the special system before getting the card 
but the user needs to go to the municipal office [5].  
The user's process of key issue is as follows: 
1. 
When a user wants to get certificate for electronic 
application by the government, she goes to the 
municipal office.  
2. 
The user asks the municipal officer to create it; the 
municipal officer and users do the paperwork. By 
the paperwork, the officer is able to check the user 
identities.  
3. 
The municipal officer asks to the user to go to the 
dedicated system in the office. The dedicated 
system is able to create public and secret keys of 
PKI and save these keys to the user card. Even the 
municipal officer, nobody is able to know keys 
information without the user. 
4. 
The user creates public and secret keys of PKI and 
saves the keys to her card by using the dedicated 
system by her. 
In this process, there is only the user in front of the 
dedicated system. That means this keys are known by only 
the user. Even officers to help users are not able to know it. 
Officers have to wait near the user during the user creates 
the keys. This process is very complicated. 
 
3) Discussion 
After this process, the user might be convinced PKI 
better that the secret key is known by only user. However, 
this approach is very time consuming; the user needs to go to 
municipal office, and the officer needs to help during 
creating keys by users but does not see the user's operation.  
This system have been under the assumption that the 
government officer is not able to be trusted. It is time-
consuming that the user needs to go the municipal office and 
go to two places in the office. If there is a mechanism to 
audit system and users are able to trust the system, then there 
is an easier way to issue generate a key pair; generating the 
card of the key pair is in the trusted factory audited to third-
party organization, and the card is delivered by trusted mail 
process. 
There might increase the risk of leakage of the secret key 
because more people involved in this process; but this 
problem should be resolved in an operational process. This 
process makes people be better time-consuming that a user 
does not have to go to the municipal office and operate the 
system by herself. 
All what a user has to do is to receive the card by mail. 
 
B. SSL/TLS in Browsers 
Over the Internet communication, such as web surfing, it 
is important for a user to protect from attacks that the user is 
able to verify the person whether a user wants to 
communicate. 
One 
solution 
is 
to 
use 
SSL/TLS 
communication. 
1) SSL/TLS 
SSL/TLS is based on PKI. In the beginning of the 
connection to a server via SSL/TLS, the browser asks the 
server to send the public key certificate. 
The company to manage the root certificate checks the 
web's legitimacy; create a secret key, the public key, and the 
certificate for the keys, and sends them to the web site. After 
the web server receives the certificate, the server installs 
them to their web server software. If the server installs 
correctly, the user can connect SSL communication to the 
server. 
2) Discussion 
In issuing the certificate of public key site by CA, there is 
a kind of audit process to manage a web site. By using this 
process, a user does not have to install certificates of all 
public keys of web sites. This is to reduce the trouble of the 
user without one problem.  
If a user wants to connect a server which has not installed 
the web certificate correctly, the browser shows the waning 
sign in the Figure 1. That means the browser recommend to 
the user to keep securely. However, the user is able to ignore 
warning [2]. That is because there is a description written by 
the web server that the user ignore the warning sign, up on 
the shelf the server cannot be installed properly.  
The registration process is correct way but the user can 
be avoided from correct process. This means the audit is able 
to be eliminated by pressing the red button even having 
correct audit. 
 
IV. 
SOFTWARE AUDIT 
In this section, we discuss other items for resolution for 
audit in information technology system. 
It is difficult to make sure that the security features are 
implemented correctly in the software. If a software is open-
sourced and this is a kind of third party evaluation, the 
software is confirmed but has a problem of maintenance and 
integrity. Because a conventional IT system is simple, it is 
difficult to mix unjustness function. As the complexity of the 
111
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

recent IT systems increased, it is difficult understand all of 
the software details. 
Therefore, there is a need for a mechanism of verification 
for the implementation of the software audit. 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
In the recent systems, security measures are required; 
but, it must have a way that can be used without difficulty 
by the user. For non-electronic security measures, the 
burden of the user is reduced; so, goes with the audit of the 
election.  
In this paper, we discussed that audit process is 
necessary for IT system. Not only the audit, but the process 
should be realized in a right operational process. To ensure 
that all, security should be ensured. 
When developers create security systems, they have to 
discuss the balance between security and usability. Because 
nowadays developers have high skills for IT and especially 
security, and they tend to make the system which made full 
use of advanced technology. However users do not have 
such high advanced technology skills; so, the users cannot 
master such systems. On the other hand, users who have not 
IT skills fall to the hole of security easily. Before creating a 
system, there should have a discussion about the usability 
and security between developers and users since the system 
engineer has to do ad hoc security patch after the system 
starts.  
 
[1] IETF 
Internet 
Society, 
“The 
TLS 
Protocol 
Version 
1.0”, 
http://www.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2246.txt, Jan 1999 
[2] Joshua Sunshine, Serge Egelman, Hazim Almuhimedi, Neha Atri, and 
Lorrie Cranor, “Crying wolf: An empirical study of SSL warning 
effectiveness,”, in Proceedings of Usenix Security 2009, pp. 399-416, 
Monreal Canada, Aug 2009 
[3] Microsoft, “There is a problem with this website's security certificate 
when you try to visit a secured website in Internet Explorer”, 
http://support.microsoft.com/kb/931850, [retrieved 20 Nov 2012] 
[4] Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, “Japanese 
Election”, 
 
(in 
Japanese) 
http://www.soumu.go.jp/senkyo/senkyo\_s/naruhodo/index.html, 
[retrived 20 Nov 2012] 
[5] Ministry of Internal Affairs and Communications, “Juuki-card Issue”,  
(in Japanese) http://juki-card.com/syutoku/index.html [retrived 20 
Nov 2012.] 
[6] Microsoft, “Internet Explorer”, http://windows.microsoft.com/en-
IE/windows/home [retrived 20 Nov 2012]. 
[7] Moxilla, “Firefox”, http://www.mozilla.jp/firefox/, [retrived 20 Nov 
2012].
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
112
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

