 
 
One-stop Shop E-government Solution for South-Korean Government Multi-
ministry Virtual Employment-Welfare Plus Center System 
 
Sofia Meacham, P.Pratichi Rath, Pritam Moharana, 
Keith Phalp 
Faculty of Science and Technology, Bournemouth 
University, 
Fern Barrow, Poole, Dorset, BH12 5BB, UK 
email: smeacham@bournemouth.ac.uk, 
pratichirath@googlemail.com, pritam.uk@gmail.com, 
KPhalp@bournemouth.ac.uk  
Min Sig Park 
Government Complex Seoul of Ministry of the Interior and 
Safety (MOIS), 
Republic of Korea, South Korea 
email: minsig@mois.go.kr 
 
 
 
 
Abstract—In this paper, a one-stop e-Government solution will 
be proposed for the existing Korean government multi-
ministry Employment-Welfare plus system that utilizes latest 
IT technologies. Since 2001, the Korean government had 
established 11 initiatives and 31 roadmaps to build e-
Government infrastructure. Although this infrastructure has 
been very successful and well-esteemed in the international 
society, several improvements are required towards a one-stop 
shop solution. Currently, the system used by the Korean 
government is not a one-stop solution with a single point for 
the citizen to access government services. A Virtual 
Employment – Welfare Plus Centre (VEWPC) is then 
introduced to unify the services offered to the citizen.  
Comparing this VEWS with UK’s e-Government solution and 
review of corresponding literature, several requirements for 
change towards a one-stop shop solution implementation have 
been identified. A refined architecture to implement a South 
Korean e-Government one-stop shop is identified and 
proposed in this paper. Future plans for the applicability and 
cost of its adoption are also identified.  
Keywords; e-Government; virtual organizations; one-stop 
shop. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Described simply, e-Government is the application of the 
tools and techniques of e-Commerce to the work of 
government. These tools and techniques are intended to 
serve both the government and its citizens. It can also be 
described as the complete process transformation of the 
Governance using the implementation of Information and 
Communication Technology. Its primary objective is to 
bring faster and transparent service delivery, information 
sharing, 
accountability 
and 
people 
participation 
in 
governments’ decision-making process [1]. 
After the economic crisis in 1998, over the past 20 years, 
the South Korea government is continuously engaged in 
reforming the government structure by integrating large 
departments performing similar public service functions. 
This has led to building up an e-government structure 
providing improved administrative services with better 
efficiency.  
Since 2002, with the help of ICT functions, an online 
platform in the form of the one-stop shop is established to 
make numerous public services easily accessible through the 
website “Government 24”. This online service allows 
citizens to request and receive many civil petitions without 
having to visit administrative agencies [2]. 
The current structure of the South Korean Government 
welfare service system and functions of its different building 
blocks are greatly influenced by New Public Management 
(NPM) and Joined-up Government (JUG) organization 
structure by integrating multiple ministerial departments to 
provide a single platform based public services. This 
presents both problems and challenges to form a collaborated 
system to combine the employment and welfare services 
under a virtual organizational platform [3]. 
Based on the data collected in previous case studies, 
literature review and comparative analysis along with the 
results from the interviews and surveys, it is possible to draw 
the architecture of the current system to distinguish between 
the key elements and considerations necessary to design the 
architecture of the one-stop shop center.  
Finally, based on this high-level architecture description, 
it can be concluded that the one-stop shop virtual 
government organization is a conceptual model of the 
manpower management system that utilizes business process 
data in the information system.  
In this paper, we have viewed the high-level architecture 
as a three-layered functional architecture in order to 
elaborate the different infrastructural functions: layer one the 
customer, layer two local welfare service centres and layer 
three as the virtual environment of the ICT infrastructure 
with integration of e-Governance policy.  
However, this can possess both limitations and 
challenges to implement conceptualized architecture using 
multi ministerial policies. Therefore, a comprehensive 
evaluation and further research are required to this paper in 
the areas of producing a detailed collaboration model for the 
above system. 
8
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
The remainder of this paper will cover an overview of the 
system, including its requirements, in Section 2. In Section 
3, the designs of the system will be defined and presented. 
Section 4 will detail the implementation of the overall 
system, 
including 
the 
classifier, 
interfaces, 
and 
explainability. Section 5 will present reflections and 
evaluations of the system, and Section 6 offers conclusion 
and suggestions for future work and research directions. 
II. 
E-GOVERNMENT EVOLUTION IN SOUTH KOREAN 
GOVERNMENT 
This case study has been constructed in a collaborative 
project between South Korea Government Department and 
Bournemouth University. The main aim is to propose 
improvements in the existing South Korea Government 
business processes and infrastructures.   
The evolution of e-government implementations within 
the South Korean Government ministries is briefly 
described in the following subsections. 
A. Service-Centred Government Policy 
After the economic crisis in 1998, over the past 30 years, 
South Korea government is continuously engaged in 
reforming the government structure by integrating large 
departments performing similar public service functions. 
This has led to building up an e-government structure 
providing improved administrative services with better 
efficiency. Since 2002, with the help of ICT functions, an 
online platform is established to make numerous public 
services easily accessible through the website “Government 
24”. This online service allows citizens to request and 
receive many civil petitions without having to visit 
administrative agencies. 
South Korea Government has implemented a 3.0 strategy 
in the form of ‘Government 3.0’ in 2013 [4], to integrate the 
administrative 
services 
provided 
by 
the 
various 
administrative agencies into one window, and the provision 
of these services is well appreciated by the public. The main 
elements of this strategy were based upon (i) to set-up and 
promote an administrative reform in the form of the e-
government, (ii) open information on all administrative 
agencies and (iii) collaborate and share information between 
administrative agencies. This strategy eventually has led to 
the formation of the ‘Employment Welfare Plus Centre’, 
which handles the employment and welfare related public 
services that have been carried out in various institutions 
autonomously. 
B. The Level of e-government 
In 2001, the Korean government had established 11 
initiatives and 31 roadmaps to build e-government 
infrastructure. These initiatives include 11 systems, with an 
online 
administrative 
service 
system, 
an 
electronic 
procurement system, a financial information system, a home 
text system, and an electronic approval document system. 
The roadmaps include improved governments’ working 
methodology, innovating administrative services and 
innovating information resource management.  
In [5] presents the Government 24 online portal providing 
public services, such as apply and print official documents 
using the internet from home or offices, without a need of 
visiting the government agencies. It uses the cloud-based 
Government Integrated Data Centres (GIDC) gateway 
comprising of 20,000 information systems from 44 
ministries. The cloud system has proprietary government-
private cloud services that could provide central government 
agencies with information resources quickly and efficiently 
to support government agencies' smart service. With the 
advent of ICTs and integrated government services, South 
Korea is implementing a 'smart government' in which 
ordinary users can easily and freely access government 
services regardless of delivery channels.  
Based on these achievements, Korean e-Government 
ranked No. 1 in the E-Government Development Index 
(EGD) and E-Participation Index in the United Nations 
Global E-Government Survey for 2010, 2012 and 2014 [6]. 
Therefore, Korean e-governmental effectiveness is widely 
recognized in the international society and a similar range of 
e-government systems are being introduced to developing 
countries [2]. 
C. Workforce Management Strategy and Public Body 
Reform 
As part of the reformed South Korea government, 
Ministry of the Interior and Safety (hereafter MOIS) is 
responsible for the manpower management, through setting 
up an upper threshold for a total number of employment and 
operating the manpower demand within that threshold.   The 
review of the workforce for legal amendments and 
manpower threshold for upcoming projects in the coming 
years is assessed by the MOIS and confirmed with the 
Ministry of Strategy and Finance (hereafter, MOSF) every 
year. Ministry of Personnel Management (hereafter, MPM) 
administers 
the 
recruitment, 
independence, 
and 
professionalism of the personnel workforce. 
III. 
EMPLOYMENT-WELFARE PLUS CENTRE (EWPC) – 
ONE-STOP SHOP SOLUTION 
To introduce the implementation of JUG and NPM 
concept, the South Korean government has formed 
Employment - Welfare Plus Centre (EWPC) that links 
employment services and welfare services to alleviate the 
budget burden caused by the surge in welfare costs in 2014. 
A. EWPC Managers and staff 
The Employment - Welfare Plus Centre is an 
administrative service delivery system that eliminates blind 
spots in employment and allows the social safety net to be 
linked to employment. EWPC has been established in more 
than 100 geographically distributed centres, between 2014 
and 2017, depicting the one-stop shop model that provides a 
combination of employment, welfare and financial services 
to the public easily and comfortably. 
9
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
B. EWPC Architecture 
The implementation of EWPC is modeled in two ways, 
first by adding welfare-related services to the existing 
employment centres and second by creating the new centres 
with linked welfare and employment-related public service.  
EPWCs are affiliated to the Ministry of Employment 
and Labor, they are controlled and monitored by employees 
from the ministries and agencies related to employment and 
welfare policies [7]. Thereby, the centre is subdivided into 
employment, 
welfare 
support, 
finance, 
and 
culture 
departments and other welfare-related functions [8].  The 
centres’ management consultation is done by the steering 
committee and the complex employment welfare case (if 
any) is managed by the Working Group and the Case 
Management Group. 
Figure 
1 
presents 
the 
typical 
architecture 
for 
Employment-Welfare Plus Centre. 
 
 
Figure 1.  Architecture for Employment-Welfare Plus Centre 
 
An individual seeking the government services should 
be able to find the relevant information using the online 
portal 
(Workplus.go.kr), 
then 
call 
further 
to 
gain 
information or visit the EWPC in person for an additional 
consultation [9]. 
Also, there is a separate online portal (Work.gov.kr) on 
job searching and job advertising for job seekers, which is 
not connected to EPWC. This is the problem with not 
having a true one-stop shop where employment-related 
services are integrated into one platform. 
C. EWPC Functions and Clients 
The main functions offered by the EWPC to their 
various clients including job seekers, benefit seekers, 
women with career break, veteran soldiers, retirees, and 
low-income earners are as follows: 
(i) 
Employment 
services: 
Provides 
comprehensive 
employment services such as job-hunting and re-
employment support to help the livelihood of the 
unemployed, 
employment 
stabilization 
project 
supporting job creation and vulnerable classes. 
(ii) 
Training services: Provides employment support 
services for job seekers (interview technical 
coaching, cooperative interviews, etc.), job search, 
recruitment events, etc. 
(iii) 
Women with career break: Provides job counseling, 
vocational education and training, and internship for 
women with career breaks. 
(iv) 
Services for veteran soldiers: Supports career 
counseling, employment and start-up support for 
soldiers who have completed long-term service. 
(v) 
Benefit support services: Provides counseling social 
welfare services, receiving welfare applications, 
linking public and private for welfare support. 
(vi) 
Finance Support Services: Provides services such as 
low-interest funds, credit recovery support, and 
illegal financial meltdown counselling services for 
ordinary people, small businessmen and low-income 
people who are experiencing economic difficulties 
[8]. 
D. EWPC Business Process 
Based on the type of the required public services, the 
main functions of the Employment Welfare Plus Centre can 
be categorized as follows: 
(i) 
Employment Services: Available for clients who are 
unemployed and do not require any welfare services 
(ii) 
Employment and Welfare Services: Available for 
clients who are unemployed and require welfare 
services as well, such as housing benefits, low-
income support etc. 
(iii) 
Welfare Services: Available for clients who are able 
to work, however, requires other forms of welfare 
services. They also receive the employment services 
[8]. 
 
The list below describes the business process flow for 
availing different types of services in the EWPC, in its 
current state: client seeking employment or welfare public 
services can do so by, (i) visiting the centre directly, (ii) 
receiving an initial interview on employment services, 
welfare services only or both the services, (iii) deciding and 
implementing a suitable service. Record of these activities is 
stored in the local information database. 
E. EWPC Performance 
After the implementation of the EWPC, in 2016, there are 
remarkable improvements in public welfare services to the 
client such as: 
(i) 
The number of employed workers per centre 
increased from 653 to 731, an increase of 12%. 
(ii) 
Employment-welfare services linkage per centre 
increased from 118 to 212 [8]. 
(iii) 
Different service paths are set for clients seeking an 
initial consultation, giving the benefit of availing 
employment services in more than one field within 
the visit to the centre. 
(iv) 
Reduction of time and cost by not visiting more than 
one service centres. 
(v) 
The collaboration of organizations to solve clients’ 
problem by not only taking their own problem but 
also, by taking into account their surrounding 
circumstances. 
10
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
The EWPC is expanded quantitatively to 100 centres 
within three years of introducing the system, however, the 
gap in the service quality is huge due to a large variation in 
workloads in each region and lack of legal platform as a 
government organization.  
The above information was provided and evidenced by 
one the authors- Min Sig Park through confidential 
performance information collected from South Korea 
Government Ministry of the Interior and Safety (MOIS) 
where he is the director.  
There is a need to increase manpower as the physical 
integration and expansion of the centre is steadily 
increasing. In addition, there is segregation of work due to 
the operation of a separate government system internally by 
dispatching agencies. The current integrated service on 
employment and welfare is to achieve the original purpose, 
that is expanding the employment rate and saving the cost of 
welfare. Therefore, it needs innovation of the operating 
system for the present centre by utilizing IT.  
F. Problems Areas in Employment Welfare Service 
System-Comparison with UK’s system 
This section presents a comprehensive comparison 
between the Korea Employment Welfare Service System 
with the corresponding UK system. The choice for the 
comparison was by the definition of the project as the 
Korean Government representative who is an author in this 
paper, Min Sig Park, was tasked to start an appropriate 
study comparing the two countries to start with from his 
Government employer. More countries and examples should 
be considered in future research. 
Both countries used the e-government architectural 
concept to establish and promote national government 
reforms by adopting a top-down approach. The innovations 
are prioritized in areas directly affecting people’s lives. In 
both countries, recent administrative reforms trends are 
being pursued in the form of an open government using data 
and digital technology.  
Compared 
to 
the 
UK, 
Korea 
has 
lack 
of 
interconnectedness and consistency between national plans 
for government innovations. There is not enough and 
specific 
systematic 
approach 
towards 
offering 
the 
consultation to government officials who are promoting 
government innovations and/or related guidelines that the 
public officials should pursue. 
Both 
countries 
are 
evaluated 
as 
e-government 
powerhouse by the international community to provide one-
stop service to the people using government portal viz, 
GOV.UK for UK and Government 24 for Korea. The UK 
has continued its efforts to build an e-government centred 
on the integration of the people's services through the 
council. However, South Korea has pursued e-government 
centred on building service systems and data centres. 
Therefore, the UK has established GOV.UK as a national 
government gateway to provide a single administrative 
service, however, South Korea is providing services through 
Government 24, which is a representative government 
gateway. 
In terms of the workforce management, both countries 
require to consult with the financial authorities when they 
increase the government workforce. The two countries have 
established a long-term plan for government personnel and 
carrying out planned and systematic workforce policies. In 
the 
UK, 
government 
organizations 
and 
manpower 
management are managed by the Cabinet Office. However, 
in South Korea, the Ministry of the Interior and Safety 
oversees organization and manpower management, while 
the Ministry of Personnel Management is in charge of 
human resources development such as recruitment of 
manpower. Unlike the UK, which is reducing its workforce 
by establishing and implementing a workforce reduction 
plan, South Korea is restricting workforce growth by 
adopting a quorum system to maintain the upper limit of the 
workforce. 
In terms of the organizational architecture of the e-
government system and business processes, both countries 
use face-to-face interviews as the primary medium to 
converse with their clients due to the nature of the public 
services offered. However, Korea does not have an online 
system for a remote application like the UK where online 
applications can be made through GOV.UK which is the 
governments’ single gateway. 
The UK is well structured in partnership with local 
government, local communities, employers, and so on. In 
the case of Korea, the centre staff is dispatched to the 
relevant 
ministries, 
local 
government, 
and 
related 
organizations to collaborate. The UK is integrated with the 
job search website GOV.UK, but the Korean Worknet 
operates independently of the centre. 
Typically, the clients in both countries organization 
system are either unemployed or like to seek other benefits. 
The clients for Jobcentre Plus in the UK are job seekers, 
students, graduates, and the disabled people, however, the 
clients of Employment Welfare Plus Centre in South Korea 
are job seekers, women with career interruptions, retirees, 
veterans, disabled people, and social disadvantage. In the 
UK, the benefits are directly implemented because the 
benefits agencies are integrated into the early stages. 
However, the Korean centre only enforces employment-
related benefits directly, and the benefit only functions in 
consultation and acceptance. 
In terms of business processes, both organizations are 
conducting face-to-face interviews for the initial assessment 
and conducting job search programs for job seekers with 
benefits. The UK provides consultation and employment 
welfare services through the integrated government gateway 
GOV.UK, telephone, and visit, whereas, South Korea has 
the drawback of not having an integrated online gateway but 
provides counseling and employment welfare services 
through telephone or institution visits. The client seeking 
unemployment benefit needs to go through initial 
interviews, however, in South Korea, an unemployed client 
does not need to go through the initial interviews. In the UK 
centre, professional counselors as a work coach are in the 
process of customizing their work. However, South Korea 
Centre is engaged in consultation with employees 
11
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
dispatched 
from 
ministries 
related 
to 
employment 
counseling. 
In terms of the performance, the UK centres are making 
a visible contribution to reducing unemployment benefits 
and increasing labour supply. There are direct and indirect 
effects on saving the welfare budget and increasing the 
national treasury. In South Korea, it is estimated that 
outcome will take time because the centre has been in 
operation for only three years. 
The below is the summary of the main problem areas in 
the current South Korea Welfare System: 
(i) 
lack of connectivity between national strategies 
(ii) 
single gateway does not fully integrate to online 
service level 
(iii) 
workforce 
management 
using 
information 
management is not available 
(iv) 
no one-stop shop for employment welfare services 
(v) 
no linkage or integration with government 24, the 
government gateway 
(vi) 
a high proportion of manual work processes 
no visibility on the performance 
IV. 
SURVEY WITH KOREAN GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES 
AND MANAGERS 
This paper uses in-depth interviews and focus group 
interviews among various qualitative research methods to 
obtain user’s requirements. These interviews were conducted 
online and in person by Min Sig Park as part of his role in 
the Korean Government and as part of the research project 
with Bournemouth University in order to provide a 
comprehensive analysis of an e-government solution for 
South Korea Government. Since, VEWPC is an information 
system that processes the current business process, business 
management, and manpower management in a virtual space. 
Thus, to understand the system better, in-depth interviews 
are required including MOIS mid-level managers and staff 
who manages government organizations and personnel in 
off-line activities [10]. In addition, focus group interviews 
were conducted in order to grasp the various requirements of 
the staff working at the site. All the interviews were recorded 
with the consent of the interviewee. This survey uses an open 
questionnaire to identify the diverse experiences and 
opinions of the interviewees. 
The following section describes the results without 
incorporating the authors’ related research. The final 
proposed system in this paper, incorporates all elements 
from the survey and the research.  
A. Survey Findings 
a) EWPC Supervisors and Employees 
The results are extracted from the survey conducted by 
the Ministry of Employment and Labor departments, as part 
of the "Development Plan for the EWPC” projects. This 
describes three aspects of service linkage, manpower 
management and information system operation. 
 
 
 
TABLE 1. EWPC SUPERVISORS AND EMPLOYEES SURVEY RESULTS 
Service Linkage 
Aspect  
Due to the reorganization of the 
employment centers into employment 
and welfare centers, the main clients 
of the center are the unemployment 
seekers. The lack of integration 
between 
the 
welfare 
and 
unemployment 
services 
brings 
diversity and complexity to the centre, 
which leads to poor services 
Personnel 
Management 
Aspect 
As a result of the employment and 
welfare linkage there is a surge in 
workforce requirement demanding 
new workers to cater the service 
demands. Centers vary in workload, 
workforce 
composition, 
service 
objects and jurisdictions leading to 
difficulty in coordinating work among 
internal employees.  
Information 
System Operation 
Aspect 
Due to the separated information 
system of employment and welfare 
services, it is difficult to compare, 
collaborate and share information of 
employees 
resulting 
in 
data 
redundancy 
and 
administrative 
inefficiency. This possesses one of the 
major concerns for the development 
of employment and welfare linked 
services. 
b) Workforce management 
The summary of the results listed below are extracted 
from the survey conducted with the employee responsible for 
workforce management across the centers.  
TABLE 2 – EWPC MANAGERS AND STAFF SURVEY RESULTS 
Information 
systems 
operation status 
Most of the staff supported the idea of 
using 
information 
system 
for 
workforce 
management 
and 
management of the organization. This 
consists of workload information, 
staffing information and accuracy of 
data 
around 
that 
information. 
However, due to lack of integrated 
infrastructure 
and 
difficulties 
of 
collecting those data, most employees 
are 
not 
actively 
utilizing 
the 
information data. 
Workforce 
analysis 
functions 
Staff agreed that the annual workload 
prediction and work assignments are 
important 
in 
the 
calculation 
of 
manpower to identify the annual 
workload trend. Besides, analysis 
based on the accurate identification of 
12
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
the current workload and manpower 
problems are equally important. 
Factors and 
benefits while 
introducing the 
new system 
Many of the interviewees agreed for 
the implementation of the virtual 
government organization concept, but 
there can be unforeseen side effects 
due to the emergence of this fictitious 
virtual organization. The consideration 
of many factors is vital such as 
information 
security, 
details 
of 
comprehensive 
services 
and 
consideration for vulnerable groups 
accessing those data. However, the 
introduction of this virtual system can 
create 
new 
services 
beyond 
the 
existing 
business 
domain, 
communication between employees 
can be greatly improved along with 
proper organization management. 
The above surveys led to the realization that an IT 
integration through a new virtual organization approach was 
emerging within the South-Korean government. 
V. 
VIRTUAL EMPLOYMENT-WELFARE PLUS CENTER 
(VEWPC) SYSTEM 
The employment welfare service system is not a simple 
interorganizational collaboration system but a virtual service 
that is built around a multi-ministry collaboration system to 
combine employment and welfare services to provide fast 
and personalized employment-welfare services. In addition, 
it presents a model to develop an organization and workforce 
management system for efficient management of the 
organization and employees related to the employment-
welfare service.  
A. VEWPC Architecture – Functional Requirements 
The architecture supports the model to build a 
collaborative system using the virtual space to provide 
employment-welfare services that are performed jointly by 
multiple ministries. The intended users and audience of this 
architecture can be categorized into two parts. The first 
categories are the users and audiences related to the 
collaboration system comprising of government officials and 
supervisors who provide employment-welfare services. It 
also 
includes 
unemployed 
customers 
seeking 
the 
employment- welfare services. Second category of users are 
the users of the organization and the employee’s 
management system related to the employment-welfare 
service. This includes the managers managing the relevant 
ministry 
officials 
providing 
the 
employment-welfare 
services. In addition, government officials in related 
ministries can also be seen as users because they need to 
update matters related to their duties.  
The stakeholders of the virtual employment-welfare plus 
center are the various sponsors, customers, and users. The 
sponsors include the Ministries of Employment and Labour 
(MOEL) in South Korea and the Ministry of the Interior and 
Safety (MOIS) which is in charge of the management of 
government organizations and employees. The customers are 
the people seeking support in terms of employment and 
welfare public services from the government. Finally, the 
users are employees and staff who work for MOEL and 
MOIS [10]. 
The VEWPC is a collaborative system built by integrated 
online employment-welfare service to manage the workforce 
efficiently. In addition, it identifies the number and workload 
of the employees who are using the existing information 
system and utilize it in the management of the workforce 
using the newly developed information system.  
The section below discusses the architecture of the 
Korean Virtual Employment-Welfare architecture and the 
business process flow associated with it. 
The center consists of an online platform (web portal), 
employment-welfare service system, workforce management 
system and the related seven support systems. The customers 
seeking unemployment support services or welfare services, 
get support from this center through the portal. Then, after 
going through an initial assessment and database cross-check 
of seven administrative agencies the center evaluates 
customers’ current situation, needs and comes to a decision 
of providing the support to that customer. The Workforce 
Management 
System 
comprehensively 
analyses 
the 
operational speed and performance of the ministries and 
agencies that operate to support the virtual center. The 
system also helps managers to determine the relocation, 
reinforcement and reduction of workforce. 
Figure 2 shows the database diagram for the Virtual 
Employment-Welfare Plus Centre. The main frame of the 
databases is made up of two parts. One of the databases (DB) 
stores information related to the welfare services and another 
one stores workforce management related information. The 
employment-welfare 
service 
server 
is 
composed 
of 
employment information DB, local job DB, woman’s re-
employment DB, veteran employment DB, local welfare DB, 
microfinance DB, and self-sufficiency DB. Also, the 
workforce management server consists of personnel 
management DB, system metadata DB, payroll DB, 
organization and workforce DB, individual business record 
DB, and user profile DB. 
13
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
Figure 2.  Database Model for the Virtual Employment-Welfare Pulse 
Centre 
 
The process flow as the use cases represent in providing 
the public service can be described as follows: 
1) the system receives enquiries seeking employment and 
welfare support from a citizen, 2) the inquiries are cross-
checked by the employees of multi-ministries or agencies in 
government, 3) the employee decides and provide a  suitable 
solution based on the decision, 4) the system record 
individual business performance, 5) the system analyses 
relationship between workforce and workload, 7) the 
administrative staff determine which action is appropriate 
based on the workload demand, 8) the administrative staff 
and managers take suitable actions to re-deploy, increase and 
reduce workforce accordingly. 
 In this arrangement, the citizen creates a personal 
account to use the public service. The actors are the citizens 
requesting employment and welfare public services from the 
government. The requests can be directly made via the 
online portal or by visiting the service center or by sending a 
letter. The employees enter the request details manually into 
the system. The employees do not work in one center but 
work individually in different ministries, responsible for 
different tasks. The meetings with customers and reporting 
activities are not automatically managed by the system. 
One of the functional requirement of the system is to 
monitor the business process of employment-welfare service 
and employee’s workload 24/7 to identify the processing 
time it takes to handle inquiries and be able to support 
flexible working hours for the employees.  
B. VEWPC Non-Functional Requirements 
The non-functional requirements, which can be 
implemented as improvement areas to realize a true one-
stop shop virtual employment-welfare service system are 
shown below: 
Usability and humanity requirements: The system 
should consider the work process, results, and working style 
of the employees. In addition, the system should be 
designed with usability heuristics in mind. 
Performance requirements: The system should measure 
the individual workloads and the workload of the 
organization. It should also be able to calculate the 
manpower demands based on criteria set by the workforce 
policy standards. 
Operational and environmental requirements: The 
system should have an integrated web portal and easy to use 
a mobile app for employees to enter the business progress 
remotely from an off-site location. The working times can 
be set for this remote working arrangement. 
Maintainability and support requirements: The system 
should 
provide 
real-time 
information 
about 
new 
appointments and retirements of employees.  
Security requirements. The system should include 
employees' personal and business performance information 
along with employees’ task schedule information as 
workload changes. Therefore, managers and employees 
should have different access rights to this sensitive 
information. 
Cultural 
requirements. 
The 
system 
should 
be 
customized based on the way of working such as, 
administrative policies and regulations, administrative 
culture etc.  
Legal requirements. Government organizations should 
limit the basic rights of the people or impose obligations on 
them, so the establishment of the government in a virtual 
environment should be done carefully. This should be 
examined together with the implications of legal issues and 
public confidence in government organizations. 
C. VEWPC Architecture Modeling 
Based on the literature reviews and the specific case 
study requirements, we have transformed the existing 
Virtual Employment-Welfare System architecture into 
SysML Block Definition Diagram. Although SysML is not 
the traditionally used formalism for business processes, we 
have selected this in order to integrate the business 
processes 
world 
with 
the 
corresponding 
systems 
architectures. More diagrams from this project towards a 
completed model-based approach will be part of our future 
plans.  This can help to prototype the model for one-stop 
shop based solution architecture. Due to the limitation of 
accessing the government technical information, Figure 3 is 
an approximate view of the existing architecture 
 
 
 
Figure 3. Block Definition Diagram for Korea Virtual Employment-
Welfare Plus Center 
 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
As mentioned in the earlier section, in South Korea, the 
integrated information system has not yet implemented 
except for the Work-Net online platform for customers 
seeking employment services established by the Ministry of 
Employment and Labor. This Work-Net is not an exclusive 
business process information system of the EWPC, but an 
employment portal operated by the Ministry of Employment 
and Labor. 
The inquiries submitted by the client are handled by the 
staff dispatched by the related ministries. The tasks are 
carried out by using the existing information infrastructure 
of their respective departments. This is the drawback of lack 
of integration of the information system between different 
ministerial departments and business processes, although, 
the work gets carried out at an integrated place. This 
demands to design a new model for a true one-stop shop 
virtual employment and welfare service system.  
VI. 
PROPOSED ONE-STOP SHOP ARCHITECTURE 
The architecture of the one-stop e-government, the virtual 
government organization in the public sector, is similar to the 
one-stop shop architecture described above.  
The generic model of one-stop e-government, presented by 
[11], is based on a client-centered approach, concurrent 
access point, channel multiplicity, versatility, and security. 
Alo, Liu described that the model of one-stop e-government 
comprises of integration of information resources, system-
based 
application 
construction 
and 
infrastructure 
construction [12]. 
Figure 5 shows the prototype architecture for one-stop 
shop Employment and Welfare Plus Center in South Korea 
based on the previous literature review of Liu and Dias & 
Rafeal, the comparative analysis results of the UK and Korea 
and the results of the survey.  
In 2005, the South Korea has integrated servers of 44 
central government ministries and local governments. 
Recently, G-Cloud has been introduced to optimize data 
management, analysis and services, and to protect data 
resources from the hacking. Thereby, the South Korean 
government needs a foundation for the information resource 
infrastructure and resource integration needed to build a one-
stop shop.  
Thereafter, the reorganization of the back office is 
required to build a one-stop shop, which is not yet done. 
Also, it is necessary to integrate work processes using 
information systems and collaborations of related ministries 
and agencies to provide employment welfare services. 
Therefore, it is designed that the government officials of 
each ministry or agency access the Employment-welfare 
service system through the platform that handles the inquiry 
related to employment welfare. A data exchange system 
should be designed separately to exchange data between 
existing related information systems. With the help of 
business process integration, it is possible to process work 
from a distance which provides the less expected number of 
employees required at the center. 
The customers who need employment welfare services 
should access the platform and submit an inquiry once, and 
then the Employment-welfare service system and related 
public officials should be able to process the inquiry. The 
information system then automatically handles the tasks that 
are handled manually, and the center staff only needs to 
perform the face-to-face meeting with clients in a 
complementary manner. 
Finally, all the work processes and performance are 
managed by the workforce management system. If 
necessary, it can reallocate the work and personnel to 
increase or decrease the manpower. 
Figure 4 shows the high level of architecture in more 
detail and allows for the construction of a customized 
regional center that reflects regional characteristics. This 
architecture includes a detailed server deployment plan 
which has improved the efficiency of data management by 
providing a regional server (database) under the main sector 
server. In addition, to implement the customized one-stop 
shop as a virtual governmental organization, a Virtual Online 
Window is integrated into the existing Work-Net and 
GOV.KR. 
“LAYERED” PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE 
The proposed architecture for the one stop shop 
Employment and Welfare system can be represented as 
three-layered high-level architecture. In this section, we 
discuss each of these sections with a view to integrate and 
consolidate the information data for easier workflow and 
knowledge management. 
The first layer of this architecture depicts the citizen 
seeking the welfare support services should access the 
online platform and submit the inquiry. To implement the 
customized one-stop shop as a virtual governmental 
organization, the primary step is to integrate the Virtual 
Online platform with the official portal of the South Korean 
Government. This portal provides public services [5], an 
employment portal operated by the Ministry of Employment 
& Labor (Work-Net), telephone consultation services and 
employment & welfare hub.  
The second layer presents the Employment Welfare Plus 
Centre architecture. For instance, if the client seeking 
employment, welfare or both services are unable to find the 
required information and avail the services using the online 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
Figure 4. Conceptual Architecture of one-stop shop. 
 
Figure 5.  The Architecture of one-stop shop. 
 
 
 
Figure 6.  Intention-Based Design for one-stop shop Conceptual Architecture. 
 
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
 
web portal information hub and telephone services are 
required to visit the walk-in welfare-employment center. An 
inquiry submitted by the client is checked and accepted by 
the Inquiry Process Department. Following to this, the client 
seeking employment services is required to attend an initial 
interview with the government employee consultants 
available at the centre. Once, the enquiry acceptance, 
processing and validation are completed, a suitable 
employment service is decided and implemented to the 
client’s inquiry. 
An unemployed person who seeks a welfare service 
receives an employment service can also avail the welfare 
benefits. However, there is an option where an unemployed 
person can choose to take the employment service only by 
opting-out the welfare services. In contrast to this, welfare 
service recipients can receive both welfare and employment 
services, if they have a valid working ability, otherwise can 
only choose to avail welfare services. 
After a certain period of time, the client is required to 
visit the local walk-in centre for further consultation to 
evaluate the status of the provided services and eligibility 
criteria associated with the initial inquiry. Furthermore, a 
check is required to identify if there is any change of 
circumstances since the recording of the last update. If there 
is no change in personal circumstances and the eligibility 
criteria are met, then the provision of the services is also 
continued. In the instance where there is a change, then the 
client is advised for an in-centre consultation to re-evaluate 
and check if the eligibility criteria are met or not and 
accordingly to avail the services.  
Information related to eligibility criteria, provided 
services, decisions and any special notes are stored in 
centers’ local Employment & Welfare Service Server 
Database against the unique ID.  
Information related to financial data such as employees’ 
payroll, business record, personal skillset matrix is stored in 
the localized Work Management Server. Databases in 
various Employment Welfare Plus Centres are located in 
many geographically dispersed locations.  
These information data are integrated into centralized 
server system, creating the 3rd layer of the proposed high-
level architecture. Here, we would propose a federated or 
hybrid technology or similar for efficiency, scalability and 
security 
as 
well 
as 
service-oriented 
architecture 
implementations. This is to be further investigated in future 
studies.  
Centralized database not only acts as an information 
storage system but also a platform for decision making and 
governance for policies and regulation. These policies and 
directives will be adopted from different ministries which 
are responsible for providing the services and its functional 
operation. Thus, creating a true one-stop architecture which 
can be easily and efficiently managed and controlled.  
The following points describe the main components that 
are catered to by the database:  
• 
An integrated hub for policies, directives and 
regulation governed by different ministries, 
localized public agencies, local government and 
ministry of employment and labor 
• 
Support and decision-making process for legal and 
jurisdiction compliance 
• 
An integrated workforce management system 
facilitating: work allocation and prioritization, 
employee skillset evaluation and development 
program, service levels classifications and 
monitoring, QA/QC monitoring and control 
• 
Archive of information 
VII. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we have presented a virtual organization 
solution by introducing a one-stop shop solution to the 
Korean government case study. The required collaboration 
model presented by the Korean government case study is 
very complicated as it involves several ministries and 
models of collaboration and therefore a Virtual Organization 
(VO) approach is required that will take into account all 
contributing factors. In this paper, an initial conceptual 
model of the proposed architecture has been proposed.  
In the proposed architecture, a hybrid approach that 
combines centralized and localized information storage and 
handling decision making has been followed. Despite the 
main requirement for a centralized VO approach, it has been 
proposed that a major part of the data processing and 
decision-making stays at the local level, therefore, leading 
to a hybrid architectural model. This optimizes the overall 
decision-making process by assigning to the local resources 
for data processing and storage, while, the complex decision 
making, involving multi-ministerial policies and related 
influences is handled by the centralized e-Governance layer. 
This has been tailored to the specific case study 
requirements in order to optimally solve South Korea 
Government e-government requirements. 
The work was evaluated through feedback from Korea 
Government as was submitted to the Ministry of Interior 
and Design for evaluation as the outcome of the 
collaborative 
project 
with 
Bournemouth 
University. 
According to this feedback the virtual organization approach 
of the proposed architecture would add a major advantage to 
the existing structure. It would provide a simplified and 
faster model of decision making led by an integrated & 
centralized e-Governance policy platform (VO solution). 
Initial draft cost analysis was also performed which 
demonstrated that this was a beneficial solution which 
required medium and feasible investment. This particular 
solution was preferred comparing to riskier alternatives 
which incorporated, for example, block-chain solutions and 
were also proposed and discussed during the project.     
Future plans also include the design development of a 
complete model-based approach using SysML and other 
formalisms in order to incorporate the business processes 
and virtual organizations’ requirements with system 
architecture descriptions. In this work, we have started from 
a high-level description of the problem and the proposed 
architecture. In order to proceed with the implementation of 
such a complex architecture, a top-down model-based 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

 
 
approach has been identified as a requirement that will 
incorporate business logic with IT. For the time being, the 
SysML language has been identified a standard and more 
accepted platform both requirements and solutions.   
Although there are several steps required until the 
successful conclusion of this study, the initial feedback from 
the South Korean government is encouraging and promising 
for the adoption of Virtual Organization approaches in real-
world applications.   
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Mogaha, “Government of Koreae Best Practices,” Seoul: 
Ministry of Government Administration and Home Affairs in 
South Korea, 2016. 
[2] M. Howard, “E-government across the globe: How will “e” 
change government?” e-Government 2001, 90, 80. 
[3] C. S. Chung, “The Introduction of e-Government in Korea: 
Development Journey, Outcomes and Future1,” Revue 
Gestion et Management Public , vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 107-122, 
2015. 
[4] S. G. Lim, “Achievement and Challenges of Government 3.0:. 
2015-34 ed. Seoul: Korea Institute of Public Administration,” 
2015. 
[5] Government 24 online portal. [Online] Available from: 
www.gov.kr/portal/main [Accessed 30 5 2018]. 
[6] United 
Nations 
DESA, 
UNITED 
NATIONS 
E-
GOVERNMENT SURVEY 2014 E-Government for the Future 
We Want, New York: the United Nations. [Online] Available 
from:  
https://publicadministration.un.org/egovkb/portals/egovkb/do
cuments/un/2014-survey/e-gov_complete_survey-2014.pdf 
[Accessed 13 01 2019]. 
[7] MOEL, Ministry of Employment and Labor in South Korea. 
[Online] 
Available 
from: 
https://www.moel.go.kr/english/main.jsp 
[Accessed 26 5 2018]. 
[8] Employment Welfare Plus Center in South Korea, Emplyment 
Welfare 
Plus 
Center. 
[Online]  
Available 
from: 
http://workplus.go.kr/index.do 
[Accessed 29 5 2018]. 
[9] Korea Employment Information Service, Worknet. [Online]  
Available from: http://www.work.go.kr/seekWantedMain.do 
[Accessed 30 5 2018]. 
[10] MOIS, Ministry of the Interior and Safety. [Online]  
Available from: http://www.mois.go.kr/eng/a01/engMain.do 
[Accessed 26 5 2018]. 
[11] G. P. Dias and J. A., Rafael, “A simple model and a 
distributed architecture for realizing one-stop e-government,” 
Electronic Commerce Research and Applications, vol. 6, no. 
1, pp. 81-90, 2007. 
[12] H. Liu, “Model and architecture of one-stop government 
system: A solution of systemic interoperability,” In 
Information Management, Innovation Management and 
Industrial Engineering (ICIII), 2013 6th International 
Conference, vol. 1, pp. 75-79, 2013. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2019.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-685-9
ICDS 2019 : The Thirteenth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

