Denial of Service Attack in Wireless LAN
∗Tauseef Jamal, ‡∗Pedro Amaral, ±Asifullah Khan, ±Aneela Zameer, ±Kiramat Ullah, ±Shariq Aziz Butt
∗Instituto de Telecomunicações, Lisboa, Portugal.
‡Dept de Eng Electrotecnica, Faculdade de Ciencias e Tecnologia, Universidade Nova de Lisboa, Caparica,
Portugal
±DCIS, Pakistan Institute of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Islamabad,
Pakistan
tauseef.jamal@lx.it.pt, pfa@fct.unl.pt, [asif, aneelaz]@pieas.edu.pk, [shariq2314, kiramat19901]@gmail.com
Abstract—IEEE 802.11 specifications set the standard for
Physical
and Medium Access Control
(MAC)
layer for
implementing wireless Local Area Network (LAN). In the
wireless network, nodes share media elements with each other.
Nodes in wireless network access the media through physical
layer using Clear Channel Assessment (CCA) plus Virtual
Carrier Sense (VCS) at MAC layer. If VCS timer is not
properly handled, there is the possibility of Denial of Service
(DoS) attack. In this article, we discuss two scenarios. In the
first scenario, DoS attack is launched by increasing the time
duration of Clear To Send (CTS) frame. When the CTS frame
is received by other nodes, they update their Network
Allocation Vector (NAV) for extra time. In prevention step,
nodes first detect the malicious duration in the CTS frame and
then correct the NAV timer to mitigate the attack. This
technique is known as RCD (Re-Evaluation of CTS Duration).
In the second scenario, DoS attack is launched by flooding the
CTS frame periodically. All other overhearing nodes update
their NAV and remain in wait state. To handle such kind of
attack, nodes never directly update their NAV after receiving
CTS, but after checking the Transmitter Address (TA) and
Receiver Address (RA). To increase back the performance of
network, blacklisting of malicious node technique is used in
both scenarios when a DoS attack is detected.
Keywords- Virtual Carrier Sense; Medium Access Control;
CTS Attack; DoS Attack.
I.
INTRODUCTION
Wireless technology is one of the fastest growing
industries nowadays. The main reason for this growth is the
advantages that only wireless technology has. In wireless
communication, there is no need of wires to transmit data
from one device to another, which provides flexibility to the
network. New devices can be easily added to the network.
However, due to the broadcast nature and shared medium of
wireless communications, there exist a variety of risks.
These risks include packet loss due to distance or mobility,
interference, collisions, delay, overhearing, eavesdropping,
session hijacking and DoS attacks [1].
In DoS attacks [2], the attacker overloads the network
bandwidth with unusual traffic, which makes resources
unavailable for others, because other nodes will not be able
to send their data after sensing the busy medium. DoS
attackers normally exploit the NAV behavior by tempering
some of the flags in control frames. In IEEE 802.11 standard,
the nodes do not counter check all the flags in control
frames, therefore, it is hard to detect such kind of attacks. In
this paper, we discuss how DoS attack can be launched when
NAV is updated for illegitimate time, by exploiting the
duration field of CTS frame in one scenario and exploiting
the RA field of CTS frame in the second scenario.
WLANs can be divided into two types: Infrastructure
WLANs and Ad-Hoc WLANs. In infrastructure WLAN
there is an Access Point (AP) which is surrounded by nodes;
AP reserves the media for a node when it has data to send. If
one node has data to send to another node, it must pass
through AP. In contrast to infrastructure type, the Ad-Hoc
WLANs are not centrally connected. In Ad-Hoc mode, the
wireless devices are directly connected to each other,
handling all communications in distributed fashion.
In Ad-Hoc networks, media is accessed by Distributed
Coordinated Function (DCF) with VCS mechanism [3]
which includes three-way handshake mechanism before
sending data.
If a node wants to send data, it sends a
Request To Send (RTS) frame to destination. The RTS frame
contains reservation duration that is required to complete the
data transfer. After receiving an RTS frame by destination, it
sends back a CTS frame containing the duration which node
requested. According to 802.11 standards all another node
when overhear either RTS or CTS must update their NAV
and stay quiet until their NAV time reached to zero, NAV is
a timer that can uniformly reduce to zero. After all setup, the
node sends DATA and waits for ACK, that completes the
process. The complete process is shown in Figure 1.
Figure 1. Virtual carrier sensing mechanism [3].
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In Section 2
we describe related work, while Sections 3 and 4 detaile
about DoS attack launching, detection and prevention of two
scenarios. Section 5 shows the evaluations of both scenarios.
Finally, we concluded the paper in Section 6.
42
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

II.
RELATED WORK
Table I elaborates the related work about DoS attacks.
Table I. DOS ATTACK IN WLAN
Type of Attack
Description
Counter measurement
(ICMP echo) [4]
Fill a network
bandwidth with
ICMP echo request
packets
Rearranging firewall
configuration such that it
blocks such packets
which are not part of the
network.
SYN Flood Attack
In SYN flood
attacker requests to
the target system to
provide adequate
server resources and
network capabilities
Filtering, increasing
backlog,
reducing SYN-
RECEIVED Timer and
SYN cache techniques
are used as a counter
measurement. [5]
DDoS Attack
The main goal of the
attacker is launching
a large traffic and
makes that flow
direction towards
victim system.
Configuring proper
incident response plan
before the DDoS attack
in the network, checking
traffic format and pattern
regularly will help out to
mitigate such type of
attack.[6]
Land Attack (Local
Area Network
Denial)[6]
The attackers send
malicious packets
such that it has the
same source and
destination address.
By enabling both ingress
and egress filters in the
router to check the
source and destination of
packets will help out to
mitigate the LAND
attack.
Authentication request
flood
Flood the state table
by malicious
requests, after the
attack there is no
space for acceptance
from legitimate
requests in the state
table.
Tracking of client
authentication process
by wIPS.
[7]
Association request
flood
Flooding the
associate table.
Log the authenticated
user and implementation
of the tracking
system.[7]
RTS /CTS DoS Attack
Sending malicious
RTS/CTS back to
back.
Using RRD technique
protect from such kind
of attack. [8]
For better understanding of DoS attacks in WLANs
authors in [9] and [10] discussed and analyzed some
weaknesses in 802.11 protocols. The cryptographically
protection is not effective because MAC spoofing is still
vulnerable and DoS attacks are still possible [9]. While
exploiting the authentication mechanism [10] leads to
additional overhead.
In [11], the authors analyzed Ad-Hoc network, and its
vulnerabilities to DoS attack. The malicious node sends
control frames to a node which does not exist in the network;
while other nodes find it as true communication in the
network which leads to DoS attack. However, they did not
consider CTS frame. This kind of DoS attack is more
prominent when CTS is sent.
In [12], the authors proposed a solution for flood attack
using Letter Envelop Protocol (LEP) with Traffic Pattern
Filtering (TPF) protocol. They can be used by Central
Manager (CM), but if CM is spoofed and maliciously used
another mirror of CM, then it will not be effective.
In [12], the authors analyzed the attacks related to VCS.
The main focus of the paper is RTS flooding. They analyzed
the effects of RTS flood in different conditions. However,
they never considered the hidden node problem in all
scenarios.
In [13], the authors increased RTS duration and by re-
evaluation of the RTS Duration (RRD) technique bring the
system performance up. However, this is not efficient either
because other nodes already updated their NAV for extra
time. Even if RTS duration is found malicious by CTS
receiver node, it will not help.
One of the problems with all above solutions is the use of
explicit control messages, which increase the overhead as
well as they are prone to collisions. Therefore, our solution
is based on implicit behavior without any additional control
or broadcast messages.
III.
FIRST SCENARIO
A. Attack launching
In our first scenario, one node works as receiver. It starts
malicious behavior by increasing CTS frame duration to
reserve medium more than the time required. CTS duration
is increased more than two 2*SIFS+DATA + ACK frames
length. Figure 2 shows that other overhearing nodes update
their NAV for more than the time required. This leads to
DoS attack.
Figure 2. Launching DoS by increasing CTS duration.
B. Detection
We use revalidation technique to detect such kind of
attack. In revalidation, there is a comparison between CTS
frame duration which is received from receiver node and
immediate RTS frame duration which are send by sender
node, at lower layer by each node before updating NAV.
43
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

In RTS, the duration is set by the sender to keep in view
the amount of data. The CTS duration is calculated by
receiver node as:

RS_Duration – SIFS – CTS
According to IEEE 802.11 standard, when any frame is
overheard by a node, it first checks if the frame is destined
for it or not. If the frame does not belong to a node, such
node just extracts the duration field from the frame and
updates its NAV. However, in our proposed detection
mechanism
all
overhearing
nodes
calculate
the
CTS
duration according to (1), upon reception of RTS.
When
CTS frame arrives, the overhearing nodes extract the
duration field from CTS frame, and compare it to the saved
CTS frame (we call it expected CTC duration). Based on the
comparison, it decides if the CTS frame is malicious or not.
Figure
3
shows
the
flow
diagram
of
the
described
mechanism.
Figure 3. Detection mechanism for the first scenario.
C. Prevention
After detecting a malicious node, we need to update the
NAV according to the correct value of duration field. Each
node will perform three tasks shown in Figure 4.

Calculates
the
malicious
time
interval
by
subtracting
(CTS
duration
frame
duration-
immediate RTS).
And save in a variable. In
non-malicious case, this variable value must be
zero.

Adjust the actual time for NAV by subtracting
the malicious time interval from malicious CTS
duration.

Update the NAV timer.
IV.
SECOND SCENARIO
A. Attack launching
In our second scenario, a malicious node pretends to be
receiver of itself, by replacing RA with its own MAC
address (Figure 5) and sends malicious CTS periodically.
This way, the channel is occupied by the malicious node
while other overhearing nodes update their NAV and remain
in quiet state, leading to DoS attack [14].
Figure 4. Detection and prevention for the first scenario.
Figure 5. Replacing RA with MyMAC.
There are three kinds of nodes, sender, receiver and
others nodes. In case of sender, when malicious CTS is
received, it goes to CONTEND state and waits there until the
medium is idle for sending the RTS again [15]. In receiver
case, when a malicious CTS is received, it goes to QUIET
44
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

state. The
receiver
finds
that
some
other
nodes are
communicating so to avoid a collision it will stay in QUIET
state. Other overhearing nodes, just update their NAV (as
explained earlier), and most of the time they remain in the
QUIET state. Therefore, attack in such a scenario is very
critical and hard to detect.
B. Detection
This attack is critical because there is no check on
receiver address of CTS frame. Other nodes do not know
about CTS frame’s Sender Address (SA). So, they can not
find malicious CTS and would update NAV after receiving
malicious CTS. This problem can be detected as follows:

Since RTS frame includes the receiver address.

Therefore, as RTS is received by other nodes, they
retrieve the RA and save it.

When CTS is arrived as a consequent of RTS, before
updating the NAV, there would be a comparison at two
steps:
◦
Compare RA to MyMAC
◦
Compare SA to RA.

If SA is same RA, declare it malicious otherwise
updated NAV.
Figure
6
describes
the
flow
diagram
of
detection
mechanism.
Figure 6. Detection of the second scenario.
C. Prevention
The main problem in this scenario is that malicious node
will not release the medium. It will send that malicious CTS
and other nodes must wait for the end of transmission. The
longer the duration mentioned in malicious CTS, the more
the network performance would go down. Therefore, in our
proposed mechanism, each node maintains a list of MAC
addresses. As soon the malicious CTS’s originator is
detected, its MAC is added to the list.
When a node is detected malicious, three steps are taken
by each node: stop updating NAV, update the list and
maintain the record of malicious MAC and send a broadcast
alert message with malicious MAC to other nodes. So, any
node may no longer involve in communication with such
malicious node and ignore such CTS in the future. As a
result, other nodes would have more chances to utilize the
medium, increasing the overall capacity of the network.
V.
EVALUATION
In our experimental setup, we used the OMNET++
framework with MIXIM simulator model on window 7
platform.
In MIXIM wireless network IEEE 802.11 is
implemented. For both scenarios the destination or receiver
node is assigned MAC address of 0, while all other nodes are
sender nodes. Node-0 sends CTS and behaves maliciously.
The number of nodes varies from 3 to 15 nodes. We have
performed three kinds of simulations for both scenarios, i.e.,
without malicious node (which is bench mark), with one
malicious
node
and
with
our
proposed
prevention
mechanism. We simulated each topology for 300s. We used
throughput and latency as performance parameters. Other
simulation parameters are listed in Table II.
Table II. SIMULATION PARAMETERS
Parameter
Values
cup-time-limit
300s
playgroundSizeX
500m
playgroundSizeY
500m
playgroundSizeZ
50m
carrier Frequency
2.4e+9Hz
Power
110.11mW
mobility.speed
0 mps
appl.burstSize
1frame
appl.trafficParam
50ms
appl.destAddr
0 node
appl.initializationTime
uniform(60000ms,60050ms)
mac.headerLength
272 bits
mac.queueLength
14 frames
acierate
2E+6bps# in bits/second
phy.useThermalNoise
true
45
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

A. First scenario results
Latency is the amount of time a message takes to traverse
a system; we can observe that latency increases as many
nodes increase in a network. We can see in Figure 7 that
latency is increased due to the malicious node which means
that nodes wait for extra time to send data. Here, our
proposal brought the latency as close as possible to normal
and decreased the latency up to 35% in case of one malicious
node.
Figure 7. Latency for the first scenario.
Throughput is a measure of how many units of
information a system can process in each amount of time.
Throughput decreases as network density increases, in
Figure 8; the throughput decreases with increase in number
of hosts due to increase in latency. As the nodes update their
NAV after receiving malicious CTS, the number of packets
sent by a node would be less compared to the non-malicious
case. Our proposal brought the throughput closer to normal
and increased the throughput up to 35% in case of one
malicious node.
Figure 8. Throughput for the first scenario.
B. Second scenario results
In the second scenario, the DoS attack has the worst
effect on network performance as compared to the first
scenario. As shown in Figure 9, when receiving malicious
CTS after the interval, here interval is 3 frames count in the
network, sender node sends again RTS frame for sending
data and other nodes just only update NAV. Other nodes
only send their RTS frame when the first node RTS retries
reaches its limit. That decreases throughput abruptly.
Figure 9. Throughput after malicious CTS for 2nd scenario.
After blacklisting the malicious node, other nodes ignore
any kind of frame from the malicious node, the throughput is
increased up to 41%, which is 65% increased to normal
behavior. It still not reached to normal behavior because
there is still a malicious CTS flow in the network. Also, there
is slight overhead of broadcast alert, which decreases
throughput c.f. Figure 10.
Figure 10. Throughput after prevention for 2nd scenario.
VI.
CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
In the first scenario, the attacker increase the CTS frame
duration field which reserves the media for a node longer
than required and other nodes update NAV for the extra
time. Nodes are not allowed to sense the media; therefore,
we proposed a Re-Evaluate CTS Duration (RCD) technique
to detect such behavior and then set back the correct value
for NAV as a prevention.
In the second scenario, CTS frame exploits the RA field
in CTS frame and sends a CTS frame to itself after a specific
interval. In the detection phase, we use the comparison of
destination and sender node addresses when CTS is received
by any node. During the prevention mechanism, other nodes
stop updating NAV and announce the MAC of the malicious
node. After that, no other node would communicate with
such node.
46
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

As a future work, we aim to extend the scenario towards
dense network having 100s of highly mobile nodes randomly
deployed, to test the proposal against increasing number of
malicious nodes. Another extension would be learning the
malicious behavior implicitly by other nodes and other nodes
would ignore such node (implicitly). In this situation we
would
use
relays
to
cooperate
with
[17],
using
the
framework proposed in [18]. The aim is to implement and
test in the real scenario.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is funded by FCT/MEC through national
funds and when applicable co-funded by FEDER – PT2020
partnership
agreement
under
the
project
UID/EEA/50008/2013.
REFERENCES
[1]
SA Butt, T. Jamal, “Study of Black Hole Attack in AODV”, in Proc
of International Journal of Future Generation Communication and
Networking, Vol.10, No.9 (2017), pp.37-48.
[2]
T. Jamal, P. Mendes, and A. Zúquete, “Wireless Cooperative
Relaying Based on Opportunistic Relay Selection,” International
Journal on Advances in Networks and Services, vol. 05, no. 2, pp.
116–127, Jun. 2012.
[3]
T. Jamal and P. Mendes, “Relay Selection Approaches for Wireless
Cooperative Networks,” in Proc. of IEEE WiMob, Niagara Falls,
Canada, Oct. 2010.
[4]
B. John and S. Stefan. “802.11 Denial-of-Service Attacks: Real
Vulnerabilities and Practical Solutions.” Proceedings of the USENIX
Security Symposium, August 2003.
[5]
D.B.Roy, R.Chaki and N.Chaki, “A New Cluster-Based Wormhole
Intrusion Detection Algorithm for Mobile Ad Hoc Neworks,”
International Journal of Network Security and Its Application
(IJNSA), Vol. 1, No.1, April, 2009.
[6]
H.Deng, W.Li and D.P.Agrawal, “Routing Security in Wireless Ad
Hoc Networks,” University of Cincinnati, IEEE Communication
Magzine, Oct, 2002.
[7]
C. Liu and J. Yu, “A Solution to WLAN Authentication and
Association DoS Attacks,” IAENG Int. J. Comput. Sci., vol. 34, no.
1, pp. 31–36, 2007.
[8]
P. M. D. Nagarjun, V. A. Kumar, C. A. Kumar, and A. Ravi,
“Simulation and analysis of RTS/CTS DoS attack variants in 802.11
networks,” in 2013 International Conference on Pattern Recognition,
Informatics and Mobile Engineering, 2013, pp. 258–263.
[9]
K.
Bicakci
and
B.
Tavli,
“Denial-of-Service
attacks
and
countermeasures in IEEE 802.11 wireless networks,” Comput. Stand.
Interfaces, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 931–941, Sep. 2009.
[10] J. Heo and C. S. Hong, “An Efficient and Secured Media Access
Mechanism Using the Intelligent Coordinator in Low-Rate WPAN
Environment,” Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2005, pp. 470–476.
[11] T. Jamal, P. Mendes, and A. Zúquete, “RelaySpot: A Framework for
Opportunistic Cooperative Relaying,” in Proc. of IARIA ACCESS,
Luxembourg, Jun. 2011.
[12] A. L., V. B., S. S., and P. A., “A Solution to Prevent Resource
Flooding Attacks in 802.11 WLAN,” Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,
2012, pp. 607–616.
[13] T. Jamal, M. Alam, and M. M. Umair, “Detection and prevention
against RTS attacks in wireless LANs,” in 2017 International
Conference on Communication, Computing and Digital Systems (C-
CODE), 2017, pp. 152–156.
[14] T. Jamal and P. Mendes, “802.11 Medium Access Control In
MiXiM,” Copelabs Technical Report, 2013.
[15] T. Jamal and P. Mendes, “Cooperative Relaying in Dynamic Wireless
Networks
under
Interference
Conditions
(2014)”,
in:
IEEE
Communication Magazine, Special issue on User-centric Networking
and Services.
[16] Y. Ohsita, S. Ata, and M. Murata, “Deployable overlay network for
defense against distributed SYN flood attacks,” IEICE Trans.
Commun., vol. E91–B, no. 8, pp. 2618–2630, Aug. 2008.
[17] T.
Jamal,
P.
Mendes,
and
A.
Zúquete,
“Interference-Aware
Opportunistic Relay Selection,” in Proc. of ACM CoNEXT, Tokyo,
Japan, Dec. 2011.
[18] T. Jamal, P. Mendes, and A. Zúquete, “Opportunistic Relay Selection
for Wireless Cooperative Network,” in Proc. of IEEE IFIP NTMS,
Istanbul, Turkey, May 2012.
47
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2018.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-615-6
ICDS 2018 : The Twelfth International Conference on Digital Society and eGovernments

