Assessing Open Government Budgetary Data in Brazil  
 
 
Gisele da Silva Craveiro and Marcelo Tavares de Santana 
School of Arts, Science and Humanities 
University of São Paulo 
São Paulo, Brazil 
giselesc@usp.br , marcelo.tavares@usp.br 
 
João Porto de Albuquerque 
Institute of Mathematical and Computing Sciences 
University of SãoPaulo 
São Carlos, Brazil 
jporto@icmc.usp.br 
 
Abstract—Budget transparency is an instrumental factor for 
better understanding the concept of budget within a 
democratic context. International codes for best governance 
practices in public management have appointed the internet as 
a communication media with the potential to provide this 
information in a timely and transparent manner to the several 
players in the society, and open government data has added 
important elements to this scenario. Currently, there is no 
structured framework to evaluate the quality of the budgetary 
information disclosed on the web. This paper takes this into 
consideration when proposing an assessment framework and 
analyzing data collected from two samples: one composed by 
54 budgetary websites from different Brazilian executive 
power levels (national, state and municipal), complemented 
with another sample of 34 Brazilian audit court websites. 
Keywords-Budgetary 
web 
sites; 
budgetary 
disclosure 
assessment; open government data 
I.  INTRODUCTION 
Accessing public finance information is essential for 
transparency in government actions in order to increase its 
confidence and accountability. The movements New Public 
Management and New Public Financial Management [1, 2] 
state the importance of transparency as a prerequisite for 
accountability. According to OECD [3] “access to 
information, consultation and active participation in policy-
making contributes to good governance by fostering greater 
transparency in policy-making; more accountability”. 
The 
use 
of 
Information 
and 
Communication 
Technologies (ICT) in Public Administration is linked to the 
New Public Management  [4]. In this context, the publication 
of information on websites on public financing, can be 
observed in many countries since the early 2000s [5]. 
Usually, these portals publish budget laws, definitions and 
other technical supporting documents for the interpretation 
of published financial data. Regarding monitoring of budget 
execution afforded by websites, data is usually published 
both in regard to past years as well as to the current year. It is 
important to note that the websites have different refresh 
rates of information about income and expenses for the 
current year, which may occur monthly, weekly or daily. The 
level of detail, the formats used and the quality of accounting 
information 
are 
also 
very 
heterogeneous, 
usually 
corresponding 
to 
the 
government's 
commitment 
to 
transparency [6]. 
Research on budgetary and financial information 
disclosure has been done since early 2000s; but, since 2009 
Open Government initiatives [7, 8] have been adding new 
elements in the discussion. Open Government Data (OGD) 
initiatives emerged worldwide aiming to make public data 
freely available to everyone, without restrictions. However, 
despite its potential, there is currently a lack of roadmaps, 
guidelines and benchmarking frameworks to drive and 
measure OGD progress. 
The publication of open government data on the web has 
great potential as pointed by [9]. However, the literature on 
governmental budgetary website evaluation does not provide 
a structured framework for assessing the quality of budgetary 
information disclosed to citizens. Therefore, the aim of this 
paper is of bridging this gap. In the pursuit of this goal, this 
paper proposes an assessment framework, which is based on 
the eight Open Government Data Principles [10]. The 
framework is then applied to assess 88 Brazilian open 
government data websites, a sample composed by different 
levels of the executive power (national, state and municipal), 
and complemented with all Brazilian audit courts. 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. 
Section 2 makes a summary of the most relevant literature on 
governmental budgetary websites and also on the principles 
of open government data. Section 3 addresses the 
methodological issues, firstly presenting the aspects 
observed, including how they have been defined, then 
establishing the hypotheses, and finally, describing the 
sample, model and analysis procedures. Section 4 presents 
the main findings of the study, and Section 5 summarizes the 
conclusions. 
II. BACKGROUND 
The international codes of good governance practices in 
public management, especially for the codes developed by 
the 
Organization 
for 
Economic 
Co-operation 
and 
Development (OECD) [3], International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) [11] and by International Federation of Accountants 
(IFAC) [12], as well as suggesting the actions that are 
translated into good practices, have also appointed the 
Internet as a communication media with the potential to 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

provide information in a timely and transparent manner to 
the several social players. 
In Brazil, the legal recommendation [13, 14, 15] demands 
the public entities to disclose in real time, detailed 
information on the financial and budget execution, in 
accessible electronic media, with the objective of promoting 
the monitoring by the society of the usage of public 
resources and hold the managers who do not abide by the 
norms accountable. 
In answer to the legal requirements, each member of the 
Federation sought its technological solutions, according to 
the principle of autonomy in the Federal Constitution, with 
different providers or creating its own technology teams. In 
this research, one can notice that even with structure and 
vocabulary defined by law, the information found in 
transparency pages from different members of the Federation 
bring different information, even if with a common 
budgetary legislation for all. 
In this context, it is also important to place the existence 
of institutional controls on public accounts. The scrutiny of 
public accountancy in Brazil occurs similarly to other 
countries, where the creation of accountancy control 
institutions took place concomitantly to the modernization or 
monarchies or changes to the republican regimen [16]. 
Currently in Brazil, there are two financial control systems 
on the government accounts: internal control, performed by 
the own entities in the state apparatus, and an external 
control, performed by the Legislative Power, which has the 
aid of audit courts [17]. Thus, it is understood that by 
autonomy, the audit courts originate from a differentiation 
process in relation to the executive power - regarding the 
control of public finances - and legislative power - regarding 
the control of executive acts. 
The external control is destined to prove: the probity of 
administrative acts; regularity of public expenditure and use 
of public goods, values and money; the faithful execution of 
budget. Also, as mentioned by [16], the external control 
should enable dialog channels with the civil society, with the 
objective 
of 
promoting 
social 
control 
on 
public 
administration so that any citizen, political party, association 
or sindicate - which are legitim parts, can inform 
irregularities or illegal acts. 
In Brazil, the audit court system includes an audit court 
for the federal level (central government), 27 audit courts in 
states and Federal District. Most of them, that is, 23 state 
level audit courts, are responsible for auditing both the state 
and its municipalities accounts, and only 4 of them have the 
task of controlling exclusively state public accounts. 
Additionally, the audit court system has 6 audit courts: 2 for 
large municipalities (São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro cities), 
and 4 audit courts for municipalities, belonging to 4 states. 
All of these 34 audit courts have their own institutional 
websites on the internet, and the large majority publishes 
information for the society to follow, not only on public 
accountancy, but also on its audits. 
A. Assessment of government portals 
Many studies have been dedicated to the theme of quality 
in the disclosure of government information, especially 
budgetary, through internet portals. This section describes 
works that have contributed both with assessment 
methodologies and reflections about financial data disclosure 
in a particular locality. 
Groff and Pitman [18] have studied 100 largest US 
Municipalities in order to establish a baseline against which 
to compare the growth of internet reporting. The items 
assessed were budgets and comprehensive annual financial 
reporting (full and summary statements). 
Some aspects concerning content and design of the 
websites for financial reporting were evaluated in [19]. In 
this work, an index is proposed that comprises the type of 
financial information (including budgetary information and 
management indicators), quality of financial reporting 
contents, and user-friendly characteristics of website design 
(e.g. navigability and interaction conditions, easiness to 
manage and identify information). They have evaluated 
some Central Administrations of EU member-States. In 
another work, Rodríguez Bolívar [20] studied budgetary and 
financial position information disclosure as well as 
qualitative characteristics; performance indicators and the 
way the website is designed, tools it uses and the navigation 
system (e.g., easiness of interaction with potential users). 
Bolívar [21] propose an index which evaluates Internet-
based financial information, based on the Spanish regional 
accounting standards. The index items embrace financial, 
budgetary and non-financial information for comparing 
accounts in hard-copy format with internet disclosure. 
Similar concerns are observed to Caba et al. [22] who 
studied the disclosure at the municipal level (Spanish 
Municipalities) and proposed a disclosure index to compare 
paper-based financial reporting with internet financial 
reporting, considering information quality characteristics. 
Their index assesses three dimensions: financial information 
that websites should include, the characteristics of the 
contents included, and the website design to make 
information more accessible. 
Transparency, 
interactivity, 
usability 
and 
website 
maturity are dimensions in the index proposed by Pina et al. 
[23]. A scoring system for the analysis of government 
financial disclosure in the internet assigns different weights 
to the dimensions, giving preponderance to transparency and 
interactivity. They have used the Web Site Attribute 
Evaluation System (WAES) methodology and surveyed 
some European regional and local government websites. 
Pina et al. [24] have surveyed five local government web 
sites (the web site of the capital and the four subsequent 
largest cities) from 15 European web sites. Their survey has 
two groups of items of financial and non-financial 
information: items relating to financial accountability 
published through the Internet (economic and financial 
information 
performance, 
social 
and 
environmental 
information) and items relating to transparency, interactivity, 
usability and website maturity. 
The municipal level is also studied by Jorge et al. [25]. 
This research combines items of budgetary and financial 
information to be disclosed with availability options, namely 
access/visibility, format and delivery mode and propose an 
disclosure index. They have evaluated a sample of 94 
21
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

municipalities institutional websites, 49 from Italy and 45 
from Portugal. 
In the Brazilian context, Cruz et al.[26] has studied the 
transparency level of information in public administration 
published in the websites of 96 Brazilian municipalities 
included among the 100 most populous. They try to verify 
which characteristics and socioeconomic indicators of the 
municipalities can contribute to explain the level of 
transparency observed. The level of transparency in public 
administration was established from a research model called 
Transparency Index Municipal Public Management (ITGP-
M) constructed with basis on international codes of good 
governance and transparency, the Brazilian legislation and 
the experiences of previous studies of similar nature 
conducted in Brazil and abroad. This index has 6 categories 
(general information on the municipality, municipal manager 
and councilors; municipal laws and municipal planning 
instruments; financial information, accountancy and fiscal 
reports; information on the interaction with citizens and 
society; analysis of the municipal portal; and quantitative and 
qualitative information on management). 
Also within the Brazilian context, Ribeiro [27] evaluated 
two governmental portals under the transparency point of 
view. This evaluation had the investigation of the 
characteristics of the websites, and the implementation of 
WEAS evaluation methodology. The evaluated portals were 
the public purchase government portal (ComprasNet), and 
the Transparency Portal of the Federal Government. 
However, it is worth mentioning that the method applied 
presents limitations, such as not analyzing the quality and 
depth of published information, accessibility; specific 
problems in Brazil, such as digital exclusion; and the main 
issue: the model is not updated (its last version dates from 
2001). Furthermore, it is important to note that none of the 
papers reviewed in this section explicitly addresses Open 
Government Data, which is the topic of the next section. 
B. Open Government Data disclosure evaluation 
As mentioned in Section 1, Open Government Data 
(OGD) introduces new possibilities to improve transparency, 
accountability 
and 
social 
participation, 
which 
are 
fundamental to financial information disclosure. Although 
there are some works that address the evaluation of OGD 
quality, 
these 
are 
not 
linked 
to 
the 
specific 
financial/budgetary domain. These works will be reviewed 
as specified below. 
Braunschweig [28] presents a more technical evaluation 
on the state of open data portals, aiming to check not only if 
the data are available, but how and in which format this is 
made. The authors analyzed 49 existing open data portals 
from several countries and different organizational levels 
(municipal, state, federal and even international ones). Then, 
they crop this sample, and perform a deeper analysis in only 
5 of these portals. Based on the observations made, the 
authors propose some standardizations, such as the 
presentation of data that can be re-used, which can be read 
by machines (and software). For the analysis of the 49 
portals, which they named global view, the authors created 
ten indexes that were observed for each portal: Number of 
published datasets (ND), Existence of standardized metadata 
attributes (SM), Standardized file formats (SF), Standardized 
domain categories (SC), Standardized spatial (SS)/temporal 
metadata (ST), Existence of an API (EA), API granularity: 
access to metadata or data (AG), Curation (CR) and Latest 
date of activity (DA). In the detailed view of the five portals, 
they created four indexes, namely: Downloadable Datasets 
(DD), Machine-readable Datasets (RD), Existence and 
number of tags (NT) and Existence and length of description 
(LD). 
In this context of availability of government data, the 
term Open Government Data (OGD) was coined, which 
became popular at the beginning of 2008, after the 
publication of a set of OGD principles by lawyers in the 
USA, in December 2007 [10]. OGD is that any data 
produced by public sectors for anyone to use for any purpose 
[1] and the principles aiming to ensure the right to 
information are [10, 28]: 
1) Complete: All public data is made available. Public data 
is data that is not subject to valid privacy, security or 
privilege limitations. 
2) Primary: Data is as collected at the source, with the 
highest possible level of granularity, not in aggregate or 
modified forms. 
3) Timely: Data is made available as quickly as necessary to 
preserve the value of the data. 
4) Accessible: Data is available to the widest range of users 
for the widest range of purposes. 
5) Machine processable: Data is reasonably structured to 
allow automated processing. 
6) Non-discriminatory: Data is available to anyone, with no 
requirement of registration. 
7) Non-proprietary: Data is available in a format over 
which no entity has exclusive control. 
8) License-free: Data is not subject to any copyright, patent, 
trademark or trade secret regulation. Reasonable privacy, 
security and privilege restrictions may be allowed. 
III. ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK 
The assessment framework proposed here encompasses 
the application of a survey to check the quality of budgetary 
data available in open government data portals. The 
framework is based on the eight open data principles [10], 
which are interpreted for the specific context of budgetary 
data based in good practice codes, regulations and applicable 
laws, namely: 
 
Manual on Fiscal Transparency (FMI, 2007); 
 
Brazilian Federal Republic Constitution; 
 
Complementary Law n.101/2000; 
 
Complementary Law n.131/2009; 
 
Law n. 4.320/1964; 
 
Technical budget manual 2012 
This research was based on the eight open data principles 
mentioned in the previous section. Some explanations on 
their connection to this paper are given below. 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

In budget, there are two large information groups 
annually planned: revenues and expenses. In order to identify 
the compliance to the first principle - data must be complete 
- it was necessary that the portal presented these two groups 
in a temporal series.  
The Brazilian budget, both for revenue and expenses, has 
a hierarchical classification in six levels. For example, in 
revenue, these levels are respectively economic (1), origin 
(2), species (3), approval (4), item (5), subitem (6). In this 
hierarchy, each sublevel is a detailing of the immediately 
prior level, that is, the total in origin (2) is the sum of all 
expenses in species (3). Thus, level 1 is the most aggregated 
and level 6 is the most primary. 
For the third principle, data must be updated. Data from 
the last revenue or expense published were considered. On 
the access to data, forth principle, the attempts to download 
datasets through addresses provided in the transparency 
portals were checked. Also, the downloaded file should 
contain budget data to be considered accessible. If the data 
did not exist, it was not considered accessible. 
The fifth principle, data must be processed by machine, 
was dealt in three issues since it depends on data being able 
to be accessed by machine, be downloaded and be in non-
proprietary format in order to be read and processed. It also 
considered possible technologies that make difficult the 
access by machines, such as the use of CAPTCHA [29], a 
technology which depends on human intervention to access 
data. It can be observed that the eight principles have some 
intersection and/or dependency, such as in the two first ones. 
Data is not expected to be primary if they are not complete, 
nor that they can be processed if their format is not 
accessible. 
For the sixth principle, non-discriminatory, it considered 
the need of some special access or enrollment. If there is no 
need to provide information for access the data were 
considered non-discriminatory. The seventh principle, data 
must be non-proprietary. It dealt on the observation of some 
options for known formats (PDF, CSV, XLS, XML) and an 
open field for unforeseen cases. The eighth principle, data 
must have free licenses, was also dealt as a single issue on 
the existence of usage licenses for data and if there is any 
restriction on them. 
For this research, the parameters considered from [28] 
were: Standardized domain categories (SC), Standardized 
file formats (SF), Existence of an API (EA), API granularity: 
access to metadata or data (AG), Latest date of activity (DA), 
Downloadable Datasets (DD), Machine-readable Datasets 
(RD). 
Number of published datasets (ND) is not part of our 
research since it is not about a data catalog, but only budget 
portals. The authors have not used the parameter Existence 
of standardized metadata attributes (SM) since there is no 
metadata standards in Brazil, even the well-know metadata 
standards such as Dublin Core [30] are not mentioned in the 
Brazilian documents like technical budget manual [31]. Also 
due to the absence of standards, the parameters Standardized 
spatial(SS)/temporal metadata (ST) were not considered. On 
Curation (CR), data from audit courts were considered 
curated data, but there is no equivalence of this parameter to 
the eight open data principles. The parameter Existence and 
number of tags (NT) was not included since this parameter 
was considered, in the case of the Brazilian budget, 
equivalent to SC. Existence and length of description (LD) 
was not included since that for the data domains there are 
public budget manuals as well as legislation. 
Table 1 summarizes the explanations on the framework. 
IV. METHODOLOGY 
Brazil has 5,565 municipalities, which belong to a federal 
district, and 26 states in the Brazilian federation. The study, 
as well as analyzing the federal government site, analyzed all 
portals from the 26 state governments and federal district, 
seeking to survey the reality of information offered in federal 
and state levels. At municipal level, at this point, the authors 
opted to investigate all capitals in the states and the federal 
district. In this manner, the criterion adopted was the 
cropping of 27 municipalities, which gather over 40% of the 
population in the country, rendering the study relevant, once 
it investigate information related to public management for a 
significant percentage of the Brazilian population, which 
answers for the largest part of all richness produced in the 
country.  
The audit courts sites also compose another sample. All 
entities controlling the accountancies at municipal (6), 
state/municipal (4), state (23) and federal (1) levels were 
evaluated, with a total of 34 portals. From the collection of 
data in the 54 sites from the executive power and the 34 
portals from control entities, we attempted to obtain 309 
datasets theoretically offered, but it was only possible to 
download a total of 268 valid datasets, which were also 
evaluated. Craveiro et al. [32] made available all datasets 
collected and analyzed on the web. 
Data collection, including the survey of municipalities 
and addresses of corresponding sites, data observation and 
analysis, information and services available on the portals, 
was performed between the months of August to October, 
TABLE I.  SUMMARY OF THE ASSESSMENT FRAMEWORK 
Open Data principle 
Our Framework 
1 Complete 
presence of information on revenues and 
expenses 
Standardized domain categories (SC) 
2 Primary 
observation of categories and phases in 
revenues and expenses 
Standardized domain categories (SC) 
3 Timely 
Date of the last update in 2012 must be of 48 
hours. 
Latest date of activity (DA) 
4 Accessible 
publication on the web (valid links, not empty 
datasets) 
Downloadable Datasets (DD) 
5 Machine processable 
Existence of an API (EA), API granularity: 
access to metadata or data(AG), Machine-
readable Datasets (RD) 
6 Non-discriminatory 
check the need of any special access or 
enrollment 
7 Non-proprietary 
Standardized file formats (SF) 
8 License-free 
existence of licenses for data usage and if 
there is any restriction to them 
 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

2012. In order to identify the websites of the municipalities, 
search machines were used, adopting as a standard 
expression “Portal de transparencia [nome do município ou 
estado ou federal]” (Transparency portal [name of the 
municipality or state or federal]. 
The collection of data from the portals, from the 
proposed assessment framework (Section 3) was performed 
following the procedure: when accessing the homepage, the 
content was accessed through the map of the site. When the 
homepage did not have a map of the site, the search was 
performed through the links existing on the main page; the 
information not found was sought through the search service, 
if it was available on the site. 
V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
This section presents the results from the collection and 
analysis of data from the sample and discusses these results, 
organized according to the eight open data principles. In 
Figure 1, there is the distribution of datasets found with valid 
data, i. e., excluding download problems or absence of data 
in the files. It can be noticed that the most prominent 
increase is between 2009 and 2010. 
In order to check the first principle of OGD, data was 
considered complete, at the budget domain, when both 
revenue and expense are published. Some portals provided 
more than one dataset for revenues or expenses, but for this 
analysis, only one dataset for each type per portal was 
considered. In this paper is presented only 2012 overview 
because there are more datasets offered. Figure 2 shows 
information type disclosure: only revenue, only expense or 
both. Regarding the information provided in our budgetary 
websites sample, majority of executive power entities 
publish both expense and revenue, and audit courts mainly 
just expenses. It can be seen that 22 of 37 (59.46%) 
budgetary portals present both revenues and expenditures. 
The assessment of the second principle was based on the 
classification of the Brazilian budget. From the 268 valid 
datasets downloaded from several years, 60 had revenues for 
2012. In Figure 3, it is shown, between parenthesis, the 
number of datasets found for revenues between 2009 and 
2012 using a scale corresponding to the classification of 
revenues: no classification (0), economic(1), origin(2), 
species(3), approval(4), item(5), subitem(6) category; a 
revenue dataset is only considered primary if it is classified 
as 6, otherwise, it only contains aggregated values. If a 
dataset is classified until species, it is accounted as 3. 
Therefore, six from the 60 datasets (10%) classified the 
expense only in economic, origin and species category. An 
increase from 31 datasets in 2009 to 60 in 2012 can be 
noticed. However, there is an increase in datasets that do not 
have the classification of the revenue.  
Figure 4 presents the number of datasets found for 
expenses between 2009 and 2012, with the total of datasets 
between parenthesis, with a classification scale for expenses 
similar to Fig. 3: no classification(0), entity(1), budgetary 
unit(2), function(3), sub-function(4), program(5), action(6). 
In the same manner as the revenues, data are considered 
primary when classified as 6. Despite the smaller difference 
 
Figure 4. Primary level of expenses datasets from 2009 to 2012 
 
Figure 3. Primary level of revenue datasets from 2009 to 2012 
 
 
Figure 1. Datasets downloaded with data per year 
 
Figure 2. Number of budgetary portals, 2012 overview 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

between datasets classified as 0 and 6, the majority of data 
for expenses is not provided with detailed budgetary 
classification.  
Among revenues and expenditures, 52 datasets were 
classified as primary, in total of 303 datasets from 2009 to 
2012. Thus, in the considered period 17.16% of datasets are 
primary. 
Considering the datasets for 2012 from executive entities, 
the average delay in publishing the budget was 1.4 months, 
being noticeable that for the State of Rio Grande do Sul, 
between the years 2006 and 2011, the last expense registered 
ranged from April and June, that is, for the previous years, 
there was a semester of information lacking on the expenses 
for this State. In the four audit courts presenting data for 
2012, the average delay was of 5 months, which can be 
considered normal once the courts need to audit the public 
accounts. Since [14] also it demands budget data to be 
available in real time, in the Brazilian scenario we 
considered that the „timely‟ principle is not met in the 
transparency portals, with only one dataset presenting a 
delay of one day and another one of two days, that is, 4.4% 
of the portals published the data in a satisfying time. 
In order to assess the accessibility of data, forth principle, 
all attempts to download data were considered, being 
successful or not. From 309 attempts, 32 did not have files, 
from the 277 datasets downloaded, 9 did not contain data, 
remaining 268 datasets (86.73%). Even if the data can be 
accessed in most of the portals, over 10% access problems is 
significant, with a total of 41 datasets not found.  
In order to analyze data that can be processed by 
machines, fifth principle, it could be seen that some 
technology would hinder the automatic downloading of data 
and format of the downloaded file. From the 88 portals 
visited, five redirected to a different address, which can 
impair the automatic access, and in one of them, human 
intervention was necessary due to the CAPTCHA 
technology. Most of the files were in PDF (50.72%), 
followed by CSV (30.07%) and XLS (19.20%). The greatest 
problem found was in the format of the downloaded file, 
where we only considered machine-processable those in 
CSV format. It is known that the format XLS/X despite 
being proprietary, has open specification [33], which makes 
the data accessible with the use of tools for the reading of 
this format, similar to a non-proprietary format. Even though 
XLS/X is similar to an open format, the majority of datasets 
are in PDF, which forbids reading by machines. 
The majority of transparency portals (98.82%) meet the 
sixth principle - non-discriminatory access. Only the Audit 
Court from the State of Amapá requests enrollment for 
access to data. 
Coincidently, as the analysis of the fifth principle 
resulted in the discussion of file formats, on the seventh 
principle, non-proprietary formats, it can be seen that only 
30.07% datasets are in non-proprietary formats. Thus, in the 
Brazilian scenario, this principle is not met. 
In no portal licenses for the data were found. This does 
not restrict the use, but it does not provide guarantees to the 
citizen. The Brazilian Freedom of Information Act 
establishes that information on government management is a 
priori public. However, the absence of a license allows that 
in the future, the data be licensed in a restrictive manner. 
Figure 5 summarizes the compliance of the sample in this 
article with the OGD principles. The authorsobserved that 
only the principles Complete, Acessible and Non-
discriminatory are in compliance greater than 50%. On the 
other hand, only 4.4% of the analyzed sites provide timely 
information and only 17.16% comply with the principle of 
providing primary data. 
As a result, it was noticed that adherence to the first two 
principles of open data - regarding complete and primary 
availability of data, respectively - is different in executive 
power portals, which normally provide both revenue and 
expenses, and in control entity portals, which focus on 
expenses. Regarding the quality of data available, it can be 
noticed that there is a tendency of growth in the amount of 
data available, but also that the majority of new data are not 
detailed (primary). This result might indicate that the 
Brazilian budgetary data portals are making efforts to meet 
the legal transparency requirements, but that the concern 
with the quality of data made public still needs to be 
reinforced. 
Regarding the remaining principles, a weak adherence to 
the timeliness principle could be noticed, since only 4.4% of 
the portals visited published updated data in the two previous 
days. Thus, most Brazilian budgetary open data portals are 
yet to comply to the legal requirement of publishing in real 
time. Regarding the other principles, it can be noticed that 
many portals are already satisfactorily meeting the principle 
of non-discriminatory access. However, there is still the need 
of improving the accessibility of data (over 10% datasets 
analyzed could not be accessed) and the capacity of machine 
processing (over 50% data is still made available in PDF 
format, hindering its processing). Finally, the principle of 
free licensing of data is not followed by any of the portals 
analyzed, which must be object of consideration and action 
by public policy decision making entities in order to ensure 
the compliance to the legislation that indicates that 
government management information must be public. 
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
This article proposed an approach for the evaluation of 
budgetary government data portals in Brazil. A robust and 
thorough assessment framework was defined, considering 
the principles of open data, good practices in the disclosure 
Complete 59.46%
Primary 17.16%
Timely 4.40%
Accessible 86.73%
Machine processable 30.07%
Non-discriminatory 98.82%
Non-proprietary 30.07%
License-free 0%
 
Figure 5. Compliance of sample with OGD principles 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

of governmental budgetary data and specific aspects in the 
Brazilian legislation. This framework was applied in the 
assessment of 88 Brazilian government budgetary data 
portals. 
In this manner, this study makes three main contributions 
to the research on open budgetary government data. First, it 
proposes an assessment framework that integrates both open 
data quality and budgetary information disclosure, aiming at 
contributing to both research areas. On the one hand, our 
framework enables a more thorough examination of the 
format with which budgetary data is disclosed in open 
government data portals, what is not accomplished by 
previous work that analyzed transparency portals. On the 
other hand, our assessment framework includes specific 
requirements of the domain of budgetary data, thus making 
the evaluation of the adherence to the principles for open 
government data more tangible and precise. 
Second, few studies hitherto have surveyed budgetary 
disclosure information in various levels, and in the case of 
Brazil, ours is the first one. Finally, as far as the authors 
know, there are no research results available that compare 
the information quality level disclosed by public entities that 
execute budget with entities that have the responsibility for 
supervising it. This work presents an assessment not only of 
the disclosure procedures of the entities responsible for 
making government data available (i.e. the executive power), 
but also from the institutions that must audit these data to 
detect irregularities and publicize them for the general 
public. 
The authors expect this paper to bring new elements in 
order to improve transparency and accountability as a whole 
in the public budget matter. The intention is to extend this 
work by creating an index based on the assessment 
framework presented here, so as to enable a classification 
that indicates the quality of the disclosure procedures of 
public entities regarding open government budgetary data. 
Future work could also extend the proposed framework and 
perform empirical studies for establishing relationships for 
the impact of perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use 
of the websites. Additionally, the authors intend to expand 
the framework to consider further technical aspects of the 
data disclosure, such as the use of Application Programming 
Interfaces (APIs) and the availability of metadata. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
To Jorge A. S. Machado, Amanda S. Moreira, Renan 
Ferreira and Tamiris J. Souza for their fundamental 
contribution to this paper. João would also like to thank 
FAPESP (process 2011/23274-3) for the financial support 
provided. 
REFERENCES 
[1] H. G. Frederickson, “Comparing the Reinventing Government 
Movement with the New Public Administration,” Public 
Administration Review, 1996, 56(3), 263-270. 
[2] C. Pollitt, “Is the emperor in his underwear? An analysis of 
the 
impact 
of 
public 
management 
reform,” 
Public 
Management, 2000, 2(2), 181-199. 
[3] OECD, “OECD Best Practices for Budget Transparency,” 
OECD 
publications, 
France, 
2002, 
available 
at 
www.oecd.org/gov/budgetingandpublicexpenditures/Best%20
Practices%20Budget%20Transparency%20-%20complete 
%20with%20cover%20page.pdf, accessed: 14 Jan 2013. 
[4] C. Lee, K. Chang and F. S. Berry, “Testing the Development 
and Diffusion of E-Government and E-Democracy: A Global 
Perspective,” Public Administration Review, 2011, May-June, 
pp. 444-454. 
[5] World Bank, “Making services work for the poor: World 
Development Report 2004,” Washington DC, 2004. 
[6] M. Solana, “Transparency Portals: Delivering public financial 
information to Citizens in Latin America,” In Thinking out 
loud V-Innovative Case Studies on Participatory Instruments, 
2004. 
[7] B. Obama, “Memorandum on Transparency and Open 
Government,” 2009, available at: www.whitehouse.gov/ 
the_press_office/TransparencyandOpenGovernment,  
accessed: 16 Oct 2012. 
[8] D. Lathrop and L. Ruma (orgs), “Open government: 
Collaboration, transparency, and participation in practice,” 
O'Reilly Media, 1st edition , 2010. 
[9] D. Robinson, H. Yu,W. P. Zeller,E. W. Felten. “Government 
Data and the Invisible Hand,” Yale Journal of Law and 
Technology, 2009, 11(1). 
[10] Open Knowledge Foundation, “Beyond Access: The Right to 
(Re)Use Public Information,” 2011, pp. 8-9. 
[11] IMF, “Code of good practices on fiscal transparency,” 2007, 
available at www.imf.org/external/np/pp/2007/eng/ 
051507c.pdf, accessed: 14 Jan 2013. 
[12] IFAC, “Governance in the Public Sector: A Governing Body 
Perspective, Study 13,” New York, Aug. 2001. 
[13] BRAZIL, “Lei Complementar nº 101, de 4 de maio de 2000,” 
2000, available at www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/LCP/ 
Lcp101.htm, accessed: 20 feb 2012. 
[14] BRAZIL, “Lei Complementar nº 131, de 27 de maio de 
2009,” 2009, available at: www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/ 
Leis/LCP/Lcp131.htm, accessed: 20 feb 2012. 
[15] BRAZIL, “Lei nº 9.755, de 16 de dezembro de 1998,” 1998, 
available at: www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/leis/L9755.htm, 
accessed: 16 oct 2012. 
[16] M. A. Teixeira and M. A. Alves, “Ethos organizacional e 
controle da corrupção: o TCU sob uma ótica organizacional,”  
In Cadernos Adenauer, Ética Pública e Controle da 
Corrupção, nº3, 2001. 
[17] C. A. A. Rocha, “O Modelo de Controle Externo Exercido 
pelos Tribunais de Contas e as Proposições Legislativas sobre 
o Tema,” 2002, available at: www.senado.gov.br/senado/ 
conleg/artigos/direito/Omodelodecontroleexterno.pdf, 
accessed: 16 oct 2012. 
[18] J. E. Groff and M. K. Pitman, “Municipal Financial Reporting 
on the World Wide Web: A Survey of Financial Data 
Displayed on the Official Websites of the 100 Largest U.S. 
Municipalities,” 
Journal 
of 
Government 
Financial 
Management, 2004, 53(2), pp. 20-30. 
[19] C. Caba Pérez, M. P. Rodríguez Bolívar and A. M. López 
Hernández, “Citizens‟ access to online governmental financial 
information: Practices in the European Union countries,” 
Government Information Quarterly, 2005, 22(2), pp. 258-276. 
[20] M. P. Rodríguez Bolívar, C. Caba Pérez and A. M. López 
Hernández, “Cultural contexts and governmental digital 
reporting. International Review of Administrative Sciences,” 
2006, 72(2), pp. 269-290. 
[21] M. P. Rodríguez Bolívar, C. Caba Pérez and A. M. López 
Hernández, “E-Government and Public Financial Reporting: 
The Case of Spanish Regional Governments,” The American 
Review of Public Administration, 2007, 37(2), pp. 142-177. 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

[22] C. Caba Pérez, M. P. Rodríguez Bolívar and A. M. López 
Hernández, “E-government process and incentives for online 
public financial information,” Online Information Review, 
2008), 32(3), pp. 379-400. 
[23] V. Pina, L. Torres and S. Royo, “Are ICTs Improving 
Transparency and Accountability in the EU Regional and 
Local 
Governments? 
An 
Empirical 
Study,” 
Public 
Administration Review, 2007, 85(2), pp. 449–472. 
[24] V. Pina, L. Torres and S. Royo, “Is e-Government leading to 
more accountable and transparent local governments? An 
overall view,” Financial Accountability & Management, 
2010, 26(1), pp. 3-20. 
[25] S. Jorge, P. M. Sá, A. F. Pattaro and R. P. Lourenço, “Local 
Government financial transparency in Portugal and Italy: a 
comparative exploratory study on its determinants,” 13th 
Biennial CIGAR Conference, Bridging Public Sector and 
Non-Profit Sector Accounting 9-10 June 2011, Ghent 
(Belgium) 
[26] C. F. Cruz, A. S. Ferreira, L. M. Silva and M. S. Macedo, 
“Transparência da gestão pública municipal: um estudo a 
partir dos portais eletrônicos dos maiores municípios 
brasileiros,” Revista de Administração Pública, jan./fev., 
2012, 46(1), pp. 153-76. 
[27] M. M. Ribeiro, J. C. Vaz and R. Matheus, “Transparency in 
the portals of Brazilian Federal Government: The cases of E-
procurement Portal and Transparency Portal,” In: 1st Global 
Conference on Transparency Research, 2011, Newark, NJ.  
[28] K. Braunschweig, J. Eberius, M. Thiele and W. Lehner, “The 
state of open data - limits of current open data platforms,” In 
WWW'12 Web Science Track, 2012. 
[29] L. v. Ahn, M. Blum, J. Langford, “Telling humans and 
computers apart automatically,” Communications of ACM, 
feb., 2004, 47(2), pp. 56-60. 
[30] Dublin Core Metadata Initiative, “DCMI Metadata Terms,” 
available at dublincore.org/documents/dcmi-terms, accessed: 
16 dez 2012. 
[31] BRAZIL, Ministério do Planejamento, Orçamento e Gestão, 
“Manual Técnico de Orçamento 2013,” available at 
www.orcamentofederal.gov.br/informacoes-
orcamentarias/mto/, accessed: 16 dez 2012. 
[32] G. S. Craveiro, J. P. Albuquerque and M. T. Santana, “Dados 
orçamentário 
do 
Brasil,” 
available 
at 
www.gpopai.usp.br/dados-abertos/article/dados-
orcamentarios-do-brasil, acessed: 16 dez 2012. 
[33] Microsoft, “[MS-XLS]: Excel Binary File Format (.xls) 
Structure Specification,” available at msdn.microsoft.com/en-
us/library/cc313154%28v=office.12%29.aspx, accessed: 16 
oct 2012. 
 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2013.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-249-3
ICDS 2013 : The Seventh International Conference on Digital Society

