Sociological Reflections on E-government 
 
 
Maria João Simões 
Department of Sociology 
University of Beira Interior, Covilhã 
Researcher at Research Centre of Social Sciences (CICS), University of Minho, Braga 
Portugal 
e-mail: mariajoaosimoes@sapo.pt 
 
 
 
Abstract — The objective of this paper is to present 
dimensions of sociological analysis that allow a more 
comprehensive and interpretative analysis of e-government. 
This effort will contribute to a more critical analysis of its 
implementation, chosen devices and assessment. The analytical 
dimensions 
presented 
are: 
(i) 
citizenship 
models; 
(ii) 
metatheoretical frameworks on society and technology; (iii) the 
concept of e-government and its articulated domains. It intends 
to demonstrate that the choice between options of each 
dimension contributes for different kinds of e-government and 
results. The e-government is not a neutral issue. The 
citizenship model adopted, in a very incisive way, makes all the 
difference in the conception, design, working and results of e-
government. The theoretical framework that is underlying to 
e-government shapes also its design, working and results. But 
the devices chosen per se are insufficient to characterize an e-
government, as their potentialities can be used in a completely 
different way by people and rulers. Research and projects on 
e-government are principally focused in e-administration, 
underestimate e-democracy and e-society that have been 
analysed in a separate way, which makes difficult a more 
comprehensive and all-encompassing analysis and assessment 
of e-government. 
 
Keywords – e-government; participation; technology; society. 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
Most research projects have a strong descriptive 
approach, probably because, on the one hand, they have, to a 
large extent, a practically oriented approach focusing in 
development projects, applications or case studies. On the 
other hand, most researches come from the information 
systems field where the major focus is the conception, design 
and application of devices.  So, it can be said that e-
government is still an under-analysed area, from a theoretical 
and conceptual point of view, as referred by Simões [1], 
Heeks and Bailur [2], and Lindblad-Gidlund and Axelsson 
[3]. 
E-government lacks deepening of theoretical and 
conceptual frameworks from the social sciences, particularly 
sociology, 
which 
can 
better 
explain, 
in 
a 
more 
comprehensive, interpretative and all-encompassing way, 
what e-government is, why, what for and how it is 
implemented. Such frameworks would allow a critical 
analysis of different visions on e-government, the purposes 
of its creation in each social context, the interests that 
underlie its creation, the adopted models of e-government 
and applications, and also to better understand why different 
social and technological results are achieved. 
What we say above allows us to state that e-government 
is clearly an interdisciplinary area; more intensive 
interdisciplinary research is crucial especially between 
researchers both from information systems and social 
sciences, particularly sociology of science and technology, 
political 
sociology 
and 
sociology 
of 
organizations. 
Surprisingly, although political sociology is a widespread 
field, sociologists have underestimated research on e-
government. 
This presentation shares, thus, the challenge of Lindblad-
Gidlund and Axelsson [4] that argues to be necessary to 
establish vessels among different scientific areas for rigorous 
and relevant e-government research.   
In this way, based on literature review regarding different 
theories on the relationship between society and technology, 
a critical reading of crucial literature on the subject, namely 
Oliver and Sanders [5], Mayer-Schönberger and Lazer [6], 
Cunningham and Cunningham [7], based on our experience 
in projects on local e-government [8] and even on e-
participation [9][10], our purpose in this paper is to present 
critical dimensions, within a sociological point of view, that 
can allow a more comprehensive and critical approach on e-
government research, implementation and assessment. 
The dimensions of the critical analysis focused from a 
sociological perspective are stated in a triptych presentation. 
Firstly, introducing two ideal types of citizenship models. 
Secondly, debating different metatheoretical frameworks on 
society and technology. Thirdly, discussing the concept of e-
government and its articulated domains: e-administration, e-
democracy 
and 
e-society. 
As 
a 
conclusion, 
final 
considerations will be presented.  
II. 
 E-GOVERNMENT IS NOT A SEPARATE ISSUE OF 
CITIZENSHIP 
First of all, government is one of the most important 
components of a state: it is the way how it was organized and 
how rulers establish its interaction with people that we can 
say if we are dealing, for example, with a dictatorial or 
democratic state. In this sense, as government is a polysemic 
term, thus e-government is also polysemic. 
29
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

But the same happens with a democratic government 
which is not also a neutral term. The history of democracy 
was undergone by maximalist and minimalist versions of 
citizenship. When we talk on e-government, what citizenship 
version are we talking about? So, we affirm that in any 
research project, either more theoretical or more empirical, 
or even in any project of implementation, we have to explain 
which conception of citizenship is used. 
A more active or passive concept of citizenship will 
induce significant variations on the type of services, its 
contents, on quantity, quality and kind of available 
information, and on communication patterns, that is, on the 
kind of adopted e-government and its working. In that sense 
it is important to reflect on the different impacts that these 
different conceptions of citizenship have in e-government 
and also on chosen applications, as we will discuss further 
on. 
Taking in account the weberian methodology of ideal 
type, two opposite kinds of political participation are 
presented [11], constructed for clarification purposes, 
knowing that there are other models between two ideal types 
where it can be found different combinations of both. 
The passive citizenship is embedded into a liberal 
perspective, which inspires western democracies and where 
the citizen role has an individualist and instrumentalist 
approach, the citizen being granted full rights. The individual 
has, as Oldfield [12] sustains, not only epistemological 
priority, but also an ontological and moral one.  
For the author, citizenship is seen as a legal status which 
must be sought, and sustained when accomplished. The state 
and other institutions are looked in an utilitarian way. It is 
only expected that they allow the conditions for individuals 
to maximize their own benefits and reach their goals, without 
any notion of common welfare present. Though, citizens are 
demanded to follow a certain set of civic obligations towards 
the state, namely, to vote, to pay taxes and to defend the 
country, in the case of external menace. 
To liberals, politics is a realm of the government, 
considered only as what politicians, specialists, political 
parties and bureaucrats do [13][14].  
Although political communication consists of emission 
and reception, verbalization and listening, liberal theory 
values the speech and neglects the listening part. It is easier 
for those in charge to speak rather than to listen. 
 Participation is largely reduced to choose between 
several options, thus giving the winner the power to establish 
the direction of the world we live in. Vote is included in a 
negotiation model within which choices are predetermined, 
thus limiting not only the choices opportunities but also the 
imagination. As Barber [15] says, there are few other 
possibilities that allow the voters to express their opinions, 
leaving the citizen as a simple spectator.  
In an active participation model, the citizen is a member 
of a political community, in which he/she assumes a central 
position. Citizenship is not just a status; participation is an 
objective by itself. In this political praxis, being a non 
participant means, in many ways, that he or she can be an 
individual but not a citizen [16][17].  
For the last author, in order to people being engaged in 
citizenship practice three conditions are requested all of them 
necessary but none alone sufficient: resources, participation 
opportunities and motivation. In the resources domain, 
beyond the assurance of civil, political and social rights, the 
economic and social resources (a reasonable living income, 
education, health, among others) as well as competences 
regarding the political activity are also crucial.  
On the other hand, the participation opportunities have to 
be assured, which implies the creation and widening of an 
appropriate institutional setting at several levels (local, 
national, global and also at horizontal and specialized level) 
that stimulate the civic participation in general and, in a 
particular way, a rational understanding and better 
information of public issues, the participation in agenda 
setting, deliberation and decision making, among other 
activities.  
Individuals also have to be encouraged to participate, to 
execute their political rights and duties, that is to say, to be 
citizens. One cannot expect, as Oldfield [18] writes, that 
citizenship 
praxis 
and 
civic 
conscience 
to 
appear 
spontaneously. As Steinko [19] states, mobilization implies 
that people feel there is a link between their daily life, in all 
spheres, 
being 
them 
local 
(namely 
the 
education, 
employment, environment issues), national or global. 
 Actually, considering the growing distance between 
rulers and people, with the option of these procedures, (e-) 
government, especially at local or regional context, can 
become a setting not only to a closer interaction between 
both but also to reduce the citizens‘ scepticism concerning 
politics. 
In this model, there is a broader conception of politics, 
involving all public issues in which the citizens have the 
right to be involved; «politics describes the realm of we» 
[20].  
The access to information is indispensable for the 
practice of citizenship, but it is only a sufficient condition. 
Equally important is the kind of information that is delivered. 
Information has to focus on problems faced by citizens, it 
has to be contextualized, justified and it should explain the 
consequences of the political choices that can be made. But 
the removal of information barriers is not enough 
[21][22][23]. 
Speech is equally valued as listening, a recurring and 
permanent 
interaction, 
established 
upwardly 
and 
downwardly, between rulers and citizens. 
      In this sense, Hacker's [24] political interactivity model 
has heuristic value. As daily interaction can be simplified, 
just including a message and its answer, and even get another 
message from the first user, political interaction requires two 
additional interactions, as seen in the Figure 1.  
The first message (m1) comes from the citizen towards 
the politician, who, in return, sends his/her feedback to the 
citizen (m2). The content of this message will determine 
what happens after the established interaction. In order to 
reply (or not) to the requested information or the citizens' 
expectations, citizens can answer back (m3), and the 
government can answer through political action (m4) or an 
30
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

explanation (m5) explaining why such course of action can 
not be fulfilled. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1 – A basic model of political interactivity [25] 
 
     More messages can be exchanged, but this five step flux 
of interaction model is the basic political interactivity model 
from which more complex models can be built, emphasizing 
upward and downward communication between rulers and 
citizens. 
Besides vertical communication, the horizontal kind is 
also considered to be crucial. On the one hand, the political 
choice includes deliberation, because individuals, when 
involved in collective participation, do not always agree on 
their civic and political concerns. On the other hand, the 
deliberation help them to overtake their narrow interests; it is 
through the debate that individuals frequently rejoin 
themselves, re-evaluate and can reformulate values, beliefs 
and opinions based upon which they engage in their political 
participation (Barber [26]; Yankelovich [27]; Oldfield [28]). 
According the citizenship model adopted the e-
government conception, the design, the implementation and 
the results and yet the assessment process will be different. 
Consequently, the services, the kind of information 
delivered, the communication patterns and the applications 
will be different. So, the choice of one of these citizenship 
models makes all the difference from the analytical and 
empirical point of view and for the achieved results.  
III. 
THEORETICAL FRAMEWORKS ON TECHNOLOGY AND 
SOCIETY 
Chosen the citizenship model to use, we are facing with 
different theoretical frameworks whenever we engage in 
further research or when we intend to present and to 
implement an e-government project. The metatheoretical 
framework selected has to be clarified because it has 
consequences on the chosen e-government models, on its 
implementation and also on achieved results and their 
assessment.  
Many e-government projects and its implementation are 
based on technological determinism, where the underlying 
idea is that the properties of technology, namely those used 
by e-governments, are transposed and absorbed by societies, 
producing the same effects upon them. This notion forgets 
that the technological devices are not neutral, since the 
results will depend on: the specific social and organizational 
context in which e-government will be implemented; the 
values and the interests of promoters that influence the 
choice of e-government models; leadership; the degree of 
commitment of the staff and the strategy followed; the 
resistance or involvement on its implementation and yet the 
way how people and rulers appropriate and shape the devices 
for their use.  
The fact that technological determinism has been 
dominating this discussion is one of several reasons for the 
deficit on a more comprehensive and interpretative analysis 
of e-government.  
The option for that metheoretical framework implies that 
the e-government projects and their implementation, as well 
as another projects focused on infra-structures, hardware and 
software and the assessment indicators are to a large extent, 
including 
in 
European 
Union 
(EU), 
predominantly 
technological [29]. 
As an alternative to technological determinism, a 
sophisticated model of analysis on the relation between 
society and technology can be used, in which technology and 
society are mutually related, that Simões [30] nominate 
reciprocal conditioning. This metatheoretical framework has 
more heuristic potential because it takes in account crucial 
social aspects (as power, interest groups, conflict, values and 
so on) that are present in the conception, implementation and 
execution phases, and therefore in the outputs reached by e-
government. It is into this framework that it can be said ―e-
government is more about government than about ‗e‘‖ [31]. 
On the other hand, it does not underestimate the fact that 
each technological device can condition our action in a 
specific direction and not in any other.  
In this sense, in such metatheoretical framework, the 
conception of e-government projects, its implementation and 
the back office, process, output and demand indicators 
embraces social and technological aspects. 
Contradicting the technological deterministic authors and 
several designers, the applications choice is not sufficient to 
characterize an e-government.  
Firstly, they can think or install, for example, 
applications to a horizontal communication (from the more 
―traditional‖ as fora to the more recent as web 2.0: facebook, 
twitter and so on), but the rulers or the people, depending of 
their interests and goals, can make a unexpected use of them. 
As an example, political parties and rulers in several 
countries use facebook to communicate with people being 
interdict the possibility of reply [32]. So, applications 
designed to a horizontal communication can be used to a 
vertical and downward one. 
     Secondly, when a communication device is available, 
communication might not be started, whether because rulers 
consider themselves the legitimate representatives of the 
citizens, whereas these should confine themselves to the 
episodic election of those, or because citizens are in apathy 
or do not believe that it is worthwhile, that is, that nothing 
will come out of their participation. During the timeframe of 
the Digital Cities Program, the Portuguese Operational 
Government 
Citizens 
m1 
m2 
m4 
m5 
m3 
31
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

Program 
for 
Information 
Society 
(POSI) 
and 
the 
Operational Program for Knowledge Society, programs 
which endured from 1998 to 2006, cities and administrative 
regions   submitted projects to turn themselves into digital 
cities and territories, e-government being one of the major 
focus. The great concern with technological modernization 
and the prevailing technological deterministic perspective 
lead the promoters to focus mainly on technological 
infrastructures and software. Most projects encompass 
devices, although different from one another, allowing 
horizontal and vertical communication.  
      We did not find differences neither in the chosen devices 
in municipalities ruled by either leftist or right parties, nor in 
the concerns about the actual use of these devices. We 
present only an exception: in one municipality, where the 
mayor invested in a more active citizen participation, facing 
the apathy of people, the mayor said he would focus mainly 
in face to face participation modalities; only later would he 
take into consideration information and communication 
technologies [33]. Nowadays, in some Portuguese cities, 
new experiences on e-government based in higher citizen 
participation have to be researched. 
      Thirdly, there can be some stimulus for citizens to 
participate, even if there is not any concern from the 
government with its citizens' worries and anxieties. This is 
just an illusion of participation, which can be amplified by 
an automatic answer by e-mail where the citizen 
participation is thanked, even if there is not a real intention 
of actually answering and there is a vague promise of taking 
the citizen participation into account.  
Some researchers have yet «observed that the same 
information system in different organizational contexts leads 
to different results. Indeed, the same system might produce 
beneficial effects in one setting and negative effects in a 
different setting» [34]. Once again, we can point out that 
technological deterministic authors underestimate several 
social factors that make the difference in the results of e-
government.  
IV. 
E-GOVERNMENT: CONCEPT AND ITS DOMAINS 
In the concept of e-government underlies a normative 
and evaluative component. From a sociological point of 
view, it is important to understand if there is a political or 
normative position or rather a scientific one. For example, it 
is often said that ―e-government is better government‖ [35]. 
From a scientific point of view, only through empirical 
evidence can we verify if the e-government can or cannot 
foster a greater engagement with citizens and enables or not 
better quality services and policy results. 
Several authors, as St-Amant [36], referred three inter-
related domains of e-government: e-administration, e-
democracy and e-society. The first stands on the 
administrative modernization issue, on efficiency and 
efficacy of services and whether electronic services do or do 
not improve services to citizens, being these principally seen 
as customers.  
In the domain of e-democracy it is debated to which 
extent ICT can enhance or not the citizen participation and 
the relationship between rulers and ruled ones. The debate on 
e-democracy is wide but has been, by large extent, carried 
out disconnected from e-government. On the other hand, we 
can face more pessimistic points of view, as Sunstein's [37], 
or very optimistic ones, as Rheingold's [38], or even more 
realistic perspectives, stated namely by Simões [39], that 
identify new opportunities but also new constrains on e-
democracy. Either way, this discussion is not the focus of 
this paper. Regardless of these perspectives having different 
empirical implications and results, we have different models 
of political participation in real or virtual context. The 
chosen model of participation within e-government implies 
different devices, different uses, different ways of 
implementation and different achieved results. This is one of 
the central issues of this paper.  
In the domain of e-society it is attempted to verify if the 
ICT contributes or not to the strengthening of relations 
between government and civil society organizations, namely 
NGO, trade unions, universities, I&D institutions, cultural 
associations, sport clubs and also corporations.   
These domains have been frequently studied separately 
as they were completely different issues. We state that 
although a research or a project can focus more in one of e-
government domains, it has to take into account all them, 
because they are all closely interconnected as we have 
emphasized along the paper.  
V. 
FINAL REFLECTIONS  
The objective of this paper was to present sociological 
dimensions of analysis that allow a more comprehensive and 
interpretative analysis of e-government, its implementation, 
chosen applications and its assessment.  
The dimensions analysed allow a more critical and 
deeper debate about the interconnection between social and 
technological factors concerning e-government. Thus, we 
point out to a more intensive interdisciplinary among 
different scientific areas for a relevant and rigorous e-
government research. 
E-government is not a neutral issue. A more active or 
passive 
conception 
of 
citizenship 
have 
significant 
implications 
on 
e-government 
conception, 
design, 
implementation and results.  
According to the chosen participation model we will find 
differences regarding the kind of information and services 
delivered, the patterns of communication, the intensity and 
frequency of the interaction between rulers and people. 
 The adoption of a technological deterministic or a 
reciprocal conditioning perspective between technology and 
society have also different implications in e-government, 
leading to different kinds of e-governments and necessarily 
different applications. As users can shape applications 
according to their interests and necessities, the chosen 
applications per se are insufficient to denominate the kind of 
e-government. Such is only possible with an on-going 
assessment and with indicators embracing technological and 
social aspects. 
32
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

E-government research is, in a large extent, centred in e-
administration, it underestimates the e-democracy and e-
society, domains largely analysed apart. Although efficiency 
and efficacy of services are crucial for e-government 
working, e-government is not a corporation. E-government is 
more related with people government, with e-democracy and 
e-society. So, even if a research or a project focuses more on 
a unique e-government domain, it has to take all of them into 
account, as they are all closely interconnected. If we do not 
head towards this path we are drifting apart of the essence of 
the e-government concept. 
 Further researches could point to deepen this theoretical 
reflection on e-government connecting it to more extended 
empirical research and identifying assessment indicators of 
e-government that encompass social and technological 
aspects. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
M. J. Simões, Política e Tecnologia – Tecnologias da Informação e da 
Comunicação e Participação Política em Portugal, Oeiras: Celta, 
2005. 
[2] 
R. Heeks and S. B. Bailur, ―Analyzing e-government research: 
Perspectives, philosophies, theories, methods, and practice‖, 
Government Information Quarterly, vol. 24, 2007, pp. 243-265. 
[3] 
K. Lindblad- Gidlund  and  K. Axelsson, ―Communicating Vessels 
for Relevant and Rigorous eGovernment Research‖, P. Cunningham 
and M. Cunningham (Eds.), Collaboration and the Knowledge 
Economy – Issues, Applications, Case Studies, vol.5, Part 1, 2008, 
pp. 255-261.   
[4] 
K. Lindblad-Gidlund and K. Axelsson, ―Communicating Vessels for 
Relevant and Rigorous eGovernment Research‖, P. Cunningham and 
M. Cunningham (Eds.), Collaboration and the Knowledge Economy – 
Issues, Applications, Case Studies, vol.5, Part 1, 2008, pp. 255-261.   
[5] 
L. Oliver and L. Sanders, (Eds.), E-Government Reconsidered: 
Renewal of Governance for the Knowledge Age, Regina: University 
of Regina, 2004. 
[6] 
V. Mayer-Schönberger and D. Lazer, (Eds.), From Electronic 
Government to Information Government, Cambridge: The MIT Press, 
2007. 
[7] 
P. Cunningham, and M. Cunningham, (Eds.), Collaboration and the 
Knowledge Economy – Issues, Applications, Case Studies, 
Amsterdam: IOS Press, vol. 5, part 1, 2008. 
[8] 
M. J. Simões (coord.), Dos Projectos às Regiões Digitais - Que 
Desafios?, Lisbon: Celta, 2008. 
[9] 
M. J. Simões, Política e Tecnologia – Tecnologias da Informação e da 
Comunicação e Participação Política em Portugal, Oeiras: Celta, 
2005. 
[10] 
M. J. Simões, A. Barriga and N. A. Jerónimo, Brave New World? 
Political participation and new media, SOTICS 2011: The First 
International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics, pp. 55-60, 
Copyright (c) IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2, available at 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=sotics_2
011_3_10_30040. 
[11] 
Barber (1984), Oldfield (1998) and Held (1996) are crucial authors 
for our elaboration of citizenship typology; this typology is further 
discussed in Simões (2005) and in M. J. Simões and E. Araújo 
(2009). 
[12] 
A. Oldfield, Citizenship and Community: Civil Republicanism and 
the Modern World, London: Routledge, 1998, (2ª Ed.). 
[13] 
B. Barber, Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984. 
[14] 
D. Held, Models of Democracy, Cambridge: Polity Press, 1996, (2ª 
Ed.). 
[15] 
B. Barber, Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984. 
[16] 
B. Barber, Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984. 
[17] 
A. Oldfield, Citizenship and Community: Civil Republicanism and 
the Modern World, London: Routledge, 1998, (2ª Ed.). 
[18] 
A. Oldfield, Citizenship and Community: Civil Republicanism and 
the Modern World, London: Routledge, 1998, (2ª Ed.). 
[19] 
A. Steinko, ―Herramientas para un chequeo de la dinámica 
democrática‖, REIS , 1, 1994,  pp. 9-35. 
[20] 
B. Barber, Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984. 
[21] 
B. Barber, Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984. 
[22] 
D. Yankelovich, Coming to Public Judgement – Making Democracy 
Work in a Complex World, Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 
1991. 
[23] 
M. Hale, J. Musso and C. Weare, "Developing digital democracy: 
evidence from Californian municipal web pages" in Barry Hague and 
Brian Loader (Eds.), Digital Democracy: Discourse and Decision 
Making in the Information Age, London, Routledge, 1999, pp. 96-
115. 
[24] 
K. Hacker, ―The White House Computer-mediated Communication 
(CMC) System and Political Interactivity‖ in K. Hacker and J. Dijk 
(Eds), Digital Democracy, London : Sage, 2000, pp. 105-129. 
[25] 
K. Hacker, ―The White House Computer-mediated Communication 
(CMC) System and Political Interactivity‖ in K. Hacker and J. Dijk 
(Eds), Digital Democracy, London : Sage, 2000, pp. 105-129, p. 123. 
[26] 
B. Barber, Strong Democracy: Participatory Politics for a New Age, 
Berkeley, University of California Press, 1984, p.123. 
[27] 
D. Yankelovich, Coming to Public Judgement – Making Democracy 
Work in a Complex World, Syracuse: Syracuse University Press, 
1991. 
[28] 
 A. Oldfield, Citizenship and Community: Civil Republicanism and 
the Modern World, London: Routledge, 1998, (2ª Ed.). 
[29] 
M. J. Simões  and  E. Araújo, ―A sociological look at e-Democracy‖, 
in Patrizia Bitonti and Vanessa Carrieri (Eds.) e-Gov 2.0: pave the 
way for e-participation, Roma: EuroSpace S.r.l., 2009,  pp. 155-161. 
[30] 
M. J. Simões, Política e Tecnologia – Tecnologias da Informação e da 
Comunicação e Participação Política em Portugal, Oeiras: Celta, 
2005. 
[31] 
OECD, 
The 
e-government 
imperative: 
main 
findings, 
www.oecd.org/publications/POL_brief,  07-09-2007, 2003, pp.1-7, 
p.1. 
[32] 
M. J. Simões, A. Barriga, N. A. Jerónimo, Brave New World? 
Political participation and new media, SOTICS 2011: The First 
International Conference on Social Eco-Informatics, pp. 55-60, 
Copyright (c) IARIA, ISBN: 978-1-61208-163-2, available at 
http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=sotics_2
011_3_10_30040. 
[33] 
M. J. Simões (coord.), Dos Projectos às Regiões Digitais - Que 
Desafios?, Lisbon: Celta, 2008. 
[34] 
J. Fountain, ―Central Issues in the Political Development of the 
Virtual State‖, The Network Society and the Knowledge Economy: 
Portugal 
in 
the 
Global 
Context 
Conference, 
March 
4-5, 
http://www.umass.edu/digitalcenter/research/pdfs/jf_portugal2005_ce
ntralissues.pdf, 26-09-2007, 2005, pp.1-29, pp. 4-5. 
[35] 
OECD, 
The 
e-government 
imperative: 
main 
findings, 
www.oecd.org/publications/POL_brief, 07- 09 -2007, 2003, pp. 1-7, 
p.1.  
[36] 
 G. St-Amant, ―E-gouvernment: cadre d‘évolution de l‘administration 
électronique‖, Revue Management et Système d‘Information, vol. 10, 
nº1, ABI/INFORM Global, 2005, pp. 15-39. 
[37] 
C. Sunstein, Republic.com, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
2001. 
33
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

[38] 
H. 
Rheingold, 
Electronic 
Democracy 
Toolkit, 
available 
at 
www.well.com/user/hlr/electrondemoc.html, 06-09-2000, 1996.  
[ 3 9 ]  M. J. Simões, Política e Tecnologia – Tecnologias da Informação e da 
Comunicação e Participação Política em Portugal, Oeiras: Celta, 
2005. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
34
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2012.     ISBN: 978-1-61208-176-2
ICDS 2012 : The Sixth International Conference on Digital Society

