On the Utilization of Smart Gadgets for Energy
Aware Sensitive Behavior
Gerold Hoelzl, Peter Halbmayer, Harald Rogner, Chen Xue, Alois Ferscha
Institute for Pervasive Computing
Johannes Kepler University Linz
Austria
surname@pervasive.jku.at
Abstract—The conscious, efﬁcient, and economical consump-
tion of energy is being identiﬁed recently as crucial topic for
industry, politics, and research. Limited earth resources that are
still used for the majority of energy production head towards
increasing energy prices and stress world climate and the budget
of people. We present the PowerIT System that utilizes smart
gadgets to achieve a more efﬁcient and economical use of the
available energy. By providing instant feedback of the current
energy consumption in households by leveraging power metering
technology and therefore raising awareness about the economics
of the own energy usage, this work aims at reducing the
energy consumption of people in their homes. The real-time
energy consumption is captured, whereas the power signatures
of electrical devices measured by power metering systems are the
input modality for the system. This data is provided in real time
as visual feedback to the residents using today’s available smart
gadgets (e.g., smart phones, tablets, and smart watches) in order
to raise awareness about the current power demands. Beside the
pure monitoring and control of power consumers, the system
additionally collects data about the activities of people by using
smart watches. This data can be used to generate activity models
resulting in activity aware power saving schemes. We argue that
the awareness of people about their energy consumption can
induce a behavioral change resulting in a more efﬁcient use of
energy without affecting their level of living.
Keywords—Power Management; Efﬁcient Power Usage and
Power Awareness; Behavioral Change; Sensor Networks; Activity
and Context Recognition; Smart Gadgets.
I.
INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
It should be common knowledge that energy is a scarce
resource. In opposite to that knowledge, we see a dramatic
increase in the use of energy in the last years [1]. Due to the
fact that our society is not aware of how many energy they
consume, a technique of unobtrusively making them aware of
their daily energy consumption should be identiﬁed. We focus
on electrical energy as a part of the global energy composition
because its consumption can be controlled and changed easily
by people. Hoelzl showed in [2] that with the utilization of
context [3] data in households, in this case the modes of
locomotion in combination with different locations, it was
possible to save on average 17% of electrical power. As the
results were mostly gained by analyzing a collected dataset of
15 households, we focus in this work on deploying a realtime
system to bring the gathered results out in the ﬁeld.
The last years, especially the last months showed that the
developments in the consumer market proved the augur that
everyone would be able to get a wearable digital and smart
artifact. Concerning nowadays developments, these gadgets
are becoming smaller and smaller and people tend to use
them as artifacts of daily living. Starting with the development
of smart phones [4] that is de facto standard equipment of
people in the researched living habits, the development goes
towards 24 hours usage of smart watches [5]. We argue to
make use of these already deployed gadgets to make users
aware of the current electrical power consumption of their
household devices and to control them in an unobtrusive way.
As the deﬁnition of unobtrusive is recognized differently by
different people, a value sensitive design [6] has to be taken
into consideration when designing such a system. We made our
system working completely autonomous without the need of
any user interaction. It’s incumbent upon the user if interaction
with the system is wanted on different levels (be referred to
Section III for further detail).
Using our system, the user is aware, at each point in time,
of his energy consumption in realtime for each connected
single device. This is a tremendous beneﬁt compared to the
nowadays deployed SmartMeter Technology were the data has
a resolution of up to 15 minutes, is only available with one full
day lag due to legal aspects (depending on the used technology
and countries, here exemplarily picked for Austria), and can
only be viewed for the aggregated power consumption of all
the devices in the household. Concerning the facts that, (i)
the measurements are not available for single devices, (ii)
have a big lag in time, and (iii) that the measurements can
be transmitted or stored at third party entities (e.g., energy
provider) one is not in control of, raising security and privacy
issues [7], [8] of people that they are spied on, we designed
the system to capture energy readings at an interval of 10
seconds for each single energy consumer. This data is kept
completely local as the system can operate without any Internet
connection. Only if the user agrees on it, the data can be
transmitted to a remotely connected storage.
To alter or at least to inﬂuence the behavior [9] of people
is an ambitious goal that can not be fulﬁlled immediately. It
is more or less a long term process, or to be more precise,
an evolution. Fogg describes in [10] that three elements must
converge at the same time to affect behavioral change: (i)
Motivation, (ii) Ability, and (iii) Trigger. From our point of
view the motivation of people is high, because saving energy
directly affects their budget in a positive way. The missing
thing is a tool, to give them an easy way to observe and control
their power usage. We developed a system that can be split into
two distinguishable components: (i) a completely autonomous
192
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

system that records and analyzes the power consumption of
connected power consumers (as described in Section II) and
(ii) an easy to use App based on the Android Framework that
can be installed on already deployed smart phones or tablets
to monitor and control the electrical power consumptions in
an unobtrusive way (see Section III). Using this App, people
become aware of how many power their electrical devices
consume when they are turned on, or when they are in
standby mode and can react accordingly in, e.g., turning them
completely off using the App to avoid standby losses.
Beside the pure monitoring and control capabilities, the
use of sensory input that can be used to infer user activities,
thus can be used for implicit control of energy consumers,
is the last major aspect of the system. Recent advancements
in Activity Recognition [11] deal with long-term evaluations
to achieve higher performances and better recognition rates.
Todays available results are mostly gathered in closed and
controlled laboratory settings [12], [13]. Bringing this research
out in the ﬁeld, to collect real world data for empirically
underpinning the research results with a highly ﬂexible system,
as sensors can dynamically appear and disappear [14], [15],
[16], on a large scale can improve the recognition models
dramatically [17].
The remaining paper is structured as follows. Section II
describes the System Architecture that is used for autonomous
collecting energy consumption and user activity data. In Sec-
tion III we present the interaction gadgets that can be used
to monitor the system and keep the user up to date about
the energy consumption in realtime. The deployed hardware
components of the system and the ﬁrst preliminary results gath-
ered during the ﬁrst rollout phase are described in Section IV.
Section V closes the paper and summarises the achievements.
II.
SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
To measure and collect the energy consumption of power
consumers, to control them, and to record the user activity data
via a wrist worn smart-watch sensor platform, we deﬁned the
architecture of the PowerIT Framework as shown in Figure 1.
For each power consumer that is connected to the system, an
Energy Consumer Control device has to be plugged between
the device itself and the power outlet. Using the Energy
Consumer Control Unit, the system is capable of monitoring
the power consumption and to switch the connected device
on or off. Using a power distribution block, it is possible to
form ensembles of devices (e.g., home entertainment system
consisting of the smart TV, surround sound, and the video
recorder) that are treated as one ’single’ device. The Energy
Consumer Control unit is connected, dependent on the house-
hold infrastructure, via WiFi or Power-Lan-Communication
(PLC) [18] to the Background Intelligence. PLC utilizes the al-
ready exiting electrical wiring infrastructure in households for
networking and communication thus eliminating the expense
and inconvenience installation of new wires or antennas.
The Background Intelligence is responsible for managing
the Power Readings from the Energy Consumer Control Units.
This includes the storing of the data, its synchronization, its
realtime analyzation (device in on-, off-, or standby-mode)
and its preprocessing for visualization in the PowerIT-App.
Beside the management of the collected power readings from
the different devices, the Background Intelligence also handles
the collection of the Smart-Watch activity readings. This
consists of storing the raw accelerometer readings and the
corresponding User Activity (i.e. the semantic label that marks
the activity of the user). Capturing this sensor data via an easy
to use smart-watch allows to build a comprehensive dataset
in a real world setting. Having the activity labels of the users
allows to relate the used power consumers to the activities of
the user. If this relation is known, one can implicit control
power consumers in turning them on or off according to the
current activities of users.
Beside the pure collection of generated power consump-
tion and user activity data, the Background Intelligence also
manages the User Generated Control Messages. These Control
Messages allow users to explicitly switch power consumers on
and off. Based on an Energy Management Constraint Set, that
contains conditions that always have to be met (e.g., never
turn the fridge off), the User Generated Control Messages
are forwarded to the Power Consumer Control Logic that
is responsible for transmitting the message over the network
(WiFi, PLC) to the corresponding Energy Control Unit.
Location Information [2] is seen as an important part of
context data. Accurate Indoor Positioning is still an open
issue always connected with high costs and maintenance effort
(e.g., body worn sensor equipment, learning of RSSI or WiFi
Maps, etc.). Nevertheless it can contain useful information for
an energy management system that can react according the
location of persons in the household (e.g., all people are in
the living room can imply to turn off the lights in all other
rooms). In the proposed architecture, this information is (i)
transmitted directly from a user worn location / positioning
sensor, (ii) inferred from the Power and Smart Watch activity
readings or (iii) used to cross-validate (i) with (ii) and vice
versa. Deploying the proposed architecture out in the ﬁeld
will show which resolution of location data is necessary and
useful for an energy management system. This can range from
cartesian coordinates to a spatial abstraction at room level.
To enable the proposed system to work completely au-
tonomous, in turning power consumers on and off implicitly
without any needed interaction from the users, an Energy
Management Rule set can be deﬁned. Based on the Event-
Condition-Action principle, each rule consists of the tuple
<Person, Activity, Location, Time/Date> and triggers a de-
ﬁned set of Actions in terms of turning power consumers on
or off. Based on the Power Readings, the Smart-Watch Activity
Readings, the Location Information, and the Time&Date, the
system can autonomously switch to predeﬁned energy man-
agement states. This system behavior needs, on the one hand
nearly 100% accurate sensor data and on the other hand a
well deﬁned rule set that has to be deﬁned for each household.
Neither of them is easy to achieve. In many complex houses the
level of granularity can require some aggregation. Evaluation
of the system over time will show the level of granularity at
which implicit, rule based power management is possible and
brings beneﬁt to the users.
In this section, we described the system architecture of the
PowerIT-System. It consists of two parallel working princi-
ples, speciﬁcally (i) an autonomous data collecting unit for
Power and Activity Readings, and (ii) and explicit control
and monitoring unit were the user can switch electrical power
193
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Fig. 1.
System Architecture of the deployed Smart Energy Management System showing its components and their interplay as described in Section II.
consumers on and off. Switching a device off means com-
pletely disconnecting it from the power supply and therefore
zero power consumption. Having the ability to autonomously
collect power and activity data allows, on the one hand to gen-
erate power statistics and proﬁles over time (e.g., aggregated
power usage of the monitored devices (be referred to Section
III)) that can be shown to the users to make them aware and
sensitive to their power consumption, and on the other hand
to collect data sets and time use surveys to train accurate
activity models. If the activity models are accurate enough,
the proposed system could work completely autonomous and
adjust the power consumption using the Energy Management
RuleSet (i.e., the used electrical devices) accurately to the
needs of the users.
III.
USER EXPERIENCE AND AWARENESS
The PowerIT system (as presented in Section II) is de-
signed to collect and analyze data in an completely au-
tonomous manner once deployed. As the user should be made
aware of his energy consumption, we developed a PowerIT
App that can be used by the user on variant different gadgets
(tablet, smartphone, and smart-watch) to monitor and control
the system at various levels. The user involvement is different
at each of the 4 levels. It raises from level 1 to level 4 and is
explained in detail below:
1)
Energy Consumption Recognition and generating of
Load Proﬁles for each connected device.
This is done completely autonomously by the system
for each connected power consumers. Results can be
shown in real-time for the current energy consump-
tion and for informative purposes for all collected
data on a daily, weekly, monthly, and yearly base.
2)
Collection of raw sensor data from the Wrist Worn
Sensor (3-axis accelerometer) of the Smart Watch
sensor platform.
In principle, this process is also handled by the
system in a completely autonomous manner. The
involvement of the user is limited to wearing the
smart-watch.
3)
Assignment of User Activity Metadata to the recorded
sensor data via the Smart Watch (exemplarily shown
in Figure 2; The Activities from left to right are:
Travel, Eat, Education, Entertainment, and Family-
Care). Users can select a subset out of a set of
28 predeﬁned activities that best ﬁt their needs and
makes selection more easily. Additionally the set can
be extended by user deﬁned activities for ﬂexibility
reasons.
The user has to set the current performed activity
by selecting the correct activity label on the smart
watch. Dependent on the granularity of activities, the
user involvement can be quite high.
4)
Implicit power consumer control based on a user de-
ﬁned Energy Management Rule Set and the collected
sensory data that is used as input for the system.
This implies (i) a fully trained activity recognition
model and (ii) a deﬁned rule set which power con-
sumers are activated based on the sensory input. This
level needs high user involvement in training the
activity model where steps 1-3 build the base, and in
deﬁning the energy management rule set. Especially
when more than one person lives in a household,
resolving conﬂicting rules can make the rule base
unmanageable. This is especially true when the rule
base management is done by non experts.
194
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Fig. 2. Realtime assignment of the User Activity to the collected Sensor-Data
on the wrist worn Smart Watch Sensor Platform.
Beside the above presented four levels of user involvement,
the user is, at each point in time able to monitor and control
the system using the PowerIT-App (as shown in Figure 3) that
can be deployed on android based tablets, smartphones, and
smart-watches. The center of the app is a ﬂoorplan containing
all attached electrical power consumers (as shown in Figures
3.ii and 3.iii). This novel navigation schema allows the user
to swipe through his home in a natural way. For each room,
the corresponding devices are displayed (presented in Figure
3.iii). The user can select one of the shown devices to see
the current, real-time energy consumption and an zoomable
energy consumption history log for the one device (see Figure
3.iv). This makes the user aware about how many energy
the electrical equipment in the household is consuming. This
is especially interesting for the so called standby modes,
where power consumers are expected to consume power near
the 0 watt level that is usually not the case. This, without
the PowerIT-App, often unperceived waste of energy can be
prevented. Therefore, the PowerIT-App offers the possibility to
fully disconnect the power consumer from the power supply
in simply switching it off (as long as it is not prohibited by
the Energy Management Constraint set as described in Section
II). The on/off switch is placed in the device view so the user
gets a realtime feedback that the device is now consuming 0
watts as it is completely disconnected from the power supply
by the Energy Consumer Control Unit (see Section II).
In this section, we brieﬂy discussed the smart gadgets that
can be used by people to interact with the system. The focus
was to build on the one hand an easy to use phone- or tablet
based App that makes the user aware of his power consumption
and on the other hand a smart-watch based App that allows to
record and annotate user activities in an easy and unobtrusive
way. The interface design of the App allows easy navigation
through the household based on a ﬂoorplan. Electrical devices
can be selected, their realtime power consumption can be
viewed, a zoomable power-history is available, and they can be
switched on or off. Furthermore, the power consumption can be
aggregated for free deﬁnable time spans (preset: current day,
week, month, and year) at device, room, ﬂoor, and building
level. Using these options people get aware of how many power
their devices are using and when. Having this information at
different levels of granularity, they may tend to alter their
behavior to a more efﬁcient use of energy if they want.
In addition to the phone- or tablet based PowerIT App
we ported its functionality also to a smart-watch. Extending
the above described functionality, the smart watch allows to
record activity data, in this case the raw values of a 3-axis
accelerometer, that can be annotated with the corresponding
activity by the user (as exemplarily shown in Figure 2).
Depending on the quality of the annotated data, that consists
of the energy consumption of the monitored devices and in
addition the raw values of a 3-axis accelerometer of the used
smart watches, activity models can be trained to implicitly
control the system in the future. If it is sufﬁcient to just take
the smart watch to infer the user activities, as human behaviour
and activity has a high variance, will be analyzed ofﬂine using
the collected dataset.
IV.
DEPLOYMENT AND PRELIMINARY RESULTS
To deploy the systems in households and test its suitability
for everyday use, we deﬁned a Deployment Kit Case con-
sisting of four MotoACTV Smart Watches (Figure 4.i), one
Low Power Embedded Computing Platform (PandaBoard) that
hosts the Background Intelligence (described in Section II),
and twenty Energy Consumer Control Units. The technical
description of the deployed hardware components is presented
in Table I. The PowerIT-App (as described in Section III) was
deployed on the tablets and smart phones of the test household
residents if available, otherwise we gave them a Nexus 7 with
the preinstalled App. We are currently testing the system in
two households with 3 (man, woman, son) and 4 (man, woman,
son, daughter) people in parallel. After the test period that will
last up to 4 month, and depending on the gathered results,
we plan to deploy the system in up to 20 households to get
representative data on a larger scale.
The needed deployment and setup steps for the system once
arrived at a household are described in the following:
1)
Unpack Deployment Kit Case and Check for com-
pleteness of Components.
2)
Setup Background Intelligence System (PandaBoard)
3)
Create the Floorplan (Rooms and assigned devices)
of the Household using the Web-Service of the Back-
ground Intelligence.
4)
Deploy Energy Consumer Controls according to the
created Floorplan and Devices and check their com-
munication (PLC, WiFi) network.
5)
Deployment of the Smart Watches to the household
residents.
6)
Register Metadata (Person,- and Device Information)
using the Web-Service of the Background Intelli-
gence.
7)
Initial test of all system components (Energy Con-
sumer Controls, Background Intelligence Platform,
Wrist Worn Smart Watch, PowerIT-App).
8)
Introduction of the system usage to household resi-
dents.
TABLE I.
TECHNICAL DETAILS OF THE DEPLOYED HARDWARE
COMPONENTS OF THE SYSTEM.
MotoACTV: Processor: ARM Cortex-A8; Frequency: 600Mhz; Memory: 256MB
RAM, 8GB Flash; Radio: 802.11b/g/n, BT 4.0, Display: 1.6” 220x176 capaci-
tive multitouch LCD; Sensors: GPS, Accelerometer, Ambient Light, Compass;
Weight: 35g; presented in Figure 4.i.
PandaBoard: Processor: ARM Cortex-A9 MPCore; Frequency: 1.2Ghz; Mem-
ory: 1GB RAM; Weight: 74g; presented in Figure 4.ii.
Energy Consumer Control Unit: Processor: ARM Cortex-M3; Memory: 256KB
Flash Memory, 96 KB SRAM; Interfaces: UART, SSI, I2C, I2S, CAN, Ethernet
MAC and PHY, USB; presented in Figure 4.iii.
To clarify the usage of the different system components,
Figure 5 shows the schematic of the components used in
the demonstration setup as shown in Figure 4.iv. to test the
system for longtime stability. Four devices, a Coffee-Machine,
a Radio, a Lamp, and a TV are connected to the system
195
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Fig. 3.
Developed PowerIT App based on the Android Platform to monitor and control the system. The four views present (i) the starting screen, (ii) the
ﬂoorplan-view for easy navigation, (iii) the room-view with the assigned energy consumers, and (iv) one selected power consumer (radio) and its realtime
power-consumption and power-consumption history (∼ 0.42 Watt).
Fig. 4.
Demonstration Setup of the PowerIT-System showing (i) MotoACTV Smart-Watch with PowerIT-App and Energy Usage Visualization, (ii) Embedded
PandaBoard Platform that hosts the Background Intelligence, (iii) the self-designed Energy Consumer Control Unit and (iv) a demonstration setup with 4 devices
(Coffee-Machine, Radio, Lamp, and TV).
using the Energy Consumer control units. The PowerIT-App
is deployed on various smart phones and tablets, and a wrist
worn smart watch is used as Activity Sensor. These tests were
performed for a period of three months before the system was
put into action in the ﬁeld. Four electrical power consumers,
a Coffee-Machine, a Radio, a Lamp, and a TV are each
connected to an Energy Consumer Control Unit. The Energy
Control Unit allows to monitor the power consumption of
the connected devices, and offers the ability to turn them on
and off. The Energy Consumer control units communicated
exclusively using PLC (Power-Line-Communication) with the
Background Intelligence System that was hosted on an embed-
ded platform (PandaBoard). As the PandaBoard is not capable
of using PLC, we connected it to a Fritz!Powerline 546E to
establish the connection. We installed the PowerIT-App on
various different Android devices (Nexus 4, Nexus 7, Sony
Xperia, Samsung Galaxy SII / III) to test its functionality and
stability on different hardware platforms. Tests showed that the
functionality and stability was given over all devices. Major
differences were only observable in the battery drain rate that
can be mostly related back to the different screen sizes that
highly inﬂuence the power consumption of the mobile devices.
Regarding the smart watch that is highly limited in battery
capacity, we managed to extend the runtime from around
3 hours with the original ﬁrmware, up to 24 hours with a
modded ﬁrmware and additional optimizations regarding the
data transmission intervals and therefore the WiFi-On times.
A 24 hour runtime is a good achievement and makes the
smart-watch usable for one full day. So, the user can wear it
throughout the day, when most of his activities will take place,
and can recharge it during the night (while sleeping) where
less (and therefore, more predictive) activities are expected to
happen.
After performing the previously described tests over a pe-
riod of three months, that proved the stability and functionality
of the system and its components, we installed the system in
two households with 3 (man, woman, son) and 4 (man, woman,
son, daughter) people in parallel. Both households have 16
devices connected to the system to monitor and control them.
A common subset of devices of both are: the microwave oven,
196
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

Fig. 5.
Schematic of the System Components and their interconnection as
used in Figure 4.iv for the demonstration setup.
bread cutter, coffee machine, various lamps, TV, HiFi, radio,
the washing machine, deep freezer, fridge, vacuum cleaner,
and a multi battery recharger (for, e.g., phones, tablets, etc.).
Complementing the ﬁx installed Energy Consumer Control
Units, each household got two ’mobile’ ones, that they can
use to measure different devices (e.g., eBike, electrical lawn-
mower, angle grinder, drill machine, ice cream machine, etc.)
on purpose.
Beside the pure technical results of the recorded and
annotated datasets containing energy logs and activity data,
as exemplarily shown for one week in Figure 6, we also
collected preliminary results concerning the question if people
have changed, or at least began to change their behavior of
using electrical energy in a more effective way. These results
are based on interviews we conducted with the people after our
system was deployed for four weeks, thus people were aware
of their energy consumption during this time. Summarizing
these interviews, the main statement was that people realized
how many energy their devices consume when they are turned
on, or switched to standby mode. The data for standby modes
showed that this can range up to 40 Watts for Hiﬁ- or television
equipment. People stated that they knew that standby modes
consume electrical power but they were not aware of how
much. Also devices that do not have an explicit standby mode,
such as microwave ovens, were thought by people to consume
now power when they are not active. Results showed that
also these devices consume a lot of electrical power, e.g., one
microwave oven consumed 25 Watts nobody was aware of.
This was ﬁgured out by people either in realtime, or more
systematically in using the electrical energy history logs in
the PowerIT-App for single devices, rooms, or ﬂoors.
As a result, people immediately used the PowerIT App to
disconnect these devices from the power supply resulting in
zero use of energy of the disconnected devices. As the users
started to be aware of the energy consumption of their devices,
regardless if they are used, in standby mode or turned off, they
switched through all their devices, and turned the not needed
ones off according to their current situation. In doing this,
one household who owned the one microwave oven and had
three TVs saved up to 60 Watts by just turning these devices
off. During the interviewing process, we deﬁnitely noticed that
people now know the energy consumption of their devices and
use them more efﬁcient in terms of energy as they can easily
switch not needed power consumers off using the PowerIT-
App (as described in more detail in Section III).
The ﬁrst two households that use the PowerIT system are
now online for two months. A brief description of the collected
data of the two households that is used for (i) analyzing the
behavior of people and their electrical power consumers (e.g.,
cooling cycles of the fridge) and (ii) for training of activity
models, is presented in Table II. This dataset can be used
to make the behavior of people more efﬁcient (making them
energy-aware) in terms of using electrical energy, as power
proﬁles of devices can be analyzed in detail and presented to
people beside the information they get from the PowerIT-App
(as shown in Section III).
TABLE II.
RECORDED DATA OF THE POWERIT DATASET UNTIL 30.
OCTOBER 2013 RESPECTIVELY A PERIOD OF 2 MONTHS THAT IS USED FOR
OFFLINE ANALYSIS.
Recordings: Two households, 7 people (2 men, 2 women, 2 boys, 1 girl)
Sensor Recordings: 40 Energy Consumer Control Units at an interval of 10 sec;
7 wrist worn activity sensors with a recording speed of 100Hz.
Sensor Online Time: 40 x 1440h (∼57600h) of energy recordings for single
electric power consumers. Activity labels for ∼ 6 x 5 hours/day (300h) (∼1800h)
Recording Size: Energy Recordings 753MB, Activity Recordings 1997MB
Collecting the energy consumption of power consumers
and giving technology to people that allows to monitor and
control these devices, showed already in the ﬁrst month to be
an effective method to make people aware of their power con-
sumption. Knowing their power consumption, people tended to
change their behavior in that way, that not always all devices
have to be turned on or in standby mode. Especially the
easiness of switching power consumers on and off remotely
using a smart gadget and an App made people change their
behavior and thinking of how they use electrical energy.
Fig. 6.
Activity Traces gathered during a test installation of the system for
calendar week 27/2013 for 24/7 yielding to a time use survey with implications
to energy management.
To make energy aware behavior even more comfortable, we
work on switching from the pure user awareness and explicit
control to an implicit control based on the current user activ-
ities. Knowing the user activities, electrical power consumers
can be switched on- or off automatically without explicitly
needed user interaction. To collect the needed activity labels,
stating what one user was doing at a speciﬁc point in time,
according to the recorded energy- and wrist worn sensor data,
the smart-watch allows to select the current activity of the
user and logs it. This collected metadata is exemplarily shown
in Figure 6 for one person for the period of one week. The
data was collected for calendar week 27/2013 for 24/7. Each
line represents a full 24h day starting with Sunday 30.06-
00:00. This recorded activity metadata, in combination with
197
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

the collected sensor data (energy consumption, accelerometer
data from the wrist-worn watch) can be used to train activity
recognition models. The color coding for exemplarily selected
main activities (not complete) is: pink:work, green:hygiene,
orange:car, violett:socialize, dark blue:sleep, light blue:don’t
care, light orange:eat.
Using the activity metadata and the recorded sensor read-
ings, activity recognition models can be trained and evaluated
to be further used to implicitly control electrical power con-
sumers based on an Energy Management Rule Set. This frees
people to explicitly turn power consumers on and off and can
make energy saving even more comfortable.
V.
CONCLUSION
Within this paper we have presented and evaluated the
use of smart gadgets (i.e., smart-phones, tablets, and watches)
to make people aware of their energy consumption. We
designed the PowerIT System that permanently collects the
energy consumption from connected devices. We developed
the PowerIT-App based on the Android Platform that can be
used by people on different gadgets to monitor and control the
energy consumption of the connected devices. We deployed
the PowerIT system in two households with 3 (man, woman,
son) and 4 (man, woman, son, daughter) people in parallel,
and in sum 40 connected electrical power consumers for a
period of two months. Using the PowerIT system to monitor
their electrical devices in realtime, turning them on- and off
remotely, and additionally showing energy history logs made
people aware of how many electrical energy is consumed
by their devices. Interviewing the participants showed that
already in the ﬁrst four weeks of the test installation, gaining
awareness about the power consumption of their electrical
devices, people changed their behavior to a more attentive
use of electrical energy. People used their phones, tablets and
smart-watches to check if their currently not used devices
were turned on and switched them off. This resulted in a
more efﬁcient use of energy as only devices were turned on
that were needed at the speciﬁc point in time. The fact that
the PowerIT system works completely autonomous and uses
already deployed smart gadgets for monitoring and control of
the system, like smart phones and tablets, the system can be
used without affecting the level of living of people. Although
the behavioral change of people towards a more energy aware
and efﬁcient behavior was already noticeable after four weeks,
the future will see an implicit control of power consumers
based on inferred user activities. To address this issue, we
additionally collect activity labels using a smart watch that will
provide the necessary information to train activity recognition
models for the future implicit energy management approach.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The project OPPORTUNITY acknowledges the ﬁnancial
support of the Future and Emerging Technologies (FET)
programme within the Seventh Framework Programme for
Research of the European Commission, under FET-Open grant
number: 225938.
The project PowerIT acknowledges the ﬁnancial support of the
FFG FIT-IT under grant number: 830.605.
REFERENCES
[1]
U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), “International Energy
Outlook 2013,” July 2013.
[2]
G. Hoelzl et al., “Locomotion@location: When the rubber hits the
road,” in The 9th International Conference on Autonomic Computing
(ICAC2012), San Jose, California, USA, September 2012, pp. 73–78.
[3]
D. Salber, A. K. Dey, and G. D. Abowd, “The context toolkit: aiding
the development of context-enabled applications,” in Proceedings of the
SIGCHI conference on Human factors in computing systems: the CHI
is the limit, ser. CHI ’99.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 1999, pp.
434–441.
[4]
M. Keally, G. Zhou, G. Xing, J. Wu, and A. Pyles, “Pbn: towards practi-
cal activity recognition using smartphone-based body sensor networks,”
in Proceedings of the 9th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked
Sensor Systems, ser. SenSys ’11.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2011,
pp. 246–259.
[5]
I. Nordin, P. Chee, M. Addi, and F. Harun, “Ez430-chronos watch as a
wireless health monitoring device,” in 5th Kuala Lumpur International
Conference on Biomedical Engineering 2011, ser. IFMBE Proceedings,
N. Osman, W. Abas, A. Wahab, and H.-N. Ting, Eds., vol. 35. Springer
Berlin Heidelberg, 2011, pp. 305–307.
[6]
A. Sellen, Y. Rogers, R. Harper, and T. Rodden, “Reﬂecting human
values in the digital age,” Commun. ACM, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 58–66,
Mar. 2009.
[7]
P. Ebinger, J. Hern´andez Ramos, P. Kikiras, M. Lischka, and A. Wies-
maier, “Privacy in smart metering ecosystems,” in Smart Grid Security,
ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, J. Cuellar, Ed., vol. 7823.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2013, pp. 120–131.
[8]
U. Greveler, B. Justus, and D. Loehr, “Forensic content detection
through power consumption,” in Communications (ICC), 2012 IEEE
International Conference on, 2012, pp. 6759–6763.
[9]
A. A. Salah, B. Lepri, A. S. Pentland, and J. Canny, “Understanding
and changing behavior,” Pervasive Computing, IEEE, vol. 12, no. 3, pp.
18–20, 2013.
[10]
B. Fogg, “A behavior model for persuasive design,” in Proceedings
of the 4th International Conference on Persuasive Technology, ser.
Persuasive ’09.
New York, NY, USA: ACM, 2009, pp. 40:1–40:7.
[11]
L. Bao and S. Intille, “Activity recognition from user-annotated accel-
eration data,” in Pervasive Computing, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, A. Ferscha and F. Mattern, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg,
2004, vol. 3001, pp. 1–17.
[12]
E. Tapia, S. Intille, and K. Larson, “Activity recognition in the home
using simple and ubiquitous sensors,” in Pervasive Computing, ser.
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, A. Ferscha and F. Mattern, Eds.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2004, vol. 3001, pp. 158–175.
[13]
J. Ward, P. Lukowicz, G. Troster, and T. Starner, “Activity recognition
of assembly tasks using body-worn microphones and accelerometers,”
Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, IEEE Transactions on,
vol. 28, no. 10, pp. 1553–1567, 2006.
[14]
G. Hoelzl, M. Kurz, and A. Ferscha, “Goal oriented recognition of
composed activities for reliable and adaptable intelligence systems,”
Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing (JAIHC),
p. in Press, July 2013.
[15]
M. Kurz et al., “The opportunity framework and data processing ecosys-
tem for opportunistic activity and context recognition,” International
Journal of Sensors, Wireless Communications and Control, Special
Issue on Autonomic and Opportunistic Communications, pp. 102–125,
December 2011.
[16]
G. Hoelzl, M. Kurz, and A. Ferscha, “Goal processing and semantic
matchmaking in opportunistic activity and context recognition systems,”
in The 9th International Conference on Autonomic and Autonomous
Systems (ICAS2013), March 2013, pp. 33–39.
[17]
E. Garcia-Ceja and R. Brena, “Long-term activity recognition from
accelerometer data,” Procedia Technology, vol. 7, no. 0, pp. 248 – 256,
2013.
[18]
S. Belgaonkar, E. Elavarasi, and G. Singh, “Smart lighting and control
using msp430 & power line communication,” International Journal Of
Computational Engineering Research, vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 662–666, 2012.
198
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2014.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-324-7
ICDS 2014 : The Eighth International Conference on Digital Society

