Digital Inclusion - The Vision and the Reality 
 
Leela Damodaran, Wendy Olphert, Teresa Gilbertson, 
Loughborough University 
Loughborough, UK 
L.Damodaran@lboro.ac.uk, C.W.Olphert@lboro.ac.uk, 
T.Gilbertson@lboro.ac.uk 
Mary Craig 
University of Edinburgh 
Edinburgh, UK 
m.craig@ed.ac.uk
Jatinder Sandhu 
Nottingham Trent University 
Nottingham, UK 
jatinder.sandhu@ntu.ac.uk 
 
 
 
Abstract— The benefits of a digitally inclusive society are 
vast and the need for such inclusion is now a 
requirement for full participation in our society.  While 
the basic concept of universal digital inclusion is simple, 
the reality is a long way from the vision.  Despite efforts 
to reduce it, inequality of access still exists.    The 
beneficiaries of a digital society are not just the 
individual, but all stakeholders in the wider society.  
While the challenges to achieve a fully inclusive digital 
society are considerable, the knowledge of how to create 
such a society already exists.  The creation of local 
venues for inclusively designed ICT (Information and 
Communications Technology), support and learning in 
familiar places along with the harnessing of political will 
could make such a society a reality rather than a vision.  
With the cooperation of all stakeholders, actualisation of 
the vision of a digitally inclusive society, while 
challenging, will yield opportunities that eclipse the cost 
of implementation. 
Keywords-Digital society; digital inclusion; accessibility; 
participation. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
The fundamental concept of digital inclusion is the 
deceptively simple premise that everyone in the world 
deserves to have equal access to whatever knowledge and 
information they require to enable them live their lives to 
their full potential, which crucially, now depends on fast and 
reliable internet access.  Despite attention in society from 
academics, politicians, social activists and many others for 
almost two decades, the reality still seems to be a long way 
from the vision.  This paper revisits the vision and 
aspiration of digital inclusion, and then, seeks to look 
beyond the rhetoric to provide an analysis of the status quo, 
a consideration of some facilitators and inhibitors to 
progress and some suggestions for moving forward with 
renewed energy and commitment. 
A. Background: The digital divide 
The term "digital divide" was adopted by the 
Clinton/Gore administration in the US in the late 1990s and 
used in 1998 in a commencement speech at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology: 
“...the digital divide has begun to narrow, but it will not 
disappear of its own accord. History teaches us that even as 
new technologies create growth and new opportunity, they 
can heighten economic inequalities and sharpen social 
divisions” [1]. 
The initial focus of the digital divide was one of access 
to technology and the acquisition of the basic skills to use it.  
As access to computers has increased across all members of 
industrialised societies, the digital divide has become not 
just about access and the acquisition of basic skills and 
knowledge, but also about the ability to exploit technologies 
for personal benefit, empowerment and even transformation.  
For such a divide to be narrowed, it is not just equipment 
and basic skills that are required but, confidence, good 
support and appropriately designed equipment and services. 
The benefits of an inclusive digital society are well-
documented and emphasise extensive and transformational 
impact.  There are numerous published articles by 
governments, academics, practitioners and others which 
show that being part of the digital world can improve life in 
numerous ways, means and forms [2]-[4].  Often, the 
emphasis of such publications is on the financial savings for 
the state and for individuals.  While monetary gains are 
important, the potential transformation for individuals, 
society and the economy are vastly more far-reaching.   
Appropriate and competent use of digital technologies also 
helps to improve the well-being of individuals and maintain 
their independence, autonomy and social connectedness.  
Other benefits include civic participation and the 
22
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

opportunity to improve skills to gain employment or simply 
to ‘keep up with the times’.   
Research identifies many factors that lead to inequality 
of access and opportunity.  For example, Norris [5] 
recognises three kinds of digital divide: 
– Global: the divide between the industrialised and 
the developing world 
– Social: the divide between the have and the have-
nots in society 
– Democratic: the divide between those who use 
technology to participate in the public realm and 
those who do not [5]. 
In order for the divide to be significantly reduced or 
eliminated, each of these aspects need to be recognised and 
appropriate solutions and coping strategies put in place.  
This paper provides a vision for the development of a fully 
inclusive digital society by identifying the benefits, 
beneficiaries as well as a roadmap to achieve this vision. 
The inspirational and aspirational ‘Declaration of 
Principles’ presented at the World Summit on the 
Information Society, Geneva, 10-12 December 2003 [6] 
states the following: 
"We, the representatives of the peoples of the world 
…declare our common desire and commitment to build 
a people-centred, inclusive and development-oriented 
Information Society, where everyone can create, access, 
utilize and share information and knowledge, enabling 
individuals, community and peoples to achieve their 
full 
potential 
in 
promoting 
their 
sustainable 
development and improving their quality of life ….” 
Since that time, the overarching goal and some of the 
components embedded in the declaration have become 
familiar and well-established – if only by repetition.  Some 
of the frequently voiced assertions, aspirations and 
principles of digital inclusion include the following:  
• 
Global 
access 
to 
ICT 
(Information 
and 
Communications 
Technology) 
will 
make 
a 
significant contribution to improving health and 
wellbeing and quality of life for all  
• 
Digital technologies make possible transformations 
which enhance quality of life of individuals, 
increase life chances, prolong independence and 
autonomy and improve social connectedness  
• 
The 
transforming 
capabilities 
of 
digital 
technologies improve society and boost the 
economy 
• 
Everyone should be able to access, create, utilise 
and share knowledge and information. 
The remainder of the paper will examine and explore the 
subject of digital inclusion in greater depth. First, the 
definition of digital inclusion will be introduced, followed 
by a presentation of some examples of evidence of the value 
of a digitally inclusive society. The benefits and 
beneficiaries of such a society will then be introduced.  
Finally, the challenges to achieving a digitally inclusive 
society and the steps needed to make such a vision a reality 
will be discussed.  
II. 
DEFINING DIGITAL INCLUSION 
An inclusive digital society has been defined as one in 
which all members of a community are able to access, use, 
and understand digital technologies [7].   For this goal to 
be achieved the following preconditions are required: 
– 
Connectivity – infrastructure and individual access 
to appropriate hardware, software, services 
– 
Capability 
– 
education, 
tailoring 
for 
ability/disability, digital literacy and skills 
– 
Content – availability of accessible, meaningful, 
relevant material  
Meeting 
these 
preconditions 
will 
require 
the 
key 
stakeholders in society to collaborate effectively to make the 
vision a reality.  The relevant stakeholders include local and 
national Government, all business sectors and professional 
groups, retailers, designers, developers and manufacturers of 
ICT products and services, third sector organisations, 
groups and communities of people and individuals.  
Crucially, they include diverse groups of the population, 
including the young and the old, the employed and the 
unemployed, the retired, the disabled and those unable to 
work.  Only by recognising the wide range of needs and 
perspectives of all people and groups that make up our 
global society and making provision for them will digital 
inclusion come about.  However, this will require that 
relevant influential stakeholders actively strive to achieve 
the digital participation of all the stakeholders in society.   
III. 
WHY IS A DIGITALLY INCLUSIVE SOCIETY 
IMPORTANT? 
Digital literacy is fast becoming a requirement for full 
participation is society.  In our emerging e-society, ICTs are 
an important aspect of daily life.  They offer particular 
advantages to older adults, such as helping them to stay 
connected to family and friends, to pursue their interests and 
hobbies, to organise the mechanics of daily living, to benefit 
from the financial savings of internet shopping and to access 
health and social care.  Yet, large numbers of older adults 
are reported to be non-users of technology [8].  Recent 
statistics show that while 99% of people aged between 16 
and 34, this drops to 88% for people aged between 55-64, 
71% of people aged between 65-74 and a very low 37% for 
people aged over 74 years [9]. 
The real benefits lie in the transformational capability of 
digital technologies.  One strong example of the power and 
significance of the benefits of digital connection is seen in 
the experience of an individual reported on the website of 
Digital Unite.  The individual was a woman who had lost 
her sight 6 years previously and had to rely on her husband 
to read the post, write letters and other tasks that required 
reading such as checking recipes.  Her life was transformed 
when she discovered that she could download magnification 
23
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

and text to speech software.  By having access to such 
software and hardware, she regained her independence [10]. 
While this is only one example, there are numerous 
examples (e.g., from Leicestershire CareOnLine [11]) 
showing similar transformations, and the importance of such 
transformations cannot be understated.  For those who are, 
or who become, digitally disengaged, there are real social 
and economic consequences in terms of accessing 
government services, accessing health information and 
social support as well as researching and procuring goods 
and services, or accessing price comparison and review 
websites.  Indeed, it can be argued that the cumulative ripple 
effect of individual digital inclusion is far-reaching enough 
to have the potential to affect wider society, for example, by 
reducing the costs of maintaining people in the community 
who might otherwise require residential care or significant 
at-home support.  The heart of this vision is to ensure that 
everyone is able to access and experience these 
transformational opportunities and impacts.  The following 
section considers the benefits and beneficiaries. 
IV. 
THE BENEFITS AND BENEFICIARIES 
To promote a digitally inclusive society, it is important 
not only to raise awareness of the wide-ranging benefits but 
also to acknowledge the wide range of beneficiaries of such 
a society. 
A. Benefits 
The spectrum of benefits of being part of the digital 
world is vast and increasing all the time.  This bigger picture 
can be overlooked when the specific aspects of digital 
inclusion, such as responsibility for delivering on-line 
services, are viewed in isolation.  The benefits of a digitally 
inclusive society include the major advantages to the 
economy and society which derive from enabling 
individuals to become or remain economically active 
through learning digital skills, resulting in enhanced health, 
wellbeing and quality of life as well as increased 
opportunities for social interaction, cohesiveness and civic 
participation. 
The keys to enabling economic development at the 
individual level are: enabling education; increasing 
opportunities; increasing self-efficacy and improving and 
expanding skills. 
1) Health, wellbeing and quality of life 
Digital participation also helps to reduce loneliness and 
improve independence and wellbeing.  These benefits could 
in turn lessen demands on other (formal and informal) 
support systems for older people; improving the quality of 
life of older people while also reducing costs of care.  By 
enabling rehabilitation, remote assessment and diagnosis 
and treatment delivery, the need for residential care could be 
delayed, or for some, avoided by supporting policies of 
early intervention.  
 
 
2) Social interaction & cohesiveness  
The social environment, as well as the social 
opportunities afforded by connectivity, promotes inclusion 
and helps to reduce social isolation.  This increased social 
contact helps maintain good mental health by reducing the 
depression, stress and anxiety associated with social 
isolation.  Increasing digital participation allows people to 
stay connected with friends and family, their local 
community and the wider world in a variety of ways.  Civic 
engagement and participation, e.g., voting and knowing 
what is going on in your community, is maintained even for 
those who are housebound.  Enabling social networks thus 
creates a digital haven of having fun and increasing and 
maintaining social contacts. 
B. Beneficiaries 
The beneficiaries of a digitally inclusive society are 
numerous and include key stakeholders in the following 
categories: government – national and local, service 
providers, retailers of on-line services and products, 
designers and developers of ICT products and services, AT 
(Assistive Technology) providers, individuals and society.  
1) Government 
a) National Government 
Digital inclusion would benefit national government by 
enabling citizens to possess the skills that are required of a 
modern workforce.  Additionally, if more people feel 
confident to access centralised services online, the burden 
on traditional services will be reduced.  The provision of 
care would also benefit from a digitally-engaged populace 
with access to the health, care and wellbeing benefits 
enabled by technology. 
b) Local Government 
The ability for all members of society, especially older 
people who use large numbers of services, to utilise online 
services, would allow for cost-savings arising from greater 
individual health, care delivery and societal participation.  
Local government could expect see a lessening on the 
burden on some services as a result of the benefits of digital 
inclusion that enable independent living, greater well-being 
and the reduction of social isolation. 
2) Service Providers 
In the case of the public sector, the increased levels of 
confidence and capability of older people in digital 
participation will begin to increase the uptake of on-line 
services (e.g., Universal credit) and this will be of great 
value to overburdened local government bodies attempting 
to ‘achieve more with less’ (such an effect would be 
especially beneficial in achieving savings as the heaviest use 
of government services is by older people). 
3) Retailers of On-line Products and Services  
Well-publicised demographic change means that a major 
market exists in the 50+ age group which is not well-served 
and has yet to be ‘discovered’ by many retailers and other 
commercial companies.  Understanding and being able to 
24
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

‘segment’ appropriately the older market to achieve better 
tailoring of products and services offers competitive 
advantage to business.  For businesses that provide online 
services, e.g., banks and retailers the existence of 
community venues will provide a venue for retailers and 
service providers to demonstrate their online services 
(without sales pressure!), provide information and support, 
build capacity in the older population, encourage customer 
loyalty and develop customer engagement. 
4) Designers and Developers of ICT Products and 
Services 
The design of technology can pose many problems – 
particularly, the speed of change and unnecessary 
complexity arising from function creep (i.e., the including of 
features outside that of the original specification).  When 
combined with a raft of ageing issues and disabilities which 
are associated with ageing, these factors adversely affect 
older adults’ experiences of using and sustaining use of 
ICTs.  Good design can mitigate these effects and enhance 
the user experience. 
The principles of designing for inclusion are well 
established and relate to the importance of eliciting detailed 
user requirements and then tailoring products, systems and 
services to these requirements.  Despite this knowledge 
having been available for decades, it is still not the norm to 
design for inclusion.  And yet, one of the major concerns 
identified by older people is that constant technological 
change poses a major hindrance for them in maintaining 
digital connection.  It is entirely possible to have new 
functionality hidden, in order to keep the interface 
unchanged.  If people want to do more, then they can; but 
when it suits them and when help is available.  In other 
words, stability of the interface is maintained for them 
until/unless they want enhanced functionality.  
The demands of digital engagement, especially cognitive 
load, can be reduced by designs which are: 
• 
Tailored to diverse user requirements                      
• 
User friendly 
• 
Accessible 
• 
Intuitive 
• 
Seamless  
• 
Embedded 
where 
appropriate 
(“hidden 
functionality”) 
• 
Adaptive 
• 
Making upgrading and administration transparent 
and easy  
Meeting such design needs represents a commercial 
opportunity for ICT designers as well as offering an exciting 
intellectual challenge.  
5) Assistive Technology (AT) Providers 
Many ATs for people with recognized disabilities can 
help everyone in demanding or extreme usage situations.  
Accessibility = Profitability.  Successful examples include:  
• 
Text to speech 
• 
Shorthand for text messaging 
• 
Image stabilization 
• 
 Closed captions in video games 
Such accessibility technologies open up new market 
opportunities in every sphere of life, e.g., healthcare, 
homecare, commerce, education and recreation.  
6) Individuals 
Individuals will benefit from all the aspects detailed 
above.  For example, creating adaptable interfaces could be 
particularly important for older users who want to use what 
everyone else is using rather an AT, either because of the 
steep learning curve of some ATs, or because of a personal 
preference to use what everyone else is using [12].  This 
experience of built-in personal customisation is of benefit to 
all.  Similarly adaptivity features that aid in automatic 
customisations can reduce or eliminate the learning curve of 
such changes - removing a number of access barriers.  By 
ensuring stable, intuitive, usable and adaptive design, 
individuals will benefit in terms of not only accessing goods 
and services but also engaging in personal pursuits and 
living independently.    
7) Society 
The breadth of individual economic, health and 
wellbeing and social benefits combined with the reach of 
benefits across the private and public sectors benefits 
society as a whole.  Moreover, the interaction between all of 
these advantages creates a synergy such that the total benefit 
to society is potentially far greater than the sum of the 
individual benefits. 
A 
genuinely 
digitally 
inclusive 
society 
offers 
transformations which range, for example, from the 
empowerment that results from an individual who learns a 
specific skill on YouTube being able to solve a particular 
problem/meet a need, becoming economically active 
through online courses and social support, to being enabled 
to participate fully in society.  There far-reaching benefits, 
will not only benefit the individual experiencing them, but 
also wider society and the economy. 
V. 
THE CHALLENGES TO DIGITAL INCLUSION 
The challenges to achieving digital inclusion are 
extensive.  Not only are there significant challenges in 
getting everyone online – especially some older and 
disabled people, but in addition, there are special challenges 
for them in staying ‘connected’.  It is a common myth that 
‘once people are online, they stay online’.  Various studies 
show that some people who have used the internet at some 
point, and for some period of time, have subsequently 
stopped doing so [13]-[16].  This phenomenon is a potential 
but largely unrecognised ‘fourth digital divide’ [17], i.e., it 
cannot be explained by a simple interpretation of lack of 
access, lack of skills or lack of interest or motivation, 
because the people in this category have formerly been 
users.  One in ten people are reported to have given up on 
using computers and it has been found that the older 
generation are more likely to be the ones that ‘give up’ [18]. 
There are a number of factors which may lead to older 
people giving up use of computers and other digital 
25
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

technologies.  It is well established that older adults are 
vulnerable to social, cognitive and physical changes in later 
life.  These changes have important implications for older 
adults’ experiences of learning to use and sustain use of 
ICTs.  Changes in psychological and cognitive aspects will 
impact on remembering sequential processes and confidence 
levels in using ICTs.  Changes in physical aspects, such as 
changes in vision have implications for seeing what is on 
the screen and dexterity issues will create problems for 
controlling the mouse.  Additionally, social changes, such as 
family members moving away, also impact on the support 
available to older ICT users.  Further, older adults encounter 
some or a range of the following barriers in learning to use 
and sustain use of ICTs: confidence and fear of using ICTs; 
problems with understanding technical jargon and dealing 
with pop-ups and spam; problems with updates, drivers, and 
software; dealing with the rate of change of technology and 
coping with poorly designed software and hardware [19]. 
The absence of adequate learning and support also 
impacts on older adults’ abilities to continue use of ICTs.  A 
survey of older ICT users showed that 56% of older people 
said they regarded support as the most important factor in 
sustaining their digital participation.  Respondents reported 
using a wide range of learning mechanisms, including self-
directed learning (54%), inter-generational learning, peer-to-
peer learning (40%) and taught classes (47%).  Respondents 
reported heavy reliance on support from family members or 
friends both to learn and to solve problems.  Around a 
quarter of respondents said that human support and 
encouragement was the most important thing to help them 
use technology successfully [20].  Yet a further study on the 
Sus-IT project showed that the opportunities for learning 
and on-going support are extremely inadequate [19].   
These learning mechanisms alone are not adequate and 
the UK Digital Inclusion Panel Report [3] reported that 
“there is a real risk that in the medium to long term, 
significantly more citizens will migrate from being digitally 
engaged to being unengaged than the other way round, as 
their capabilities change”.    
One of the major determinants of sustained digital 
engagement – and therefore of digital inclusion in the long 
term – and for older people in particular, is the quality of 
support available to them.  For ICT users in the workforce, 
the majority of workplaces will have a dedicated member of 
staff tasked with ICT support i.e. setting up and maintaining 
the infrastructure, selecting which technology platform is 
used, installing updates etc.   The ICTs are looked after for 
those in the workplace although they are the relatively able 
bodied, reasonably technologically au-fait members of 
society.  What exists beyond the workplace for the many 
without the institutional support is very different.  In 
contrast to the situation in many workplaces, many ICT 
users who are at home, unemployed, retired, living with 
disabilities, living on a reduced income, living with a 
reduced social circle and possibly living with reduced health 
find themselves having to cope with all these demands 
themselves.  There are organisations, such as public libraries 
that can offer limited help, but more typically it is piecemeal 
and variable, and as such, is inadequate and unsatisfactory.  
In spite of this lack of support it is amazing that so many do 
succeed with so little support.  Just think what these 
individuals could achieve with adequate support.    
The current situation is very unsatisfactory from the 
point of view of older and disabled users and from the 
perspective of many stakeholders tasked with delivering 
services designed to be used on-line.  For digital inclusion 
to become a reality for these groups, vastly improved access 
to ICT support in the community is required.  
From the brief analysis of the status quo presented 
above, it will be evident that the challenges to digital 
inclusion are immense. 
VI. 
HOW TO MEET THE CHALLENGES?  
Encapsulating the essence of the 2003 Declaration of 
Principles allows the vision of an inclusive society and 
economy to be articulated as “the enhancement of the 
quality of life for all, extending autonomy and independence 
through the use of digital technologies.  This vision would 
be characterized by: 
• 
Empowered people experiencing the benefits of 
digital inclusion 
• 
Widespread participation in society and the 
economy 
• 
Readily available support in the community for 
engaging with and managing all aspects of the 
digital world”.  
To create the digitally inclusive society encapsulated in the 
vision described above requires structural, political, and 
social change on a vast scale - which perhaps helps to 
explain the slow progress to date.   
 The process of achieving such change needs itself to be 
inclusive of all stakeholders across society.  This means that 
to succeed, the co-creation of an inclusive society is 
required – and this will require collaboration on a grand 
scale to address the challenges through innovating, creating 
and evolving a digitally inclusive society that harnesses the 
power of ICT for the benefit of all.  The knowledge to meet 
the challenges already exists, but before a fully inclusive 
digital society can be achieved, the prevailing myths 
concerning the idea that once people are online they stay 
online; that there is no clear cut way to get older people 
online; that the one-size fits all workplace model of ICT 
training is sufficient for widespread digital inclusion; and 
that older people are not interested in shaping the design of 
technologies to their benefit should be dispelled.   
The key enablers for a digitally inclusive society are the 
provision of Community ICT learning and support venues 
and the will of influential stakeholders.   
A. Community ICT Learning and Support Venues  
Learning to use new technology is only the beginning of 
the journey to competent and confident use of ICTs.  People 
26
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

need appropriate venues in which to learn to use ICTs. The 
majority of ICT courses and campaigns to promote internet 
use are centred on acquisition of basic skills to go online 
rather than on promoting confidence and sustained usage. 
Many older people express their discomfort with formal 
classes and the negative associations with their school days. 
Once initial training is over, older people can feel alone, 
anxious and frustrated when experiencing problems with on-
going ICT use.  Fifty-six percent of older people said they 
regarded support as the most important factor in sustaining 
their digital participation [20].  Evidence also indicated that 
older people would like ICT learning and support 
opportunities that are user friendly, accessible, affordable, 
local, adaptive and embedded in purposeful and enjoyable 
activities. Similarly, findings from the research suggest that 
once older people are doing what matters to them, facilitated 
by ICT use, they are more likely to be motivated to continue 
their participation in the digital world and to progress to 
being ‘digital by choice’ in other areas of their lives. 
To enable individuals that are not familiar with ICT but 
wish to develop digital literacy skills, to have their ICT 
needs met, the requirements articulated by older people in 
the UK are for access at home/in the community to 
inclusively designed ICT, support and learning which 
utilises wherever possible, existing venues e.g., libraries and 
village halls with which people are familiar and comfortable 
and which are sustainable. 
B. Harnessing Stakeholder Will 
The vision and benefits of a digitally inclusive society 
are known and the structural changes needed to achieve the 
vision have also been identified. These are essential 
preconditions but are not sufficient to turn the vision into 
reality.  Change comes about when (i) dissatisfaction with 
the ‘As Is’ situation (ii) a shared vision of the desirable 
future and (iii) a clear ‘roadmap’ to achieve the vision are 
cumulatively greater than the costs (both financial and 
psychological) of implementing the vision.  Where this 
situation arises, it is often the case that a strong will 
develops among stakeholders to take action and move 
towards the shared goal. While there will inevitably be 
different perspectives and priorities among individuals, 
communities, businesses and government regarding what a 
digitally inclusive society looks like, the transformational 
outcomes envisioned by the Declaration of Principles help 
to  inspire a shared vision and perspectives and encourages 
commitment to follow the path to achieving this.  The 
sharing of perspectives between all stakeholders, especially 
those in positions of authority such as national and local 
government and those in business developing and selling 
ICTs are crucial to success in creating and sustaining a 
digitally inclusive society.  Inter- and intra- stakeholder co-
operation, ongoing negotiation for the mutual benefit of 
varied stakeholders and respecting the voices of less 
influential/authoritative stakeholders is also key to this 
journey. 
VII. NEXT STEPS 
To provide a path towards the vision of an inclusive 
digital society, the following steps are essential: 
• 
Promote widespread awareness of the benefits –
individual, societal and economic – of digital 
inclusion  
• 
Engage and gain the ‘buy-in’ of key stakeholders 
to the Vision of digital inclusion 
• 
Encourage and reward adoption of inclusive design 
principles and promote them as the industry ‘norm’ 
for designers, developers and manufacturers of ICT 
systems, services and products 
• 
Create expectations of and demand for inclusive 
design/digital inclusion amongst buyers and users 
of ICT   
• 
Promote awareness that current ICT learning and 
support provision in the community is variable in 
quality and availability and not ‘purpose’ tailored 
to the requirements of users 
• 
Recognise that sustaining people online is an even 
greater challenge than getting them online in the 
short term – and invest in community provision 
indicated above. 
• 
Create a framework for ubiquitous provision of 
ICT support in the community e.g., in public 
libraries  
• 
Document and co-ordinate the various local 
initiatives that exist, e.g., some GPs are now 
“social prescribing” (e.g., recommending patients 
make an appointment at a local library to obtain 
digital skills training). 
• 
Utilise local resources to meet local needs 
• 
Harness the political will to push this vision  
• 
Recognise and celebrate what we can all achieve 
given the right access to ICTs.  
These steps offer a roadmap to a digitally inclusive society. 
VIII.  CONCLUSION 
In summary, digital inclusion is fundamental to a 
flourishing democracy and to the full participation of people 
in society and the vision for universal inclusion and 
connectivity has been stated.  At the individual level, digital 
inclusion 
is 
crucial 
to 
sustaining 
and 
enhancing 
independence and autonomy. However, the transformative 
potential of such inclusion transcends the individual and has 
wide-reaching benefits for the whole of society and the 
economy.  To achieve the vision will require coordinated 
policies, strategies and practices which led or endorsed by 
national governments, coordinated and implemented by 
local government, service providers, businesses and third 
sector organisations. The barriers to achievement of a 
digitally inclusive society are well understood and, while 
commitment and effort to overcome them will be required, 
solutions are available and the return on investment in 
implementing these will be extensive.  With leadership and 
27
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

commitment, sustained digital connectivity for everyone is 
within our grasp now. In particular, leadership is needed to 
promulgate the vision and to encourage the development of 
strategic alliances and partnerships within a framework of 
appropriate policies and strategies, involving all relevant 
stakeholders – especially older people and disadvantaged 
groups in society.  Engagement at grass-roots is urgently 
needed to complement the 'top-down' digital inclusion 
campaigns currently in operation in some countries.  
  The path is understood and waiting to be travelled.  The 
rewards are significant and achieving the vision of digital 
inclusion presents opportunities for innovation and change 
in business and society that are even greater than the 
challenges.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
Sus-IT ('Sustaining IT use by older people to promote 
autonomy and independence') is a New Dynamics of Ageing 
project, funded by the 5 UK Research Councils – AHRC, 
BBSRC, EPSRC, ESRC and MRC (grant No. RES-353-25-
0008). 
REFERENCES 
[1] Clinton B. Remarks by the President at Massachusetts Institute 
of Technology 1998 Commencement. 1995; transcript. 
[2] Wangberg SC, Andreassen HK, Prokosch H-U, Vagos Santana 
SM, Sørensen T and Chronaki CE. Relations between Internet use, 
socio-economic status (SES), social support and subjective health. 
Health Promot Int 2007; 23: 70–77. 
[3] UK Cabinet Office. Enabling a digitally United Kingdom. 
2004; Available 
at: http://webarchive.nationalarchives.gov.uk/+/http://www.cabinet
office.gov.uk/media/cabinetoffice/corp/assets/publications/reports/
digital/digitalframe.pdf. Accessed 01/05, 2014. 
[4] Gatto SL and Tak SH. Computer, Internet and Email 
use among older adults: benefits and barriers. Educ Gerontol 2008; 
34: 800–811. 
[5] Norris P. Digital Divide? Civic Engagement, Information 
Poverty and the Internet Worldwide. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press; 2001. 
[6] World Summit on the Information Society. Declaration of 
Principles: Building the Information Society: a global challenge in 
the new Millennium. 2003. 
[7] Information Policy and Access Centre. Public Libraries and 
Digital Inclusion. Digital Inclusion Survey 2013. 
[8] Gorard S. and Selwyn N. Towards a le@rning society? the 
impact of technology on patterns of participation in lifelong 
learning. British Journal of Sociology of Education 2005 01/01; 
2014/12;26(1):71-89. 
[9] Office for National Statistics. Internet Access Quarterly Update, 
Q1 2014. 2014; Available 
at: http://www.ons.gov.uk/ons/rel/rdit2/internet-access-quarterly-
update/q1-2014/stb-ia-q1-2014.html. Accessed 12/18, 2014. 
[10] Digital Unite. Reclaim your independence by getting online!. 
2013; Available at: http://digitalunite.com/blog/reclaim-your-
independence-getting-online. Accessed 12/22, 2014. 
[11] Leicestershire CareOnLine. Your Story. Available at: 
http://www.leicscareonline.org.uk/careonline_people. Accessed 
01/21/15. 
[12] Sayago S. and Blat J. About the relevance of accessibility 
barriers in the everyday interactions of older people with the web. 
Proceedings of the 2009 International Cross-Disciplinary 
Conference on Web Accessibililty (W4A) New York, NY, USA: 
ACM; 2009. 
[13] Katz J.E. and Aspden P. Internet dropouts in the USA, the 
invisible group. Telecomm Policy 1998; 22:327-339. 
[14] Emmanouilides C. and Hammond K. Internet usage, 
predictors of active users and frequency of use. J Interact 
Marketing 2000(24):17-18-32. 
[15] Dutton W.H. and Blank G. Next generation users, the Internet 
in Britain. Oxford Internet Survey 2011 2011. 
[16] Young W., Clarke J., Klima G., Gadag V, Gien L., and 
Hardill I. Sustaining information and communication technology 
use among Canadians with at least one activity limitation. Int J 
Tech Know Soc 2012;7:1-2-10. 
[17] Olphert W. and Damodaran L. Older people and digital 
disengagement: a fourth digital divide? Gerontology 
2013;59(6):564-570. 
[18] Dutton W.H., Blank G., Groselj D. Oxford Internet Survey 
2013 Report: Cultures of the Internet. 2013. 
[19] Ramondt L., Sandhu J. and Damodaran L. Staying digitally 
connected – a study of learning and support provision for older 
people in seven cities in the UK and the implications for policy and 
practice. Int J Educ Ageing 2013;3:95-96-114. 
[20] Damodaran L., Olphert C.W. and Sandhu J. Falling Off the 
Bandwagon? Exploring the Challenges to Sustained Digital 
Engagement by Older People. Gerontology 2014;60:163-164-173. 
 
28
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2015.     ISBN:  978-1-61208-381-0
ICDS 2015 : The Ninth International Conference on Digital Society

