 
Implementing the Cyber Security Act in Public Financial Institutions in Ghana 
What are the Constraints and Enabling factors? 
 
Emmanuel Awuni Kolog  
Operations and MIS, University of Ghana 
Accra, Ghana 
Email: eakolog@ug.edu.gh  
Tijani Mohammed  
Operations and MIS, University of Ghana 
Accra, Ghana 
Email: mtijani003@st.ug.edu.gh 
 
Abstract— The Cyber Security Act of Ghana was enacted as a 
result of the National Cyber Security Policy and Strategy in 
Ghana. However, two years after its implementation, progress 
has been slow. This paper aimed to explore the constraints and 
enabling factors affecting the implementation of the Cyber 
Security 
Act 
in 
Ghana, 
based 
on 
the 
International 
Communication Union's pillars of cybersecurity. A mixed-
method approach was used, with data collected from 168 
respondents through a questionnaire and interviews. The 
survey data was analysed using Partial Least Square- Structural 
Equation Modeling (PLS-SEM), while the interview data was 
analysed using theory-based content analysis. The study found 
that financial institutions in Ghana have satisfactory policies 
and regulatory measures on cybersecurity, but lack the 
technical capacity to implement them effectively. The study also 
revealed satisfactory organizational and capacity development 
measures, but more awareness creation and organizational 
support are needed, including budget allocation and support 
from top management, to effectively implement cybersecurity 
policies in Ghana. 
Keywords- information security; cyber security act; public 
financial institutions; Ghana. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION  
Governments 
and 
organizations 
worldwide 
are 
increasingly utilizing Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICTs) to promote economic growth and 
national development [1]. However, the growing number of 
Internet users globally is hindering this progress. As of April 
2022, there were over 5 billion active Internet users and 
approximately 
1.92 
billion 
websites, 
making 
cyber 
monitoring and control extremely difficult [2]. This 
development has also made cyberspace more susceptible to 
attacks and exploitation. Cybersecurity breaches can be 
catastrophic, resulting in loss of life, financial loss, and 
business collapse. Infamous cyberattacks, such as those on 
Sony Pictures, the USA pipeline shutdowns, and the NotPetya 
virus, for instance, were reported to have caused over US $10 
billion in damages [3]. 
On December 29, 2020, Ghana's President assented to the 
2020 Cyber Security Act 1038 [7]. The policy's aim is to 
provide a secure cyberspace to support the country's 
digitalization agenda and its transition to a knowledge-based 
economy. The Act draws on eight frameworks from Ghana's 
National Cybersecurity Policy and Strategy (NCSPS): 
legislative 
and 
regulatory 
frameworks, 
cybersecurity 
technology frameworks, culture of security and capacity 
building, research and development towards self-reliance, 
compliance and enforcement, child online protection, 
cybersecurity 
emergency 
readiness, 
and 
international 
cooperation frameworks [8]. 
The Act contains 100 sections and three schedules and 
assigns it to a Cybersecurity Authority (CSA) [8]. The CSA's 
objectives include regulating, managing, and promoting 
cybersecurity issues, as well as preventing and responding to 
cyber threats and incidents in Ghana. Sections 5 to 34 outline 
the CSA's structure, administrative provisions, financial 
provisions, and the establishment of a cybersecurity fund to 
support the authority's operations. Sections 41 to 48 provide 
for the establishment of national and sectoral computer 
emergency response teams (CERT) and cyber security 
incident reporting (CIRT). Licensing of cybersecurity service 
providers, 
accreditation 
of 
cyber 
professionals, 
and 
certification of cyber products are covered in Sections 49 to 
58. The Act also promotes cybersecurity standards and their 
enforcement, public awareness and education as detailed in 
Sections 59 to 61. 
As ICTs continue to fuel economic growth and national 
development, the number of active Internetusers worldwide 
has surpassed 5 billion, with over 1.92 billion websites as of 
April 2022 [2]. However, this increased digitalization has also 
made cyberspace vulnerable to cyber attacks, which can have 
severe consequences such as loss of life, financial loss, and 
business collapse. To address this, countries and organizations 
worldwide are now incorporating cybersecurity regulatory 
measures into their national and sectoral security strategies. In 
Ghana, the government is pursuing an ambitious digitalization 
agenda, which has led to increased cyber-related activities 
among government agencies, private sector institutions, and 
citizens. However, this has also led to an increase in 
cybercrime and cyber threats [5], such as ransomware, 
identity fraud, blackmail, online child exploitation, and social 
engineering.  
 This study aims to explore the implementation of Ghana's 
Cybersecurity Act 2020 (Act 1038) by public financial 
institutions and investigate the constraints and enabling 
factors needed to improve its implementation. The study is 
divided into six sections. Section I introduces the study and 
emphasizes the importance of the topic. Section II presents the 
study's framework and the development of its hypotheses. In 
Section III, the methodology is discussed, including data 
collection and analysis methods. Section IV presents the 
study's findings, while Section V interprets and discusses the 
results in depth. Finally, in Section VI, the paper concludes by 
summarizing the main points and drawing conclusions about 
the implementation of the Cybersecurity Act. 
II. 
FRAMEWORK AND HYPOTHESIS DEVELOPMENT  
In the section, we present the study’s conceptual framework 
and the hypothesis development. 
14
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
A. Framework 
A 
comparative 
analysis 
of 
current 
international 
cybersecurity indexes by [10] [13] identified three key 
frameworks developed by cybersecurity experts and globally 
accepted for evaluating cybersecurity capacities: the Global 
Cybersecurity Index (GCI) by the ITU, the National 
Cybersecurity Index (NCSI) developed by the e-Governance 
Academy Foundation, and the Index of Cybersecurity (ICS) 
developed by the New York University Centre for 
Cybersecurity. Table I presents the GCI framework, which 
shows the various constructs. 
TABLE I.  
MAPPING ITU MEASURES TO GHANA’S NCSPS 
ITU 
Measures 
Corresponding NCSPS Framework 
Legal  
§ 
Policies and regulatory framework 
§ 
Compliance and enforcement measures 
§ 
Child online protection 
Technical  
§ 
Cyber security technology framework 
§ 
Cyber security emergency 
Organisational  
§ 
Effective governance 
Capacity 
Development  
§ 
Culture of security and capacity building 
§ 
Research and development towards self-
reliance 
Cooperation 
§ 
International cooperation 
 
Although each framework seeks to measure cybersecurity 
capacities at the national and organizational level, their 
application and context vary because they have different 
systems of indicators and evaluation. The GCI is the most 
comprehensive and widely accepted framework, and it is used 
in this study. 
 
B. Hypothesis Development  
The legal measures, as presented in Table I, focus on the 
presence of legal and regulatory frameworks, which serve as 
the foundation of all cybersecurity policies. These measures 
provide clear guidance for cybersecurity governance and 
include indicators such as regulations for prosecuting 
cybercrime, protecting online identities and data, child online 
protection, privacy, system breaches, cybersecurity audits, 
implementation of standards, and identification and protection 
of Critical Information Infrastructure (CII) [10]. The 
implementation of these measures provides legal support in 
the form of policies and procedures that protect individuals 
and CII from exploitation and harm [11]. The question now is 
whether financial institutions are adapting to Ghana's 2020 
Cyber Security Act 1038 or revising their existing policies to 
align with it. This leads to the first hypothesis of this study: 
H1: Financial institutions in Ghana have legal measures 
to implement cyber security Act 
 
The technical measures focus on the presence of structures 
and mechanisms to address cyber threats and incidents. This 
pillar acknowledges the significance of national and sectoral 
Computer Incident Response Teams (CIRT) and Computer 
Emergency Response Teams (CERTs) in promoting cyber 
resilience. Technical capacity also includes the existence of 
standards and baseline requirements for the deployment and 
use of technological resources. As technology is rapidly 
advancing, the technical capacity and technologies necessary 
to combat cybercrime and enhance national cybersecurity 
must also be continually improved to remain relevant. The 
2020 Cyber Security Act 1038 contains provisions for 
establishing national and sectoral CERTs, CIRTs, and early 
warning systems, developing system standards, and capacity 
building [10]. Therefore, the study hypothesis is: 
H2: Financial institutions in Ghana have the technical 
capacity to implement cyber security Act 
 
The organizational measure examines the IT governance 
structures, including the establishment of cybersecurity 
objectives and strategic plans, as well as the formal definition 
of institutional roles and responsibilities to ensure 
accountability [10]. It assesses the existence of a central 
governing body and how it coordinates with various 
departments to implement and enforce these regulations. Key 
organizational indicators include the existence of a legitimate 
and enforcement authority; organizational cybersecurity 
strategies with an action plan; protection of Critical 
Information Infrastructure (CII); and a clear definition of roles 
and accountability for key stakeholders. Therefore, the third 
hypothesis for this study is: 
H3: Financial institutions in Ghana have organizational 
capacity to implement cyber security Act 
 
The Capacity measure involves activities required to 
increase human and institutional knowledge [10]. This 
measure supports the development of cybersecurity solutions 
to prevent and respond to threats and cyber risks. Under 
resource constraints environment, risk of cyber threats is 
higher because of absent or limited tools and technical 
knowledge [17]. Capacity building includes targeted 
awareness campaigns; a system for certification and 
accreditation of cyber security professionals and service 
providers; support for professional training packages in 
cybersecurity for key stakeholders; and the inclusion of 
cybersecurity in training programs. Other capacity-building 
measures also include research and development; the 
existence of a cybersecurity industry to support the 
development of cyber security products and services; and the 
growth of cyber start-ups. The study thus, hypothesize that: 
H4: Financial institutions in Ghana have developed a 
capacity building measures towards awareness of the 
Act. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Conceptual framework 
 
Cybercrimes are borderless and transnational; hence, 
promoting 
cybersecurity 
requires 
collaboration 
and 
Capacity building 
Measures  
Cooperation Measures 
Legal Measures 
Organisational Measures 
Technical Measures 
Implementatio
n framework 
of Cyber 
security Act 
H1 
H2 
H3 
H4 
H5 
15
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
cooperation amongst internal stakeholders and external 
agencies [17]. This requires a multi-stakeholder approach, 
including bilateral and multilateral agreements; participation 
of industry forums, international fora/associations; public-
private partnerships; inter-agency partnerships; and alluring to 
best practices. This also assesses the number of partnerships, 
cooperative frameworks, and information-sharing networks 
established to build capacity and cyber resilience. Hence, we 
hypotheses that: 
H5: Financial institutions in Ghana are collaborating and 
cooperating to implement Act  
 
III. 
METHODOLOGY 
The purpose of this section is to provide an overview of the 
approach and methodology used in the study 
A. Research Approach and Data collection  
A mixed research method was chosen for this study in line 
with its purpose. An empirical review was conducted to 
identify the constraints and enabling factors in the 
implementation of cyber security policies. The review 
revealed that a quantitative method combined with a 
qualitative approach would be the most appropriate way to 
gather data and insights from subject matter experts in the 
field of cybersecurity [13]. 
       To achieve this, a survey questionnaire was developed 
along with structured interview questions for qualitative 
insights [14]. Efforts were made to ensure that the 
questionnaires relating to the hypothesis and conceptual 
framework could accurately ascertain discriminant validity 
and reliability [15]. The questionnaires used in this study 
were adapted from ITU's model questionnaires for cyber 
security evaluation (see Table II). Data was collected using 
online survey questionnaires and semi-structured interviews 
conducted simultaneously.  
TABLE II.  
MAPPING ITU MEASURES TO GHANA’S NCSPS 
 
Constructs 
# of Items 
Source  
1 
Legal measures 
LM (7) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
2 
Technical measures 
TM (7) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
3 
Organisational measure 
OM (7) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
4 
Capacity measures 
CD (5) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
5 
Cooperation measures 
CM (4) 
ITU-GCI, NCSSP 
 
A purposive sampling technique was used, and survey links 
were sent to about 200 staff of financial institutions in Ghana. 
This provided a wide population reach to supplement the 
interviews conducted with 14 IT managers and chief 
information security officers (CISOs) from selected financial 
institutions. 
B. Method of Data Analysis  
A total of 154 valid responses were received from the 
survey, and data cleaning was performed. The data from the 
Likert scale were coded into numerical values for easy 
analysis. For close-ended responses, partial least squares 
structural equation modelling (PLS-SEM) was used for 
analysis. PLS-SEM is recommended for quantitative data 
analysis as it provides tools for estimating multiple and 
interrelated dependencies in a single analysis, which tends to 
provide a high level of predictive accuracy [16]. SmartPLS 
software was used as it is more feasible for measuring and 
developing comprehensive structural and predictive models. 
 
IV. 
RESULTS  
The study’s result is presented in this section.  
A. Demorgraphic  
Respondents spanned 12 banks and 4 rural banks in Ghana, 
with an average of 10 staff from each institution. 52 of the 
participants were females (34%) with the remaining being 
male (66%). For age distribution, there were distinct age 
groupings, which were Gen X, Gen Y, and Gen Z. 
Interestingly, the lowest level of education of the participants 
was bachelor’s degree holders. Table III shows the summary 
statistic of the demographic data. 
TABLE III.  
PARTICIPANT DEMOGRAPHY 
Category 
Variable 
Frequency 
(N=154) 
Percentage 
Gender 
Male 
102 
66 
Female 
52 
34 
Age 
18-23 years  
6 
4 
24-39 years 
128 
83 
40-55 years 
20 
13 
Education 
Bachelor 
78 
51 
Masters 
76 
49 
Employment 
Level 
Operational 
90 
58 
Middle mgt 
52 
34 
Top Mgt. 
12 
8 
 
We assessed the respondent’s knowledge of the Cyber 
Security Act in Ghana. From the results in Table III, 69% of 
participants were aware of the Act, with 31% not being 
aware. A question on cyber security attributes was asked by 
providing six options as follows: confidentiality, security, 
availability, protection, reliability, and policies. The 
respondents were tasked to select those that they know.  
 
B. Cyber Act Implementation in Ghana   
In using PLS-SEM to analyse the quantitative data, a 3-
stage approach involving initial estimates of the measurement 
model and the structural model was developed, after which a 
final estimate for both the measurement and structural model 
was constructed. 
 
1) Measurement Model Assessment  
The latent variable with the indicators is reflective, hence, 
in its assessment, an analysis was conducted on the size and 
significance of the loadings, construct reliability, and 
convergent and discriminant validity [17]. The purpose of 
these assessment was to test for the relationship between 
indicators and constructs to ascertain their relevance. The 
initial step in measurement model assessment was to assess 
the indicator loadings of each construct. According to Hair et 
al. [12] loadings at 0.70 and above indicates that the construct 
explains more than 50% of the indicator’s variance. As 
indicated in Table IV, some of the indicators were weak and 
deleted eventually.  
16
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
An assessment of the reliability of the constructs was 
undertaken to identify the degree to which the indicators 
measuring the same constructs are related. This was done 
using Cronbach’s alpha and composite reliability. However, 
for reflective PLS-SEM models, composite reliability is 
preferred to Cronbach’s alpha because Cronbach's alpha can 
over or underestimate reliability due to its usage of the entire 
model for estimation [18]. Higher values indicate higher 
levels of reliability when interpreting construct reliability with 
a value at 0.70 and above preferred [16]. The composite 
reliabilities of the constructs in the research model are all 
above 0.70, indicating reliability among constructs to their 
indicators as shown in Table V. 
After satisfying indicator and construct reliability, 
construct validity was performed to measure the extent to 
which the defined construct in the research model measures 
what it is intended to measure, such as legal measures truly 
measuring only legally related indicators. This assessment 
was done using convergent and discriminant validity. 
TABLE IV.  
CONSTRUCT LOADINGS 
  
CD 
CM 
LM 
OM 
TM 
CD2 
0.912 
 
 
 
 
CD3 
0.923 
 
 
 
 
CM1 
 
0.870 
 
 
 
CM2 
 
0.812 
 
 
 
CM4 
 
0.902 
 
 
 
LM1 
 
 
0.927 
 
 
LM2 
 
 
0.906 
 
 
LM7 
 
 
0.779 
 
 
OM1 
 
 
 
0.969 
 
OM2 
 
 
 
0.967 
 
TM1 
 
 
 
 
0.903 
TM2 
 
 
 
 
0.912 
TM3 
 
 
 
 
0.919 
TM5 
 
 
 
 
0.903 
TM7 
 
 
 
 
0.932 
 
Convergent validity examines if two interrelated 
constructs in the model are theoretically connected. This is 
also referred to as communality and it is measured with 
Average Variance Extracted (AVE). AVE value above 0.50 is 
always desired [20]. From Table V, all the constructs’ AVE 
exceeds 0.50 which is above the desired threshold. 
TABLE V.  
CONSTRUCT RELIABILITY AND VALIDITY 
Constructs 
Cronbach's 
Alpha 
rho_A 
Composite 
Reliability  
AVE 
Capacity 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Cooperation 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Implementation 
framework 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
1.000 
Legal 
0.843 
0.871 
0.905 
0.762 
Organisational 
0.933 
0.933 
0.968 
0.937 
Technical 
0.953 
1.125 
0.962 
0.835 
 
TABLE VI.  
HETEROTRAIT-MONOTRAIT RATION MATRIX= 
 
CD 
CM 
IF 
LM 
OM 
TM 
Capacity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cooperation 
0.765 
 
 
 
 
 
Implementation 
framework 
0.328 
0.169 
 
 
 
 
Legal 
0.313 
0.216 
0.876 
 
 
 
Organisational 
0.786 
0.590 
0.269 
0.293 
 
 
Technical 
0.576 
0.429 
0.170 
0.126 
0.699 
 
 
Discriminant validity is the last assessment done in the 
measurement model. This determines that two unrelated 
constructs are theoretically not connected. Three approaches 
are generally used to assess discriminant validity. They are 
Fornell and Larcker’s [19] criteria, cross-loadings, and the 
Heterotrait-Monotrait Ration (HTMT) criterion [9]. However, 
PLS-SEM recommends using HTMT.  
The HTMT criterion estimates the true correlation 
between two constructs as if they were perfectly reliable. 
HTMT value above 0.90 suggests a lack of discriminant 
validity. From Table VI, all constructs in our model score 
below 0.90, hence the indication of model discriminant 
validity. 
 
2) Structural Model Assessment  
After satisfying all the measurement model requirements, 
an assessment is conducted on the structure of the model to 
test the hypothesis of the study. Multicollinearity amongst 
constructs is assessed using the variance inflation factor 
(VIF). Higher VIF indicates critical levels of collinearity, with 
values below 5 being desirable. Table VII shows the VIF 
values for the constructs in the research model, with the 
highest being 3.987, indicating good indicator collinearity. 
Higher VIF indicates critical levels of collinearity, with values 
below 5 being desirable. Table VII shows the VIF values for 
the constructs in the research model, with the highest being 
3.987, indicating good indicator collinearity. 
TABLE VII.  
VARIANCE INFLATION FACTOR (VIF) 
Constructs 
VIF 
Capacity 
3.987 
Cooperation 
2.422 
Legal 
1.106 
Organisational 
2.895 
Technical 
1.758 
 
Once there are no collinearity issues amongst the 
indicators, the value of 𝑅! was computed to determine the in-
sample predictive power of the model. 𝑅! values range from 
0 to 1, with higher values closer to 1 indicating better 
predictability of the structural model. 𝑅! for this model is 
0.710, as indicated in Table VIII, which is closer to the 
substantial preferred value of 0.75 and greater than the 
moderate value of 0.5. This indicates that the model predicts 
by a combined percentage of 71% how legal, technical, 
organisational, capacity development, and cooperation 
measures predict the policy implementation framework of the 
2020 Cyber Security Act 1038 by financial institutions in 
Ghana. 
TABLE VIII.  MODEL FIT WITH R2 
 
R2 
Adjusted R2 
Implementation framework 
 
0.686 
0.675 
 
The effect size represents the change in the coefficient of 
determination when a specified construct is omitted from the 
model. This is measured with 𝑓!, where values of 0.02, 0.15, 
and 0.35 represent small, medium, and large effects, 
respectively. Thus, values of less than 0.02 indicate no effect, 
whilst values above 0.15 indicate significant effects. From 
17
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
Table 4.8, legal measures have the largest effect size with 
values of 1.788. Capacity had 0.043 which is substantive. 
Cooperation and technical measures had medium effects with 
0.025 and 0.015 respectively. Organisational had no effect 
with a value of 0.011 which is below 0.02. 
Hair et al. [20] recommend a minimum acceptable sample 
size for bootstrapping to be 1000 samples. However, for more 
reliability, a sample size of 10000 was chosen using a two-
tailed distribution with a bias-corrected and accelerated (BCa) 
bootstrap method. This produced t-values and p-values as 
shown in Table IX. 
At the 0.95 significance level, t-values above 1.96 show 
significance, whilst values below show no significance. In that 
order, legal measures, cooperation measures, and capacity 
measures are significant. t-values of 1.649 and 1.112 for 
technical and organisational measures indicate they have no 
statistical significance in this research model. 
TABLE IX.  
EFFECT SIZE 
Constructs 
Effect size (𝒇𝟐) 
Capacity 
0.043 
Cooperation 
0.025 
Legal 
1.788 
Organisational 
0.011 
Technical 
0.015 
 
Hair et al. [20] recommends t-values of at least 196 before 
a hypothesis can be inferred as supported. Therefore, this 
model supports three of our hypotheses outlined in Section 3. 
𝐻!  and 𝐻" are rejected based on the t-values.  𝐻#,  𝐻$, and 𝐻%  
can be considered viable hypotheses and hence accepted.
 
TABLE X.  
CONSTRUCTS SIGNIFICANCE 
 
Original 
Sample (O) 
Sample 
Mean (M) 
Standard 
Deviation  
T Statistics 
(|O/STDEV|) 
p-values 
 
 
 
Legal =>implementation 
0.358 
0.356 
0.024 
15.037 
0.000 
𝐻" 
Supported 
Technical -> implementation 
0.042 
0.042 
0.025 
1.649 
0.099 
𝐻# 
Not Supported 
Organisational -> implementation 
-0.045 
-0.043 
0.04 
1.112 
0.266 
𝐻$ 
Not Supported 
Capacity -> implementation 
0.105 
0.105 
0.045 
2.339 
0.019 
𝐻% 
Supported 
Cooperation -> implementation 
-0.063 
-0.063 
0.029 
2.154 
0.031 
𝐻& 
Supported 
C. Constraints and Enabling factors  
All the interviewed participants affirmed their knowledge of 
the 2020 Cyber Security Act and indicated that their 
organizations are taking steps to implement it. With regards to 
the frequency of review of cyber security policies, about 90% 
of the participants suggested 2 years and must be guided by 
the frequent changes in the threat landscape in the cyber 
ecosystem. At the organizational level, it is recommended that 
policies are reviewed annually, but when new threats or 
technologies emerge, changes in national or international 
regulations occur, or internal incidents happen that were not 
captured in existing policies, they should be reviewed and 
updated. Tables XI and XII are sample extracts (response) 
from participants during the interview. 
 
TABLE XI.  
CONSTRAINTS OF IMPLEMENTING CYBER SCEIRTY ACT IN GHANA 
 
Sample Extract 
Identified Themes 
1 
“For the implementation, it’s fully done. But it's one thing to implement and another to enforce. Now 
the question is, are we enforcing all the policies in the act as stated??” 
Policy enforcement 
2 
“In my opinion, the cost and resources are the constraints. Cost can be broken down into 
infrastructure and human resource costs. Resources will be human and tools to be used.” 
Financial cost, Limited technical 
capacity, Human resources 
3 
“Lack of awareness on the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038” 
Lack of awareness 
4 
“The understanding of Act 1038 is still not too much by the public and the institutions tasked to 
implement, simply because the institutions tasked to do so may not be doing its job” 
Lack of understanding of the Act, 
Ineffective organisations 
 
TABLE XII.  
ENABLING FACTORS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF CYBER SECURITY ACT IN GHANA 
Participant 
Sample Extract 
Identified Themes 
 1 
“The first task is to identify those charged to implement it and those charged to ensure more 
education. Identification of what has been done so far by these two separate bodies will inform the 
awareness mechanism to undertake. When people get informed, it empowers them to take proactive 
and preventive actions” 
Collaboration 
 
Awareness 
 2 
“Training of persons in IT roles to enable them to focus on cyber security issues. Government to give 
waivers for certain cyber security tools or operations for cyber security service providers” 
Training 
Government support 
3 
“Creation of awareness on the Cyber Security Act amongst stakeholders. Capacity building and 
knowledge transfer between personnel of stakeholder agencies.   
Collaboration, Awareness 
creation, Capacity building 
4 
“Establish and adopt cyber security standards for education, skills development, risk management, 
research and development and practitioners.” 
Cyber security standards, Skills 
development, Research 
 
V. 
DISCUSSION 
The ITU's Global Cyber Security Index assessed Ghana's 
cyber security score as 89.69% in 2021, a significant increase 
from 32.6% in 2017 [6]. This achievement was celebrated by 
the CSA and the Ghana Ministry of Communication, as it 
placed Ghana in the 3rd position as the most cyber-committed 
country in Africa after Mauritius and Tanzania. The 
assessment evaluated five key pillars, including legal, 
technical, 
organizational, 
capacity 
development, 
and 
cooperation measures [10]. However, the public financial 
18
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
institutions in Ghana still need to fully comply with the ITU's 
cyber security index despite Ghana's progress in the cyber 
space due to the implementation of the Act. 
The findings of this study indicate that the public financial 
institutions in Ghana have sufficient legal measures to 
implement the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038, which is a 
crucial determinant of the model's reliability. Financial 
institutions in Ghana have appropriate policy and regulatory 
measures on data protection, unauthorised use of computer 
systems, and cyber security audit and risk management. 
However, policies on enforcing cyber security standards, 
managing online harassment, and mitigating cyber security 
risks are either non-existent or inadequate, despite public 
financial institutions in Ghana implementing several policy 
measures 
 The study findings indicate that financial institutions in 
Ghana lack adequate technical capacity to comply with the 
Cyber Security Act 1038. This means that these institutions 
do not have sufficient technical measures to implement the 
Act. Despite these technical limitations, financial institutions 
in Ghana employ only certified cyber security professionals 
and procure and use genuine software systems, as the risks 
and implications of using pirated or fake software are high. 
This is due to the strict directive from the Bank of Ghana, 
which enforces regulations that require all financial 
institutions in Ghana to only employ certified IT managers 
and chief information security officers. 
The study rejects the third hypothesis, which states that 
public financial institutions in Ghana are organized to 
implement the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038. Critical 
organizational measures that are lacking include the absence 
of a dedicated cyber security unit, and cyber security policies 
that are not readily available and disseminated [18]. 
Additionally, the management of financial institutions in 
Ghana must be more committed to supporting the 
implementation of the Act through financial support and any 
other means possible at the strategic level. The supervisory 
division of the Bank of Ghana could help ensure proper 
organization of financial institutions in terms of cyber 
security implementation and enforcement. 
The study has found that the capacity building 
development initiative by financial institutions in Ghana is 
satisfactory. However, more needs to be done to increase their 
capacity building initiatives through investing in cyber 
security infrastructure, research, and providing security 
education, training, and awareness. In addition, the study 
identified constraints in the implementation of the Cyber 
Security Act, including lack of awareness and training, lack of 
top management support, policy enforcement challenges, lack 
of understanding of the Act, and user non-compliance. The 
study also highlighted cross-cutting themes, including 
awareness creation and training, policy enforcement, cyber 
security technical measures and standards, human resource 
development, management support, and collaboration, which 
need to be addressed to enable the successful implementation 
of the Act. It is crucial to provide these enabling factors for 
the implementation of the 2020 Cyber Security Act 1038. 
Moreover, CSA should be supported and equipped to perform 
its mandates while developing the capacities of various CIIs 
and stakeholders necessary to ensure the Act's successful 
implementation 
VI. 
CONCLUSION 
Based on the Global Cyber Security Index and the Ghana 
National Cyber Security Policy and Strategy, a conceptual 
framework was developed to explore the state of the 
implementation of cyber security in Ghana. Five key themes 
were identified, which underpin all cyber security policies and 
implementation strategies. These are legal, technical, 
organizational, capacity development, and cooperation 
measures. Questionnaires were administered and interviews 
were conducted to collect data. The study found that financial 
institutions have instituted several policy measures but lack 
the capacity to implement them. In future, we intend to expand 
the study by exploring he various cyber security techniques 
being adopted by the financial institutions in Ghana. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
D. Thapa and Ø., Saebø, “Exploring the link between ICT and 
development in the context of developing countries: A literature 
review” The Electronic Journal of Information Systems in Developing 
Countries, vol 64, no. 1, pp. 1-15, 2014.  
[2] 
Statistica, “Internetusers in the world 2022”. [Retrieved: January 2023] 
https://rb.gy/7h9ots  
[3] 
M. Hepfer and T.C. Powell, “Make Cybersecurity a Strategic 
Asset”. MIT Sloan Mgt.  Review, vol. 63, no. 1, 4pp. 0-45, 2020 
[4] 
V. Lebogang, O. Tabona., and T. Maupong, “Evaluating Cybersecurity 
Strategies in Africa”. In Cybersecurity Capabilities in Developing 
Nations and Its Impact on Global Security, pp. 1-19, 2022. 
[5] 
R. Sabillon, V. Cavaller and J. Cano, ”National cyber security 
strategies: global trends in cyberspace. International Journal of 
Computer Science and Software Eng. Vo. 5, no.5, p. 67, 2016. 
[6] 
O. Longe, O. Ngwa, F. Wada, V. Mbarika, and L. Kv asny,“Criminal 
Use of Informationand Communication Technologies in Sub-Saharan 
Africa: Trends, Concerns andPerspectives”. Journal of Information 
Technology Impact, vol 9, no. 3, pp.155-165, 2009. 
[7] 
Paliament of Ghana, “Cyber Security Act 2020”. [Retrieved: January 
2023] available at https://rb.gy/al3oky  
[8] 
GNCSP. "Ghana National cyber security policy and strategy” 
[Retrieved: January 2023], available at https://rb.gy/7u9lfj  
[9] 
J.F Hair, J.J Risher, M. Sarstedt, C.M, Ringle “When to use and how 
to report the results of PLS-SEM”. European business review. Vol. 3, 
no. 1, pp. 1-24, 2019 
[10] ITU (2015), “Global security index”. [Retrieved: January 2023] 
https://www.itu.int/en/action/cybersecurity/Pages/gca.aspx 
[11] M. Kaur, “Cyber Security Challenges in the Latest Technology”. 
In Proceedings of Third International Conference on Communication, 
Computing and Electronics Systems, pp. 655-671, 2022. 
[12] J.F Hair, G.T.M. Hult, C.M Ringle, M. Sarstedt, “A primer on partial 
least squares structural equation modeling (PLS-SEM)”.Sage 
publications, New York, 2021. 
[13] J. Mayoh, and A.J. Onwuegbuzie, “Toward a conceptualization of 
mixed methods phenomenological research”. Journal of mixed 
methods research, vol. 9 no. 1, pp. 91-107, 2021. 
[14] J.L Myers, A.D Well, and R.F Jr, “Research design and statistical 
analysis” 3rd ed, Routledge, 2013. 
[15] E. Dubois and U. Tatar “Data analysis in research: Why data, types of 
data, data analysis in qualitative and quantitative research. 
QuestionPro. [Retrieved: January 2023] at https://rb.gy/apfphh  
[16] K.K.K Wong, “Mastering Partial Least Squares Structural Equation 
modelling ” Universe: Bloomington. IN, USA, pp. 1-184, 2019. 
19
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
[17] Jr., J. F., Hult, G. T., Ringle, C. M., Sarstedt, M., Danks, N. P., and 
Ray, S, “Partial least squares structural equation modelling (PLS-
SEM) using R: A workbook” no. 1, pp. XIV, 197, 2021 
[18] Bank of Ghana (2018). Cyber and Information security directives. 
[Retrieved: January 2023], https://rb.gy/ylvoz  
[19] C. Fornell and D.F, larcker, “ Evaluating structural equation models 
with unobservable variables and measurement error”. Journal of 
Marketing Research, vol 18, no. 1, pp. 39–50, 1981. 
[20] J., Hair, C, Ringle, and m. Sarstedt, M., “PLS-SEM: Indeed a Silver 
Bullet”,  Journal of Marketing Theory and Practice, no. 19, pp. 139-
151, 2011. 
 
 
 
20
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

