Wine Live Label: A Consumer-Oriented Augmented Reality Design for Wine 
Labeling 
 
Georgios Lappas 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: glappas@uowm.gr 
Michalis Vrigkas 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: mvrigkas@uowm.gr 
 
Alexandros Kleftodimos 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: akleftodimos@uowm.gr 
Amalia Triantafyllidou 
Communication and Digital Media Department,  
University of Western Macedonia 
Kastoria, Greece 
Email: atriantafylidou@uowm.gr
 
 
Abstract— Augmented Reality (AR) technologies are emerging 
technologies that may develop new consumer-oriented devices 
and services to provide new types of economic activities and 
business models. In this work, AR technology is used in the 
marketing sector of the wine industry by creating innovative 
consumer-oriented experience with augmented “live” wine 
labels. Starting from the idea of creating an AR experience for 
wine products, an AR expert designs the AR experience, 
develops the AR application and the application is distributed 
to the users with the use of various platforms where the user 
can interact with the wine label on a whole new level by 
creating new digital products of wine “live” labels. The 
purpose of the present study is to examine the impact of AR 
smartphone applications embedded in wine labels on 
consumers’ experience and their subsequent perceptions and 
intentions A consumer-oriented approach is used to evaluate 
the wine-label AR mobile application by examining its impact 
on consumer experience dimensions, satisfaction, and re-usage 
intentions towards the application, as well as attitude and 
purchase intentions towards the wine product. Results found 
the increase of respondents’ satisfaction with the application 
and in turn help them form positive attitudes and purchase 
intentions for the wine. This indicates that AR technologies 
may provide new business models in the marketing sector of 
food and beverages to enhance user experience, develop 
positive attitude of costumers to the products and increase 
purchase intentions towards the products. 
Keywords: 
Augmented 
Reality; 
Wine 
labels; 
Digital 
Marketing; Consumer experience. 
I. 
 INTRODUCTION 
Augmented Reality (AR) technologies as well as Virtual 
Reality (VR) and Mixed Reality (MR) technologies are 
constantly gaining ground today in various fields of 
communication 
such 
as 
entertainment, 
education, 
information, marketing, and advertising but also in other 
fields such as industrial product design and medicine. These 
technologies could not leave the food and drink industry 
unaffected, where a system of augmented reality can be used 
to enable the combination or enhancement of the real world 
with digital objects or digital information for extending print 
information with interactive digital objects. Wine companies 
nowadays are increasingly utilizing AR technologies to 
promote their products. With the help of augmented-reality 
technology, wineries are able to provide rich digital content 
to their customers through videos, 2D/3D animations, 
photos, and text to enhance their experience [1].  
AR technologies can support marketing and promotional 
activities of companies and in turn foster the relationships of 
consumers with the brands [2]. Marketers are utilizing these 
technologies to provide augmented and immersive content 
for a product/service using a physical background [3]. AR 
technologies can offer exceptional experiences to consumers 
since they aim at enhancing consumers’ interactions with the 
product/service [4]. Herein, consumer experience is a 
multidimensional construct [5] that encapsulates various 
dimensions such as hedonism-entertainment, flow, escapism, 
learning, challenge, socialization, and communitas [6].  
In this work, we present an AR technology used to create 
augmented “live” wine labels (section II) and to evaluate its 
impact on consumer experience dimensions, satisfaction, and 
re-usage intentions towards the application, as well as 
attitude and purchase intentions towards the wine product 
(section III). Section IV provides the conclusion of the study. 
II. 
AUGMENTED REALITY DESIGN FOR LIVE WINE LABEL 
An AR wine label application was developed using Unity 
2018.4.31f1 and Vuforia Engine 10.2. The underlying 
application was implemented for Android mobile devices. 
The wine “live” label application is launched to the user 
mobile device, as follows: users are prompt to target their 
mobile camera to the front bottle label; once the camera 
recognizes the target image, the AR application generates the 
augmented multimedia content which is then shown on the 
56
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

users’ smartphone (Figure 1). Specifically, the AR content of 
the application includes: 
• 
Videos of the winery's production procedures such 
as harvesting and crushing grapes, fermenting, maturing, and 
bottling. 
• 
Interactive and 360o videos of the infrastructure of 
the winery. 
• 
Videos and animation narratives about wine 
products. 
• 
Information about the wine ingredients and calories 
in text format and short animated clips. 
 
 
 
Figure1. Wine Live Label. 
 
The user can interact with the AR content by selecting 
the proper action from the application menu and the 
corresponding information pops up. Furthermore, once the 
user presses the info button that is located on the bottom 
right side of the application, a 2D animation character 
appears on the screen providing additional information in 
both text and audio form such as wine ingredients, calories, 
and storage temperature.  designations. 
III. 
USER EXPERIENCE AND EVALUATION OF THE AR 
APPLICATION  
To evaluate the AR application and test the study’s 
objectives, a survey was conducted with a self-administered 
questionnaire through a convenience sam-pling approach. 
More specifically, the questionnaires were delivered during 
the Hotelia exhibition in Thessaloniki, Greece (November 
18-20, 2022) that was directed to professionals in the field of 
hotel equipment, as well as catering and coffee services.  
Seven university students approached attendees of the 
exhibition and asked them to participate in the survey. 
Participants that agreed to take part in the survey, were first 
shown the application by scanning the label of the wine 
bottle. Then, they completed the questionnaire. In total, 325 
questionnaires were completed, whereas 306 were used in 
subsequent analysis due to incomplete data. Scales 
developed regarding user experience and user attitude for the 
wine.  All scales exhibited satisfactory internal reliability 
(Cronbach’s alpha exhibited the 0.70 threshold). Mean 
Scores (M) of factors that affect respondents experience with 
the AR wine label application revealed that respondents rated 
the AR experience as highly educational (M=3.82) and 
entertaining experience (M=3.68). Flow was experienced in 
a moderate level by participants (M=3.37) while escapism 
was experienced to a lesser extent (M=2.80). The AR 
experience was also able 
to 
increase respondents’ 
satisfaction with the application and in turn enable them to 
form positive attitudes (M=4.06) and purchase intentions 
(M=3.97) for the wine. 
IV. 
CONCLUSION 
AR wine live label application induced the entertainment 
and educational dimensions of consumer experience, while 
feelings of flow and escapism were triggered by the AR 
application to a lesser extent to respondents. Thus, positive 
feelings and new knowledge can be generated through wine 
AR label applications. Results also found the increase of 
respondents’ satisfaction with the application and in turn 
help them form positive attitudes and purchase intentions for 
the wine. This indicates that AR may provide new business 
models in the marketing sector of food and beverages to 
enhance user experience, develop positive attitude of 
costumers to the products and increase purchase intentions 
towards the products. Future work will explore further 
analysis of AR usage in the food and beverages sector. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work has been co-funded by the European Union 
and Greek national funds through the operational program 
competitiveness, entrepreneurship, and innovation, under the 
call research-create-innovate (project code: T2EDK-03856). 
All statements of fact, opinion or conclusions contained 
herein are those of the authors and should not be construed 
as representing the official views or policies of the sponsors. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. 
Vrigkas, 
G. 
Lappas, 
A. 
Kleftodimos 
and 
A. 
Triantafillidou, “Augmented reality for wine industry: Past, 
Present, and Future”, in SHS Web of Conferences, Vol. 102, 
https://doi.org/10.1051/shsconf/202110204006, 2021.  
[2] A. Rejeb, K. Rejeb, and H. Treiblmaier, “How augmented 
reality impacts retail marketing: A state-of-the-art review 
from a consumer perspective”, Journal of Strategic Marketing 
DOI: 10.1080/0965254X.2021.1972439, 2021. 
[3] S. H. Y. Hsu, H. T., Tsou and J. S. Chen, “Yes, we do. Why 
not use augmented reality? customer responses to experiential 
presentations of AR-based applications”. Journal of Retailing 
and Consumer Services, vol. 62, 2021 
[4] N. Vaidyanathan and S. Henningsson, “Designing augmented 
reality services for enhanced customer experiences in retail”, 
Journal of Service Management, Vol. 34, o. 1, pp. 78-99, 
2022. 
[5] C. Gentile, N. Spiller and G. Noci, “How to sustain the 
customer experience: An overview of experience components 
that 
co-create 
value 
with 
the 
customer”, 
European 
Management Journal, vol. 25, no. 5, pp. 395-410, 2007. 
[6] A. Triantafillidou and G. Siomkos, “Consumption experience 
outcomes: satisfaction, nostalgia intensity, word-of-mouth 
communication and behavioural intentions”, Journal of 
Consumer Marketing, vol. 31, no. 6/7, pp. 526-540, 2014.  
57
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
58
Copyright (c) IARIA, 2023.     ISBN:  978-1-68558-077-3
ICDS 2023 : The Seventeenth International Conference on Digital Society

